TITLE: Value co-destruction causing customers to stop service usage: a topic modelling analysis of dental service complaint data
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05045-z
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05045-z
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Value co-destruction causing customers to stop service
usage: a topic modelling analysis of dental service complaint
data
Hikaru Goto1
· H. M. Belal2
· Kunio Shirahada1
Accepted: 24 October 2022 / Published online: 8 November 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
This study aims to identify the types of value co-destruction (VCD) emerging in healthcare
services that cause patients to reduce or extinguish their intentions to continue using the
services; it also aims to identify the VCD antecedents. Complaints from 1075 dental clinic
patients, which are collected as textual data, are analysed in this study. The authors adopt an
exploratory approach comprising a quantitative analysis based mainly on the topic model, a
type of machine learning, and a qualitative analysis based on the KJ method. Twelve types
of VCD were empirically identiﬁed, three of which had a signiﬁcant negative effect on the
intention to continue using the service. Ten antecedents that cause these types of VCD were
identiﬁed, when examined based on a multi-level perspective, institutional factors and social
norms were found to be related to the VCD process. This study contributes to understanding
the mechanisms by which failures in healthcare services occur and to developing effective
decision making to overcome them.
Keywords Value co-destruction · Healthcare service · Social norm · Institution · Topic
model
1 Introduction
Improving the well-being of actors in healthcare services is an important issue in service
research (Ostrom et al., 2015). As healthcare services play an important role in supporting
physically and mentally vulnerable people and in enabling them to lead a better life, it is
important for service researchers to study the healthcare service ﬁeld (Berry & Bendapudi,
2007). Healthcare services industry can be affected by many factors (Chen et al., 2019).
B Kunio Shirahada
kunios@jaist.ac.jp
Hikaru Goto
hikaru.goto@gmail.com
1
School of Knowledge Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Nomi,
Ishikawa, Japan
2
Liverpool Business School, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, Merseyside, UK
123

1692
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
Healthcare services do not only involve dyadic relationships between professionals (medical
doctors, dentists, nurses, etc.) and non-professionals (patients), but also they closely involve
the third-party actors such as other family members, organisations (public and private) and
relative professionals (e.g., healthcare professionals who adopt and use advanced technology
(Fan et al., 2020) and facility supporters for service delivery such as healthcare service
availability in strategic location (Verter & Lapierre, 2002). Moreover, other relative factors
include institutions such as governments, laws and decrees (Beirão et al., 2017; Frow et al.,
2016; Kaartemo & Känsäkoski, 2018).
Hence, healthcare services can be considered as a socially responsible service operations
process as well that needs to be designed by way of service concept and service delivery
system (Jung et al., 2015). And also, healthcare services require to search for optimal methods
to assess healthcare quality from the patients’ perspective (Kong et al., 2018). Since service-
dominant logic (Vargo & Lusch, 2004, 2008, 2016) was developed, service researchers have
conducted numerous studies on value co-creation (VCC) perspective. In this perspective, the
values are always mutually and reciprocally co-created in the interactions among providers
and beneﬁciaries through the activities of both party’s knowledge/resources (Vargo & Lusch,
2008). In professional and high-contact services such as healthcare, however, many actors
invest resources to co-create value. McColl-Kennedy et al. (2012) claimed that healthcare
service customers co-create value differently, demonstrating different types and levels of
activities and integrate resources in different ways through interactions with various actors
including individuals from the focal ﬁrm, other market-facing and public sources, private,
and personal sources. Therefore, the adverse effects of VCC failure can be extensive. That is
why it is necessary to pay attention to both positive and negative aspects of VCC (Plé, 2016,
2017) to improve the quality of healthcare services.
The concept of value co-destruction (VCD) has recently been proposed. VCD is ‘an
interaction between service systems that results in a decline in at least one of the systems’
well-being’ (Plé & Chumpitaz Cáceres, 2010, p. 431) and, from the service-dominant logic
perspective, it can be regarded as service process failure. Studies on VCD have focused on
various areas included business-to-customer (Echeverri & Skålén, 2011; Greer, 2015; Kashif
& Zarkada, 2015; Smith, 2013), business-to-business (Mills & Razmdoost, 2016; Prior &
Marcos-Cuevas, 2016; Vafeas et al., 2016), public services (Järvi et al., 2018), service robots
( ˇCai´c et al., 2018), customer-to-customer (Kim et al., 2020), self-services (Robertson et al.,
2014), and social media (Dolan et al., 2019). Many of these studies conducted qualita-
tive approach using a small sample size to debate on VCD situations and to identify their
antecedents. In addition, previous studies focused only on the description and causes of VCD
(e.g. Laud et al., 2019), but not on customers’ intentions to continue using a service after
VCD occurred. To improve patients’ well-being (quality of life), healthcare services require
their continuous active participation. The customers’ active participation in healthcare service
operations process helps to increase the inﬂuence of big data through healthcare informa-
tion systems (Malik et al., 2018) which is useful in data-driven decision making (Oztekin,
2018), resource use, operational performance, and quality of service (Johnson et al., 2020).
If patients stop using services due to resource misintegration that results in VCD between
healthcare service providers and patients, they will not recover, which may lead to bigger
problems later on and result in unexpected additional costs not only to the patient but also to
their families, the organisation, and the society. It, therefore, is required to clarify the types
and antecedents of VCD that critically affect customers’ intentions to continue service usage.
This study addresses the following two research questions to ﬁll up the gaps, using both
quantitative and qualitative approaches and larger sample sizes.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1693
RQ1 What types of VCD occur in healthcare services, and which of them negatively affect
customers’ service usage intentions after VCD?
RQ2 What are the antecedents that may trigger the VCD types, and what is the relation-
ship between them (the VCD types) and the VCD mechanisms, from a multi-level
perspective?
Consequently, this study had two objectives and used two procedures. The ﬁrst objective
was to clarify the types of VCD that occurred in healthcare services, using a quantitative
approach, and to determine which of these types were relevant to the customers’ ﬁnal nega-
tive decisions. The second objective was to identify the antecedents that would most likely
lead to these types of VCD, using a qualitative approach. The data used for the analy-
sis were descriptive complaint questionnaires ﬁlled out by dental clinic patients in Japan.
Although oral diseases are largely preventable, they affect the majority of the world’s pop-
ulation, approximately 3.5 billion (Vasdev et al., 2022; World Health Organization, 2022).
This means that oral health is an indispensable issue for customers. Since receiving dental
care and maintaining good oral health is directly linked to the well-being of the human being,
it is important to encourage customers to continue access to dental health care services. Most
healthcare services in Japan are operated under the national health insurance system; there-
fore, many actors (professionals, non-professionals, public and private organisations), social
norms, and regulations are involved in the patients’ service provision services. In Japan,
among all the healthcare services, the market of dental clinics has been getting more compet-
itive. Dental clinics in general, therefore, are improving their services and facilities, which
leads to patients’ higher expectations. The more they tend to expect better services, the more
complaints they have. That is a very reason that we picked dental clinic services as a subject
of this research. All the data collected by Fuman Kaitori Center, a service sector managed
by Insight Tech Inc., which collects a huge number of complaints against various industry,
were analysed. These data are considered valid and trustworthy, as they are widely used in
academic research (Mitsuzawa et al., 2016).
In this study, we found twelve VCD types, three of which negatively inﬂuenced patients’
intentions to continue using services. In addition, ten antecedents of the three VCD types
were identiﬁed. The theoretical contribution of this study’s ﬁndings is that it demonstrates
that the manifestation of VCD, which could diminish the intention to use a medical service,
can be inﬂuenced by institutions and social norms. This study responds to the call to study
VCD from a multi-level (service ecosystem) perspective (Leroi-Werelds, 2019; Plé, 2017).
In the next section, we present the theoretical background and focus on previous studies
on VCD. We then pose two research questions to understand VCD in the healthcare service
ﬁeld better. Subsequently, we describe our study, which comprises two phases. While most
previous studies have used a qualitative research approach with a small sample size, we used
bothquantitativeandqualitativeanalyseswithlargersamplesizes.Inthequantitativeanalysis,
the questionnaire data were analysed and categorised into VCD types using machine learning
to attain higher objectivity. Machine learning is an effective method for solving problems in
healthcare service operations (Alizadehsani et al., 2021; Malik et al., 2018; Sariyer et al.,
2022). In addition, the types that had a signiﬁcant negative effect on customers’ intentions
to continue using the service were identiﬁed through statistical analysis. In the qualitative
analysis, each comment on the questionnaires was extracted, as these types of VCD were
analysed using the KJ method to obtain their antecedents. Finally, we discuss our ﬁndings
and present the conclusions.
123

1694
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
2 Theoretical background and questions development
2.1 S-D logic and value co-destruction
In the view of service-dominant (S-D) logic, value is co-created by not only service providers
and customers but also by other actors, and all social and economic actors are resource
integrators (Vargo & Lusch, 2016). VCC is characterised by three levels (micro, meso, and
macro)ofinteractionaswellasametalayerthatreﬂectstheirevolutionovertime(Akakaetal.,
2013; Chandler & Vargo, 2011). Value is not co-created only in the face-to-face interaction
(micro-level) between service employees and customers. For value to be co-created by a
service, the organization (meso-level) providing the service, the trader, and even related
government agencies and laws (macro-level) are involved with each other. Therefore, value
is co-created multidimensionally (Vargo et al., 2017).
S-D logic has also been applied in studies on VCD, which, as noted above, is deﬁned as
‘an interaction between service systems that causes a decline in at least one of the systems’
well-being’ (Plé & Chumpitaz Cáceres, 2010, p. 431). Value is both co-created and co-
destroyed at the provider–customer interface (Echeverri & Skålén, 2011); therefore, VCD
can be considered as an outcome of VCC. That is, one is the obverse of the other (Smith,
2013). Many studies on VCC tend to focus on overly positive outcomes that have a strong
impact on the term ‘co-creation,’ that is, ‘co-destruction as a criticism of co-creation’ myopia
(Plé, 2017). Therefore, it is important to pay attention to VCD as well to further expand our
understanding of VCC and improve the VCC process.
VCD studies have been conducted for various types of services. Kashif and Zarkada (2015)
investigated VCD in banking services using the critical incident technique in structured inter-
views and found that a communication gap between employees and customers can lead to
VCD. Vafeas et al. (2016) investigated VCD for creative agencies and their clients using
one-to-one interviews and identiﬁed ﬁve antecedents of VCD. Järvi et al. (2018) used an
abductive qualitative approach to identify eight VCD causes as well as when they emerged
in the service interaction process. In the healthcare context, the degree of customer partic-
ipation (Greer, 2015) and the lack of information and knowledge ﬂow within organisations
(Kaartemo & Känsäkoski, 2018) were identiﬁed as two factors that cause VCD. Laud et al.
(2019) conducted a systematic and iterative literature review on VCD and categorised the
manifestation of resource misintegration, as a VCD phenomenon, into ten types. They also
suggested causes and developed a conceptual model of the VCD process. The VCD leads
to marketing failure. For example, VCD is known to cause unexpected loss of resources
(emotional, time, etc.) for customers (Sthapit & Björk, 2019), loss of emotional value for
customers (Kim et al., 2020), customer distrust of online sites (Nam et al., 2020), and brand
skepticism (Quach & Thaichon, 2017).
2.2 Need for quantitative study and multi-level perspective on VCD for effective
decision making
Most of the studies on VCD have been conducted by qualitative analysis and have pointed
out the diverse consequences of VCD. For example, Echeverri and Skålén (2011), based on
interviews with employees of a transportation company, showed that VCD results in lower
customer well-being due to anxiety and stress. In addition, Järvi et al. (2018) pointed out
that VCD leads to the non-achievement of service goals based on interviews with public
sector service providers. Quach and Thaichon (2017) reported that VCD causes skepticism
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1695
and dislike of brands based on interviews with consumers on the topic of online interaction
of luxury fashion goods.
On the other hand, the relationship between VCD and customers’ decision to use ser-
vices has not been well studied. As Daunt and Harris (2017) empirically demonstrated that
co-destructive and co-creative behaviours could occur simultaneously, concurrently, and iter-
ativelyinserviceprocesses.Therefore,whattheimportantpointformanagersinservicesector
is to understand which VCD factors have the greatest impact on the customer’s willingness
to stop using the service. There is a need to identify the types of VCD that affect customer
service usage (especially stopping the usage) by conducting empirical research using a larger
sample size, which is rare approach in VCD study (Kim et al., 2020; Nam et al., 2020).
Furthermore, Plé (2017)’s calls for the study of VCD from a multi-level (service ecosys-
tem)perspective.Plé(2017)arguedthatnecessarytoexaminenotonlytheinteractionbetween
serviceemployeesandcustomers(micro-levelactors),butalsohoworganizations(meso-level
actors) and governments, laws and institutions, and social norms (macro-level actors) can
affect VCD. Leroi-Werelds (2019, p. 667) asked, ‘When and how can value be destroyed,
instead of created, in a service ecosystem?’ ‘What is the role of institutions in value (co-
)destruction in a service ecosystem?’ In the healthcare service context, Beirão et al. (2017)
deﬁned three service system levels. These include ‘the micro-level, which comprises indi-
vidual actors such as health professionals, patients, and family’; ‘the meso-level, which
comprises public and private hospitals, primary care units, and health support organisations’;
and ‘the macro-level actors, which include the government, ministry of health, and other
organisations that are responsible for deﬁning national health policies’. Research that focuses
on VCD arisen from interactions of actors from the viewpoint of a multi-level perspective
in the healthcare services is scarce, and conducting research to expand our understanding
of VCD, in response to the call by Plé (2017) is worthwhile. If patients stop using services
due to resource misintegration that results in VCD between healthcare service providers and
patients, they will not recover, which may lead to bigger problems later on and result in
unexpected additional costs not only to the patient but also to their families, the organisation,
and the society. Therefore, it is essential to clarify the types and antecedents of VCD that
critically affect customers’ intentions to continue service usage.
3 Research design
3.1 Research methodology
As shown in Fig. 1, our exploratory approach comprised a quantitative approach based mainly
on text mining and a qualitative approach based on the KJ method. The quantitative study
(Study I) comprised two analyses. First, a topic model, that is, a type of machine learning used
to classify a large amount of text data, was used to identify the types of VCD in healthcare
services. Second, a chi-square test and residual analysis were used to determine which types
of VCD had been signiﬁcantly related to subsequent patients’ behaviours. In the qualitative
study (Study II), an analysis was conducted using the KJ method to identify the antecedents
of the VCD types found to have statistical signiﬁcance in the ﬁrst analysis.
123

1696
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
Fig. 1 Analysis ﬂow
3.2 Data sample and collection
The data were retrieved from the database using the keywords ‘dental clinic’, ‘dentistry’,
and ‘dentist’, and 1200 complaints were extracted. The database is managed by Insight Tech
Inc., which collects a huge number of complaints against various industry. The data and the
database are considered valid and trustworthy, as they have been used in academic research
(Mitsuzawa et al., 2016). The complaints used in the analysis was collected extensively from
all over Japan, speciﬁcally from eight regions (Hokkaido, Tohoku, Kanto, Chubu, Kansai,
Chugoku, Shikoku, and Kyushu). After all complaints were visually reviewed and complaints
irrelevant to this survey were excluded, 1075 complaints remained. Subsequently, the data
were cleaned by deleting unnecessary words and correcting punctuation, typographical, and
grammatical errors. After data cleaning, the average number of Japanese and Chinese char-
acters per complaint was 58.8 (standard deviation 41.5, maximum 251, and minimum 7). The
complainant’s gender, age, and subsequent behaviours were also attached to each complaint.
There were 254 male and 821 female respondents: 13 in their teens, 200 in their twenties,
429 in their thirties, 260 in their forties, 146 in their ﬁfties, and 27 in their sixties and over.
There were four types of responses regarding subsequent behaviours: ‘I will not go to the
dental clinic again.’ (232), ‘I do not go to the dental clinic as frequently’ (272), ‘I will keep
going to the dental clinic, although I have some complaints.’ (306), and ‘I do not know.’ or
blanks (265).
3.3 Study I
3.3.1 Method
A topic model based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) was used to analyse the data.
LDA is a ‘topic model’ (Blei, 2012; Blei et al., 2003; DiMaggio et al., 2013) that uses
an exploratory technique and machine learning to discover a set of interpretable ‘topics’
(i.e., groups of words with a common theme) in large collections of documents (DiMaggio
et al., 2013). The consumers’ complaints posted online are vague and unstructured in nature
(Mishra & Singh, 2018). A topic model provides a new effective and reliable computational
lens into the latent structures of a collection of texts, enabling researchers to discover new
patterns in text data and analyse more collections than they would by hand (Ali & Kannan,
2022; DiMaggio et al., 2013). Since existing research on VCD has primarily used qualitative
approaches with small sample sizes, analysing data from larger sample sizes will be likely to
increase the potential for new ﬁndings and insights. The authors determined that it is rational
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1697
and suitable to use a topic model to analyse over one thousand open-ended questionnaires
in order to contribute to the development of the VCD theory, which is still an insufﬁciently
investigated research theme.
The analysis comprised four stages. First, morphological analysis using Tiny Text Miner
(Matsumura & Miura, 2014) was conducted on the 1075 complaints. Nouns, verbs, adjectives,
and adverbs were analysed. Next, to obtain an approximate ‘number of topics’ (a parameter
set in the topic model), we asked dozens of dentists and staff in dental clinics to state how
many types of complaints had been reported. The types of complaints they were able to come
up with were generally about ten. Therefore, eight topic modeling analyses were conducted
with the number of topics ranging from eight to ﬁfteen. The model with the number of topics
set at twelve was the most optimal in terms of interpretability. Third, the probabilities of each
analysed complaint belonging to each topic were calculated, and each analysed complaint
was allocated to the topic with the highest probability, according to the calculation result.
Topic modelling was conducted using the R statistical computing language and environment
(R Core Team, 2017), the topic models package (Hornik & Grün, 2011), and the lda package
(Chang,2010).Finally,allcomplaintswerevisuallycheckedtoensurethattheywereallocated
in the appropriate category (topic). If any allocation was clearly wrong, we reallocated it to
a more appropriate topic.
After topic modelling, we used the chi-square test and residual analysis to analyse the
relationships between the VCD types and the patients’ intentions on subsequent behaviours.
As such, we identiﬁed the types of VCD that signiﬁcantly affect customer intention (e.g. ‘I
will not go to the dental clinic again’, ‘I do not go to the dental clinic as frequently’, and ‘I will
keep going to the dental clinic although I have some complaints’). Of the 1075 complaints,
810 were analysed, excluding responses such as ‘I do not know’ and blanks.
3.3.2 Results
After topic modelling with LDA, we assigned names to the twelve topics, according to
the high-frequency words for each topic and the most common complaints (see Table 1).
Prominent words within a topic are those that tend to occur together in documents more
frequently than they would normally (DiMaggio et al., 2013), that is, each topic can be
regarded as a type of VCD.
Type I VCD was named ‘cost of service’, as it includes dissatisfaction with the cost of
the service provided. Types II and III were named ‘loss of trust,’ and ‘quality of treatment’,
respectively.TypeIVwasnamed‘attitudeofreceptionist’,asitmainlyincludesdissatisfaction
with the receptionist. Type V was termed ‘Appointment/Time’, as it includes the difﬁculty in
making an appointment or having to wait for treatment past the appointment time. Type VI
was named ‘fear of treatment’, because it includes anxiety and ‘fear of treatment’. Types VII,
VIII, IX, X, and XI were named ‘condition besides treatment’, ‘attitude during treatment’,
‘environmentofclinic’,‘durationoftreatment’,and‘peripheralservice’,respectively.Finally,
Type XII was named ‘beyond health insurance coverage’, as it includes treatments not covered
by insurance.
The results of the chi-square test and the residual analysis are shown in Table 2. The
numbers refer to the total number of patients’ intentions of service usage for each VCD type.
The number of intentions for ‘cessation of service usage’ was signiﬁcantly larger for types
II and VII. The number of intentions for ‘reduction in frequency’ was signiﬁcantly larger for
type X., and the number of intentions for ‘cessation of service usage’ was signiﬁcantly smaller
for types V and IX. However, only the high numbers of intentions should be considered, as
the objective of this paper is to identify and ﬁnd solutions to the antecedents of VCD.
123

1698
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
Table 1 Identiﬁed value co-destruction type by topic model
#
Five most frequent words
Common complaints
Name of VCD type
I
Expensive, dental cost, ﬁnish,
pay, money
I’ve always been surprised that the bill is so high
The costs are opaque. There are no itemized lists but just a total. The receipt is
only for a total that includes the cost of medicine, and it seems much higher
than it should be for the treatment given
I was surprised when I was told, “You’re quite rich, aren’t you?” The total was
10 times higher than usual. I was surprised that they just seemed to swindle
money
Cost of service
II
Dentist, understandable,
mount, hear/inquire, denture
The dentist seems unprofessional and has not earned my trust
In the past, this was the only dentist near me, so I didn’t have a choice but to
visit. I brought my child, but when he cried I saw three adults holding him
down and forcing his mouth open for the procedure. My child learned to hate
going to the dentist. What’s worse, the cost was very high. When I asked about
it I was told that the points were high. I have a friend in the dental industry, so
I pointed out that this was incorrect, and then I was told that he had been
confused with another patient. They were just trying to take advantage of us
Loss of trust
III
Inlay, cavity, pain, check-up,
scaling
Although I had my ﬁlling ﬁxed, it was still painful
I’ve had check-ups every three months. I pointed out the area that was uncomfort-
able for me, but no treatment was done. The dentist was told me later that I had
had a cavity. I don’t understand what the point of the regular check-ups was
The tartar removal process is too painful. Even if I brush my teeth, it still needs
to be removed, and I feel blue when I have to go. I want them to ﬁnd a way to
remove tartar without so much pain
Quality of treatment
IV
Receptionist, phone, attitude,
reservation, inaudible
The receptionist was so unfriendly and a bit frightening
I called the dentist to make an appointment, but the person on the phone spoke
too weakly and I couldn’t hear her. When I pointed out that I couldn’t hear her,
she hung up the phone. I called back, and even though I said that I couldn’t hear
her, she still spoke in a small voice. Someone who is unable to communicate on
the phone shouldn’t answer the phone
The attitude of the receptionist was truly horrible. The person didn’t give me any
time to think about or answer questions but kept asking me questions after
question. It really made me feel bad
Attitude of receptionist
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1699
Table 1 (continued)
#
Five most frequent words
Common complaints
Name of VCD type
V
Appointment, available, wait,
time, appointment time
I arrived in time for my appointment but was forced to wait for 30 min. What is
the point of making an appointment?
I don’t understand why I can’t make an appointment in the next one or two weeks.
They don’t seem to be that busy
I had trouble making an appointment and I had to wait for 3 weeks. After all
that, I arrived 5 min before my appointment time but was made to wait for
40 min. What’s the point of making an appointment?
Appointment/time
VI
Pain, extract, anaesthesia,
grind, wisdom tooth
It was too painful to have my wisdom tooth removed. Even after the procedure, I
was in horrible pain for three months
I was given anesthetic to have my tooth removed, but rather than doing it all of a
sudden, I wanted to be informed that the dentist would give an injection so that
I wouldn’t have been stunned
Can they do something about that drilling noise? The noise makes it twice as
frightening
Fear of treatment
VII
Child, parking, noise, waiting
room, fearful
We went to a pediatric dentist, but there was no background music in the waiting
room or the treatment room. They should reconsider this. It is frightening for
children to wait in a silent environment like that, and it is not sufﬁcient to simply
place a TV set on the ceiling above the dental chair
The entire waiting area was ﬁlthy. They should clean the place up
The parking lot is too small. It only holds four cars, so I want them to make it
bigger
Condition besides treatment
123

1700
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
Table 1 (continued)
#
Five most frequent words
Common complaints
Name of VCD type
VIII
Open, dentist, hand, pain,
visible
Althoughadvertisingpediatricdentistry,duringmychild’svisittheyoverwhelmed
her with an intimidating attitude, causing her trauma. I will never take her there
again
I don’t like going to the dentist in the ﬁrst place, but when the dentist is a smoker
it get more horrible. His ﬁngers go into my mouth and his face comes close to
me, and they all smell like cigarettes. I wish they’d be more thoughtful about
such matters
They tell me to call out or to raise my hand if it hurts, but when a dental
hygienist is pressing down on my arms and holding down my tongue with
instruments, how can I do that?
Attitudes during treatment
IX
Dental chair, water,
extremely, put in, lack of
cleanliness
The patient’s gargling sink is ﬁlthy. Just looking at it makes me feel disgusting.
Even the tray for the instruments is dirty
I don’t know if it’s water or saliva, but some water hits on my face during treatment
and I don’t like it. Maybe they could use a towel to cover my face like they do
at beauty salons
The fact that the dental chair has hair on it shows that the clinic has not been
cleaned and isn’t sanitary. I feel uncomfortable sitting in it
Environment of clinic
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1701
Table 1 (continued)
#
Five most frequent words
Common complaints
Name of VCD type
X
Duration, take, long, visit,
money
Each treatment is too long. Even if it costs more, I’d like them to do more work
during a single visit
It takes too long for treatment to ﬁnish. It’s common to see progress, but it’s
troublesome to have to take so much time off for every visit. Even if something
can’t be ﬁxed in one visit, it would be helpful if the total number of visits
required could be reduced. I’d like more rapid treatment
I’m sure that the dentists have their reasons, but the number of visits required is
just too high. I don’t have that much free time
Duration of treatment
XI
Brushing, gum, hygienist,
toothbrush, brush
A variety of tubes of toothpaste for whitening were sold in the dental ofﬁce. I
don’t know why I had to pay high price to have my teeth whitened
I have used ﬂoss since they ordered me to, but I feel like that made grooves
between the teeth. I wonder if I really need ﬂoss. I think there are disadvantages
as well
I had a pain in my teeth and I went to the dental ofﬁce to have all bad teeth
treated. When it comes to getting tartar, the dentist always pressed me to buy
an interdental brush and a toothbrush. When I told him that I would buy them
at a store for a lower price, his face turned to a terribly disgusting one. Even
going to the dentist is depressing, but it got more depressing
Peripheral service
XII
Insurance, out-of-pocket
expense, orthodontics,
expensive, silver crown
Every dentist in charge of a dental check-up at school notiﬁes me that my child’s
teeth are crooked, but when I go to the dentist, I ﬁnd that the cost of orthodontics
is much too high. I feel sorry for my child, but it’s too expensive. It’s strange
that Japan’s universal health insurance system does not cover this
Recently I was told that dental implants would be ideal, but the out-of-pocket
cost is too high. It would be best if Japan’s universal health insurance system
covered this
Ceramic crowns are too expensive, so I wish Japan’s universal health insurance
system could cover them
Beyond health insurance coverage
123

1702
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
Table 2 Patients’ intentions of service usage for each VCD type
Value co-destruction type
Patients’ intentions of service usage
#
Name of VCD type
Cessation
Reduction of frequency
No speciﬁc change
I
Cost of service
17
22
25
II
Loss of trust
49*
29
31*
III
Quality of treatment
30
37
41
IV
Attitude of receptionist
11
18
11
V
Appointment time
16*
43
47
VI
Fear of treatment
12
8
14
VII
Condition besides
treatment
31*
15
19
VIII
Attitudes during treatment
19
14
24
IX
Environment of clinic
9*
20
27
X
Duration of treatment
20
41*
26
XI
Peripheral service
6
10
13
XII
Beyond health insurance
coverage
13
15
27
N = 810, Chi-square value 58.52, DF 22, Cramer’s V = 0.19, Cohen’s w 0.27 (95% CI [0.20, 0.33]), *p <
0.05
3.4 Study II
3.4.1 Data and method
Next, we identiﬁed the antecedents of the three types of VCD (II, VII, and X) that affected
patients’ behaviours more negatively, compared to the others. The data used were patients’
complaints for each type: 49 complaints for type II, 31 complaints for type VII, and 41
complaints for type X.
We used the KJ method (Scupin, 1997), which can extract the essence of data by repeating
the grouping of qualitative data. Since it adopts the bottom-up sorting process and is very
useful for classifying data to ﬁnd new ideas and summaries (Cheng & Leu, 2011), it is suitable
in this analysis. First, we wrote down every complaint for each topic separately on a piece
of paper to create classiﬁcation cards. Next, we grouped the cards based on their likelihood
to have common and/or similar elements. This procedure was repeated until the cards could
no longer be grouped. Since the KJ method is a subjective classiﬁcation method, to enhance
objectivity, we had 17 students, who were trained on the KJ method, perform the same
procedure using the same data. Their results were almost the same as ours, which proved
that the objectivity of our results was trustworthy. The slight difference was the usage of
vocabulary they used. One of the only few examples is that we used the word, “inconsiderate
behaviour” while they used “lack of concern”, which fell into the same category.
3.4.2 Results
The identiﬁed antecedents are shown in Fig. 2. Four antecedents were identiﬁed for ‘loss
of trust’ (Type II): (i) Inconsiderate behaviour (18 complaints), (ii) Fraudulent action (10
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1703
Fig. 2 Antecedents for three VCD types negatively affecting patients’ intentions
complaints), (iii) Mistrust of expertise (17 complaints), and (iv) Combination of the above
(4 complaints).
Inconsiderate behaviours of service providers (dentists, dental hygienists, and recep-
tionists, etc.) could lead to patients’ disappointment and anger and trigger VCD. Typical
complaints on ‘inconsiderate behaviour’ include the following:
My dentist was arrogant, which infuriated me. I did not have any cavities and was not
in a hurry to go in, but when I did not go in for a while because I was too busy, he asked
me, ‘Do you not have any intention of coming in? I have more important things to do’
and I did not like his words, so I have decided to go to another dentist.
— woman in her 30s
The second antecedent is ‘fraudulent action,’ which can make a patient feel that he/she has
been deceived by the service provider, leading to VCD. Typical complaints on ‘fraudulent
action’ include the following:
Sometimes, when they examine patients, they do it in two sessions, even though it
should only take one. I think the dentists that divide the sessions do it to proﬁt from the
higher fees. This is fraud. It is also difﬁcult to go twice. I will not go to the dentists that
do this. I think the Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare should investigate them.
— woman in her 30s
The third antecedent is ‘mistrust of expertise.’ VCD can occur when a patient becomes
sceptical about service providers’ words and actions. An example is as follows:
I wanted to ask my dentist about an out-of-pocket treatment called direct bonding. When I
called the clinic, the dentist got on the phone to speak with me personally, but he had a know-
it-all attitude. This is a procedure to ﬁx gaps between teeth. It has to be paid out-of-pocket
because it is aesthetic, but he said the insurance might cover it. Then, he suddenly started
using technical terms when speaking, and I felt I could not trust him. I thought this would
be an easy clinic to go to because they remain open on Sundays, but my impression of them
completely changed. What a shame.
— woman in her 30s
In the above scenario, the dentist explained to the patient that the insurance would not
cover the special treatment, but when the patient conﬁrmed this information with the dentist
thoroughly, the dentist used many technical terms to imply that the insurance may cover the
123

1704
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
treatment. This dentist’s behaviour most likely to have caused the patient not to trust the
dentist’s expertise.
The fourth antecedent is ‘combination of the above.’ Although the antecedents include
those described above and those related to other topics, VCD ultimately could occur because
of patients’ distrust. The following is a typical example of a combination of complaints:
The receptionist was rude. They tried to sell me medicine that I had already. I went in
for dental scaling; during the procedure, my gums were injured and became painfully
swollen. However, they completely denied that, telling me that I hurt my gums myself.
Then, they discovered that I had a wisdom tooth. Even though it did not hurt, they
recommended removing it. Before the dentist explained the procedure, he ground the
tooth down. I had no idea of what they were doing. I had no pain at all before I went
in, but after I went, things only got worse. Those people are the worst ever.
— woman in her 20s
Four antecedents were identiﬁed as ‘condition besides treatment’ (Type VII). This type of
VCD might have been caused by the following: (i) Annoying advertisements and ornaments
(8 complaints), (ii) Inconvenient and uncomfortable facilities (16 complaints), (iii) Lack
of support for the weak (4 complaints), and (iv) Inaccessibility to clinic and/or lack of
information (3 complaints).
The ﬁrst antecedent ‘annoying advertisements and ornaments’, including excessive adver-
tising, unnecessary equipment, and inappropriate service offerings, may have resulted in
patients avoiding to visit a dental clinic. A typical complaint for ‘annoying advertisements
and ornaments’ is.
There is a big sign with a large picture of exposed gums and missing teeth, which
causes me to feel nauseous.
— woman in her 40s
The second antecedent, ‘inconvenient and uncomfortable facilities,’ can be related to
clinics not providing the desired level of patients’ comfort, resulting in patients no longer
visiting their clinics. The typical complaints regarding ‘inconvenient and uncomfortable
facilities’ are as follows:
The parking lot was too small, with only four parking spaces. I would like them to
make it larger for the ten parking spaces.
— man in his 20s
The third antecedent is ‘lack of support for the weak.’ Patients possibly felt that ‘I cannot
continue going to the clinic because I saw that….’ When patients saw or felt that their clinics
neglected thoughtfulness for the weak, they might stop visiting. They may have imagined
that their dentists would also lack concern for their well-being. A typical complaint of ‘lack
of support for the weak’ is:
The facility is new and was built one or two years ago. However, wheelchairs and canes
were forbidden. The reason seems to be that small children crawl on the ﬂoor. Would
it not be better to create a space exclusively for children? In practice, entry seems
forbidden for the elderly or disabled people. I have never known such an inconsiderate
dental clinic.
— woman in her 50s
The fourth antecedent is ‘unavailability and/or lack of information.’ A typical complaint
of ‘unavailability and/or lack of information includes.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1705
With so many choices, I cannot determine which dentist to visit.
— woman in her 30s
Twoantecedentswereidentiﬁedas‘durationoftreatment’(TypeX):(i)Imbalancebetween
investment time/cost and effect (31 complaints) and (ii) Gap in expectations between non-
professional and professional (10 complaints).
The ﬁrst antecedent means that patients might feel that the result of the treatment was
not worth the cost (mainly time and money). Generally, in Japan, patients visit dental clinics
once a week for several weeks for a 15- to 30-min treatment per visit. Seeing the effect of
each treatment may be difﬁcult because the treatment is often carried out systematically.
Consequently, patients are apt to distance themselves and consider visiting clinics as futile.
They probably would like to receive their treatment all at once or at least with fewer visits.
Dental clinics have not managed to meet this demand. Typical complaints of an ‘imbalance
between investment time/cost and effect’ are as follows:
I had to go to the dental clinic once a week for over a month just to have one tooth
treated. Could it not be done a bit faster? I wish I could have gone more often to shorten
the treatment period. I wondered how long I would have to visit. I started to hesitate to
go there.
— woman in her 40s
The second antecedent is ‘Gap in expectations between non-professional and profes-
sional.’ This is similar to the previous antecedent, but it can be considered a more deteriorated
phase of VCD. This may have been caused by dissatisfaction with the long treatment period,
leading to suspicions about the treatment provided. A typical complaint of ‘Gap in expecta-
tions between patients and service providers is as follows:
The treatment sessions were too long. I go to the dentist despite my busy schedule, so
I would like them to stop removing the ﬁlling in one day and replacing it another day.
I have come to believe that they made the process longer on purpose. I do not have any
free time for the ﬁshy treatment.
— man in his 40s
4 Discussion
4.1 Theoretical implications
This study analysed descriptive critical complaints against medical services and classiﬁed
VCD types using a machine learning method. While most of the previous studies have focused
on the description of VCD and analysis of the factors that cause VCD, using interview
data, this study identiﬁed three VCD types: loss of trust’, ‘condition besides treatment,’
and ‘duration of treatment’, which could have negative impacts on patients’ intentions to
continue using the service. Furthermore, the qualitative analysis revealed ten antecedents
that might have caused the three VCD types. This study’s ﬁndings contribute to the literature
by suggesting that the manifestation of VCD, which is catastrophic to the intention to use
a medical service, can be partly attributed to institutions and social norms. Plé (2017) and
Leroi-Werelds (2019) suggested that with respect to the manifestation of VCD, the study of
VCD should not be limited to the micro-relationship between service providers and customers
but extended to a multi-level relationship including elements besetting a legal system and
123

1706
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
social norms. This study responds to this call. Since two out of ten antecedents are closely
related to what they claimed, these two antecedents are discussed as below.
First, ‘unavailability to clinic and/or lack of information’ was extracted as one of the
important antecedents that can lead to VCD. This antecedent may lead to resource misinte-
gration by unsettling the customer (patient), who has to ﬁnd the desirable service provider
(dentist) or to receive the appropriate service. This antecedent corresponds to ‘absence of
information’ identiﬁed by Järvi et al. (2018) and ’blocked access to integrate resources’ in the
VCD research review by Laud et al. (2019). Moreover, this antecedent is due to the lack of
information provided by not only service providers but also the Ministry of Health, Labour,
and Welfare (MHLW) regulations, including laws and ofﬁcial guidelines, and the Dental
Association (a mutual aid association) regulations. Japan’s healthcare system imposes many
regulations and rules to provide high-quality healthcare to the public as fairly as possible. For
example, strict restrictions prevent dental clinics from competing for customers with merely
attractive advertisements. In addition, the Dental Association strictly requires dental clinics
to abide by these restrictions. Therefore, dental clinics have to provide stereotypical infor-
mation, making it difﬁcult for patients to judge which dental clinic is the most suitable for
them. In other words, institutional factors inhibit access to information for resource integra-
tion. Legislation is an important factor that affects the interaction between healthcare service
providers and patients (Pop et al., 2018). This study shows that the institutions and systems
surrounding dental clinics may prevent patients from accessing appropriate resources, leading
to resource misintegration and VCD, which may reduce patients’ intentions to use services.
Second, ‘lack of support for the weak’ is also an important antecedent that causes VCD
and can be related to the inﬂuence of social norms in the VCC process. Social norms are
known to affect the VCC process (Edvardsson et al., 2014; Vargo & Akaka, 2012), and
customers tend to engage negatively when they perceive a deviation from a social norm during
the consumption process (Li et al., 2018). Overall, these features suggest that customers’
perceptions of deviations from social norms can promote resource misintegration, resulting
in VCD, which can reduce or extinguish the intentions of service usage. The presence of VCD
antecedents that violate social norms may be characteristic of services that require public
and ethical standards. People’s normative sense of ‘this is how services should be’, whether
right or wrong, is likely to emerge for those who engage in services where inclusiveness is
required (Fisk et al., 2018). Van de Walle (2016) found a close relationship between deviation
from established norms and service failure in the context of public services. These ﬁndings
can be applied to healthcare services that have a negative impact on customers’ intentions
to use services. This illustrates how adherence or deviation from the ethical standards that
customers implicitly hold for healthcare services is critical to the success or failure of value
creation.
4.2 Practical implications
4.2.1 Service encounter and servicescape
This study has implications for practitioners in that it discloses the types of VCD and
antecedents that healthcare service practitioners should know. This study reveals that the
four antecedents of VCD type II (loss of trust), ‘mistrust of expertise’, ‘fraudulent action’,
‘inconsiderate behaviour’, ‘combination of the above’, and two of the antecedents of VCD
type VII (condition besides treatment), ‘annoying advertisements and ornaments’ and ‘incon-
venient and uncomfortable facilities’, may result in reduction of intention to use services.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1707
Regarding the four antecedents of type II, ‘customer neglect by service providers’ (Bitner
et al., 1990) and ‘opportunistic behaviours of service providers’ (Chowdhury et al., 2016;
Pathak et al., 2020) can result in customers’ distrust of the service providers (Järvi et al.,
2018; Vafeas et al., 2016). Service providers should be aware of the importance of appropri-
ate behaviour and service encounters to prevent the termination or reduction of customers’
intentions to use services caused by VCD. In addition, we noticed an interesting ﬁnding that
two antecedents of VCD type VII: servicescape (Bitner, 1992; Hoffman et al., 2003) may
negatively affect resource integration, which signiﬁcantly affects the patients’ perception of
the value proposition by service providers. To circumvent VCD, service providers need to
examine whether the servicescape is appropriate from the customers’ perspectives.
4.2.2 Handling time/cost-conscious customers
Healthcare service providers may understand the importance of paying attention to patients’
time and cost. Particularly, this study shows that practitioners need to pay attention to the
antecedent ‘imbalance between investment time/cost and effect.’ This antecedent emerges
when patients feel that the cost and time spent on treatment are not commensurate with the
results. This results in coercive resource integration (Laud et al., 2019), with patients experi-
encing dissatisfaction with perceived beneﬁts and perceived costs (Prior & Marcos-Cuevas,
2016). However, this antecedent goes beyond the dental clinic–patient dyad relationship
explained.Inmostcases,dentistsdonotwanttheirpatientstowastetimeandmoney;however,
to provide a wide range of standardised treatments to the public, the MHLW has established
standardised treatment procedures and penalties. In addition, most inlays and crowns are
produced in external dental laboratories, not in dental clinics, making it difﬁcult to complete
these procedures on the same day. Therefore, even if the patient wishes to ﬁnish treatment
quickly, the dental clinic must follow a standardised procedure, and the length of treatment
is affected by the workload of the external laboratory. Most patients are unaware of these
situations and feel forced to spend more money and time. As this situation worsens over time,
it can change into a ‘gap in expectations between patient and service provider.’ To prevent
VCD due to these factors, dentists and staff should provide patients with background and
relevant knowledge of healthcare services.
5 Conclusion
This study aimed to identify the types of VCD and their antecedents that critically affect the
reduction of patients’ intention to use healthcare services, using an exploratory approach.
Using the topic model, a textual data analysis of 1075 patient complaints regarding dental
clinics resulted in their categorisation into twelve types of VCD. Statistical testing revealed
that three of these VCD types had a signiﬁcant negative effect on patients’ intentions to use
services. We then identiﬁed ten antecedents that signiﬁcantly affect service usage intention.
The most important contribution of this study to service research and service operation is
that the relationship between VCD and the reduction of service usage intention was analysed
using empirical data. Conventional studies have been conducted on VCD alone, and pio-
neering studies have analysed the relationship between VCC and goods purchase intention
(Leroi-Weldens et al., 2017). Nevertheless, to explore the importance of VCD for service
research and service operation, it is necessary to analyse the relationship between VCD and
the reduction of service use intentions. Furthermore, it also responds to the importance of
123

1708
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
using a multi-level perspective. Based on this analytical perspective, institutional factors and
social norms, such as macro-level actors, were found to inﬂuence the process of VCD and to
inhibit resource integration, which results in reducing or extinguishing customers’ intentions
to continue service use.
While this is a novel study on the classiﬁcation of VCD types that cause the reduction
of service use intention, it has three explicit limitations. First, this study only included data
on healthcare services, speciﬁcally dental services in Japan. Further studies are needed to
investigate the types of VCD and customers’ service usage intentions in other countries and
other areas of business. Second, we did not use data from service providers, as this study
focused on customer complaints only. A similar analysis using service providers’ data should
be conducted to clarify the types of VCD from the service providers’ perspectives, as well
as their antecedents. Finally, a study on how service providers should improve their services
to avoid VCD and offer best service experience to patients should be further studied.
Despite these limitations, this study has revealed the impact of VCD caused by institutions
and social norms, which will encourage future research. Therefore, although only one social
norm was found to have an impact on VCD in this study, other social norms and prejudice
are likely to have a similar impact. Institutions and social norms that may affect VCD can
vary by service type, and further research is required to identify them. Moreover, in service
marketing research and practice, a study that analysed VCD while utilising data mining of
electronic word of mouth (Gkritzali et al., 2019) has recently identiﬁed the actual needs of
customers and their complaints against the service. Consequently, in the future, an effective
analysis of qualitative data will be important in the service sector.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interests The authors have no relevant ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interests to disclose.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Akaka, M. A., Vargo, S. L., & Lusch, R. F. (2013). The complexity of context: A service ecosystems approach
for international marketing. J. Int. Marketing., 21(4), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1509/jim.13.0032
Ali, I., & Kannan, D. (2022). Mapping research on healthcare operations and supply chain management: A
topic modelling-based literature review. Annals of Operations Research, 315(1), 29–55. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-022-04596-5
Alizadehsani, R., Roshanzamir, M., Hussain, S., Khosravi, A., Koohestani, A., Zangooei, M. H., Abdar, M.,
Beykikhoshk, A., Shoeibi, A., Zare, A., Panahiazar, M., Nahavandi, S., Srinivasan, D., Atiya, A. F., &
Acharya, U. R. (2021). Handling of uncertainty in medical data using machine learning and probability
theory techniques: A review of 30 years (1991–2020). Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-021-04006-2
Beirão, G., Patrício, L., & Fisk, R. P. (2017). Value cocreation in service ecosystems. Journal of Service
Management, 28(2), 227–249. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOSM-11-2015-0357
Berry, L. L., & Bendapudi, N. (2007). Health care: A fertile ﬁeld for service research. Journal of Service
Research, 10(2), 111–122. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094670507306682
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1709
Bitner, M. J. (1992). Servicescapes: The impact of physical surroundings on customers and employees. Journal
of Marketing, 56(2), 57–71. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299205600205
Bitner, M. J., Booms, B. H., & Tetreault, M. S. (1990). The service encounter: Diagnosing favorable and unfa-
vorable incidents. Journal of Marketing, 54(1), 71–84. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299005400105
Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the ACM, 55(4), 77–84. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2133806.2133826
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3, 993–1022. https://doi.org/10.5555/944919.944937
ˇCai´c, M., Odekerken-Schröder, G., & Mahr, D. (2018). Service robots: Value co-creation and co-destruction in
elderly care networks. Journal of Service Management, 29(2), 178–205. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOSM-
07-2017-0179
Chandler, J. D., & Vargo, S. L. (2011). Contextualization and value-in-context: How context frames exchange.
Marketing Theory, 11(1), 35–49. https://doi.org/10.1177/1470593110393713
Chang J (2010) lda: Collapsed Gibbs Sampling Methods for Topic Models: R package version 1.2.3. http://
CRAN.R-project.org/package=lda. Accessed 24 Aug 2020
Chen, Y., Wang, J., Zhu, J., Sherman, H. D., & Chou, S. (2019). How the great recession affects performance:
A case of Pennsylvania hospitals using DEA. Annals of Operations Research, 278(1), 77–99. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10479-017-2516-1
Cheng, Y. M., & Leu, S. S. (2011). Integrating data mining with KJ method to classify bridge construc-
tion defects. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(6), 7143–7150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2010.
12.047
Chowdhury, I. N., Gruber, T., & Zolkiewski, J. (2016). Every cloud has a silver lining—Exploring the dark side
of value co-creation in B2B service networks. Industrial Marketing Management, 55, 97–109. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2016.02.016
Daunt, K. L., & Harris, L. C. (2017). Consumer showrooming: Value co-destruction. Journal of Retailing and
Consumer Services, 38, 166–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2017.05.013
DiMaggio, P., Nag, M., & Blei, D. (2013). Exploiting afﬁnities between topic modeling and the sociological
perspective on culture: Application to newspaper coverage of US government arts funding. Poetics, 41(6),
570–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2013.08.004
Dolan, R., Seo, Y., & Kemper, J. (2019). Complaining practices on social media in tourism: A value co-
creation and co-destruction perspective. Tourism Management, 73, 35–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tourman.2019.01.017
Echeverri, P., & Skålén, P. (2011). Co-creation and co-destruction: A practice-theory based study of interactive
value formation. Marketing Theory, 11(3), 351–373. https://doi.org/10.1177/1470593111408181
Edvardsson, B., Kleinaltenkamp, M., Tronvoll, B., McHugh, P., & Windahl, C. (2014). Institutional logics
matter when coordinating resource integration. Marketing Theory, 14(3), 291–309. https://doi.org/10.
1177/1470593114534343
Fan, W., Liu, J., Zhu, S., & Pardalos, P. M. (2020). Investigating the impacting factors for the healthcare
professionals to adopt artiﬁcial intelligence-based medical diagnosis support system (AIMDSS). Annals
of Operations Research, 294(1), 567–592. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-2818-y
Fisk, R. P., Dean, A. M., Alkire, L., Joubert, A., Previte, J., Robertson, N., & Rosenbaum, M. S. (2018). Design
for service inclusion: Creating inclusive service systems by 2050. Journal of Service Management, 29(5),
834–858. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOSM-05-2018-0121
Frow, P., McColl-Kennedy, J. R., & Payne, A. (2016). Co-creation practices: Their role in shaping a health
care ecosystem. Industrial Marketing Management, 56, 24–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.
2016.03.007
Gkritzali, A., Mavragani, E., & Gritzalis, D. (2019). Negative MWOM and value co-destruction during des-
tination crises. Business Process Management Journal, 26(4), 839–856. https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-
07-2019-0278
Greer, D. A. (2015). Defective co-creation. European Journal of Marketing, 49(1/2), 238–261. https://doi.org/
10.1108/EJM-07-2012-0411
Hoffman, K. D., Kelley, S. W., & Chung, B. C. (2003). A CIT investigation of servicescape failures and asso-
ciated recovery strategies. J. Ser. Mark., 17(4), 322–340. https://doi.org/10.1108/08876040310482757
Hornik K, Grün B (2011) topicmodels: An R package for ﬁtting topic models. J. Stat. Softw. 40(13):1–30.
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v040.i13
Järvi, H., Kähkönen, A. K., & Torvinen, H. (2018). When value co-creation fails: Reasons that lead to value
co-destruction. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 34(1), 63–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scaman.
2018.01.002
123

1710
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
Johnson, M., Albizri, A., & Simsek, S. (2020). Artiﬁcial intelligence in healthcare operations to enhance
treatment outcomes: A framework to predict lung cancer prognosis. Annals of Operations Research.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03872-6
Jung, H., Lee, C. G., & White, C. C. (2015). Socially responsible service operations management: An overview.
Annals of Operations Research, 230(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-015-1839-z
Kaartemo, V., & Känsäkoski, H. (2018). Information and knowledge processes in health care value co-creation
and co-destruction. SAGE Open, 8(4), 158244018820482. https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244018820482
Kashif, M., & Zarkada, A. (2015). Value co-destruction between customers and frontline employees. Int. J.
Bank. Mark., 33(6), 672–691. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJBM-09-2014-0121
Kim, K., Byon, K. K., & Baek, W. (2020). Customer-to-customer value co-creation and co-destruction in
sporting events. The Service Industries Journal, 40(9–10), 633–655. https://doi.org/10.1080/02642069.
2019.1586887
Kong, G., Jiang, L., Yin, X., Wang, T., Xu, D. L., Yang, J. B., & Hu, Y. (2018). Combining principal component
analysis and the evidential reasoning approach for healthcare quality assessment. Annals of Operations
Research, 271(1), 679–699. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-2789-z
Laud, G., Bove, L., Ranaweera, C., Leo, W. W. C., Sweeney, J., & Smith, S. (2019). Value co-destruction:
A typology of resource misintegration manifestations. Journal of Services Marketing, 33(7), 866–889.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JSM-01-2019-0022
Leroi-Weldens, S., Sandra, S., Van Vaerenbergh, Y., & Grönroos, C. (2017). Does communicating the cus-
tomer’s resource integrating role improve or diminish value proposition effectiveness? Journal of Service
Management, 28(4), 618–639. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOSM-11-2015-0366
Leroi-Werelds, S. (2019). An update on customer value: State of the art, revised typology, and research agenda.
Journal of Service Management, 30(5), 650–680. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOSM-03-2019-0074
Li, L. P., Juric, B., & Brodie, R. J. (2018). Actor engagement valence: Conceptual foundations, propositions
and research directions. Journal of Service Management, 29(3), 491–516. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOSM-
08-2016-0235
Malik, M. M., Abdallah, S., & Ala’raj, M. (2018). Data mining and predictive analytics applications for the
delivery of healthcare services: A systematic literature review. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1),
287–312. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2393-z
Matsumura N, Miura A (2014) TTM: Tiny Text Miner. Accessed August 24, 2020, http://mtmr.jp/ttm/.
McColl-Kennedy, J. R., Vargo, S. L., Dagger, T. S., Sweeney, J. C., & Yvan, K. (2012). Health care customer
value cocreation practice styles. Journal of Service Research, 15(4), 370–389. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1094670512442806
Mills, G. R. W., & Razmdoost, K. (2016). Managing value co-creation/destruction: A longitudinal education
capital programme/project case study. Construction Management and Economics, 34(4–5), 286–301.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2016.1187284
Mishra, N., & Singh, A. (2018). Use of twitter data for waste minimisation in beef supply chain. Annals of
Operations Research, 270(1), 337–359. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2303-4
Mitsuzawa, K., Tauchi, M., Domoulin, M., Nakashima, M., & Mizumoto, T. (2016). FKC Corpus: A Japanese
Corpus from new opinion survey service. In Proceedings of the novel incentives for collecting data and
annotation from people: Types, implementation, tasking requirements, workﬂow and results (pp. 11–18).
Nam, K., Baker, J., Ahmad, N., & Goo, J. (2020). Dissatisfaction, disconﬁrmation, and distrust: An empirical
examination of value co-destruction through negative electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM). Information
Systems Frontiers, 22(1), 113–130. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-018-9849-4
Ostrom, A. L., Parasuraman, A., Bowen, D. E., Patrício, L., & Voss, C. A. (2015). Service research priorities
in a rapidly changing context. Journal of Service Research, 18(2), 127–159. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1094670515576315
Oztekin, A. (2018). Creating a marketing strategy in healthcare industry: A holistic data analytic approach.
Annals of Operations Research, 270(1), 361–382. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2493-4
Pathak, B., Ashok, M., & Tan, Y. L. (2020). Value co-destruction: Exploring the role of actors’ opportunism
in the B2B context. International Journal of Information Management, 52, 102093. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102093
Plé, L. (2016). Studying customers’ resource integration by service employees in interactional value co-
creation. Journal of Services Marketing, 30(2), 152–164. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSM-02-2015-0065
Plé, L. (2017). Why Do We Need Research on Value Co-destruction? J. Creat. Value., 3(2), 162–169. https://
doi.org/10.1177/2394964317726451
Plé, L., & Chumpitaz Cáceres, R. (2010). Not always co-creation: Introducing interactional co-destruction of
value in service-dominant logic. Journal of Services Marketing, 24(6), 430–437. https://doi.org/10.1108/
08876041011072546
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 348:1691–1711
1711
Pop, O. M., Leroi-Werelds, S., Roijakkers, N., & Andreassen, T. W. (2018). Institutional types and institutional
change in healthcare ecosystems. Journal of Service Management, 29(4), 593–614. https://doi.org/10.
1108/JOSM-02-2017-0041
Prior, D. D., & Marcos-Cuevas, J. (2016). Value co-destruction in interﬁrm relationships. Marketing Theory,
16(4), 533–552. https://doi.org/10.1177/1470593116649792
Quach, S., & Thaichon, P. (2017). From connoisseur luxury to mass luxury: Value co-creation and co-
destruction in the online environment. Journal of Business Research, 81, 163–172. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jbusres.2017.06.015
R Core Team (2017). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna: R Foundation for
Statistical Computing. https://www.R-project.org/. Accessed 24 Aug 2020
Robertson, N., Polonsky, M., & McQuilken, L. (2014). Are my symptoms serious Dr Google? A resource-
based typology of value co-destruction in online self-diagnosis. Australasian Marketing Journal, 22(3),
246–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ausmj.2014.08.009
Sariyer, G., Ataman, M. G., Mangla, S. K., Kazancoglu, Y., & Dora, M. (2022). Big data analytics and the
effects of government restrictions and prohibitions in the COVID-19 pandemic on emergency department
sustainable operations. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04955-2
Scupin, R. (1997). The KJ method: A technique for analyzing data derived from Japanese ethnology. Human
Organs, 56(2), 233–237. https://doi.org/10.17730/humo.56.2.x335923511444655
Smith, A. M. (2013). The value co-destruction process: A customer resource perspective. European Journal
of Marketing, 47(11/12), 1889–1909. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJM-08-2011-0420
Sthapit, E., & Björk, P. (2019). Sources of value co-destruction: Uber customer perspectives. Tourism Review,
74(4), 780–794. https://doi.org/10.1108/TR-12-2018-0176
Vafeas, M., Hughes, T., & Hilton, T. (2016). Antecedents to Value Diminution. Marketing Theory, 16(4),
469–491. https://doi.org/10.1177/1470593116652005
Van de Walle, S. (2016). When public services fail: A research agenda on public service failure. Journal of
Service Management, 27(5), 831–846. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOSM-04-2016-0092
Vargo,S.L.,& Akaka,M.A.(2012).Value cocreation and service systems(re) formation: Aservice ecosystems
view. Servi. Sci., 4(3), 207–217. https://doi.org/10.1287/serv.1120.0019
Vargo, S. L., Akaka, M. A., & Vaughan, C. M. (2017). Conceptualizing Value: A Service-ecosystem view. J.
Creat Value., 3(2), 117–124. https://doi.org/10.1177/2394964317732861
Vargo, S. L., & Lusch, R. F. (2004). Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing. Journal of Marketing,
68(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.68.1.1.24036
Vargo, S. L., & Lusch, R. F. (2008). Service-dominant logic: Continuing the evolution. Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science, 36(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-007-0069-6
Vargo, S. L., & Lusch, R. F. (2016). Institutions and axioms: An extension and update of service-dominant
logic. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 44(1), 5–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-015-
0456-3
Vasdev, D., Gupta, V., Shubham, S., Chaudhary, A., Jain, N., Salimi, M., & Ahmadian, A. (2022). Periapical
dental X-ray image classiﬁcation using deep neural networks. Annals of Operations Research. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04961-4
Verter,V.,&Lapierre,S.D.(2002).Locationofpreventivehealthcarefacilities.AnnalsofOperationsResearch,
110(1), 123–132. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1020767501233
World Health Organization. (2022, March 15). Retrieved from July 28, 2022, from https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/oral-health
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123