TITLE: A novel explainable artificial intelligence framework using knockoffs techniques with applications to sports analytics
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06575-y
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06575-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A novel explainable artiﬁcial intelligence framework using
knockoffs techniques with applications to sports analytics
Tingting Zhao1 · Jeﬀrey Cabral2 · Guangyu Zhu3
Received: 14 August 2024 / Accepted: 7 March 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
The rapid integration of black-box Machine Learning (ML) models into critical decision-
making scenarios has triggered an urgent call for transparency from stakeholders in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI). This call stems from growing concerns about the deployment of models
whose decisions lack justiﬁcation, legitimacy, and detailed explanations of their behavior. To
address these concerns, Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) has emerged as a crucial
ﬁeld, focusing on methods and processes that enable the comprehension of how AI systems
make decisions, generate predictions, and execute their functions. The importance of XAI
lies in its ability to provide explanations that justify a model’s outputs, thereby ensuring
trust and accountability in AI systems. In this work, we propose a novel XAI framework that
leverages state-of-the-art statistical knockoff techniques to identify the most informative pre-
dictors while maintaining a controlled False Discovery Rate (FDR). This framework enhances
informed decision-making by ensuring robust and interpretable insights. We validate our
approach through synthetic data experiments, demonstrating that it can effectively identify
important features with high power while providing ﬁnite-sample FDR control across various
scenarios. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our approach by applying it to predict the outcomes
of National Football League (NFL) playoffs, a domain of signiﬁcant importance in sports
analytics. Our method provides invaluable insights that support strategic decision-making in
the highly competitive ﬁeld of professional football.
Keywords Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI ) · Sports analytics · NFL prediction ·
Knockoffs · Controlled false discovery rate · Logistic regression · Decision trees · Random
forest · XGBoost
B Guangyu Zhu
guangyuzhu@uri.edu
Tingting Zhao
tingting.zhao@uri.com
Jeffrey Cabral
jcabral11@bryant.edu
1
College of Business, University of Rhode Island, 45 Upper College Rd, Kingston, RI 02881, USA
2
Information Systems and Analytics, Bryant University, 1150 Douglas Pike, Smithﬁeld, RI 02917,
USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Statistics, University of Rhode Island, 45 Upper College Rd,
Kingston, RI 02881, USA
123

Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
With the rise of black-box Machine Learning (ML) models in critical decision-making sce-
narios, there is a growing call for transparency from stakeholders in AI (Langer et al., 2021).
This demand arises from concerns about deploying models whose decisions lack justiﬁca-
tion or legitimacy and do not offer detailed explanations of their behavior (Gunning et al.,
2019). Therefore, providing explanations that justify a model’s outputs is essential to ensure
trust and accountability in AI systems (Arrieta et al., 2020). These challenges underscore
the necessity for simple, interpretable machine learning models capable of attaining high
predictive accuracy.
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) refers to the methods and processes that enable
us to comprehend how an AI system makes decisions, generates predictions, and executes its
functions. Coussement et al. (2024) explore the role of XAI in improving decision-making
processes. XAI is essential for the development and application of AI in various industries,
including retail, banking and ﬁnancial services, healthcare, manufacturing, and supply chain
management (Kim et al., 2020; Shin, 2021; Zhdanov et al., 2022; Davazdahemami et al.,
2022; Pamucar et al., 2023; Sadeghi et al., 2024; Kraus et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024).
The False Discovery Rate (FDR) is a statistical metric used to evaluate the performance
of multiple hypothesis testing (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995). The FDR has been popular in
various domains such as ﬁnancial economics (Harvey & Liu, 2020), mutual fund selection
(Wang et al., 2023), drug repurposing (Zhao et al., 2023), and online sequential testing (Gang
et al., 2023). FDR control is crucial in XAI because it ensures that the explanations provided
by the AI are trustworthy, mitigates the risk of incorrect explanations leading to signiﬁcant
negative consequences, validates the model’s performance to assess whether the AI model
genuinely captures the underlying patterns in the data, and supports AI systems in being
transparent and accountable.
In this paper, we introduce a novel robust statistical protocol utilizing the Model-X Knock-
offs framework (Candes et al., 2018) within the context of XAI to ensure rigorous control
of the FDR. The Model-X knockoffs procedure (Candes et al., 2018) is a new statistical
framework that allows scientists to perform feature selection while controlling the FDR in
ﬁnite samples, even in the presence of complex correlation structures. Model-X knockoffs
do not require any assumptions about how the response depends on the features. This makes
it well-adapted to situations where ﬂexible tools such as deep learning techniques (Lu et al.,
2018) or Lasso regression (Tibshirani, 1996) are available to learn the dependence relation-
ship between the response and the features. Knockoffs have been applied in various ﬁelds,
including group-feature selection (Zhu & Zhao, 2021), random design settings (Candes et
al., 2018), whole-genome sequencing data (He et al., 2021), and genome-wide association
studies (Sesia et al., 2019).
Recent trends in Information System (IS) literature show increasing attention towards
developing XAI solutions in domains less focused on extensive data-driven or machine learn-
ing approaches. This shift underscores the growing need for XAI in diverse ﬁelds, including
sports analytics. Sports analytics plays a pivotal role in modern athletics, revolutionizing
how teams strategize, scout talent, and optimize performance. Sports analytics uses relevant
historical sports-related statistics to ﬁnd meaningful patterns and valuable insights to provide
a competitive advantage to a team or individual. Sports analytics help analyze player per-
formance metrics (Nguyen et al., 2022), predict game outcomes (Gifford & Bayrak, 2023;
Roumani, 2023), enable coaches and managers to make informed decisions (Cervone et al.,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 The knockoffs framework for explainable AI
2014), maximize player potential and enhance overall team performance (Gonçalves et al.,
2017).
The burgeoning interest in sports analytics is fueled by the wealth of statistical data
available, coupled with advancements in data management technologies and computational
techniques, facilitating the gathering and interpretation of observable data about athletes
and game play (Baker & Kwartler, 2015). The utilization of sports analytics spans various
sports disciplines, encompassing, yet not conﬁned to, baseball (Koseler & Stephan, 2017),
prognosticating volleyball match outcomes (Chellatamilan et al., 2015), scrutinizing soc-
cer dynamics (Fernández & Bornn, 2021), National Basketball Association (NBA) playoff
prediction (Cheng et al., 2016; Thabtah et al., 2019; Ma, 2021).
As the landscape of sports analytics continues to expand, attention has increasingly turned
to its application in the National Football League (NFL), where teams seek to leverage
data-driven insights to gain a competitive edge in player evaluation, game strategy, and per-
formance optimization (Thakkar & Shah, 2021; Gifford & Bayrak, 2023; Roumani, 2023).
Despite the extensive research conducted in the ﬁeld of sports analytics, two signiﬁcant chal-
lenges dominate much of the existing literature. Firstly, a notable portion of the work suffers
from low accuracy (Haghighat et al., 2013; Bunker & Thabtah, 2019), which may not translate
into actionable decisions due to restrictions on sideline technology. The NFL exempliﬁes this
issue with its stringent regulations on sideline technology. Secondly, there is a prevalent lack
of interpretation and meaningful data insights in decision-making sports analytics. More-
over, even though deep learning, particularly Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs), stands as
one of the most commonly utilized machine learning algorithms in sports analytics, it lacks
consistent superiority over alternative methods (Bunker & Susnjak, 2022). Deep learning
models are often criticized for being black box models due to their complex internal work-
ings, posing signiﬁcant challenges in interpretation (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Samek et al., 2019).
This complexity leads to coaches’ understandable skepticism towards models they may not
fully comprehend, thereby impeding the widespread adoption of such methodologies (Joash
Fernandes et al., 2020).
In this paper, we apply our novel framework to identify signiﬁcant seasonal statistics for
predicting the NFL playoffs while controlling FDR. The ﬂowchart in Fig.1 demonstrates our
utilization of the knockoffs framework to elevate NFL playoff prediction, offering transparent
123

Annals of Operations Research
and actionable data insights derived from regular season statistics of all 32 NFL teams across
the 2017 to 2023 seasons. 1 In our study, we pinpoint four essential features from a total of
17 seasonal statistics features resulting in a 5% enhancement in prediction accuracy when
utilizing just these four features as opposed to all 17 features. To summarize, our paper
provides the following contributions:
• Introduce a novel XAI framework utilizing advanced statistical knockoff techniques.
• Demonstrate the ability of our XAI framework to identify key decision-making features
while maintaining control over the FDR.
• Apply the framework to pinpoint critical seasonal statistics for NFL playoff predictions
with FDR control.
• Showcase superior predictive performance with our model using only four features
selected by knockoffs, outperforming multiple state-of-the-art machine learning algo-
rithms while using a full set of features and providing valuable insights for enhancing
NFL decision-making strategies.
2 Related work
2.1 Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI)
The advent and proliferation of machine learning techniques have markedly enhanced the
performance of AI models. There is a signiﬁcant need to comprehend the decisions and ratio-
nale underlying model predictions, which is crucial for evaluating trustworthiness. XAI is a
set of methods and tools that help users understand and trust the output of machine learning
algorithms. It allows users to understand why an AI system made a particular prediction, rec-
ommendation, or decision (Li et al., 2022). Interpretability promotes fairness by identifying
and addressing bias in the training data, thereby contributing to unbiased decision-making
processes (Linardatos et al., 2020). An extensive and thorough review of XAI can be found
in Arrieta et al. (2020). Islam et al. (2022) have provided a systematic review of XAI in terms
of different application domains and tasks. XAI has broad applications and profound impacts
in sectors including but not limited to healthcare (Kim et al., 2023), precision medicine (Tjoa
& Guan, 2020), autonomous driving systems (Dong et al., 2023), decision-making systems
(Linardatos et al., 2020; Coussement & Benoit, 2021), emotion analysis for customers in
marketing (Li et al., 2024), ﬁnance (Zhang et al., 2022), and broader societal contexts.
XAI methods can be either global or local in scope. Global XAI methods aim to clarify
the overall behavior of the model by examining its entire structure and logic. In contrast,
local models focus on providing explanations for speciﬁc decisions or predictions made by
the model. In this paper, we focus on global XAI methods. Early global XAI methods can
trace their origins to the development of feature selection techniques such as Least Absolute
Shrinkage and Selection Operator (Lasso) (Tibshirani, 1996) and Elastic Net (Zou & Hastie,
2005). These methods pioneered the integration of interpretability into machine learning
models by prioritizing the identiﬁcation of essential predictors while ensuring model sim-
plicity and transparency. Lasso performs both variable selection and regularization, which
enhances the prediction accuracy and interpretability of the model. By shrinking some coef-
ﬁcients to exactly zero, Lasso makes it clear which features are contributing to the model
and which are not, making the model easier to interpret.
1 https://www.pro-football-reference.com/
123

Annals of Operations Research
Decision trees are inherently interpretable models due to their hierarchical structure, where
decisions are made based on feature values leading to an output. Breiman et al. (1984) popu-
larized decision trees through the CART algorithm, highlighting their transparency and ease
of understanding. However, single decision tree can suffer from instability and overﬁtting.
Random Forests (Breiman, 2001) improve prediction accuracy by aggregating multiple deci-
sion trees. While these ensemble methods are more powerful, they lose some interpretability.
Techniques such as feature importance scores have been developed to help interpret these
models.
With the development and widespread of Deep Neural Networks (DNN), the interpretabil-
ity of deep learning models has also become a major area of study. The most widely used
advanced deep learning XAI methods include but not limited to Local Interpretable Model-
agnostic Explanations (LIME) (Ribeiro et al., 2016), SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP)
(Lundberg & Lee, 2017), Saliency Maps (Simonyan et al., 2013), Integrated Gradients (Sun-
dararajan et al., 2017), and Counterfactual Explanations (Wachter et al., 2017). LIME is a
method to explain individual predictions of any classiﬁer. SHAP is based on cooperative
game theory and provides a uniﬁed measure of feature importance. Both LIME and SHAP
are local XAI methods. In the realm of neural networks, Saliency Maps highlight the areas of
an input image that are most inﬂuential for the model’s prediction, while Integrated Gradients
provide a way to attribute the prediction of a neural network to its input features, offering
insight into the model’s decision-making process. Counterfactual Explanations provide a
way to understand model decisions by identifying the smallest change to an input that would
change the model’s prediction. This method is particularly useful for identifying decision
boundaries and understanding how different features contribute to predictions.
However, all the aforementioned XAI methods do not consider the FDR, which quantiﬁes
the expected proportion of features identiﬁed as important for model interpretation that are
actually not important (false positives). Accounting for the FDR is crucial because it helps
quantify the likelihood of false positives among the identiﬁed features or patterns, ensuring
thattheexplanationsprovidedarenotonlyinterpretablebutalsostatisticallyreliable.Ignoring
the FDR can lead to misleading conclusions, reducing the trustworthiness and utility of
the explanations (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995; Storey & Tibshirani, 2003). Therefore, a
rigorous statistical modeling framework is needed that extends beyond the traditional XAI
methods. This framework should effectively identify the key features that enhance model
prediction quality while simultaneously controlling the FDR.
2.2 The knockoffs framework
The Knockoffs framework is a statistical approach designed to control the False Discov-
ery Rate (FDR) in feature selection problems, particularly in high-dimensional settings. It
provides a robust way to identify signiﬁcant predictors while managing the rate of false
discoveries. Fixed Knockoffs, introduced by Barber and Candès (2015), was the initial for-
mulation of the Knockoffs framework. This method creates knockoff variables that mimic the
correlation structure of the original features but are conditionally independent of the response
variable. Barber and Candès (2015) demonstrated that the Fixed Knockoffs framework could
achieve exact FDR control under the assumption that the design matrix has more observations
than variables (n > p), which does not apply to high-dimensional settings.
Building on the Fixed Knockoffs framework, Candes et al. (2018) introduced the Model-
X Knockoffs framework, which addresses the limitations of Fixed Knockoffs by handling
cases where the number of features exceeds the number of observations (p > n). Model-X
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 The knockoffs framework for explainable AI
Knockoffs generate knockoff variables conditionally independent with the response variable
given the observed features, making them suitable for a wider range of problems. Assuming a
joint Gaussian distribution of the features, this approach accurately models this distribution to
create knockoff variables in high-dimensional settings. Model-X Knockoffs achieve rigorous
FDR control and feature selection under weaker assumptions compared to Fixed Knockoffs,
accommodating any arbitrary correlation structure.
To relax the joint Gaussian distribution constraints of the features, Deep Knockoffs, intro-
duced by Romano et al. (2020), represent a signiﬁcant advancement by leveraging deep
learning techniques to generate knockoff variables. This method utilizes deep generative
models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) or Vari-
ational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014), to create knockoff variables that
are more ﬂexible and can handle complex feature distributions. Deep Knockoffs can model
intricate dependencies among features, making them suitable for high-dimensional and non-
linear data structures. By training a deep generative model on the original features, Deep
Knockoffs can generate synthetic knockoff features that maintain the necessary statistical
properties for effective FDR control.
In addition to these primary methods, several other extensions and reﬁnements have been
proposedtoenhancetheKnockoffsframework.ZhuandZhao (2021)designedDeep-GKnock
to handle features with group structure, where features are naturally divided into groups, and
the goal is to control the FDR at the group level. Barber et al. (2020), Ren et al. (2023),
Blain et al. (2024) have proposed robust inference with knockoffs to ensure robustness to
model misspeciﬁcation. These advancements have established the Knockoffs framework as
a powerful tool for high-dimensional data analysis and model interpretation. Researchers
now have a reliable means of identifying signiﬁcant predictors while controlling the FDR
across various applications, including drug repurposing (Zhao et al., 2023), causal inference
(Ahmad et al., 2021), detecting risk variants in whole-genome sequencing studies (He et
al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022), and predictive biomarker identiﬁcation (Sechidis et al., 2021).
Despite its widespread applicability, the potential of the knockoffs framework has yet to be
fully explored in the context of XAI and decision-making within business domains.
3 Methodology
In our work, we propose leveraging the Knockoffs framework to identify crucial seasonal
statistical measures for accurately predicting NFL playoff outcomes. Figure2 illustrates the
process of utilizing the Knockoffs framework for XAI applications. First, we collect regular
seasonstatisticsofall32NFLteamsacrossthe2018to2023seasonscreatetheoriginalfeature
123

Annals of Operations Research
matrix. Next, we apply the Knockoffs framework to generate synthetic seasonal statistics that
mirror the correlation structure of the actual NFL data but remain conditionally independent
of the playoff outcomes given the observed feature matrix. These synthetic statistics act as
negative controls, allowing us to identify the genuinely important statistics for predicting
playoff outcomes while controlling the FDR at a predetermined level.
The Model-X knockoff framework is well-suited for our modeling needs because it does
not assume a speciﬁc functional relationship between NFL seasonal statistics and the binary
playoff outcomes. It ensures ﬁnite sample FDR control for a range of NFL seasonal sta-
tistical measures. This ﬂexible approach can integrate traditional powerful methods like
Lasso regression (Tibshirani, 1996) for feature selection and model interpretation as well as
advanced techniques such as deep learning under the knockoffs framework (Lu et al., 2018;
Zhu & Zhao, 2021).
3.1 Problem statement
Our work tackles the crucial problem of selecting important seasonal statistics in sports
analytics by assuming a general conditional model. In this model, the response variable
(playoff outcome) Y can depend arbitrarily on the features X1, X2, . . . , X p. We consider n
i.i.d.samplesfromapopulation,eachintheform(X, Y),where X = (X1, X2, . . . , X p) ∈Rp
and Y ∈R. If the conditional distribution of Y depends on a smaller subset of these features,
our goal is to classify each feature as important or not based on its membership in this subset.
For instance, in the context of the NFL, X represents p different seasonal statistics, while Y
represents the corresponding playoff outcome. Speciﬁcally, Yi is a binary variable indicating
whether a team has made it to the playoffs. However, our method is versatile and can be
applied to continuous Yi outcomes as well, since the knockoffs framework is suitable for
both classiﬁcation (binary Yi outcome) and regression (continuous Yi outcome) scenarios.
A feature X j for j ∈{1, . . . , p} is said to be unimportant if and only if X j is independent
of Y conditionally on the other responses X−j, where X−j = {X1, . . . , X p}\{X j}. The
set of unimportant variable indices is denoted by H0 and we call a feature X j important if
j /∈H0. The set of the important feature indices is denoted as S. The unimportant features
are conditionally independent of the features given the important features {X j} j∈H0
Y |
{X j} j∈S. Our goal is to identify as many important features as possible while keeping the
FDR under control, where FDR = E

| ˆS ∩H0|/(| ˆS| ∨1)

and ˆS denotes a selected subset
of the important feature indices. We deﬁne our feature selection problem under a global XAI
context using graphical models in Fig.3.
3.2 Seasonal statistics knockoffs generation
The key idea is to adopt the Model-X knockoffs framework (Candes et al., 2018) to generate
negative controls ˜X of the true seasonal statistics, X. We present the deﬁnition of Model-
X knockoffs in Deﬁnition 1. This approach allows us to use the knockoffs to ﬁlter out the
true signals. It is observed that the generation and use of Model-X knockoffs depend solely
on the joint distribution between the features and the response, denoted as FXY . Model-X
knockoffs assume that the marginal distribution FX is known exactly and this allows the
conditional distribution FY|X to be unspeciﬁed. It is important to note that the generation
of knockoffs, ˜X, is independent of the predictive models relating X and Y. This ﬂexibility
allows us to incorporate knockoffs into various machine learning models, such as logistic
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig.3 A Feature selection problem.
The goal is to identify features
X5, X6 and X7 as important
because
Y
{X1, X2, X3, X4}|{X5, X6, X7}.
The response Y only depends on
{X1, X2, X3, X4} through the
important features {X5, X6, X7}
regression, decision trees, random forests, and XGBoost. This versatility is demonstrated in
our real data analysis presented in Sect. 5.
Deﬁnition 1 (Model-XKnockoffs(Candesetal.,2018))Arandomvector ˜X = ( ˜X1, . . . , ˜X p)
is the Model-X knockoffs of a random vector X = (X1, . . . , X p) if it satisﬁes two prop-
erties: (1) Pairwise exchangeability: for any subset D ⊂[p], where [p]={1, 2, …, p},
(X, ˜X)swap(D)
d= (X, ˜X), i.e. swapping the entries X j and ˜X j for each j ∈D leaves the joint
distribution invariant; and (2) Conditional independence: ˜X
Y | X, i.e., ˜X is independent
of the response Y given the response X, which can be guaranteed by constructing ˜X without
looking at Y.
Here we introduce Theorem 1 to explain why the knockoffs framework can provide a
ﬁnite sample FDR control when selecting important features.
Theorem 1 (Model-X Knockoffs) Let W j = w j([X, ˜X], Y) be the knockoff statistic to mea-
sure the importance for each X j, j ∈[p]. Here, functions w j, j ∈[p] are required to satisfy
the following ﬂip-sign property:
w j

[X, ˜X]swap(D), Y

=
 w j([X, ˜X], Y),
j /∈D,
−w j([X, ˜X], Y), j ∈D.
(1)
For any q ∈[0, 1], let
τ = min

t > 0 : 1 + |

j : W j ≤−t
 
|
|

j : W j ≥t
 
|
≤q

.
(2)
Then we can control the FDR = E

| ˆS ∩H0|/(| ˆS| ∨1)

at the target level of q by selecting
importance features
ˆS = { j : W j ≥τ}.
3.3 Important feature selection algorithm using knockoffs
3.3.1 Generalized linear model-X knockoffs (Lasso-MXK)
Since our real-world case involves a binary response variable (playoff outcome), we select
important features (seasonal statistics in the NFL example) within a generalized linear model
123

Annals of Operations Research
Algorithm 1 Feature Selection using Knockoffs
1: Generate the knockoffs of the original features such that
( ˜X, X) ∼N(0, G), s.t. G =


 −diag{s}
 −diag{s}


.
2: if A linear relationship is assumed between X and Y then
3:
Construct the feature importance measure and knockoff statistics using Lasso-MXK described in
Sect. 3.3.1.
4: else
5:
Construct the response importance measure and knockoff statistics using DNN-MXK described in
Sect. 3.3.2.
6: end if
7: Filter the important features using the threshold τ in Equation 2 with the target FDR level q.
framework. We apply a Lasso-regularized multinomial logistic regression model (Tibshirani,
1996). This model uses the original features X, augmented with their knockoff counterparts
˜X to predict the binary response variable.
The optimal Lasso solution in our case is
ˆβ(λ) ∈arg min
β∈R2p×1

−1
n
n

i=1

yi log(pi) + (1 −yi) log(1 −pi)

+ λ∥β∥1},
(3)
where pi = 1/

1 + exp(−[X, ˜X]iβ)

is the predicted probability for the i-th observation,
[X, ˜X]i is the feature vector and its knockoffs counterparts for the i-th observation, yi is the
observed binary playoff outcome for the i-th observation, n is the number of observations,
λ ⩾0 is the regularization parameter, and ∥β∥1 = 2p
j=1 |β j| is the l1-norm of the coefﬁcient
vector β, which includes p coefﬁcients for the original features X and p coefﬁcients for the
knockoffs ˜X.
We deﬁne Z j = sup

λ : ˆβ j(λ) ̸= 0

as the threshold λ on the lasso path, where the
coefﬁcient β j for feature X j ﬁrst becomes non-zero. We then compute the standard knockoff
statistics W j = Z j −˜Z j, which tends to be large for genuinely important features and
negative for null features. The set of important features, denoted as ˆS is selected to control
the FDR using Step 3 of Algorithm 1. This Lasso-based approach can be adapted for other
generalized linear models by modifying the objective functions.
3.3.2 Deep neural networks model-X knockoffs (DNN-MXK)
If the data set suggests a nonlinear relationship between Y and X, Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) can be employed to generate knockoff statistics and facilitate controlled feature
selection. However, constructing a knockoff statistic that maintains the ﬂip-sign property
within DNNs presents a signiﬁcant challenge. Following the approach of Lu et al. (2018),
who applied this method to enhance the interpretability and reproducibility of DNNs, we
use a pairwise-competing layer as the initial layer of a DNN, where inputs include both the
original features X and its knockoffs ˜X. In the pairwise-competing layer, there are p nodes,
with each jth node connecting exclusively to the original feature X j and its corresponding
knockoff ˜X j. This setup encourages competition between the weights ψ j and ˜ψ j assigned
to each pair.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The weights from the competing layer to the subsequent layer are denoted by θ0. The
weights for the ﬁnal layer leading to the output Y are denoted by θL, while the weights for
the intermediate layers are denoted by θ1, θ2, . . . , θL−1. We deﬁne  j as θ0 ⊙(θ1 ·θ2 · · · θL),
where ⊙represents element-wise multiplication. The term (θ1 · θ2 · · · θL) represents the
matrix multiplication of the weights across all connected layers, indicating the importance
of X j within the multilayer perceptron.
We then deﬁne the feature importance Z j as ψ j ×  j and the knockoff importance ˜Z j
as ˜ψ j ×  j. The knockoff statistics W j are obtained as W j = Z j −˜Z j, for j ∈1, 2, . . . , p.
Similar to the Lasso, these deﬁnitions allow us to employ Theorem 1 effectively.
4 Synthetic data experiments
Objectives Our objective is to demonstrate that our approach can identify important features
with high power while providing ﬁnite-sample FDR control under the following scenarios:
(1) a generalized linear model (logistic regression) setting with continuous features to mimic
the real data, (2) a high-dimensional setting with p > n, (3) highly correlated features.
4.1 Data
To generate the synthetic data, we set the number of features p = 200. The true regression
coefﬁcient vector β0 ∈Rp is sparse with k nonzero signals, and the nonzero coefﬁcients are
randomly chosen from {±γ }. We draw Xi independently from a multivariate normal distri-
bution with mean 0 and covariance matrix X = 4

ρ| j−k|
1≤j,k≤p. For each observation,
the binary outcome Y is generated from Bernoulli distribution with
π(X) = P(Y = 1|X) =
1
1 + exp(−XT
i β0).
In our default setting, we set n = 150, k = 10, γ = 4, and ρ = 0.3. To study the
effects of key parameters-including the sample size n, the number of non-zero signals k, the
scale regression coefﬁcient γ , and the correlation between features ρ, on controlled feature
selection performance, we vary one parameter while keeping the others at their default levels
in each experiment.
(1) Sample size n: we vary n from 100, 125, 150, 175, 200.
(2) Number of non-zero signals (sparsity) k: we vary k from 6, 8, 10, 12, 14.
(3) Scale regression coefﬁcient γ : we vary γ from 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
(4) Correlation between features ρ: we vary ρ from 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5.
For each setting, we run each experiment for 100 replications and set the target FDR level at
q = 0.2. The empirical power and FDR are reported in Fig.4. For each setting, we use target
FDR level q = 0.2 and repeat each experiment 100 times.
4.2 Results
Figure4 presents the results, illustrating the power (the proportion of true signals discovered)
and the FDR, both averaged across all trials. Across all settings, our method consistently
controls the FDR at the desired level. The power of our method increases with the sample
123

Annals of Operations Research
Power
FDP
100
125
150
175
200
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
Sample Size (n)
Power
FDP
6
8
10
12
14
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
Number of Non−Zero Signals (k)
Power
FDP
2
3
4
5
6
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
Scale Regression Coefficient ()
Power
FDP
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
Correlation between Features ()
Fig. 4 Results for the sparse logistics regression simulation. The dotted line indicates the target FDR level
q = 0.2
size (n), decreases with the number of non-zero signals (k) and the correlation between
features (ρ), and does not change signiﬁcantly with the scale of the regression coefﬁcient
(γ ).
The power of a statistical method typically rises with larger sample sizes (n), as more data
provides a clearer representation of underlying population patterns, enhancing the ability to
detect true effects. Additionally, a balanced dataset, indicated by a higher proportion of Y = 1
cases (δ), improves power by providing a clearer distinction between cases and controls. With
increased δ, the model beneﬁts from a stronger representation of the target class, enhancing
its capacity to identify true signals.
Conversely, higher feature correlation (ρ) diminishes power due to multicollinearity,
which complicates the distinction between predictors. Similarly, as the number of impor-
tant features (k) increases, power tends to decrease because additional features introduce
more true effects into the dataset, making it more difﬁcult to differentiate signiﬁcant signals
from noise.
5 Real data analysis
5.1 Data collection
The dataset for this study is sourced from the extensive online database, Pro-Football-
Reference.2 We have collected regular season statistics from all 32 NFL teams for the seasons
2 https://www.pro-football-reference.com/
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Our data collection process
spanning 2018 to 2023, providing our model with ample data for comprehensive playoff pre-
dictions. The data speciﬁcally includes offensive statistics related to rushing and receiving,
such as “Yards,”“Attempts,”and “Touchdowns.”Our dataset comprises 192 observations with
26 distinct features. We randomly selected 80% (153 observations) of the total data for train-
ing, leaving the remaining 20% (39 observations) as the testing dataset. Among the testing
data, there are 15 observations representing teams that made the playoffs and 24 observations
representing teams that missed the playoffs.
The target variable “Playoffs”is binary, where “0”indicates a team that did not make the
playoffs and “1”indicates a playoff-caliber team. A team is considered playoff-caliber if it has
a win-loss percentage of 0.529 or better, corresponding to a record of at least nine wins and
eight losses. The dataset includes 60 performance-related variables, which serve as features
contributing to the prediction of playoff outcomes. The collected dataset and the Python
implementation will be publicly available upon acceptance. In Fig.5, we have described our
data collection process.
Multicollinearity arises when two or more independent variables within a predictive model
demonstrate high correlation, potentially causing unstable results and coefﬁcient estimates.
In our sports model, we have retained 17 distinct seasonal statistical features after eliminating
variables with signiﬁcant multicollinearity and redundant meanings, as detailed in Table 1.
5.2 Competing methods
To assess the performance of the knockoff algorithm, we compare the results of various
prevalent machine learning methods using both the original and knockoff feature sets. Such
performance is shown for models including logistic regression (Cox, 1958), decision trees
(Quinlan, 2014), random forest (Breiman, 2001), and Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost)
(Chen & Guestrin, 2016). We provide the brief description of all the methods in Table 2.
5.2.1 Logistic regression
Logistic regression, introduced by Cox (1958), stands as a cornerstone in statistical model-
ing, speciﬁcally tailored for binary classiﬁcation tasks where outcomes are binary, such as
predicting playoff participation. This technique models the probability of an event, aligning
perfectly with our objective to predict playoff outcomes.
5.2.2 Decision trees
A decision tree (Breiman et al., 1984; Quinlan, 2014) is a versatile supervised machine learn-
ing method used for regression and classiﬁcation tasks. It constructs a tree-like model where
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Explanation of the 17 features included in the original predictive models
Seasonal statistics
Description
R Att
Rushing attempts
R Yds
Rushing yards
R TD
Rushing touchdowns
R 1D
First down rate
R BrkTkl
Rushing broken tackles
R YAC
Rushing yards after contact
R YAC/Att
Rushing yards after contact per attempt
R YBC/Att
Rushing yards before contact per attempt
C Rec
Receptions
C Yds
Receiving yards
C TD
Receiving touchdowns
C YBC
Receiving yards before contact
C YAC
Receiving yards after contact
C ADOT
Average depth of target
C BrkTkl
Receiving broken tackles
C Drop
Dropped passes
C Drop%
Dropped pass percentage
Table 2 List of competing methods and the method in blue is our best performing algorithm
Competing methods
Description
Logistic regression (LR)
Linear regression for binary classiﬁcation
Decision trees (DT)
Hierarchical tree-based classiﬁcation
Random forest (RF)
Ensemble of decision trees with bagging
XGBoost
Extreme gradient boosting decision tree
Logistic regression with knockoffs
LR using knockoffs under FDR control
Decision trees with knockoffs
DT using Knockoffs under FDR control
Random forests with knockoffs
RF using Knockoffs under FDR control
XGBoost with knockoffs
XGBoost using Knockoffs under FDR control
each internal node represents a feature, branches depict possible feature values, and leaves
indicate ﬁnal predictions. Decision trees handle both categorical and numerical data but can
overﬁt if they become too deep and complex, adapting too closely to training data noise. Ran-
dom Forest builds upon decision trees by employing ensemble learning and randomization
to enhance performance and generalization.
5.2.3 Random forest
Random Forest (Breiman, 2001) is an ensemble learning method that improves upon indi-
vidual decision trees by introducing randomness and diversity. It combines multiple trees
trained on different subsets of the data (bagging) and considers random subsets of features
at each split (feature bagging). This approach reduces overﬁtting and enhances predictive
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Selected seasonal
statistics features using knockoffs
over 100 replications
Selected seasonal statistics using knockoffs
Description
R Att
Rushing attempts
R Yds
Rushing yards
R TD
Rushing touchdowns
C TD
Receiving touchdowns
performance by aggregating predictions through methods like majority voting for classiﬁca-
tion or averaging for regression (Ishwaran et al., 2008). By considering different features at
each split, random forest can capture different aspects of the data and reduce the correlation
between trees (Breiman, 2001). Furthermore, random forest can estimate feature interactions
and capture nonlinear relationships in the data Louppe (2015).
5.2.4 XGBoost
XGBoost, short for eXtreme Gradient Boosting, Chen and Guestrin (2016) is an advanced
ensemble method used for classiﬁcation and regression. It sequentially builds decision trees
that correct errors of previous models, focusing on hard-to-predict instances to improve
accuracy. XGBoost stands out for its ability to handle diverse data types, mitigate overﬁtting
with regularization, and efﬁciently process sparse data or missing values. XGBoost uses
gradient boosting for additive training, continually reﬁning predictions by learning from
residuals. It combines tree outputs by weighted sums for classiﬁcation and averaging for
regression tasks to produce ﬁnal predictions.
5.3 Model evaluation and prediction quality comparision
To measure the success of our evolved feature set, we compare various performance metrics
across a distinct array of machine learning models detailed in Table 2. In the realm of
classiﬁcation evaluation metrics, three fundamental measures play a crucial role: precision
(P), recall (R), and the F1-score (F1). The F1-score emerges as a harmonious amalgamation
of precision and recall, offering a balanced measurement that considers both false positives
and false negatives:.
5.4 Empirical results
In Table 3, we present the features selected using the knockoffs framework across 100 repli-
cations. Due to the inherent randomness in generating knockoffs, we replicated the feature
selection process 100 times to identify the most robust features. As a result, we selected four
out of the 17 features under the knockoffs framework. We refer to the model using only the
four features selected under the knockoffs framework as the “Simpliﬁed Model,”while the
model incorporating all 17 features is termed the “Full Model”.
To evaluate the effectiveness and explainability of our four selected features in the “Sim-
pliﬁed Model”under the knockoffs framework, we compared it to the “Full Model”with 17
features using various performance metrics, including precision, recall, and F1-score. As
shown in Table 4, the “Simpliﬁed Model”meets or exceeds the predictive performance of
the “Full Model”while offering better explainability. Table 4 shows that using only the four
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Model performance comparison, where the bolded Logistic method represents the best overall model,
and in the Accuracy column, red indicates an accuracy increase for the simpliﬁed model compared to its full
model, while blue indicates an decrease compared to the corresponding full mode
Features
Method
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Accuracy
Logistic regression
0.82
0.82
0.82
0.82
Decision trees
0.61
0.59
0.60
0.59
Full model
Random Forest
0.80
0.79
0.80
0.79
Without knockoffs
XGBoost
0.84
0.79
0.80
0.79
Logistic regression
0.87
0.87
0.87
0.87
Decision trees
0.80
0.77
0.77
0.77
Simpliﬁed model
Random forest
0.75
0.74
0.75
0.74
Using knockoffs
XGBoost
0.87
0.85
0.85
0.85
features selected by the knockoffs framework results in signiﬁcant improvements in both
F1-score and accuracy for both logistic regression (a linear classiﬁer) and XGBoost (a non-
linear classiﬁer). These improvements range between 5% and 6% compared to the “Full
Model”with 17 features. Based on Table 4, logistic regression, utilizing the four features
selected under the knockoffs framework, achieves the highest accuracy and F1-score of 87%.
Additionally, decision trees, when using these same four selected features, show a signiﬁcant
improvement in accuracy, increasing from 59% to 77%.
By leveraging the knockoffs framework to streamline our feature set to just four key
variables, our models not only improve efﬁciency but also enhance their ability to predict
playoff and non-playoff teams. This approach exempliﬁes the principles of explainable AI,
as it highlights the effective use of transparent features like rushing yards and attempts in
accurately predicting playoff outcomes.
5.4.1 Feature importance and data insights
Feature importance measures in a machine learning model offer valuable insights into which
data points are crucial for accurate predictions. In our study, features with high importance
measures are particularly useful for predicting NFL teams’ wins and their chances of making
the playoffs. The feature importance analysis for our best-performing logistic regression
model, using the full set of features (as shown in Fig.6), highlighted the statistics most
predictive of winning teams. Notably, among the four features selected using the knockoffs
framework, three ranked as the top three most important features in the full model.
Figure 7 illustrates the feature importance of the four features selected using the knockoffs
framework under the best-performing logistic regression. Table 5 outlines the various game
statistics utilized to evaluate the performance of different NFL positions. For instance, the
performance of dual-threat quarterbacks, who excel in both passing and rushing, underscores
the value of rushing metrics in achieving high overall productivity and success in critical
games. Rushing attempts (R Att) are primarily used to evaluate the performance of running
backs. This statistic measures the number of times a running back carries the ball, providing
insight into their workload and involvement in the team’s offensive strategy.
Rushing touchdowns (R TD) and receiving touchdowns (C TD) play pivotal roles in
predicting whether an NFL team will make the playoffs. Scoring is essential for victory, so
teams proﬁcient in scoring via either method tend to have higher playoff probabilities. In
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Logistic regression feature importance for the full feature set. Four selected features under the knockoffs
framework are shown in green
Fig. 7 Logistic regression feature importance and regression coefﬁcients with standard errors for four selected
features under the knockoffs framework
Table 5 NFL game statistics by different positions
Position
Statistical measure
Quarterback
Rushing Yards (R Yds), Rushing Touchdowns (R TD)
Running Back
Rushing Attempts (R Att), Rushing Yards (R Yds),
Receiving Touchdowns(C TD), Rushing Touchdowns (R
TD), Receiving Yards (C Yds), Rushing Yards After
Contact(RYAC),RushingYardsbeforeContact(RYBC)
Wide Receiver
Receiving Yards (C YDS), Receiver Touchdowns (C TD),
Receiving Yards Before Contact (C YBC), Receiving
Yards After Contact (C YAC)
addition to touchdown metrics, rushing attempts (R Att) and rushing yards (R Yds) emerged
as crucial predictors, identiﬁed through knockoffs and reﬂected in their importance measures.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Both metrics are integral for assessing a team’s ability to manage possession and game clock
effectively. Furthermore, teams that lead in later game stages often rely more on rushing,
underscoring its signiﬁcance in determining winning outcomes. Studies show that teams
with high rushing attempts and yards tend to perform better because they control the game
tempo, reducing the opposing team’s scoring opportunities (Moskowitz & Wertheim, 2011;
Gallagher, 2019). This correlation is evident from analyses showing that effective rushing
contributes signiﬁcantly to overall team performance and playoff outcomes. Notably, three
out of the four features selected by knockoffs are rushing statistics, highlighting their overall
predictive superiority over receiving statistics in identifying playoff-bound teams.
6 Discussion
6.1 Implication for NFL analytics
Previous research has primarily focused on using machine learning models to enhance the
prediction accuracy of football outcomes through predictive analysis and modeling (Joash
Fernandes et al., 2020; Rodrigues & Pinto, 2022; Balita, 2019). To elucidate decision-making
in game outcome predictions, Joash Fernandes et al. (2020) employed decision trees for
explanatory decision support. More recently, Reyers and Swartz (2023) leveraged tracking
data to comprehensively evaluate quarterback performance. Additionally, existing literature
has examined the inﬂuence of speciﬁc NFL statistics on computationally estimating player
wages (Yaldo & Shamir, 2017), as well as the business and market impact (Ezzeddine, 2020).
However, the interpretable models developed in previous work are limited due to the lack of
rigorous FDR control on the identiﬁed important NFL game statistics. Without stringent FDR
control, the results may include a high proportion of false positives, making the identiﬁed
statistics less reliable and potentially misleading. Rigorous FDR control is essential to ensure
that the identiﬁed variables truly contribute to the prediction accuracy, thereby enhancing the
trustworthiness of the model’s ﬁndings.
Our study centers on NFL game statistics data, proposing a rigorous XAI framework
with FDR control, utilizing state-of-the-art Model-X knockoffs techniques. This approach
accurately identiﬁes key NFL statistics predictive of playoff outcomes and decision-making.
By selecting only four features-Rushing Attempts (R Att), Rushing Yards (R Yds), Rush-
ing Touchdowns (R TD), and Receiving Touchdowns (C TD)-our logistic regression model
achieves the highest accuracy and F1-score of 87%, marking a 5% improvement over a full
model with 17 features. Additionally, decision trees attain a 77% F1-score using these four
features, compared to 59% with all 17 features. Our study leads to more reliable predictions
and informed decision-making, ultimately improving strategic planning and player evalua-
tions within the league. The framework’s ability to achieve higher accuracy and F1-scores
compared to full models underscores its efﬁcacy and practical value.
6.2 Insights derived from interpretable forecasting
Understanding AI is crucial for users to trust and effectively oversee these AI systems. This
comprehension spans algorithm transparency, global clarity, and local insight into speciﬁc
operations and decisions. Global models seek to elucidate the model’s overall behavior by
analyzing its complete structure and logic. Early global XAI methods originated from feature
123

Annals of Operations Research
selection techniques like the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (Lasso) (Tib-
shirani, 1996). Decision trees are naturally interpretable models because of their hierarchical
structure. Irarrázaval et al. (2021) have leveraged the natural interpretability of tree models to
explain the output in the ﬁeld of telecom trafﬁc pumping analytics. However, we discovered
that the current literature lacks global explainable AI methods that effectively control the
FDR of important features. To address this gap, we introduce an innovative XAI framework
for decision-supported interpretable machine learning utilizing knockoffs techniques (Can-
des et al., 2018). This approach effectively controls the FDR of key features within the global
scope of XAI. By employing knockoffs techniques, our model identiﬁes four crucial NFL
game statistics and achieves better prediction performance compared to a full model with 17
features, while maintaining high explainability.
6.3 Limitations and future research
There are multiple research directions that remain unexplored for future studies. In this paper,
we leverage the Model-X knockoffs framework to develop a novel XAI system with a global
scope. Our study assumes all features are continuous and follow a multivariate normal distri-
bution. If this assumption is violated, deep learning techniques can be employed to generate
knockoffs, as demonstrated by Romano et al. (2020). In scenarios involving categorical fea-
tures, it is feasible to create new XAI methods using techniques that generate categorical
knockoffs (Kormaksson et al., 2021). We acknowledge this as a promising direction for
future research.
We utilized data collected during the playoff seasons. However, numerous events such as
injuries, can occur before the ﬁnal whistle of the Super Bowl. Future research should consider
these factors to enhance predictions of the Super Bowl winner. Our results are based on data
from 2018-2023; therefore, we recommend that future studies include data from additional
seasons for broader analysis. Additionally, we did not incorporate player-level data, which
are critical indicators of team performance.
7 Conclusion
We propose utilizing knockoff techniques to develop a novel XAI framework that controls
the FDR of key decision-making factors. Our framework is applied to improve NFL playoff
predictions, offering transparent and actionable insights derived from regular season statistics
for all 32 NFL teams from the 2018 to 2023 seasons. 3 In our study, we identify four essential
features out of 17 seasonal statistics, resulting in a 5% improvement in prediction accuracy
when using just these four features compared to using all features. Our framework has broad
applicability to various classiﬁcation and regression settings. Consequently, it holds potential
for use in other sports, such as golf and basketball, as well as in predictive business domains.
By employing our novel XAI framework, these ﬁelds can achieve better interpretability and
identify key factors for informed decision-making.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that there is no potential Conﬂict of interest concerning the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this paper.
3 https://www.pro-football-reference.com/
123

Annals of Operations Research
Ethics Approval The authors certify that they have no afﬁliation with or involvement with human participants
or animals performed by any of the authors in any organization or entity with any ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial
interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this paper.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ahmad, W., Shadaydeh, M.,& Denzler, J. (2021). Causal inference in non-linear time-series using deep net-
works and knockoff counterfactuals. In 2021 20th IEEE international conference on machine learning
and applications (ICMLA) (pp. 449–454). IEEE.
Arrieta, A. B., Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A., Tabik, S., Barbado, A., García, S., Gil-López, S.,
Molina, D., Benjamins, R., et al. (2020). Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai): Concepts, taxonomies,
opportunities and challenges toward responsible ai. Information Fusion, 58, 82–115.
Baker, R. E., & Kwartler, T. (2015). Sport analytics: Using open source logistic regression software to classify
upcoming play type in the nﬂ. Journal of Applied Sport Management, 7(2), 11.
Balita, T. (2019). Touchdown—A predictive and detailed analysis of the national football league: Technical
report. PhD thesis, Dublin, National College of Ireland.
Barber, R. F.,& Candès, E. J. (2015). Controlling the false discovery rate via knockoffs. The Annals of Statistics
2055–2085.
Barber, R. F., Candès, E. J., & Samworth, R. J. (2020). Robust inference with knockoffs. The Annals of
Statistics, 48(3), 1409–1431.
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach
to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 57(1), 289–300.
Blain, A., Thirion, B., Grisel, O.,& Neuvial, P. (2024). False discovery proportion control for aggregated
knockoffs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems36.
Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning45, 5–32.
Breiman, L., Friedman, J., Olshen, R., & Stone, C. (1984). Classiﬁcation and regression trees.
Bunker, R., & Susnjak, T. (2022). The application of machine learning techniques for predicting match results
in team sport: A review. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 73, 1285–1322.
Bunker, R. P., & Thabtah, F. (2019). A machine learning framework for sport result prediction. Applied
Computing and Informatics, 15(1), 27–33.
Candes, E., Fan, Y., Janson, L., & Lv, J. (2018). Panning for gold:‘Model-x’knockoffs for high dimensional
controlled variable selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology,
80(3), 551–577.
Cervone, D., D’amour, A., Bornn, L., & Goldsberry, K. (2014). Pointwise: Predicting points and valuing
decisions in real time with nba optical tracking data. In Proceedings of the 8th MIT Sloan sports analytics
conference, Boston, MA, USA, vol. 28.
Chellatamilan, T., Ravichandran, M. M., & Kamalakkannan, K. (2015). Modern machine learning approach
for volleyball winning outcome prediction. Global Journal of Multidisciplinary Studies, 4(12), 63–71.
Chen, T.,& Guestrin, C. (2016). Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd Acm
Sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 785–794).
Cheng, G., Zhang, Z., Kyebambe, M. N., & Kimbugwe, N. (2016). Predicting the outcome of nba playoffs
based on the maximum entropy principle. Entropy, 18(12), 450.
Chen, S., Ke, S., Han, S., Gupta, S., & Sivarajah, U. (2024). Which product description phrases affect sales
forecasting? An explainable ai framework by integrating wavenet neural network models with multiple
regression. Decision Support Systems, 176, 114065.
Coussement, K., Abedin, M.Z., Kraus, M., Maldonado, S., & Topuz, K. (2024). Explainable AI for enhanced
decision-making. Elsevier
Coussement, K., & Benoit, D. F. (2021). Interpretable data science for decision making. Decision Support
Systems, 150, 113664.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Cox, D. R. (1958). The regression analysis of binary sequences. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series
B: Statistical Methodology, 20(2), 215–232.
Davazdahemami, B., Zolbanin, H. M., & Delen, D. (2022). An explanatory machine learning framework
for studying pandemics: The case of covid-19 emergency department readmissions. Decision Support
Systems, 161, 113730.
Dong, J., Chen, S., Miralinaghi, M., Chen, T., Li, P., & Labi, S. (2023). Why did the ai make that deci-
sion? Towards an explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai) for autonomous driving systems. Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 156, 104358.
Ezzeddine, M. (2020). Pricing football transfers: determinants, inﬂation, sustainability, and market impact:
Finance, economics, and machine learning approaches. PhD thesis, Université Panthéon-Sorbonne-Paris
I.
Fernández, J.,& Bornn, L. (2021). Soccermap: A deep learning architecture for visually-interpretable analysis
in soccer. In Machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases. Applied data science and demo
track: European conference, ECML PKDD 2020, Ghent, Belgium, September 14–18, 2020, Proceedings,
Part V, pp. 491–506. Springer.
Gallagher, M. (2019). A better predictor of nﬂsuccess: Collegiate performance or the nﬂdraft combine?
Master’s thesis, East Tennessee State University.
Gang, B., Sun, W., & Wang, W. (2023). Structure-adaptive sequential testing for online false discovery rate
control. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 118(541), 732–745.
Gifford, M., & Bayrak, T. (2023). A predictive analytics model for forecasting outcomes in the national football
league games using decision tree and logistic regression. Decision Analytics Journal, 8, 100296.
Gonçalves, B., Coutinho, D., Santos, S., Lago-Penas, C., Jiménez, S., & Sampaio, J. (2017). Exploring team
passing networks and player movement dynamics in youth association football. PLoS ONE, 12(1),
0171156.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A.,& Bengio, Y.
(2014). Generative adversarial nets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems27.
Gunning, D., Steﬁk, M., Choi, J., Miller, T., Stumpf, S., & Yang, G.-Z. (2019). Xai-explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence. Science Robotics, 4(37), 7120.
Haghighat, M., Rastegari, H., Nourafza, N., Branch, N., & Esfahan, I. (2013). A review of data mining
techniques for result prediction in sports. Advances in Computer Science: An International Journal,
2(5), 7–12.
Harvey, C. R., & Liu, Y. (2020). False (and missed) discoveries in ﬁnancial economics. The Journal of Finance,
75(5), 2503–2553.
He, Z., Liu, L., Wang, C., Le Guen, Y., Lee, J., Gogarten, S., Lu, F., Montgomery, S., Tang, H., Silverman,
E. K., et al. (2021). Identiﬁcation of putative causal loci in whole-genome sequencing data via knockoff
statistics. Nature Communications, 12(1), 1–18.
Irarrázaval, M. E., Maldonado, S., Pérez, J., & Vairetti, C. (2021). Telecom trafﬁc pumping analytics via
explainable data science. Decision Support Systems, 150, 113559.
Ishwaran, H., Kogalur, U. B., Gorodeski, E. Z., Minn, A. M., & Lauer, M. S. (2008). Random survival forests.
The Annals of Applied Statistics, 2(3), 841–860.
Islam, M. R., Ahmed, M. U., Barua, S., & Begum, S. (2022). A systematic review of explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence in terms of different application domains and tasks. Applied Sciences, 12(3), 1353.
Joash Fernandes, C., Yakubov, R., Li, Y., Prasad, A. K., & Chan, T. C. (2020). Predicting plays in the national
football league. Journal of Sports Analytics, 6(1), 35–43.
Kim, B. R., Srinivasan, K., Kong, S. H., Kim, J. H., Shin, C. S.,& Ram, S. (2023). Rolex: A novel method for
interpretable machine learning using robust local explanations. MIS Quarterly47(3).
Kim, B., Park, J., & Suh, J. (2020). Transparency and accountability in ai decision support: Explaining and
visualizing convolutional neural networks for text information. Decision Support Systems, 134, 113302.
Kingma, D. P.,& Welling, M. (2014). Auto-encoding variational bayes. In International conference on learning
representations (ICLR).
Kormaksson, M., Kelly, L. J., Zhu, X., Haemmerle, S., Pricop, L., & Ohlssen, D. (2021). Sequential knockoffs
for continuous and categorical predictors: With application to a large psoriatic arthritis clinical trial pool.
Statistics in Medicine, 14, 3313–3328.
Koseler, K., & Stephan, M. (2017). Machine learning applications in baseball: A systematic literature review.
Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 31(9–10), 745–763.
Kraus, M., Tschernutter, D., Weinzierl, S., & Zschech, P. (2024). Interpretable generalized additive neural
networks. European Journal of Operational Research, 317(2), 303–316.
Langer, M., Oster, D., Speith, T., Hermanns, H., Kästner, L., Schmidt, E., Sesing, A., & Baum, K. (2021).
What do we want from explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai)?—A stakeholder perspective on xai and a
conceptual model guiding interdisciplinary xai research. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 296, 103473.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Li, Y., Chan, J., Peko, G., & Sundaram, D. (2024). An explanation framework and method for ai-based text
emotion analysis and visualisation. Decision Support Systems, 178, 114121.
Linardatos, P., Papastefanopoulos, V., & Kotsiantis, S. (2020). Explainable ai: A review of machine learning
interpretability methods. Entropy, 23(1), 18.
Li, X., Xiong, H., Li, X., Wu, X., Zhang, X., Liu, J., Bian, J., & Dou, D. (2022). Interpretable deep learning:
Interpretation, interpretability, trustworthiness, and beyond. Knowledge and Information Systems, 64(12),
3197–3234.
Louppe, G. (2015). Understanding random forests. In Software and Computing R&D Working Meeting.
Lu, Y. Y., Fan, Y., Lv, J., & Noble, W. S. (2018). Deeppink: Reproducible feature selection in deep neural
networks. In NeurIPS.
Lundberg, S. M.,& Lee, S.-I. (2017). A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems30.
Ma, N. (2021). Nba playoff prediction using several machine learning methods. In 2021 3rd international
conference on machine learning, big data and business intelligence (MLBDBI) (pp. 113–116). IEEE.
Moskowitz, T.,& Wertheim, L. J. (2011). Scorecasting: The hidden inﬂuences behind how sports are played
and games are won. Crown Archetype.
Nguyen, N. H., Nguyen, D., Ma, B., & Hu, J. (2022). The application of machine learning and deep
learning in sport: Predicting nba players’performance and popularity. Journal of Information and
Telecommunication, 6(2), 217–235.
Pamucar, D., Deveci, M., Gokasar, I., Delen, D., Köppen, M., & Pedrycz, W. (2023). Evaluation of metaverse
integration alternatives of sharing economy in transportation using fuzzy Schweizer–Sklar based ordinal
priority approach. Decision Support Systems, 171, 113944.
Quinlan, J. R. (2014). C4. 5: Programs for machine learning. Elsevier.
Ren, Z., Wei, Y., & Candès, E. (2023). Derandomizing knockoffs. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 118(542), 948–958.
Reyers, M., & Swartz, T. B. (2023). Quarterback evaluation in the national football league using tracking data.
AStA Advances in Statistical Analysis, 107(1), 327–342.
Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S., & Guestrin, C. (2016). Why should i trust you? explaining the predictions of any
classiﬁer. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining (pp. 1135–1144).
Rodrigues, F., & Pinto, Â. (2022). Prediction of football match results with machine learning. Procedia
Computer Science, 204, 463–470.
Romano, Y., Sesia, M., & Candès, E. (2020). Deep knockoffs. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
115(532), 1861–1872.
Roumani,Y.F.(2023).Sportsanalyticsinthenﬂ:Classifyingthewinnerofthesuperbowl.AnnalsofOperations
Research, 325(1), 715–730.
Sadeghi, K., Ojha, D., Kaur, P., Mahto, R. V., & Dhir, A. (2024). Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence and agile
decision-making in supply chain cyber resilience. Decision Support Systems, 180, 114194.
Samek, W., Montavon, G., Vedaldi, A., Hansen, L. K., & Müller, K.-R. (2019). Explainable AI: Interpreting,
explaining and visualizing deep learning vol. 11700. Springer.
Sechidis, K., Kormaksson, M., & Ohlssen, D. (2021). Using knockoffs for controlled predictive biomarker
identiﬁcation. Statistics in Medicine, 40(25), 5453–5473.
Sesia, M., Sabatti, C., & Candès, E. J. (2019). Gene hunting with hidden Markov model knockoffs. Biometrika,
106(1), 1–18.
Shin, D. (2021). The effects of explainability and causability on perception, trust, and acceptance: Implications
for explainable ai. International Journal of Human–Computer Studies, 146, 102551.
Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., & Zisserman, A. (2013). Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image
classiﬁcation models and saliency maps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6034
Storey, J. D., & Tibshirani, R. (2003). Statistical signiﬁcance for genomewide studies. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 100(16), 9440–9445.
Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., & Yan, Q. (2017). Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In International
conference on machine learning (pp. 3319–3328). PMLR
Thabtah, F., Zhang, L., & Abdelhamid, N. (2019). Nba game result prediction using feature analysis and
machine learning. Annals of Data Science, 6(1), 103–116.
Thakkar, P. & Shah, M. (2021). An assessment of football through the lens of data science. Annals of Data
Science 1–14.
Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series B (Methodological), 58(1), 267–288.
Tjoa, E., & Guan, C. (2020). A survey on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai): Toward medical xai. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 32(11), 4793–4813.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., & Russell, C. (2017). Counterfactual explanations without opening the black box:
Automated decisions and the gdpr. Harv. JL & Tech., 31, 841.
Wang,L.,Han,X.,&Tong,X.(2023).Skilledmutualfundselection:Falsediscoverycontrolunderdependence.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 41(2), 578–592.
Yaldo, L., & Shamir, L. (2017). Computational estimation of football player wages. International Journal of
Computer Science in Sport, 16(1), 18–38.
Yang, Y., Wang, C., Liu, L., Buxbaum, J., He, Z., & Ionita-Laza, I. (2022). Knockofftrio: A knockoff framework
for the identiﬁcation of putative causal variants in genome-wide association studies with trio design. The
American Journal of Human Genetics, 109(10), 1761–1776.
Zhang, Z., Wu, C., Qu, S., & Chen, X. (2022). An explainable artiﬁcial intelligence approach for ﬁnancial
distress prediction. Information Processing & Management, 59(4), 102988.
Zhao, T., Zhu, G., Dubey, H. V., & Flaherty, P. (2023). Identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant gene expression changes
in multiple perturbation experiments using knockoffs. Brieﬁngs in Bioinformatics, 24(2), 084.
Zhdanov, D., Bhattacharjee, S., & Bragin, M. A. (2022). Incorporating fat and privacy aware ai modeling
approaches into business decision making frameworks. Decision Support Systems, 155, 113715.
Zhu, G., & Zhao, T. (2021). Deep-gknock: Nonlinear group-feature selection with deep neural networks.
Neural Networks, 135, 139–147.
Zou, H., & Hastie, T. (2005). Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 67(2), 301–320.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123