TITLE: A deep learning approach to improve built asset operations and disaster management in critical events: an integrative simulation model for quicker decision making
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05247-z
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05247-z
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A deep learning approach to improve built asset operations
and disaster management in critical events: an integrative
simulation model for quicker decision making
Carlos Galera-Zarco1
· Goulielmos Floros1
Accepted: 16 February 2023 / Published online: 10 March 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Increasing levels of urbanisation and the rapid growth of modern cities require that particular
attentionbepaidtoensuringthesafetyandprotectionoflivingconditionsfortheirinhabitants.
In this context, natural and human-induced disasters pose a major threat to the safety and
normal operational procedures of buildings and infrastructures. In consequence, disaster
management and built assets operations demand modern tools to be effectively prepared in
order to better respond to such critical events. This study explores the potential of artiﬁcial
intelligence in these operational ﬁelds by developing a deep learning model that is able
to provide a rapid assessment of an asset’s structural condition in the case of a seismic
excitation. The proposed simulation model makes an accurate prediction of the damage status
of individual elements in a built asset, thus leading to operational improvements across all
disaster management phases. In addition, the above development integrates the deep learning
algorithm into building information modelling and then uploads the graphical information to
a web dashboard. By following the framework proposed, an integrative model is designed that
provides a visual and user-friendly interface that allows different stakeholders to navigate and
comprehend essential information on the effects of a disaster; thus enabling quicker decision
making and strengthening operational resilience in critical events.
Keywords Disaster management · Deep learning · Built asset operations · Artiﬁcial
intelligence · Digitalisation
1 Introduction
The unexpected occurrence of disasters, both natural and human-induced, often has dramatic
consequences,includinghumanlossesandsigniﬁcanteconomicimpacts(Dubeyetal., 2019a;
GAR, 2019). These critical events usually highlight the unpreparedness of communities to
respond promptly and efﬁciently (Alsubaie et al., 2016). Indeed, the need to develop swift
B Carlos Galera-Zarco
c.galerazarco@ucl.ac.uk
1
The Bartlett School, University College London, London, UK
123

574
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
and accurate responses to disasters is boldly underlined in the United Nations Ofﬁce for
Disaster Risk Reduction regulations and frameworks (UNDRR, 2021).
Consequently, the literature on disaster management (DM) is garnering attention and
growing as a discipline that aims to optimise operations management in terms of efﬁcient
planning and effective response to emergency situations, thus minimising the adverse impacts
of catastrophes on the population and surrounding environment (Adnan et al., 2015; Bang,
2014). Nevertheless, research into DM from the perspective of operations management is
relatively new (Gupta et al., 2016). Moreover, the uniqueness of disasters, their intrinsic
uncertainty, and the operational constraints associated with these critical events, mean that
DM is considered to be a challenging area from an operative lens (Rolland et al.,2010). Hence,
disaster operations is identiﬁed in the operations research literature as a domain growing in
importance, where new studies and different approaches are required (Altay & Green, 2006;
Holguín-Veras et al., 2012; Kovács & Spens, 2011; Seifert et al., 2018; Vanany et al., 2021).
Disasters hugely affect the built environment. In this regard, the rapid growth in human
population, together with rural–urban migration, is leading to increasing urbanisation (United
Nations, 2019). Consequently, the number of built assets (buildings and infrastructures) dam-
aged by calamitous events has grown dramatically in recent years (GAR, 2015). Furthermore,
the protection of critical infrastructures providing key services to communities becomes cru-
cial in order to reduce disaster vulnerability and enable operations in the aftermath of such
events. There is therefore an identiﬁed need to assess and improve the operational resilience
of built assets (Bosher et al., 2007; Cer`e et al., 2017).
Research on the application of emergent digital technologies in DM has recently been
gaining momentum (Mari´c et al., 2021; Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., 2020). The use of tech-
nology is showing huge potential to beneﬁt the pre- and post-event stages of DM (Mari´c et al.,
2021). Nonetheless, some challenges surrounding the use of technologies in DM have also
been identiﬁed; ﬁrst, the need for improved information sharing among stakeholders (Saku-
rai & Murayama, 2019); second, the integration of digital tools to provide information that
is rapidly available and easily understandable so as to accelerate decision making (Waring
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019).
Among the disruptive technologies with applications in DM, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI),
and its subsets such as machine learning (ML) or big data analytics (BDA) are already
showing their potential to address problems in disaster operations due their capability to
make accurate predictions, which is a key factor given the unexpected nature of disasters
(Akter & Wamba, 2019). In addition, the capability of these technologies to process huge
amounts of data (including images) rapidly enables quick access to essential information in
this time-sensitive context (Oﬂi et al., 2016). AI also has the potential to play a prominent
role in improving decision making across the four DM stages (Sun et al., 2020).
However, the use of deep learning (DL), one of the principal branches of ML, has not been
widely researched in DM. Applying DL algorithms as tools to improve decision making in
DM is still in its early infancy (Aqib et al., 2020; Pouyanfar et al., 2019). The use of DL
to improve the operational resilience of built assets is therefore a largely unresearched topic
in an area where the need for interdisciplinary approaches has been stressed in order to
gain greater understanding (Belhadi et al., 2021; Bosher et al., 2007; Haigh & Amaratunga,
2010). Another unresolved issue observed when applying DL in DM is how to treat the
outputs obtained from complex analysis so as to transform them into information that can
be easily understood by different stakeholders, thus enabling quicker decision making (e.g.,
Devaraj et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2002).
Given the aforementioned context, the main purpose of this research article is to explore
the application of DL to improve the operational resilience of built assets and to enhance
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
575
disaster management operations. Thus, in order to comprehensively achieve this aim, three
research objectives are deﬁned. First, to develop a ML model that is able to predict a built
asset’s damage status. Second, to integrate the ML model into a data-rich 3D model which is
uploaded to a web dashboard that combines information and enables easy understanding of
the ML outputs. Third, to assess the potential of this DL-enhanced simulation tool for built
asset operations and DM.
This study proposes a framework in which to develop a rigorous simulation method that
integrates a DL model and provides visual information of damage status in built assets after a
disaster. By following this framework, a DL algorithm was initially designed which is able to
predict built asset safety levels. The DL model is then integrated into a visual 3D environment
that is easy to understand and share. This integrative visual model has huge potential to run
analyses and react more efﬁciently in the case of an extreme hazard. Overall, applying this
simulation model has important implications for DM in terms of increasing the operational
resilience of the built environment.
The rest of the article is structured as follows; Sect. 2 provides the theoretical contextu-
alisation and positioning of this study by reviewing literature on disaster management, built
asset resilience and the role of emerging technologies in these operational ﬁelds; Sect. 3
presents the methodological framework and a detailed explanation and justiﬁcation of the
research method adopted; Sect. 4 presents the framework’s empirical application and shows
the results of the development; Sect. 5 discusses the main implications regarding the DL-
enhanced simulation tool, outlining the limitations and future research lines; and ﬁnally,
Sect. 6 summarises the main conclusions.
2 Theoretical background
This section presents an overview of the existing literature of relevance to this research study.
It begins with a contextualisation of the disaster management discipline and concept of built
environment resilience. Digitalisation in disaster management and built asset operations are
then examined, with particular focus on the current role of AI in these ﬁelds. The challenges
identiﬁed in the literature motivating this research are then presented.
2.1 Disaster management
The term disaster is used to describe an extreme adverse event, either gradual or sudden,
that causes wide-scale damage and/or casualties, and disrupts communities, systems and
infrastructures in the surrounding area (Adnan et al., 2015; Bang, 2014: Gunasekaran et al.,
2018). Disasters include both natural (earthquakes, ﬂoods, wildﬁres, volcanic eruptions,
tsunamis, etc.) and human-induced (war, terrorism, cyber-attacks, etc.) events. These critical
events have co-existed with civilisation since ancient times, and their increased frequency
and degrees of disruption have led to the emergence and development of DM as a discipline
(Adnan et al., 2015; Bang, 2014).
DM is a discipline that essentially seeks to minimise the adverse consequences of ruinous
events. DM comprises a series of actions tailored by governments, non-governmental organ-
isations (NGOs), policymakers, private organisations and academia which aim to develop
frameworks and regulations so as to optimise operations for both the pre- and post-event
stages (Altay et al., 2018; Dubey et al., 2019b; Tufekci & Wallace, 1998). These two main
123

576
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Fig. 1 The disaster management cycle (Self-elaborated)
stages are usually deployed in four phases that make up the DM cycle: (1) Mitigation (2)
Preparedness (3) Response and (4) Recovery (Fig. 1).
The Mitigation phase includes actions taken in advance of an extreme event, and are aimed
at preventing the onset of a disaster and/or minimising its impact (Altay & Green, 2006).
The Preparedness phase refers to actions that ensure an effective response by delivering
effective and timely warnings (UNISDR, 2021). In the response phase, actions are aimed
at implementing procedures to preserve life, the environment and the social and economic
structures of the impacted area (Altay & Green, 2006). The Recovery phase encompasses
actions deployed after the impact of a disaster, these can be long-term, and aim to stabilise
the situation in the affected area and restore the status quo (Altay & Green, 2006).
2.2 The importance of a resilient built environment in disaster management
Disasters hugely affect the built environment and cause signiﬁcant disruption to economic
and social activities (Malalgoda & Amaratunga, 2015). In this respect, increasing levels of
urbanisation due to growth in human population and the global trend to live in cities are
leading to a higher number of damaged built assets after calamitous events United Nations,
2019). Built assets can be affected at both structurally and non-structurally, and the impact
is on three key components: structure, systems and occupants (Cer`e et al., 2017). In terms of
natural disasters, infrastructures and buildings often suffer the effects of ﬂooding (Kelman &
Spence, 2004), earthquakes (Hall et al., 1995; Hu et al., 2012), Tsunamis (Park et al., 2013),
and high winds (Eurocode, 2010).
The built environment has a crucial role to play in protecting people from natural and
human-induced disasters, and helps to increase society’s resilience (Haigh & Amaratunga,
2010; Ransolin et al., 2020). The importance of the built environment in DM is best illustrated
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
577
by understanding it in a broad context where most human endeavours take place (Bartuska
& Young, 2007). Consequently, damage to the built environment may lead to dramatic situ-
ations such as the relocation of populations, or even environmental disasters when industrial
facilities (chemical, nuclear, etc.) are affected (Krausmann et al., 2010). Hence, the impor-
tance of creating a resilient built environment that is designed, built, operated and maintained
to maximise the capability of built asset key components (structure, systems and occupants)
to withstand the impact of an extreme event (Bosher, 2008b). The operational resilience of
built assets becomes particularly paramount for critical facilities and infrastructures (those
essential to key operations in the economy, defence and public health) that need to be fully
operational during and after a disaster (Bosher et al., 2007; McAllister, 2013). Indeed, the
built environment’s lack of resilience is considered a key factor that incurs greater risk of
wider damage caused by hazardous events (Mannakkara & Wilkinson, 2013). Likewise, in
the post-disaster phase, impacted critical infrastructures increase the vulnerability of com-
munities in terms of suffering subsequent or future hazards (Haigh & Amaratunga, 2010).
Therefore, it is essential to increase built environment resilience, and the application of
new technologies is expected to play an increasingly important role in achieving this (Ama-
ratunga & Haigh, 2011). Nonetheless, the increase in costs associated with creating resilient
buildings and infrastructures, together with negative connotations of resilience enhancement
(i.e. heightened perceptions of risk) are identiﬁed as factors hindering the development of
a more resilient built environment (Bosher, 2008a, 2014). What is clear, however, is the
increasing need for agents related to the built environment; architects, civil engineers, oper-
ators and owners, to better understand the importance of creating operational resilience for
built assets (Malalgoda & Amaratunga, 2015). In this respect, there is currently a call for
interdisciplinary approaches, including technological and DM perspectives, to create better
equipped and more resilient built assets (Bosher et al., 2007; Doorn et al., 2019; Haigh &
Amaratunga, 2010).
2.3 Digitalisation and AI in disaster management
Previous literature on DM reveals the existence of a trend stressing the need for further
research into the application of new technologies to improve operational quality and efﬁ-
ciency in this area (Modgil et al., 2020; Vinck, 2013; Wassenhove, 2006). Accordingly, the
publication of studies in this research line have become more numerous since the beginning
of the second decade of the twenty ﬁrst century (Behl & Dutta, 2019; Mari´c et al., 2021).
Digitalisation enables both internal and interorganisational processes to be integrated
and offers solutions for the automation and “smartization” of activities (Ghobakhloo, 2020;
Schroeder et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2018). Recent studies in the available literature have anal-
ysed the effect of digital technologies in different DM domains such as; risk and assessment
(Ivanov et al., 2019); humanitarian logistics (Delmonteil & Rancourt, 2017); Supply chain
resilience (Bag et al., 2021); Agility, trust and coordination in humanitarian supply chain
(HSC) (Dubey et al., 2020; Kabra & Ramesh, 2015; Lu et al., 2018; Shayganmehr et al.,
2021); Supply chain management (Ye et al., 2022); emergency relief (Gavidia, 2017); epi-
demic control strategies (Kumar et al., 2021); and emergency-response information systems
(Abdalla & Esmail, 2018). In this respect, the use of digital technologies in DM is displaying
its potential to improve collaboration and coordination among stakeholders, enhance perfor-
mance assessment methods and alleviate the adverse consequences of disasters (Mari´c et al.,
2021; Xiong et al., 2021). Increased digitalisation in DM also demands front-line operators
who are technologically savvy (Chatterjee et al., 2022).
123

578
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
The integration of AI in operations research has been explored since the early 2000s
(Dixon & Ginsberg, 2000), with scheduling, maintenance, forecasting, fault identiﬁcation
and process design deemed as the key areas of application (Guner et al., 2016; Kobbacy
et al., 2007; Kumar et al., 2022). Moreover, optimisation processes, which are a core goal
in operations research, are now being enhanced by the use of AI-aided decision making
(Nedˇelková et al., 2018). Also, AI tools in the area of prediction and reasoning, such as DL,
are helping to improve the reliance of communities on operations research (Kourou et al.,
2015; Min & Lee, 2005).
Applying AI in DM is particularly beneﬁcial in decision making processes (Sun et al.,
2020). The prominent use of AI in DM may be linked to the uncertain nature characterising
this ﬁeld, that makes the ability of AI to enable prognostic decision making notably suitable
(Gupta et al., 2021). In recent literature, different AI applications in DM are outlined; to
improve resilience and decision making in HSC (Grifﬁth et al., 2019; Guillaume et al., 2014;
Papadopoulos et al., 2017; Sahebjamnia et al., 2017; Swaminathan, 2018); to predict natural
disasters (Stickley et al., 2016); optimise warehousing in HSC (Dash et al., 2019); in disaster
response (Mulder et al., 2016; Oﬂi et al., 2016); decision support systems (Drosio & Stanek,
2016; Horita et al., 2017); and to predict crowd behaviour and improve efﬁciency in DM
(Bellomo et al., 2016; Ragini et al., 2018).
2.4 Digital transformation and AI in built asset operations
The AECOO (architects, engineers, contractors, operators, owners) industry is embracing a
period of digital transformation (Hjelseth, 2017). This process has been sparked by the emer-
gence of building information modelling (BIM) technologies and tools that are transforming
the way data are created, stored and shared in the built environment (Galera-Zarco et al.,
2016; Kubicki et al., 2019).
BIM methodology can be understood as a set of processes, technologies or activities that
enhance collaboration among disciplines and organisations within the AECOO industry, and
subsequently improve productivity and efﬁciency, thus leading to improved overall construc-
tionprojectmanagementthroughouttheentirelifecycle(Azharetal.,2012;Ghaffarianhoseini
et al., 2017; Succar, 2009). In BIM methodology, central focus is on the production of a digital
three-dimension (3D), data-rich model that includes graphical and non-graphical information
on the built asset (Criminale & Langar, 2017; Ghaffarianhoseini et al., 2017). This data-rich
3D model becomes an information hub for the physical asset that can be leveraged by its
integration with other digital technologies to support operations, facility management and
maintenance (Ghaffarianhoseini et al., 2017; Liu, et al., 2020a, 2020b; Rüppel & Schatz,
2011).
AlthoughtheBIMparadigmwasessentiallycreatedtoimprovecollaborationamongstake-
holders in the design and construction phases, it is increasingly engaging adjacent research
areas throughout the built asset’s lifecycle (Boje et al., 2020). This evolution of the BIM
paradigm is unleashing the expansion of digital technologies such as the Internet of things
(IoT) and AI subsets (ML, DL, BDA), which have the potential to be integrated into BIM
(Boje et al., 2020; Howell & Rezgui, 2018). The incorporation of these emergent technologies
into BIM enables built assets operations to become automated and intelligent, thus provid-
ing efﬁcient support for facility managers in decision making processes (Liu et al., 2020a,
2020b). Nonetheless, BIM currently faces challenges related to software and data interoper-
ability that inhibit the full potential of these technologies in BIM as solutions to operations
automation and its expansion to broader contexts (Pauwels et al., 2017).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
579
In particular, integrating AI into BIM enables the establishment of interactive bidirectional
information ﬂows offering the potential to provide value to end-users (Deng et al., 2021; Liu,
et al., 2020a, 2020b). This integration mainly beneﬁts the monitoring and control of built
assets during their entire lifecycle (Deng et al., 2021). Speciﬁcally, applying AI in built
assets operations comprises; predictive maintenance for facility buildings (Bouabdallaoui
et al., 2021), condition monitoring and diagnostics (Lebold et al., 2003), fault diagnosis
(Hallaji et al., 2021), building energy behaviour (Halhoul Merabet et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021), HVAC control (Azuatalam et al., 2020), inhabitant and activity recognition (Zou et al.,
2018), structural damage detection (Feng et al., 2019; Gharehbaghi et al., 2020; Mangalathu
et al., 2019); and anomaly detection (Araya et al., 2017).
2.5 Challenges in the literature and research gap
Despite the fact that the published literature pays increasing attention to DM, public admin-
istrations, policymakers and NGOs call for further research in order to join forces in the
common objective of becoming better prepared to respond to disasters more effectively
(Altay et al., 2018; Dubey et al., 2019a, 2019b). Concurrently, in relation to the development
of a more resilient built environment, a lack of methods and tools to enhance and assess built
asset resilience has been identiﬁed (Ribeiro & Gonçalves, 2019), and the need for multidis-
ciplinary studies to ﬁll this gap speciﬁcally underlined (Bosher & Dainty, 2011; Cai et al.,
2018; Cer`e et al., 2017; Shavindree et al., 2022).
Nevertheless, digital technologies are demonstrating their potential to reduce the negative
effects of calamitous events and mitigate impact on critical infrastructures (Pedraza-Martinez
& Wassenhove, 2016). Indeed, the United Nations Ofﬁce for Disaster Risk Reduction recently
expressed, in its Agenda 2030, the need for more applied research on the use of new tech-
nologies to improve DM operations (UNDRR, 2020). Among these digital technologies, the
design and development of AI-based tools that are able to support decision making in uncer-
tain contexts, such as the case of a disaster, remains unresearched (Alanne & Sierla, 2022). In
particular, further research is needed to develop AI decision-support frameworks in complex
systems, such as the case of built asset operations following a disaster (Chen et al., 2021).
Structural damage detection is identiﬁed as an AI application ﬁeld in built asset operations
offering the potential to improve operational resilience in the built environment (Feng et al.,
2019; Gharehbaghi et al., 2020; Mangalathu et al., 2019). Nevertheless, in most of these
approaches, the study of damage is performed at macro level (i.e., areas affected by a natural
disaster), and do not assess the damaged asset at individual-component level (i.e., Hajeb et al.,
2020; Mangalathu et al., 2020; Naito et al., 2020). Similarly, many of these studies come
from engineering areas and the AI developments presented remain difﬁcult to understand
and interpret. In particular, the lack of visualisation tools reduces stakeholders’ chances of
rapidly becoming aware of a damaged built asset’s functional status (Liu et al., 2020b). In
a time-sensitive ﬁeld such as DM, this factor becomes critical as decisions need to be taken
rapidly, having reached a quick consensus among different stakeholders. In addition, visual
information may reduce the likelihood of accidents and presence of poor management (Lin
& Wald, 2007). Hence, the importance of integrating visual tools into DM that enable easy
and rapid understanding of information derived from complex algorithms.
Finally, AI integration into BIM to enhance built asset management and provide visual
solutions is a ﬁeld that requires further research efforts (Lu et al., 2020). In this respect, the
use of simulation models combining BIM and AI is yielding results in energy-related studies
(Clarke, 2018). Nonetheless, there is a call for future research exploring the integration of
123

580
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
technologies in BIM, and which explains the development of AI-enabled asset operations
tools (Lu et al., 2020).
3 Methodology
3.1 Research design
This research aims to explore DL’s potential to beneﬁt both built asset operations and DM
in an extreme event. With this purpose in mind, a framework is proposed that leads to the
development of a rigorous simulation method which integrates a DL algorithm into BIM to
supply accurate, visual information on built asset damage status, and support critical decision
making.
This study adopted a positivist research approach because a solution was modelled in a
rational way, whilst maintaining a technology-centred orientation. The research design com-
bines prototyping and simulation; ﬁrst, a DL algorithm that performs predictive analysis was
prototyped; this algorithm was then integrated into the BIM model and a simulation ran.
This method is suitable to address the study objectives, as simulations offer the opportu-
nity to attain a holistic and dynamic perspective from different disciplines, and provide a
comprehensive understanding of systems behaviour. Furthermore, simulations alleviate the
intrinsic challenges facing complex and dynamic processes such as strategy formulation,
assessment and implementation. Finally, in order to assess the potential of this DL-enhanced
simulation tool, its applicability in terms of building operational resilience in extreme events
was discussed by confronting the tool’s possibilities with the challenges identiﬁed in the DM
literature.
The proposed framework includes the following stages (Fig. 2):
1. Creating a 3D BIM model of a built asset including data on the relevant parameters (i.e.,
material characteristics, cost, downtime, etc.) for each element
2. Using structural and probabilistic analysis software to generate a dataset that reﬂects how
the different intensity levels of an extreme event (i.e., earthquakes, ﬂooding, explosions,
etc.) affect the built asset’s structural behaviour
Fig. 2 Framework for the development of a DL-enhanced simulation model (Self-elaborated)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
581
3. Prototyping a DL model that is able to predict the damage status of each element of the
built asset by using the previously created dataset
4. Integrating the DL model into the 3D BIM model in order to combine information from
BIM and information predicted by the DL algorithm
5. Visualising the DL algorithm outputs in the 3D BIM model and integrating the smart 3D
model into a visual web dashboard
The framework herein considers the development of a DL model as a predictive tool. It has
been shown that DL algorithms effectively address a variety of problems that other machine-
learning algorithms struggle with. DL is considered very efﬁcient in terms of performance,
and the most popular method in the AI community for solving new complex problems (LeCun
et al., 2015; Palanisamy et al., 2008; Yuan et al., 2020). The explanation for this performance
capacity of DL models lies in the non-linear functions operating within their hidden layers.
For example, DL is used in complex problem-solving tasks with large datasets such as
environmental remote sensing (which is potentially the case here) or in image and speech
recognition (LeCun et al., 2015; Palanisamy et al., 2008; Yuan et al., 2020).
The use of BIM responds to a dual objective; on the one hand, via the interaction of data
produced by the DL model with data already established in the BIM model, higher levels
of accuracy can be reached for health and safety, cost and downtime analysis (Charalambos
et al., 2014). On the other hand, the use of a BIM model is aimed at increasing the knowledge
and awareness of facility owners, occupants and any other related stakeholders with regards
to an impacted built asset’s functional status (Liu, et al., 2020a, 2020b).
4 Research method
The generic framework proposed in the previous section is speciﬁed here. The aim is to
provide a paradigmatic exempliﬁcation of the framework by using a building as a basic
case of built asset, and earthquakes as a kind of extreme event that is widespread all over the
world. Indeed, seismic excitations cause important adverse consequences in terms of number
of deaths, people affected and total annual damage (EM-DAT, 2021). Moreover, the United
Nations has stated that eight out of the ten most populated cities are located on fault lines
(United Nations, 2010).
This section presents a detailed explanation of the stages followed in the development of a
simulation method that is able to predict and visualise building damage status after a seismic
excitation (Fig. 3).
• Stage 1 3D model development
In this ﬁrst step, the 3D model of the asset is created by using a BIM authoring tool (i.e.,
Autodesk Revit Software). Modelling is developed on an individual basis, meaning each
element separately. At this point, non-graphical information (parameters) can be added to
each element. The type and amount of non-graphical data contained in the 3D model will
determine the analysis competency after combining these data with the results from the DL
model. For example, data such as each element’s repair time and cost have the potential to
interact with the data predicted by the DL model, and to produce an accurate repair cost
analysis immediately after an extreme event. Therefore, the variety of parameters that can be
included in the 3D model depends on the type of analysis that the built asset’s operators and
other relevant stakeholders require.
In the case of a building, the information regarding each room’s safety level becomes quite
relevant. However, as modelling takes place on an individual basis, all the elements belonging
123

582
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Fig. 3 Stages followed in our research method (self-elaborate)
to each room need to be tagged and grouped. This process can be done manually, in the case
of complex buildings, however, this may be time-consuming, and could be automated using
a visual programming language for BIM authoring tools (i.e., Dynamo). Indeed, this visual
programming language in BIM has the potential to tag elements automatically depending on
needs and preferences.
• Stage 2 Generating the dataset to feed the DL model
In the second stage, a dataset to train the DL model is created. The building’s struc-
tural model created in BIM can be imported to structural analysis software (i.e., CSi
SAP 2000). The rationale behind using this software is to obtain data on the build-
ing’s structural behaviour under a series of seismic excitations. For this purpose, seismic
ground motion records collected from the database INNOSEIS were used. This database,
containing medium and high intensity seismic records, was created by the European Com-
mission’s Research Fund for Coal and Steel to examine the design of innovative steel-based
earthquake-proof elements. As it is used to test innovative processes related to seismic exci-
tations, the accelerated time-history of each seismic excitation recorded in this database
was used to feed the DL model (INNOSEIS, 2021).
By using structural analysis software for each ground motion, non-linear time history
analysis was performed to identify each storey’s relative ﬂoor displacement (RFD) in the
building. The software also ran the computation for each ﬂoor’s storey drift ratios (SDR)
according to the critical direction. Equation (1) describes the calculation for each ﬂoor’s SDR,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
583
which is the result of subtracting the RFDs corresponding to two adjacent storeys divided
by storey height. RFD is the subtraction of the absolute maximum values of displacement
recorded on each ﬂoor and the ground displacement (Eq. 2).
Equation (3) calculates each ground motion’s intensity measurement (IM), which is the
result of the square root of the product of the ground motion’s spectral accelerations in both
directions. Both the spectral accelerations of each ground motion are calculated based on the
Newmark methodology for linear accelerations developed in Python script (Online Appendix
A) (Chopra, 2007).
SDRi = RFDi+1 −RFDi
Hi
(1)
RFDi = max
ui(t) −ug(t)

(2)
I M =

Sa(T x) ∗Sa(T y)
(3)
The above results are needed to calculate damage status (DS), which will ultimately be
the target variable in the DL model. Hence, in order to obtain this variable for the dataset,
analysis of the damage produced by each ground motion was conducted. The performance-
based earthquake engineering framework (PBEE) was to be adopted in the method here
(Günay & Mosalam, 2013). PBEE is a process that aims to improve seismic risk decision-
making by identifying a built asset’s performance metrics (Deierlein et al., 2003; Zhang
et al., 2018). Damage characterisation of the built asset’s elements is a key feature in order to
identify its performance metrics. Comparison of the damage to elements caused by seismic
excitations with their strength limits, as deﬁned by the American Society of Civil Engineers,
helps engineers identify the values of immediate occupancy (IO or DS ≥1), life safety (LS or
DS ≥2) and collapse prevention (CP or DS ≥3) (ASCE, 2007). These performance metrics
are therefore linked to civil engineering concepts such as the built asset’s structural response
metrics (Fig. 4) (Deierlein et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2018).
Fig. 4 Damage status thresholds for a built asset (Adapted from Deierlein et al., 2003)
123

584
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
An increasingly popular methodology related to PBEE to assess a built asset’s structural
performancehasrecentlybeendevelopedbytheUSFederalEmergencyManagementAgency
(FEMA) (Cremen and Baker, 2019; Zeng et al., 2016). FEMA has created the Performance
Assessment Calculation Tool (PACT), which employs a probabilistic method that links each
element’s damage to the likelihood of leading to an unsafe environment by checking the
damage’s level of exceedance according to a ﬁxed ratio (Zhang et al., 2018).
PACT is used in our study to obtain DS values for each element of the building (PACT,
2021). PACT requires that the category and quantity of elements existing on each ﬂoor
be selected. The previously calculated values for SDRs and IM are then inserted in PACT
software for each ground motion. As part of its analysis process, PACT applies Monte Carlo
analysis and generates a distribution of 200 possible DS scenarios ranging from zero to four
(0,1,2,3,4) for each element on each storey. In this study, of the possible 200 DS scenarios
produced by each ground motion, the most frequent values in the distribution were selected
in order to identify the most likely DS of each element on each storey.
At the end of this second stage, a dataset for each element on each storey is produced
(Fig. 5).
For every ground motion, we have the values for IM, RFD for the bottom (RFDB) and
top ﬂoors (RFDT) on each storey, and DS. For example, if this methodology is applied to a
built asset with K number elements, the dataset’s ﬁnal format is as shown in Table 1
• Stage 3: DL Model development
This stage prototypes a DL algorithm which is capable of predicting DS for each element
for a given ground motion. First, as the dataset created in the previous stage contains a
categorical column that determines element type, transformation of the categorical values
into dummy variables is required. This process creates new columns for each categorical
value. The new columns contain value one if it corresponds to the respective categorical
value or value zero if not. This is shown in Table 2.
Fig. 5 Dataset for each element on each storey (self-elaborated)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
585
Table1 Example of the format adopted by the dataset
Ground
motion
Intensity
measure
RFD: Bottom ﬂoor
RFD: Top ﬂoor
Element
Damage
state
1
IM1
RFDB1
RFDT1
Element I
LS
2
IM2
RFDB2
RFDT2
Element I
CP
N
IMN
RFDBN
RFDTN
Element I
IO
1
IM1
RFDB1
RFDT1
Element J
IO
2
IM2
RFDB2
RFDT2
Element J
CP
N
IMN
RFDBN
RFDTN
Element J
LS
1
IM1
RFDB1
RFDT1
Element K
CP
2
IM2
RFDB2
RFDT2
Element K
CP
N
IMN
RFDBN
RFDTN
Element K
LS
Table 2 Transformation of categorical columns into dummy variables
Following this initial step, a DL model is developed for the multinomial classiﬁcation
of the DS for each built asset element. The DL model’s architecture (Online Appendix B)
includes an input layer, output layer, and a N number of hidden neuron layers (Fig. 6) (LeCun
et al., 2015).
The key elements considered in the DL model development are: (1) the neurons, (2)
activation functions, (3) loss functions and (4) optimisation techniques. First, the input values
are needed, which are the DL model’s initiation neurons that travel between all the synapses
engineered in the model to produce an output. The neurons in this methodology’s output
layer produce a categorical value. Prior to model training, and in order to gain operational
efﬁciency, the standardisation function needs to be applied to the input values (Eq. 4) (LeCun
et al., 2012). This function subtracts the mean from each value and divides the result by
standard deviation.
x′
i = xi −x
σ
(4)
Each neuron contained in the model’s layers is linked via synapses to the neurons contained
in the following layer. The synapse function is responsible for passing the signal to each set
of neurons. This is the linear function described in Eq. (5) (LeCun et al., 2015). Weight “w”
in the equation describes the synapse’s importance (“weight”) between the two layers, as it
dictates whether the signal passes or not, and to what extent it does so (LeCun et al., 2012).
z j =

wi j × xi
(5)
123

586
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Fig. 6 An example of a multi-layered neural network (Adapted from LeCun et al., 2015)
The value received by each neuron in a layer is then transformed based on an activation
function speciﬁed by the model’s engineer. The activation function determines whether the
neuronisneededinthemodelornot(Nwankpaetal.,2018).Inthismethodologytheactivation
function for the non-linear rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLu) is selected for the neurons in the hidden
layers (Eq. 6), where x is the neuron’s input value. The reason why this is selected for the
neurons in the hidden layers is because this approach has been successfully applied in recent
years by the AI community (LeCun et al., 2015). Moreover, since this study aims to predict
categorical values, the selected activation function for the output layer is softmax (Nwankpa
et al., 2018) (Eq. 7), where z is a vector of K real numbers that are normalised into a probability
distribution consisting of K probabilities which are proportional to the exponentials of the
input numbers.
f (x) =
 x, x < 0
ax, x ≤0
(6)
σ(z)i =
ezi
K
j=1 ez j , i = 1, . . . , K and z = (z1, . . . , zK )ε RK
(7)
During DL model training, the predicted value of the neurons contained in the output layer
are compared with their actual value. Based on a loss function (e.g., mean squared error, cross
entropy etc.), the error is calculated. As the methodology is applied to categorical values,
the categorical cross-entropy loss function is selected (Eq. 8) (Zhang, 2019), where ˆy is the
i-th scalar value in model output, y is the corresponding target value, and output size is the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
587
number of scalar values in model output.
Loss = −
output
size

i=1
yi log ˆyi
(8)
After this step, the DL model starts the process of back propagation (Fig. 7), which
propagates the error backwards from the output layer and, based on a learning algorithm,
adjusts the weights of Eq. 5 and recalculates the predicted values up until the optimal value
minimising the performance metric error is identiﬁed (LeCun et al., 2015). The optimisa-
tion function applied in this methodology for model training is adaptive moment estimation
(Adam) (Eqs. 9, 10), which is the result of combining the momentum and root mean square
propagation gradient descent methodologies. In these equations, value m is the aggregate
of gradients at time t (initially 0), w are the weights at time t, ε is a small positive constant
(10−8), u is the sum of the squares of past gradients at time t, and β1 and β2 (0.9 and 0.999)
are the decay rates of average gradients that come from the momentum and root mean square
propagation gradient descent methodologies.
ˆmt =
mt
1 −βt
1
ˆut =
ut
1 −β2t
(9)
wt+1 = wt −ˆmt

a

ˆut + ε

(10)
This is usually used for large datasets as it is computationally efﬁcient, requires little
memory storage, and works appropriately against noisy gradients (Kingma & Ba, 2017).
Furthermore, in order to identify the best DL model, an algorithm was designed that runs
a random search of speciﬁc hyperparameters to identify the set that best performs. The
hyperparameters targeted for identiﬁcation are the number of the DL model’s hidden layers
Fig. 7 Error calculation and back propagation process (Adapted from LeCun et al., 2015)
123

588
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Fig. 8 K-Fold cross-validation process (Self-elaborated)
and number of neurons contained in each one. Two arrays containing a range of values for
each of the hyperparameters were therefore created. Later, the Random Search process was
applied (Agrawal, 2021), and then10 iterations were run that randomly combined the values
of the two hyperparameters each time, ﬁtted them into the DL model, and returned the set
of values that achieved the best performance. In the next step, having identiﬁed the best
hyperparameters to tune the model, a k-fold cross-validation test was performed to ensure
that the dataset was not biased (Fig. 8). Cross-validation was applied to estimate how the
model was expected to perform when used to make predictions on data not used during model
training. By following this process, it was ensured that the DL model’s prediction skill was
less biased.
Finally, having deﬁned all the necessary parameters, the model was trained based on the
dataset produced in stage 2, this was tested and saved in a ﬁle. Also, the scale parameter that
performed data standardisation was saved in a ﬁle.
• Stage 4: Integrating the DL Model into BIM
In the fourth stage, the DL algorithm was integrated into the 3D BIM model created in
Stage 1. To achieve this objective, a visual programming language for BIM authoring tools
(dynamo software) was used. The integration process was performed in two sub-stages:
First, the values corresponding to the DL algorithm input values need to be integrated
for each built asset element or group of elements that corresponds to the DL model input
values. In order to implement this, a code block was written which receives a ﬁle containing
the ground motion data and time-history of accelerations in both directions. A second code
block receives the time-history of each ﬂoor’s displacements in the critical direction. A
code item was then integrated that calculates the IM, and another that receives RFD data. A
code item was then written to assign the correct dummy variable to each element. Finally,
these data are merged into a list in order to structure the input values in the correct format
so that they can be understood by the DL model.
Second, the DL model and ﬁle containing the scale parameter that performs standardisation
for the DL model input values were integrated. After this step, the previously created list
of each element or group of elements was inserted into the DL model, and the predictions
simulating the ﬁnal performance of the built asset’s elements on each ﬂoor for the critical
direction were computed. The algorithms developed were the same for every ﬂoor in the
building. The only modiﬁcation was the code block containing the information on the level
it referred to.
• Stage 5 Visualising the information predicted by the DL model in BIM and integrating it
into a web dashboard
In this stage, dynamic visualisations of the information predicted by the DL model were
generated. The objective was to provide insightful visual information that integrates the DL
algorithm outputs. To achieve this, in the previously used visual programming environment
(Dynamo software), a new algorithm was developed that assigns the predicted DS as a
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
589
new parameter for each built asset element. Four steps can be determined in the integration
process of outputs from the DL model into BIM; ﬁrst, every element in the 3D model
is allocated to a speciﬁc room. Second, a list for each room exclusively containing the
allocated elements is created. Third, the algorithm compares the DS parameter values of
the elements included in each room and assigns the most critical value as a new parameter
for each room, which is called safety level. In the fourth step, the algorithm calculates
the repair cost for each room in order to reach a threshold of accepted safety level. The
complete repair cost is also calculated for each room. Both costs are assigned as parameters
for the elements belonging to each room. Applying this algorithm enables the visualisation
of rooms in 5 different colours (green, chartreuse yellow, yellow, orange, red) depending
on their predicted safety level.
Finally, as the use of a BIM authoring tool can be challenging for inexperienced users,
the 3D BIM model is integrated into a web platform with a user-friendly dashboard (i.e.,
Autodesk Forge). The platform connects the 3D BIM model to the cloud via an application
programming interface (API). In order to visualise the safety level as well as the repair
cost information for each room on the web dashboard, this information must be stored
within the 3D elements conﬁguring each room. As a result, a dashboard with all the key
information is created, linking the 3D model to statistical charts on safety levels and repair
costs.
5 Empirical analysis
Application of the deﬁned method to our unit of study is explained in this section, and
provides all aspects relating to its implementation and the results obtained.
5.1 Designing the 3D BIM model
As a unit of study, a 3D model was designed and developed using a BIM authoring tool
(Autodesk Revit). In order to simplify calculations and make the method application more
easily understandable, a simple a six-storey building was created. The building’s dimensions
are 21 × 28 m, and height of each storey 3.5 m (Fig. 9). The ﬂoor plans are identical for all
six storeys (Fig. 10).
Regarding the non-graphical information included in the model, a set of parameters are
assigned for each element and each room in the building (Fig. 11).
The parameter “room tag” is assigned to each element to show the room it belongs to.
This process of room allocation for each element was automated by using Dynamo software.
The DS parameter was also generated, which stores each element’s DS predicted by the
DL model, and the repair cost parameter (in US dollars), which stores information on each
element’s repair cost (Table 3). At room level, the safety level parameter was created to store
information on a room’s safety based on the DS of the elements making it up. Finally, two
further parameters were created for each room that reﬂect the room’s reconstruction costs
to an accepted safety level (Room repair cost (SL < 2) and total repair cost (Room (Total)
Repair Cost (SL < 1)) respectively (Table 4).
Here, it is worth mentioning that the simulation method can be implemented either for all
the building’s elements or for a set of selected building elements. Also, analysis of seismic
excitations could be run either in the critical direction or in both directions. To avoid further
123

590
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Fig. 9 3D model of the building used as unit of analysis (Self-elaborated)
complexity in this empirical analysis, the simulation method was only applied in the criti-
cal direction. Similarly, based on their role in structural behaviour, the following structural
elements were selected for examination: (1) Metal panel walls; (2) Glazed walls; (3) Steel
columns/beams; (4) Steel bracings (Table 5).
5.2 Generating the dataset for the DL model
The building’s structural elements in the 3D BIM model are exported to the structural soft-
ware to compute structural calculations. Non-linear time history analyses of ground motions
from the INNOSESIS database are then conducted. The building’s structural behaviour was
calculated for 150 different ground motions (30 originally obtained from the INNOSEIS
database and 120 scaled in the critical direction). Structural software (SAP 2000) was used
to calculate the RFD for each ﬂoor and the respective SDR (Fig. 12). In addition, the New-
mark methodology for linear accelerations was implemented in a Python script to calculate
the IM for each ground motion (Online Appendix A).
The PACT tool was then employed to obtain the elements’ DS. PACT software requires
that the elements be categorised, and a set of inputs introduced in order to produce results
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
591
Fig. 10 Floor plan of each storey of the building
(PACT, 2021). To run the analysis, the structural elements were categorised as seen in Table
6. The element type contained in the building is therefore speciﬁed, categorised into groups,
and quantiﬁed for each ﬂoor. As input values for each element, the SDR and IM (calculated in
the previous step) were introduced. A simpliﬁed type of probabilistic analysis then evaluated
the response of the building elements examined for each ground motion.
The same category of structural elements yields different results for the same ground
motion depending on the storey’s location, as each storey has a different SDR. A dataset
containing 150 rows for each of the four element categories on each of the six storeys was
123

592
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Fig. 11 Parameters for each room (left) and each element (right) (Self-elaborated)
Table 3 Parameters included per
individual element and how data
were added
Elements parameters
Data added
Room tag
Semi-automatic (Coding)
Repair cost
Semi-automatic
Damage state (DS)
Automatic (Coding)
Table 4 Parameters included per
room and how data were added
Room/ﬂoor parameters
Data added
Room tag
Semi-automatic (Coding)
Safety level (SL)
Automatic (Coding)
Room repair cost (SL < 2)
Automatic (Coding)
Room (Total) repair cost (SL < 1)
Automatic (Coding)
Table 5 Selected building elements
Examined elements
Family (mm)
Metal panel walls
Wall-Partn_12P-75Std-12P
Glazing walls
Curtain wall–Exterior glazing
Steel columns/beams
HEB280, HEB300, HEB320, HEB340, HEB360/IPE 300, IPE330, IPE360,
IPE400, IPE450, IPE500
Steel bracings
TCAR 120X7.1, TCAR 100X5, TCAR 90X5
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
593
Fig. 12 Relative displacement of each ﬂoor for a ground motion in the critical direction (Self-elaborated)
Table 6 Categories used by the PACT tool for the selected structural elements
Structural elements
Category ID (PACT)
Metal panel walls
C1011.001a: wall partition, type: gypsum with metal studs, full height,
ﬁxed below, ﬁxed above
Curtain walls
B2022.001: curtain walls–generic midrise stick-built curtain wall, conﬁg:
monolithic, lamination: unknown, glass type: unknown, details: aspect
ratio = 6:5, other details unknown
Steel joints (Column-Beam)
B1035.022: post-Northridge welded steel moment connection other than
RBS, beam one side, beam depth > = W30
Steel bracings
B1033.013b: Special concentric braced frame w HSS braces, balanced
design criteria, X Brace, Brace 41 PLF < w < 99 PLF
therefore generated. When all the datasets from each category and each storey were merged,
a ﬁnal dataset with 3600 rows and the following columns was obtained: (1) the IM for ground
motion, (2) the RFD for the bottom and top ﬂoors, (3) element type and (4) the element’s
ﬁnal damage status. A sample of the dataset in its ﬁnal format can be seen in Table 7.
5.3 DL model development
First, the dataset obtained to transform the categorical values in the element category col-
umn into dummy variables was pre-processed. The standardisation scaling function (Eq. 4)
was then applied to the six input values (IM, RFD bottom ﬂoor, RFD top ﬂoor and three
dummy variables). Three dummy variables were created as this study examines four element
categories (Columns, Bracings, Interior Walls, Curtain Walls) (Fig. 13).
123

594
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Table 7 Final dataset sample
Ground
motion/characteristics
IM
RFD bottom
ﬂoor
RFD top
ﬂoor
Element
category
Damage state
GM 8
2.34
0.54
0.78
Column
3
GM 80
3
0.636
0.768
Bracings
4
GM 52
0.129
0
0.0102
Curtain
wall
0
GM 116 ITALY 000
0.14
0.058
0.08
Bracings
1
GM 113
2.58
0.132
0.3
Curtain
wall
3
GM 23
0.54
0.0516
0.132
Column
0
GM 94
4.14
1.98
2.25
Curtain
wall
3
GM 88
2.58
0.078
0.216
Metal panel
wall
3
GM 141 NORTHR 180 2
0.06
0.03
0.036
Curtain
wall
0
GM 121 KOCAELI 180
0.087
0.0063
0.016
Bracings
0
GM 29
1.98
0.873
1.17
Bracings
4
GM 122
0.261
0.0189
0.048
Column
0
GM 17
0.3
0.021
0.054
Column
0
GM 136 NORTHR 180 1
0.22
0
0.012
Metal panel
wall
0
Fig. 13 Description of four elements categories based on 3 dummy variables (Self-elaborated)
A DL model was then designed (Online Appendix B). In this model, the activation,
loss and optimiser functions (ReLu, SoftMax, Categorical Cross-Entropy and ADAM) were
selected following the architecture described and justiﬁed in the research method (Stage 3).
As explained in the methodology, in order to tune the hyperparameters of the layers and
neurons contained in each layer of the DL model, multiple iterations using a variety of values
were examined. Finally, an input layer was selected with six neurons, three hidden layers
with 40, 40 and 10 neurons respectively, and an output layer with ﬁve expected prediction
values (Fig. 14).
In addition, to prevent overﬁtting in the neural network, dropout layers with a value of 0.3
were added following each of the input and hidden layers. The dataset was then split in two;
a dataset containing 70% of the data was used for training, and the other dataset containing
30% of the data to test the DL model. The DL model was trained to predict the damage status
of the structural elements for a given ground motion. The test results yielded 97% accuracy
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
595
Fig. 14 Representation of our DL model (Self-elaborated)
Fig. 15 Confusion matrix of the DL model (Self-elaborated)
as shown in the confusion matrix (Fig. 15). The trained DL model and scaling value were
then saved in a H5 and a pickle ﬁle.
5.4 Integrating the DL model into BIM
In this stage, Dynamo software is used to integrate the DL model into BIM. A ﬂowchart of
the main steps followed in this process is presented in Fig. 16.
After designing the 3D model and prototyping the DL algorithm, the trained DL model
and scaling value are uploaded by linking them to the BIM model via python script (Online
Appendix C). The scaling value is required because the six input elements need to be scaled
in the DL model. Moreover, in order to implement the simulation, a ground motion must be
selected (Fig. 17).
123

596
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Fig. 16 Flowchart of main steps followed using visual programming code (Dynamo software) to integrate the
DL model into BIM
Fig. 17 Example of acceleration time-history for KOCAELI -ground motion in the critical direction (Self-
elaborated)
The ground motion’s acceleration time-history in both directions, and each ﬂoor’s dis-
placement time-histories in the critical direction are structured as ﬁles in their speciﬁc format.
They are then inserted into the algorithm in Dynamo in order to start the simulation. The
algorithm generates a list of values for each storey containing the IM for the ground motion
and RFD for the bottom (RFDB) and top ﬂoors (RFDT) (Fig. 18) (Online Appendix D).
Finally, in the same list of values, the dummy variables categorising each structural element
are inserted. Following this step, a list for each element category on each storey is created.
This list contains the input values, which are scaled according to the scaled parameter and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
597
Fig. 18 Relative ﬂoor displacements of each ﬂoor in the critical direction (Self-elaborated)
then inserted into the DL model for the damage status predictions for each element category
(Online Appendix C).
5.5 Visualising the DL model outputs in BIM and integrating the smart model
into a web dashboard
In the ﬁnal stage, the algorithm developed in Dynamo assigns each building element to the
corresponding room. It leverages the room tag parameter created for each element examined
and allocates the elements their respective rooms. Then, based on the highest DS among the
elements conﬁguring each room, the respective room’s safety level is assigned. The algorithm
assesses each room’s safety level and generates two cases concerning each room’s repair cost;
repair cost to lower the safety level to acceptance level and total repair cost (Fig. 19).
Finally, the algorithm provides visual information on each room in Revit by using colour
tags in green, yellow, orange and red, based on the room’s safety level (Figs. 20 and 21).
The ﬁnal step in this stage is to generate a user-friendly interface so that the building’s
stakeholders can navigate and visualise the results obtained in the BIM model. In order to
do so, the BIM model with all the graphical and non-graphical information (parameters) was
saved and uploaded to a local server containing the Autodesk Forge dashboard (Forge, 2021).
Figures 22 and 23 show examples of visual results using this interface.
6 Implications, limitations and future research
This section presents the main implications of the research study, and discusses the poten-
tial of the prototyped DL-enhanced simulation tool for both DM and built asset operations
management.
123

598
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Fig. 19 Room’s repair cost based on the acceptance criteria (Self-elaborated)
6.1 Implications for disaster management and the strengthening of operational
resilience in the built environment
This research puts forward a ﬁve-stage framework to develop a simulation method that inte-
grates a DL algorithm into BIM. This tool ultimately has the potential to provide visual
information on damage to a built asset after a disaster, and to produce useful insights associ-
ated with such damage (safety levels, repair costs, expected downtime, etc.). The ﬁve stages
making up our proposed framework are: (1) creating a 3D BIM model; (2) developing a
dataset that reﬂects the structural behaviour of the different elements comprising the asset
under different intensities of a particular extreme event; (3) developing a DL algorithm that
is able to predict DS of each element analysed of the built asset; (4) integrating the DL model
into the 3D BIM model in order to combine the information from both sources; (5) creating
different visualisations that reﬂect the key insights gained in an easily understandable format.
In this study, a step-by-step guide has been produced showing a paradigmatic application
of this framework. To do so, a six-storey building was used as the archetype of a built asset,
and earthquakes were considered an illustrative example of extreme event that can impact the
built environment. The empirical results obtained by this exemplary application show that
the DL-enhanced simulation method has the potential to have an impact on all the different
phases in the DM cycle, and not only in the response phase as the majority of AI applications
in this ﬁeld (Sun et al., 2020). By using this simulation tool, the different actors involved in
DM can gain better understanding of potential damage to the built environment caused by an
extreme event of any given magnitude. Anticipated knowledge of the most likely impacts in
different assets would help improve strategic plans that alleviate the adverse consequences
of a disaster as it has shown in previous studies (Stickley et al., 2016). In the Preparedness
phase, this simulation tool could help stakeholders draw up better evacuation plans based on
predicted damage to the built environment, complementing other technologies in emergency
evacuation planning (Yin et al., 2020; Yoo & Choi, 2019). Similarly, in the Response phase,
accurate responses could be designed according to the most probable simulated scenario,
which would result in efﬁcient health and safety response actions to protect built assets and
end-users. Furthermore, since this simulation method has the potential to generate reliable
visual information extremely rapidly, it can be leveraged in the Response phase immediately
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
599
Fig. 20 Visualisation based on room’s safety level within Revit (1st ﬂoor)
after the disaster. In this line, effective visual risk communication is recognised as a key
element in emergency management as it allows risk and disaster managers to react quickly and
transfer this information directly to general public (Stephens et al., 2015). Once the disaster’s
magnitude is known or, at least, estimated, this DL-enhanced tool is able to simulate outcomes
in order to establish the built asset safety levels. This would therefore provide emergency
and rescue teams with a realistic picture of the impact on the environment, enabling them
123

600
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Fig. 21 Visualisation based on room’s safety level within Revit (6th ﬂoor)
to improve evacuation and rescue plans. This point responds to one of the identiﬁed needs
on the use of technology in humanitarian operations (Mari´c et al., 2021). Finally, in the
Recovery phase, the information supplied by this tool could be very useful to assess the
damage to impacted assets and better understand which of the asset’s elements are most
unsafe. Such information is crucial when attempting to prevent subsequent accidents during
recovery actions (Krausmann et al., 2011). Moreover, reconstruction would be improved
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
601
Fig. 22 Visualisation of the results within the Autodesk Forge environment (Self-elaborated)
Fig. 23 Visualisation of the results within the Autodesk Forge environment (Point of view perspective) (Self-
elaborated)
since the repair costs and time needed to repair buildings and infrastructures would be more
quickly and better understood.
This study also contributes to the digitalisation of the AECOO and responds to one of the
research challenge in BIM research by providing an exemplary application that integrates a
DL model into BIM (Pauwels et al., 2017). This research exploits the visual potential and
information contained in a 3D BIM model as a platform to integrate the valuable insights
123

602
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
generated by the DL model. Developing this kind of simulation tools could help to understand,
from the built asset’s initial design phase, which parameters need to be integrated into BIM in
order to run different types of simulation analyses that enhance built asset operations. In this
damage prediction application, decisions to improve built asset resilience can be made at the
design phase, thus saving the cost of having to make improvements once an asset has been
built. Hence, this tool can be applied to design a safer and more resilient built environment,
contributing to the generation of future-prooﬁng buildings and infrastructures (Love et al.,
2018). Furthermore, using the BIM model to store information in the digital building database
affords the opportunity to interact with predicted information, enabling the implementation
of different analyses (i.e., repair cost analysis or recovery time analysis).
In addition to the above, this tool can help to better understand how to operate a built
asset in the event of a disaster by helping operators to react more swiftly and effectively. This
could be particularly important for the operability of critical infrastructures after a disaster
(Alsubaie et al., 2016). Better knowledge of the impacts on built assets could lead to shorter
recovery times and better understanding of how to continue operating safely. This is crucial
when the operability of these critical assets is essential in order to respond to the calamitous
event.
Finally, integrating the model into a web dashboard supports asset owners and operators
by creating a user-friendly interface to navigate, plan and assess parameters. This contributes
to the improving of the interpretability of DL model’s results in comparison with previous
studies applying AI in structural damage detection.
6.2 Key contributions and practical insights
It is argued here that the key contribution of this research is not the prototyped DL-enhanced
simulation tool itself, rather what this tool illustrates, and the door for similar or alternative
developments that it opens. Thus, it is considered that an important outcome of this study is
that a ﬁve-stage framework is provided which is adaptable to other contexts and applications.
It can be applied to any built asset affected by any extreme event could potentially damage
the built environment. Accordingly, different scenarios can be simulated to respond to the
different needs that DM actors and built asset owners and operators are able to deﬁne based
on their speciﬁc contexts.
We also believe that the potential of this simulation tool for health and safety analysis must
be outlined; indeed, emergency teams can apply this type of simulation tool to increase their
capability to ﬁnd survivors in destroyed and severely damaged buildings after a catastrophe.
Furthermore, focusing on the empirical results, the simulation of the built asset’s ﬁnal DS
can help insurance companies calculate the monetary losses according to different scenarios.
Hence, the degree of uncertainty associated with extreme events can be lessened and more
affordable insurance policies offered, thus increasing the number of insured assets and result-
ing in a less vulnerable built environment. Indeed, this application is quite relevant, based
on data collected by EM-DAT, a recognised global database on natural and technological
disasters, where it has been observed that of total damage costs due to seismic excitations,
only a small proportion was insured (Fig. 24) (EM-DAT, 2021).
In conclusion, it is important to note that the framework herein could be speciﬁcally
adapted to better understand how to respond to particular natural disasters which are more
likely to occur in a given region or context, and where the speciﬁc data available to feed the
DL model are better in terms of volume and quality.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
603
Fig. 24 Quantiﬁcation of total damages/insured damages due to seismic-excitations (self-elaborated)
6.3 Limitations
The limitations of this study mainly concern the unit of study’s relative simplicity. The
rationale behind this decision is that a model was sought in which the framework’s different
stages were recognisable and the analyses easy to follow; also, to avoid the risk of adding
unnecessary complexity to this novel approach. Following this logic, a very simple building
was examined and only a few key elements contained in the 3D model were selected to run the
structural analysis, whose results were entered into the DL model. Moreover, the empirical
analysis only examined the seismic excitation’s critical direction.
Furthermore, although the framework is generalisable, it must be acknowledged that spe-
ciﬁc DL models would have to be developed and trained depending on the built asset’s speciﬁc
characteristics (e.g. geometry, rigidity, etc.). Regarding the integration of the DL model into
BIM, there could be additional difﬁculties when applied to more complex cases, but this
would only involve small modiﬁcations to the Dynamo environment, depending on the ﬁle
format containing the recorded data.
One ﬁnal point, the input data for the DL model training were based on a probabilistic
structural analysis. Therefore, there is a degree of uncertainty with regard to the simulation
method’s outputs following a seismic excitation. Consequently, statutory inspections of the
asset should still be made. Nonetheless, this simulation method does not seek to replace the
legally established examination methods for an asset’s structural health, rather to increase
awareness of structural damage both before and shortly after a disaster.
6.4 Future research
It is proposed that the integration of real-time data into the model by using Internet of Things
(IoT) technology should be investigated. It would enable the development of a Digital Twin
123

604
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
where more accurate algorithms could be designed, since they would be fed real data, leading
to improved outputs and applications.
Moreover, another line for future work could be to test the framework in more complex-
built assets by implementing more detailed structural analyses, and considering more
elements for analysis, in order to provide a more comprehensive dataset to train the DL
algorithm. Moreover, it is suggested that the framework could be applied to a BIM model
containing a larger amount of information to be combined with the output generated by the
DL algorithm, thus enabling improved and varied analyses (i.e., health and safety, monetary).
Applying this methodology to a real-world building with a fully developed BIM model could
therefore be an interesting case study.
Finally, further assessments on how the visual information produced by the simulation
model can be utilised are required to ﬁnd new ways of informing end-users and thereby
reduce causalities.
7 Conclusion
This research responds to the different challenges posed by recent literature on DM,
Operations management and built asset management. First, the need for interdisciplinary
approaches that include technology in order to respond more effectively to disasters (Altay
et al., 2018; Dubey et al., 2019a, 2019b; Wassenhove, 2006). Second, calls for the potential
of AI, and DL in, to be explored to enhance operational solutions in uncertain contexts such
as disasters (Alanne & Sierla, 2022). And third, the need to improve operational resilience
in the built environment (Gharehbaghi et al., 2020; Mangalathu et al., 2019), and to apply
new technologies in order to make decision making quicker (Lin & Wald, 2007).
The proposed framework to develop a DL-enhanced simulation method, and subsequent
application to the case described, fulﬁl the proposed research objectives. An ML model was
prototyped that is able to predict the DS of a built asset. Moreover, different algorithms were
implemented in a visual programming language for BIM (Dynamo software) that detail the
integration of a DL model into a BIM environment. In addition, the simulation model creates
visual information, which is easy to understand and share, thus supporting quick decision-
making. Later, in the implications section, the simulation tool’s applicability to the different
DM stages is discussed so as to address the current challenges. Finally, the impact of this
method to strengthen operational resilience of the built environment is discussed.
In conclusion, it can be argued here that the DL approach implemented in this article
demonstrates DL’s potential, particularly in combination with BIM, as a powerful tool to
perform different analyses that are able to improve operations management and decision
making in uncertain environments.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-023-05247-z.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest All authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
605
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdalla, R., & Esmail, M. (2018). WebGIS for disaster management and emergency response. Springer.
Adnan, A., Ramli, M., & Sk Abd Razak, S. M. (2015). Disaster management and mitigation for earthquakes:
Are we ready?
Agrawal, T. (2021). Hyperparameter optimization using scikit-learn. In T. Agrawal (Ed.), Hyperparameter
optimization in machine learning: make your machine learning and deep learning models more efﬁcient.
APress.
Akter, S., & Wamba, S. F. (2019). Big data and disaster management: A systematic review and agenda for
future research. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 939–959. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-
2584-2
Alanne, K., & Sierla, S. (2022). An overview of machine learning applications for smart buildings. Sustainable
Cities and Society, 76, 103445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2021.103445
Alsubaie, A., Alutaibi, K., & Martí, J. (2016). Resilience assessment of interdependent critical infrastructure.
In E. Rome, M. Theocharidou, & S. Wolthusen (Eds.), Critical information infrastructures security.
Springer International Publishing.
Altay, N., & Green, W. G. (2006). OR/MS research in disaster operations management. European Journal of
Operational Research, 175(1), 475–493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2005.05.016
Altay, N., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2018). Agility and resilience as antecedents of supply
chain performance under moderating effects of organizational culture within the humanitarian setting:
A dynamic capability view. Production Planning and Control, 29(14), 1158–1174. https://doi.org/10.
1080/09537287.2018.1542174
Amaratunga, D., & Haigh, R. (2011). Post-disaster reconstruction of the built environment: Rebuilding for
resilience. Wiley.
Aqib, M., Mehmood, R., Alzahrani, A., & Katib, I. (2020). A smart disaster management system for future
cities using deep learning, GPUs, and in-memory computing. In R. Mehmood, S. See, I. Katib, & I.
Chlamtac (Eds.), Smart infrastructure and applications: foundations for smarter cities and societies.
Springer International Publishing.
Araya, D. B., Grolinger, K., ElYamany, H. F., Capretz, M. A. M., & Bitsuamlak, G. (2017). An ensemble
learning framework for anomaly detection in building energy consumption. Energy and Buildings, 144,
191–206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.02.058
ASCE. (2007). Seismic rehabilitation of existing buildings. American Society of Civil Engineers. https://doi.
org/10.1061/9780784408841
Azhar, S., Khalfan, M., & Maqsood, T. (2012). Building information modelling (BIM): Now and beyond.
Construction Economics and Building. https://doi.org/10.5130/AJCEB.v12i4.3032
Azuatalam, D., Lee, W.-L., de Nijs, F., & Liebman, A. (2020). Reinforcement learning for whole-building
HVAC control and demand response. Energy and AI, 2, 100020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyai.2020.
100020
Bag, S., Gupta, S., Choi, T.-M., & Kumar, A. (2021). Roles of innovation leadership on using big data analytics
to establish resilient healthcare supply chains to combat the COVID-19 pandemic: a multimethodological
study. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3101590
Bang, H. N. (2014). General overview of the disaster management framework in Cameroon. Disasters, 38(3),
562–586. https://doi.org/10.1111/disa.12061
Bartuska, T. J., & Young, G. (2007). The built environment: Deﬁnition and scope. The Built Environment: A
Collaborative Inquiry into Design and Planning, 2, 3–14.
Behl, A., & Dutta, P. (2019). Humanitarian supply chain management: A thematic literature review and
future directions of research. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 1001–1044. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10479-018-2806-2
Belhadi, A., Mani, V., Kamble, S. S., Khan, S. A. R., & Verma, S. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence-driven
innovation for enhancing supply chain resilience and performance under the effect of supply chain
dynamism: An empirical investigation. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-
021-03956-x
123

606
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Bellomo, N., Clarke, D., Gibelli, L., Townsend, P., & Vreugdenhil, B. J. (2016). Human behaviours in evacua-
tion crowd dynamics: From modelling to “big data” toward crisis management. Physics of Life Reviews,
18, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2016.05.014
Boje, C., Guerriero, A., Kubicki, S., & Rezgui, Y. (2020). Towards a semantic construction digital twin: Direc-
tions for future research. Automation in Construction, 114, 103179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.
2020.103179
Bosher, L. (2008b). Introduction: The need for built-in resilience. In Hazards and the Built Environment.
Routledge
Bosher, L. (2008). Hazards and the built environment: Attaining built-in resilience. Routledge.
Bosher, L. (2014). Built-in resilience through disaster risk reduction: Operational issues. Building Research
and Information, 42(2), 240–254. https://doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2014.858203
Bosher, L., Carrillo, P., Dainty, A., Glass, J., & Price, A. (2007). Realising a resilient and sustainable built
environment: Towards a strategic agenda for the United Kingdom. Disasters, 31(3), 236–255. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7717.2007.01007.x
Bosher, L., & Dainty, A. (2011). Disaster risk reduction and ‘built-in’ resilience: Towards overarching princi-
ples for construction practice. Disasters, 35(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7717.2010.01189.x
Bouabdallaoui, Y., Lafhaj, Z., Yim, P., Ducoulombier, L., & Bennadji, B. (2021). Predictive maintenance in
building facilities: a machine learning-based approach. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21041044
Cai, H., Lam, N. S. N., Qiang, Y., Zou, L., Correll, R. M., & Mihunov, V. (2018). A synthesis of disaster
resilience measurement methods and indices. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 31,
844–855. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2018.07.015
Cer`e, G., Rezgui, Y., & Zhao, W. (2017). Critical review of existing built environment resilience frameworks:
Directions for future research. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 25, 173–189. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.09.018
Charalambos, G., Dimitrios, V., & Symeon, C. (2014). Damage assessment cost estimating, and scheduling
for post-earthquake building rehabilitation using BIM. Computing in Civil and Building Engineering.
https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784413616.050
Chatterjee, S., Chaudhuri, R., González, V. I., Kumar, A., & Singh, S. K. (2022). Resource integration and
dynamic capability of frontline employee during COVID-19 pandemic: From value creation and engi-
neering management perspectives. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 176, 121446. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121446
Chen, J., Lim, C. P., Tan, K. H., Govindan, K., & Kumar, A. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence-based human-
centric decision support framework: An application to predictive maintenance in asset management under
pandemic environments. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04373-w
Chopra, A. K. (2007). Dynamics of structures. Pearson Education.
Clarke, J. (2018). The role of building operational emulation in realizing a resilient built environment. Archi-
tectural Science Review, 61(5), 358–361. https://doi.org/10.1080/00038628.2018.1502157
Criminale, A., & Langar, S. (2017). Challenges with BIM Implementation: A Review of Literature.
Dash, R., McMurtrey, M., Rebman, C., & Kar, U. K. (2019). Application of artiﬁcial intelligence in automation
of supply chain management. Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability, 14(3), 4585.
Deierlein, G., Krawinkler, H., & Cornell, C. (2003). A framework for performance-based earthquake engi-
neering.
Delmonteil, F.-X., & Rancourt, M. -È. (2017). The role of satellite technologies in relief logistics. Journal of
Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 7(1), 57–78. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-
07-2016-0031
Deng, M., Menassa, C. C., & Kamat, V. R. (2021). From BIM to digital twins: A systematic review of
the evolution of intelligent building representations in the AEC-FM industry. Journal of Information
Technology in Construction (ITcon), 26(5), 58–83. https://doi.org/10.36680/j.itcon.2021.005
Devaraj, J., Ganesan, S., Elavarasan, R. M., & Subramaniam, U. (2021). A novel deep learning based model
for tropical intensity estimation and post-disaster management of hurricanes. Applied Sciences. https://
doi.org/10.3390/app11094129
Dixon, H. E., & Ginsberg, M. L. (2000). Combining satisﬁability techniques from AI and OR. The Knowledge
Engineering Review, 15(1), 31–45. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0269888900001041
Doorn, N., Gardoni, P., & Murphy, C. (2019). A multidisciplinary deﬁnition and evaluation of resilience:
The role of social justice in deﬁning resilience. Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructure, 4(3), 112–123.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23789689.2018.1428162
Drosio, S., & Stanek, S. (2016). The Big Data concept as a contributor of added value to crisis decision
support systems. Journal of Decision Systems, 25(sup1), 228–239. https://doi.org/10.1080/12460125.
2016.1187404
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
607
Dubey, R., Altay, N., & Blome, C. (2019a). Swift trust and commitment: The missing links for humanitarian
supply chain coordination? Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 159–177. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-017-2676-z
Dubey, R., Bryde, D. J., Foropon, C., Graham, G., Giannakis, M., & Mishra, D. B. (2020). Agility in human-
itarian supply chain: An organizational information processing perspective and relational view. Annals
of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03824-0
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Roubaud, D., Fosso Wamba, S., Giannakis, M., & Foropon, C.
(2019b). Big data analytics and organizational culture as complements to swift trust and collaborative
performance in the humanitarian supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 210,
120–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.01.023
EM-DAT. (2021). EM-DAT Public [Database]. EM-DAT Public. https://public.emdat.be/.
European Committee for Standardization (CEN). (2010). Eurocode 1: Actions on structures – Part 1–4: Gen-
eral actions – wind actions. EN 1991-1-4:2005/ AC:2010 (E). Europe: European Standard (Eurocode),
European Committee for Standardization (CEN).
Feng, C., Zhang, H., Wang, S., Li, Y., Wang, H., & Yan, F. (2019). Structural damage detection using deep con-
volutional neural network and transfer learning. KSCE Journal of Civil Engineering, 23(10), 4493–4502.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12205-019-0437-z
Forge. (2021). Autodesk Forge. Learn Forge. https://learnforge.autodesk.io/#/.
Galera-Zarco, C. G., Bustinza, O., & Perez, V. F. (2016). Adding value: How to develop a servitisation strategy
in civil engineering. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers Civil Engineering, 169(1), 35–40.
https://doi.org/10.1680/jcien.15.00023
Gavidia, J. V. (2017). A model for enterprise resource planning in emergency humanitarian logistics. Jour-
nal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 7(3), 246–265. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JHLSCM-02-2017-0004
Ghaffarianhoseini, A., Tookey, J., Ghaffarianhoseini, A., Naismith, N., Azhar, S., Eﬁmova, O., & Raahemifar,
K. (2017). Building Information Modelling (BIM) uptake: Clear beneﬁts, understanding its implementa-
tion, risks and challenges. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 75, 1046–1053. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.083
Gharehbaghi, V. R., Nguyen, A., Noroozinejad Farsangi, E., & Yang, T. Y. (2020). Supervised damage and
deterioration detection in building structures using an enhanced autoregressive time-series approach.
Journal of Building Engineering, 30, 101292. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2020.101292
Ghobakhloo, M. (2020). Industry 4.0, digitization, and opportunities for sustainability. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 252, 119869. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119869
Global assessment report on disaster risk reduction 2015. (n.d.). Retrieved 29 December 2021, from https://
www.undrr.org/publication/global-assessment-report-disaster-risk-reduction-2015
Global assessment report on disaster risk reduction 2019. (n.d.). Retrieved 29 December 2021, from https://
www.undrr.org/publication/global-assessment-report-disaster-risk-reduction-2019
Grifﬁth, D. A., Boehmke, B., Bradley, R. V., Hazen, B. T., & Johnson, A. W. (2019). Embedded analytics:
Improving decision support for humanitarian logistics operations. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1),
247–265. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2607-z
Guillaume, R., Marques, G., Thierry, C., & Dubois, D. (2014). Decision support with ill-known criteria in the
collaborative supply chain context. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 36, 1–11. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2014.06.013
Günay, S., & Mosalam, K. M. (2013). PEER Performance-Based Earthquake Engineering Methodology.
Revisited. Journal of Earthquake Engineering, 17(6), 829–858. https://doi.org/10.1080/13632469.2013.
787377
Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Wamba, S. F., Papadopoulos, T., Hazen, B. T., & Ngai, E. W. T. (2018). Bridging
humanitarian operations management and organisational theory. International Journal of Production
Research, 56(21), 6735–6740.
Guner,H.U.,Chinnam,R.B.,&Murat,A.(2016).Simulationplatformforanticipativeplant-levelmaintenance
decision support system. International Journal of Production Research, 54(6), 1785–1803. https://doi.
org/10.1080/00207543.2015.1064179
Gupta, S., Modgil, S., Bhattacharyya, S., & Bose, I. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence for decision support systems
in the ﬁeld of operations research: Review and future scope of research. Annals of Operations Research.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03856-6
Gupta, S., Starr, M. K., Farahani, R. Z., & Matinrad, N. (2016). Disaster Management from a POM Perspective:
Mapping a New Domain. Production and Operations Management, 25(10), 1611–1637. https://doi.org/
10.1111/poms.12591
123

608
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Haigh, R., & Amaratunga, D. (2010). An integrative review of the built environment discipline’s role in the
development of society’s resilience to disasters. International Journal of Disaster Resilience in the Built
Environment, 1(1), 11–24. https://doi.org/10.1108/17595901011026454
Hajeb, M., Karimzadeh, S., & Matsuoka, M. (2020). SAR and LIDAR datasets for building damage evaluation
based on support vector machine and random forest algorithms—a case study of kumamoto earthquake
Japan. Applied Sciences. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10248932
Halhoul Merabet, G., Essaaidi, M., Ben Haddou, M., Qolomany, B., Qadir, J., Anan, M., Al-Fuqaha, A., Abid,
M. R., & Benhaddou, D. (2021). Intelligent building control systems for thermal comfort and energy-
efﬁciency: A systematic review of artiﬁcial intelligence-assisted techniques. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 144, 110969. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.110969
Hall, J. F., Heaton, T. H., Halling, M. W., & Wald, D. J. (1995). Near-source ground motion and its effects on
ﬂexible buildings. Earthquake Spectra, 11(4), 569–605. https://doi.org/10.1193/1.1585828
Hallaji, S. M., Fang, Y., & Winfrey, B. K. (2021). Predictive maintenance of pumps in civil infrastructure:
State-of-the-art, challenges and future directions. Automation in Construction. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
autcon.2021.104049
Hjelseth, E. (2017). BIM understanding and activities. 978-1-78466-171-7. https://oda.oslomet.no/oda-xmlui/
handle/10642/6226
Holguín-Veras, J., Jaller, M., Van Wassenhove, L. N., Pérez, N., & Wachtendorf, T. (2012). On the unique
features of post-disaster humanitarian logistics. Journal of Operations Management, 30(7), 494–506.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2012.08.003
Horita, F. E. A., de Albuquerque, J. P., Marchezini, V., & Mendiondo, E. M. (2017). Bridging the gap between
decision-making and emerging big data sources: An application of a model-based framework to disaster
management in Brazil. Decision Support Systems, 97, 12–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2017.03.001
Howell, S., & Rezgui, Y. (2018). Beyond BIM: Knowledge management for a smarter built environment.
https://www.brebookshop.com/details.jsp?id=327975.
Hu, K. H., Cui, P., & Zhang, J. Q. (2012). Characteristics of damage to buildings by debris ﬂows on 7 August
2010 in Zhouqu, Western China. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 12(7), 2209–2217. https://
doi.org/10.5194/nhess-12-2209-2012
INNOSEIS. (2021). INNOSEIS–valorization of INNOvative anti-SEISsmic devices. INNOSEIS. http://
innoseis.ntua.gr/.
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2019). The impact of digital technology and Industry 4.0 on the ripple
effect and supply chain risk analytics. International Journal of Production Research, 57(3), 829–846.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1488086
Kabra, G., & Ramesh, A. (2015). Analyzing drivers and barriers of coordination in humanitarian supply
chain management under fuzzy environment. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 22(4), 559–587.
https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-05-2014-0041
Kelman, I., & Spence, R. (2004). An overview of ﬂood actions on buildings. Engineering Geology, 73(3),
297–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enggeo.2004.01.010
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2017). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Kobbacy, K. A. H., Vadera, S., & Rasmy, M. H. (2007). AI and OR in management of operations: History
and trends. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 58(1), 10–28. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.
jors.2602132
Kourou, K., Exarchos, T. P., Exarchos, K. P., Karamouzis, M. V., & Fotiadis, D. I. (2015). Machine learning
applications in cancer prognosis and prediction. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal,
13, 8–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2014.11.005
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. M. (2011). Trends and developments in humanitarian logistics—a gap analysis.
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 41(1), 32–45. https://doi.org/
10.1108/09600031111101411
Krausmann, E., Cruz, A. M., & Affeltranger, B. (2010). The impact of the 12 May 2008 Wenchuan earthquake
on industrial facilities. Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, 23(2), 242–248. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jlp.2009.10.004
Krausmann, E., Renni, E., Campedel, M., & Cozzani, V. (2011). Industrial accidents triggered by earthquakes,
ﬂoods and lightning: Lessons learned from a database analysis. Natural Hazards, 59(1), 285–300. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-9754-3
Kubicki, S., Guerriero, A., Schwartz, L., Daher, E., & Idris, B. (2019). Assessment of synchronous interactive
devices for BIM project coordination: Prospective ergonomics approach. Automation in Construction,
101, 160–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2018.12.009
Kumar, A., Choi, T.-M., Wamba, S. F., Gupta, S., & Tan, K. H. (2021). Infection vulnerability stratiﬁcation
risk modelling of COVID-19 data: A deterministic SEIR epidemic model analysis. Annals of Operations
Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04091-3
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
609
Kumar, A., Gopal, R. D., Shankar, R., & Tan, K. H. (2022). Fraudulent review detection model focusing on
emotional expressions and explicit aspects: Investigating the potential of feature engineering. Decision
Support Systems, 155, 113728. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2021.113728
Lebold, M., Reichard, K., & Boylan, D. (2003). Utilizing dcom in an open system architecture framework
for machinery monitoring and diagnostics. In 2003 IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings (Cat. No.
03TH8652), 3, 3_1227-3_1236.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521, 7553. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature14539
LeCun, Y. A., Bottou, L., Orr, G. B., & Müller, K.-R. (2012). Efﬁcient BackProp. In G. Montavon, G. B. Orr,
& K.-R. Müller (Eds.), Neural networks: Tricks of the trade (2nd ed.). UK: Springer.
Lin, K., & Wald, D. J. (2007). ShakeCast: automating and improving the use of shakemap for post-earthquake
decision- making and response. AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts, 51, S51A-0212.
Liu, Z., Bai, W., Du, X., Zhang, A., Xing, Z., & Jiang, A. (2020). Digital Twin-based safety evaluation of
prestressed steel structure. Advances in Civil Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8888876
Liu, Z., Zhang, A., & Wang, W. (2020b). A framework for an indoor safety management system based on
digital twin. Sensors, 20(20), 5771. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20205771
Love, P. E. D., Ika, L. A., Locatelli, G., & Ahiaga-Dagbui, D. D. (2018). Future-prooﬁng ‘Next Generation’
infrastructure assets. Frontiers of Engineering Management, 1, 452.
Lu, Q., Goh, M., & De Souza, R. (2018). An empirical investigation of swift trust in humanitarian logistics
operations. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 8(1), 70–86. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JHLSCM-07-2017-0033
Lu, Q., Xie, X., Heaton, J., Parlikad, A. K., & Schooling, J. (2020). From BIM towards digital twin: strategy
and future development for smart asset management. In T. Borangiu, D. Trentesaux, P. Leitão, A. Giret
Boggino, & V. Botti (Eds.), Service oriented, holonic and multi-agent manufacturing systems for industry
of the future. Springer International Publishing.
Malalgoda, C., & Amaratunga, D. (2015). A disaster resilient built environment in urban cities: The need to
empower local governments. International Journal of Disaster Resilience in the Built Environment, 6(1),
102–116. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJDRBE-10-2014-0071
Mangalathu, S., Hwang, S.-H., Choi, E., & Jeon, J.-S. (2019). Rapid seismic damage evaluation of bridge
portfolios using machine learning techniques. Engineering Structures, 201, 09785. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.engstruct.2019.109785
Mangalathu, S., Sun, H., Nweke, C. C., Yi, Z., & Burton, H. V. (2020). Classifying earthquake damage
to buildings using machine learning. Earthquake Spectra, 36(1), 183–208. https://doi.org/10.1177/
8755293019878137
Mannakkara, S., & Wilkinson, S. (2013). Build Back Better principles for post-disaster structural improve-
ments. Structural Survey, 31(4), 314–327. https://doi.org/10.1108/SS-12-2012-0044
Mari´c, J., Galera-Zarco, C., & Opazo-Basáez, M. (2021). The emergent role of digital technologies in the
context of humanitarian supply chains: A systematic literature review. Annals of Operations Research.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04079-z
McAllister, T. P. (2013). Developing guidelines and standards for disaster resilience of the built environment:
A research needs assessment (NIST TN 1795).
Min, J. H., & Lee, Y.-C. (2005). Bankruptcy prediction using support vector machine with optimal choice of
kernel function parameters. Expert Systems with Applications, 28(4), 603–614. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.eswa.2004.12.008
Modgil, S., Singh, R. K., & Foropon, C. (2020). Quality management in humanitarian operations and disaster
relief management: A review and future research directions. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10479-020-03695-5
Mulder, F., Ferguson, J. E., Groenewegen, P., Boersma, F. K., & Wolbers, J. J. (2016). Questioning Big Data:
Crowdsourcing crisis data towards an inclusive humanitarian response. Big Data Society, 3(2), 1–13.
Naito, S., Tomozawa, H., Mori, Y., Nagata, T., Monma, N., Nakamura, H., Fujiwara, H., & Shoji,
G. (2020). Building-damage detection method based on machine learning utilizing aerial pho-
tographs of the Kumamoto earthquake. Earthquake Spectra, 36(3), 1166–1187. https://doi.org/10.1177/
8755293019901309
Nedˇelková, Z., Lindroth, P., Patriksson, M., & Strömberg, A.-B. (2018). Efﬁcient solution of many instances of
a simulation-based optimization problem utilizing a partition of the decision space. Annals of Operations
Research, 265(1), 93–118. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2721-y
Nwankpa, C., Ijomah, W., Gachagan, A., & Marshall, S. (2018). Activation functions: Comparison of trends
in practice and research for deep learning. http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.03378
123

610
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Oﬂi, F., Meier, P., Imran, M., Castillo, C., Tuia, D., Rey, N., Briant, J., Millet, P., Reinhard, F., & Parkan,
M. (2016). Combining human computing and machine learning to make sense of big (aerial) data for
disaster response. Big Data, 4(1), 47–59.
PACT. (2021). Report volumes. https://femap58.atcouncil.org/reports.
Palanisamy, P., Rajendran, I., & Shanmugasundaram, S. (2008). Prediction of tool wear using regression and
ANN models in end-milling operation. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technol-
ogy, 37(1), 29–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-007-0948-5
Papadopoulos, T., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Altay, N., Childe, S. J., & Fosso-Wamba, S. (2017). The
role of Big Data in explaining disaster resilience in supply chains for sustainability. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 142, 1108–1118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.03.059
Park, Y., Hong, P., & Roh, J. (2013). Supply chain lessons from the catastrophic natural disaster in Japan.
Business Horizons, 56, 75–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2012.09.008
Pauwels, P., Zhang, S., & Lee, Y.-C. (2017). Semantic web technologies in AEC industry: A literature overview.
Automation in Construction, 73, 145–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2016.10.003
Pedraza-Martinez, A. J., & Wassenhove, L. N. V. (2016). Empirically grounded research in humanitarian
operations management: The way forward. Journal of Operations Management, 45(1), 1–10. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jom.2016.06.003
Pouyanfar, S., Tao, Y., Tian, H., Chen, S.-C., & Shyu, M.-L. (2019). Multimodal deep learning based on
multiple correspondence analysis for disaster management. World Wide Web, 22(5), 1893–1911. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11280-018-0636-4
Ragini, J. R., Anand, P. M. R., & Bhaskar, V. (2018). Big data analytics for disaster response and recovery
through sentiment analysis. International Journal of Information Management, 42, 13–24. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.05.004
Ransolin, N., Saurin, T. A., & Formoso, C. T. (2020). Integrated modelling of built environment and functional
requirements: Implications for resilience. Applied Ergonomics, 88, 103154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apergo.2020.103154
Ribeiro, P. J. G., & Pena-Jardim-Gonçalves, L. A. (2019). Urban resilience: A conceptual framework. Sus-
tainable Cities and Society, 50, 101625. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2019.101625
Rodríguez-Espíndola, O., Chowdhury, S., Beltagui, A., & Albores, P. (2020). The potential of emergent disrup-
tive technologies for humanitarian supply chains: The integration of blockchain, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and 3D printing. International Journal of Production Research, 58(15), 4610–4630. https://doi.org/10.
1080/00207543.2020.1761565
Rolland, E., Patterson, R. A., Ward, K., & Dodin, B. (2010). Decision support for disaster management.
Operations Management Research, 3(1), 68–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12063-010-0028-0
Rüppel, U., & Schatz, K. (2011). Designing a BIM-based serious game for ﬁre safety evacuation simulations.
Advanced Engineering Informatics, 25(4), 600–611. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2011.08.001
Sahebjamnia, N., Torabi, S. A., & Mansouri, S. A. (2017). A hybrid decision support system for managing
humanitarian relief chains. Decision Support Systems, 95, 12–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2016.
11.006
Sakurai, M., & Murayama, Y. (2019). Information technologies and disaster management–Beneﬁts and issues.
Progress in Disaster Science, 2, 100012. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pdisas.2019.100012
Schroeder, A., Galera Zarco, C., Baines, T., & Ziaee Bigdeli, A. (2016). Barriers to capturing the value of
advanced services and digitisation in the road transport industry. In Spring Servitization Conference
SSC2016. Spring Servitization Conference SSC2016, GBR. https://publications.aston.ac.uk/id/eprint/
29683/.
Seifert, L., Kunz, N., & Gold, S. (2018). Humanitarian supply chain management responding to refugees:
A literature review. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 8(3), 398–426.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-07-2017-0029
Shavindree, N. A. C., Amaratunga, D., & Haigh, R. (2022). Disaster resilient properties: built environment
discourse. In S. Kolathayar, I. Pal, S. C. Chian, & A. Mondal (Eds.), Civil engineering for disaster risk
reduction. UK: Springer.
Shayganmehr, M., Gupta, S., Laguir, I., Stekelorum, R., & Kumar, A. (2021). Assessing the role of industry 4.0
for enhancing swift trust and coordination in humanitarian supply chain. Annals of Operations Research.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04430-4
Stephens, S. H., DeLorme, D. E., & Hagen, S. C. (2015). Evaluating the utility and communicative effectiveness
of an interactive sea-level rise viewer through stakeholder engagement. Journal of Business and Technical
Communication, 29(3), 314–343. https://doi.org/10.1177/1050651915573963
Stickley, A., Christensen, S., Duncan, W. D., & Buchbach, J. (2016). Predictive technology and natural hazards:
Risk for Australian planning authorities? International Journal of Law in the Built Environment, 8(1),
42–55. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLBE-12-2015-0020
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
611
Succar, B. (2009). Building information modelling framework: A research and delivery foundation for industry
stakeholders. Automation in Construction, 18(3), 357–375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2008.10.003
Sun, W., Bocchini, P., & Davison, B. D. (2020). Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence for disaster management.
Natural Hazards, 103(3), 2631–2689. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-020-04124-3
Swaminathan,J.M.(2018).Bigdataanalyticsforrapid,impactful,sustained,andefﬁcient(RISE)humanitarian
operations. Production and Operations Management, 27(9), 1696–1700. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.
12840
Tufekci, S., & Wallace, W. A. (1998). The emerging area of emergency management and engineering. IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management, 45(2), 103–105. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.1998.669742
UNDRR Annual Report 2020. Retrieved 29 December 2021, from https://www.undrr.org/publication/undrr-
annual-report-2020.
UNDRR. (2021). UNDRR Strategic Framework 2022–2025. https://www.undrr.org/publication/undrr-
strategic-framework-2022-2025.
UNISDR terminology on disaster risk reduction. (2009) Retrieved 29 December 2021, from https://www.
undrr.org/publication/2009-unisdr-terminology-disaster-risk-reduction.
United Nations. (2010). Earthquakes the deadliest of all disasters during past decade—UN ofﬁcial. UN News.
United Nations. (2019). World population prospects 2019: Highlights | Multimedia Library—United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs. United Nations.
Vanany, I., Ali, M. H., Tan, K. H., Kumar, A., & Siswanto, N. (2021). A supply chain resilience capability
framework and process for mitigating the covid-19 pandemic disruption. IEEE Transactions on Engi-
neering Management. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3116068
Vinck, P. (2013). World disasters report 2013: Focus on technology and the future of humanitarian intervention.
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 1, 245.
Wang, J., Han, X., Mao, J., & Li, W. (2021). Design and practice of prefabricated zero energy building in cold
plateau area. Energy and Buildings, 251, 111332. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2021.111332
Waring, S., Alison, L., Carter, G., Barrett-Pink, C., Humann, M., Swan, L., & Zilinsky, T. (2018). Information
sharing in interteam responses to disaster. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology,
91(3), 591–619. https://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12217
Wassenhove, L. N. V. (2006). Humanitarian aid logistics: Supply chain management in high gear. Journal of
the Operational Research Society, 57(5), 475–489. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jors.2602125
Wei, Y., Xu, W., Fan, Y., & Tasi, H.-T. (2002). Artiﬁcial neural network based predictive method for ﬂood disas-
ter. Computers Industrial Engineering, 42(2), 383–390. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-8352(02)00047-5
Xiong, Y., Lam, H. K. S., Kumar, A., Ngai, E. W. T., Xiu, C., & Wang, X. (2021). The mitigating role of
blockchain-enabled supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic. International Journal of Operations
Production Management, 41(9), 1495–1521. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-12-2020-0901
Xu, L. D., Xu, E. L., & Li, L. (2018). Industry 4.0: State of the art and future trends. International Journal of
Production Research, 56(8), 2941–2962. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1444806
Ye, F., Liu, K., Li, L., Lai, K.-H., Zhan, Y., & Kumar, A. (2022). Digital supply chain management in the
COVID-19 crisis: An asset orchestration perspective. International Journal of Production Economics,
245, 108396. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2021.108396
Yin, L., Chen, J., Zhang, H., Yang, Z., Wan, Q., Ning, L., Hu, J., & Yu, Q. (2020). Improving emergency
evacuation planning with mobile phone location data. Environment and Planning b: Urban Analytics
and City Science, 47(6), 964–980. https://doi.org/10.1177/2399808319874805
Yoo, B., & Choi, S. D. (2019). Emergency Evacuation Plan for Hazardous Chemicals Leakage Accidents Using
GIS-based Risk Analysis Techniques in South Korea. International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16111948
Yuan, Q., Shen, H., Li, T., Li, Z., Li, S., Jiang, Y., Xu, H., Tan, W., Yang, Q., Wang, J., Gao, J., & Zhang, L.
(2020). Deep learning in environmental remote sensing: Achievements and challenges. Remote Sensing
of Environment, 241, 111716. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2020.111716
Zeng, X., Lu, X., Yang, T. Y., & Xu, Z. (2016). Application of the FEMA-P58 methodology for regional earth-
quake loss prediction. Natural Hazards, 83(1), 177–192. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-016-2307-z
Zhang, J. (2019). Gradient descent based optimization algorithms for deep learning models training. http://
arxiv.org/abs/1903.03614.
Zhang, C., Fan, C., Yao, W., Hu, X., & Mostafavi, A. (2019). Social media for intelligent public information
and warning in disasters: An interdisciplinary review. International Journal of Information Management,
49, 190–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.04.004
Zhang, Y., Burton, H. V., Sun, H., & Shokrabadi, M. (2018). A machine learning framework for assessing post-
earthquake structural safety. Structural Safety, 72, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.strusafe.2017.12.001
123

612
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:573–612
Zou, H., Zhou, Y., Yang, J., & Spanos, C. J. (2018). Towards occupant activity driven smart buildings via
WiFi-enabled IoT devices and deep learning. Energy and Buildings, 177, 12–22. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.enbuild.2018.08.010
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123