TITLE: Integrating multiple sources of ordinal information in portfolio optimization
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06495-x
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06495-x
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Integrating multiple sources of ordinal information in
portfolio optimization
Eranda Çela1
· Stephan Hafner2 · Roland Mestel3
· Ulrich Pferschy2
Received: 7 July 2023 / Accepted: 13 January 2025 / Published online: 31 January 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
In this contribution we consider multiple qualitative views speciﬁed as total orders of the
expected asset returns and discuss two different approaches for incorporating this input in
a mean–variance portfolio optimization model. In the robust optimization approach we ﬁrst
compute a posterior expectation of asset returns for every given total order by an extension
of the Black–Litterman (BL) framework. Then these expected asset returns are considered
as possible input scenarios for robust optimization variants of the mean–variance portfolio
model (max–min robustness, min-max regret robustness and soft robustness). In the order
aggregation approach rules from social choice theory (Borda, Footrule, Copeland, Best-of-k
and MC4) are used to aggregate the individual total orders into a single “consensus total
order”. Then expected asset returns are computed for this “consensus total order” by the
extended BL framework mentioned above. Finally, these expectations are used as an input
of the classical mean–variance optimization. Using data from EUROSTOXX 50 and S&P
100 we empirically compare the success of the two approaches in the context of portfolio
performance analysis and observe that aggregating orders by social choice methods mostly
outperforms robust optimization based methods for both data sets and for different combi-
nations of conﬁdence and quality levels of the views.
Keywords Finance · Black–Litterman model · Qualitative views · Order aggregation ·
Robust optimization · Portfolio optimization
B Ulrich Pferschy
ulrich.pferschy@uni-graz.at
Eranda Çela
cela@math.tugraz.at
Roland Mestel
roland.mestel@uni-graz.at
1
Department of Discrete Mathematics, TU Graz, Steyrergasse 30, 8010 Graz, Austria
2
Department of Operations and Information Systems, University of Graz, Universitaetsstrasse 15,
8010 Graz, Austria
3
Department of Banking and Finance, University of Graz, Universitaetsstrasse 15, 8010 Graz, Austria
123

1968
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1 Introduction
This paper addresses the question of how to incorporate qualitative information about
expected asset returns into portfolio management. We apply a recent approach by Çela et al.
(2021) that extends the Black–Litterman model (Black and Litterman 1991, 1992; hereafter
BL) by allowing views that simply rank assets or asset classes according to their expected
future returns.1 However, while Çela et al. (2021) consider a single source of ordinal infor-
mation (e.g., the beliefs of a single ﬁnancial expert or a ranking based on a single technical
indicator of stock prices), we introduce a signiﬁcant extension by allowing multiple views
about different assets to be taken into account. The idea behind this extension is the fact
that asset allocation in the context of portfolio management is increasingly being carried
out by investment teams or committees rather than by individual portfolio managers. Such
teams may be made up of several portfolio managers, research analysts, risk managers or
economists, thereby leveraging the expertise and perspectives of different professionals to
improve the quality of investment decisions. In such a situation, asset allocation decisions are
usually the result of a consensus-building process in which these different perspectives, expe-
riences, skills and hierarchical positions must be taken into account. The aim of this paper is
to present alternative methods that could be used for aggregating multiple qualitative views in
the context of asset allocation and to conduct a horse race using historical stock market data
to see which of these methods delivers the highest portfolio performance in a stylized setting.
We pursue two different approaches for dealing with multiple views which from now
on are considered to be orderings (or rankings) of the assets in the considered investment
universe: On the one hand, we use different methods from robust optimization considering
each ordering as a possible scenario. On the other hand, we apply methods from social choice
theory to aggregate multiple rankings into a single consensus ranking. While methods from
robust optimizations have long been established in portfolio management (see for example
Fabozzi et al. 2007, Goldfarb and Iyengar 2003 and Kim et al. 2023), to the best of our
knowledge our paper is the ﬁrst to integrate aggregation methods from social choice theory
into the world of asset allocation. We show how different methods from these approaches can
be used to integrate multiple rankings into portfolio optimization. In addition to formal expla-
nations, we empirically evaluate the performance of the different models in a mean–variance
(MV) framework based on historical stock market data. This allows us to formulate recom-
mendations on which method is preferable when considering multiple pieces of qualitative
information in portfolio optimization.
1.1 Mean–variance portfolio optimization and the Black–Litterman approach
The relevance of incorporating multiple exogenous insights, such as portfolio managers’
judgments, into formal models of portfolio management was already highlighted in Harry
Markowitz’s seminal work on portfolio selection (Markowitz 1952, 1959), commonly
referred to as mean–variance (MV) optimization or Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT):
”Various types of information concerning securities can be used as the raw material of
a portfolio analysis. One source of information is the past performance of individual
securities. A second source of information is the beliefs of one or more security analysts
concerning future performances." (Markowitz (1959), p. 3)
1 Note that a view is generally deﬁned as an uncertain statement about the expected return of one or more
assets or asset classes.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1969
There is a plethora of papers on the theoretical aspects of MPT, see e.g. the reviews by
Rubinstein (2002) and Kim et al. (2021). However, the reputation of the method and its
implementation in practice have often been subject to criticism among practitioners. Several
studies(e.g.Michaud1989,BestandGrauer1991,ChopraandZiemba1993orKanandSmith
2008) provide empirical evidence on the poor performance of the classical MV optimization
model in practice. One of the main criticisms focuses on model estimation errors resulting
from difﬁculties in ﬁnding appropriate estimates for the necessary model inputs (expected
returns and covariances) for all securities in the investment universe under consideration.
To mitigate the adverse effects of neglecting uncertainty in the inputs and considering the
portfolio optimization problem in the original MV framework as a deterministic problem,
several approaches have been taken in the literature (for a concise overview, we refer to Kolm
et al. 2014). Some of these approaches focus on modifying the constraints and/or the objective
function, e.g. by imposing restrictions on portfolio weights (e.g., Michaud 1989 and Levy
and Levy 2014) and incorporating higher moments and tail-risk measures (e.g., Harvey et
al. 2010 and Lassance and Vrins 2021). Other approaches target appropriate modiﬁcations
to the input of the portfolio selection problem including robust optimization methods (e.g.,
DeMiguel and Nogales 2009, Huang et al. 2010 and Goldfarb and Iyengar 2003), Bayesian
statistics (e.g., Pastor and Stambaugh 2000 and Bodnar et al. 2022) and the Black–Litterman
model (Black and Litterman 1991, 1992). The latter provides the framework for our analysis.
The original BL-approach (Black and Litterman 1991) assumes that the “true” expected
asset returns μ are both, unknown and random. In order to take into account this uncertainty
in estimation, the model starts with equilibrium risk premia as the neutral reference point
(the prior distribution) for expected returns, derived from an asset pricing model such as the
CAPM using reverse optimization. The prior can be interpreted as the market view on the
portfolio optimization process, since all investors who do not have speciﬁc views on expected
asset returns will hold the same optimal portfolio, the market portfolio. Further it is assumed
that investors formulate their own individual views on (at least some of) the securities in the
investment universe. These can be views on absolute returns of individual assets (e.g. “the
expected 1-year return on security X is 3.5%”) or relative predictions about the difference
in returns between two or more assets (e.g. “security X will outperform security Y by 1%
over the next 6 months”). Similar to the prior μ, investor individual views are assumed to be
stochastic, with uncertainty inversely proportional to the conﬁdence in investor’s views.
After separately specifying the prior distribution of expected returns implied by the market
equilibrium and the investor’s views on expected asset returns, the BL-model applies Bayes’
theorem to combine these two sources of information and to derive the posterior distribution
of μ. The lower the conﬁdence in an investor’s views, the closer the posterior distribution of
the expected returns will be to that implied by the market equilibrium. On the other hand, the
higher the conﬁdence in the views, the more the posterior distribution of the expected returns
will tilt away from market equilibrium in the direction of the views. Indeed, the vector of
expected returns derived from the BL-model (μBL) is obtained as the conditional expectation
of the prior distribution given the investor’s views. These estimates ﬁnally enter the MV
portfolio optimization process.
1.2 Qualitative views
The traditional BL-model assumes that the views, whether formulated in absolute or rel-
ative terms (see above), are metrically scaled variables (we will refer to such views as
quantitative views hereafter). Although this assumption might simplify the calculation of
123

1970
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
μBL, it is unlikely that this kind of views will prevail in practice. Portfolio managers and
ﬁnancial analysts are likely to feel more comfortable expressing qualitative views, e.g., by
simply ranking their expectations concerning the future performance of individual stocks,
different asset classes, several sectors of the economy, or individual or multiple stock mar-
kets in different geographic regions. In this sense, Fabozzi et al. (2007) (p. 233) states that
“...trading strategies... rather just provide relative rankings of securities that are predicted
to outperform/underperform other securities.” Further (p. 234):“Clearly, it is not an easy
task to translate any of these relative views into the inputs required for the modern portfolio
theoretical framework.” Recently, Çela et al. (2021) proposed a method to implement this
translation.
In many situations more than one qualitative view might be relevant for the MV opti-
mization process. For example, this might be the case in team-based portfolio management,
which has become very popular in recent years, especially among institutional investors such
as mutual funds (e.g., Patel and Sarkissian 2017). In an investment committee different mem-
bers usually have different opinions and perspectives on the possible future performance of
individual assets, sectors, or even entire markets. In such a situation, the team’s decisions
inevitably will be compromises between these different opinions (e.g., Sah and Stiglitz 1986).
Finally, multiple views may also matter to individual investors aiming to incorporate the
views of several ﬁnancial analysts into their portfolio selection process in addition to their
own views. In this paper we discuss different approaches to incorporate multiple qualitative
views in the MV optimization process.
1.3 Contribution
We contribute to the literature dealing with the integration of qualitative views into portfolio
optimization using the BL-framework. Following the argument of Fabozzi et al. (2007) above,
we apply an approach recently proposed by Çela et al. (2021) that translates qualitative
views, expressed as ordering relations between asset returns, into quantitative estimates of
expected returns. However, we substantially extend Çela et al. (2021) by allowing multiple
qualitative views and apply two different approaches to incorporate these views into portfolio
optimization: the ﬁrst one (I) is based on robust optimization and the second one (II) on social
choice theory. We are not aware of any work that has applied methods from social choice
to portfolio optimization before.2 Obviously, different views may differ in terms of their
importance. E.g., depending on the reliability of ﬁnancial experts’ opinions certain views
might be considered more relevant than others. It may not be trivial to quantify the relevance
of different views in practice. However, if the relevance of the views is accessible, it can
easily be taken into account in both aggregation models, either based on robust optimization
or based on approaches from social choice theory, as brieﬂy explained below.
In (I), we consider K different ranking orders (e.g., views of K ﬁnancial analysts) and
apply the approach discussed in Çela et al. (2021) to compute a vector of estimated returns for
each of them. These K (different) vectors of expected returns are considered as the possible
scenarios of expected returns in the MV portfolio optimization model (MVO). We solve three
robust variants of the MVO which are obtained by applying the following concepts of discrete
2 It should be noted that Simonian (2014) contains a ﬁrst pointer into the direction of social choice theory. The
paper addresses a speciﬁc situation in which each view includes a set of stochastically related components. The
goal is to aggregate the views such that the components of the aggregated view fulﬁll the stochastic relation
to the greatest extent possible. The components of the aggregated view are seen in analogy to an allocation
vector in cooperative game theory and a Shapley-value-based heuristic is proposed to compute them.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1971
robustness: max–min robustness, min–max regret robustness, and soft robustness. Depending
on the concept of discrete robustness involved, we obtain different robust optimization-based
methods as representatives of this “ﬁrst estimate, then aggregate” approach. It should be
noted that in this setting the relative relevance of the different views (i.e. ranking orders) can
be taken into account in a natural way by adjusting the parameter of conﬁdence in the views
included in the approach discussed in Çela et al. (2021) accordingly.
In (II) we follow a completely different approach. Given K views, we ﬁrst aggregate
them into a single “consensus” ordering by applying some method from social choice the-
ory (varying among the Borda rule, the Footrule aggregation, the Best-of-k-Algorithm, the
Copeland method and the MC4-Algorithm). We then apply the approach discussed in Çela
et al. (2021) to compute a vector of estimated returns from this single total order. Finally, we
use this vector as input to the classical MVO and compute the respective optimal portfolio.
In summary, in (II), we ﬁrst aggregate the orderings and then generate the expected return
estimator. Depending on the aggregation rule from social choice theory we obtain differ-
ent social choice-based methods as representatives of this “ﬁrst aggregate, then estimate”
approach. Note that the relative relevance of the different views (i.e. ranking orders) can also
be easily taken into account in this framework. To this end, we compute the “consensus”
order for a set of rankings that contains multiple “copies” for each view (i.e. ranking order),
where the number of copies is proportional to the relevance of the latter. This cloning of
rankings is well-known in the social choice literature, see Kurz et al. (2020) and Mayer and
Napel (2021).
The main advantage of our proposed aggregation methods from (I) and (II) is that they are
purely deterministic, in the sense that they do not use probabilistic assumptions in the aggre-
gation process itself. This is in contrast to well known approaches used to aggregate multiple
views in portfolio optimization, such as the classical Black–Litterman approach (BL) in
Black and Litterman (1992), the copula-opinion pooling technique in Meucci (2006), or the
generalized Black–Litterman model in Chen and Lim (2020),3 all of which consider quanti-
tative views, and the entropy pooling approach in Meucci (2008), which also treats qualitative
views. All these approaches (implicitly) assume a stochastic dependence structure among the
different views. Essentially, this is required because in these approaches aggregation is an
integral part of the estimation process and the latter is based on distributional assumptions.
The proposed approaches (I) and (II) decouple the aggregation from the estimation process,
so that no assumptions about the stochastic dependencies between the different views need
to be made. This is an obvious advantage since it is not necessary to ﬁgure out suitable
distributional assumptions and then calibrate the distribution’s parameters.
Another approach to generating the inputs of the MVO (or a more general portfolio
optimization model) by “blending” equilibrium arguments with (more general) investor’s
views, without resorting to speciﬁc distributional assumptions, is discussed in Bertsimas et
al. (2012). This is a fairly general inverse optimization approach that can incorporate any view
that can be expressed as a linear matrix inequality. Thus, it can incorporate views addressing
risk measures or risk factors in addition to views addressing expected returns. This approach
is conceptually and methodologically quite different from the other approaches mentioned
in this paper and we refer to Bertsimas et al. (2012) for further details.
The main goal of this paper is a comparative analysis of the different approaches mentioned
above for the aggregation of multiple qualitative views in the portfolio optimization process.
From a practical point of view, establishing appropriate ordering relations between single
3 Chen and Lim (2020) consider multiple quantitative views and generalize the classical BL approach to
account for biases in both the prior distribution and the expert’s views. The biased views and the biased prior
are aggregated into a posterior distribution by using historical forecast data in a Bayesian hierarchical model.
123

1972
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
assets or asset classes is undoubtedly challenging. This task could not only be performed
by experts relying on their personal views, but for example, also by means of fundamen-
tal analysis or technical analysis, two methods commonly used in practice to sort and pick
stocks. Notice, however, that the objective of this paper is not to show different ways of
deriving such rankings, but to analyse the performance of different approaches suitable for
processing given multiple rankings (obtained from any conceivable source) in a MV portfolio
framework. Thus, it seems reasonable to perform a comparative analysis based on artiﬁcially
generated synthetic views. Our synthetic views are rankings of expected asset returns gen-
erated uniformly at random at some distance d from the realized ordering. Obviously, the
latter would be known in an in-sample setting. Hence, the effect of estimation errors could
be mitigated by performing an analysis based on in-sample tests. We consider the distance
value d mentioned above as a control parameter for the quality of the information represented
in the corresponding views. The second parameter in our computational experiments is the
conﬁdence level in the views, denoted by c. We evaluate the performance of the approaches
from robust optimization (I) and social choice theory (II) for different combinations of values
of the parameters c and d in an MV framework. In particular, we consider two performance
measures of the in-sample optimal portfolios, the Sharpe Ratio and the Certainty-Equivalent
return, using historical ﬁnancial market data. In a ﬁrst step we compare the methods within
groups (I) and (II) separately, and in a second step we compare the best performing methods
from each group with each other.
Our ﬁndings can be summarized as follows. In general, the best methods of group (I)
are the min–max regret robustness and the soft robustness. In group (II), the methods based
on the Borda rule and on the Footrule aggregation clearly perform better than the others.
The comparison across the two groups of methods (I) and (II) reveals that the best social
choice-based methods outperform the best robust optimization-based methods for almost all
parameter settings, albeit the absolute difference between the performance measures is not
very accentuated. Thus, our results show that an investor considering incorporating multiple
qualitative views into the portfolio allocation decision should use a method from social choice
and aggregate ﬁrst, and then estimate, rather than the other way around.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section2 prepares the formal frame-
work for our analysis. Section3 presents different methods from robust optimization for
deriving an optimal portfolio given multiple expert views. Section4 relates to selected meth-
ods from social choice theory that can be applied in a ﬁrst step to compute a single consensus
total order of expected asset returns from different orders. In a second step the aggregated
order feeds into the portfolio selection process. Section5 presents the results of our compu-
tational experiments based on historical stock market data. We conclude and discuss future
work in Sect. 6.
2 Formal framework for ordinal information
In this section we introduce the formal framework and brieﬂy review the extension of the BL
model derived in Çela et al. (2021). We consider a universe of assets 1, . . . , n from which an
investor has to choose a portfolio represented by a weight vector w = (w1, . . . , wn)⊺with
n
i=1 wi = 1, where wi represents the fraction of capital invested in asset i. We assume that
wi ≥0 (i = 1, . . . , n), i.e. no short selling is allowed. Let μ = (μ1, . . . , μn)⊺= E(R) be
the expected value of the random vector of asset returns R = (R1, . . . , Rn)⊺with an n × n
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1973
covariance matrix  = Cov(R). We assume that μ is a normally distributed random vector
μ ∼Nn(π, τ)
(1)
with mean vector π and covariance matrix τ.  is estimated from historical data and π is
determined by invoking CAPM equilibrium arguments as described for example in Çela et
al. (2021). The scale parameter τ indicates the uncertainty of the prior, the smaller the value
of τ, the higher the investor’s conﬁdence in the estimation of the implied equilibrium return
π.
The classical BL model considers quantitative views which express statements about
the expected return of linear combinations of the considered assets.4 These statements are
represented as equalities of the form Pμ = v, where P is a so-called pick matrix and v is
a declared outcome. For example, the view that asset 1 will outperform asset 3 by 2% and
asset 2 will outperform asset 4 by 1% can be modeled by setting v = (0.02, 0.01)⊺and the
pick matrix
P =
1 0 −1 0 ... 0
0 1 0 −1 ... 0

.
Uncertainty is captured by assuming that v is subject to normally distributed perturbations ε.
Thus v is a random variable V such that V = Pμ+ε with ε ∼N(0, ) and μ, ε independent.
Çela et al. (2021) consider an extended BL-model denoted by EBL. Instead of using
quantitative views, the authors process qualitative views which simply express ordering
relations between asset returns. These are represented as inequalities Pμ ≥0, where P
is again a pick matrix. For example, the qualitative view that asset 1 will outperform asset 3
and asset 2 will outperform asset 4 can be modeled by the pick matrix
P =
1 0 −1 0 ... 0
0 1 0 −1 ... 0

.
The uncertainty is captured by the random variable V fulﬁlling V = Pμ + ε and V ≥0 with
ε ∼N(0, ) and μ, ε independent. The conditional expectation of μ given the event V ≥0
will be denoted by μEBL and serves as the input to a mean–variance portfolio optimization
problem.
A frequent choice for the uncertainty  is a matrix proportional to the covariance matrix
of Pμ (see e.g. Walters 2014), i.e.
 = c PP⊺,
(2)
where the parameter c represents an overall conﬁdence level in the views with c = 0 cor-
responding to full conﬁdence in the views. Under this setting Çela et al. (2021) derive the
following expression for μEBL:
μEBL = π +
τ
τ + cP⊺
PP⊺−1 (E(V | V ≥0) −Pπ)
(3)
For the numerical computation of μEBL according to (3) the authors apply an an Importance
Sampling approach.
Çela et al. (2021) provide us with an algorithmic framework which outputs a vector μEBL
of expected return estimators combining information from historical data with a view on
the future development represented by order relations on the expected future asset returns.
4 For a more detailed review of the BL model we refer to Meucci (2010) or Walters (2014).
123

1974
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
The outcome μEBL can ﬁnally be used as an input for the following classical mean–variance
portfolio optimization model (Markowitz 1952) with a risk-aversion parameter δ > 0:
max
w
w⊺μ −δ
2w⊺w
s.t.
n

i=1
wi = 1 and wi ≥0 (i = 1, . . . , n)
(4)
While the approach of Çela et al. (2021) allows to account for qualitative information in
portfolio optimization, the restriction of views to one single total order is a major loss of
potentially relevant information. Rather, it is reasonable to assume that investors consider
multiple views (e.g., from different analysts) when constructing their optimal portfolios. Ín
the following, we consider multiple views represented by K different total orders of expected
asset returns. Formally we use K permutations σk, k = 1, . . . , K, each of them describing a
total order of expected asset returns. Notice that in general it is not feasible to just express
these K permutations in terms of the pick matrix. Different permutations might sort some
pairs of assets differently leading to an extremely rare event V ≥0 and thus to difﬁculties
when computing the expectation of μEBL conditional on V ≥0.
We compare two different approaches to incorporate these views into portfolio optimiza-
tion. In Sect.3 we ﬁrst apply the extended BL approach described above to obtain a return
estimator μk for each permutation σk. Thus, μk is obtained by applying (3), where P is
replaced by the pick matrix Pk corresponding to permutation σk. Then, we take the vectors
μk, 1 ≤k ≤K, as possible scenarios for μ in a robust version of (4) with the discrete uncer-
tainty set {μk : 1 ≤k ≤K}. A completely different approach is pursued in Sect.4, where we
apply aggregation rules from social choice theory to reach a single total order representing a
consensus over the given permutations σk, 1 ≤k ≤K. Then, according to the extended BL
approach, we use (3) to compute a return estimator ¯μ for the consensus total order. Finally,
the MVO (4) is solved with ¯μ as an input.
3 Robust optimization with discrete scenarios
Robust optimization (RO), introduced by Ben-Tal and Nemirovski in the late 1990s in the
context of linear and convex optimization problems, is a methodology for dealing with opti-
mization problems whose input has some uncertainty in the form of deterministic variability
on the data (for a comprehensive survey, we refer to Ben-Tal and Nemirovski (2002)). The
possible values of a parameter or a set of parameters are called scenarios. The scenarios
represent possible realizations of data and take their values from a discrete uncertainty set
or an uncertainty continuum. The goal is to ﬁnd solutions that are of high quality for each
scenario or realization of the data. There are different ways to deﬁne the quality of a solution
with respect to all scenarios, and different deﬁnitions of solution quality lead to different
robust optimization models. Robust optimization has found numerous applications in vari-
ous disciplines including ﬁnancial optimization. Some applications in portfolio selection are
discussed in Ceria and Stubbs (2016), Goldfarb and Iyengar (2003) and Tütüncü and Koenig
(2004), although there is also some scepticism, see e.g. Scherer (2007). A general overview
on robust portfolio optimization can be found in Kim et al. (2023).
In this paper we consider the classical mean–variance portfolio optimization model (4),
where the input parameter μ is uncertain and its realizations build a discrete uncertainty set
U :=

μk : k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}
 
. We assume that there are K qualitative views, each of which
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1975
is speciﬁed as a total order σk of the assets in the portfolio according to the magnitude of their
expected returns, k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}. For any k we apply the algorithmic framework of Çela
et al. (2021) to incorporate the k-th total order σk in the vector μk of expected asset returns.
In particular μk is obtained by applying (3) with a pick matrix Pk which represents the total
order of expected asset returns speciﬁed by the permutation σk, for all k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}:
μk := π +
τ
τ + cP⊺
k

PkP⊺
k
−1 (E(V | V ≥0) −Pkπ).
(5)
In the following we brieﬂy discuss the three robust optimization variants of (4) addressed in
this paper: max–min robustness, min–max regret robustness and soft robustness.
3.1 Max–min robustness
In max–min robustness, also called the strictly robust optimization approach, see Ben-Tal
and Nemirovski (2002), the goal is to ﬁnd a solution which maximizes the worst value of the
objective function over all scenarios in U.
max
w
min
μ
w⊺μ −δ
2w⊺w
s.t. μ ∈{μ1, . . . , μK }
n

i=1
wi = 1 and wi ≥0 (i = 1, . . . , n).
(6)
It is obvious that this robust version of the mean–variance formulation is very conservative;
a candidate portfolio w is considered to be optimal if it maximizes the worst case, i.e.
the smallest value of the risk adjusted expected return that this portfolio achieves over all
possible realizations of expected asset returns in U. The above problem can be reformulated
equivalently as a concave quadratic maximization problem.
max
w,y
y −δ
2w⊺w
s.t. y ≤μ⊺
k w (k = 1, . . . , K)
n

i=1
wi = 1 and wi ≥0 (i = 1, . . . , n).
(7)
It is well known that concave quadratic programming, i.e. maximizing a concave quadratic
objective function subject to linear and afﬁne constraints is (weakly) polynomially solvable
(see e.g. Vavasis 2001) and efﬁcient optimization algorithms for solving this type of problems
are available in every standard optimization software. Thus, in this case the max–min robust
problem (7) (or equivalently (6)) remains polynomially solvable and is computationally not
harder than the non-robust counterpart (4). Note, however, that the time complexity of the
algorithms for solving (7) depends on the number K of scenarios (or views).
3.2 Min–max regret robustness
The min–max regret robustness model is less conservative than the max–min robustness
model. In this model the quality of a solution is measured in terms of the maximum regret
deﬁned as follows.
123

1976
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
Deﬁnition 1 The maximum regret Max Reg(w) of a portfolio w with respect to the mean–
variance portfolio optimization model (4) and the discrete uncertainty set U :=

μk : k ∈
{1, 2, . . . , K}
 
is deﬁned as
Max Reg(w) :=
max
μ∈{μ1,μ2,...,μK }[ f (wμ, μ) −f (w, μ)] ,
(8)
where f (w, μ) is the objective function of (4), i.e. f (w, μ) := w⊺μ −δ
2w⊺w, and wμ
maximizes f (w, μ) for ﬁxed μ, i.e.
f (wμ, μ) = max

f (w, μ): w ∈Rn
+,
n

i=1
wi = 1

.
The expression in the square parentheses in (8) is called the regret of the portfolio w for a
given μ and is equal to the portion of the objective function value lost when the optimal
portfolio wμ with respect to μ is replaced by the portfolio w.
The min–max regret robustness problem is then given as
min{Max Reg(w): w ∈Rn
+,
n

i=1
wi = 1} .
(9)
For k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K} the portfolios wμk and the values fk := f (wμk, μk) of the risk-
adjusted return can be computed by setting μ := μk for k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K} and solving K
mean–variance portfolio optimization problems as in (4). Observe that
Max Reg(w) :=
max
k∈{1,2,...,K}

fk −w⊺μk + δ
2w⊺w

=
max
k∈{1,2,...,K}

fk −w⊺μk

+ δ
2w⊺w.
Thus, (9) can be equivalently written as
−max

−
max
k∈{1,2,...,K}[ fk −w⊺μk] −δ
2w⊺w: w ∈Rn
+,
n

i=1
wi = 1

.
By setting −yw := maxk∈{1,2,...,K}

fk −w⊺μk

we get the next equivalent formulation of
(9) as
−max

yw −δ
2w⊺w : −yw ≥fk −w⊺μk, k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}, w ∈Rn
+,
n

i=1
wi = 1

.
Finally, by observing that in the last formulation the variable yw can be replaced by a single
variable y (and by neglecting the minus in front of the problem) we get the following concave
quadratic maximization formulation of (9)
max
w,y
y −δ
2w⊺w
s.t. y ≤μ⊺
k w −fk , k = 1, . . . , K
n

i=1
wi = 1 and wi ≥0 , i = 1, . . . , n.
(10)
Thus, similarly to the case of the max–min robustness approach, also the min–max regret
robustness problem (9) (or equivalently (10)) remains polynomially solvable and is not harder
than its non-robust counterpart (4). Note, however, that the time complexity of algorithms
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1977
for solving (10) heavily depends on the number K of scenarios (or views). Other than in the
case of the max–min robust version of the mean–variance formulation, here we also need
to solve K concave quadratic minimization problems to determine fk, k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K},
prior to solving the concave quadratic maximization problem (10) which analogously to (7)
involves K + 1 linear constraints besides the nonnegativity constraints.
3.3 Soft robustness
The soft robustness model allows to control the degree of conservativeness of the robust
solution in the vein of the so called -robustness (see Bertsimas and Sim 2003). This model
includes a parameter  ∈(0, 1] which allows to adjust the extent at which the possible
estimators of the expected asset returns μk, k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}, are taken into account. More
precisely, we want to choose a portfolio w∗which maximizes a threshold of risk adjusted
return which would be exceeded by at least K estimators μk, k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}. In other
words w∗maximizes the empirical (1 −)-quantile y(w) of the risk-adjusted expected
returns over all feasible portfolios w.
Deﬁnition 2 The empirical (1 −)-quantile y(w) of the set { f (w, μ1), f (w, μ2), . . . , f
(w, μK )} is deﬁned as follows
y(w) := sup

z ∈R:

k : k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}, f (w, μk) ≥z
  ≥K

.
The corresponding optimization problem is then given as
max

y(w): w ∈Rn
+,
n

i=1
wi = 1

.
(11)
By introducing a new variable y to represent the maximum of y(w) we obtain the
following equivalent formulation of (11).
max
w,y
y
s.t.
{k : k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}, f (w, μk) ≥y}
 ≥K
n

i=1
wi = 1 and wi ≥0 , i = 1, . . . , n.
(12)
Obviously, the larger the value of , the more conservative is the model. In the limit case
 = 1 we get y(w) = min{ f (w, μ1), f (w, μ2), . . . , f (w, μK )} and the soft robustness
model coincides with max–min robustness model. On the other hand, if  becomes very
small, e.g.  = 1
K , we get y(w) = max{ f (w, μ1), f (w, μ2), . . . , f (w, μK )} and the soft
robustness model becomes
max
w max
μ
w⊺μ −δ
2w⊺w
s.t. μ ∈{μ1, μ2, . . . , μK }
n

i=1
wi = 1 and wi ≥0 , i = 1, . . . , n.
Observe now that (12) can be formulated as a convex mixed integer nonlinear problem
(MINLP)whithalinearobjectivefunctioninvolvingjustcontinuousvariablesaswellaslinear
123

1978
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
and convex quadratic constraints. Indeed, we introduce the binary variables vk ∈{0, 1},
k ∈{1, 2, . . . , K}, such that vk = 0 iff y ≤f (w, μk) and vk = 1, otherwise. In the
latter case y ≤f (w, μk) + vk M is fulﬁlled for a large enough constant M. The constraint
K
k=1 vk ≤(1 −)K guarantees that at least K of the variables vk equal zero, i.e. that
f (w, μk) ≥y holds for at least K estimators μk. Finally, by introducing an additional
auxiliary variable z as an upper bound on w⊺w the inequality y ≤f (w, μk) + vk M can
be formulated as a linear constraint y ≤w⊺μk −δ
2z + vk M. Summarizing we obtain the
following equivalent formulation of (12):
max
w
y
s.t. y ≤w⊺μk −δ
2z + vk M , k = 1, 2, . . . , K
w⊺w ≤z
n

k=1
vk ≤(1 −)K
n

i=1
wi = 1 and wi ≥0 , i = 1, . . . , n
vk ∈{0, 1} , k = 1, . . . , K.
(13)
In general the convex MINLP is a NP-hard problem because it includes the mixed integer
linear programming (MILP), see e.g. Belotti et al. (2013). There is a wealth of literature on
exact and heuristic solution approaches for convex MINLP, see e.g. the recent review by
Kronqvist et al. (2019). Note, however, that (13) has a particular structure: the constraints
involving the binary variables are linear and the objective function just involves continuous
variables. The outer approximation method of Duran and Grossmann (1986) is an iterative
approach which exploits the particular structure mentioned above and consists in solving an
alternate ﬁnite sequence of convex quadratic subproblems and relaxations of a MILP as a
master problem. A rigorous analysis of the convergence properties of the algorithm can also
be found in Belotti et al. (2013).
4 Aggregation by social choice methods
In this section we pursue the idea of computing a single consensus total order of expected
asset returns which is a sort of “center” of all K given total orders. Formally, we are looking
for a total order σ ∗which minimizes the sum of distances to the total orders σ1, . . . , σK
(see Marden 1996 for an overview). The distance between two total orders σ ′ and σ ′′ will
be measured by the classical Kendall-Tau distance which counts the number of pairwise
disagreements between two total orders, i.e. the number of pairs (i, j) with σ ′(i) < σ ′( j)
and σ ′′(i) > σ ′′( j). For our purposes we use the normalized version of the Kendall-Tau
distance K T (σ ′, σ ′′) given as the number of pairwise disagreements between σ ′ and σ ′′
divided by the overall number of pairs (i, j) with i ̸= j, see e.g. Dwork et al. (2001). Then
we are looking for an optimal total order σ ∗such that
σ ∗= arg min
σ∈Sn
K

k=1
K T (σ, σk),
(14)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1979
where Sn is the set of all permutations of numbers 1, . . . , n. This optimization problem,
which is called the Kemeny–Young problem, is the basis for the well-known Kemeny–Young
method for group decisions. However, the problem is NP-hard for K ≥4 (Dwork et al. 2001)
and becomes practically intractable already for a moderate number of assets. Thus, we will
focus on approximate solutions to the Kemeny–Young problem, in particular on methods
developed in the area of social choice.
Social choice theory (see e.g. Arrow et al. 2002) studies the aggregation of individual
preferences or opinions into a group decision considering issues such as fairness, social
welfare or acceptability. Typical areas of application are voting, selection of committees and
allocation of resources. A central concept in this ﬁeld is a social welfare function (cf. the
seminal work of Nobel price winner Sen 1970), which receives as input K total orders of
the objects 1, . . . , n representing the preferences of K individuals and determines as output
a single total order. This is exactly the task we are facing in this section. The mapping of
the total orders σk, 1 ≤k ≤K, to σ ∗in (14) can be seen as one particular social welfare
function. For a total order σ we call the sum in the righthand side of (14) the Kendall-Tau
score of σ (with respect to the input total orders σk, 1 ≤k ≤K).
In social choice theory a large number of social welfare functions were introduced and
their theoretical properties investigated. A good overview can be found in Brams and Fishburn
(2002). In the following we will describe some of the more prominent examples which will
then be applied to compute a total order of expected asset returns. For a broader discussion
and computational aspects we refer the reader to Brandt et al. (2016).
4.1 Borda rule
The Borda rule was formulated by Jean-Charles Chevalier de Borda in 1770 and is one of
the most prominent and natural aggregation rules. It belongs to the family of scoring rules,
where an element at a certain position of a total order is assigned a certain number of points.
In case of the Borda rule, the asset i at position σ(i) in a total order gets a Borda score
Borσ (i) := n −σ(i). The aggregation works by simply summing up for every asset i the
scores over all K total orders, i.e. K
k=1 Borσk(i), and sorting the assets in decreasing order
of these total scores.
4.2 Footrule aggregation
This aggregation is based on an optimization problem similar to (14), but it applies the
Spearman footrule SF(σ ′, σ ′′) for measuring the distance between two total orders σ ′ and
σ ′′ instead of the Kendall-Tau distance. It is based on measuring for every i the absolute
difference between the positions σ ′(i) and σ ′′(i) and summing up these values. Formally,
we are looking for a total order σ ∗such that
σ ∗= arg min
σ∈Sn
K

k=1
SF(σ, σk),
with SF(σ, σk) =
n

i=1
|σ(i) −σk(i)|.
(15)
It was shown by Diaconis and Graham (1977) that the difference between the Spearman
footrule distance and the Kendall-Tau distance can be bounded by
K T (σ ′, σ ′′) ≤SF(σ ′, σ ′′) ≤2 K T (σ ′, σ ′′).
(16)
123

1980
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
Moreover, SF(σ ′, σ ′′) can be computed efﬁciently in polynomial time by solving a linear
assignment problem as shown e.g. in Dwork et al. (2001).
4.3 Copeland method
For a given set of K total orders, we introduce a relation ≿(majority dominance) on the
set of assets such that i ≿j if and only if i is ranked higher than j by a majority of the
total orders, i.e. |{k ∈{1, . . . , K} : σk(i) < σk( j)}| ≥K/2, see e.g. Fishburn (1977). The
Copeland value Cop(i) of an asset i is deﬁned as the number of assets majority dominated
by i minus the number of assets majority dominating i, i.e.
Cop(i) := |{ j ∈{1, . . . , n} : i ≿j}| −|{ j ∈{1, . . . , n} : j ≿i}|
For use as an aggregation rule, assets are ordered in decreasing order of their Copeland values.
4.4 Best-of-k-algorithm
This simple approach solves the Kemeny–Young problem under the strong restriction that σ ∗
is chosen only among the given total orders, i.e. in (14) the domain of the minimization σ ∈Sn
is replaced by σ ∈{σ1, . . . , σK }. Thus, it sufﬁces to calculate the Kendall-Tau distance
between all pairs of total orders and then compare the appropriate sums. This straightforward
approach yields a 2-approximate solution to (14) with a Kendall-Tau distance at most twice
as large as given by σ ∗(see e.g. Ailon et al. 2008).
4.5 MC4-algorithm
In their widely cited paper Dwork et al. (2001) present four aggregation algorithms based
on Markov chains. Among these, we will consider the so-called MC4-Algorithm, which
performed best in the empirical evaluation of Dwork et al. (2001) and Schalekamp and van
Zuylen (2009). In this approach, the n assets correspond to the n states of a Markov chain.
Starting from a randomly chosen state, the Markov process moves in each iteration from the
current state to a new state of the system. From a current state i, the new state j is chosen
with a certain transition probability pi j. If the current situation of the system is represented
by a probability distribution x, where xi gives the probability that the process is currently
in state i, then the probability distribution of the next state is given by x⊺P, where the
probability matrix P = (pi j) consists of the transition probabilities. It is known that under
certain conditions, this process reaches a stationary distribution y with y = y⊺P, and y can
be computed e.g. by a simple power-iteration algorithm.
When applying MC4 in the aggregation of total orders, the probabilities pi j are deﬁned as
follows: if i is the current state, a potential new state j is chosen from {1, . . . , n} uniformly at
random. If a majority of the total orders ranks j before i, i.e. j ≿i according to the majority
dominance of the Copeland Method,5 then the Markov process moves to state j, otherwise it
remains in state i. To ensure that the process has a unique stationary distribution Schalekamp
and van Zuylen (2009) add a random “jump”: in every step the process moves from i to the
randomly chosen j with a tiny probability α, independently from the dominance relation.
With probability 1 −α, the move to j is only chosen if j ≿i. Hence, there is a transition
probability pi j = 1/n + α/n, if j ≿i, and pi j = α/n, otherwise. The non-transition
5 Ties are broken lexicographically, i.e. by the index number of the assets.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1981
probabilities are then set as pii = 1 −
j̸=i pi j, for all i. We use α = 1/100 to ensure that
for up to n = 100 assets the sum of the transition probabilities does not exceed 1.
After reaching the unique stationary distribution y, the aggregation of total orders follows
by sorting the assets in decreasing order of yi.
4.6 Local improvement
Any total order σ produced by one of the above aggregation methods can be further improved
by reducing the corresponding value of the objective function in (14), i.e. the Kendall-Tau
score of σ. In our approach this is done by an iterative pairwise exchange operation. We
consider the assets in increasing order, i.e. we go through all positions ℓ= 2, 3, . . . , n. In the
iteration for asset i in position ℓ, σ(i) = ℓ, we compare i with the asset j at the preceding
position σ( j) = ℓ−1. If j ≿i (according to the majority dominance), then and we proceed
to the next iteration for the asset in position ℓ+1. Otherwise, if i ≿j, we exchange i and j in
σ by setting σ(i) = ℓ−1 and σ( j) = ℓ, thereby improving the Kendall-Tau score of σ. We
continue by comparing i with the asset at position ℓ−2 and so on, until either a comparison
without improvement is found or i reaches the ﬁrst position. At this point the iteration for
asset i terminates and we move to the next iteration for the immediate successor of asset i
at position ℓ+ 1. This procedure is called “Local Kemenization” in Dwork et al. (2001) and
“InsertionSort” in Schalekamp and van Zuylen (2009).
In our experiments we apply this process of Local Improvement to all total orders produced
by the above aggregation procedures.
5 Computational experiments
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the different approaches presented in Sects.3
and 4 for aggregating multiple qualitative views, expressed as total orders of expected returns
of assets in the portfolio, in the context of classical MVO using real stock market data. We
apply the extended BL-model suggested in Çela et al. (2021), more precisely the equality
(3), to compute an estimator of expected asset returns for any given total order of the latter
(see Sect.2).
We use historical data from two stock indices, one in Europe and one in the U.S. (see
Sect.5.1). For both samples, we compare the performance of monthly rebalanced MVO
portfolios based on (I) the several robust optimization approaches and (II) the various ordering
aggregation methods based on social choice theory.
In a ﬁrst step, we compare the performance of the different approaches within each group
separately. To mitigate the effect of estimation errors the analysis is based on in-sample tests.
The tests are in-sample in that (a) the complete time series of realized asset returns are used
to estimate the corresponding covariance matrix (which then remains constant over the entire
time horizon) and (b) the synthetic views (i.e. total orders) on the expected asset returns in the
time interval (t, t +1) are randomly generated (see below) utilizing information of the actual
total order of asset returns realized in that time interval. We are aware that our procedure for
generating ordering relations relies on a theoretical setting. One can imagine that in practice
these relations could be derived, for example, from analysts’ earnings estimates. Most likely,
however, these are not total orders since ﬁnancial analysts can at best make such forecasts
for a limited number of individual stocks in a given industry or for a few different asset
classes. Alternatively, rankings could be created by using some technical indicators (such
123

1982
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
as the Moving Average Convergence Divergence, the Bollinger Bands or any Fibonacci
retracement levels; see for example Di Lorenzo 2013), which could be converted into total
orders. Similarly, one can determine the intrinsic value of a stock (e.g., by combining ﬁnancial
statements, external inﬂuences, or industry trends) and rank stocks according to the difference
between their current market prices and their intrinsic values. However, the aim of our analysis
is not to present ways to generate ordering relations between asset returns, but rather to present
different methods for aggregating multiple views and to compare the performance of these
approaches given different ordering relations in a MV analysis. Therefore, we separate the
process of generating rankings from the process of processing these rankings and focus on
the latter.
In a second step and after identifying the two best performing approaches from each group
(I) and (II), we compare the performance of the two winners of each group to identify the
overall “champion”.
All experiments were implemented and run in Matlab R2021b on a standard PC.6
5.1 Data description
We create two samples with single stock data from the EURO STOXX 50 and the S&P 100.
The EURO STOXX 50 is a blue-chip stock index that comprises ﬁfty of the largest and most
liquid stocks in the Eurozone. The S&P 100, a subset of the S&P 500, includes the largest
U.S. companies across a variety of industries. We collect monthly total return index data from
Reﬁnitiv Datastream for the period December 1998 to December 2021 for all stocks included
in either index at the end of 2021. We eliminate stocks for which we do not have a continuous
price series over the entire time period. In this way we identify 38 (76) stocks from EURO
STOXX 50 (S&P 100) that are eligible for our investigation. We calculate monthly returns
from the total return index series, with January 1999 being the ﬁrst observation, giving a total
of 276 monthly returns for each stock. Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for cross-sectional
averages for our sample of constituents of the EURO STOXX 50 (Panel A) and the S&P 100
(Panel B). For the former, the average monthly holding period return (in EUR) is 1.05% with
an average standard deviation of 8.33%. The corresponding values for our S&P 100 sample
are 1.14% for the average monthly return (in USD) and 8.21% for the standard deviation.
Concerning skewness, we ﬁnd evidence of slightly positive values, while kurtosis shows the
typical pattern of fat tails in both samples.
5.2 Setup of the experiments
We perform our experiments for a large number of different settings of the parameters d and
c as described later in this paragraph. A third parameter K ∈{5, 10, 20} representing the
number of views is also taken into account. For each data sample and for each triple of values
of the parameters d, c and K we run 10 experiments, generating K total orders of all assets
in each experiment. We always report average values over the outputs of the 10 experiments.
The total orders represent different synthetic qualitative views, as they might be expressed by
different experts (e.g. ﬁnancial analysts) under different scenarios. We consider our choice
of values for K to be reasonable, but emphasize that our methods can in principle be applied
to any number of views.
6 Since the computations required negligible running times and the computational performance was not the
focus of this study we refrain from describing further technical details.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1983
Table 1 Descriptive statistics for monthly returns (in %) of 38 stocks in the EURO STOXX 50 (Panel A) and
76 stocks in the S&P 100 (Panel B)
Monthly return (%)
Mean
q1
q2
q3
Min
Max
Panel A: selected constituents of EURO STOXX 50
Mean
1.05
0.76
0.96
1.22
0.42
2.32
Stdev
8.33
6.62
8.57
9.52
4.79
11.79
Skew
0.15
−0.13
0.13
0.32
−1.02
1.22
Excess kurtosis
3.74
1.10
1.90
4.74
0.34
20.30
Panel B: selected constituents of S&P 100
Mean
1.14
0.81
1.02
1.37
0.22
3.03
Stdev
8.21
6.51
7.46
9.12
4.73
20.81
Skew
0.31
−0.23
0.08
0.38
−1.38
6.51
Excess kurtosis
5.82
1.53
2.64
4.84
0.21
76.35
All stocks are included (a) that were constituents of one of the corresponding stock indices on December
31, 2021, and (b) for which a complete return time series is available for the period from January 1999 to
December 2021. The values for mean and stdev are given in %. q1 (q2) [q3] represents the ﬁrst (second)
[third] quartile. All measures are expressed as equally weighted cross sectional averages. Monthly returns are
calculated as holding period returns from the last day of one month to the last day of the following month.
Sample period: January 1999 to December 2021. Source: Reﬁnitiv Datastream
We differentiate the views according to the validity of the information they contain, rep-
resented in terms of parameter d, and according to the level of conﬁdence in the information
validity, represented in terms of parameter c. We quantify the degree of validity of informa-
tion in a total order O by means of the Kendall-Tau distance d of O from the the correct
ordering, i.e. the total order of the assets returns realized in the time interval (t, t + 1). Note
that if the Kendall-Tau distance between O and the correct ordering is about 0.5, then O
coincides with the correct ordering for about half of the pairs of assets. Such a total order O
would therefore represent a complete lack of knowledge about the correct ordering. On the
other hand, a value of d around 0 (and symmetrically a value of d around 1) corresponds to
a high degree of useful information, because in this case O would coincide with the correct
ordering for almost all pairs (no pairs) of assets. In order to cover the whole range of the
possible values of d we consider d ∈{0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.47} in analogy to Çela et al. (2021).
For each value of d we generate K random total orders of assets, each of them having the
same Kendall-Tau distance d from the correct ordering.7
Finally, we consider four different levels of overall conﬁdence in the validity of the gen-
erated total orders, represented by the parameter c (see equation (2)). Note that the same
conﬁdence level applies to each of the K total orders. This should reﬂect the fact that it is
indeed difﬁcult to a priori quantify the level of conﬁdence in the information content of a
(qualitative) view.8 We span a wide range of relevant values with c ∈{0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.95},
7 Note that we could also generate orders with different values of d to obtain synthetic views of different
quality. This would be a model for real life cases where qualitative views of different quality need to be
aggregated in the MV process. However, in a real life setting the “quality of a view” is not known a priori.
Therefore, we generate views with the same value of d for each run of our experiments.
8 Recalling our comments in Sect.1.3 we note that our approaches for incorporating multiple qualitative
views in the portfolio optimization process are fully ﬂexible to account for different conﬁdence levels c for
each view, i.e. each ranking order. To keep the comparison between the proposed approaches as simple as
possible, however, we assume that parameter c has the same value for all individual views in each run of our
experiments, analogously as for parameter d as described in footnote 7.
123

1984
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
where c = 0.25 (c = 0.95) indicates a very high (low) degree of conﬁdence. As in Çela et
al. (2021), we set τ = 1 −c, where the parameter τ represents the conﬁdence in the prior
information.
For each value K ∈{5, 10, 20}, we perform our experiments for all 16 value combinations
of the parameters d and c, giving a total number of 48 parameter settings. One might argue that
some parameter combinations, such as large distances and high levels of conﬁdence, are less
meaningful, but we chose to retain all combinations because it is in general unpredictable
where the ordering information will come from and in what context our method will be
applied.
5.3 Illustrating the effect of views on the asset allocation
Before we present the results of our extensive analyses, we want to illustrate the effect of views
on the choice of the portfolio weights by means of a small example. We consider the ﬁrst 6
assets (in alphabetical order) from our S&P 100 sample for the last period of the investigation
horizon (December 2021, see Sect.5.1). Excluding views from consideration, i.e., solving
the pure MVO model based on the prior distribution of expected asset returns, we obtain
the following vector of optimal portfolio weights w = (0.04, 0.10, 0.11, 0.03, 0.67, 0.05)⊺.
According to the realized asset returns in December 2021, as contained in the data, we
construct the ordinal view with perfect foresight (d = 0) and get the following rank numbers
for the assets in decreasing order of returns for the next period: (4, 2, 6, 1, 5, 3). This means
that asset 4 with rank number 1 will give the highest return for the next period, while asset 3
will yield the lowest return (rank 6). This ordering represents the optimal view. We generate
μEBL by running the extended BL-model with c = 0.95 and the single ordinal view given by
the optimal ranking above. Solving the MVO model with this μEBL we get the weight vector
w = (0, 0.13, 0, 0.23, 0.59, 0.05)⊺.
Next, we generate K = 5 views of limited validity chosen randomly with d = 0.4. Aggre-
gating these 5 views by the Borda rule yields the ordering (6, 1, 5, 2, 4, 3). By solving the
MVO model with the μEBL resulting from running the extended BL-model with c = 0.95 and
theaggregatedorderingabovegivesportfolioweightsw = (0, 0.34, 0.01, 0.01, 0.62, 0.02)⊺.
Notice that this weight vector substantially deviates from the weight vector we obtained when
just the perfect view was used.
Now we replace c.p. one of the ﬁve views above by the optimal view. This results in
a different outcome of the Borda rule, namely (5, 2, 6, 1, 4, 3). Running the extended BL-
model with c = 0.95 for the latter ordering and plugging the output μEBL in the MVO model
we obtain the vector w = (0, 0.12, 0.02, 0.20, 0.62, 0.04)⊺. This small example shows that
aggregatingﬁveblurredviewsbytheBordarulegivesaquitedifferentassetallocationthanthe
portfolio resulting from optimal foresight. Adding valid information on future performance
to the mediocre views has a notable effect on the weights of the asset allocation. Indeed,
even one valid view combined with four views of low quality clearly moves the weights of
the allocation closer to the “target” allocation resulting from the optimal ordering. For ease
of comparison we list the weights of all portfolios in the following Table 2.
5.4 Measuring portfolio performance
Our goal is to ﬁnd the best out of the aforementioned approaches that allow for integrating
multiple input orderings into MVO (cf. (I) and (II) at the beginning of this section). To make
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1985
Table 2 Weights of different portfolios on the ﬁrst 6 assets from the S&P 100 sample for December 2021 (in
alphabetical order)
Asset
1
2
3
4
5
6
Pure MVO weights
0.04
0.10
0.11
0.03
0.67
0.05
5 Random views
0.00
0.34
0.01
0.01
0.62
0.02
4 Random views combined
with one optimal view
0.00
0.12
0.02
0.20
0.62
0.04
Weights from optimal view
0.00
0.13
0.00
0.23
0.59
0.05
’Pure MVO weights’ result from solving the MVO model with the prior estimation of the expected asset
returns as an input (this corresponds to setting c = 1 in equation (3).) For all other portfolios we set c = 0.95.
’Optimal view’ corresponds to d = 0, i.e., perfect foresight, while ’random views’ are derived as low quality
views with d = 0.4. Source: Reﬁnitiv Datastream
a decision in this “horse race” we compare the performance of the optimal portfolios derived
from each approach by means of two metrics9:
• Sharpe Ratio (SR): The Sharpe Ratio is deﬁned as the excess return of a portfolio divided
by its total risk, where the latter is measured by the standard deviation of portfolio returns.
The excess return is calculated with respect to the average risk-free rate. Thus, if the return
and the volatility of a porfolio P are given by μP and σP, respectively, then the Sharpe
Ratio SRP of the portfolio P is given as10
SRP = μP −r f
σP
,
where r f is the risk-free rate. We use the 3m Euribor for the EURO STOXX 50 sample
and the 3m USD Libor for the S&P 100 sample. The higher SR the higher the risk-adjusted
performance of a portfolio.
• Certainty-Equivalent return (CEQ): The Certainty-Equivalent return is the zero-risk
return that an investor with risk aversion δ is willing to accept rather than pursuing
a particular risky investment strategy with a higher but riskier return. Formally, the
Certainty-Equivalent return C E Q P of a portfolio P with return μP and volatility σP is
given as
C E Q P = μP −δ
2σ 2
P .
We set δ equal to three which is a commonly used value in the literature (e.g., Çela et al.
2021). As with SR investors prefer portfolios with higher CEQ values to portfolios with
lower values.
5.5 Computational comparison
As mentioned at the beginning of this section, we ﬁrst evaluate the performance of the robust
optimization-based approaches (I) and the performance of the social choice-based approaches
(II) separately and try to identify the best performing methods in each of the two groups.
9 For a detailed description of the two metrics we refer to Bodie et al. (2021). They are used, among others,
in studies by DeMiguel et al. (2009) and Allaj (2020).
10 Note that since we are using in-sample mean and variance estimates, we calculate the in-sample Sharpe
Ratio with portfolio weights obtained with these estimates.
123

1986
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
In (I) we consider six robust optimization variants: Max–min robustness (Max–min), Min–
max regret robustness (Min regret) and soft robustness (Soft ) with  ∈{0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1}
as described in Sect.3. In (II), we consider ﬁve ordering aggregation approaches: Borda rule
(Borda), Footrule aggregation (Footrule), Best-of-k algorithm (Best-of-k), Copeland method
(Copeland) and MC4-algorithm (Markov). As described in Sect.5.2, we conduct experiments
for 48 parameter settings.
For each group of approaches (I) or (II) and for each parameter setting, we determine the
winners in terms of SR and CEQ. We deﬁne as winners all methods with a SR, or CEQ value
within 1% of the respective maximum value. For each method we count the number of wins
out of the 48 “races” and report results in Table 3. Each “race” is repeated 10 times.
In general, we ﬁnd that there is no particular method in either (I) or (II) that clearly
dominates all other methods across all parameter settings. We therefore select the two most
successful methods from each of the groups (I) and (II). To this end, we consider the total
number of wins over all parameter settings with respect to SR and CEQ, respectively. To
illuminate the best methods within each group (I) and (II) we indicate the method with the
highest (second highest) number of total wins with a solid (dashed) box in Table 3.
For the methods based on robust optimization, the choice of Soft 0.5 is unambiguous:
this method has the largest number of wins in 3 out of 4 subtables. This method is also
mostly top-ranked in this group regardless of the number of views K. Other Soft methods
also perform well in some races, but Soft 0.5 is clearly the best performing variant from this
family. As the second best method within group (I), we identify Min regret with one win and
one second place out of 4 subtables. Min regret is closely followed, but not dominated, by
Max–min.
Among social choice-based methods, Borda can be seen as the overall winner with 4
wins and Copeland is the runner-up in all 4 subtables (even with some ﬁrst places in indi-
vidual settings), although the competitors are quite close. Therefore, and to identify the best
method that allows for integrating multiple input orderings into MVO, we focus our further
investigations on the four methods Min regret, Soft 0.5, Borda and Copeland.
Table 4 provides more detailed results for the comparison of these “ﬁrst step winners”.
For each combination of the Kendall-Tau distance d and the conﬁdence level c, we consider
the number of wins across the three portfolios obtained for the three values of K, where we
perform 10 runs for each value of K. These numbers are counted separately for SR and CEQ.
Aggregating the number of wins across all parameter conﬁgurations, we ﬁnd the two
methods based on social choice theory to emerge as winners in more than three quarters of
all cases. The dominance is particularly pronounced when CEQ is used as the performance
measure. In this case, the results from Table 4 show a single case (EURO STOXX 50,
d = 0.47, c = 0.25) in which a method based on robust optimization yields the highest
number of wins. When SR is used as a performance measure, robust optimization performs
signiﬁcantly better; however, social choice-based methods achieve the highest number of
wins in almost 60% of all cases. Comparing the aggregated results for the two panels, the
superiority of the social choice-based methods is more pronounced in the EURO STOXX
50 than in the S&P 100 sample. While in the ﬁrst sample, more than 80% of all wins are
achieved by either the Borda rule or the Copeland method, this number is lower in the S&P
100 sample, but still clearly dominant with more than 70%.
Evaluating the results from Table 4 in more detail allows us to derive additional conclu-
sions.
First, considering the results for different conﬁdence levels c, we ﬁnd that for both samples
the overall inferiority of the robust optimization variants is particularly pronounced at lower
conﬁdence levels (values of c > 0.5 in our settings). This can be explained by the fact that
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1987
Table 3 Average number of wins over 10 simulations of different methods of aggregating qualitative views
organized in groups
Method
Sharpe Ratio SR
Certainty-Equivalent return CEQ
K = 5
K = 10
K = 20
Total
K = 5
K = 10
K = 20
Total
Panel A: selected constituents of EURO STOXX 50
Max–min
4.2
3.8
3.0
11.0
2.7
2.8
1.5
7.0
Min regret
7.9
4.7
4.2
16.8
2.5
2.1
1.0
5.6
Soft 0.25
5.6
4.9
5.6
16.1
6.0
1.7
2.8
10.5
Soft 0.5
3.5
7.5
7.6
18.6
8.1
10.7
8.9
27.7
Soft 0.75
0.2
1.0
2.1
3.3
0.9
2.0
6.0
8.9
Soft 1
1.2
0.8
0.6
2.6
1.8
1.9
1.0
4.7
Borda
13.1
10.0
12.5
35.6
14.6
12.7
14.1
41.4
Footrule
3.8
4.5
7.8
16.1
4.2
4.8
9.2
18.2
Copeland
6.5
9.1
10.4
26.0
8.0
13.9
14.3
36.2
Best-of-k
3.3
3.3
7.3
13.9
3.8
3.9
8.5
16.2
Markov
5.7
6.4
8.9
21.0
5.6
9.0
11.0
25.6
Panel B: selected constituents of S&P 100
Max–min
5.6
4.7
4.8
15.1
1.1
0.1
0.6
1.8
Min regret
7.5
6.2
5.9
19.6
0.5
0.2
0.3
1.0
Soft 0.25
3.5
2.7
2.7
8.9
8.3
4.5
3.5
16.3
Soft 0.50
3.7
6.0
4.4
14.1
6.4
10.4
10.3
27.1
Soft 0.75
0.0
1.7
3.9
5.6
0.1
1.3
3.2
4.6
Soft 1
1.0
1.2
1.3
3.5
3.7
2.8
2.1
8.6
Borda
8.9
7.2
10.3
26.4
13.1
12.2
13.2
38.5
Footrule
4.5
6.6
8.5
19.6
4.1
7.0
9.0
20.1
Copeland
8.9
10.2
12.4
31.5
9.4
14.0
14.8
38.2
Best-of-k
5.0
4.1
6.8
15.9
4.7
6.0
8.6
19.3
Markov
6.3
5.9
9.6
21.8
7.2
9.6
11.6
28.4
Methods ’Max–min’ to ’Soft 1’ denote robust optimization-based approaches (group I), ’Borda’ to ’Markov’
are social choice-based approaches (group II). K ∈{5, 10, 20} indicates the number of views in terms of total
orders of assets. The input total orders have four different values of Kendall-Tau distance d to the correct
order of returns, d ∈{0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.47}. The level of conﬁdence in the views c takes four different values:
c ∈{0.95, 0.75, 0.50, 0.25}. The maximum number of wins for any K is 16. Results are counted as wins if they
deviate from the corresponding optimum within a group (I or II) by less than 1 percent. Solid (dashed) boxes
give the highest (second highest) number of total wins within robust estimation and social choice methods,
respectively. Panel A (B) shows results for 38 (76) stocks in the EURO STOXX 50 (S&P 100). Sample period:
January 1999 to December 2021. Data frequency: Monthly. Source: Reﬁnitiv Datastream
these methods follow a “ﬁrst estimate, then aggregate” philosophy, i.e., they ﬁrst translate
views into posterior return estimators and then consider these estimators as scenarios in the
context of the robust optimization model. At low conﬁdence levels, the information contained
in the views has a minor impact on the posterior estimator of the vector of expected returns
and some of the scenarios might differ only to a minor extent from the prior return estimators.
The robust optimization of MVO accounts for all (or many) scenarios, hence it will (probably)
123

1988
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
Table 4 Total number of wins over 10 simulations for selected methods of aggregating qualitative views per
different pairs of values of the Kendall tau distance d and the conﬁdence parameter c
Method
c
Kendall tau distance
d = 0.2
d = 0.3
d = 0.4
d = 0.47
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
Panel A: selected constituents of EURO STOXX 50
Min regret
0.95
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Soft 0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Borda
30
30
30
30
30
30
26
27
Copeland
22
23
16
18
15
10
17
15
Min regret
0.75
7
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
Soft 0.5
19
0
12
1
5
0
12
4
Borda
17
30
21
30
20
30
13
17
Copeland
14
30
19
26
17
20
10
21
Min regret
0.50
15
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
Soft 0.5
16
0
8
0
8
0
29
12
Borda
15
30
23
30
24
29
0
7
Copeland
11
30
18
27
11
20
1
16
Min regret
0.25
16
0
11
0
6
0
0
0
Soft 0.5
8
1
11
1
9
0
29
24
Borda
13
30
13
29
15
25
0
2
Copeland
11
29
13
28
11
24
1
8
Panel B: selected constituents of S&P 100
Min regret
0.95
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Soft 0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Borda
30
30
30
30
30
30
10
16
Copeland
23
19
21
16
12
4
29
25
Min regret
0.75
22
0
16
0
2
0
0
0
Soft 0.5
12
5
12
0
8
1
13
5
Borda
17
30
13
30
20
30
6
8
Copeland
21
30
16
25
15
18
17
24
Min regret
0.50
20
0
23
0
12
0
0
0
Soft 0.5
8
0
2
0
8
0
28
6
Borda
8
30
5
30
8
30
0
1
Copeland
8
30
5
29
12
24
5
27
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1989
Table 4 continued
Method
c
Kendall tau distance
d = 0.2
d = 0.3
d = 0.4
d = 0.47
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
Min regret
0.25
23
0
25
0
13
0
0
0
Soft 0.5
6
2
6
2
7
2
26
13
Borda
4
30
3
28
13
30
1
0
Copeland
6
30
6
28
10
23
4
21
The numbers are aggregated across three different levels for the number of views K ∈{5, 10, 20}. The
maximum number of wins for any combination of d and c is 30. Results are counted as wins if they deviate
from the optimum within a parameter setting by less than 1 percent. SR (CEQ) denotes the Sharpe Ratio
(Certainty-Equivalent return). Solid boxes give the highest number of total wins within a parameter setting.
Panel A (B) shows results for 38 (76) stocks in the EURO STOXX 50 (S&P 100). Sample period: January
1999 to December 2021. Data frequency: Monthly. Source: Reﬁnitiv Datastream
account also for the scenarios which are “close” to the prior return estimator. In this case the
resulting portfolio might show a performance which is not very different from that of the MVO
based on just the prior return estimators (on which the views have no impact at all). The social
choice methods, on the other hand, initially aggregate the different views into one ordering
thereby taking into account all information contained in these views. Then the dampening
effect of low conﬁdence comes into play, but this happens only once, namely when the
posterior return estimators are calculated. So the dampening effect of low conﬁdence might
have less impact in the case of the aggregation by social choice methods, thus explaining why
the social choice methods clearly dominate the horse races for higher values of c for both
performance metrics. For high conﬁdence levels, the result is not so clear-cut. When using the
Sharpe Ratio as a performance measure, the robust optimization variants perform even better
than their opponents from social choice theory. They win in 12 out of 16 cases, whereby in
two cases there is a tie with a social choice variant. However, if CEQ is considered, the result
of our horse race is clear. The social choice-based methods clearly dominate and emerge as
the winner in 15 out of 16 cases.
Second, we consider the inﬂuence of different degrees of information validity, expressed
by different distances d of the views from the correct order. Table 4 reveals that for d = 0.3
and d = 0.4 the winner methods coincide for almost all values of c in both data samples.
Thus, the value of d does not seem to have a strong effect on the ranking of the different
methods in both samples. The situation is slightly different for d = 0.47, where the winning
method differs to some extent from that for other values of d. This is not surprising as such
a high value of d implies a high lack of knowledge about the correct order (consider that
d = 0.5 represents a complete lack of knowledge). In this case, the ranking of the different
methods becomes more random, and the more so the higher the conﬁdence in the almost
worthless qualitative information.
Finally, we analyse how the number of considered views K (i.e., total orders) affects the
outcome of our horse races. To this end, we refer to the results in Table 5 (for the EURO
STOXX 50 sample) and Table 6 (for the S&P 100 sample) where the actual values of SR
and CEQ are given for various values of K = 5, 10, 20 for each d (averaged over all c)
and for each c (averaged over all d). We ﬁnd that changing the number of views considered
has almost no inﬂuence on the overall winner of our horse races. Although the levels of
123

1990
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
our performance measures increase with the number of views considered, as can well be
expected, the rankings of the respective methods in the different settings remain largely
unaffected. Aggregating the views before computing the posterior return estimators turns out
to be superior to ﬁrst computing the individual posterior return estimators and then handling
them as scenarios in a robust optimization setting, mostly regardless of the number of views
considered. Within the winning group of socialchoice-based methods, Borda tends to perform
slightly better than Copeland for K = 5, while for larger K, e.g. K = 20, these two social
choice approaches are more or less on par.
To emphasize our main experimental result, we present the total number of wins for
our selected methods for all 48 parameter settings in Table 7. It shows that the social choice
methods clearly dominate the robust optimization methods in our experiments for both panels
and for both performance metrics.
Summarizing our empirical tests, “ﬁrst aggregate and then estimate" seems to be preferable
to “ﬁrst estimate and then aggregate”. Based on our ﬁndings we suggest the application of
one of our proposed methods based on social choice theory rather than those based on
robust optimization when there is a need to incorporate multiple qualitative views in the
portfolio optimization process by means of a Black–Litterman based approach. In particular,
the aggregation approach based on the Borda rule should be preferred over the Copeland rule
as the former outperforms the latter in three of our four sub-tables.
6 Conclusions
While it is recognized in practice that relative rankings of future asset returns are easier to
generate and generally more reliable than estimates of absolute returns, research on portfolio
theory concerning this topic is rather modest. Moreover, portfolio allocation decisions are
increasingly made by teams requiring compromises among several different views. This
effect has not yet been taken into account in the portfolio optimization literature.
In this paper we propose two general approaches that allow the integration of multiple
and potentially divergent views on the ranking of expected future stock returns in mean–
variance (MV) portfolio optimization using the Black–Litterman-framework (BL). While
methods from group (I) ﬁrst generate an estimator of expected returns for each individual
view and then process all these estimators in a robust MV portfolio optimization framework,
the methods based on social choice theory (group (II)) ﬁrst aggregate all orderings into one
single consensus view and then use the latter to generate an estimator of expected returns
which subsequently enters MV optimization. We are not aware of any previous literature that
has combined social choice theory with MV portfolio optimization in the BL framework.
Applying long-term in-sample analyses to stocks included in one of two broad stock
indices and differentiating the views in terms of (i) the level of relevant information they
contain, (ii) the level of conﬁdence in the correctness of each generated view, and (iii) the
number of views an investor considers in his/her portfolio decision, we ﬁnd that portfolios
built upon our proposed social choice methods (group (II)) clearly outperform portfolios
based on robust optimization methods. We therefore recommend that if multiple qualitative
views are to be considered in the portfolio allocation process, these views should be aggre-
gated into a single view in a ﬁrst step. Subsequently, the aggregated view can be used to derive
a posterior estimator of the expected stock returns by applying the Black–Litterman-based
method proposed in Çela et al. (2021). Eventually, MVO can be applied to this estimator of
expected returns.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1991
Table 5 Average values of Sharpe Ratio (SR) and Certainty-Equivalent return (CEQ) obtained from portfolio simulation runs computed by two robust optimization-based methods
(Min regret; Soft 0.5) and two social choice-based methods (Borda; Copeland)
Selected constituents of EURO STOXX 50
d = 0.2
d = 0.3
d = 0.4
d = 0.47
c = 0.95
c = 0.75
c = 0.50
c = 0.25
Method
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
K = 5
Min regret
1.45
0.11
1.40
0.10
1.25
0.08
0.45
0.02
1.01
0.05
1.20
0.08
1.17
0.09
1.17
0.09
Soft 0.5
1.31
0.11
1.20
0.10
1.04
0.08
0.51
0.03
0.53
0.03
1.18
0.09
1.19
0.10
1.16
0.10
Borda
1.48
0.12
1.44
0.12
1.36
0.11
0.56
0.04
1.14
0.06
1.29
0.10
1.22
0.11
1.18
0.11
Copeland
1.47
0.12
1.43
0.11
1.32
0.10
0.55
0.04
1.12
0.06
1.27
0.10
1.21
0.10
1.17
0.11
K = 10
Min regret
1.46
0.10
1.42
0.10
1.27
0.08
0.55
0.03
1.04
0.06
1.22
0.08
1.21
0.09
1.22
0.09
Soft 0.5
1.33
0.11
1.31
0.10
1.22
0.09
0.75
0.05
0.61
0.04
1.33
0.10
1.33
0.11
1.32
0.11
Borda
1.50
0.12
1.49
0.12
1.46
0.12
0.81
0.06
1.26
0.07
1.38
0.11
1.32
0.12
1.30
0.12
Copeland
1.49
0.12
1.49
0.12
1.46
0.12
0.82
0.06
1.26
0.07
1.38
0.11
1.32
0.12
1.31
0.12
K = 20
Min regret
1.46
0.10
1.43
0.10
1.26
0.08
0.67
0.03
1.07
0.06
1.25
0.08
1.26
0.09
1.25
0.09
Soft 0.5
1.41
0.12
1.37
0.11
1.32
0.10
1.07
0.07
0.82
0.05
1.45
0.11
1.45
0.12
1.45
0.12
Borda
1.50
0.12
1.50
0.12
1.47
0.12
1.12
0.08
1.34
0.08
1.45
0.12
1.41
0.13
1.39
0.13
Copeland
1.50
0.12
1.50
0.12
1.47
0.12
1.11
0.08
1.33
0.08
1.45
0.12
1.40
0.13
1.39
0.13
K ∈{5, 10, 20} indicates the number of views. The average is taken over the values of SR (CEQ) obtained for 10 simulations performed for each ﬁxed value of the Kendall-Tau
distance d or the level of conﬁdence in the views c while varying the other parameter in the whole range of values, i.e. d ∈{0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.47} and c ∈{0.95, 0.75, 0.50, 0.25},
respectively. For each of the 24 combinations of parameters c, K or d, K, solid boxes give the method with the highest value for SR (CEQ), while dashed boxes mark those
methods deviating from the optimum by less than 1 percent. The sample contains 38 stocks in the EURO STOXX 50. Sample period: January 1999 to December 2021. Data
frequency: Monthly. Source: Reﬁnitiv Datastream
123

1992
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
Table 6 Average values of Sharpe Ratio (SR) and Certainty-Equivalent return (CEQ) obtained from portfolio simulation runs computed by two robust optimization-based methods
(Min regret; Soft 0.5) and two social choice-based methods (Borda; Copeland)
Selected constituents of S&P 100
d = 0.2
d = 0.3
d = 0.4
d = 0.47
c = 0.95
c = 0.75
c = 0.50
c = 0.25
Method
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
SR
CEQ
K = 5
Min regret
1.64
0.13
1.61
0.12
1.51
0.11
0.62
0.03
1.39
0.07
1.41
0.10
1.32
0.11
1.27
0.11
Soft 0.5
1.40
0.12
1.32
0.12
1.17
0.10
0.75
0.05
0.62
0.04
1.40
0.11
1.34
0.12
1.27
0.13
Borda
1.65
0.14
1.62
0.14
1.57
0.13
0.82
0.06
1.55
0.08
1.49
0.12
1.34
0.13
1.27
0.14
Copeland
1.64
0.14
1.60
0.14
1.55
0.13
0.86
0.06
1.52
0.08
1.49
0.12
1.35
0.13
1.28
0.14
K = 10
Min regret
1.65
0.13
1.62
0.12
1.55
0.11
0.70
0.03
1.43
0.07
1.45
0.10
1.36
0.11
1.29
0.11
Soft 0.5
1.41
0.13
1.37
0.12
1.34
0.12
1.11
0.09
0.76
0.04
1.57
0.13
1.48
0.14
1.41
0.14
Borda
1.64
0.14
1.64
0.14
1.64
0.14
1.17
0.09
1.72
0.09
1.59
0.13
1.44
0.14
1.35
0.15
Copeland
1.65
0.14
1.64
0.14
1.64
0.14
1.24
0.10
1.72
0.09
1.62
0.14
1.46
0.15
1.37
0.15
K = 20
Min regret
1.66
0.12
1.64
0.12
1.57
0.11
0.84
0.03
1.46
0.07
1.50
0.10
1.41
0.11
1.34
0.11
Soft 0.5
1.50
0.13
1.47
0.13
1.47
0.13
1.38
0.11
1.13
0.07
1.70
0.14
1.54
0.15
1.45
0.15
Borda
1.66
0.14
1.62
0.14
1.63
0.14
1.51
0.12
1.81
0.09
1.71
0.14
1.50
0.15
1.40
0.16
Copeland
1.66
0.14
1.63
0.14
1.62
0.14
1.54
0.12
1.80
0.09
1.71
0.14
1.51
0.16
1.42
0.16
K ∈{5, 10, 20} indicates the number of views. The average is taken over the values of SR (CEQ) obtained for 10 simulations performed for each ﬁxed value of the Kendall-Tau
distance d or the level of conﬁdence in the views c while varying the other parameter in the whole range of values, i.e. d ∈{0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.47} and c ∈{0.95, 0.75, 0.50, 0.25},
respectively. For each of the 24 combinations of parameters c, K or d, K, solid boxes give the method with the highest value for SR (CEQ), while dashed boxes mark those
methods deviating from the optimum by less than 1 percent. The sample contains 76 stocks in the S&P 100. Sample period: January 1999 to December 2021. Data frequency:
Monthly. Source: Reﬁnitiv Datastream
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1993
Table 7 Average number of wins over 10 simulations for selected methods of aggregating qualitative views
Method
Sharpe Ratio SR
Certainty-Equivalent return CEQ
Panel A: selected constituents of EURO STOXX 50
Min regret
6.3
0.0
Soft 0.5
16.6
4.3
Borda
29.0
40.6
Copeland
20.7
34.5
Panel B: selected constituents of S&P 100
Min regret
15.8
0.0
Soft 0.5
13.6
3.6
Borda
19.8
38.3
Copeland
21.0
37.3
The numbers are aggregated across three different levels for the number of views K ∈{5, 10, 20}. The
input views are total orders of assets with a Kendall tau distance d to the correct order of returns: d ∈
{0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.47}. c ∈{0.95, 0.75, 0.50, 0.25} is the parameter representing the conﬁdence in the views.
Thus, 48 parameter combinations are performed for each method and the maximum achievable number of
wins per method is 48. Results are counted as wins if they deviate from the optimum by less than 1 percent.
Solid (dashed) boxes give the highest (second highest) number of total wins with respect to the corresponding
performance measure and the corresponding sample. Panel A (B) shows results for 38 (76) stocks in the EURO
STOXX 50 (S&P 100). Sample period: January 1999 to December 2021. Data frequency: Monthly. Source:
Reﬁnitiv Datastream
Since we are (to the best of our knowledge) the ﬁrst to combine methods from social
choice theory with portfolio optimization, a number of questions arise for future research.
As a generalization of our ordinal framework, we might consider views represented by
partial orders. The extended BL model from Çela et al. (2021) could process partial orders
as input and compute individual estimators of expected returns for each order, to be then
used as inputs to robust optimization approaches. On the other hand, aggregation of partial
orders is typically not studied in the context of social choice methods. A further extension
could be the combination of qualitative and quantitative information. Clearly, this would be
straightforward for robust portfolio optimization methods, after “translating” information of
both types into return estimators. Exploiting the potential of social choice methods for such
a setting seems to be far less obvious.
In the context of practical decision making on asset allocations we would recommend
practitioners to take a fresh view at the process of ﬁnding a consensus between differing
opinions (e.g., within an investment committee). It is well-known that personal relations,
hierarchies and anticipation of expected behaviour have a notable inﬂuence on the outcome
of a group decision. We propose to use the tools of robust optimization and social choice
theory to formalize and objectify the consensus building process for decisions involving
ordered preferences in portfolio optimization.
Acknowledgements We thank Christian Klamler for valuable input on social choice theory and Stefan Lendl
for helping with computational issues. We would also like to thank the anonymous referees for detailed com-
ments that signiﬁcantly improved the paper. We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the University
of Graz.
Funding Open access funding provided by University of Graz.
123

1994
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no relevant ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interests to disclose. The authors
have no Conﬂict of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ailon, N., Charikar, M., & Newman, A. (2008). Aggregating inconsistent information ranking and clustering.
Journal of the ACM, 55(5), 1–27.
Allaj, E. (2020). The Black–Litterman model and views from a reverse optimization procedure: An out-of-
sample performance evaluation. Computational Management Science, 17, 465–492.
Arrow, K. J., Sen, A. K., & Suzumura, K. (Eds.). (2002). Handbook of social choice and welfare. Elsevier.
Belotti, P., Kirches, C., Leyffer, S., Linderoth, J., Luedtke, J., & Mahajan, A. (2013). Mixed-integer nonlinear
optimization. Acta Numerica, 22, 1–131.
Ben-Tal, A., & Nemirovski, A. (2002). Robust optimization: Methodology and applications. Mathematical
Programming, Series B, 92, 453–480.
Bertsimas, D., Gupta, V., & Paschalidis, I. C. (2012). Inverse optimization: A new perspective on the Black–
Litterman model. Operations Research, 60(6), 1389–1403.
Bertsimas, D., & Sim, M. (2003). Robust discrete optimization and network ﬂows. Mathematical Programming
B, 98(1–3), 49–71.
Best, M. J., & Grauer, R. R. (1991). On the sensitivity of mean–variance-efﬁcient portfolios to changes in asset
means: Some analytical and computational results. The Review of Financial Studies, 4(2), 315–342.
Black, F., & Litterman, R. (1991). Asset allocation: Combining investor views with market equilibrium. The
Journal of Fixed Income, 1(2), 7–18.
Black, F., & Litterman, R. (1992). Global portfolio optimization. Financial Analysts Journal, 48(5), 28–43.
Bodie, Z., Kane, A., & Marcus, A. (2021). Investments (12th ed.). Mc Graw Hill.
Bodnar, T., Lindholm, M., Niklasson, V., & Thorsén, E. (2022). Bayesian portfolio selection using VaR and
CVaR. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 427, 127120.
Brams, S. J., & Fishburn, P. C. (2002). Voting procedures. In K. J. Arrow, A. K. Sen, & K. Suzumura (Eds.),
Handbook of social choice and welfare (Vol. 1, pp. 173–236). Elsevier.
Brandt, F., Conitzer, V., Endriss, U., Lang, J., & Procaccia, A. D. (2016). Handbook of computational social
choice. Cambridge University Press.
Çela, E., Hafner, S., Mestel, R., & Pferschy, U. (2021). Mean-variance portfolio optimization based on ordinal
information. Journal of Banking and Finance, 122, 105989.
Ceria, S., & Stubbs, R. A. (2016). Incorporating estimation errors into portfolio selections: Robust portfolio
construction. In S. Satchell (Ed.), Asset management: portfolio construction, performance and returns
(pp. 270–294). Springer.
Chen,S.D.,& Lim,A.E.B.(2020).Ageneralized Black–Litterman model.OperationsResearch,68,381–410.
Chopra, V. K., & Ziemba, W. T. (1993). The effect of errors in means, variances, and covariances on optimal
portfolio choice. Journal of Portfolio Management, 19(2), 6–11.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., & Uppal, R. (2009). Optimal versus naive diversiﬁcation: How inefﬁcient is the
1/n portfolio strategy? Review of Financial Studies, 22, 1915–1953.
DeMiguel, V., & Nogales, F. J. (2009). Portfolio selection with robust estimation. Operations Research, 57,
560–577.
Di Lorenzo, R. (2013). Basic technical analysis of ﬁnancial markets. Springer.
Diaconis, P., & Graham, R. L. (1977). Spearman’s footrule as a measure of disarray. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series B, 39(2), 262–268.
Duran, M. A., & Grossmann, I. E. (1986). An outer-approximation algorithm for a class of mixed-integer
nonlinear programs. Mathematical Programming, 36, 307–339.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:1967–1995
1995
Dwork, C., Kumar, R., Naor, M., & Sivakumar, D. (2001). Rank aggregation methods for the Web. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 613–622. ACM
Fabozzi, F. J., Kolm, P. N., Pachamanova, D. A., & Focardi, S. M. (2007). Robust portfolio optimization and
management. Wiley.
Fishburn, P. C. (1977). Condorcet social choice functions. SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics, 33(3),
469–489.
Goldfarb, D., & Iyengar, G. (2003). Robust portfolio selection problems. Mathematics of Operations Research,
28(1), 1–38.
Harvey, C. R., Liechty, J. C., Liechty, M. W., & Müller, P. (2010). Portfolio selection with higher moments.
Quantitative Finance, 10(5), 469–485.
Huang, D., Zhu, S., Fabozzi, F. J., & Fukushima, M. (2010). Portfolio selection under distributional uncertainty:
A relative robust CVaR approach. European Journal of Operational Research, 203(1), 185–194.
Kan, R., & Smith, D. R. (2008). The distribution of the sample minimum-variance frontier. Management
Science, 54(7), 1364–1380.
Kim, J. H., Kim, W. C., Lee, Y., Choi, B.-G., & Fabozzi, F. J. (2023). Robustness in portfolio optimization.
The Journal of Portfolio Management, 49(9), 140–159.
Kim, J. H., Lee, Y., Kim, W. C., & Fabozzi, F. J. (2021). Mean–variance optimization for asset allocation. The
Journal of Portfolio Management, 47(5), 24–40.
Kolm, P. N., Tütüncü, R. H., & Fabozzi, F. J. (2014). 60 years of portfolio optimization: Practical challenges
and current trends. European Journal of Operations research, 234(2), 356–371.
Kronqvist, J., Bernal, D. E., Lundell, A., & Grossmann, I. E. (2019). A review and comparison of solvers for
convex MINLP. Optimization and Engineering, 20, 397–455.
Kurz, S., Mayer, A., & Napel, S. (2020). Weighted committee games. European Journal of Operational
Research, 282(3), 972–979.
Lassance, N., & Vrins, F. (2021). Portfolio selection with parsimonious higher comoments estimation. Journal
of Banking & Finance, 126, 106115.
Levy, H., & Levy, M. (2014). The beneﬁts of differential variance-based constraints in portfolio optimization.
European Journal of Operational Research, 234(2), 372–381.
Marden, J. (1996). Analyzing and modeling rank data. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance, 7(1), 77–91.
Markowitz, H. (1959). Portfolio selection. Wiley.
Mayer, A., & Napel, S. (2021). Weighted scoring committees. Games, 12(4), 94.
Meucci, A. (2010). Black–Litterman approach. In Encyclopedia of quantitative ﬁnance. Wiley, Hoboken.
https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470061602.eqf14009
Meucci, A. (2006). Beyond Black–Litterman: Views on non-normal markets. Risk Magazine, 19, 87–92.
Meucci, A. (2008). Fully ﬂexible views: Theory and practice. Risk, 21(10), 97–102.
Michaud, R. O. (1989). The Markowitz optimization enigma: Is ‘optimized’ optimal? Financial Analysts
Journal, 45, 31–42.
Pastor, L., & Stambaugh, R. F. (2000). Comparing asset pricing models: An investment perspective. Journal
of Financial Economics, 56(3), 335–381.
Patel, S., & Sarkissian, S. (2017). To group or not to group? Evidence from mutual fund databases. Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 52, 1989–2021.
Rubinstein, M. (2002). Markowitz’s “portfolio selection”: A 50-year retrospective. The Journal of Finance,
57(3), 1041–1045.
Sah, R. K., & Stiglitz, J. E. (1986). The architecture of economic systems: Hierarchies and polyarchies.
American Economic Review, 76, 716–727.
Schalekamp, F., & van Zuylen, A. (2009). Rank aggregation: Together we’re strong. in Proceedings of the
11th workshop on algorithm engineering and expermiments (ALENEX 2009), pp. 38–51. SIAM.
Scherer, B. (2007). Can robust portfolio optimisation help to build better portfolios? Journal of Asset Man-
agement, 7, 374–387.
Sen, A. (1970). Collective choice and social welfare. Holden-Day.
Simonian, J. (2014). Copula-opinion pooling with complex opinions. Quantitative Finance, 14(6), 941–946.
Tütüncü, R. H., & Koenig, M. (2004). Robust asset allocation. Annals of Operations Research, 132, 157–187.
Vavasis, S. A. (2001). Complexity theory: Quadratic programming. In C. A. Floudas & P. M. Pardalos (Eds.),
Encyclopedia of optimization (p. 2001). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/0-306-48332-7
Walters, J. (2014). The Black–Litterman model in detail. Working Paper. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1314585
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123