TITLE: The common ground of Numerical Optimization and Exact Optimization: Quadratic programming theory and its financial insights for Portfolio Selection
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07049-5
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07049-5
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The common ground of Numerical Optimization and Exact
Optimization: Quadratic programming theory and its
п¬Ғnancial insights for Portfolio Selection
Li-Gang Lin1,2
Received: 31 January 2025 / Accepted: 9 January 2026
В© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Although the mainstream literature resorts to numerical iterations for an optimization task,
the research path toward exact solutions has recently become clearer; for example, the п¬Ғrst,
exact, and complete solution to quadratic programming (basis of optimization) has been
reported. This paper follows the path and focuses on Problems (1) and (2). (1) We analyze
the consistency between the two methodologies to the core; speciп¬Ғcally, the analysis clariп¬Ғes
the common ground that supports both Numerical and Exact Optimization. The common
ground is equality-constrained quadratic programming. Hence, the theoretical results help
to revisit classical problems in, for instance, п¬Ғnancial economics. (2) We selectively demon-
strate the benchmark problem of Portfolio Selection and formulate the closed-form solution
corresponding to positive semideп¬Ғnite covariance matrices in general, which aligns with
MarkowitzвҖҷs vision and the diversiп¬Ғcation principle in investment. Financial insights high-
light the generalization of Minimum-Variance Set (resp., Efп¬Ғcient Frontier), the geometric
structure of which is consistently and normally a parabola (resp., the upper half of a parabola)
with respect to the general risk measure. Noting the ubiquitous nature of optimization, vari-
ous communities have been calling for theoretical support of Problem (1), such as consistency
analysis and comparison study. In particular, the operations research community describes
solving the problems вҖңthe start of a substantial studyвҖқ. The contributions of this paper are:
(i) solution to Problem (1) and its byproduct that helps in analyzing (2); and (ii) uniп¬Ғed,
closed-form parameterization of Minimum-Variance Set/Efп¬Ғcient Frontier вҖ“ which theoret-
ically complements the literature gap associated with singular covariance matrices вҖ“ and its
computational enhancement that enriches practical potential. Validations and evaluations are
in terms of pedagogical and real-world examples, as well as numerical and hardware exper-
iments on basic computing platforms such as microprocessor and п¬Ғeld-programmable gate
This work was supported by National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, under Grants
114-2115-M-008-007-MY2, 114-2221-E-008-040-MY3, 113-2115-M-008-001, 112-2115-M-008-008,
111-2221-E-008-052, and 110-2221-E-008-097-MY3 (Mathematics, Solid Mechanics, Aerospace, Control,
and International Internship Pilot Programs); Max Planck Society, Germany; AMD/Xilinx University
Program; and FactSet. We gratefully acknowledge R. J. Allen and J. Wile for their assistance in the native
use of this language; Y.-T. Chen, A. Iqbal, and J. Reddy for their time and effort in Examples 3-5; and Prof.
C. P. Teo for enlightening the substantial impacts of QP.
B Li-Gang Lin
lglin@g.ncu.edu.tw
1
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Central University, Taoyuan 32001, Taiwan
2
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Magdeburg 39106, Germany
123

Annals of Operations Research
array. The practical results further strengthen the commercial potential by the computational
enhancement (in time and accuracy) and low implementation cost. Overall, the proposed
results achieve the research frontier and advance the п¬Ғeld.
Keywords Portfolio Selection В· Efп¬Ғcient Frontier В· General covariance matrix В· Quadratic
programming В· Field-programmable gate array
Mathematics Subject Classiп¬Ғcation 91G10 В· 90C20 В· 68W35 В· 90C25 В· 90C46
1 Introduction
Optimization has played a major role throughout human civilization, particularly in recent
years (see, for example, Luenberger and Ye (2021)). Its application spectrum covers busi-
ness, engineering, science, and many others; in particular, the п¬Ғeld of operations research
manifests its essential importance in benchmark problems such as Portfolio Selection (Guer-
ard, 2025; Lleo & MacLean, 2025), which is pioneered by the Nobel economics laureate
Markowitz (1952) and followed by tremendous impacts such as another Nobel masterpiece
Sharpe (1964) and more ongoing (Barroso & Saxena, 2022; Qi & Steuer, 2020). Gener-
ally speaking, optimization problems can be categorized by three levels according to Boyd
and Vandenberghe (2004): (1) equality-constrained quadratic programming (ECQP); (2) lin-
ear equality-constrained optimization problem with twice-differentiable objective, which is
solved using NewtonвҖҷs method by reducing it to a sequence of ECQP problems; and, after
further imposing inequality constraints, (3) interior-point methods, which reduce the most
general problem formulation to a sequence of problems at the level (2). In short, optimization
builds on the basis of ECQP; more speciп¬Ғcally, ECQP serves as the common ground sup-
porting the literature of nonlinear programming вҖ“ either by means of the classical Numerical
Optimization (to name a few more benchmarks, Nemirovsky and Yudin (1983); Nesterov
(2018); Nocedal and Wright (2006)) or the more recent Exact Optimization (to start with,
Lin and Liang (2023)).
The research direction toward Exact Optimization as well as its name is inspired by, to
name the latest literature, (Nesterov, 2018, Sec. 1.1.2). To be more in-depth, its philosophy
differentiates from Numerical Optimization, tries to minimize or refrain from the use of
approximations, and eventually relaxes the goal (resp., deп¬Ғnition) in solving an optimiza-
tion problem. Fundamentally speaking, Exact Optimization continues the corresponding
curriculums in primary and secondary schools as per International Standard Classiп¬Ғcation
of Education, mainly the topics of quadratic equation and function that are unary. The for-
mer is the scalar specialization of Convex Quadratic Equation (Lin et al., 2020), while the
latter (unary quadratic function) focuses on the two-dimensional subspace of the general-
order Exact Optimization (Lin & Liang, 2023). The curriculum is designed in a way that
starts from unary quadratic equation and then moves on to unary quadratic function and
its graphical interpretations. In a consistent manner, the authors п¬Ғrst generalize the topic of
unary quadratic equation to be multi-dimensional; speciп¬Ғcally, Lin et al. (2020) presents an
equivalent solvability condition and a uniп¬Ғed parameterization of all the solutions. And then
the authors demonstrate one of its applications to optimization, namely, quadratic program-
ming (QP) that generalizes the subsequent topic (unary quadratic function and the related
materials). As a matter of fact, not only are the topics continued and generalized, but also
the mathematical preliminaries elaborated to be within or close to the level of secondary
123

Annals of Operations Research
school. Both generalizations in (Lin & Liang, 2023; Lin et al., 2020) only use materials in
elementary linear algebra (mainly, singular value decomposition (SVD)), which are partially
delivered in the freshman year in university and partially in secondary school. Such a funda-
mental consistency helps to efп¬Ғciently promote the recently developed Exact Optimization,
with respect to the ubiquitous presence of optimization in todayвҖҷs world (Vadlamani et al.,
2020). Meanwhile, the analytical nature of Exact Optimization responds to a wide variety of
communities, notably, the call for analytical and exact solutions in Portfolio Selection (see,
for instance, Steuer et al. (2024); DeBacco (2023); Haugh and Lo (2001)). In contrast, the
common and classical Numerical Optimization imposes a higher entry level that entails more
complicated mathematical preliminaries. Some of the preliminaries reach graduate level and
even beyond, while sometimes it can be difп¬Ғcult to understand as recently reported by Qi
(2022). Such an impedance in education reminds the third difп¬Ғculty according to Elton et al.
(1976) that hinders the widespread impacts of Portfolio Selection.
The above mentioned calls for Exact Optimization can also be explained by other intrinsic
advantages rather than Numerical Optimization; in particular, it is expected by
вҖ“ (Luenberger, 2014, Sec. 6.6): The analytical solution to Portfolio Selection brings strong
conclusions as compared to numerical solvers.
вҖ“ Qi (2022); Qi and Steuer (2020): One can see the mathematical relations among various
portfolios more clearly by means of analytical method, which is the only one that can
readily compute the minimum-variance frontier and establish the capital asset pricing
model among the existing solvers in (Qi, 2022, Fig. 3); while (Qi and Steuer, 2020,
Sec. 2) deп¬Ғnes the limit of up-to-date analytical methods, which will be complementar-
ily extended by Exact Optimization. Similar arguments and expectation also appear in
Haugen (2001).
вҖ“ (Luenberger and Ye, 2021, Chapter 9): Detailed analysis of QP contributes to signiп¬Ғcant
advances in practice.
вҖ“ Gunjan and Bhattacharyya (2023) highlights the pressing need for a better QP solver to
perform Portfolio Selection, partially in response to the expected increase of employment
of п¬Ғnancial analysts (5% growth by 2029 according to Bureau of Labor Statistics) and
partially because of the demand to determine the correct portfolio in a timely bound
manner.
вҖ“ In the up-to-date Special Issue for Markowitz/Portfolio Selection, Simaan (2025) reit-
erates the vital importance of analytical, exact results, which are meant to be treated as
insights in economics but cannot be similarly obtained by simulation (analysis).
First, the solution to QP is usually approached by Active Set Method in an iterative man-
ner, but a feasible point is necessary to initiate the numerical process (see Luenberger and
Ye (2021) for details). Finding a feasible start a priori is generally deemed as challenging,
which also increases the computational effort of Numerical Optimization, and thus such
a prerequisite is highlighted up until the latest version of MATLAB (2025). Besides, it is
also emphasized in the latest MATLABВ® R2025b that a Hessian matrix must be positive
deп¬Ғnite, which partially leads to consequences in various п¬Ғelds, such as the commonly
imposed вҖңno-arbitrageвҖқ assumption in the п¬Ғeld of п¬Ғnancial economics (even though it is not
comprehensively acknowledged among the community, to name a few, Roll (1977); Kwan
(2018); Lewis (1988); Sharpe (1963)). Note that the assumption means вҖңno rewarding risk-
less investmentsвҖқ as per Bodie et al. (2024). In contrast, Exact Optimization autonomously
(for instance, no feasible start is required) generates the solution in closed form, by means
of a uniп¬Ғed framework that coalesces both nonsingular and singular Hessian matrices. The
exact solution as well as the uniп¬Ғed framework is the only one of its kind in the optimization
123

Annals of Operations Research
literature. Second, Exact Optimization refrains from any iteration, converging analysis, and
the associated computational concerns such as the tradeoff between solution accuracy and
computation time. On the contrary, a minimum number of iteration steps is indispensable
for convergence with regard to barrier method, which serves as a representative example in
Numerical Optimization; while it is challenging to estimate the maximum number of iter-
ations (Johansen & Fossen, 2013). Third, the derivative-free feature of Exact Optimization
meets the long and still ongoing demand in the literature such as Xu et al. (2016), because
any computational task involving gradients can be costly and cannot avoid approximations
in general. Although there exist more beneп¬Ғts, we вҖ“ for conciseness вҖ“ specialize the scope
to the focused ECQP, which has just been explicitly solved. To be more detailed, Lemma
1 (associated with Eqs. (2)-(4) in Sec. 3 later) summarizes the equivalent conditions on the
solvability of ECQP and related properties, along with the uniп¬Ғed parameterization for all the
solutions. It is worth mentioning that, in Lemma 1, the more complex case of singular Hes-
sian matrices complements the research endeavors among economists, to exemplify recent
achievements, (Gulliksson et al., 2025, Theorem 1), (Drin et al., 2025, Eq. (4)), (Gulliksson
et al., 2024, Eq. (4)), and (Bodnar et al., 2022, 2024, Eq. (7)). Note that the survey by Bodnar
et al. (2022, 2024) reports more п¬Ғnancial motivations and impacts by virtue of closed-form
solutions, which are not recalled for the sake of brevity.
Among extensive applications of ECQP, we selectively demonstrate the application to
Portfolio Selection owing to its shared benchmark importance in both п¬Ғnance and optimiza-
tion (Kwan, 2018; Ledoit & Wolf, 2017; Stellato et al., 2020). For compactness, hereafter we
will also adopt the abbreviated alias of modern portfolio theory (MPT), noting that the paper
of Markowitz (1952) marks the moment of the birth of modern п¬Ғnancial economics accord-
ing to a retrospective by Rubinstein (2002) and boasts wide impacts in practice (Guerard &
Ziemba, 2021; Lleo & MacLean, 2025). In terms of a recent survey by (Qi, 2022, Fig. 3), the
overwhelming majority of п¬Ғnance literature resorts to Numerical Optimization, even though
the very п¬Ғrst benchmark of research endeavors toward exact solutions can be dated back to
more than half a century ago, notably, the contribution by the Nobel economics laureate Mer-
ton (1972). The community has been urging for more analytical п¬Ғndings to compensate for
such a signiп¬Ғcant shortage (Haugen, 2001), in light of the substantial impacts by closed-form
results. To name one example, Merton (1972) explicitly formulates Efп¬Ғcient Frontier (corner-
stone of MPT) and thus uncovers its geometric structure (upper half of a parabola, in general)
for the п¬Ғrst time in the literature. It is worth reiterating that the results by Merton (1972) are
of essential importance in the development and popularization of MPT. Accordingly, this
paper also responds to the call and demonstrates closed-form results subject to the general
scope of MPT. Among extensive topics about MPT, an immediate question naturally arises at
the п¬Ғrst glance: What is the scope, capability spectrum, or full coverage of MPT with respect
to its measure of investment risk? Markowitz (1952) creatively selects variance of assetsвҖҷ
returns to quantify risk of a portfolio, while, shortly later, Markowitz (1956, 1959) envision
the complete formulation of minimum-variance portfolio that introduces both nonsingular
and singular covariance matrices. This is consistent with the later conclusions in вҖңWe shall
note, however, that certain results can only occur when C [covariance matrix] is singular.вҖқ
(Markowitz, 2000, Chapter 3), вҖңA valid covariance matrix is always positive semideп¬Ғnite.вҖқ
(Markowitz, 2000, Chapter 13), the underlying mathematical characteristics (Kolm et al.,
2014), and thus the desirable criteria of diversiп¬Ғcation in п¬Ғnancial economics (Cetingoz et
al., 2024; Rubinstein, 2002), where the diversiп¬Ғcation can be exempliп¬Ғed by the extension
from domestic markets to global universes (Guerard et al., 2013). Nonetheless, it is almost
comprehensive that the MPT literature narrows the spectrum by assuming positive deп¬Ғnite
covariance matrices only (Markowitz & Xu, 1994), whereas there still emerges the tip of
123

Annals of Operations Research
the iceberg that sticks with the complete formulation by Markowitz, such as another Nobel
economics laureate William F. Sharpe, and more in a recent survey by Bodnar et al. (2022,
2024). Speciп¬Ғcally, Sharpe (1963) deals with singular covariance matrices in its Sec. 6.A
(The вҖңLending PortfolioвҖқ), where the incurred computational issue motivates this paper to
improve the efп¬Ғciency of standard QP algorithms. In addition, the Appendix in Roll (1977),
Bodnar et al. (2017), Gulliksson and Mazur (2020), [16, 27, 35] in Bodnar et al. (2022), and
Gulliksson et al. (2025) analyze the singular case as per the general MPT and with respect
to real-world data, but the п¬Ғndings still account for a scarce minority in the literature, which
also motivates this paper to demonstrate the п¬Ғnancial insights by using Exact Optimization.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
1. In a general scope that extends beyond п¬Ғnancial economics, the common ground sup-
porting both Numerical Optimization and Exact Optimization is analytically clariп¬Ғed in
Theorem 1 (associated with Eq. (5) in Sec. 3). As a byproduct, two basic identities in
matrix algebra are discovered in Corollary 1 (related to Eqs. (7) and (8) in Sec. 3), which
will be leveraged in the demonstration of Portfolio Selection.
2. In light of the broad spectrum of optimization applications, the benchmark problem of
MPT is selected to exemplify the п¬Ғnancial insights using Exact Optimization. Two main
topics 2(a) and 2(b) are focused upon in Secs. 4.1 and 4.2, respectively:
(a) Minimum-Variance Set (resp., Efп¬Ғcient Frontier): A novel proof of (Merton, 1972,
Eq. (12)) is provided by way of Exact Optimization (Theorem 2). Moving forward, the
main assumption in (Merton, 1972, Eq. (12)) is removed, so that the result in Theorem
2 is generalized to the full scope of MPT. Notably, both cases of nonsingular and
singular covariance matrices are uniп¬Ғed in one formula, notably Eq. (14) in Theorem
3, and its geometric structure is consistently a parabola (resp., the upper half of
a parabola) in general. Moreover, the computational performance of Theorem 3 is
enhanced by Corollary 2, that is, by means of a few basic operations only.
(b) Pedagogical and Real-World Examples, which are in terms of analysis, numerical
experiments, and hardware experiments:
вҖ“ The former are presented in Examples 1-3, which are associated with Eqs. (18),
(19), and Table 2 in Sec. 4.2, respectively. In a theoretical context, the focus of
Examples 1 and 2 is set on the generalization of MPT by lifting the common
вҖңarbitrage-freeвҖқ constraint. Thanks to the complete solution using Exact Opti-
mization, the general envisioning by Markowitz (1956, 1959) can be strictly
followed and thus new п¬Ғnancial potential is uncovered, such as the increased
diversity in investment. Practically speaking, Example 3 is dedicated to alle-
viating implementation concerns of MPT (Elton et al., 1976). The example
is also adopted from (Elton et al., 1976), where the computation time using
вҖңquadprogвҖқ in MATLABВ® (resp., the methods in (Elton et al., 1976)) is on
average reduced to 4% (resp., 14%) by Exact Optimization. Additionally, the
cost and education concerns as reported in (Elton et al., 1976) are also mitigated
thanks to the fundamental interpretations of Exact Optimization (up until the
freshman level in university).
вҖ“ The latter are given in Examples 4 and 5 that are related to Tables 3 and 4 in Sec.
4.2, respectively. Both examples are mainly used to evaluate the computational
enhancement in a higher-dimensional system than those in Examples 1-3.
в—ҰExample 4 presents experiments that are benchmarked against the popular
solver MATLAB (2025) in terms of both the classic and the latest editions.
According to the numerical experiments in Table 3, the computation time is
123

Annals of Operations Research
maximally (resp., minimally) reduced to 0.44% (resp., 0.81%) by resorting
to the closed-form solution. In addition, the enhanced solver can be imple-
mented on basic computing platforms, for instance, on a microprocessor and
п¬Ғeld-programmable gate array (FPGA) that are based on Python and Very
High-Speed Integrated Circuit Hardware Description Language (VHDL),
respectively; whereas, further research is required to realize the numerical
iterations. Note that the commercial potential is endorsed by the increased
computational efп¬Ғciency and the low implementation cost.
в—ҰExample 5 consistently validates the computational enhancement by Exact
Optimization, and it highlights analytical insights that the method reveals. The
example deals with singular covariance matrices and analyzes the correspond-
ing (non)uniqueness of optimal portfolio weights. In contrast to Numerical
Optimization, the analytical nature of Exact Optimization responds to calls for
closed-form results among various communities; in this example, the п¬Ғnd-
ings theoretically and practically guarantee the uniqueness of the optimal
portfolio, respectively. Hence, п¬Ғnancial analysts refrain from any computa-
tional effort due to numerical routines or iterations; while the underlying, low
implementation cost resonates with Example 4 thanks to the uniп¬Ғed solution
framework for the general risk measure. Moving forward, Remark 7 enriches
Example 5 theoretically and practically. It extends to different, larger, and
longer-time stock universes, where the covariance matrix is also singular. Not
only are the similar computational advantages observed in the evaluations,
but more analytical, п¬Ғnancial insights are uncovered вҖ“ all of these help alle-
viate the concerns among societies (Luenberger, 2014; Simaan, 2025). More
speciп¬Ғcally, Remark 7 instead demonstrates the case of nonunique optimal
portfolios, where (i) the analytical results enable п¬Ғnancial analysts to exploit
more potential of Portfolio Selection (Markowitz, 1952) while (ii) the practi-
cal endorsements further consolidate the common ground in optimization.
Next, Sec. 2 summarizes the adopted notations, including the mathematical nomencla-
ture and acronyms that frequently appear. Sec. 3 covers a general scope and analyzes the
common ground between the classical Numerical Optimization and the proposed Exact
Optimization, particularly the consistency veriп¬Ғcation. Among various applications using
Exact Optimization, Sec. 4 focuses on the п¬Ғeld of п¬Ғnancial economics; more speciп¬Ғcally,
it considers the landmark problem of Portfolio Selection and diversiп¬Ғes its capabilities and
potential with respect to the general covariance matrix. There are two subsections that explic-
itly demonstrate the п¬Ғnancial insights of this new application: Sec. 4.1 analyzes Efп¬Ғcient
Frontier/Minimum-Variance Set owing to its cornerstone importance in MPT, subject to both
the common specialization and a general extension; while Sec. 4.2 endorses the theoretical
results using pedagogical and real-world examples as well as in terms of numerical and hard-
ware experiments, notably, the microprocessor and the FPGA implementations that promote
the proposed computational enhancement from the aspect of basic computing units. Sec. 5
gives the conclusions.
2 Nomenclature and Frequent Acronyms
On the one hand, the following notations are also adopted in a consistent manner with the
literature (notably, Luenberger and Ye (2021); Boyd and Vandenberghe (2004); Lin and Liang
123

Annals of Operations Research
(2023)), unless otherwise mentioned: (В·)вҖ , N(В·), R(В·), (В·)T , det(В·), and || В· ||F as the Moore-
Penrose generalized inverse/pseudoinverse, null space, range space, transpose, determinant,
and Frobenius norm of a matrix or vector, respectively; In is the identity matrix in RnГ—n, while
all the elements of ImГ—n вҲҲRmГ—n equal one; M вү»0 (resp., M вӘ°0), if M = MT вҲҲRnГ—n is
positive deп¬Ғnite (resp., semideп¬Ғnite); and RвүҘ0 = R>0 вҲӘ{0}, where R>0 denotes the set of
strictly positive real numbers. All of the above notations are summarized in Table 1 for easy
reference.
On the other hand, it is worth summarizing the frequent acronyms for better readability,
alphabetically: (equality-constrained) quadratic programming (ECQP; QP); environmental,
social, and governance (ESG); п¬Ғeld-programmable gate array (FPGA); if and only if (iff);
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT); modern portfolio theory (MPT); MSCI All Country World
Index (MSCI ACWI); singular value decomposition (SVD); unconstrained linear program-
ming (ULP); unconstrained quadratic programming (UQP); and Very High-Speed Integrated
Circuit Hardware Description Language (VHDL).
3 Consistency Analysis (The Common Ground)
Consider the optimization problem (ECQP):
minimize
Fx(x) = xT Px/2 + qT x + s
subject to Ax = b,
(1)
where Fx : Rn вҶ’R (its level set value denoted by ВҜl вҲҲR), both x, q вҲҲRn, P = PT вҲҲRnГ—n,
P вӘ°0, s вҲҲR, A вҲҲRmГ—n, rank(A) = m вҲҲ{1, 2, В· В· В· , n вҲ’1}, and b вҲҲRm. Perform SVD of
A and let a V2 вҲҲRnГ—(nвҲ’m) be given, which is associated with R(V2) = N(A).
First we recall the recent п¬Ғndings about ECQP in the following Lemma 1, while its more
in-depth results are available in (Lin and Liang, 2023, Theorem 3.5).
Lemma 1 (The Exact Solution to ECQP (Lin and Liang, 2023, Theorem 3.5))
1. If V T
2 PV2 Мё= 0 вҮ”R(P) вҲ©N(A) Мё= {0} вҮ”N(A) вҠҲN(P),
(a) ECQP (1) is equivalent to a UQP (see (Lin and Liang, 2023, Theorem 3.2) for more
details),
(b) the preimage of any level set/value of вҖңFx subject to Ax = bвҖқ can be respectively
parameterized by
x = AвҖ b + V2y,
(2)
where y вҲҲRnвҲ’m is determined by (Lin and Liang, 2023, Eqs. (3.3), (3.6)-(3.8)), with
z = y, M = V T
2 PV2/2,k = V T
2 (q+P AвҖ b),and c = s+[qT +bT (AвҖ )T P/2]AвҖ bвҲ’
ВҜl,
(c) among all ВҜl in 1(b), the optimal one (namely, minimum) is п¬Ғnite, iff V T
2 (q+ P AвҖ b) вҲҲ
R(V T
2 PV2),
(d) following 1(c), this п¬Ғnite optimal value is ВҜlвҲ—вҲҲR,
ВҜlвҲ—=[bT (AвҖ )T P/2+qT ][InвҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҖ V T
2 P]AвҖ b+sвҲ’qT V2(V T
2 PV2)вҖ V T
2 q/2,
(3)
and the corresponding unique optimum is, or optima are all, parameterized by
xВҜвҲ—= xВҜвҲ—
p + V2ОөВҜвҲ—,
(4)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Notations (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004; Lin & Liang, 2023; Luenberger & Ye, 2021)
(В·)вҖ , N(В·), R(В·), (В·)T det(В·), and || В· ||F
Moore-Penrose generalized inverse/pseudoinverse, null space, range space, transpose, determinant, and
Frobenius norm of a matrix or vector, respectively
In and ImГ—n
In being the identity matrix in RnГ—n, while all the elements of ImГ—n вҲҲRmГ—n being one
M вү»0 (resp., M вӘ°0)
M = MT вҲҲRnГ—n being positive deп¬Ғnite (resp., semideп¬Ғnite)
RвүҘ0 and R>0
RвүҘ0 = R>0 вҲӘ{0}, where R>0 is the set of strictly positive real numbers
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Representative cases of ECQP (1) in terms of N(P) and N(A) = R(V2): (a) N(A) вҲ©N(P) = {0},
(b) left: N(A) вҠғN(P); right: N(A) вҲ©N(P) Мё= {0} and N(A) МёвҠғN(P), and (c) N(A) вҠҶN(P)
where xВҜвҲ—
p := AвҖ b вҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҖ V T
2 (q + P AвҖ b) вҲҲRn denotes the particular
solution of xВҜвҲ—вҲҲRn, ОөВҜвҲ—вҲҲRnвҲ’m, and ОөВҜвҲ—вҲҲN(V T
2 PV2),
(e) to further categorize 1(d), the optimum is unique, iff N(A) вҲ©N(P) = {0};
2. else, if V T
2 (q + P AвҖ b) Мё= 0, ECQP (1) is equivalent to an unbounded ULP;
3. else,
(a) ECQP (1) is equivalent to a constant function,
(b) its value is вҖң ВҜlвҲ—= ВҜl = s + [qT + bT (AвҖ )T P/2]AвҖ bвҖқ,
(c) the (only) preimage is parameterized by Eq. (2), for all y.
Then we present Fig. 1 that representatively categorizes all the cases in Lemma 1, where (a)
and (b) correspond to UQP whereas (c) associates with 2 and 3 of Lemma 1. The illustration
is useful in visualizing the main results that immediately come afterward (as well as the
п¬Ғndings in Lin and Liang (2023)).
Theorem 1 Regarding ECQP in Eq. (1), the complete solution parameterization in Eq. (4)
that adopts Exact Optimization uniquely solves KKT system

P
AT
A
0
  x
О»

=
 вҲ’q
b

,
(5)
where О» вҲҲRm is the Lagrange multiplier in Numerical Optimization (to name a few repre-
sentative examples, Luenberger and Ye (2021); Nocedal and Wright (2006); Vadlamani et
al. (2020); Chataigner et al. (2021)).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Proof By 1(e) of Lemma 1, divide the derivations into the following paragraph (I), if the
optimum is unique; (II), otherwise.
(I)
N(A) вҲ©N(P) = {0} вҮ”V T
2 PV2 вү»0. From Eq. (4), we have AxВҜвҲ—= b because of i)
AвҖ  = AT (AAT )вҲ’1 given the underdetermined constraint (m < n); and ii) AV2 = 0. On the
other hand, PxВҜвҲ—+ AT О»ВҜвҲ—+ q = 0 вҮ”
[In вҲ’PV2(V T
2 PV2)вҲ’1V T
2 ]



denoted as  вҲҲRnГ—n
(P AвҖ b + q) = вҲ’AT О»ВҜвҲ—.
(6)
Since V T
2  = 0, the matrix  is singular and R() вҠҶR(AT ). Therefore, both sides of
Eq. (6) reside in R(AT ). Given that AT is of full (column) rank, the dual/coordinate vector
on the right-hand side is uniquely determined, corresponding to the left-hand side vector, in
terms of the R(AT )вҲ’basis that is formed by the columns of AT .
(II)
N(A) вҲ©N(P) в«Ң{0} вҮ”V T
2 PV2 is singular. Following the above derivations in (I),
it only remains to show that, in Eq. (4), the only term contributing to the nonuniqueness of
optima - V2ОөВҜвҲ—- 1) resides in N(A) and 2) PV2ОөВҜвҲ—вҲҲR(AT ). The п¬Ғrst one is obvious since
R(V2) = R(AT ) as deп¬Ғned in Lemma 1; while the second one follows since V T
2 В·PV2ОөВҜвҲ—= 0,
given that ОөВҜвҲ—вҲҲN(V T
2 PV2) in Eq. (4).
вҠ“вҠ”
Remark 1 In the literature, ECQP (1) is commonly but differently addressed by means of
Lagrange/Primal-Dual method, namely, Numerical Optimization. Theorem 1 veriп¬Ғes the
solution consistency by using Numerical Optimization and Exact Optimization, while this
remark further discusses the computational difference for practical efп¬Ғciency. On the one
hand, Lagrange method adopts the differential perspective and thus stems from the necessary
(п¬Ғrst-order) optimality condition for ECQP, which is in the form of Eq. (5) that is commonly
known as KKT system. On the other hand, Exact Optimization equivalently solves ECQP,
where Theorem 1 veriп¬Ғes the necessary condition. To demonstrate a special consideration,
regarding 1(e) of Lemma 1, (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004, Exercise 10.1) includes a dif-
ferent derivation that yields the same equivalence condition. However, from the viewpoint
of implementation complexity, all the computations using Exact Optimization are more efп¬Ғ-
ciently performed in either Rn or Rm. In other words, the effects by the value function and
constraint to obtain (that is, to compute) the optimality are decoupled. As a comparison,
Numerical Optimization generally solves KKT system in the coupled dimension of (n + m);
to name one example in the п¬Ғeld of п¬Ғnance, (Kwan, 2018, Sec. 3) considers the problem
of Portfolio Selection (Markowitz, 1952), where not only is the system dimension increased
due to the augmentation, but also further analysis is required for the invertibility of the KKT
matrix. Remarkably, Exact Optimization refrains from any additional step that either intro-
duces or veriп¬Ғes a feasible point, a priori and anytime during the computation; to name a
few examples, Eq. (4) consists of only one compact closed formula for the optimal point(s)
xВҜвҲ—, where xВҜвҲ—readily satisп¬Ғes the constraint Ax = b; while similar statements extend to Eq.
(3) and more in Lemma 1. Such a feature also generalizes from the unary specialization in
secondary school, contrasts with the common Numerical Optimization, and thus contributes
to the overall computational enhancement, which will be evaluated in Examples 3-5 (notably,
those results of the improved efп¬Ғciency in Tables 2-4).
Corollary 1 (A Byproduct of Theorem 1)
V2(V T
2 PV2)вҲ’1V T
2 = PвҲ’1[In вҲ’AT (APвҲ’1 AT )вҲ’1 APвҲ’1],
(7)
123

Annals of Operations Research
AвҖ  вҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҲ’1V T
2 P AвҖ  = PвҲ’1 AT (APвҲ’1 AT )вҲ’1.
(8)
Proof The analysis perspective sets on an important and popular case вҖңP вү»0вҖқ (see
Luenberger and Ye (2021); Boyd and Vandenberghe (2004); Nocedal and Wright (2006);
Vadlamani et al. (2020) for examples), which renders an explicit formula for the unique
optimum using Numerical Optimization and Exact Optimization, respectively, and then the
equalities (7) and (8) result from the following consistency veriп¬Ғcation of the formula(s).
Since P is nonsingular (and V2 is of full rank), the case falls into the above (I) in the proof
of Theorem 1. By Numerical Optimization, directly solving KKT system (5) yields a repre-
sentation of the optimum (see details at, for example, Luenberger and Ye (2021); Qi and Li
(2020); Bodnar et al. (2022, 2024)):
xВҜвҲ—= PвҲ’1 AT (APвҲ’1 AT )вҲ’1(APвҲ’1q + b) вҲ’PвҲ’1q.
(9)
Given the derivations on the uniqueness of the optimum (Theorem 1 and Lemma 1), compar-
ing Eqs. (4) and (9) вҖ“ respectively on the вҖңcoefп¬Ғcient termsвҖқ of q and b вҖ“ concludes with Eqs.
(7) and (8). To be more detailed, ОөВҜвҲ—вҲҲN(V T
2 PV2) = {0} in Eq. (4), given the nonsingular
P. Also, Equality (7) corresponds to any arbitrary q вҲҲRn as deп¬Ғned in Eq. (1); while (8)
applies for any arbitrary b вҲҲR(A) = Rm, where A is of full (row) rank, as deп¬Ғned in (1). вҠ“вҠ”
Remark 2 The following Item 1 (resp., 2) provides importance demonstrations of Corollary
1 (resp., further observations and concluding remarks of Sec. 3).
1. Corollary 1 presents two basic identities in matrix algebra, namely Eqs. (7) and (8),
and the next Sec. 4 helps justify their importance by means of the demonstration of
Portfolio Selection. To be more detailed, Eq. (7) is essential in the proof of Theorem
2, speciп¬Ғcally, in the reformulation from Eq. (11) to Eq. (12). The theory justiп¬Ғes the
consistency between a benchmark result in п¬Ғnance (Merton, 1972, Eq. (12)/Efп¬Ғcient
Frontier) and its new proof using the proposed Exact Optimization. Actually, there are
more important п¬Ғndings in Merton (1972), for example, Eq. (14) therein, which can
also be derived using Exact Optimization. Such an alternative proof is available in 1 of
Remark 4, which (i) leverages Eq. (8) to bridge the connection from Eq. (16) to Eq. (17)
and (ii) serves as another consistency veriп¬Ғcation.
2. Both Numerical Optimization and Exact Optimization build on the common ground
of ECQP, but they adopt different methodologies to solve a general optimization task.
The former scheme centers around the necessary condition in the form of KKT system,
whereas the latter formulates equivalent results, in particular, the closed-form solution to
ECQP that also satisп¬Ғes the necessary condition (Theorem 1). As a byproduct (Corollary
1), the consistency veriп¬Ғcation uncovers two basic equalities in linear algebra, which
associates with a common consideration (positive deп¬Ғnite Hessian matrix) that is still a
prerequisite in industrial implementations such as the latest MATLABВ® R2025b. There-
fore, regarding the wide and fast growing spectrum of optimization applications, this
paper helps to revisit a diversity of classic problems; for instance, it helps with an imme-
diate and intuitive question: Where to start the comparison study for computational
enhancement? This responds to calls among scientiп¬Ғc communities, noting that Exact
Optimization only leverages elementary linear algebra to maximize its coverage; to name
just one example, MPT in the п¬Ғeld of п¬Ғnancial economics as pioneered by the Nobel
laureate H. Markowitz. MPT has been widely investigated numerically but it is still a chal-
lenging problem to date (Gunjan & Bhattacharyya, 2023; Haugh & Lo, 2001), and thus
123

Annals of Operations Research
the community has been expecting strong improvements by way of Exact Optimization
(to name a few, Steuer et al. (2024); DeBacco (2023); Luenberger (2014)). In response
to the calls, Sec. 4 is demonstrated, where not only are consistency veriп¬Ғcations with
the classic п¬Ғnance literature of exact results analyzed, but also numerical and hardware
experiments of computational enhancement are leveraged to enrich the practical merit of
this study.
4 Portfolio Selection ( Markowitz (1952)) Revisited
The common ground, as theoretically clariп¬Ғed in Sec. 3, can be practically exempliп¬Ғed by
the classic problem of Portfolio Selection in the п¬Ғeld of п¬Ғnancial economics. The problem
was pioneered by Markowitz (1952) and has been followed by substantial impacts, to name
a few, Lleo and MacLean (2025); Guerard and Ziemba (2021) and the references therein. In
other words, the common ground bridges the connection between Numerical Optimization
and Exact Optimization, and it can be implemented by a renowned optimization problem
in п¬Ғnance (see (Stellato et al., 2020, Sec. 8.1) and (Kwan, 2018, Conclusion) for consistent
arguments). More speciп¬Ғcally, MPT answers the fundamental question that is quoted from
Kolm et al. (2014): How should an investor allocate funds among the possible investment
choices? From another aspect, the question can be interpreted as the following optimization
problem that leads to the minimum-variance/risk portfolio:
minimize
1
2
n

i,j=1
xixjПғij = 1
2
вҺӣ
вҺңвҺңвҺқ
n

i=1
x2
i Пғ 2
i +
n

i,j=1
iМё=j
xixjПғij
вҺһ
вҺҹвҺҹвҺ 
subject to
n

i=1
Ојixi = ВҜОј
n

i=1
xi = 1,
(10)
which is in the form of ECQP (1), where n > 1 denotes the number of assets (in the form
of cash, bond, stock, and so on), xi вҲҲR the proportion of the total funds as invested in
the ith asset (accordingly, a portfolio is represented by the set {xi}n
i=1), P = [Пғij]n
i,j=1 вҲҲ
RnГ—n the covariance matrix that is generally positive semideп¬Ғnite (see Barroso and Saxena
(2022); Nocedal and Wright (2006); Markowitz (1959); Kolm et al. (2014) for more details),
Пғii = Пғ 2
i , Пғi the standard deviation of Ојi, Ојi вҲҲRвүҘ0 the expected or mean rate of uncertain
return associated with the ith asset, [Ој1, . . . , Ојn]T := Ој вҲҲRn, Пғij = Пғji = ПҒijПғiПғj, ПҒij the
correlation coefп¬Ғcient corresponding to {Ојi, Ојj} for any i Мё= j, ВҜОј вҲҲRвүҘ0 the return by the
portfolio {xi}n
i=1 that is designed and п¬Ғxed at some arbitrary value, q = 0, s = 0, and hence
ВҜl вүҘ0; lastly, divide the remaining parameters using the following categorization:
(a) if [ ВҜОј, 1]T /вҲҲR(
 Ој
InГ—1
T ), then there is no feasible point in Problem/Eq. (10), namely
no portfolio {xi}n
i=1 that satisп¬Ғes the constraints in (10);
(b) else if вҖңn = 2вҖқ and вҖңdet(
 Ој
I2Г—1

) Мё= 0вҖқ, then there is only one feasible point, that
is, only one feasible portfolio x = (
 Ој
InГ—1

)вҲ’1 В· [ ВҜОј, 1]T , and thus there is no need to
perform the portfolio optimization;
(c) else if Ој = Ој1 В· InГ—1, then A = aT = I1Г—n, rank(A) = 1, and b = b = 1;
123

Annals of Operations Research
(d) else, A =
 Ој
InГ—1
T вҲҲR2Г—n, rank(A) = 2, and b = [ ВҜОј, 1]T вҲҲR2.
Note that (Haugen, 2001, Appendix 3) demonstrates a numerical procedure to solve the
ECQP problem in Eq. (10) with a P вү»0; in other words, it validates how the classical method
(Numerical Optimization) solves the problem that is subject to a nonsingular covariance
matrix. Moreover, the problem formulation in Eq. (10) does not fully exploit the state of the
art in Exact Optimization; for instance, it does not take into account (Lin and Liang, 2023,
Algorithm 3.1) that includes inequality constraints, which thus remains focused of this study.
However, the problem in (10) allows negative weights (namely вҖңxi < 0 for some iвҖқ or short
selling) to broaden the application spectrum; see Simaan (2025) and references therein for
more discussions. Moreover, to further enlarge the scope, Eq. (10) also takes the case that
det(P) = 0 into consideration, noting that:
1. A tremendous amount of п¬Ғnance or economics literature assume that P вү»0, such as
(Markowitz & Xu, 1994), which can be partially owing to the fact that the complete and
exact solution of ECQP (1) was not available until recently by (Lin and Liang, 2023,
Theorem 3.5), notably, the parameterization of the п¬Ғnite optimal value as well as all the
optima п¬Ӯexibility (see 1(d) of Lemma 1 for a summary).
2. There exist a variety of research endeavors that uncover or exploit the full potential of
MPT, to chronologically name a few:
вҖ“ Sharpe (1963) developed a simpliп¬Ғed model of the relationships among assets for
portfolio analysis, particular from practical viewpoints such as the implementation
cost. The theory takes a special case вҖңlending portfolioвҖқ into account, which asso-
ciates with a singular P. Remarkably, the paper also reports the critical concern in
computational performance that requires further investigation.
вҖ“ Roll (1977) considered the case вҖңwhen the least-risky portfolio has zero varianceвҖқ and
suggested that its occurrence is much more frequent than the common вҖңarbitrage-
freeвҖқ consideration. In particular, the comparativeness endorses Example 1 later,
where the minimum variance is zero.
вҖ“ Lewis(1988)highlightedthetechnicalimportanceofpositivesemideп¬Ғnitecovariance
matrix on the п¬Ғrst page, as well as its signiп¬Ғcant generality in the п¬Ғnal section
of summary. Consistent arguments still exist in the recent literature; for instance,
Barroso and Saxena (2022) that restates such a general requirement.
вҖ“ Kwan(2018)anditsreferencesprovidedseveralexamplesofsingular P andreiterated
the underlying difп¬Ғculty (resp., mystery) of matrix inversion by means of existing
algorithms for portfolio optimization. Note that a common approach in MPT uses
numerical search procedures to alleviate the difп¬Ғculty (Haugen, 1999; Haugen &
Baker, 1996). The conclusions of Kwan (2018) emphasize that resolving the difп¬Ғculty
(resp., mystery) facilitates a better understanding of the inner workings of Markowitz
method, which thus manifests investing and pedagogical values (see Qi and Steuer
(2020) for endorsements). Notably, Kwan (2018) emphasizes the importance of the
research line in its title, motivating this paper to respond to the demand.
вҖ“ (Markowitz, 2000, Chapter 3) stressed that, quoted, вҖңBut in fact there already exist
applications in theory and practice with singular CвҖқ and then demonstrated three
of these applications, where the п¬Ғrst one is endorsed by the analysis in (Ledoit and
Wolf, 2003, Sec. 2). Moreover, as he voiced the concern and difп¬Ғculty related to the
singular case, he thus suggested different models for the covariance matrix.
вҖ“ More recently, Bodnar et al. (2022, 2024) performed the latest survey about the
extension study to deal with singular P, including examples that are based on real-
world data. Along with Drin et al. (2025), this paper also responds to the calls among
123

Annals of Operations Research
Bodnar et al. (2022) and its references (such as [27] therein) that urge for the exact
extension from Eq. (9) to the singular counterpart. To be more in-depth, Eq. (4)
parameterizes all the solution freedom in ECQP (the general problem formulation
where P вӘ°0), which, in particular, removes the popular assumption, approximation,
or restriction associated with (Bodnar et al., 2017, Eq. (1)), (Gulliksson and Mazur,
2020, Eq. (3)), (Bodnar et al., 2022, 2024, Eq. (7)), (Gulliksson et al., 2024, Eq. (4)),
(Drin et al., 2025, Eq. (4)), and regularization techniques as mentioned in (Alfelt
and Mazur, 2022, Footnote 4). Moreover, Sec. 3 analytically clariп¬Ғes the common
ground, from which the above scholars can thus readily start or continue their research
progress toward closed-form results.
It is worth remarking that the more general formulation of MPT by relating to all of the
above materials in 1 and 2 aligns with the critical design issue, that is, the desirable diversi-
п¬Ғcation (see a retrospective by Rubinstein (2002), Kolm et al. (2014), Guerard et al. (2013),
and Cetingoz et al. (2024)). More speciп¬Ғcally, relaxing the common limitation (P вү»0) to
allow the full capability of covariance matrix (P вӘ°0) better meets the crucial criteria of
diversiп¬Ғcation (Guerard et al., 2013), which has already been envisioned more than half a
century ago by (Markowitz, 1956, Sec. 1) and (Markowitz, 1959, Appendices A and B).
For better readability, the rest of this section is divided into Secs. 4.1 and 4.2. On the
one hand, Sec. 4.1 is devoted to theoretical insights, where the focus is set upon Efп¬Ғcient
Frontier/Minimum-Variance Set from both the viewpoints of the milestone (Merton, 1972)
and its extended coverage. On the other hand, Sec. 4.2 is provided to demonstrate the practical
advantages by applying Exact Optimization (Lin & Liang, 2023) to MPT, particularly the
generalization to singular covariance matrices as well as computational enhancements subject
to both numerical (MATLABВ®) and hardware experiments (microprocessor and FPGA).
4.1 Consistency Analysis (MPT) and Generalization
Among analytical and explicit results in п¬Ғnance or economics literature, we demonstrate the
following consistency veriп¬Ғcation as well as its generalization with regard to the benchmark
contributions by the Nobel laureate Merton (1972). More speciп¬Ғcally, we вҖ“ by way of Exact
Optimization вҖ“ revisit the classic formulation of Efп¬Ғcient Frontier/Minimum-Variance Set,
whose geometric structure was п¬Ғrst analyzed and revealed by Merton (1972), and then
вҖ“ provide a different but consistent proof in Theorem 2;
вҖ“ extend the pioneering result to the general case of вҖңP вӘ°0вҖқ in Theorem 3, as well as its
computational improvement in Corollary 2.
Theorem 2 Under the common assumption that P вү»0, Minimum-Variance Set/Efп¬Ғcient
Frontier that is associated with the minimum variance ВҜlвҲ—in Eq. (3) and expected return ВҜОј in
Eq. (10) specializes to (Merton, 1972, Eq. (12)).
Proof Regarding the cases (a) and (b) in Problem/Eq. (10), there is no need to perform the
portfolio optimization; therefore, we consider the other cases (c) and (d). It is worth noting
that the proof is designed to be within a uniп¬Ғed framework, which coalesces both (c) and
(d) as well as the generalization in Theorem 3. As such, the following derivation focuses
on the case of (d), which corresponds to the formulation of Minimum-Variance Set/Efп¬Ғcient
Frontier and can be specialized to the case of (c) after slight modiп¬Ғcations (see Remark 3).
Given thatdet(P) Мё= 0, the categorization in Lemma 1 goes to its case 1 because V T
2 PV2 Мё=
0; more speciп¬Ғcally, the ECQP in (10) is equivalently a UQP by means of Exact Optimization.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Among all the properties related to the case, 1(c) of Lemma 1 ensures that the minimum risk is
п¬Ғnite owing to V T
2 (P AвҖ b) вҲҲR(V T
2 PV2) = R(nвҲ’2)Г—(nвҲ’2) and thus the derivations proceed
to 1(d) of Lemma 1 for the analysis and formulation of Minimum-Variance Set/Efп¬Ғcient
Frontier. Applying Eq. (3) yields
ВҜlвҲ—= bT (AвҖ )T P[In вҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҲ’1V T
2



to be reformulated
P]AвҖ b/2,
(11)
where (V T
2 PV2)вҖ  = (V T
2 PV2)вҲ’1 because det(P) Мё= 0 while ВҜlвҲ—вүҘ0 since ВҜl вүҘ0. According
to the matrix identity in Eq. (7), Eq. (11) can be reformulated as
ВҜlвҲ—
=
bT (AвҖ )T P{In вҲ’PвҲ’1[In вҲ’AT (APвҲ’1 AT )вҲ’1 APвҲ’1]P}AвҖ b/2
=
bT (AвҖ )T AT (APвҲ’1 AT )вҲ’1 AAвҖ b/2.
(12)
Noting that the constraints in Problem/Eq. (10) conform to the formulation of least-norm
problem (see Horn and Johnson (2013) for details), we apply the basic identity in matrix
theory, that is, AAвҖ  = A В· AT (AAT )вҲ’1 = In subject to an underdetermined linear equation,
and hence Eq. (12) is further equivalent to
ВҜlвҲ—
=
bT (APвҲ’1 AT )вҲ’1b/2
=
 ВҜОј
1 
В· (

ОјT
I1Г—n

В· PвҲ’1 В·
 Ој
InГ—1

)вҲ’1 В·
 ВҜОј
1

/2
=
 ВҜОј
1 
В· (

ОјT PвҲ’1Ој
ОјT PвҲ’1InГ—1
I1Г—nPвҲ’1Ој
I1Г—nPвҲ’1InГ—1




2 Г— 2 matrix that is independent of ВҜОј
)вҲ’1 В·
 ВҜОј
1

/2.
(13)
Finally, applying CramerвҖҷs rule for the inversion of the 2 Г— 2 matrix in Eq. (13) immediately
yields the formula in (Merton, 1972, Eq. (12)). It is worth remarking that the invertibility of
the 2 Г— 2 matrix in Eq. (13) has been guaranteed in the arguments associated with Eqs. (11)
and (12), while it can also be endorsed by (Merton, 1972, Footnote 5) that is analyzed from
a different aspect.
вҠ“вҠ”
Remark 3 As for the case (c) in Eq. (10) and also under the common assumption that P вү»0,
the condition of вҖңОј1 = Ој2 = В· В· В· = ОјnвҖқ leads to the only one possible return вҖң ВҜОј = Ој1вҖқ;
if not, it is obvious that [ ВҜОј, 1]T /вҲҲR(
 Ој InГ—1
T ), which has been included in the earlier
case (a) via the adopted categorization process. Accordingly, the uniп¬Ғed proof of Theorem 2
also coalesces the case (c); speciп¬Ғcally, replacing (A, b) in the proof by (aT, b) = (I1Г—n,1)
readily yields the result: ВҜlвҲ—= I1Г—nPвҲ’1InГ—1/2, which is a constant value that is larger than
or equal to zero because ВҜl вүҘ0. The constant optimal value (that is, minimum variance/risk)
ВҜlвҲ—in this case is independent of, notably, the portfolio return ВҜОј, which can be anticipated by
the categorization design (a)-(d) in Eq. (10). Such a theoretical outcome can be interpreted
from the perspective of п¬Ғnancial economics: If all the assets share the same expected return
data, then they can be analytically treated as only one asset, and hence, with respect to
all the possible portfolios {xi}n
i=1, there is only one return value вҖң ВҜОј = Ој1вҖқ and variance
вҖңВҜlвҲ—= I1Г—nPвҲ’1InГ—1/2вҖқ. Remarkably, the boundary scenario that {Ојi}n
i=1 = {0} is also taken
into account in the above derivations as well as the problem formulation in Eq. (10) for the
sake of mathematical completeness. In the following, we consider another element within
the uniп¬Ғed coverage of Theorem 2вҖҷs proof, which generalizes the theorem to exploit the full
capability of covariance matrix and thus adheres to the envisioning by Markowitz (1956,
1959).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Theorem 3 (Generalization of Theorem 2) After lifting the assumption that P вү»0,
1. if V T
2 PV2 Мё= 0 вҮ”R(P) вҲ©N(A) Мё= {0} вҮ”N(A) вҠҲN(P),
(a) regarding Theorem 2, the geometric structure of Minimum-Variance Set is a parabola
in this most general case, which is formulated by
ВҜlвҲ—= (О“11/2) ВҜОј2 + О“12 ВҜОј + О“22/2 вүҘ0,
(14)
where О“ := [О“ij]2
i,j=1 = (AвҖ )T P[InвҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҖ V T
2 P]AвҖ  вҲҲR2Г—2 and О“ = О“ T ,
while Efп¬Ғcient Frontier accounts for the upper half of Eq. (14),
(b) considering Remark 3, the statements still apply, except that the constant minimum
variance/risk is generalized to
ВҜlвҲ—= I вҖ 
nГ—1P[In вҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҖ V T
2 P]I вҖ 
1Г—n/2 вүҘ0;
2. else, if V T
2 (P AвҖ b) Мё= 0, the portfolio optimization problem in Eq. (10) is equivalent to
an unbounded ULP, namely, unbounded minimum variance/risk;
3. else, the problem in Eq. (10) is equivalent to a constant function, and its value equals
bT (AвҖ )T P AвҖ b/2, that is, a constant variance/risk. Moreover,
(a) regarding Theorem 2, the statements in the above case 1(a) still apply except О“ =
(AвҖ )T P AвҖ ,
(b) considering Remark 3, the statements in the above case 1(b) still apply except вҖңВҜlвҲ—=
ВҜl = I вҖ 
nГ—1P I вҖ 
1Г—n/2 вүҘ0вҖқ.
Proof We explicitly present the proof for the case 1, which easily extends to the arguments of
case 3; whereas the derivation of case 2 readily follows from 2 of Lemma 1. The remaining
is divided into the following two paragraphs 1(a) and 1(b), which correspond to the cases (d)
and (c) in Eq. (10), respectively.
1(a)
This proof is within the uniп¬Ғed framework of Theorem 2вҖҷs proof. The derivations start
from Eq. (11) and then relax it to the general case (P вӘ°0) as per Eq. (3), that is,
ВҜlвҲ—= bT О“ b/2,
where О“ is deп¬Ғned along with Eq. (14) while ВҜlвҲ—вүҘ0 because ВҜl вүҘ0. Note that О“ does not
depend on b; to be speciп¬Ғc, it is independent of ВҜОј. Moreover, given that (MвҖ )T = (MT )вҖ 
for any M вҲҲRmГ—n, it is straightforward to show that О“ = О“ T . Therefore, the formula in
Eq. (14) follows by substituting b = [ ВҜОј, 1]T and {О“ij}2
i,j=1.
1(b)
This part is similar to the above 1(a) as well as Remark 3. The arguments also start
from Eq. (11) and then relax the equation to generally P вӘ°0. Speciп¬Ғcally, replacing b with
1, A with I1Г—n, and вҖң(V T
2 PV2)вҲ’1вҖқ with вҖң(V T
2 PV2)вҖ вҖқ, respectively, leads to
ВҜlвҲ—= (I вҖ 
1Г—n)T P[In вҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҖ V T
2 P]I вҖ 
1Г—n/2,
(15)
which is larger than or equal to zero since ВҜl вүҘ0. Given that the pseudoinversion operator
commutes with transposition, Eq. (15) can be made more compact by virtue of (I вҖ 
1Г—n)T =
I вҖ 
nГ—1, which thus completes the proof.
вҠ“вҠ”
Corollary 2 (Computational Enhancement of Theorem 3)
1. I вҖ 
nГ—1 = (1/n) В· I1Г—n.
123

Annals of Operations Research
2. By 1, the following variance can be more efп¬Ғciently computed, respectively:
вҖ“ [1(b) of Theorem 3]: ВҜlвҲ—= I1Г—nP[In вҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҖ V T
2 P]InГ—1/(2n2);
вҖ“ [3(b) of Theorem 3]: ВҜlвҲ—= n
i,j=1 Пғij/(2n2).
Proof The derivations for the item 1 are presented afterward, whereas the other results can be
easily obtained by applying the п¬Ғrst item. The proof is outlined by: We examine The Penrose
Conditions and verify that the right-hand side of 1 satisп¬Ғes the four conditions. Only the п¬Ғrst
condition is demonstrated below,
InГ—1 В· [(1/n) В· I1Г—n] В· InГ—1 = InГ—1 В· (1/n) В· [I1Г—n В· InГ—1] = InГ—1 В· (1/n) В· n = InГ—1,
which can be similarly extended to analyze the others and hence the details are omitted for
brevity.
вҠ“вҠ”
Remark 4 (Further observations and concluding remarks of Sec. 4.1)
1. Theorem 2 merely demonstrates one of the milestone results by Robert C. Merton for the
sake of compactness. Actually, Merton (1972) contributed more benchmark п¬Ғndings to
the literature, which motivate this remark to provide additional consistency veriп¬Ғcations
by means of Exact Optimization. Representatively, (Merton, 1972, Eq. (14)) analyzes
the minimum-variance portfolio subject to a special scenario of Problem/Eq. (10), where
P вү»0, A = aT = I1Г—n, and b = b = 1. By Eq. (4) using Exact Optimization, the
unique optimal portfolio is
xВҜвҲ—= AвҖ  вҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҲ’1V T
2 (P AвҖ ),
(16)
where the solution п¬Ӯexibility ОөВҜвҲ—in Eq. (4) vanishes owing to the nonsingular P, which
also readily leads to the identity that (V T
2 PV2)вҖ  = (V T
2 PV2)вҲ’1. According to the matrix
identity in Eq. (8), we have that Eq. (16) is further equivalent to
xВҜвҲ—
=
PвҲ’1 AT (APвҲ’1 AT )вҲ’1
=
PвҲ’1InГ—1(I1Г—nPвҲ’1InГ—1)вҲ’1
(17)
and the result immediately follows.
2. By comparing Theorems 2 and 3, we notice that such an extension to general risk mea-
sure (Kolm et al., 2014; Markowitz, 1959) is no longer an open problem mainly because
of the complete and closed-form solution to ECQP. More speciп¬Ғcally, the common con-
sideration of P вү»0 (Theorem 2) readily falls into the equivalent case of UQP since
V T
2 PV2 Мё= 0, whereas the generalization to P вӘ°0 (Theorem 3) additionally hinges
upon the other two equivalent cases according to the comprehensive categorization in
Theorem 3. It is worth reiterating that such an equivalent and exact categorization is
the only one of its kind in the up-to-date literature (Lin & Liang, 2023), which further
solidiп¬Ғes the signiп¬Ғcance of this Sec. 4.1. Remarkably, Theorems 2 and 3 completely and
uniп¬Ғedly clarify the geometric structure of the generalized Efп¬Ғcient Frontier/Minimum-
Variance Set by way of Exact Optimization, whereas it is challenging or even impossible
by means of other major MPT methods, such as those repetitive and heuristic schemes
in a recent survey (Qi, 2022, Fig. 3).
3. On the one hand, Theorem 3 formulates and presents the п¬Ғndings from an analytical
viewpoint, which will be useful for further analysis and application study. On the other
hand, Corollary 2 reexamines the results in Theorem 3 and adopts a practical perspective,
where the main purpose of the perspective aims to reduce the associated computational
123

Annals of Operations Research
complexity. The computational reduction is attributed to the equivalence in 1 of Corollary
2, where the alternative aspect helps reform the computations into a few basic operations
only, speciп¬Ғcally, additions and multiplications. Such a practical enhancement will be
validated and evaluated in terms of the reduced computation time later in Examples 1
and 2, respectively, which enriches the commercial potential of the proposed results.
4.2 Numerical Validations and Hardware Experiments on Real-World Data
The consistency analyses in Sec. 3 (general scope) and 4.1 (MPT in the п¬Ғeld of п¬Ғnancial
economics) help grow conп¬Ғdence to proceed with the practical investigation using Exact
Optimization (in comparison to the common, classical Numerical Optimization). Accord-
ingly, this Sec. 4.2 performs the comparison study with respect to the common ground of
the two schemes (namely, ECQP) and demonstrates three examples. Examples 1 and 2 are
for pedagogical purposes and associate with basic setups in Portfolio Selection (Markowitz,
1959); more speciп¬Ғcally, the two examples manifest the covariance matrix being singular, but
the optimal portfolio as well as the minimum variance/risk can still be explicitly formulated,
along with consistent investment implications. This research direction not only responds to
the general envisioning by Markowitz (1956, 1959), but also aligns with the objective among
the recent endeavors (Bodnar et al., 2022, 2024; Qi, 2022). In addition, Examples 3-5 eval-
uate the computational enhancement by using Exact Optimization (Lin & Liang, 2023) than
MATLABВ® (Numerical Optimization). More speciп¬Ғcally, Example 3 continues the research
effort by Elton et al. (1976) and provides further computational reductions to alleviate the
implementation concerns of MPT. Example 4 is subject to an MPT application that explicitly
follows the Forum of Sustainable and Responsible Investment, and it is in terms of various
computing platforms: personal computer (MATLABВ®), microprocessor (Python-based), and
FPGA (VHDL-based), respectively. Along with Example 4, Example 5 and its companion
Remark 7 are also subject to real-world data but deal with a singular covariance matrix. They
highlight analytical insights that are readily available using Exact Optimization but not for
Numerical Optimization.
Example 1 This example demonstrates a portfolio selection of two assets, where the covari-
ance is negative and the covariance matrix is singular. Consider a special case of Markowitz
model (10):
minimize
Fx(x) = 1
2xT Px = 1
2xT
 1
вҲ’1
вҲ’1
1

x = 1
2(x1 вҲ’x2)2
subject to x1 + x2 = 1,
(18)
which is in the form of ECQP (1), where A = aT = I1Г—2, b = b = 1, and Fx(x) вүҘ0 and the
equality occurs when x1 = x2. We compare two state-of-the-art methods for this intuitive
and simple optimization problem. On the one hand, MATLAB (2025) adopts the classical
Numerical Optimization (Nocedal & Wright, 2006) and highlights in the very beginning of
the documentation: A Hessian matrix must be positive deп¬Ғnite for the problem to have a
п¬Ғnite minimum, even if there is no constraint in ECQP (1). Such a requirement can be par-
tially explained by the matrix-inversion issue in NewtonвҖҷs method, which cannot be directly
resolved whenever a Hessian matrix is close to being singular, more speciп¬Ғcally, whenever its
condition number is large. Nonetheless, the covariance matrix in MPT is generally positive
semideп¬Ғnite вҖ“ as reported in Kolm et al. (2014) вҖ“ and thus we resort to the other hand using
the recently developed Exact Optimization (Lin & Liang, 2023). The problem in (18) can
123

Annals of Operations Research
be completely solved by Lemma 1, where the word вҖңcompletelyвҖқ means that all the solution
п¬Ӯexibility corresponding to N(P) can be analyzed and parameterized. In addition, applying
Lemma 1, Theorem 3, and Corollary 2, respectively, yields the following closed-form results:
1. 1(c) of Lemma 1 asserts that the optimal value (namely, minimum variance/risk) is п¬Ғnite
since V T
2 (q+P AвҖ b) = 0 вҲҲR(V T
2 PV2) = R, which agrees with the intuitive inspection
on Fx(x) in Eq. (18).
2. 1(d) of Lemma 1 renders the minimum variance/risk ВҜlвҲ—= 0 mainly because (AвҖ )T P =
(вң–) В· V T
1 P = 0, where V1 вҲҲR2 comes from SVD of A and it satisп¬Ғes that R(V1) =
R(AT ). In addition, the theory gives (1) the particular solution xВҜвҲ—
p = [1/2, 1/2]T , (2) all
the solution freedom ОөВҜвҲ—вҲҲN(V T
2 PV2) = {0} that vanishes, and thus (3) the minimum-
variance portfolio xВҜвҲ—= xВҜвҲ—
p.
3. 1(e) of Lemma 1 guarantees the unique optimum by means of another analysis aspect,
and the arguments are
N(A) = {x вҲҲR2 | x1 = вҲ’x2} and
N(P) = {x вҲҲR2 | x1 = x2},
which immediately lead to the equivalent statement: N(A) вҲ©N(P) = {0}.
4. 1(b) of Theorem 3 gives the constant minimum variance/risk
ВҜlвҲ—= I вҖ 
2Г—1P[I2 вҲ’V2(V T
2 PV2)вҖ V T
2 P]I вҖ 
1Г—2 = 0,
which is owing to b = b = 1 (speciп¬Ғcally, ВҜlвҲ—is independent of ВҜОј) while the result agrees
with the above item 2.
5. Corollary 2 consistently provides the result in the above item 4 by ВҜlвҲ—= I1Г—2P[I2 вҲ’
V2(V T
2 PV2)вҖ V T
2 P]I2Г—1/8 = 0, but the computational effort is enhanced by 2.67 times
averagely among several trials and in terms of the latest MATLABВ® platform (with Intel
CoreВ® CPU i7-12700H (4.7GHz) and 16GB RAM). In other words, the dominant burden
is almost removed by virtue of basic operations, and the overall effort is reduced by 63%.
Financially speaking, the problem in Eq. (18) will be immediately excluded under the
common вҖңno-riskless-investmentвҖқ assumption, whereas the above analytical results using
Exact Optimization are consistent with the intuitive portfolio selection for minimum risk
subject to this investment scenario. Note that the optimal value вҖңВҜlвҲ—= 0вҖқ is interpreted
to be associated with the minimum variance/risk (rather than zero/no risk), which aligns
with the name вҖңMinimum-Variance PortfolioвҖқ as sophisticated by Markowitz (1952) and
more statements in the literature (Kolm et al., 2014; Roll, 1977). To be more in-depth,
the two assets under the scenario exhibit similar standard deviation; while the correlation
coefп¬Ғcient is negative, which reduces portfolio volatility and can be exempliп¬Ғed by the pair
of government bonds and stocks. Therefore, it is intuitive that an investor would equally divide
the total funds to each asset, which can be endorsed by the theoretical result: xВҜвҲ—= xВҜвҲ—
p =
[1/2, 1/2]T . It is worth noting that the optimal portfolio is unique even if the covariance
matrix is singular. This is because the uniqueness of optimum is equivalently formulated
by 1(e) of Lemma 1, namely N(A) вҲ©N(P) = {0}, which not only depends on the null
space of a covariance matrix but also on the constraints. When specialized to the common
consideration that P вү»0, the uniqueness condition readily holds because N(A) вҲ©N(P) =
N(A) вҲ©{0} = {0}, which retains no matter what the constraints are. In other words, it is
computationally convenient that the nonsingularity of P ensures the uniqueness of optimum;
however, relaxing the consideration to generally P вӘ°0 does not necessarily imply that there
are multiple optima, namely, more than one optimal portfolio selection. Actually, the design
123

Annals of Operations Research
philosophy of Exact Optimization still takes the practical merits such as the computational
convenience into account. Regarding this example, even if the optimum freedom contains
more than one point, an investor can still focus on the particular solution xВҜвҲ—
p to readily
conclude with an optimal portfolio selection; while the whole freedom V2ОөВҜвҲ—awaits further
investigations for more performance enhancements, which is not granted using Numerical
Optimization and will be better elaborated in the next Example 2. To brieп¬Ӯy summarize the
above observations, Exact Optimization formulates closed-form solutions that help solidify
the theoretical basis of MPT (Markowitz, 1952) and broaden the critical diversity (Guerard et
al., 2013; Kolm et al., 2014; Rubinstein, 2002), particularly its most comprehensive coverage
that also takes singular covariance matrices into consideration (Markowitz, 1956, 1959; Roll,
1977).
Example 2 We consider another extreme-case investment scenario that causes computational
concerns in Numerical Optimization due to the singular covariance matrix, and the issue also
exists in other scenarios where the covariance matrix is nonsingular but ill-conditioned. As
a comparison, the following intuitive problem in Eq. (19) can still be completely solved by
resorting to Exact Optimization.
minimize
Fx(x) = 1
2xT Px = 1
2xT
 1
1
1
1

x = 1
2(x1 + x2)2
subject to x1 + x2 = 1,
(19)
which is in a form similar to Eq. (18) except the positive correlation coefп¬Ғcient. According
to the arguments in Example 1, we thus still demonstrate how Exact Optimization explicitly
resolves this extreme scenario (19), given that the prerequisite in MATLAB (2025) precludes
singular Hessian matrices. Speciп¬Ғcally, the problem can also be completely solved by Lemma
1. Noting that V T
2 PV2 = 0 and V T
2 (q + P AвҖ b) = 0 in this example, the categorization in
Lemma 1 (resp., Theorem 3) leads the problem to the equivalent case 3 (resp., 3(b)), namely,
a constant function according to 3(a) of Lemma 1 (resp., 3 of Theorem 3). Moreover, we
summarize the following derivations as per 3 of Lemma 1, Theorem 3, as well as Corollary
2 for reading convenience and п¬Ғnancial discussions afterward.
1. 3(b) of Lemma 1 formulates the constant (resp., minimum) variance/risk:
ВҜlвҲ—= ВҜl = (AвҖ b)T P(AвҖ b)/2 = 1/2.
It is worth noting that вҖңAвҖ bвҖқ is a particular solution of the constraint вҖңAx = bвҖқ, where the
constraint constitutes an underdetermined system; in other words, the theory consistently
specializes to this special case.
2. 3(c) of Lemma 1 parameterizes the only preimage by Eq. (2), where
вҖ“ y = z вҲҲR and M = V T
2 PV2/2 = 0,
вҖ“ k = V T
2 (q + P AвҖ b) = V T
2 P AвҖ b = 0,
вҖ“ c = s + [qT + bT (AвҖ )T P/2]AвҖ b вҲ’ВҜl = (AвҖ b)T P(AвҖ b)/2 вҲ’ВҜl = ВҜl вҲ’ВҜl = 0, since
AвҖ b is a particular solution of the undetermined system вҖңAx = bвҖқ in Eq. (19),
вҖ“ k = 0 вҲҲR(M) = {0} and kT MвҖ k = 0 вүҘ4c = 0, which directs the categorization
in (Lin and Liang, 2023, Lemma 3.1) to the corresponding parameterization in (Lin
and Liang, 2023, Eq. (3.6)): accordingly, y = Оө вҲҲR, Оө вҲҲN(0) = R, and
x = AвҖ b + V2y
=
 1/2
1/2

+
 вҲ’
вҲҡ
2/2
вҲҡ
2/2

В· Оө.
(20)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Obviously, the parameterization in (20) for all the optima coincides with the common
parameterization for all the feasible points on the hyperplane вҖңAx = bвҖқ, which can also be
inferred by directly inspecting the problem in Eq. (19). Note that all the above consistency
and insights are attributed to the only, complete, and uniп¬Ғed solution parameterization
in the literature, which is formulated by means of Exact Optimization rather than the
common Numerical Optimization (Chataigner et al., 2021; Luenberger & Ye, 2021;
Nocedal & Wright, 2006; Vadlamani et al., 2020).
3. 3(b) of Theorem 3 yields the constant variance/risk
ВҜlвҲ—= ВҜl = I вҖ 
2Г—1P I вҖ 
1Г—2/2 = 1/2,
(21)
which results from b = b = 1 (speciп¬Ғcally, b is independent of ВҜОј) while the п¬Ғnding is
consistent with the above item 1.
4. Corollary 2 gives the result ВҜlвҲ—= 2
i,j=1 Пғij/8 = 1/2, which agrees with the above item
3 but the computation time is merely 0.2% of that by 3(b) of Theorem 3, where the time
is averaged from several evaluations on the latest MATLABВ® version (with Intel CoreВ®
CPU i7-12700H (4.7GHz) and 16GB RAM). In other words, the overall computational
burden is largely mitigated by 99.9% owing to the basic implementation.
From the viewpoint of п¬Ғnancial economics, this example occurs when the two assets are
almost identical; more speciп¬Ғcally, they exhibit almost the same investment characteristics.
On the one hand, the above design using Exact Optimization circumvents any singularity
concern that hinders Numerical Optimization; for instance, when a nonsingular covariance
matrix is computationally close to the extreme one in Eq. (19). On the other hand, Exact
Optimization formulates explicit results that can be leveraged to analyze further performance
potential and enhancement, which has been widely expected among the community of п¬Ғnance
or economics, for instance, Qi and Li (2020). With regard to this extreme-case Example 2,
it serves more than just for mathematical veriп¬Ғcation and completeness, but it can also be
an automatic indication that two assets manifest quite similar п¬Ғnancial properties. As such,
it is intuitively argued that investment risk does not depend on the various proportions,
which can be supported by the constant value вҖңВҜl = 1/2вҖқ and the parameterization for all the
feasible portfolios x in Eq. (20). It is worth mentioning that the optimal value (ВҜlвҲ—= 1/2)
is nonzero вҖ“ that is, the minimum variance/risk is nonzero even if the covariance matrix
is singular вҖ“ while there is no portfolio {xi}2
i=1 corresponding to Fx(x) = 0. Remarkably,
the proposed theoretical results can also be valued in terms of practical computation. Note
that the Problem (19) merely amounts to one case among many others (see Bodnar et al.
(2022, 2024) for the latest survey of вҖңdet(P) = 0вҖқ), it is much less efп¬Ғcient to explicitly
associate each one of them with an implementation condition (Numerical Optimization) than
the concise and uniп¬Ғed framework in Lemma 1 (Exact Optimization). Indeed, imposing
the nonsingularity condition can be convenient, but this is against the essential principle of
diversiп¬Ғcation (Cetingoz et al., 2024; Guerard et al., 2013; Kolm et al., 2014; Rubinstein,
2002) as well as the pioneering envisioning by Markowitz (1956, 1959). As a comparison,
Exact Optimization responds to the most general expectation of MPT by, for instance, lifting
the common compromise of det(P) Мё= 0 that has been imposed up until the recent literature.
In addition, it also responds to the calls for more analytical methods that can explicitly and
efп¬Ғciently solve Portfolio Selection, such as in a recent survey (Qi, 2022, Fig. 3) and more
(Haugen, 2001). A motivation of the calls comes from the fact that the methods manifest
pedagogical values, which facilitate the understanding among practice managers and have
been pressed by the community of п¬Ғnance (for example, see the third major concern by Elton
et al. (1976)).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Remark 5 Examples 1 and 2 respond to the open problem as highlighted in (Kwan, 2018,
Title), while they are only for demonstration purposes and account for just the tip of the
iceberg. In the literature, there exist a tremendous amount of practical examples of вҖңdet(P) =
0вҖқ that are based on real-world data; see Ledoit and Wolf (2003, 2017), Kwan (2018), Drin
et al. (2025), and a recent survey in (Bodnar et al., 2022, 2024, Sec. 1). More speciп¬Ғcally,
there arise concerns and reservations when the covariance matrix is close to being singular;
for example, the matrix-inversion difп¬Ғculty in NewtonвҖҷs method (Numerical Optimization).
Such a difп¬Ғculty has been reported as early as in Elton et al. (1976), and it can be alleviated by
approximating the singular matrix using techniques such as the popular shrinkage estimation
(see Barroso and Saxena (2022); Ledoit and Wolf (2017, 2003) and references therein)
and regularization techniques in (Alfelt and Mazur, 2022, Footnote 4); whereas it can be
equivalently and explicitly resolved by way of Exact Optimization to align with the important
principle of diversiп¬Ғcation in Portfolio Selection (Cetingoz et al., 2024; Guerard et al., 2013;
Kolm et al., 2014; Rubinstein, 2002), where both singular and nonsingular cases are integrated
in a uniп¬Ғed framework. Speaking of the common consideration that det(P) Мё= 0, the enhanced
computational efп¬Ғciency using the uniп¬Ғed framework will also be demonstrated in Examples
3 and 4 below, which are in a higher-dimensional space than Examples 1 and 2.
Example 3 This example practically evaluates the computational performance using Exact
Optimization, which responds to the common expectation of how to efп¬Ғciently solve MPT in
practice; for instance, the computation time and cost constitute major implementation issues
that have been reported in Elton et al. (1976). The issues motivate the п¬Ғnance community
including Elton et al. (1976) to devote more research effort, and the literature boasts two
methods that help alleviate the computational concerns, which are validated by the examples
in (Elton et al., 1976, P. 1346 and 1352), respectively. For compactness, we demonstrate
the п¬Ғrst example and apply the proposed results to further alleviate the issues; while similar
improvement is also observed in the application to the other example. More speciп¬Ғcally, the
focused application is conformed to Eq. (10), where P вҲҲR4Г—4, P(1, :) = [100, 40, 20, 10],
P(2, :) = [40, 64, 16, 8], P(3, :) = [20, 16, 16, 4], P(4, :) = [10, 8, 4, 4], A вҲҲR2Г—4,
A(1, :) = [12, 10, 8, 6], A(2, :) = [1, 1, 1, 1], and b = [5.84, 1]T вҲҲR2. The computing
platform mainly entails Intel CoreВ® CPU Ultra 5 135H (3.6GHz), 16GB RAM, and various
MATLABВ® editions: R2010b, R2012a, and R2013a owing to their benchmark signiп¬Ғcance
in the literature of scientiп¬Ғc computing (Mei et al., 2022).
The focus of this example is to mitigate the computational concerns of MPT. Accord-
ingly, we compare three solving methods: Elton et al. (1976), вҖңquadprogвҖқ in MATLABВ®
(Chataigner et al., 2021), and Exact Optimization that consists of the following major imple-
mentation steps:
1
A_dagger=pinv(A) ;
2
V_2=null(A) ;
3
x_star_particular=A_daggerвҲ—b. . .
вҲ’V_2вҲ—pinv(V_2вҖҷвҲ—PвҲ—V_2)вҲ—(V_2вҖҷвҲ—q+V_2вҖҷвҲ—PвҲ—A_daggerвҲ—b) ;
( i )
Note that we demonstrate the intuitive and thus preliminary Implementation (i) for better
presentation clarity; more speciп¬Ғcally, the implementation complexity can be reduced by, for
instance, performing only one SVD operation on A rather than two (lines 1 and 2). According
to the analytical results in Exact Optimization,
вҖ“ this example is equivalent to a UQP because det(P) Мё= 0 and V T
2 PV2 Мё= 0 according to
1(a) of Lemma 1;
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Beneп¬Ғt in computation time [unitless]a in Example 3b,c
MATLABВ®
Elton et al. (1976)
Exact Optimization
R2013a
1a
0.27
0.04
R2012a
1
0.33
0.05
R2010b
1
0.37
0.06
aIt is normalized by the computation time using MATLABВ®, more speciп¬Ғcally, the time using вҖңquadprogвҖқ
routine subject to Intel CoreВ® CPU Ultra 5 135H (3.6GHz) and 16GB RAM; therefore, the numeric represents
a ratio and the units cancel out.
bThe solution accuracy is evaluated in terms of whether the solution satisп¬Ғes the constraints; speciп¬Ғcally,
||AxE вҲ’b||2 = 0.17, where xE adopts the solver in Elton et al. (1976), whereas it is less than 10вҲ’13 for the
other methods. Note that the accuracy evaluations are consistent with respect to all the computing platforms
in this table.
cSharpe ratio: 2.09 (resp., 2.05) using the method in Elton et al. (1976) (resp., MPT solvers by MATLABВ®
and Exact Optimization).
вҖ“ 1(c) of Lemma 1 endorses that the optimal value is п¬Ғnite, that is, V T
2 (q + P AвҖ b) вҲҲ
R(V T
2 PV2) = R2 given that V T
2 PV2 is nonsingular; and
вҖ“ the uniqueness of the optimum is guaranteed by вҖңОөВҜвҲ—вҲҲN(V T
2 PV2) = {0} in Eq. (4)вҖқ
and вҖңN(A) вҲ©N(P) = N(A) вҲ©{0} = {0} as per 1(e) of Lemma 1вҖқ.
The exact solution yields the п¬Ғnite minimum variance/risk ВҜlвҲ—= 1.74 and the unique optimal
portfolio xВҜвҲ—= [вҲ’0.04, вҲ’0.04, 0.13, 0.94]T , which are almost identical to the numerical
results by MATLABВ®. To be more in-depth, ||xM вҲ’xВҜвҲ—||2, |lM вҲ’ВҜlвҲ—|, ||AxM вҲ’b||2, and
||AxВҜвҲ—вҲ’b||2 are all less than 10вҲ’13, where the subscript вҖҳMвҖҷ denotes the results by MATLABВ®
(quadprog); in the context of scientiп¬Ғc computing, all these accuracy residuals are treated
as zero. Financially speaking, the results by Exact Optimization and MATLABВ® abide by
MPT, where the optimal portfolio favors lower-risk/return securities and short-sells higher
ones, which (strategy) is consistent with the design in Elton et al. (1976). Moreover, the
negligible residuals render the almost identical Sharpe ratio (Bodie et al., 2024, Chapter 5)
using MATLABВ® and Exact Optimization, namely 2.05 for all the computing platforms in
this example, where the annual risk-free rate adopts the commonly used 2% in literature
(Bodie et al., 2024, Sec. 6.4). The ratio corresponds to MPT and is slightly smaller than that
by the approximation method (Elton et al., 1976): 2.09, which is formulated to maximize
the Sharpe ratio. It is worth reiterating that the method in Elton et al. (1976) was motivated
by the computational difп¬Ғculties of MPT, and thus we present Table 2 to summarize the
computation time of the three methods. For easy comparison, the computation time using
MATLABВ® (quadprog) serves as the normalization reference. The statistics in Table 2
show that the classical/numerical optimization scheme вҖңquadprogвҖқ costs the most time,
which echoes the driving force of Elton et al. (1976) and the results account for a minimum
(resp., maximum) of 27% (resp., 37%) of the time by вҖңquadprogвҖқ. Moving forward, Exact
Optimization further reduces the computation time to 4% at least and 6% at most, which
enriches the practical values of MPT even more. Notably, all the results in Exact Optimization
are interpreted using elementary linear algebra only (namely, up until the freshman level in
university). The design not only responds to the third difп¬Ғculty of MPT as reported in (Elton
et al., 1976, P. 1341) but also more efп¬Ғciently promotes the proposed method.
To sum up the validations in this example, Elton et al. (1976) alleviates the computational
concerns of MPT, and then Exact Optimization continues the research effort and provides
furthercomputationalreductions.Remarkably,thecomputingplatforminthisexampleentails
123

Annals of Operations Research
a personal computer and MATLABВ® for demonstration convenience, which can be downcast
to a basic environment with low commercial cost. As such, we present the following Example
4 to solidify the commercial potential of the proposed scheme.
Example 4 We broaden the validation spectrum of Example 3 by considering a higher-
dimensional system in (Qi and Li, 2020, Page 9), where the computational advantages are
in terms of both numerical and hardware experiments. The former experiments are evalu-
ated on MATLABВ® platform (C-based); while the latter ones are validated using both the
microprocessor (Python-based) and the FPGA (VHDL-based) hardware environments вҖ“ both
environments entail basic implementations. The problem is in the form of Eq. (10) but with
the additional ESG constraints, where the covariance matrix P вҲҲR27Г—27 is nonsingular and
summarized in the Table in Supplementary Material for easy reference (details at (Qi and Li,
2020, Tables 1 and 2)), AT = [I27Г—1, eT , sT , gT ] вҲҲR27Г—4, {e, s, g} relate to the ESG data
of the 27 stocks in the Table in Supplementary Material, b = [1, 1.275, 5.45, вҲ’0.1]T вҲҲR4,
b(2) = 0.75 В· (I1Г—27 В· e), b(3) = 0.75 В· (I1Г—27 В· s), and b(4) = 0.75 В· (I1Г—27 В· g). Brieп¬Ӯy
speaking, this example imposes the ESG considerations as additional constraints in Portfolio
Selection for sustainable investment, and we reference the design details to (Qi and Li, 2020,
Page 9) for the sake of compactness and to remain focused of this study.
The focus of this example is to compare the computational efп¬Ғciency using the closed-
form solution (Exact Optimization) and the iterative routine in the latest and benchmark
MATLABВ® versions (Numerical Optimization), where the latter (quadprog) is selected
owing to its wide popularity in the literature of п¬Ғnance (Chataigner et al., 2021) and beyond.
At п¬Ғrst, we evaluate the efп¬Ғciency on MATLABВ® platform with respect to the Implementation
(ii), where
вҖ“ line 1 adopts Eq. (4) to solve the minimum-variance portfolio, notably
(a) the problem is equivalent to a UQP since det(P) Мё= 0 and V T
2 PV2 Мё= 0 in 1(a) of
Lemma 1,
(b) the optimal value being п¬Ғnite is ensured according to 1(c) of Lemma 1, that is,
V T
2 (q + P AвҖ b) вҲҲR(V T
2 PV2) = R23 given that V T
2 PV2 is nonsingular,
(c) the optimum being unique is guaranteed by the two properties:
вҖ“ ОөВҜвҲ—вҲҲN(V T
2 PV2) = {0} in Eq. (4)
вҖ“ N(A) вҲ©N(P) = N(A) вҲ©{0} = {0} as per 1(e) of Lemma 1;
вҖ“ line 2 uses the built-in routine вҖңquadprogвҖқ in MATLABВ®, but none of the above
properties (a)-(c) is (equivalently) characterized up until the latest edition of MATLABВ®.
1
x_star_particular=pinv(A)вҲ—b. . .
вҲ’null(A)вҲ—pinv(null(A)вҖҷвҲ—PвҲ—null(A))вҲ—null(A) вҖҷвҲ—(q+PвҲ—pinv(A)вҲ—b) ;
2
x_quadprog=quadprog(P,q,[] ,[] ,A,b) ;
( ii )
On the one hand, the exact solution using line 1 yields the п¬Ғnite minimum variance/risk
ВҜlвҲ—= 0.0167 and the unique optimal portfolio
xВҜвҲ—= [вҲ’0.0351, 0.0203, вҲ’0.109, вҲ’0.1265, вҲ’0.0584, вҲ’0.0181, вҲ’0.0528, вҲ’0.0577,
0.0201, 0.0529, 0.2254, 0.0033, 0.1330, вҲ’0.0871, вҲ’0.0175, 0.0158, 0.1331,
вҲ’0.0182, 0.0853, 0.1428, 0.0504, 0.2382, 0.0014,
0.0663, 0.0430, 0.1165, 0.1348]T .
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Advantage in computation time [unitless]a in Example 4b,c in terms of various hardware and software
environments (16GB RAM)d
i3-12100 (3.3GHz)d
i5-12500H (3.3GHz)
i7-12700H (4.7GHz)
R2013ad
0.44%a
0.52%
0.73%
R2012a
0.57%
0.55%
0.81%
R2010b
0.54%
0.54%
0.53%
aRatio of computation time using line 1 (Exact Optimization) over line 2 (MATLABВ®; Numerical
Optimization) in the Implementation (ii).
bAccuracy evaluation: ||Ax вҲ’b||2 < 10вҲ’14 for all the computed portfolios.
cSharpe ratio: 0.61 for all the numerical experiments of lines 1 and 2 in (ii).
dRow (resp., column) headings: MATLABВ® editions (resp., CPU platforms).
On the other hand, the iterative process via line 2 renders almost the same numerics of
ВҜlвҲ—and xВҜвҲ—, but it cannot (equivalently) determine the associated п¬Ғniteness and uniqueness,
respectively. To be more in-depth, we evaluate the computational performance in terms
of various hardware and software environments: Intel CoreВ® CPU i3-12100 (3.3GHz), i5-
12500H (3.3GHz), i7-12700H (4.7GHz), MATLABВ® R2010b, R2012a, and R2013a, where
the benchmark importance can be endorsed by the literature of scientiп¬Ғc computing, for
instance, Mei et al. (2022); while the memory space is consistently 16GB RAM throughout
Table 3. The numerical experiments suggest that both solvers (lines 1 and 2 in the Imple-
mentation (ii)) maintain a high solution accuracy across all the computing platforms in Table
3, where the accuracy is evaluated in terms of the constraint; speciп¬Ғcally, it is in terms of
whether ||Ax вҲ’b||2 equals zero. The numerical results vary with respect to п¬Ғnite-precision
setting while they amount to small residuals of ||Ax вҲ’b||2, which are all within the range
between 10вҲ’14 and 10вҲ’16 to the order; in other words, the residuals are all much smaller than
the common threshold in scientiп¬Ғc computing (10вҲ’12). The negligible residuals render the
remarkably alike Sharpe ratio for all the computed portfolios in Table 3, namely 0.61, where
the annual expected return Ој (resp., risk-free rate) adopts (Qi and Li, 2020, Table 1) (resp.,
2% (Bodie et al., 2024)). Even though the solution accuracy is consistently high in Table 3,
the computation times using Numerical Optimization and Exact Optimization quite differ.
The numerics in Table 3 are evaluated in terms of the ratio of the computation time using
line 1 over line 2 in the Implementation (ii). The maximum ratio is merely 0.81%, whereas
the minimum reaches 0.44%; in other words, the proposed solver reduces the computation
time of the common, classical method by 99.19%-99.56%. On average, the enhancement
statistics signiп¬Ғcantly amount to 0.58% of the computation time using вҖңquadprogвҖқ, which
is about one-fourth of the achievement by (Sharpe, 1963, Abstract) that marked an extremely
low cost (2%) as compared to the state-of-the-art QP solvers. Actually, line 1 in (ii) only
accounts for the direct and preliminary implementation stage for the sake of demonstration
and clarity purposes, noting that:
a. AвҖ  is implemented twice while
b. вҖңnull(A)вҖқ that implements V2 appears thrice.
More speciп¬Ғcally, the computation time of line 1 can be further reduced by economizing the
above subroutines a and b, so that the preliminary stage can be pushed ahead toward a more
efп¬Ғcient and thus more practically competitive realization.
Even though the above evaluations help alleviate the computational concerns among the
community (for example, Elton et al. (1976)), the evaluations are numerically subject to
MATLABВ® software on a personal computer. Therefore, we adopt another practical perspec-
123

Annals of Operations Research
tive and quantify the proposed computational enhancement in terms of a microprocessor,
that is, a basic and more practical computing platform. The demonstrated microprocessor is
based on Python language, while it is equipped with 650MHz dual-core Cortex-A9 processor
and 512MB DDR3 memory. It should be highlighted that only Exact Optimization is eval-
uated in this hardware environment, given that the implementation details of вҖңquadprogвҖқ
in MATLABВ® are not released publicly up until the latest R2025b edition. Accordingly, the
closed-form minimum-variance portfolio is implemented in Python language below
x_star_particular=np. linalg .pinv(A).dot(b)вҲ’null_space(A)\
.dot(np. linalg .pinv(null_space(A).T.dot(P)\
.dot(null_space(A)))). dot(null_space(A).T)\
.dot(q+P.dot(np. linalg .pinv(A)). dot(b));
( iii )
where the associated libraries are embedded: вҖңscipy.linalgвҖқ for SVD and the related
routines; and вҖңnumpyвҖқ for basic matrix or vector operations. On the one hand, the solution
accuracy renders that ||AxВҜвҲ—вҲ’b||2 = 8 Г— 10вҲ’15, which is under the default data type
вҖңfloat64вҖқ (double-precision п¬Ӯoating-point) and the precision setting of 10вҲ’15. On the
other hand, the computation time to execute (iii) costs 0.01 seconds, which can also be
achieved by the FPGA enhancement that will be addressed later. Remarkably, not only is the
major issue of computation time mitigated, but also the realization cost is also reduced. More
speciп¬Ғcally, the demonstrated Python-based microprocessor is integrated in the development
board: TUL PYNQ-Z2 (XilinxВ® ZYNQВ®-7020 architecture). The practical popularity of
such a development board can be inferred by its price, which is around USD$129 globally in
Dec., 2024. Note that the implementation cost has always been an importance design criterion
in the п¬Ғnance literature, as early as (Sharpe, 1963, Sec. 7) where the price reached USD$300
per hour to realize the simpliп¬Ғed portfolio model. Actually, there is more computing platform
integrated and to be exploited in this development board, such as FPGA environment that
will also be leveraged to promote the proposed computational enhancement.
The hardware experiments move further toward the most fundamental stage, speciп¬Ғcally,
to the widely applied and basic computing unit on FPGA platform that is built on integrated
circuit technology. To alleviate the computational concern among the community (Elton et al.,
1976; Sharpe, 1963), we further exploit the same low-cost development kit (TUL PYNQ-Z2)
and use the component вҖңXilinxВ® ArtixВ®-7вҖқ for the FPGA demonstration. For conciseness
and completeness, Appendix A summarizes the hardware design of the FPGA architecture,
along with its block diagram in Fig. 2. Given that this evaluation is performed at the basic
implementation level, only part of the VHDL codes associated with the dominant complexity
in the realization of Eq. (4) are explicitly presented below, while the other codes are omitted
for brevity.
...
grp_svdPairs_27_27_svdTraits_27_27_float_float_float_float_s_fu_237 :
component ACQE_Solver_svdPairs_27_27_svdTraits_27_27_float_float_float
_float_s
port map (ap_clk => ap_clk,...
);
(iv)
...
The Implementation (iv) belongs to the lower-left module in Fig. 2, and its function is to
compute the SVD of A вҲҲR4Г—27 for the beginning of Eq. (4), that is, the computation
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 FPGA block diagram, where the upper-left module associates with data collection, upper-middle
one with FPGA reset, upper-right and lower-right ones with streamlining, lower-middle one with memory
management(DMA:directmemoryaccess),andlower-leftonewiththeimplementationofExactOptimization,
speciп¬Ғcally, realization of Eq. (4)
of AвҖ . Note that (iv) dominantly accounts for 47% of the total computation time since,
partially, the FPGA design utilizes it for the implementations afterward to enhance the overall
computational efп¬Ғciency, such as the computation of V2. It should be reiterated that only
the exact formula is evaluated in this computing platform, because the general public are
not granted access to the implementation details of the numerical iterations in MATLABВ®
(вҖңquadprogвҖқ up until the latest R2025b version). On the one hand, the solution accuracy
yields that ||AxВҜвҲ—вҲ’b||2 = 5 Г— 10вҲ’6, which quite approaches the default precision of 10вҲ’6
that is adopted in this hardware experiment. On the other hand, the total computation time
costs about 0.1 seconds, which can be reduced to 0.01 seconds by adding more memory space
to this basic hardware environment. To be more in-depth, 56% extra memory space allows
more Look-Up-Table components and logic resources to better pipeline the basic operations
of multipliers and adders, which contributes to the 10-time enhancement and can be easily
realized by the present semiconductor technology. Remarkably, such an improvement will
not compromise the solution accuracy (still close to the default precision), while the tradeoff
only leans against the cost of the additional 56% memory, which is of minor concern in the
market nowadays and thus brings forth commercial potential.
Finally, we further enrich the practical values of the proposed results by uncovering more
commercial potential. The above numerical experiments are far beyond such consideration
due to 1) the much higher cost of the software and its hardware realization; and 2) the
much larger memory size to accommodate MATLABВ® as well as the associated libraries and
packages. On the contrary, the computing platforms for all the above hardware experiments
(microprocessor and FPGA) are all integrated into one development board (TUL PYNQ-
Z2), which is merely of dimension 13 Г— 8 Г— 1 [cm]. Actually, the size can be further, largely
reduced by means of the cutting-edge semiconductor technology; to be more insightful, the
proposed FPGA implementation approaches the end of production process, where the size
can be greatly reduced by the remaining step (integrated-circuit implementation) so that the
outcome (.gds п¬Ғle) can be exported to fabricate the chip-size computing platform, that is,
a state-of-the-art and efп¬Ғcient realization.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Remark 6 This remark summarizes the computational enhancements in Example 4, and then
it also provides further insights.
1. The computational enhancements in Example 4 вҖ“ by using Exact Optimization (Eq. (4))
than Numerical Optimization (вҖңquadprogвҖқ in MATLABВ®) вҖ“ are summarized as fol-
lows. There are three implementations (ii)-(iv), where only the п¬Ғrst one includes both
methods,whereastheImplementations(iii)and(iv)dealwithExactOptimizationbecause
the details of вҖңquadprogвҖқ are not publicly available. Regarding (ii), the numerical
experiments suggest that both methods yield similar solution accuracy, where the resid-
uals of ||Ax вҲ’b||2 are all within the range between 10вҲ’14 and 10вҲ’16 to the order; but,
the computation times quite differ subject to a variety of hardware platforms in Table 3,
where the maximum enhancement reaches 227 times faster while the minimum one is
around 123. The computational enhancement can be argued as signiп¬Ғcant by referencing
to Sharpe (1963). Moving forward, the hardware experiments leverage microprocessor
and FPGA environments, namely basic computing units in terms of Python and VHDL
languages, respectively. Notably, the latter is based on integrated circuit technology that
has been widely applied in industry as the most fundamental computing unit. Considering
the Python-based microprocessor, the Implementation (iii) renders the solution accuracy
to be close to the default precision setting (10вҲ’15, as adopted therein), while its execution
time costs 0.01 seconds to compute the optimal portfolio. As for the FPGA evaluations,
the remarkable accuracy still remains, while the computation time is only 0.1 seconds
in terms of such a basic computing unit. Note that the time can be further reduced to
0.01 seconds by equipping with 56% extra memory space; however, the demonstrated
hardware (TUL PYNQ-Z2) is selected owing to its, for example,
(1) low cost that
is around USD$129, (2) small size (13 Г— 8 Г— 1 [cm]), and (3) combined manner that
integrates both microprocessor and FPGA platforms. All the advantages (1)-(3) endorse
the commercial potential of the proposed method, and such a research direction has been
generally pursued among economists, notably, Sharpe (1963).
2. The enhanced computational efп¬Ғciency as summarized in the above Item 1 is not limited
to the common case that det(P) Мё= 0. Speciп¬Ғcally, the improved efп¬Ғciency is attributed
to the compact formulation of the unique solution xВҜвҲ—in Eq. (4), where the solution
п¬Ӯexibility is nulled owing to the nonsingular covariance matrix (see 1(e) of Lemma 1 for
more details). The solution to the minimum-variance portfolio in Eq. (10) is formulated
by Eq. (4), namely xВҜвҲ—, which is designed to be identical with the particular solution xВҜвҲ—
p
subject to the general scope of MPT (Kolm et al., 2014; Markowitz, 1956). Therefore,
the proposed generalization still reserves the вҖңconvenienceвҖқ in the normal computation
of the optimal portfolio; that is, it refrains from any hesitation, delay, or hardware-
implementation complexity caused by the nonunique solutions. To be more in-depth, the
proposed extension to singular covariance matrices maintains the superior computational
efп¬Ғciency as well as the lower implementation cost, which helps alleviate the second
major concern in Portfolio Selection as reported by Elton et al. (1976). In addition,
Exact Optimization allows further investigations into the solution freedom, which is
completelyparameterizedasвҖңV2ОөВҜвҲ—вҖқinEq.(4)tocomplywiththedesirablediversiп¬Ғcation
in п¬Ғnancial economics (Cetingoz et al., 2024; Guerard et al., 2013; Kolm et al., 2014;
Rubinstein, 2002); in other words, more investing potential can be expected or exploited
by navigating through the whole portfolio freedom corresponding to the minimum risk.
As a comparison, the up-to-date Numerical Optimization (for example, methods in the
latest MATLABВ® R2025b and a survey (Stellato et al., 2020, Sec. 1.2)) does not grant a
uniп¬Ғed formulation as in Eq. (4), let alone the associated analytical and computational
123

Annals of Operations Research
convenience. Remarkably, the proposed method is analytical and thus facilitates the
understanding of the results for portfolio managers, which has been reported as difп¬Ғcult
byEltonetal.(1976)andthusquitevaluedamongthecommunity(Qi,2022).Forinstance,
the following Example 5 demonstrates analytical insights corresponding to det(P) = 0,
which are obtained by Exact Optimization and in terms of the recent п¬Ғnancial data; while
its accompanying Remark 7 extends to different, larger, and loner-time stock universes
than all the previous demonstrations.
Example 5 There are three parts in this example: stock selection, Portfolio Selection
(Markowitz, 1952), and discussion of results from both analytical and practical perspec-
tives, which are presented respectively below. At п¬Ғrst, we investigate various stock universes
including MSCI ACWI and Russell 3000 Index as models for real-world research. This exam-
ple considers MSCI ACWI, and then Remark 7 immediately comes afterward and instead
deals with Russell 3000. In its scope for global stock research and among all the constituents
in MSCI ACWI (around 2, 500 stocks worldwide), we focus on the 252 stocks that record
the complete п¬Ғnancial data from the п¬Ғscal year 2015 to this year. Note that we leverage the
support from FactSet that largely facilitates the data acquisition and analysis, while there
are tremendously many methodologies for an efп¬Ғcient and practical stock selection within a
stock universe, to name a few, those in Beheshti et al. (2021); Bloch et al. (1993); Guerard
(2006); Guerard et al. (2015, 1993); Haugen and Baker (2010); Markowitz et al. (2021).
After extensive trials among various methods, we present the one termed вҖңEV4вҖқ in Guer-
ard (2006), which (i) averages four basic value ratios (earnings-to-price, book-to-price, cash
п¬Ӯow-to-price, and sales-to-price) to create a ranking score and (ii) yields the most compet-
itive results as compared to randomly selected stocks. More speciп¬Ғcally, we select the top
10% of the 252 stocks that attain the highest EV4 score: ALV, CHMF, CI, CMCSA, CNC,
COF, CTC.A, EDP, ELV, FNF, GPC, HUM, JBL, LKQ, LYB, MET, MTX, NUE, PFC, PFG,
SYY, UHS, 2502, 5110, and 7751, which are the corresponding 25 stock tickers; while we
randomly select the same number of stocks within the stock set: ALV, CB, CHRW, CNC,
CTSH, DUK, DVA, EXR, FDS, FI, JBL, MLM, MNST, MTX, NDSN, OTEX, PGR, PH,
RMD, RS, SCCO, SPG, TT, WFC, and 6465. Next, it proceeds to Portfolio Selection, and
we consistently adopt the classic problem formulation in Eq. (10), where the expected daily
return is ВҜОј = 0.06%. Regarding the parameters, it is worth noting that the covariance matrix
P вҲҲR25Г—25 is treated as singular for each scenario afterward, since the determinant is
evaluated to be less than 10вҲ’12 respectively.
The portfolio optimization problem is solved and compared using Numerical Optimization
(вҖңquadprogвҖқ in MATLABВ® (Chataigner et al., 2021)) and the proposed Exact Optimiza-
tion, while two scenarios are considered: random stock selection and EV4-selected stocks.
In the adopted validation setting, we observe that the minimum variance/risk corresponding
to the EV4-selected stocks is ВҜlвҲ—= 6 Г— 10вҲ’3, which is less than that for the other scenario
of random stocks (8 Г— 10вҲ’3). The advantage of the EV4 scenario is consistent with another
evaluation metric: Sharpe ratio (Bodie et al., 2024), which yields 1.23 that is larger than 0.93
for the random scenario; qualitatively speaking, EV4-selected stocks correspond to a higher
return than the random stock selection in terms of Sharpe ratio. Moreover, the result differ-
ence between Numerical and Exact Optimization is negligible (around 10вҲ’7 or less) with
respect to the minimum variance and the optimal portfolio, respectively; while the optimal
solution quite satisп¬Ғes the constraints, which is in terms of the metric ||Ax вҲ’b||F and all
the results are less than 10вҲ’12 for both schemes. All of these observations suggest that both
optimization solvers yield the almost identical solution. However, a more in-depth exam-
ination of the results distinguishes the two solvers, and the difference mainly arises from
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Beneп¬Ғt in computation time [unitless]a in Example 5b,c
R2013a
R2012a
R2010b
Random Stock Selection
0.043a
0.052
0.057
EV4-Selected Stocks (Guerard, 2006)
0.038
0.048
0.054
aRatio of computation time using Implementation (i) in Example 3 (Exact Optimization) over вҖңquadprogвҖқ
in MATLABВ® (Numerical Optimization), which is computed in terms of AMD Ryzen 5 7535HS with Radeon
Graphics (3.30GHz) and 16GB RAM.
bAccuracy evaluations: ||Ax вҲ’b||F вүӨ10вҲ’12 for all the computing settings.
cSharpe ratio: 0.93 (resp., 1.23) for all the computed portfolios in the scenario of random stock selection
(resp., EV4-selected stocks).
the singular covariance matrix. Intuitively speaking, a singular P renders a non-singleton
null space, and thus the optimal portfolio corresponding to the minimum risk вҖңmightвҖқ be
nonunique. Even though the latest MATLAB (2025) edition still requires that P вү»0, its
function вҖңquadprogвҖқ returns the almost identical solution as Exact Optimization, and such
п¬Ғnding can be inferred by analyzing the uniqueness/nonuniqueness of xВҜвҲ—as per Eq. (4). We
explicitly present the arguments for the EV4-selected scenario, while similar statements apply
to the other/random scenario. In accordance with Exact Optimization, the considered opti-
mization problem belongs to 1 of Lemma 1 because ||V T
2 PV2||F = 1.4 Г— 10вҲ’3 Мё= 0, where
V2 вҲҲR25Г—23 in this example. In addition, 1(c) of Lemma 1 endorses that ВҜlвҲ—is п¬Ғnite owing
to R(V T
2 PV2) = R23, which is veriп¬Ғed by using the null function and supported by the
evaluation that rank(V T
2 PV2) = 23 in MATLABВ®. As such, Eq. (4) guarantees the unique-
ness of xВҜвҲ—, which helps explain the above mentioned solution similarity between Numerical
and Exact Optimization. It is worth reiterating that the solution uniqueness is obtained only
by Exact Optimization, which helps п¬Ғnancial analysts refrain from any computational effort
in searching for any other вҖңfeasibleвҖқ optimal portfolio. Alongside the analytical insights, the
computational performance is also quite different between the two solvers, and the results for
both stock-selection scenarios are summarized in Table 4 for easy comparison. The numerics
in Table 4 are evaluated in terms of the ratio of the computation time using Implementation
(i) in Example 3 over вҖңquadprogвҖқ in MATLABВ®, and the computing platform includes
the hardware (AMD Ryzen 5 7535HS with Radeon Graphics (3.30GHz) and 16GB RAM)
and various software environments (MATLABВ® R2013a, R2012a, and R2010b (Mei et al.,
2022)). The statistics in Table 4 indicate that Exact Optimization merely accounts for 3.8%
(resp., 5.7%) of the computation time using MATLABВ® with respect to the maximum (resp.,
minimum) computational improvement; on average, the computational reduction among all
the scenarios and computing environments approaches 95.2%. To summarize, not only the
analytical п¬Ғnancial insights but also the computational enhancement substantiate the value of
the proposed Exact Optimization, particularly when it is integrated into the classic Portfolio
Selection (Markowitz, 1952, 1956, 1959) for the full potential of the general risk measure
(P вӘ°0). Remarkably, this example demonstrates the portfolio optimization problem (10)
in terms of the basic one-period investment (resp., original historical data); moving forward,
Markowitz (1976) (resp., Markowitz and Xu (1994)) extends Markowitz (1952) and enlight-
ens how to achieve maximum growth of wealth over the indeп¬Ғnitely long run (resp., take
multiple stock selection methods into account and develop data mining corrections to formu-
late a better return estimation), while the following Remark 8 shares more research directions
that continue this study.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Remark 7 (Extension of Example 5 to larger and longer-time stock universes) Considering
the Russell 3000 Index instead, this remark continues Example 5 for modeling real-world
research of Portfolio Selection, where the two stock universes (MSCI ACWI and Russell
3000) total about 5, 500 stocks. To start with, we double the number of randomly selected
stocks (n = 50 as per Eq. (10)) and expand the time span from 10 years to 25 years,
speciп¬Ғcally, from the п¬Ғscal year 1995 to 2020; while the evaluation platforms are consistently
the benchmark MATLABВ® versions in Table 4. In accordance with Example 5, it is worth
highlighting the following evaluations: det(P) = 1.3 Г— 10вҲ’165 вүҲ0, and thus P вҲҲR50Г—50
is also treated as a singular covariance matrix; the minimum variance/risk is ВҜlвҲ—= 8 Г— 10вҲ’3
while the Sharpe ratio is 0.43 for both the classic solver вҖңquadprogвҖқ in MATLABВ® and
the proposed scheme using Implementation (i) in Example 3 (Exact Optimization), where
the ratio is worse than the EV4-selected result in Example 5, and hence the observation
reiterates the signiп¬Ғcance of the method for stock selection (Guerard, 2006); ||Ax вҲ’b||F =
1.1 Г— 10вҲ’16 вүҲ0 (resp., 5.4 Г— 10вҲ’20) using вҖңquadprogвҖқ (resp., Exact Optimization) on
MATLABВ® R2010b, while similar accuracy residuals appear in the other evaluations; last
but not least, Exact Optimization solves this model of Portfolio Selection about 8.9, 9.7, and
11.2 times faster than Numerical Optimization respectively on the MATLABВ® platforms.
Even with the above computational advantages, we recall that the main motivation of Exact
Optimization comes from the demand for analytical results among various communities
(Gunjan & Bhattacharyya, 2023; Luenberger, 2014; Qi, 2022; Simaan, 2025); therefore, the
following manifest further validations that uncover additional п¬Ғnancial insights. According
to Lemma 1, singularity of a covariance matrix is not equivalent to nonuniqueness of the
optimal points in Eq. (10); on the contrary, the evaluations of вҖң||V T
2 PV2||F = 0.02 Мё= 0вҖқ
and вҖңdet(V T
2 PV2) = 1.3 Г— 10вҲ’159 вүҲ0вҖқ support the nonuniqueness in this demonstration,
speciп¬Ғcally, ОөВҜвҲ—вҲҲN(V T
2 PV2) Мё= {0} as per the solution parameterization in Eq. (4). Given
that Numerical and Exact Optimization differ in the underlying solving philosophy, it is
intuitively expected that the two solvers return different portfolio weights among the inп¬Ғnitely
many optima (denoted xM and xВҜвҲ—
p, respectively); as expected, the evaluations of
xM вҲ’xВҜвҲ—
p

F = 1.2 Г— 10вҲ’6 Мё= 0 and
(22)
V T
2 PV2 В·

V2\(xM вҲ’xВҜвҲ—
p)

F = 2.8 Г— 10вҲ’10 вүҲ0
(23)
serve as endorsements, where вҖң\вҖқ stands for the вҖңmldivideвҖқ or вҖңbackslashвҖқ operator
in MATLABВ®. To be more in-depth, the nonzero Eq. (22) suggests that Numerical and Exact
Optimization render different optimal portfolios (xM Мё= xВҜвҲ—
p), and then Eq. (23) veriп¬Ғes that
xM exempliп¬Ғes xВҜвҲ—in Eq. (4) because
1. the feasible outcome of вҖңmldivideвҖқ implies that the difference vector вҖңxMвҲ’xВҜвҲ—
p вҲҲR50вҖқ
resides in R(V2) вҠҠR50; and
2. the above outcome constitutes the coordinates for the difference vector in 1 with respect
to the R(V2) basis вҖ“ namely the [ вң–] term in Eq. (23) вҖ“ and such a coordinate vector
belongs to N(V T
2 PV2).
Financially speaking, the nonuniqueness of optimal portfolios allows п¬Ғnancial analysts to
exploit other potential in Portfolio Selection (Markowitz, 1952), and the exact parameteri-
zation in Eq. (4) for the nonuniqueness efп¬Ғciently facilitates the investigation as well as the
associated computations. Remarkably, similar observations and merits consistently exhibit
in other, larger models of stock universe, including n = 100, 200, and so on, which serve
as practical evidences (in addition to Theorem 1) that also conп¬Ғrm the consistency between
123

Annals of Operations Research
Numerical and Exact Optimization and hence reinforce their common ground as focused in
this article.
Remark 8 (Summary of learnings from Sec. 4.2 and directions of future research from Sec.
4)
вҖ“ Sec. 4.2 comprises numerical validations and hardware experiments: Example 1 reaf-
п¬Ғrms the relative nature of the sophisticated variance/risk measure (Markowitz, 1952) and
demonstrates a case of unique optimal portfolio subject to a singular covariance matrix;
Example 2 further elaborates on the singular consideration, deals with another Hes-
sian matrix, and justiп¬Ғes the corresponding, nonzero minimum variance/risk; Example
3 advances the computational reduction by Elton et al. (1976), which was benchmarked
at 67%-73% and is now 94%-96% against MATLABВ®; and Examples 4, 5, and the
complementary Remark 7 move on to real-world higher-dimensional data, highlighting:
в—Ұcomputationalreductionof99.19%-99.56%(resp.,94.3%-96.2%)inExample4(resp.,
5), where the accuracy residuals are all less than 10вҲ’12;
в—ҰFPGA implementability of the proposed Exact Optimization, which manifests low cost
(around USD$129), small size (13 Г— 8 Г— 1 [cm]), and integration of a microprocessor
вҖ“ but not for MATLABВ® (Numerical Optimization);
в—Ұanalytical, п¬Ғnancial insights and practical evidences in Example 5 (resp., Remark 7) for
the pedagogical Example 1 (resp., its complement for nonunique optimal portfolios),
where the analyzed stock universes use MSCI ACWI (resp., Russell 3000 Index) that
should be sufп¬Ғcient for real-world research.
вҖ“ Sec. 4 only exploits a subset of the full capabilities in the state of the art of Exact Opti-
mization (Lin & Liang, 2023) so as to be within the focus of this paper, that is, the
common ground of ECQP. More speciп¬Ғcally, Lin and Liang (2023) presents the main
results in Sec. 3 therein, which consists of п¬Ғve subsections and dominantly the п¬Ғrst two
are leveraged in this study. As a step forward, it is worth investigating whether there exist
more п¬Ғnancial insights or potential by applying the closed-form QP solver in (Lin and
Liang, 2023, Sec. 3.3) to Portfolio Selection (Markowitz, 1952), where the solver gener-
ally deals with equality, inequality, equality-and-inequality constraints, respectively. In
other words, the further research responds to the long expectation among the community
that the literature of MPT demands analytical methods for inequality constraints; see Qi
(2022) (resp., Qi and Steuer (2020)) for a recent survey, which particularly highlights such
a deп¬Ғciency in Fig. 3 (resp., Sec. 2) therein. Accordingly, the future research continues
Sec. 4 and still bypasses the need of numerical programming, which has been reported to
bear research and pedagogical values as well as rich empirical implications (see Qi and
Li (2020); Qi (2022) and the references therein). In addition, another further investigation
entails the introduction of nonlinear covariance matrices. The majority of п¬Ғnance liter-
ature adopts the popular mathematical basis that partially characterizes the dependence
among assets (notably, linear dependence according to (Wackerly et al., 2008, Deп¬Ғnition
5.10) and discussions afterward), while there also exist endeavors that strive to provide
a more accurate measure of the complete dependence, such as (Malevergne & Sornette,
2004; Sornette et al., 2000). The associated nonlinear covariance matrix is also generally
positive semideп¬Ғnite (speciп¬Ғcally, zero eigenvalues exist with respect to real-world data),
which can be readily anticipated because it extends from the state of the art (Kolm et
al., 2014; Ledoit & Wolf, 2017). Accordingly, the proposed results not only beneп¬Ғt the
existing literature of MPT, but also aligns with its general extension that is equipped
with an equivalent, rather than partial, description of the relations among assets. Last but
123

Annals of Operations Research
not least, there exist more concerns and challenges in the development of MPT, notably
its parameter sensitivity (Kolm et al., 2014; Kwan, 2018), which is also promising to
be alleviated by leveraging analytical methods such as Exact Optimization (see Qi and
Steuer (2020); Qi (2022) for endorsements and the state of the art).
5 Conclusion
Two major results are presented in this paper. The п¬Ғrst one is designed subject to a general
scope of optimization, where the common ground that supports both Numerical Optimiza-
tion and Exact Optimization is analytically clariп¬Ғed. The theory can be leveraged to revisit
classic problems in numerous п¬Ғelds, noting that optimization is ubiquitous in todayвҖҷs world
(Vadlamani et al., 2020); at least, it elucidates the starting point to perform the comparison
study so that more potential can be expected, such as increased diversity of optimization
solvers. Demonstratively, the п¬Ғeld of п¬Ғnancial economics is focused upon and the landmark
problem of Portfolio Selection (Guerard, 2025) is examined in a bottom-up manner, where
the п¬Ғndings are grouped as the second major result. It is highlighted that the value of the
п¬Ғndings is substantiated by benchmarking to three Nobel economics laureates. Speciп¬Ғcally,
we strictly follow the envisioning by Markowitz (1956, 1959) and thus lift the common
вҖңno-arbitrageвҖқ assumption; in other words, all the results in this paper are subject to the
general covariance matrix (either nonsingular or singular). The motivation also comes from
the up-to-date literature that almost comprehensively imposes the limitation, even though
research endeavors exist that strive to uncover the full potential of MPT, as early as (Roll,
1977; Sharpe, 1963) and particularly in recent years. Moreover, we respond to the calls for
more analytical methods up until the latest literature (Qi, 2022; Simaan, 2025), which are
motivated by the associated research and education merits as well as empirical impacts. One
classic instance of analytical methods suggests Merton (1972), which partially uncovers the
geometric structure of Minimum-Variance Set (resp., Efп¬Ғcient Frontier); whereas this paper
equivalently complements the result with respect to the general risk measure, namely, the
analysis п¬Ғnds that it is generally a parabola (resp., the upper half of a parabola) with respect
to positive semideп¬Ғnite covariance matrices. Alongside the analysis, we design another view-
point that is practically advantageous, and the observations contribute to the computational
enhancement of the generalized Efп¬Ғcient Frontier/Minimum-Variance Set. Moving forward,
pedagogical and real-world examples strengthen the conп¬Ғdence in the proposed scheme,
where the validations and evaluations are in terms of analysis, numerical experiments, and
hardware experiments. The examples
1. demonstrate how the extension to the general risk measure further and efп¬Ғciently diver-
siп¬Ғes the investing portfolios, which adheres to the corresponding desirability and helps
to explain the envisioning by Markowitz;
2. further alleviate practical concerns for MPT, where the performance using Exact Opti-
mization is superior to the methods in (Elton et al., 1976) and MATLABВ® in terms of
computation time;
3. promote the proposed closed-form solution particularly owing to its extremely low cost,
which is in the context of the achievement by Sharpe (1963) and the evaluations are in
terms of basic computing platforms; and
4. shed light on analytical, п¬Ғnancial insights that are (i) associated with singular covariance
matrices and (ii) obtained exclusively by Exact Optimization.
123

Annals of Operations Research
To be more detailed about 1, Example 1 reiterates that the variance/risk measure being zero
corresponds to the minimum (rather than zero) variance/risk as per Markowitz (1952), and
it also demonstrates that the optimal portfolio can be unique even if the covariance matrix is
singular; while, in Example 2, the minimum variance/risk is nonzero even subject to a rank-
deп¬Ғcient covariance matrix. As for 2/Example 3, all the computational reductions amount
to a ratio of computation time: 4% вҲ’6% of the time using вҖңquadprogвҖқ in terms of vari-
ous computing platforms; moreover, the underlying educational convenience that responds
to expectations among the community is another highlight. Regarding 3/Example 4, it is
worth remarking that the evaluations are in terms of solution accuracy and computation time,
simultaneously. The computational reductions are all within the range of 99.19%-99.56%
subject to a variety of software (MATLABВ®) and hardware environments. However, only
the proposed scheme can be readily implemented on the basic microprocessor and FPGA
platforms, which are based on Python and VHDL, respectively. Not only is the accuracy
close to the precision setting, but also the computation time reaches 10вҲ’2 seconds. The
overall implementation cost is another highlight, which is around USD$129, of dimension
13Г—8Г—1 [cm], and in a combined manner that integrates both the microprocessor and the
FPGA. Such a п¬Ғnancial motive aligns with, notably, Sharpe (1963), while the result further
strengthens the commercial potential of the proposed scheme. Lastly, Item 4/Example 5 also
manifests signiп¬Ғcant computational enhancements, where the minimum (resp., maximum)
enhancement corresponds to a ratio of 0.057 (resp., 0.038) than the time using the classical,
numerical method. In addition, it highlights the analytical п¬Ғnding that the optimal portfolio
can still be unique, even if the risk measure entails a singular matrix; complementarily speak-
ing, the п¬Ғnding is also endorsed by practical evidences using MATLAB (2025). In a manner
that complements Example 5, Remark 7 extends to different, larger, and longer-time stock
universes. Notably, (1) it demonstrates the other case of nonunique optimal portfolios, and
the proposed scheme allows п¬Ғnancial analysts to parametrically and efп¬Ғciently explore more
potential of Portfolio Selection; while (2) the practical endorsements solidify the common
ground of Numerical Optimization and Exact Optimization, along with the aforementioned
theory.
6 Summary of Theorems and Corollaries: Importance and Further Work
On the one hand, Theorem 1 analytically clariп¬Ғes the common ground that supports both the
classic Numerical Optimization and the proposed Exact Optimization, which encompasses a
general scope of research п¬Ғelds such as operations research; Corollary 1 serves as a byproduct
of Theorem 1 and uncovers two basic equalities in linear algebra, where their impacts are
demonstrated by the analytical results in Sec. 4; for instance, Theorem 2 leverages Corollary
1 and provides a new proof for a benchmark п¬Ғnding in п¬Ғnance (Merton, 1972), which consti-
tutes another consistency veriп¬Ғcation and strengthens the conп¬Ғdence in Exact Optimization;
Theorem 3 generalizes Theorem 2 to the full extent as envisioned by Markowitz (1956,
1959) and expected by various societies (Bodnar et al., 2024; Qi, 2022), where both cases
of invertible and singular covariance matrices are uniп¬Ғed in a design framework; last but not
least, Corollary 2 practically examines Theorem 3 and reduces its computational complexity
by using a few basic operations, which thus complies with the outstanding research (Sharpe,
1963).
On the other hand, the summary of further work follows the order of the above: Theorem
1 can be essentially utilized to analyze more complex optimization problems in the upper
123

Annals of Operations Research
levels of the categorization in Boyd and Vandenberghe (2004), and it is only the start of
such a substantial study; Corollary 1 is initially applied in the demonstrative Sec. 4, while
more potential of such a mathematical basis is expected with respect to other scientiп¬Ғc п¬Ғelds;
Theorem 2 is generalized by Theorem 3, where the former boasts tremendous inп¬Ӯuences
in the economics literature and their extensions to the complete application spectrum of
MPT comprise additional topics of future research; lastly, the above theoretical results will
attract more attention after reducing the implementation complexity, which is exempliп¬Ғed
by Corollary 2 and widely urged among practice communities (Elton et al., 1976).
A Summary of Hardware Design of FPGA Architecture in Example 4
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the FPGA design comprises six modules (speciп¬Ғcally, intellectual
properties). In the beginning of the cycle, the upper-left module in Fig. 2 is used to collect
data, which are then transmitted to the upper-right module. Therein, the data are transformed
accordingly for the computations in the later stages in the FPGA environment. More speciп¬Ғ-
cally, the data are streamlined in a certain form, stored in the lower-middle module, and then
fed into the lower-left one, where Exact Optimization is implemented; speciп¬Ғcally, Eq. (4) is
realized in terms of VHDL language. The solution (optimal portfolio) is stored in the memory
space as allocated by the lower-middle module, where the module notiп¬Ғes the upper-middle
one that there is no more data. Finally, through the lower-right one that performs similar
tasks as by the upper-right one, the result can be sent back to the upper-left module for output
operations such as the computation time and solution accuracy. This is denoted as the п¬Ғnal
stage of the cycle, given that the upper-middle module has been notiп¬Ғed with the end of the
data stream.
Data Availability The data that support the п¬Ғndings of this study are available from the author upon reasonable
request.
Declarations
Competing interests The author has no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
articleвҖҷs Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the articleвҖҷs Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Alfelt, G., & Mazur, S. (2022). On the mean and variance of the estimated tangency portfolio weights for
small samples. Mod Stoch: Theory Appl, 9(4), 453вҖ“482. https://doi.org/10.15559/22-VMSTA212
Barroso, P., & Saxena, K. (2022). Lest we forget: Learn from out-of-sample forecast errors when optimizing
portfolios. Rev Financ Stud, 35(3), 1222вҖ“1278. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhab041
Beheshti, B., Guerard, J. B. J., & Mercs, C. (2021). Truly active management requires a commitment to
excellence: Portfolio construction and management with FactSet, World Scientiп¬Ғc Publishing Co. Pte.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Ltd., Singapore, chap 6, pp 87вҖ“126. https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811222634_0007, in Guerard, JB and
Ziemba, WT, Editors. Handbook of Applied Investment Research
Bloch, M., Guerard, J., Markowitz, H., Todd, P., & Xu, G. (1993). A comparison of some aspects of the U.S.
and Japanese equity markets. Jpn World Econ, 5(1), 3вҖ“26. https://doi.org/10.1016/0922-1425(93)90025-
Y
Bodie, Z., Kane, A., & Marcus, A. J. (2024). Investments (13th ed.). New York, USA: McGraw-Hill.
Bodnar, T., Mazur, S., & PodgГіrski, K. (2017). A test for the global minimum variance portfolio for small
sample and singular covariance. AStA Adv Stat Anal, 101, 253вҖ“265. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10182-016-
0282-z
Bodnar, T., Mazur, S., & Nguyen, H. (2022). Estimation of optimal portfolio compositions for small sample
and singular covariance matrix. Working Papers 2022:15, Г–rebro University, School of Business, https://
hdl.handle.net/10419/274600
Bodnar, T., Mazur, S., & Nguyen, H. (2024). Estimation of optimal portfolio compositions for small sample
and singular covariance matrix, Switzerland: Springer Nature, pp 259вҖ“278. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-031-69111-9_13, extended version of Bodnar et al. (2022)
Boyd, S., & Vandenberghe, L. (2004). Convex optimization. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,
27th/latest printing with corrections, 2021, and its solution manual
Cetingoz, A. R., Fermanian, J. D., & GuГ©ant, O. (2024). Risk budgeting portfolios: Existence and computation.
Math Financ, 34(3), 896вҖ“924. https://doi.org/10.1111/maп¬Ғ.12419
Chataigner, M., Cousin, A., CrГ©pey, S., Dixon, M., & Gueye, D. (2021). Beyond surrogate modeling: Learning
the local volatility via shape constraints. SIAM J Financial Math, 12(3), SC58вҖ“SC69. https://doi.org/10.
1137/20M1381538
DeBacco, C. (2023). Post-modern portfolio theory (latest version, 2020). Summer Scholarship, Creative Arts
and Research Projects (SCARP), https://jayscholar.etown.edu/scarp/8
Drin, S., Mazur, S., & Muhinyuza, S. (2025). A test on the location of tangency portfolio for small sample
size and singular covariance matrix. Mod Stoch: Theory Appl, 12(1), 43вҖ“59. https://doi.org/10.15559/
24-VMSTA261
Elton, E. J., Gruber, M. J., & Padberg, M. W. (1976). Simple criteria for optimal portfolio selection. J Financ,
31(5), 1341вҖ“1357. https://doi.org/10.2307/2326684
Guerard, J. (2025). Investments: The (almost) century of Markowitz Harry Markowitz: Portfolio selection
scholar, simulation creator, and applied investment researcher and consultant extraordinaire. Ann Oper
Res, 346, 1вҖ“8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06396-5
Guerard, J. B., & Ziemba, W. T. (2021). Handbook of applied investment research. World Scientiп¬Ғc Handbook
in Financial Economics Series, Singapore: World Scientiп¬Ғc Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., https://doi.org/10.
1142/11727
Guerard, J. B. J. (2006). Quantitative stock selection in Japan and the United States: Some past and current
issues. J Invest, 15(1), 43вҖ“49. https://doi.org/10.3905/joi.2006.616843
Guerard, J. B. J., Takano, M., & Yamane, Y. (1993). The development of efп¬Ғcient portfolios in Japan with
particular emphasis on sales and earnings forecasting. Ann Oper Res, 45(1), 91вҖ“108. https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF02282043
Guerard, J. B. J., Rachev, S. T., & Shao, B. P. (2013). Efп¬Ғcient global portfolios: Big data and investment
universes. IBM J Res Dev, 57(5), 1вҖ“11. https://doi.org/10.1147/JRD.2013.2272483
Guerard, J. B. J., Markowitz, H., & Xu, G. (2015). Earnings forecasting in a global stock selection model
and efп¬Ғcient portfolio construction and management. Int J Forecast, 31(2), 550вҖ“560. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijforecast.2014.10.003
Gulliksson, M., & Mazur, S. (2020). An iterative approach to ill-conditioned optimal portfolio selection.
Comput Econ, 56, 773вҖ“794. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10614-019-09943-6
Gulliksson, M., Oleynik, A., & Mazur, S. (2024). Portfolio selection with a rank-deп¬Ғcient covariance matrix.
Comput Econ, 63(6), 2247вҖ“2269. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10614-023-10404-4
Gulliksson, M., Mazur, S., & Oleynik, A. (2025). Minimum VaR and minimum CVaR optimal portfolios:
The case of singular covariance matrix. Results Appl Math, 26, Article 100557. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rinam.2025.100557
Gunjan, A., & Bhattacharyya, S. (2023). A brief review of portfolio optimization techniques. Artif Intell Rev,
56, 3847вҖ“3886. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-022-10273-7
Haugen, R. A. (1999). The inefп¬Ғcient stock market. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall Inc.
Haugen, R. A. (2001). Modern investment theory (5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall Inc.
Haugen, R. A., & Baker, N. L. (1996). Commonality in the determinants of expected stock returns. J Financ
Econ, 41(3), 401вҖ“439. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(95)00868-F
123

Annals of Operations Research
Haugen, R. A., & Baker, N.L. (2010). Case closed. In: Guerard JBJ (ed) Handbook of Portfolio Construction:
Contemporary Applications of Markowitz Techniques, Springer, New York, USA, chap 23, pp 601вҖ“619,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77439-8
Haugh, M. B., & Lo, A. W. (2001). Computational challenges in portfolio management. Comput Sci Eng,3(3),
54вҖ“59. https://doi.org/10.1109/5992.919267, in the special issue of вҖңTomorrowвҖҷs Hardest ProblemsвҖқ
Horn, R. A., & Johnson, C. R. (2013). Matrix analysis (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Johansen, T. A., & Fossen, T. I. (2013). Control allocation-A survey. Automatica J IFAC, 49(5), 1087вҖ“1103.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.automatica.2013.01.035
Kolm, P. N., TГјtГјncГј, R., & Fabozzi, F. J. (2014). 60 years of portfolio optimization: Practical challenges and
current trends. European J Oper Res, 234(2), 356вҖ“371. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2013.10.060
Kwan, C. C. (2018). What really happens if the positive deп¬Ғniteness requirement on the covariance matrix of
returns is relaxed in efп¬Ғcient portfolio selection? Financ Mark Portfolio Manag, 32, 77вҖ“110. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11408-018-0306-7
Ledoit,O.,&Wolf,M.(2003).Improvedestimationofthecovariancematrixofstockreturnswithanapplication
to portfolio selection. J Empir Financ, 10(5), 603вҖ“621. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927-5398(03)00007-
0
Ledoit, O., & Wolf, M. (2017). Nonlinear shrinkage of the covariance matrix for portfolio selection: Markowitz
meets Goldilocks. Rev Financ Stud, 30(12), 4349вҖ“4388. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy016
Lewis, A. L. (1988). A simple algorithm for the portfolio selection problem. J Financ, 43(1), 71вҖ“82. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1988.tb02589.x
Lin, L.-G., & Liang, Y.-W. (2023). Exact Optimization: Part I. Taiwanese J Math,27(1), 169вҖ“205. https://doi.
org/10.11650/tjm/220907
Lin, L.-G., Liang, Y.-W., & Hsieh, W.-Y. (2020). Convex quadratic equation. J Optim Theory Appl,186(3),
1006вҖ“1028. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10957-020-01727-5
Lleo, S., & MacLean, L. C. (2025). Dual dominance: How Harry Markowitz and William Ziemba impacted
portfolio management. Ann Oper Res, 346, 181вҖ“216. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06281-1
Luenberger, D. G. (2014). Investment science (2nd ed.). New York, USA: Oxford University Press.
Luenberger, D. G., & Ye, Y. (2021). Linear and nonlinear programming, 5th edn. Springer, Switzerland, and
its 2nd ed. (2003).
Malevergne, Y., & Sornette, D. (2004). Value-at-Risk-efп¬Ғcient portfolios for a class of super- and sub-
exponentially decaying assets return distributions. Quant Finance, 4, 17вҖ“36. https://doi.org/10.1088/
1469-7688/4/1/002
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. J Financ,7(1), 77вҖ“91. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1952.
tb01525.x
Markowitz, H. (1956). The optimization of a quadratic function subject to linear constraints. Naval Res Logist
Q, 3, 111вҖ“133. https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.3800030110
Markowitz, H., Guerard, J., Xu, G., & Beheshti, B. (2021). Financial anomalies in portfolio construction and
management. J Portf Manage, 47(6), 51вҖ“64. https://doi.org/10.3905/jpm.2021.1.242
Markowitz, H. M. (1959). Portfolio selection: Efп¬Ғcient diversiп¬Ғcation of investments (2nd ed.). USA: Yale
University Press.
Markowitz, H. M. (1976). Investment for the long run: New evidence for an old rule. J Financ, 31(5), 1273вҖ“
1286. https://doi.org/10.2307/2326680
Markowitz, H. M. (2000) Mean-variance analysis in portfolio choice and capital markets. New Hope, PA,
USA: Frank J. Fabozzi Associates. (with a chapter and program by Todd, GP)
Markowitz, H. M., & Xu, G. L. (1994). Data mining corrections. J Portf Manage,21(1), 60вҖ“69. https://doi.
org/10.3905/jpm.1994.409494
MATLABВ® (2025) Documentation (вҖңquadprogвҖқ function). https://www.mathworks.com/help/optim/ug/
quadprog.html
Mei, L., Huang, L., & Wu, X. (2022). Energy-preserving continuous-stage exponential Runge-Kutta integrators
for efп¬Ғciently solving Hamiltonian systems. SIAM J Sci Comput, 44(3), A1092вҖ“A1115. https://doi.org/
10.1137/21M1412475
Merton, R. C. (1972). An analytic derivation of the efп¬Ғcient portfolio frontier. J Financ Quant Anal, 7(4),
1851вҖ“1872. https://doi.org/10.2307/2329621
Nemirovsky, A. S., & Yudin, D. B. (1983). Problem complexity and method efп¬Ғciency in optimization. New
York, USA: A Wiley-Interscience Publication, John Wiley & Sons Inc. translated from the Russian and
with a preface by E.R. Dawson, Wiley-Interscience Series in Discrete Mathematics.
Nesterov, Y. (2018). Lectures on convex optimization, (2nd ed., Vol. 137). 2nd edn, Springer, USA: Springer
Series in Operations Research and Financial Engineering.
Nocedal, J., & Wright, S. J. (2006). Numerical optimization (2nd ed.). Springer, USA: Springer Series in
Operations Research and Financial Engineering.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Qi, Y. (2022). Classifying the minimum-variance surface of multiple-objective portfolio selection for capital
asset pricing models. Ann Oper Res, 311(2), 1203вҖ“1227. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03649-x
Qi, Y., & Li, X. (2020). On imposing ESG constraints of portfolio selection for sustainable investment and
comparing the efп¬Ғcient frontiers in the weight space. SAGE Open, 10(4), 2158244020975070. https://
doi.org/10.1177/2158244020975070
Qi, Y., & Steuer, R. E. (2020). On the analytical derivation of efп¬Ғcient sets in quad-and-higher criterion
portfolio selection. Ann Oper Res, 293, 521вҖ“538. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-3101-y
Roll, R. (1977). A critique of the asset pricing theoryвҖҷs tests Part I: On past and potential testability of the
theory. J Financ Econ, 4(2), 129вҖ“176. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(77)90009-5
Rubinstein, M. (2002). MarkowitzвҖҷs вҖңPortfolio SelectionвҖқ: A п¬Ғfty-year retrospective. J Financ,57(3), 1041вҖ“
1045. https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-6261.00453
Sharpe, W. F. (1963). A simpliп¬Ғed model for portfolio analysis. Manage Sci, 9(2), 277вҖ“293. https://doi.org/
10.1287/mnsc.9.2.277
Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk. J Financ,
19(3), 425вҖ“442. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1964.tb02865.x
Simaan, Y. (2025). Markowitz and the CAPM. Ann Oper Res, 346(1), 673вҖ“691. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-024-06404-8
Sornette, D., Simonetti, P., & Andersen, J. V. (2000). ПҶq-п¬Ғeld theory for portfolio optimization: вҖңfat tailsвҖқand
nonlinear correlations. Phys Rep,335(2), 19вҖ“92. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0370-1573(00)00004-1
Stellato, B., Banjac, G., Goulart, P., Bemporad, A., & Boyd, S. (2020). OSQP: An operator splitting solver
for quadratic programs. Math Program Comput, 12(4), 637вҖ“672. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12532-020-
00179-2
Steuer, R. E., Qi, Y., & Wimmer, M. (2024). Computing cardinality constrained portfolio selection efп¬Ғcient
frontiers via closest correlation matrices. European J Oper Res, 313(2), 628вҖ“636. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ejor.2023.08.026
Vadlamani, S. K., Xiao, T. P., & Yablonovitch, E. (2020). Physics successfully implements Lagrange multiplier
optimization.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA,117(43),26639вҖ“26650.https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2015192117
Wackerly, D. D., Mendenhall III, W. & Scheaffer, R. L. (2008). Mathematical statistics with applications (7th
ed.). Canada: Cengage Learning.
Xu, W., Chen, X., & Coleman, T. F. (2016). The efп¬Ғcient application of automatic differentiation for computing
gradients in п¬Ғnancial applications. J Comput Financ, 19(3), 71вҖ“96. https://doi.org/10.21314/JCF.2016.
209
PublisherвҖҷs Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afп¬Ғliations.
123