TITLE: Assessing the systemic effects of modern slavery mitigation strategies in supply chains
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06965-2
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 18 September 2024 / Accepted: 13 November 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Assessing the systemic effects of modern slavery mitigation 
strategies in supply chains
Mahnaz Hosseinzadeh1
 · Reza Alikhani2
 · Stefan Gold3
 · 
Marzieh Samadi Foroushani4
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06965-2
Abstract
According to recent estimates, around 50 million people worldwide are victims of modern 
slavery (MS), with approximately 28 million subjected to forced labour, much of which 
is linked to global supply chains. The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 
8.7 and various national legislations urge businesses and stakeholders to take proactive 
measures to eradicate MS and other severe forms of labour exploitation. MS in supply 
chains represents a complex socio-economic system. Adopting a systems perspective and 
drawing on situational crime prevention theory, this study presents one of the first system 
dynamics models of MS in supply chains. The model investigates the long-term effects 
of mitigation strategies and addresses the common issue of policy resistance in business-
driven MS mitigation efforts. The model was developed in two stages: first, by deriving 
a causal loop diagram from the literature, and second, by extending it into a stock and 
flow diagram with mathematical formulations and calibrating it using empirical insights 
from a petrochemical supply chain in a developing country, which also served to confirm 
and refine the literature-based causal relationships. The results indicate that MS mitigation 
strategies are most effective in the long run when implemented together, supporting the 
configurational approach in social sustainable supply chain management research. Ad­
ditionally, the findings highlight the critical role of increasing the risk of offending the 
MS crime for offenders, such as enhancing public awareness, as a key component of any 
combined policy aimed at significantly reducing MS. While mitigation strategies are valu­
able for detecting labour exploitation, the study highlights a persistent gap: the lack of 
clear, actionable responses once MS is identified. Finally, although digital platforms offer 
potential support, their high implementation costs may limit their feasibility for many 
supply chains.
Keywords  Forced labour · Social sustainability · System dynamics · Supply chain 
management
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
1  Introduction
Modern slavery (MS) is a hidden crime involving severe forms of exploitation, including 
forced labour, child labour, and human trafficking. Nearly 50 million people worldwide are 
affected by Jiang et al. (2023), Khan et al. (2021), with approximately 28 million victims of 
forced labour, most of whom are linked to upper-tier supply chains (International Labour 
Organization (ILO), 2022). The increasing complexity and globalisation of supply chains 
heighten the risk of companies being associated with MS, particularly in emerging and 
developing economies (Meehan & Pinnington, 2021; Khan et al., 2021; Mathiyazhagan et 
al., 2023). In response, laws such as the UK MS Act (Parliament 2015) mandate companies 
to identify and report MS risks in their supply chains (Lotfi & Walker, 2024).
The MS issue, particularly following the introduction of the UK MS Act, has attracted 
significant attention from Supply Chain Management (SCM) researchers, who have focused 
on exploring strategies to mitigate forced labour in supply chains and on how focal com­
panies respond to MS legislation (Geng et al., 2022; Han et al., 2024). However, due to the 
fundamental human rights violations involved, MS policies require urgent action, irrespec­
tive of economic consequences (Meehan & Pinnington, 2021). Existing studies propose 
various factors and strategies to reduce labour coercion and improve detection, remediation, 
and disclosure (Crane, 2013; Gold et al., 2015; LeBaron, 2021). Yet, the economic motiva­
tions behind unethical corporate inaction have been underexplored (Geng et al., 2022; Liu et 
al., 2022; Stevenson, 2022). Furthermore, current research predominantly examines linear 
relationships, overlooking the nonlinear dynamics inherent in MS as a socio-economic sys­
tem (New, 2015; Schaper & Pollach, 2021).
MS operates as a complex system with feedback loops, interactions, time delays, and 
policy resistance, necessitating a nonlinear systemic perspective (Han et al., 2024; Yu et 
al., 2025). Ketchen Jr et al. (2022) emphasised the need for configurational approaches in 
SCM research to address such complexities. The disproportionate effects of interventions–
where small changes can yield significant shifts or vice versa due to policy resistance–high­
light the need for systemic modelling (Yung et al., 2022). Despite corporate investments in 
MS detection and reporting, global worker exploitation remains persistent (Simpson et al., 
2021), indicating the failure of current strategies in addressing the reinforcing and balancing 
loops within MS systems.
To address this gap, we develop a system dynamics (SD) model to analyse the systemic 
effects of various MS mitigation strategies, considering policy resistance and delays. The 
following research questions motivate and guide our research:
RQ1: How can MS in supply chains be effectively mitigated through systemic 
interventions?
RQ2: What are the key leverage points for interventions to reduce MS in SCs while 
addressing policy resistance?
Sterman (2001) highlights the importance of identifying feedback processes, stock and flow 
structures, time delays, and nonlinearities in SD modelling. This approach enables the iden­
tification of leverage points and the simulation of mitigation policies to assess both short 
and long-term system behaviours (Arranz et al., 2023). To construct the dynamic system 
structure, we integrate situational crime prevention (SCP) theory as a foundational frame­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
work, inspired by the Global Slavery Index (GSI) 2018 (Walk Free Foundation, 2018). By 
embedding SCP strategies within a closed-loop structure, we simulate the nonlinear causal 
interactions among mitigation strategies and supplement our analysis with empirical data 
from a petrochemical supply chain case study in a developing country.
This study makes three key contributions: (1) advancing configurational perspectives in 
operations and SCM (OSCM) by applying systems theory through SD modelling to analyse 
social issues in sustainable SCM (SSCM); (2) developing one of the first SD models of MS 
in supply chains, enabling pre-implementation assessment of mitigation strategies, identifi­
cation of leverage points, and analysis of policy resistance; and (3) integrating SCP theory 
into a closed-loop structure, categorising mitigation strategies while incorporating financial 
considerations, an aspect previously underexplored.
The application of our model in a real case study suggests that a combination of MS miti­
gation strategies across different SCP categories is more effective than isolated measures. 
It also highlights that the success of hybrid strategies depends on specific leverage points, 
such as media coverage, reinforcing its importance in MS mitigation (Geng et al., 2022).
2  Literature review
We review the literature in the following four subsections before elaborating on the research 
gap in the fifth subsection. First, we address the need to adopt configurational approaches 
in SSCM research to tackle social and economic goals simultaneously. Second, we discuss 
the SCP theory and its implications to MS research. Third, we explore the research on MS 
mitigation in supply chains and develop a new categorisation of mitigation strategies based 
on the SCP framework, which is extended with a system view. Forth, we review the SD 
methodology and its application in modelling social sustainability aspects. Finally, we out­
line our contributions by highlighting the relevance of applying SD as a tool for modelling 
problematic MS situations in supply chains based on the gaps in the literature.
2.1  SSCM and the need for configurational research approaches
Effectively managing the trade-off between profitability and social objectives has been a 
long-debated issue in the SSCM literature (Sodhi, 2015; Sodhi & Tang, 2018). Gold et al. 
(2015) underlined that in the case of hidden illegal activities, such as forced labour, this 
trade-off becomes more pronounced, as the substantial potential profits for the perpetrators 
make suppliers insensitive to incentives or penalties. However, there are no specific linear 
prescriptions for developing social SSCM models that simultaneously improve social and 
financial goals, leading to inconclusive results. Tang (2018) emphasised the need to apply 
research approaches that evaluate the long-term value of different social SSCM practices.
Meanwhile, Flynn et al. (2020) explained these inconclusive results by highlighting that 
OSCM researchers tend to over-simplify supply chains, whereas real supply chains are 
more complex, involving complicated, interwoven variables and relationships. Hence, the 
authors urged the adoption of new approaches to develop OSCM-specific theory. Follow­
ing this call, Ketchen Jr et al. (2022) noted that the fundamental types of relationships in 
theory development are linear, unique, and configurational. The authors argued that linear 
relationships are highly generalisable and simple but not accurate. Unique case studies are 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
simple and accurate but not generalisable. Configurational approaches, which are largely 
overlooked in OSCM research, are positioned between generalisable linear relationships 
and the uniqueness of case study results, and are thus more suitable for OSCM research. In 
configurational terms, a combination of different causes or causal configurations with com­
plex interplays creates an outcome. Various combinations may lead to a similar outcome, 
and the failure to reach a specific outcome is not necessarily due to an inverse combination 
of causal factors. Thus, Ketchen Jr et al. (2022) recently highlighted the need for configura­
tional approaches in OSCM research and theory building.
Examples of inconclusive linear results regarding MS can also be found in social SSCM 
research. For instance, a study by Geng et al. (2022) concluded that more media coverage of 
MS increases firms’ efforts to address MS issues in supply chains. In contrast, Flynn (2020) 
found that media exposure was not significantly related to corporate attempts to report MS. 
Accordingly, new configurational approaches are needed to understand MS in SSCM more 
comprehensively, and this paper contributes to this field by adopting an SD approach.
2.2  SCP framework
SCP is a pragmatic framework for addressing crime in social systems, focusing on reducing 
criminal opportunities by modifying environmental conditions (Von Lampe, 2011). Unlike 
traditional approaches that prioritise offender motivations, SCP seeks to disrupt the condi­
tions that enable criminal activities (Williams et al., 2022). According to SCP, crime arises 
when several antecedents coincide, creating criminal opportunities: (1) a desirable and 
unprotected target in an insecure setting, referred to as potential victims; (2) the absence 
of capable crime preventers with executive authority, known as guardians, who could 
deter crime by altering conditions, discouraging offenders, intervening during incidents, or 
responding afterward; (3) the presence of crime facilitators, who may either be negligent 
or deliberately encourage criminal acts by influencing the situation, assisting offenders, or 
failing to intervene; (4) a broader environment that either enables or restricts crime and pre­
vention efforts; and (5) a motivated offender, who not only has criminal intent but also the 
resources needed to commit crimes (Ekblom & Tilley, 2017). SCP is based on the premise 
that offenders act rationally and exercise free will; when a crime opportunity arises, they 
weigh the potential advantages and disadvantages before deciding to commit the offence 
(Williams et al., 2022). Therefore, reducing crime requires structured and long-term man­
agement of the immediate environment, minimising opportunities for crime while increas­
ing the perceived risks for potential offenders (Clarke, 1983)
The GSI 2018 (Walk Free Foundation, 2018) adopted the SCP framework to analyse the 
factors contributing to MS and identify strategies to mitigate them. For MS to occur, four 
key elements must be present: a vulnerable victim susceptible to exploitation, a motivated 
offender, a facilitator, and the absence of effective guardianship or surveillance. Addition­
ally, crime does not occur in isolation; broader contextual factors, such as political instabil­
ity, systemic discrimination, and disregard for human rights, play a crucial role in shaping 
MS. In this research, considering MS in supply chains as a complex socio-economic system 
affected by many contextual factors, we apply the SCP framework to design the main sub­
systems of our SD model. The identified subsystems include the MS subsystem, which 
encompasses forced labour in the supplier company; motivated offenders, referring to 
supplier companies employing forced labour; potential victims, including unemployed 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
individuals in the region; crime facilitators, such as corrupt auditors who aid offenders; 
contextual factors, including political instability, corruption, and poor economic condi­
tions in the region; and guardians, comprising government authorities, oil industry regula­
tors, the executive board of the focal company, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) 
and trade unions and other entities with the power to enforce laws, implement public and 
operational policies, and hold offenders accountable through operational measures or legal 
penalties.
We further develop this framework by emphasising the interwoven causality of complex 
socio-economic systems, which involves reinforcing and balancing feedback loops and time 
delays. For example, contextual factors influence offenders, victims, and guardian laws. 
Similarly, the capacity of law enforcement could affect the contextual factors, the motiva­
tion of offenders, and the supply of vulnerable victims. While highly motivated offenders 
may encourage fraud and deception in the legal system, a high level of MS may also lead 
to increased political will to pass more powerful guardian laws. To reduce MS opportuni­
ties, the GSI 2018 (Walk Free Foundation, 2018) suggests decreasing the opportunities for 
offenders to commit crimes, increasing the risks for offenders, reducing the vulnerability of 
potential victims, and enhancing the capacity of law enforcement and other guardians. We 
further categorise MS mitigation strategies based on GSI’s classification of MS mitigation 
solutions, as presented in the next subsection. By integrating GSI’s categorisation within 
the SCP framework, these mitigation strategies align with an evidence-based and widely 
recognised approach to crime prevention. SCP has been effectively applied in various crime 
contexts, and GSI’s categorisation refines it for MS, ensuring conceptual clarity and practi­
cal applicability. Moreover, by categorising mitigation strategies and testing them within 
a dynamic modelling framework, this research moves beyond theoretical discussions to 
provide empirical insights into SCP.
2.3  MS mitigation strategies in supply chains
A growing number of studies are addressing how organisations can tackle MS. Strategies 
for MS mitigation have been divided into detection and remediation strategies (Benstead 
et al., 2021); detection, remediation, and exposure strategies (Stevenson & Cole, 2018); or 
preventive, detective, and reactive measures (Bodendorf et al., 2023). Based on the SCP 
framework and its general categorisation of MS mitigation solutions by GSI 2018 Walk Free 
Foundation (2018), we assign the MS mitigation strategies in the literature to each solution 
group as follows. A core objective of this research is to test the effectiveness of different 
mitigation strategies within the SD model by examining which group or combination of 
strategies best reduces MS. By categorising strategies systematically under the SCP frame­
work, we create clear experimental conditions for simulation, allowing for comparative 
analysis and the identification of the most impactful interventions.
 
●
Increasing the guardian capacity strategies
 
External policies and reporting requirements are important aspects of fighting MS (Liu 
et al., 2022). Most countries have governmental labour protection standards, which are 
codified as laws, and some even have anti-slavery acts focused on companies’ entire 
supply chain. For example, external policies like the UK MS Act or ILO codes are 
utilised by governments to force companies to assume accountability regarding MS in 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
their supply chains. However, Meehan and Pinnington (2021) found that companies 
commonly use ambiguity in their MS statements to preserve their current situations and 
deny accountability for potential MS cases in their supply chains.
 
Overall, various external policies would contribute to the development of initiatives to 
combat MS in supply chains. However, according to Liu et al. (2022), a high level of 
executive board commitment is needed to develop operational MS mitigation policies 
and comply with external policies. Such commitment is greatly affected by the instru­
ment used for policy implementation and its economic implications for the company, 
which must be addressed in a systemic manner.
 
●
Decreasing the opportunities for offenders
 
Risk assessment is an operational strategy that companies use to mitigate risks asso­
ciated with high-risk suppliers (Schaper & Pollach, 2021). In addition, ongoing due 
diligence, auditing, and performance monitoring allow buyers to scrutinise suppliers 
closely (Chen, 2022). The most common approach for addressing MS is auditing sup­
pliers based on standard codes of conduct (Stevenson & Cole, 2018).
 
However, the literature has extensively addressed the limitations of traditional audit­
ing or the so-called compliance-based paradigm (Lund-Thomsen & Lindgreen, 2014). 
While focal companies pressure suppliers to comply with standards, they often fail to 
provide adequate educational and financial support. As a result, suppliers frequently 
lack proper understanding of the standards’ implications and cannot afford to implement 
them Benstead et al. (2021). This can lead to audit fraud, corrupt auditors, and superfi­
cial compliance, which fail to improve conditions for exploited workers (Benstead et al., 
2021; Stevenson & Cole, 2018).
 
Moreover, many authors have proposed adopting integrated online platforms and digital 
technologies to improve detection and remediation practices (Jiang et al., 2023; Liu et 
al., 2022). For example, Christ and Helliar (2021) suggested using blockchain tech­
nology to reduce deceptive exploitation of migrant workers, while Jiang et al. (2023) 
examined the role of various technologies in mitigating MS risks.
 
By and large, risk assessment, ongoing due diligence and auditing, and follow-up audits 
are operational strategies that limit suppliers’ opportunities to offend, while integrated 
online platforms facilitate implementation, further reducing potential opportunities for 
offender. However, while the limitations of audits are well-documented, Christ and 
Helliar (2021) also noted that the efficiency of online platforms is conditional on a 
number of variables, including collaboration with other groups like NGOs. Further­
more, Jiang et al. (2023) found that numerous factors - particularly institutional changes 
mandated by different stakeholders - influence digital technology adoption for MS risk 
mitigation in supply chains. Consequently, a systemic approach is required to effec­
tively reduce opportunities for offences.
 
●
Increasing the risks of offending for offenders
 
According to Stevenson (2022), whistleblowing could be a key source of informa­
tion about supply chains to help detect forced labour. Whistleblowing hotlines or apps 
provided by the government or focal companies encourage reporting. Clear grievance 
channels for employees, internal and external reporting channels, and clear remedial 
activities help to create trust in the usefulness of reporting, increasing the chances that 
bystanders or victims will report cases of coercion or exploitation (Liu et al., 2022; Ste­
venson & Cole, 2018). Additionally, media coverage of MS helps to increase awareness 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
of this issue for both the public and companies. In turn, higher public awareness could 
make people more sensitive to and insistent on solutions to MS issues in supply chains 
(Geng et al., 2022), although this could not be confirmed by Flynn (2020).
 
Overall, the variety of internal and external channels that are available to expose labour 
rights abuses, including clear grievance mechanisms, whistleblowing hotlines or apps, 
and media coverage, has increased the likelihood of uncovering MS in supply chains. 
However, Stevenson (2022) suggested that the effectiveness of whistleblowing depends 
on clear communication channels, which need to be promoted through horizontal col­
laboration or technology adoption. Moreover, from a systemic perspective, the differ­
ence in the results of Geng et al. (2022) and Flynn (2020) is probably due to the interac­
tion of many variables, resulting in varying behaviours in response to the same policy 
intervention in different settings.
 
●
Decreasing the vulnerability of victims
 
Simpson et al. (2021) argued that MS is a “far away" concept for employees and suppli­
ers, and there is a psychological distance between buyers and suppliers. By reducing this 
distance, employees and suppliers can gain more insight into the complexities of MS 
and how to better tackle it. A key operational strategy for decreasing this psychological 
distance is offering training and education programmes to staff and suppliers (Liu et al., 
2022; Stevenson & Cole, 2018). Another mitigation strategy is financial empowerment 
of suppliers by the focal company to meet the standards and compensate individuals 
who are exploited. For example, Benstead et al. (2021) showed how a supplier could 
work with the buyer to compensate workers who had paid recruitment fees.
 
By and large, supporting suppliers and their workers educationally or financially leads 
to capability building and higher awareness on the part of exploited labourers regarding 
their rights, resulting in less vulnerability in the supply chain. Yet, for example, Ben­
stead et al. (2021) investigation included a multi-billion-pound turnover focal company 
that was resourceful enough to compensate exploited labourers and influential enough 
to attract the support of NGOs and third parties, and not focal companies less resource­
ful to support the suppliers. So, the efficiency of this strategy is also affected by various 
factors demanding a systemic view.
 
●
Horizontal collaboration
 
The limitations of standard auditing have prompted the development of a cooperation-
based paradigm, wherein focal companies support suppliers’ capacity-building while 
engaging in horizontal collaboration with NGOs, trade unions, and competitors to moni­
tor and audit suppliers. Williams et al. (2022) identify cooperation as fundamental to 
SCP theory, demonstrating that coordinated, integrated approaches enhance surveillance 
of criminal activity and reduce opportunities for offences. Accordingly, horizontal col­
laboration can be seen as an umbrella that increases resources for training the vulnerable 
or financially supporting them and promotes due diligence and performance monitoring, 
leading to a more powerful guardian capacity and stronger protection for victims of MS 
or those vulnerable to it. Yet, according to Benstead et al. (2018), an effective govern­
ance structure (e.g., top management support) as well as relational capital (e.g., trust) 
are essential for productive horizontal collaboration, necessitating to be investigated in 
a systemic manner.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Figure 1 illustrates our proposed classification of the MS mitigation strategies base on SCP 
which is extended with a closed-loop view, including the nonlinear interaction among its 
components. By adopting the initial linear SCP framework, all mitigation strategies will 
lead to the reduction of MS in supply chains. However, we aim to further develop this 
framework by emphasising the interwoven causality of complex socio-economic systems, 
which involves reinforcing and balancing feedback loops and time delays.
2.4  SD methodology and MS mitigation strategies
Melnyk et al. (2024) called for revitalising simulation tools such as SD and agent-based 
modelling in OSCM and SSCM to uncover hidden causalities in complex supply chains, 
noting that empirical research is often descriptive while simulations enable repeated sce­
nario testing. Complex systems display structural and dynamic complexity, the latter aris­
ing from feedback loops, delays, and nonlinear interactions (Shurrab & Jonsson, 2023). 
SD, developed by Forrester (1997), models nonlinear feedback structures to predict system 
behaviour (Zhao et al., 2024; Kazantsev et al., 2023) on the premise that structure drives 
behaviour (Tang & Rehme, 2017). Linear, event-oriented approaches risk policy resistance 
(Morecroft, 2015), as seen in MS interventions that may worsen outcomes. Systems theory 
emphasises that improvements require combined strategies (Sterman, 2001).
The SD process involves problem identification, building dynamic hypotheses (causal 
loop diagrams), refinement with modelling and real-world data, and validation through sim­
ulation (Sterman, 2001). It integrates diverse knowledge sources, including data, records, 
and mental models (Armenia et al., 2024), and supports theory exploration in feedback-rich 
Fig. 1  MS mitigation strategies based on the SCP framework
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
systems. SD has been applied to sustainability by integrating economic, social, and envi­
ronmental dimensions (Nahar, 2024) and to social policy analysis in supply chains (Sudarto 
et al., 2017; Rostamnezhad et al., 2020; Mangla et al., 2021). In the MS context, Kunz et 
al. (2023) used agent-based modelling to assess an anti-slavery programme in U.S. tomato 
farming. Building on this, the present study applies SD to model the complex structure of 
MS in supply chains.
2.5  Gap analysis and our contributions
This study contributes to SSCM, MS, and OSCM research, respectively, in several important 
ways. First, it responds to the call by Ketchen Jr et al. (2022) to strengthen the application 
of configurational approaches in OSCM research. Specifically, we aim to elaborate theory 
on social SSCM (Fisher & Aguinis, 2017) through a systemic lens. The SD approach makes 
it possible to grasp various causal nonlinear relationships among factors and their diverse 
effects, thus overcoming the limitations of linear approaches. Additionally, our research 
responds to the call made by Tang (2018) regarding the need for approaches capable of 
evaluating the long-term impact of social SSCM practices on social and economic dimen­
sions simultaneously. By employing the SD approach, we can simulate the behaviour of dif­
ferent target variables over time, gaining valuable insights into the impact of social SSCM 
practices on both social and economic aspects.
Second, current research on MS in supply chains has identified several individual strate­
gies for detecting and remediating MS. However, these studies typically emphasise the need 
to apply multiple solutions simultaneously irrespective of the specific dynamic behaviour 
resulting from the interactions among multiple variables. This study seeks to address this 
gap by developing a dynamic system to capture the interplay between forced labour in sup­
ply chains and its aggravating and mitigating factors. Our proposed generic model can be 
viewed as a decision support system (DSS) (Chesney et al., 2017), which can be customised 
by academics, researchers, managers, and policymakers based on the parameters of their 
supply chains. Through simulation-based sensitivity analysis, our model identifies leverage 
points for transformational improvements and can aid in the development of new strate­
gies that may not have been previously recognised as effective. By testing policies prior 
to implementing an intervention, users can identify dominant loops in their systems that 
amplify or resist policy effects (Desai, 2012). The simulation results for different variables 
based on various intervention practices are visually represented, facilitating comparison and 
decision-making for researchers and decision-makers. In addition, we employ SCP in this 
study to categorise MS mitigation strategies.
Finally, we enhance SCP by incorporating a closed-loop perspective, yielding novel 
insights that can inform future mitigation strategy development.
3  Research methodology
3.1  causal loop diagram development
To identify key variables for the causal loop diagram model, we reviewed the literature on 
MS in supply chains using the Web of Science database. The search included the keywords 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
(‘MS’ OR ‘forced labor’ OR ‘forced labour’) AND ‘supply chain’ to ensure broad coverage 
of relevant literature. To maintain a structured and rigorous selection process, we followed 
established review protocols (Montecchi et al., 2021). The initial search yielded 1,428 arti­
cles. To refine the dataset, we screened articles based on their title, abstract, and keywords to 
ensure relevance to MS within supply chains. Studies focusing solely on human trafficking, 
child labour, or general labour rights without explicit discussion of MS in supply chains 
were excluded. We also limited our selection to peer-reviewed journal articles, excluding 
conference papers, book chapters, and industry or NGO reports to ensure academic rigour. 
Since our research focuses on developing mitigation strategies within a SD framework, we 
prioritised articles that discussed intervention strategies to prevent, mitigate, or remedi­
ate MS in supply chains. Studies that primarily described cases of MS without addressing 
actionable strategies were removed.
Further refinement was conducted by assessing the methodological quality and theo­
retical contribution of each article. We prioritised research that employed empirical analy­
sis, theoretical modelling, or case studies while excluding anecdotal or purely descriptive 
studies. Additionally, we focused on literature published within the last two decades to 
ensure the findings reflect contemporary issues and practices, although seminal works were 
retained regardless of publication date. After applying these criteria, we shortlisted 55 high-
quality articles for further analysis. Following an in-depth review, we identified 30 articles 
that provided the most comprehensive insights into mitigation strategies, which informed 
the selection of key variables for our causal loop diagram model.
3.2  Stock and flow diagram formulations and data collection
To validate the initial structure of the causal loop diagram model, we contacted four experts 
in both MS in SCs and SD, who agreed to review the model. After incorporating the experts’ 
opinions, we formulated the stock and flow diagram using VENSIM software.
To test the model’s applicability, we applied it to a real case involving a petrochemi­
cal supply chain reportedly employing numerous forced labourers (see Sect. 3.4 for case 
details). For the mathematical formulation, we collected secondary data from multiple 
sources. Financial and operational data, such as costs, profits, wages, market share, produc­
tion, sales, and exports, for both focal and supplier companies were obtained from stock 
exchange disclosures (http://codal.ir). Contract specifications and supply chain labour 
improvement initiatives, like audits, performance monitoring, training, and financial sup­
port allocations, were extracted from company Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
reports. These CSR reports were published at two accessibility levels: publicly available 
Level 1 reports (hosted on company websites or on publicly accessible media in the coun­
try that publish CSR reports (CSR Rasaneh, 2024)) and non-public Level 2 reports. We 
extracted only those elements directly relevant to MS mitigation (e.g., frequency of supplier 
audits, provision of training, grievance reporting mechanisms) from CSR reports. Other 
CSR activities (such as environmental or philanthropic initiatives) were not considered. 
We supplemented this dataset with market demand forecasts and competitor pricing data 
from both reports of National Petrochemical Company Iran (www.nipc.ir) and global sector 
analyses in OPEC Annual Statistical Bulletin (https://www.opec.org).
For qualitative variables and those for which secondary data was unavailable, we esti­
mated some of the required data based on experts’ opinions and intuitive judgments. To sup­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
port this process, we conducted 23 expert interviews from January to April 2022. Given the 
complexity and sensitivity of the topic, we adopted a purposive sampling approach, select­
ing participants involved in human rights, social sustainability, and the executive board of 
the focal company. The inclusion criteria required participants to have at least 10 years of 
experience in Iran’s oil sector or a minimum of five years of involvement in social respon­
sibility projects within the industry. The interviewees’ information is presented in Table A1 
(Appendix).
To identify and contact potential participants, we collaborated with the Iranian Federa­
tion of Petroleum Industry, a semi-governmental body that engages both private and gov­
ernmental oil and gas industry professionals. The Federation played a key role in facilitating 
access to relevant experts. An agent from the Federation together with our coauthor who 
resides in Iran conducted the interviews.
The interviews, known as semi-structured expert-elicitation sessions, combined numeric 
elicitation with targeted qualitative probing. Table A2 in the Appendix lists sample items 
that were provided to participants in the information/consent sheet; these are illustrative 
examples of the relationships we sought to estimate rather than a fixed questionnaire that 
was asked verbatim of every participant. Interviewers selected a subset of items tailored 
to each expert’s domain knowledge (e.g., audit specialists were asked audit-related items; 
regulator/NGO experts were asked media/regulation items). For relationships that required 
parameterisation in the stock and flow model, participants were asked to provide percentage-
based estimates of these relationships, which were plotted on a two-dimensional driver→
effect chart; these numeric responses were used to construct lookup (nonlinear) functions 
in VENSIM (See Figs. A1 and A2 in the Appendix). In addition, experts were also asked to 
provide starting values for certain endogenous variables where reliable secondary data were 
unavailable (e.g., brand visibility, current level of external reporting channels, and rent-
seeking behaviour; see Table A2, items 18–20). Interviewers also requested brief qualitative 
explanations of mechanisms and feedback (e.g., why an increase in grievance reporting 
changes detection rates), which were used to confirm the sign and causal logic of links iden­
tified in the literature-based causal loop diagram and to inform the functional shape. Thus, 
although many elicitation items are scale-based, the interviews were not a closed survey: 
they were adaptive, interactive expert-elicitation sessions combining numeric parameter 
estimates with focused qualitative justification. Interviews lasted between 35 and 75 min 
depending on the number and complexity of items relevant to each expert’s expertise.
To enhance model validity, participants were re-engaged approximately two months 
after the initial data collection. They were presented with the developed model and asked 
to review its structure and behaviour to assess its accuracy and relevance based on their 
expertise. Feedback was integrated to refine the model, ensuring alignment with real-world 
dynamics. Once the validation process was complete, individual data points were destroyed, 
and only the averaged functional relationships remained in the final model.
3.3  Model simulation and validation
Subsequently, we simulated the model in VENSIM. The model was calibrated and simulated. 
Structural tests, including structure assessment, dimensional consistency, and structure veri­
fication were performed, along with behavioral tests such as behavioral reproduction and 
integral error tests. Finally, we simulated the effect of different mitigation strategies groups, 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
defined in the extended dynamic SCP framework, to analyse the complex system of MS 
behaviour in response to different strategies. The research steps are presented in Fig. 2. The 
solid arrows indicate the logical sequence of the stages; the dotted arrows represent the feed­
back received at each stage; and the dotted lines show the connection between each stage 
and the activities undertaken to address it.
3.4  Case study data description
Our case study is a company producing polymer products in the ethylene value chain of 
a developing country, Iran. Iran is one of the main ethylene producers in the world, with 
a share of 4.2% of the world’s total ethylene production (Global data, 2022). Iran’s pet­
rochemical sector presents a relevant case study due to its inclusion in GSI reports high­
lighting both high Ms prevalence (GSI 2018) (Walk Free Foundation, 2018) and limited 
government response in the country (GSI 2023) (Walk Free Foundation, 2023). The extrac­
tive industry context, documented vulnerabilities in labour practices, and complex supply 
chain structures provide a suitable environment for examining the MS dynamics. This set­
ting allows practical testing of our SD model while acknowledging broader regional pat­
terns identified in independent research. Considering the prospect of increasing the volume 
of petrochemical products exported to European countries and the critical situation of MS 
in the region, exporting companies are motivated to reduce the risk of slavery across their 
supply chains. Although the national labour rights law is a public policy that is imposed 
Fig. 2  Research steps
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
through the Ministry of Oil and National Standard Organisation in the country, this law is 
not protected by sanctions seriously.
The case company’s share of the total ethylene and polymer production in the country 
is about 15%. Ethane is the primary raw material of this company. The production volume 
of petrochemical products, the market shares of each product, the major customers, and the 
financial information of the focal company are presented in Tables A3–A5 (Appendix). The 
amount of ethane produced by the supplier is about 1.6 million tons per year, of which 1.267 
million tons are supplied to the studied focal company. Table A6 (Appendix) presents the 
production and financial information of the supplier in recent years.
Due to ethical issues, this study only considers forced labour based on employment con­
tracts. Currently, in the supplier company, there are five employment contract types. Each 
contract type is explained in Table A6 (Appendix). The fifth group includes sub-contract 
employees, who do not have direct contract with the supplier company, are employed by 
a sub-contracting company, and are counted as forced labour based on the labour right 
standards in the country. This group of labour are required to sign a so-called “Perfor­
mance Bond Promissory Note." While this bond is ostensibly signed to hold them finan­
cially responsible for any damage to equipment, in reality, it serves to prevent workers from 
lodging complaints about their working conditions and restricts them from leaving their 
jobs until the contract period expires. In effect, subcontractors use this bond as a tool to 
threaten workers. Although monitoring by the Standards Organisation has prohibited this 
type of bond for the first four types of contracts since 1 January 2020, unfortunately, it is 
still applied to subcontracted technical workers.
At the operational level, since 2018, the focal company has devoted a budget to detect­
ing MS in the supplier company. Based on an audit by the focal company, the employees’ 
statistics by contract type are identified and represented in Table A7 (Appendix), showing 
that most of the employees are working under the fifth contract. In an attempt to change the 
contracts into more standard forms, the focal company has held training courses in the sup­
plier company. However, the focal company believes that due to the unemployment in the 
region, the courses have not served their purpose. Further, in the current situation, it is not 
feasible for the focal company to provide financial help to the supplier’s employees. The 
executive board believes that external policies are ineffective for promoting labour protec­
tion in Iran, and the public is not sensitive to MS due to limited media coverage of this issue. 
However, in recent years, due to the listing of petrochemical products and companies on the 
stock market, competition among petrochemical companies and attention to credit and repu­
tation related to social responsibility have increased. This has led to the publication of CSR 
reports in the petrochemical industry and special attention to social responsibility standards 
by companies active in the capital market. Accordingly, the focal company and another pet­
rochemical company, as main customers of the supplier alongside an NGO (Social Respon­
sibility and Corporate Governance Commission), are planning to horizontally collaborate 
on MS mitigation at the supplier company, and they have made initial estimates of the cost 
of this collaboration.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
4  Developing the SD model and scenario analysis
4.1  The subsystem diagram
In this study, we adopt the extended dynamic SCP framework shown in Fig. 1 as the main 
subsystem diagram of the MS system, which contains five subsystems: MS; motivated 
offenders; vulnerable victims; contextual or aggravating contexts; guardian capacity or 
external policies and operational strategies. The main variables are extracted from the lit­
erature and assigned to the main subsystems. Based on the developed SCP framework, the 
main subsystems of the model include the following:
MS subsystem variables: We define the variables MS risk and the total number of 
forced labourers in the upstream supply chain separately. Further, the actual MS risk in the 
supply chain is differentiated from the perceived MS risk in the supply chain. Similarly, 
the real cases of forced labourers in the supply chain are distinguished from the MS cases 
perceived by the focal company.
Motivated offenders subsystem variables: We categorise suppliers as high-risk and 
low-risk suppliers, assuming that MS occurs in the high-risk upstream chain. Accordingly, 
high-risk suppliers are considered main offenders in this system. Profit is considered a moti­
vation for high-risk suppliers to commit forced labour crimes. In this subsystem, fraud audi­
tors are also considered motivated offenders.
MS facilitators: We defined fraud auditors as the main MS crime facilitators in this 
subsystem. Audit fraud and deception and mock compliance by the suppliers are important 
variables in this subsystem.
Vulnerable victims subsystem variable: Unemployed individuals, migrants, unedu­
cated individuals, and women in the region are defined as vulnerable victims in this subsys­
tem. All are defined under the total available vulnerable labour variable in the model.
Contextual factors subsystem variable: We identified the vulnerability score in the 
region as the key variable in this subsystem. GSI 2018 calculates this score based on con­
textual factors, including governance issues, lack of basic needs, inequality, disenfranchised 
groups, and the effects of conflict. In our models, we define the final score as the primary 
contextual variable within the system.
Guardians capacity subsystem variables: The main guardians in this subsystem are 
identified as government and oil industry authorities, third parties such as trade unions and 
NGOs, and the executive board of the focal company, all of whom have the power to enact 
laws and regulations. The key variables in this subsystem include the severity of govern­
mental acts on MS, third-party performance evaluation and monitoring of the focal com­
pany, and internal MS policies within the focal company, which are strongly influenced by 
the commitment of its executive board. Additionally, implementation instruments designed 
to hold offenders accountable, such as fines, are also included in this subsystem.
4.2  The causal loop diagram and the stock and flow diagram
Figure 3 illustrates the causal loop diagram of MS in problematic supply chain situations. 
We design the causal relationships and feedback loops among the variables based on the 
main identified subsystems and their variables. We hypothesise the relationships based on 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
the relevant literature discussed in Sect. 2 and the basic concepts of SD modelling and 
closed-loop systems.
The rest of this section addresses the main reinforcing and balancing feedback loops in 
the system. Since the causal loop diagram includes many feedback loops, the main loops are 
extracted and presented in Figs. 4 and 5. In these figures, R and B denote reinforcing and 
balancing loops, respectively. Due to the closed relationships among the first four subsys­
tems, we explain them under one heading.
MS subsystem
In a reinforcing loop (R1 in Fig. 4a), as the use of forced labour increases, the supplier’s 
total labour cost decreases, resulting in profit growth and thus a decline in its prices. The 
focal company’s profit will increase due to lower supplier cost, leading to lower prices 
and a greater market share. In turn, this larger market share increases the demand and time 
pressure on the focal company to deliver its products, which requires shorter lead times and 
places pressure on suppliers to produce more, forcing them to employ more exploited labour 
(Benstead et al., 2021). However, in the balancing loop (B1 in Fig. 4a), higher profit could 
also result in an increase in the price ceiling. The price ceiling forces high-risk suppliers 
to cut their prices or receive fewer orders, and an increase in this price ceiling leads to a 
decrease in labour exploitation.
Through other balancing loops (B2 and B3 in Fig. 4b), a higher percentage of forced 
labour employment increases the amount of MS cases perceived by the focal company, 
leading to remediation strategies, such as stricter codes of conduct, follow-up audits, and 
reporting of MS cases (Stevenson & Cole, 2018; Schaper & Pollach, 2021; Benstead et al., 
2021). Follow-up audits and stricter codes of conduct both result in a decrease in the total 
number of forced labourers (Emberson et al., 2022).
In another balancing loop (B4 in Fig. 4c), perceived cases of MS may result in companies 
terminating their contracts with high-risk suppliers (New, 2015; Flynn, 2020). Fewer orders 
for these suppliers reduce their demand for labour and thus their employment of forced 
labour. However, in the reinforcing loop (R3 in Fig. 4c), termination of the contract dimin­
ishes the demand and profit of high-risk suppliers, and thus they will have no choice but to 
cut their cost and employ lower-cost labour, resulting in more forced labour.
Guardian capacity and mitigation strategies subsystems
A commitment of the focal company’s executive board to MS is a key variable in the 
model, which is essential for combatting MS. This commitment results in effective horizon­
tal collaboration, the development of internal policies related to MS, and increased budget 
allocations to meet MS requirements. This, in turn, leads to MS risk assessment, the devel­
opment of grievance and remediation mechanisms, ongoing due diligence and auditing, and 
training on MS (Liu et al., 2022).
The higher budget allocation to MS requirements enhances the focal company’s risk 
assessment (Liu et al., 2022). The more risk assessment the company performs, the more 
likely it is that MS risks in the supply chain will be perceived, leading to more risk-mitiga­
tion activities. These activities include supplier engagement, developing codes of conduct 
for suppliers, providing financial support for suppliers to meet the codes of conduct, and 
workforce training (Esoimeme, 2020; Benstead et al., 2021). Risk mitigation through sup­
plier engagement, developing codes of conduct, and financial support decreases the workers’ 
vulnerability score in the region, while risk mitigation through workforce training reduces 
the size of the vulnerable workforce. Both strategies result in a lower risk of MS in the sup­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3  The causal loop diagram of problematic MS situations in supply chains
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ply chain. The less MS risk, the fewer real MS cases, resulting in more compliance with the 
internal and external codes of conduct and a better reputation for the focal company. The 
improved reputation will increase the company’s market share and thus reinforce the execu­
tive board’s commitment to combatting MS (Nunes et al., 2021). Importantly, this effect of 
reputation on market share is highly dependent on public awareness of MS (R4 in Fig. 5a). 
The executive boards of companies acknowledge the significant influence of transparency 
in CSR/MS on corporate profitability, as it shapes consumers’ perceptions of a product’s 
social impact (Fan et al., 2024).
The higher the budget allocated to combatting MS, the more ongoing due diligence and 
auditing will be performed (Liu et al., 2022), enhancing the efficiency of auditing in terms 
of identifying non-compliance. Thus, more cases of MS will be perceived by the focal 
company. In a balancing loop, as the number of perceived cases increases, the amount of 
reporting to the public and authorities also increases, resulting in a better reputation for 
the company and reinforcing the executive board’s commitment to combatting MS (R5 
in Fig. 5b). In addition, a higher number of perceived MS cases increases the amount of 
remediation practices, decreasing the number of real MS cases (B3 in Fig. 5b). Following 
R4, this will result in more commitment, while following R3 this may lead to contract ter­
mination with the suppliers, increasing the number of real cases. Reporting by third-party 
groups, declines the focal company’s reputation, and subsequently reduces commitment to 
combatting MS.
In addition, with a strong executive board commitment to MS issues, horizontal col­
laboration become more effective, improving knowledge and resource sharing. In turn, this 
improves collaboration with suppliers and third parties in risk assessment, the efficiency 
of audits in identifying non-compliance, joint training, and risk mitigation by providing 
financial support to suppliers (Benstead et al., 2018). A higher level of risk assessment 
evolves into risk mitigation, reinforcing the commitment to combatting MS following the 
previously mentioned loops (e.g., R4). Higher audit efficiency, through a reinforcing loop, 
also enhances the commitment to combatting MS (regarding R5). Improved joint training 
decreases the ambiguity of MS in communities. On the one hand, less ambiguity decreases 
the cultural difference between bystanders and victims and increases the public understand­
ing of the emergency of the situation. This results in increased bystander responsibility and 
an indirect intervention through MS-related whistleblowing. A high whistleblowing rate 
supports third-party reporting of MS (Stevenson, 2022) and thus a decline in the reputation 
of the focal company, which in a balancing way, diminishes the company’s commitment to 
combatting MS (B5 in Fig. 5c).
On the other hand, less ambiguity increases the percentage of discovered MS cases, rein­
forcing the perceived MS cases and resulting in an increased commitment to combatting MS 
(Meehan & Pinnington, 2021) (R6 in Fig. 5c). Meanwhile, joint training involves internal 
training on MS, reducing ambiguity. Through joint training, risk mitigation increases due 
to the suppliers’ workforce training, resulting in less available vulnerable labour, fewer real 
cases of MS, better compliance and reputation, and eventually a higher commitment to 
combatting MS (regarding R4). Finally, joint training cuts the company’s training costs, 
resulting in higher profits. As stated above, higher profit on one side increases the market 
share and leads to higher demand, resulting in more labour exploitation, a larger number 
of real cases of MS, and ultimately a lower commitment to combatting it. On another side, 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
higher profit increases the suppliers’ price ceiling, which may lead to lower exploitation and 
thus a higher commitment to combatting MS (regarding R1 and B1).
In another reinforcing loop, increased commitment and budget allocation to MS require­
ments leads to more development of grievance and remediation mechanisms (Liu et al., 
2022). Available grievance channels increase the reporting of perceived MS cases, resulting 
in an increasing number of discovered MS cases in the supply chain. With a rise in perceived 
MS cases, reporting increases, which, as explained previously, increases the company’s 
reputation and the commitment to combatting MS (R7 in Fig. 5c). However, the emergency 
nature of the situation becomes more obvious for witnesses, resulting in increased bystander 
responsibility and indirect intervention through MS whistleblowing, which may decrease 
commitment (regarding B5) (Stevenson, 2022). Moreover, with a higher commitment to 
combatting MS, more coherent internal policies related to MS are developed, increasing MS 
case reporting, the reputation of the company, and ultimately its commitment to combatting 
MS (R8 in Fig. 5d).
High media coverage increases public awareness of MS (Geng et al., 2022) and reduces 
the ambiguity regarding MS in communities (Meehan & Pinnington, 2021). High public 
awareness of MS enhances people’s ability to distinguish the emergency of the situation and 
decreases the cultural difference between bystanders and victims, both of which increase 
Fig. 4  The main reinforcing and balancing loops in the MS subsystem
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
bystander responsibility (Stevenson, 2022). In addition, public awareness of MS increases 
the effect of the reputation of the focal company on its market share. In other words, when 
the public has enough awareness of MS and cares about the issue, the reputation of the 
company related to MS affects its market share and consumer demand. In turn, this signifi­
cant effect of reputation on market share positively affects the company’s commitment to 
combatting MS.
Fig. 5  The main reinforcing and balancing loops in the governance structure subsystem
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Perceived MS cases could be reported or hidden by the focal company, which is a func­
tion of the percentage of reporting. The percentage of reporting is dependent on the com­
pany’s internal policies in relation to MS, the severity of external policies related to MS, the 
degree of performance evaluation and monitoring provided by third-party groups, firm size, 
and its prior social responsibility commitment (Flynn, 2020). When focal company reports 
cases of MS, its reputation improves. However, when it does not do so and the cases remain 
hidden, they could be revealed by third-party groups, resulting in a decrease in the reputa­
tion of the company.
As mentioned earlier, when third-party groups reveal MS cases, the focal company’s rep­
utation decreases (regarding B5). The company is then obliged to invest a large amount of 
money in investigating malpractice in its supply chain, thus increasing its costs and reducing 
its profits (Stevenson, 2022). Conversely, such revelation could lead to audit fraud to hide 
the incompliance and corrupt inspectors (Gold et al., 2015), resulting in inefficient audits 
and fewer discovered cases of MS (Stevenson & Cole, 2018). However, this reduction in 
discovered cases, again, would increase the revelation of cases by third parties.
Next, we present the stock and flow diagram based on the causal loop diagram at two 
levels of detail. Figure 6 depicts the compact model. The extended model, including all 
auxiliary variables and their relationships, is presented in Fig. A1 (Appendix), and the main 
mathematical formulations are listed and discussed in A2 (Appendix).
4.3  Validation and base-run simulation
Due to the qualitative nature of many variables defined in the system and the reliance on 
experts’ opinions in defining many of the relationships, the structural and behavioural valid­
Fig. 6  The compact version of the stock and flow diagram for problematic MS situations in supply chains
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ity of the model is crucial. Several rounds of discussion with MS experts and the people 
involved in the system confirmed the structural validity of our model. After ensuring that 
all the units and dimensions of the variables and equations were consistent, the stock and 
fiow model was simulated using VENSIM DSS 6.4E with annual time steps over a 10-year 
horizon, with 2021 considered as the base year. Since the time step is one year in the model, 
it was cut both in half and in quarters to evaluate its sensitivity to the time step. The results 
of the tests for the variables of interest, the focal company’s profit, and the total number of 
forced labourers are presented in Fig. 7.
The model behaviour did not change significantly in either of the cases. Hence, a one-
year time step was considered appropriate for simulation. To check the capability of the 
model to reproduce the historical trend of the model behaviour, we performed the behaviour 
reproduction test, using historical data from 2012 to 2021. The Root Mean Square Percent­
age Error (RMSPE) was calculated by comparing the simulated and actual data (Hosse­
inzadeh et al., 2023). The actual and simulated data and error analysis results for the main 
variables, including the total number of forced labourers, the focal company’s profit, the 
total number of standard workforces, and the total number of available vulnerable labourers 
are presented in Table 1.
The RMSPE index for all variables is less than 10%, and the general trend of the simu­
lated and actual variables is also the same, as shown in Fig. 8. Hence, we conclude that the 
model has behavioural validity for the case under investigation.
To investigate the sensitivity of the main variables of interest to the model’s parameters, 
we performed various Monte Carlo sensitivity analysis tests, considering the possible logi­
cal range of changes for the exogenous variables. The two main variables of interest were 
not sensitive to most of the parameters, implying the stability of the model. However, varia­
tions in some parameters, such as relational capital and adopting online platforms, led to 
significant changes in model behaviour, as shown in Fig. 9.
According to the figure, adopting online platforms could lead to a decline in the total 
number of forced labourers, but the focal company’s profit could fall to nearly zero in 
some cases. Hence, the adoption of online platforms requires a careful analysis of the costs 
imposed on the focal company. Moreover, the total number of forced labourers is highly 
sensitive to variations in the variable relational capital in a horizontal collaboration. This 
implies that a high level of relational capital among the collaborators could lead to a large 
decline in the number of forced labourers, whereas a low level of relational capital might 
increase the number of forced labourers even more than the current situation. Thus, we 
Fig. 7  The integration error test results for the variables ‘focal company profit’ and ‘total number of 
forced labourers’ based on three time steps: 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1  The actual and simulated data and the error analysis for key variables in the model
Variable
Value
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Total number of forced labourers (persons)
At
697
702
723
736
751
768
784
795
821
827
St
697
694
719
729
746
768
771
811
814
856
RMSPE = 0.02
Focal company profit (millions of dollars)
At
101.876
108.665
117.233
131.176
168.932
194.561
210.945
302.062
303.112
301.774
St
101.876
111.812
122.123
149.973
182.987
204.235
241.356
296.744
316.809
330.231
RMSPE = 0.06
Total number of standard workforce (persons)
At
270
263
257
255
250
238
234
228
226
218
St
270
266
262
259
254
239
236
232
228
224
RMSPE = 0.02
Total number of vulnerable labourers (persons)
At
1256
1238
1194
1132
1097
1045
1088
1091
1087
1190
St
1256
1227
1179
1121
1088
1045
1057
1075
1102
1166
RMSPE = 0.02
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
will further analyse the adoption of an online platform as an individual strategy through a 
scenario analysis. Furthermore, given the sensitivity of the model to the relational capital 
parameter, we will define potential scenarios involving changes to this parameter within the 
horizontal collaboration strategy.
The baselines in Fig. 10 depict the simulated behaviour of the main variables of interest, 
including the total number of forced labourers and the focal company’s profit, maintain­
ing business as usual in the supply chain. The MS cases in the supplier company increase 
sharply at the beginning of the period, reaching a peak of 2,060 people in the third year 
and remaining steady thereafter. However, this represents almost 90% of the total number 
of employees in the supplier company, implying that the company, due to the weak sur­
veillance and high profit, will follow the strategy of employing all its labour through sub-
contracting. Only a small number of standard labourers will remain due to their long-term 
contracts from previous years, and almost all new workers will be hired by sub-contractors.
The focal company’s profit keeps increasing across the simulation horizon with a little 
variation in some years. This high profit could be the main reason why the system does not 
control the total number of forced labourers in the supplier’s organisation, indicating that 
policy intervention is essential to mitigate MS cases over the years.
4.4  MS mitigation strategies
Based on the categorisation of mitigation strategies in the extended SCP framework shown 
in Fig. 1, five main groups of strategies are developed. The main aim of scenario analysis 
is to test if the proposed mitigation strategies in the literature help reduce MS in a real con­
text or if they may be dominated or intensified by other controlling or reinforcing factors 
in the system. The five groups of strategies include reducing the opportunity for offenders, 
increasing the risk of offending the MS crime by offenders, decreasing the vulnerability of 
victims, increasing the guardian capacity, and horizontal collaboration. Besides, based on 
the sensitivity analysis results, the adoption of online platforms is defined as an individual 
strategy, and the horizontal collaboration strategy is introduced by variations in the rela­
tional capital parameter. The followings address the six strategy groups. 
1. Decreasing the opportunities for offenders
 
This scenario emphasises increasing audit efficiency by devoting a large portion of the 
available budget for MS detection to risk assessment, due diligence, audit, and perfor­
mance monitoring of high-risk suppliers. To operationalise this policy into the model 
structure, we change the audit cost coefficient, which is the share of the available budget 
devoted to due diligence and auditing, from 0.1 to 0.3. Moreover, we changed the risk 
assessment share of the available budget from 0.4 to 0.6.
2. Increasing the risk of offending for offenders
 
In this group of scenarios, the focus is on increasing the risk that MS cases in the 
supply chain will be revealed by third-party groups, which directly affects the focal 
company’s reputation. Since media coverage increases public awareness of MS issues 
and decreases public ambiguity regarding MS, an increase in the percentage of media 
coverage from 10% to 70% is defined in the form of a step function. In addition, a larger 
portion of the available budget for MS detection is devoted to developing grievance 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
mechanisms (from 0.2 to 0.8). Similarly, the amount of clear external channels for 
reporting, that is, whistleblowing hotlines, is increased from 5% to 80%.
3. Decreasing the vulnerability of victims
 
This group of scenarios concentrates on target hardening by mitigating the risk of MS 
through training and enhancing the capabilities of the suppliers’ workforce as well as 
providing financial help to suppliers to meet the codes of conduct. Financial help will 
affect the region’s vulnerability score, and workforce training will decrease the total 
number of labourers who are vulnerable to exploitation. To operationalise these poli­
cies, the training share of the available budget is increased from 0.1 to 0.5, and the 
percentage of financial help provided due to the perceived risk of MS is increased from 
0% to 60%.
4. Increasing the guardian capacity
 
This scenario group emphasises strengthening the capacity of law enforcement by 
strengthening the rules and increasing the fines for criminals. We apply this policy to 
the model structure by increasing the severity of governmental action on MS from 0.1 
to 0.9. Moreover, a fine of 200 times workers’ average salary is imposed for any cases 
of MS in the supply chain revealed by third parties, which is not explicitly stated in the 
governmental acts on MS.
5. Horizontal collaboration
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
700
750
800
850
Year
Persons
Total Number of Forced Labourers
At
St
(a) RMSPE=0.02
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
100
200
300
Year
Millions of Dollars
Focal Company Proﬁt
At
St
(b) RMSPE=0.06
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
220
240
260
Year
Persons
Total Number of Standard Workforce
At
St
(c) RMSPE=0.02
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
1100
1200
Year
Persons
Total Number of Vulnerable Labourers
At
St
(d) RMSPE=0.02
Fig. 8  Comparison of various metrics over time
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
The impact of effective horizontal collaboration on different variables is designed into 
the model structure. However, according to the sensitivity analysis results, successful 
horizontal collaboration is highly dependent on relational capital, such as trust among 
the collaborators. While the current level of trust among peers in the horizontal collabo­
ration, including the focal company, another petrochemical company (a key customer 
of the supplier), and the Social Responsibility and Corporate Governance Commission 
NGO, is estimated at 50%, this solution aims to determine whether such a collaboration 
would improve the forced labour situation while considering the focal company’s profit.
6. Adopting online platforms
 
Based on the sensitivity analysis results, the adoption of online platforms could have 
a significant effect on the total number of forced labourers. However, their impact in 
terms of the cost imposed on the system needs to be analysed in the long run. Based 
Fig. 10  Simulation results of the main variables of the model in the base case scenario
 
Fig. 9  Monte Carlo sensitivity analysis results of the main variables of interest, ‘total number of forced 
labourers’ and ‘focal company profit’, to the variations in ‘adopting online platforms’ and ‘relational 
capital’ variables
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
on the estimation of the executive board of the focal company, the company’s digital 
platform could be developed to integrate with that of the supplier company for a fixed 
cost of 30 million dollars and an annual variable cost of 10 million dollars. Considering 
the available options, the integration level with this cost would be about 40%.
The strategy lines 01–06 in Fig. 11 illustrate the simulation results of scenario groups 1–6 
compared to the base case for the two main variables of focal company profit and total 
number of forced labourers.
When applying the ‘decreasing the opportunities for offenders’ strategy group (01), the 
number of perceived MS cases will increase, which is consistent with the growth of MS 
cases in the supply chain. Since this mitigation strategy is more sensitive to the remediation 
policies of the focal company and other factors like the severity of external and internal poli­
cies, which affect the percentage of reporting, it does not reduce the total number of forced 
labourers significantly. However, a drop can be seen after the sixth year, which might be due 
to the balancing effect of the company’s diminishing reputation and the current remediation 
policies, which become more active with the increase in the number of perceived cases due 
to more audits. In addition, the company’s total profit will not change significantly since 
the audit cost will not result in an increased budget allocation to detecting MS. Hence, this 
policy is not significantly productive on its own.
This strategy structurally alters system behaviour, triggering measurable shifts in key 
variables by adopting the ‘increasing the risk of offending’ strategy group (02), but it will 
take some time for public awareness to affect the system’s behaviour. In the current situa­
tion, the media has not properly covered the MS issue for the public, so the cases are not 
discovered or, if discovered, are not revealed, and the reputation loop does not strongly bal­
ance the high rate of labourer exploitation. Moreover, grievance channels and whistleblow­
ing hotlines are not clearly developed and known to the employees and the public. However, 
a stepwise increase in media coverage and improvements in grievance channels and hotlines 
leads to a descending pattern of forced labour beginning in the fifth year. Even so, a high 
percentage of forced labour can be found in the system. The focal company’s profit keeps 
dropping beginning in the third year, which confirms the dynamic hypothesis that the effect 
of public awareness on the company demand when MS cases are revealed will result in less 
profit, and, with a delay, this will affect the focal company’s attempt to eradicate MS in its 
supply chain. Yet, the decrease in profit is not notable since there are no fines imposed on 
the focal company for malpractice.
Fig. 11  The simulation results of the proposed scenarios compared to the base case
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The ‘decreasing the vulnerability of victims’ strategy group (03) does not control the 
system in the short term, but after the seventh year, the total number of forced labourers 
begins to decline. This implies that training affects the system, but only after a long delay, 
as it takes time to change people’s thinking about a social phenomenon. While the delay 
for public awareness and decreased ambiguity is about one year, it is notable that the effect 
of these changes on the main variables of interest appear after seven years. The high cost 
of training on MS and capability building and a decrease in forced labour cases will result 
in increased supplier costs, and so the company’s profit will drop from the very beginning 
years of simulation compared to the base case. This may initially disappoint policymakers, 
but from a long-term view, the policy group would be effective in reducing the number of 
MS cases in the supply chain and profits will start to rise after the seventh year.
By applying the ‘increasing the guardian capacity’ strategy group (04), the total number 
of forced labourers starts to decline sharply after the first year. This is a substantial deviation 
from the other scenarios and reflects the high impact of external policies and fines soon after 
becoming imperative. However, it again shows an increasing trend after the fifth year. This 
behaviour confirms the compliance-based paradigm, according to which a policy turns into 
an anti-policy due to policy resistance. Here, increased surveillance increases the reporting 
percentage, resulting in a decline in MS cases, but the severity of the rules can lead to audit 
fraud and, ultimately, an increase in the number of MS cases. Furthermore, applying penal­
ties on the focal company for revealed MS cases causes the number of MS cases to drop 
immediately after the first year. However, a sharp increase in cases begins after the fifth 
year. The initial decrease is because the company may terminate its contract with the high-
risk supplier after being charged for MS cases in its supply chain. Nevertheless, the sharp 
decline in the high-risk supplier’s profit encourages its use of forced labour to reduce costs, 
and the reality of declining profits in the focal company after the second year may encourage 
it to renew the contract with the suppliers. This, again, confirms the policy resistance that 
occurs in complex socio-economic systems. However, eradicating cases of MS once they 
are detected is the company’s biggest problem, as there is no enforcement tool for prevent­
ing suppliers from exploiting workers.
‘Horizontal collaboration’ (05), in the first few years, imposes some costs on the com­
pany because the initial coordination arrangements take time, money, and human resources. 
However, after a while, it leads to a considerable amount of savings in training costs, audit­
ing, and financial help to suppliers to satisfy the codes of conduct, and after the seventh year, 
the profit increases much more than in the base case. With 50% trust between the executive 
board and the other competitor and the NGO, the horizontal collaboration will lead to a 
slightly descending trend in the total number of forced labourers, but only after a long delay. 
According to the sensitivity analysis results, the total number of forced labourers is far more 
sensitive to the relational capital variable, so if the company aims to collaborate horizontally 
with other groups, it first needs to invest in building trust.
By ‘adopting online platforms’ (06), even with a low level of integration, the total num­
ber of forced labourers begins to decrease slightly after the third year. However, this strategy 
results in a high decrease in the focal company’s profit compared to the other strategies. This 
strategy also requires remediation and reporting mechanisms since, like the first strategy, 
it only assists in discovering the cases, while reporting relies on other external policies. 
Hence, the adoption of these platforms will not have the desired results without a strong 
eradication policy.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Hybrid policies
According to SCP theory, the conjunction of motivated offenders, vulnerable victims, 
and low capacity of surveillance on criminals, in time and space, leads to opportunities 
for crime. As long as it is impossible to purely remove motivated offenders or vulnerable 
victims or monitor them at any time and situation, motivated offenders will find ways to 
engage in exploitation if the benefits are higher than the costs. Therefore, according to the 
configurational view, a combination of mitigation strategies should be applied to reduce 
such opportunities. However, resources for accomplishing this are often scarce, and sat­
isfactory decision-making is needed to choose among the strategies based on the limited 
resources. Accordingly, in the MS context, we also designed and applied different combina­
tions of strategies based on possible logical changes in the exogenous variables regarding 
individual strategies.
The hybrid policies lines shown in Fig. 12 demonstrate the simulation results of the best-
combined group of scenarios, considering both social and financial objectives. This policy 
includes a combination of public policies, such as a 50% increase in the severity of public 
policies and a fine of 200 times the average worker’s salary for each case of MS detected in 
the supply chain. It also includes operational policies, such as 70% media coverage of MS 
and 50% relational capital. A 30% share of the focal company’s training budget is devoted 
to MS detection, and 40% is dedicated to providing financial help to the supplier company, 
considering the available capacity in the case study region and the initial budget for MS 
detection in the base year of simulation for the focal company.
As shown in Fig. 12, the total number of forced labourers continues to grow steadily until 
reaching a peak in the fourth year. A declining trend can then be seen, with a mild decease 
up to the sixth year and then more aggressive drops until a balance is achieved after the tenth 
year. The focal company’s profit continues to decrease from the second to the sixth year 
due to the initial costs of combating MS and paying for malpractice in the first years of the 
simulation horizon. However, it begins to grow steadily and reaches a peak in the final year 
due to a decrease in the number of MS cases in the supply chain and a reduction in fines due 
to malpractice. Importantly, the growth in profit is not as strong as the decline in the number 
of forced labourers, likely due to an increase in the supplier’s workforce cost.
The analysis of different combined policies reveals that media coverage and public 
awareness are necessary for any strategy groups to effectively mitigate MS. However, pub­
lic awareness is insufficient on its own without external laws that impose high costs for 
malpractice on the offending companies. According to Liu et al. (2022), executive board 
Fig. 12  The simulation results of the best hybrid scenario compared to the base case and other scenarios
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
commitment is a key factor in combatting MS in the supply chain, but it is not an exogenous 
variable. Rather, it is an endogenous variable influenced by the public demand to mitigate 
MS and the demand of law enforcement to reduce labour exploitation. Training can also 
be effective when grievance channels and whistleblowing hotlines are available and when 
the legal system supports victims after MS is reported; otherwise, the amount of vulnerable 
will not change significantly. Moreover, horizontal collaboration is beneficial when accom­
panied by a strong commitment from the company’s executive board, which, as explained 
above, is highly dependent on high public awareness of MS and law enforcement capacity.
5  Discussion and research implications
5.1  Discussion
This study set out to answer two key research questions: (1) How can MS in supply chains 
be effectively mitigated through systemic interventions? and (2) What are the key leverage 
points for interventions to reduce MS in supply chains while addressing policy resistance 
and economic trade-offs? Our findings, grounded in SD modelling and the SCP framework, 
provide novel insights into both questions while addressing gaps in the existing literature 
as follows.
Addressing RQ1: How can MS in supply chains be effectively mitigated through systemic 
interventions?
Our SD model demonstrates that MS in supply chains cannot be effectively addressed 
through isolated interventions due to the complex interplay of reinforcing and balancing 
feedback loops. While prior research has advocated for specific strategies like supplier audits 
(Stevenson & Cole, 2018) or digital traceability (Jiang et al., 2023), our simulations reveal 
that these approaches often lead to policy resistance, where short-term gains are offset by 
unintended consequences. For instance, while audits increase detection, they may also drive 
suppliers toward mock compliance (Benstead et al., 2021) without addressing root causes. 
By embedding mitigation strategies in an SCP-based systems model, we show why these 
failures occur: interventions targeting only one element of the crime triangle (e.g., offenders 
or victims) leave other enabling conditions unaddressed, allowing MS to persist.
In line with SCP’s configurational perspective, our simulations confirm that only bundled 
interventions, reducing opportunities, increasing risks, decreasing victim vulnerability, and 
enhancing guardian capacity, produce sustained declines in forced labour. This supports 
calls in SSCM research for configurational rather than linear approaches (Ketchen Jr et al., 
2022). Our contribution lies in demonstrating, via SD, how such configurational effects 
materialise over time.
Taken together, these findings highlight that effective mitigation requires systemic pack­
ages rather than piecemeal actions. Interventions must be designed with an appreciation of 
interconnected feedback loops, time delays, and unintended spillovers, making system-wide 
configurations the only viable pathway to long-term effectiveness. Addressing policy resis­
tance requires a holistic approach that considers systemic delays and feedback loops. For 
example, our findings confirm that while stricter regulations initially reduce MS cases, they 
can also drive unintended consequences such as audit fraud or deeper concealment of forced 
labour, as outlined by Stevenson and Cole (2018). This aligns with SD research on policy 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
resistance (Desai, 2012), suggesting that interventions must include continuous monitoring 
and adaptable policies to counteract unanticipated responses. Moreover, the implementation 
of remediation strategies should consider long-term impacts rather than short-term compli­
ance measures.
Addressing RQ2: What are the key leverage points for interventions to reduce MS in sup­
ply chains while addressing policy resistance?
While RQ1 highlights the necessity of bundled interventions, RQ2 pinpoints the specific 
levers within such bundles that exert disproportionate influence.
First, the SCP framework suggests that increasing the perceived risks of offending a 
crime for offenders is a critical leverage point. Our findings confirm that public awareness 
and media coverage significantly influence corporate behaviour, consistent with Geng et al. 
(2022). When MS issues gain public attention, companies perceive higher risks associated 
with non-compliance, leading to more proactive mitigation efforts. However, in regions 
where public scrutiny is low, firms lack motivation to act, emphasising the need for sustained 
awareness campaigns and media engagement as deterrents against exploitation. At the same 
time, our analysis shows that media coverage is most effective when paired with strong legal 
enforcement mechanisms. If public awareness increases but legal penalties remain weak, 
companies may resort to superficial compliance measures rather than substantive change.
Second, reputational consequences alone are insufficient unless economic incentives are 
realigned. When the financial penalties for non-compliance are weak, the cost of exploita­
tion becomes lower than the benefits. This aligns with SCP principles, which emphasise 
the importance of deterrents that outweigh the incentives for criminal activity. Currently, 
reputational damage is the most significant consequence for non-compliant firms, but our 
findings, consistent with Han et al. (2024), show that this has a limited financial impact 
on large multinational corporations. Stronger legal enforcement and economic penalties 
are therefore required to shift corporate decision-making towards ethical sourcing. To wit, 
public awareness and the subsequent reputational damage alone is insufficient to drive this 
shift unless accompanied by strict external laws that impose high financial costs on offend­
ing companies. Without such penalties, companies may perceive MS risk as a reputational 
issue rather than a legal or financial one, reducing their incentive to take proactive measures.
Third, remediation strategies such as supplier disengagement, where companies termi­
nate contracts with high-risk suppliers, do not eliminate MS but rather exacerbate it by 
increasing unemployment in vulnerable regions. This supports SCP literature on crime dis­
placement, suggesting that eradicating MS requires not only detection but also comprehen­
sive post-audit remediation policies. Our findings extend those of Meehan and Pinnington 
(2021) who highlight the lack of structured pathways for companies to address MS once 
detected. Without viable alternatives for suppliers and vulnerable workers, disengagement 
merely relocates the problem rather than solving it.
Fourth, horizontal collaboration is essential for addressing systemic weaknesses in MS 
detection and remediation. Our study also finds that partnerships with NGOs, trade unions, 
and competitors can improve auditing and support interventions to reduce forced labour. 
However, in agreement with Benstead et al. (2018), we find that effective collaboration is 
dependent on relational capital. Without trust and long-term commitment, the initial coor­
dination costs and slow realisation of benefits may discourage sustained efforts. To coun­
teract this, policymakers must create incentives for ongoing multi-stakeholder engagement. 
Furthermore, the success of horizontal collaboration is tied to executive board commit­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ment, which, as noted above, is strongly influenced by public awareness and the presence 
of robust legal enforcement. Without these factors, collaboration efforts may lack the neces­
sary authority and financial backing to produce meaningful change.
Finally, digital technologies, such as blockchain, can be powerful levers for transparency, 
as widely recommended in the literature (Liu et al., 2022; Christ & Helliar, 2021; Jiang et 
al., 2023), but our study highlights that high implementation costs can hinder their adoption, 
particularly for smaller firms or those operating in low-margin supply chains. This supports 
the argument that cost-benefit analyses must precede implementation, and financial support 
mechanisms should be introduced to enable broader access to these technologies.
Table 2 compares the MS mitigation strategy groups along their impacts on forced labour, 
company profit, and their key leverage points.
5.2  Theoretical contributions
Our research contributes to the literature in three ways. First, it demonstrates the suitability 
of SD modelling and simulation as a configurational approach for theory elaboration in 
SCM (Fisher & Aguinis, 2017) and, specifically, SSCM, as called for by Flynn et al. (2020) 
and Ketchen Jr et al. (2022). In doing so, we respond to calls in the social sustainability 
literature to incorporate dynamic and systemic modelling approaches that can capture com­
plex socio-economic trade-offs (Melnyk et al., 2024). Our model integrates focal company 
and supplier revenues and costs into feedback loops that are non-linearly connected with 
the social objective, enabling simultaneous analysis of economic and social outcomes. This 
extends work on socially responsible SCM (e.g., Tang, 2018) by showing how financial and 
social dimensions evolve together over time, and by illustrating the temporal delays and 
feedbacks that shape policy effectiveness.
Second, the systemic model of MS provides researchers with a holistic representation 
of causal structures underlying labour exploitation in supply chains. In contrast to prior 
Table 2  Comparison of MS mitigation strategies
Strategy group
Impact on forced labour
Impact on company profit
Key leverage points
Decreasing op­
portunities for 
offenders
Slight decline after 6 years 
due to increased audits and 
perceived MS cases
Minimal change; budget 
reallocation within existing 
limits
Limited effect alone; 
more effective when 
combined with remedia­
tion strategies
Increasing risk 
of offending for 
offenders
Significant decline after year 
5; relies on media and public 
awareness
Profit drops from year 3 
due to public awareness 
and reputation effects
Dependent on grievance 
mechanisms and whistle­
blower effectiveness
Decreasing vic­
tim vulnerability
Notable and relatively steady 
decline through training and 
financial aid
Slight drop in profit; mod­
erate due to training and 
financial support
Works best with supplier 
engagement and adequate 
financial resources
Increasing guard­
ian capacity
Delayed but notable decline 
due to stronger laws and 
penalties
Short-term profit decline 
from legal fines; stabilises 
long-term
Effective if legal changes 
are enforced; needs 
strong policy support
Horizontal 
collaboration
Significant decline if rela­
tional capital (trust) is high
Depends on trust level; low 
trust can harm profit, high 
trust improves balance
Highly sensitive to rela­
tional capital and organ­
isational commitment
Adopting online 
platforms
Potentially large decline, but 
depends heavily on digital 
integration level
High cost implementation; 
profit may fall significantly
Costly; requires long-
term investment and 
integration with suppliers
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
MS research that has often examined single levers in isolation (e.g., Benstead et al., 2018; 
Christ & Helliar, 2021; Stevenson, 2022), our approach highlights interdependencies and 
unintended consequences that emerge over time. The ability to simulate mitigation strate­
gies before implementation avoids real-world costs and risks (Desai, 2012). Our findings 
demonstrate two specific theoretical insights for the MS and social sustainability literatures: 
(a) time matters, delays and feedback effects mean that strategies may appear ineffective in 
the short run yet prove critical over longer horizons, and (b) no single strategy is sufficient, 
policy resistance emerges when interventions are pursued in isolation. For instance, while 
the role of media coverage has been recognised in exposing MS cases (e.g., Geng et al., 
2022), our results show that its effectiveness is amplified only when combined with other 
SCP-rooted strategies. Similarly, our analysis shows why some measures (e.g., online plat­
forms) underperform relative to expectations, advancing understanding of why MS persists 
despite extensive compliance initiatives. The model, being generic with two levels of detail, 
can also be adapted to other settings; thus supporting broader theory-building in DSS appli­
cations (for a similar approach, see Chesney et al., 2017).
Third, we contribute to the MS and SCP literatures by introducing a new categorisation 
of MS mitigation strategies in supply chains. Drawing on SCP (e.g., Von Lampe, 2011; Wil­
liams et al., 2022), we then structure the MS problem system and its main subsystems based 
on this framework and enrich it with the closed-loop system theory view, which elaborates 
causal interrelationships between the components of the framework. The mitigation strate­
gies in the new categorisation include decreasing the opportunities for offenders, increas­
ing the risk of offending, decreasing the vulnerability of victims, increasing the guardian 
capacity, and horizontal collaboration. Our new categorisation and simulation analysis of 
individual policy categories reveal that isolated attention on an SCP policy group will not 
improve labourers’ situations as expected and that the effectiveness of each strategy group 
is sensitive to variations in the variables related to other policy groups. For example, there 
may be sufficient supportive policies in place to reduce the vulnerability of labourers and 
opportunities for offenders as well as sufficient rules and codes of conduct to monitor the 
supply chain. However, if there are still cases of MS in the chain, decision-makers are likely 
to focus on the fourth group, that is, increasing the risk of offending and developing strate­
gies to accomplish this group. This advances the SCP-based theorisation of MS mitigation 
proposed by GSI 2018 (Walk Free Foundation, 2018), offering a foundation for future theo­
retical and empirical work on multi-pronged strategies against labour exploitation.
5.3  Practical implications
This study offers actionable insights for policymakers, supply chain managers, and corpo­
rate leaders seeking to combat MS in supply chains. The systemic perspective highlights the 
need for multi-faceted interventions that address both immediate challenges and long-term 
structural barriers. Key implications include:
Policy design and enforcement: Governments should prioritise deterrence-based poli­
cies that impose substantial financial penalties for non-compliance, ensuring the cost of 
exploitation outweighs its benefits. Current legislation, such as the UK MS Act, often lacks 
enforceable economic sanctions, limiting its effectiveness.
Moreover, public awareness campaigns should be institutionalised to amplify scrutiny of 
corporate practices. Media coverage and transparency initiatives (e.g., mandatory disclosure 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
of remediation efforts) can heighten reputational risks for offenders, complementing legal 
frameworks.
Supply chain management strategies: (1) Beyond audits: While supplier audits remain 
common, they risk fostering “mock compliance" without addressing root causes. Firms 
should integrate audits with capacity-building programmes for suppliers, such as training 
on labour rights and financial support to meet ethical standards. (2) Horizontal collabora­
tion: Partnerships with NGOs, competitors, and trade unions can pool resources for more 
effective monitoring and remediation. However, success hinges on relational capital (e.g., 
trust and long-term commitment). Firms should invest in trust-building measures to sustain 
collaboration. (3) Digital technologies: Blockchain and integrated platforms can enhance 
traceability, but their high costs may exclude smaller firms. Policymakers and industry con­
sortia should subsidise or standardise affordable technologies to broaden access.
Remediation and victim support: Terminating contracts with high-risk suppliers may 
displace rather than resolve MS, exacerbating unemployment in vulnerable regions. Firms 
should adopt remediation-focused approaches, such as financial empowerment programmes 
for exploited workers (e.g., wage reparations, skills training) and alternative employment 
pathways in collaboration with local governments and NGOs. Clear post-detection pro­
tocols are critical. Firms should develop internal guidelines for remediation, including 
whistleblower protections and victim compensation, rather than relying solely on punitive 
measures.
Executive leadership and organisational culture: Executive boards must recognise 
MS as a strategic risk rather than a compliance checkbox. This requires aligning anti-slavery 
goals with corporate performance metrics (e.g., linking executive remuneration to supply 
chain transparency), and allocating dedicated budgets for MS mitigation, including technol­
ogy adoption and supplier support.
Contextual adaptation: Strategies must account for regional disparities. In high-risk 
countries with weak governance, firms should leverage local NGOs and trade unions to 
bridge enforcement gaps, and advocate for international frameworks that pressure host gov­
ernments to strengthen labour protections.
These recommendations emphasise systemic synergy–combining legal, operational, and 
collaborative measures–to disrupt the feedback loops perpetuating MS. By adopting a con­
figurational approach, stakeholders can mitigate policy resistance and achieve sustainable 
reductions in labour exploitation.
6  Conclusion
This study demonstrates that MS in supply chains is a deeply entrenched, systemic issue 
that cannot be effectively mitigated through isolated interventions. By integrating the SCP 
framework within a SD model, this research highlights the critical importance of config­
urational approaches that account for the complex feedback loops and policy resistance 
inherent in socio-economic systems. The results reveal that combined mitigation strate­
gies, particularly those enhancing public awareness, reinforcing legal accountability, and 
fostering horizontal collaboration, are significantly more effective than singular measures. 
However, the high implementation costs and the contextual limitations of digital solutions, 
as well as the dynamic nature of stakeholder behaviour, underscore the need for adaptable, 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
evidence-based policymaking. This study contributes to the theoretical and practical dis­
course by offering a validated simulation model that aids in pre-implementation assessment 
and supports more informed, systemic decision-making in the fight against forced labour in 
supply chains.
6.1  Limitations and future research
This research is one of the first systematic attempts to model the complex dynamics of MS, 
leaving room for future improvements. We conducted a single case study to develop a stock 
and flow diagram and simulate the long-term effects of mitigation strategies in practice. Pre­
cisely estimating the relationships in the model could be a subject of experimental research. 
Moreover, continuous empirical validation is essential for refining the model while enhanc­
ing its parsimony.
For simplicity, we considered a focal company and its first-tier supplier in a scenario 
where no alternative low-risk supplier was available in the country. Both entities were 
located in a high-risk country, as originally defined in the main model. However, the model 
can be adapted to include additional sub-supplier tiers, expanding its applicability to inter­
national supply chains. Further research could address these gaps by testing the model 
across diverse sectors and geographies, incorporating multi-tier supply chain dynamics.
Moreover, the high implementation costs of blockchain and traceability tools were high­
lighted, but their long-term return on investment remains underexplored. Comparative case 
studies could assess cost-benefit trade-offs across firm sizes and industries. Additionally, 
the model identifies post-detection remediation as a critical weakness but does not pre­
scribe specific protocols. Future work could develop frameworks for victim compensation, 
supplier rehabilitation, or alternative employment programmes. Integrating complementary 
methodologies like agent-based modelling could enrich the understanding of behavioural 
and systemic drivers of MS. Agent-based modelling could complement SD by simulating 
individual actor behaviours (e.g., suppliers, auditors) within the broader system.
Finally, a limitation of our dataset is that, in the absence of a legal requirement for MS 
statements in the studied country, we had to rely on CSR reporting as a proxy. While this 
is consistent with existing scholarship where MS practices are nested within broader CSR 
frameworks (LeBaron and Rühmkorf, 2019; New, 2015), it may not capture the full extent 
of MS-specific practices.
Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplementary material available at ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​5​-​0​6​9​6​5​-​2​.​
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
References
Armenia, S., Franco, E., Iandolo, F., Maielli, G., & Vito, P. (2024). Zooming in and out the landscape: Arti­
ficial intelligence and system dynamics in business and management. Technological Forecasting and 
Social Change, 200, Article 123131.
Arranz, C. F., Arroyabe, M. F., Arranz, N., & de Arroyabe, J. C. F. (2023). Digitalisation dynamics in SMEs: 
An approach from systems dynamics and artificial intelligence. Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change, 196, Article 122880.
Benstead, A. V., Hendry, L. C., & Stevenson, M. (2018). Horizontal collaboration in response to modern 
slavery legislation: An action research project. International Journal of Operations & Production Man­
agement, 38(12), 2286–2312.
Benstead, A. V., Hendry, L. C., & Stevenson, M. (2021). Detecting and remediating modern slavery in supply 
chains: A targeted audit approach. Production Planning & Control, 32(13), 1136–1157.
Bodendorf, F., Wonn, F., Simon, K., & Franke, J. (2023). Indicators and countermeasures of modern slavery 
in global supply chains: Pathway to a social supply chain management framework. Business Strategy 
and the Environment, 32(4), 2049–2077.
Chen, J.-Y. (2022). Responsible sourcing and supply chain traceability. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 248, Article 108462.
Chesney, T., Gold, S., & Trautrims, A. (2017). Agent based modelling as a decision support system for 
shadow accounting. Decision Support Systems, 95, 110–116.
Christ, K. L., & Helliar, C. V. (2021). Blockchain technology and modern slavery: Reducing deceptive 
recruitment in migrant worker populations. Journal of Business Research, 131, 112–120.
Clarke, R. V. (1983). Situational crime prevention: Its theoretical basis and practical scope. Crime and Jus­
tice, 4, 225–256.
Crane, A. (2013). Modern slavery as a management practice: Exploring the conditions and capabilities for 
human exploitation. Academy of Management Review, 38(1), 49–69.
Desai, A. (2012). Simulation for policy inquiry. Springer Science & Business Media.
Ekblom, P. & Tilley, N. (2017). Going equipped: Criminology, situational crime prevention and the resource­
ful offender. In Crime Opportunity Theories (pp. 445–467). Routledge.
Emberson, C., Pinheiro, S. M., & Trautrims, A. (2022). Adaptations to first-tier suppliers’ relational anti-
slavery capabilities. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 27(4), 575–593.
Esoimeme, E. E. (2020). Using the risk-based approach to curb modern slavery in the supply chain: The 
Anglo American and marks and spencer example. Journal of Financial Crime, 27(2), 313–322.
Fan, X., Zhang, J., Yao, Y., & Wei, L. (2024). Social responsibility disclosure format in a supply chain. 
Omega, 126, Article 103043.
Fisher, G., & Aguinis, H. (2017). Using theory elaboration to make theoretical advancements. Organizational 
Research Methods, 20(3), 438–464.
Flynn, A. (2020). Determinants of corporate compliance with modern slavery reporting. Supply Chain Man­
agement: An International Journal, 25(1), 1–16.
Flynn, B., Pagell, M., & Fugate, B. (2020). From the editors: Introduction to the emerging discourse incuba­
tor on the topic of emerging approaches for developing supply chain management theory. Journal of 
Supply Chain Management, 56(2), 3–6.
Forrester, J. W. (1997). Industrial dynamics. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 48(10), 1037–1041.
Geng, R., Lam, H. K., & Stevenson, M. (2022). Addressing modern slavery in supply chains: An awareness-
motivation-capability perspective. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 
42(3), 331–356.
Global data (2022). Ethylene industry installed capacity and capital expenditure (capex) forecast by region 
and countries including details of all active plants, planned and announced projects, 2021–2026. ​h​t​t​p​s​
:​/​/​t​i​n​y​u​r​l​.​c​o​m​/​2​e​s​t​2​z​k​x​.​
Gold, S., Trautrims, A., & Trodd, Z. (2015). Modern slavery challenges to supply chain management. Supply 
Chain Management: An International Journal, 20(5), 485–494.
Han, C., Jia, F., Jiang, M., & Chen, L. (2024). Modern slavery in supply chains: A systematic literature 
review. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 27(7), 1206–1227.
Hosseinzadeh, M., Foroushani, M. S., Ghayem, H., & Mehregan, M. R. (2023). Sustainable maintenance 
planning in the petroleum industry: An application of system dynamics approach. International Journal 
of Quality & Reliability Management, 40(9), 2083–2113.
International Labour Organization (ILO) (2022). Global estimates of modern slavery: Forced labour and 
child marriage. https://tinyurl.com/2wsxmrfd.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Jiang, M., Chen, L., Blome, C., & Jia, F. (2023). Digital technology adoption for modern slavery risk mitiga­
tion in supply chains: An institutional perspective. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 192, 
Article 122595.
Kazantsev, N., Petrovskyi, O., & Müller, J. M. (2023). From supply chains towards manufacturing ecosys­
tems: A system dynamics model. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 197, Article 122917.
Ketchen, D. J., Jr., Kaufmann, L., & Carter, C. R. (2022). Configurational approaches to theory develop­
ment in supply chain management: Leveraging underexplored opportunities. Journal of Supply Chain 
Management, 58(3), 71–88.
Khan, S. A. R., Zkik, K., Belhadi, A., & Kamble, S. S. (2021). Evaluating barriers and solutions for social 
sustainability adoption in multi-tier supply chains. International Journal of Production Research, 
59(11), 3378–3397.
Kunz, N., Chesney, T., Trautrims, A., & Gold, S. (2023). Adoption and transferability of joint interventions 
to fight modern slavery in food supply chains. International Journal of Production Economics, 258, 
Article 108809.
LeBaron, G. (2021). The role of supply chains in the global business of forced labour. Journal of Supply 
Chain Management, 57(2), 29–42.
LeBaron, G., & Rühmkorf, A. (2019). The domestic politics of corporate accountability legislation: Struggles 
over the 2015 UK modern slavery act. Socio-Economic Review, 17(3), 709–743.
Liu, T., Suprun, E., Stewart, R. A., & Duran, S. (2022). Developing a framework for assessing the readiness 
of entities in the construction industry in addressing modern slavery. Sustainable Production and Con­
sumption, 31, 139–151.
Lotfi, M. & Walker, H. (2024). See no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil? Barriers to modern slavery risk 
management in supply chains: An empirical investigation. Production Planning & Control, pp. 1–16.
Lund-Thomsen, P., & Lindgreen, A. (2014). Corporate social responsibility in global value chains: Where are 
we now and where are we going? Journal of Business Ethics, 123, 11–22.
Mangla, S. K., Kazancoglu, Y., Ekinci, E., Liu, M., Özbiltekin, M., & Sezer, M. D. (2021). Using system 
dynamics to analyze the societal impacts of blockchain technology in milk supply chainsrefer. Trans­
portation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 149, Article 102289.
Mathiyazhagan, K., Mani, V., Mathivathanan, D., & Rajak, S. (2023). Evaluation of antecedents to social 
sustainability practices in multi-tier Indian automotive manufacturing firms. International Journal of 
Production Research, 61(14), 4786–4807.
Meehan, J., & Pinnington, B. D. (2021). Modern slavery in supply chains: Insights through strategic ambigu­
ity. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 41(2), 77–101.
Melnyk, S. A., Thürer, M., Blome, C., Schoenherr, T., & Gold, S. (2024). (Re)-discovering simulation as a 
critical element of OM/SCM research: Call for research. International Journal of Operations & Produc­
tion Management, 44(7), 1376–1389.
Montecchi, M., Plangger, K., & West, D. C. (2021). Supply chain transparency: A bibliometric review and 
research agenda. International Journal of Production Economics, 238, Article 108152.
Morecroft, J. D. (2015). Strategic modelling and business dynamics: A feedback systems approach. John 
Wiley & Sons.
Nahar, S. (2024). Modeling the effects of artificial intelligence (AI)-based innovation on sustainable develop­
ment goals (SDGs): Applying a system dynamics perspective in a cross-country setting. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 201, Article 123203.
New, S. J. (2015). Modern slavery and the supply chain: The limits of corporate social responsibility? Supply 
Chain Management: An International Journal, 20(6), 697–707.
Nunes, M. F., Park, C. L., & Shin, H. (2021). Corporate social and environmental irresponsibilities in sup­
ply chains, contamination, and damage of intangible resources: A behavioural approach. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 241, Article 108275.
Rasaneh, C. S. R. (2024). (Reportorial). Retrieved from 15, May 2024 ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​c​s​r​r​a​s​a​n​e​h​.​i​r​/​c​a​t​e​g​o​r​y​/​r​e​p​o​r​t​
o​r​i​a​l​/​
Rostamnezhad, M., Nasirzadeh, F., Khanzadi, M., Jarban, M. J., & Ghayoumian, M. (2020). Modeling social 
sustainability in construction projects by integrating system dynamics and fuzzy-DEMATEL method: 
A case study of highway project. Engineering, construction and architectural management, 27(7), 
1595–1618.
Schaper, S., & Pollach, I. (2021). Modern slavery statements: From regulation to substantive supply chain 
reporting. Journal of Cleaner Production, 313, Article 127872.
Shurrab, H., & Jonsson, P. (2023). Untangling the complexity generating material delivery “schedule insta­
bility’’: Insights from automotive OEMs. International Journal of Operations & Production Manage­
ment, 43(2), 235–273.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Simpson, D., Segrave, M., Quarshie, A., Kach, A., Handfield, R., Panas, G., & Moore, H. (2021). The role of 
psychological distance in organizational responses to modern slavery risk in supply chains. Journal of 
Operations management, 67(8), 989–1016.
Sodhi, M. S. (2015). Conceptualizing social responsibility in operations via stakeholder resource-based view. 
Production and Operations Management, 24(9), 1375–1389.
Sodhi, M. S., & Tang, C. S. (2018). Corporate social sustainability in supply chains: A thematic analysis of 
the literature. International Journal of Production Research, 56(1–2), 882–901.
Sterman, J. D. (2001). System dynamics modeling: Tools for learning in a complex world. California Man­
agement Review, 43(4), 8–25.
Stevenson, M. (2022). Hidden in plain sight: The bystander effect and the mobilisation of modern slavery 
whistleblowing. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 27(1), 128–139.
Stevenson, M., & Cole, R. (2018). Modern slavery in supply chains: A secondary data analysis of detection, 
remediation and disclosure. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 23(2), 81–99.
Sudarto, S., Takahashi, K., & Morikawa, K. (2017). Efficient flexible long-term capacity planning for optimal 
sustainability dimensions performance of reverse logistics social responsibility: A system dynamics 
approach. International Journal of Production Economics, 184, 179–192.
Tang, C. S. (2018). Socially responsible supply chains in emerging markets: Some research opportunities. 
Journal of Operations Management, 57, 1–10.
Tang, O., & Rehme, J. (2017). An investigation of renewable certificates policy in Swedish electricity indus­
try using an integrated system dynamics model. International Journal of Production Economics, 194, 
200–213.
Von Lampe, K. (2011). The application of the framework of situational crime prevention to ‘organized 
crime’. Criminology & Criminal Justice, 11(2), 145–163.
Walk Free Foundation (2018). Global slavery index 2018. https://tinyurl.com/2j9t28np
Walk Free Foundation (2023). Global slavery index 2023. https://tinyurl.com/3bsps2j7
Williams, A., Corner, E., & Taylor, H. (2022). Vehicular ramming attacks: Assessing the effectiveness of 
situational crime prevention using crime script analysis. Terrorism and Political Violence, 34(8), 
1549–1563.
Yung, K. K., Ardern, C. L., Serpiello, F. R., & Robertson, S. (2022). Characteristics of complex systems in 
sports injury rehabilitation: Examples and implications for practice. Sports Medicine-Open, 8(1), 24.
Yu, W., Wong, C. Y., Jacobs, M., & Chavez, R. (2025). Modern slavery supply chain capabilities: The effects 
of blockchain technology and employees’ digital dexterity. International Journal of Operations & Pro­
duction Management, 45(1), 210–235.
Zhao, L.-T., Chen, Z.-Y., Duan, Y.-X., & Qiu, R.-X. (2024). How will CBAM affect the decarbonisation of 
steel industry in China? A system dynamics approach. International Journal of Production Research, 
62(18), 6859–6880.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Mahnaz Hosseinzadeh1
 · Reza Alikhani2
 · Stefan Gold3
 · 
Marzieh Samadi Foroushani4
 
 Mahnaz Hosseinzadeh
m.hosseinzadeh@sheffield.ac.uk
Reza Alikhani
r.alikhani@mbs-education.com
Stefan Gold
stefan.gold@tum.de
Marzieh Samadi Foroushani
samadi.m@eyc.ac.ir
1 
Sheffield University Management School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
2 
MBS School of Business, Montpellier, France
3 
TUM Campus Straubing for Biotechnology and Sustainability, Technical University of 
Munich, Straubing, Germany
4 
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Eyvanekey, Eyvanekey, Iran
1 3