TITLE: Inequalities matter when prioritizing sustainable goals: Insights from applying a novel multi-criteria-clustering modeling to SDG Index Scores
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07125-w
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07125-w
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Inequalities matter when prioritizing sustainable goals:
Insights from applying a novel multi-criteria-clustering
modeling to SDG Index Scores
Helder Gomes Costa1
· Diogo Lima1
Received: 7 October 2024 / Accepted: 23 February 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
The SDG Index aggregates country performance across 17 Sustainable Development Goals
using arithmetic means, which allows high scores in some goals to compensate for poor
performance in others, if weighted sum is applied as the aggregation function. To address
this limitation, we develop and apply the KRP2 algorithm that combines K-means clustering
with PROMETHEE II ranking to group countries based on their complete SDG performance
proﬁles rather than overall scores alone. Applying this methodology to 2023 data reveals
substantial disparities between high-performing and low-performing clusters. Countries in
top-ranked categories show strong socioeconomic performance but score lowest on SDG
12 (Responsible Consumption and Production) and SDG 13 (Climate Action). Conversely,
bottom-ranked categories struggle with poverty and basic needs (SDGs 1, 7, and 9) yet exhibit
the best performance on SDGs 12 and 13, reﬂecting their minimal historical contribution
to environmental degradation. These trade-offs remain hidden when using compensatory
aggregation methods. We extend the analysis with a nine-cluster sensitivity test that further
isolates extreme cases, conﬁrming the robustness of these patterns. Our framework provides
decision-support inputs for policy deliberation, suggesting that differentiated approaches may
better serve sustainable development objectives than uniform global policies.
1 Introduction
The discussion about sustainability has been under the spotlight since the seminal work
of Carson (1962), which brought the detrimental impact of pesticides on the environment
into focus. The discussion advanced in the Brundtland Report (Bruntland, 1987), which
introduced the notion of sustainable development (SD) as the ability to fulﬁll current needs
while safeguarding the capacity of future generations to fulﬁll their needs.
These authors contributed equally to this work.
B Helder Gomes Costa
heldergc@id.uff.br
Diogo Lima
diogoﬂs@id.uff.br
1
Departamento de Engenharia de Produção, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Rua Passos da Pátria, 156
- Bloco D, Niterói 100190, RJ, Brazil
123

Annals of Operations Research
That is, sustainable development is in agreement with the core idea of the Triple Bot-
tom Line (TBL), as suggested in Elkington (1994), since it prioritizes equilibrium between
economic progress, environmental conservation, and societal welfare.
Later, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) were deﬁned in the Millennium Dec-
laration [4], which established a comprehensive vision for world development focusing on
issues connected to poverty, hunger, maternal and child health, basic education, gender equal-
ity, HIV/AIDS and other diseases, environmental sustainability, and global partnerships for
development.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) succeeded the MDGs and comprise a set of
17 interconnected goals (see Table B.1) addressing the social, economic, and environmental
challenges facing the world. As stated by Sachs et al. (2023), the SDG Index has been
assessing the progress in meeting the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.
Although the SDG Index is robust and has been carefully built, there is a problem with it:
the use of the mean as the aggregation function allows the possibility of compensatory effects
occurring when applying Equation 3. This means that a high performance in one SDG could
compensate for a poor performance in another SDG. For instance, suppose two hypothetical
countries (X and Y), so that:
• Country X has received a score of 0.50 in all SDGs, which results in an overall SDG
score equal to 0.50.
• Now, suppose another country Y scored 0.9 from SDG 1 up to SDG 8 but scored 0.1
from SDG 9 up to 16.
• If one applies the simple average to compute the overall score, it would result in both
X and Y having an overall score equal to 0.5, despite their signiﬁcantly different scores
across the SDGs.
• Some questions that arise here are: Should countries X and Y be assigned to the same
category? Should the same policies be addressed to these countries?
On the other hand, there are studies that indicate that countries’ contributions to sustain-
ability damage are not equal or homogeneous, and, as a consequence, no global or uniform
policy should be applied to all countries on our planet. As a sample of this reasoning, we men-
tion (Gutmann & Gorman, 2022), which analyzed the period before the UN SDG’s existence,
highlighting the footprint produced by historical decisions and policies on contemporane-
ous sustainable issues and claiming that strategies to face sustainable challenges should not
be equally applied to all countries. This work has a chapter addressed to each one of the
seventeen Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Similarly, Caradonna (2022) and Bruckmeier (2020) highlight the relevance of historical
political, social and economic events and movements on sustainability issues, underlining the
need to recognize such historical inﬂuence and to introduce compensations when deﬁning
strategies to promote sustainability.
Finally, although our proposal does not aim to discuss the reasons for inequalities, we
suggest that those interested in a deeper understanding of this subject read (Szreter, 2024),
which highlights the increasing inequality among countries worldwide and explores its ori-
gins. In this work, Szreter (2024) provides a worthy discussion by focusing on the history of
institutions, covering a period since the 1320s, about ideas and measures of inequalities.
123

Annals of Operations Research
1.1 Nature of the research
However, before advancing in describing the research, we believe it is fundamental to clarify
for the reader the nature and purpose of our research. We must address this before responding
to the speciﬁc technical concerns.
Our research does not attempt to prescribe speciﬁc policy implementations or substitute for
decision-makers. Rather, it provides a decision support framework that structures complex
SDG performance data to reveal patterns and inform policy discussions. Accordingly, we
clarify that:
• A Prescriptive approach (not our proposal) focuses on specifying exact penalty
amounts, administrative structures, enforcement mechanisms, and claims to provide
implementable policy solutions.
• A Decision support approach (our proposal): Reveals empirical patterns (e.g.,
socioeconomic-environmental trade-offs), demonstrates disparities through cluster anal-
ysis, and suggests directions that policymakers might consider–recognizing that imple-
mentation details require political negotiation, institutional design, and stakeholder input
beyond our analytical scope.
1.2 Objective
According to the previous discussion, an opportunity or gap we identiﬁed to enhance and
complement the SDG report analysis involves organizing countries into groups based on
their similarity and recognizing their differences and inequalities across the whole SDG
set. Hence, the main objective of this research is to provide a framework for conducting
analytical studies to support decision-making in operational research and decision analytics
by providing rigorous empirical analysis of SDG performance heterogeneity and identifying
patterns that could inform more equitable and effective sustainable development policies.
Speciﬁcally, our proposal is to combine K-means clustering and PROMETHEE II ranking
as analytical tools (clustering and outranking MCDA) that:
1. Identify countries with similar SDG performance proﬁles
2. Map disparities between cluster centroids
3. Reveal systematic differences or inequalities among the clusters
4. Obtaintheclusters’ranking,identifyingwhatclustersneedmoreattentionandwhatshould
be used as a benchmark
5. Identify clusters in extreme positions of the ranking
6. Provide empirical evidence for why differentiated policies make sense
We emphasize that these analytical outputs should be used as further inputs to policy
deliberation, not as complete policy proposals, supported by validation signposts such as the
elbow and silhouette diagnostics and a k = 9 sensitivity analysis (see section 5). Accordingly,
actual policy implementation remains entirely within the domain of legitimate decision-
makers.
2 A brieﬁng on the computation of SDG scores
As described in Lafortune et al. (2018), the arithmetical mean was applied to compute coun-
tries’ scores for each SDG (Ii j) (Equation 1) as well as countries’ overall score (Ii) (Equation
2):
123

Annals of Operations Research
Ii j(Ni j, Ii jk) =
Ni j

k=1
1
Ni j
Ii jk
(1)
Ii(Ni, Ni j, Ii jk) =
Ni

j=1
1
Ni
Ni j

k=1
1
Ni j
Ii jk
(2)
In these equations:
• Ii j is the SDG Index for the ith country under the jth SDG
• Ni j is the number of indicators for SDG j for which country i has data
• Ii jk is the score of country i for indicator k of SDG j
• Ii is the overall index score for the country i
• Ni denotes the number of SDGs for which the country i has data
Without loss of generality, Equation 2 should be rewritten as Equation 3, which clariﬁes
the fact that the overall SDG Index score (Ii) of a country is the arithmetic mean of the SDG
scores Ii j of that country.
Ii(Ni, Ni j, Ii jk) =
Ni

j=1
1
Ni
Ii j
(3)
Aiming to emphasize the signiﬁcance of measures related to SDGs in research and its
global dissemination, we present in this section a brief bibliometric analysis in this ﬁeld.
This analysis is based on a data set consisting of metadata regarding documents published
in sources indexed in Scopus or Web of Science (WoS) databases and that mentioned, in
their abstracts, titles, or even keywords, ("Sustainable Development Goals" OR SDGs OR
"Sustainable Development Goal") AND (countries OR country) AND (ranking OR sorting
OR cluster*), and excluding retracted ﬁles. This analysis is based on a data set consisting of
metadata regarding documents published in sources indexed in Scopus or Web of Science
(WoS) databases and that mention, in their abstracts, titles, or even keywords, ("Sustainable
Development Goals" OR SDGs OR "Sustainable Development Goal") AND (countries OR
country) AND (ranking OR sorting OR cluster*), and excluding retracted ﬁles. The metadata
from the research were retrieved as BibTeX archives and merged with the support of Costa et
al. (2025), which resulted in a ﬁle containing the metadata of 1279 documents. The merged
ﬁle was inputted into Biblioshiny app (Aria & Cuccurullo, 2023) to run the bibliometrix
(Aria & Cuccurullo, 2017) package, resulting in Figure 1 that shows an overview of the main
metrics related to the records recovered and presents the ranking of countries regarding SDGs.
Analyzing this ﬁgure, we concluded that this topic is growing, since it has an annual growth
rate equal to 55.38% with 15.67 average citations per article. There were 6290 different
authors involved in 681 different sources, covering the period from 2015 up to 2025.
Upon examining the subjects covered in the previous articles, we have observed a discus-
sion about SDGs arising in areas such as Climate change, Healthcare, and Quality of life,
mostly with an emphasis on the needs of children and women. In Appendix A, we provide a
limited selection of articles that can better illustrate this perception. To the best of our knowl-
edge, we identiﬁed a gap in previous works: the absence of models that classify countries
based on their similarities and differences in performance across the entire set of SDG scores.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Overview of metadata of previous publications on SDGs: 2015-2025. [Plot generated by Biblioshiny]
3 About unsupervised multi-criteria clustering methods
Although the main objective of this paper is not to compare multi-criteria clustering meth-
ods, in this section we provide a non-exhaustive discussion about previous proposals that
approached the multi-criteria clustering issue.
This discussion is organized according to a typology we created regarding clustering
situations. In this original typology, clustering problems are classiﬁed into three types: cat-
egorization, sorting of instances (sorting Type A), and ranking of categories (sorting Type
B).
• As categorization problems, we consider the clustering situations in which a sample of
instances are organized into groups, clusters, or categories, usually taking into account
similarities and differences among them. In these situations, there is no preference rela-
tionship among the groups or categories. For instance, in biology, we assign organisms to
species according to their characteristics. Figure 2a shows the representation of a generic
categorization problem. This kind of clustering is usually done through data-mining
algorithms such as k-means and DBSCAN.
• In sorting problems, the instances, objects, or alternatives are organized into ranked
groups or categories. It differs from categorization since there is a preference or impor-
tance relationship among the categories. In this paper, we categorize the sorting problems
into the following derivations:
a) SortingType A involvesassigninginstancestorankedcategoriesorsetsbycomparing
each instance against a set of ranked proﬁles that deﬁne each category. As shown
in Figure 2b, the instances in a group do not need to be similar among them. In the
multi-criteria ﬁeld, Electre Tri (Mousseau et al., 2000) and Promethe-sort (Araz &
Ozkarahan, 2005) are examples of methods created to solve Type A sorting problems.
b) Sorting Type B ranks a group of objects pre-organized according to their similarities
into a category or class, as illustrated in Figure 2c. In the multi-criteria ﬁeld, Souza
et al. (2021), Lima et al. (2024) and Matos et al. (2025) are examples of studies that
used Electre III (Roy & Hugonnard, 1982) and PROMETHEE II ((Brans & Vincke,
1985), (Brans & De Smet, 2016)) respectively, to rank groups formed by k-means
clustering for this type of sorting problem.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 A typology of clustering
and sorting approaches
In sorting Type A, ﬁrst the boundaries (or proﬁles) of each category are deﬁned, and then
the instances are compared with proﬁles to be assigned to a group. On the other hand, on
Type B, the instances are ﬁrst grouped according to their similarities, and then, after ending
the clustering step, the groups that store the instances are ranked.
Another point we highlight is about the functions for aggregation of preferences applied
in multi-criteria methods, which should allow these methods to be classiﬁed as either com-
pensatory or non-compensatory ones. Using a compensatory method to combine preferences
means that the decision maker thinks a low score in one area can be made up for by a high score
123

Annals of Operations Research
in another area–common examples of compensatory functions are the average and weighted
sum. In contrast, the non-compensatory method prevents a high performance in one criterion
from compensating for a poor performance in another criterion. Matos et al. (2025) reports an
up-to-date systematized review about recent articles that used multi-criteria combined with
clustering. Table 1 extends the results reported in Matos et al. (2025) by identifying:
• The kind of multi-criteria aggregation of preferences was adopted–see the 5th column of
Table 1.
• The type of clustering problem the modeling addressed–see the 6th or last column of
Table 1
4 The proposal
Figure 3 shows the steps of our research, which involves using the introduced KRP2 (algo-
rithm 1) to evaluate how countries perform on the SDG indicators through an integrated
clustering-and-outranking decision support framework . This algorithm uses PROMETHEE
II to rank the groups created by K-means, and all three algorithms are explained in Appendix
C. What follows is an overview of how the steps that are displayed in Figure 3 were carried
out.
Step 1. The ﬁrst step was to get and process the data set D from https://dashboards.
sdgindex.org/, featuring the latest edition (2023) of the SDG index scores published in Sachs
et al. (2023) and licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share-Alike 4.0 Interna-
tional License.
It involved ﬁlling in blank cells within the data set. Following a strategy similar to that
adopted in Sachs et al. (2023), the blank cells were ﬁlled with the mean scores of the other
countries in the same geographic region. For example, if a country had a blank cell for SDG
10, it was ﬁlled using the mean index scores for SDG 10 of the country’s region.
As a result, we got a data set without blank cells and ready to be input into the next step
for clustering the countries.
Step 2. In the second step, we input the results from the previous one into the k-means++
clustering method described in Arthur and Vassilvitski (2007), which we explain in algorithm
algorithm 2 found in Appendix C. The main reason to use k-means is that it groups objects in
the same cluster or category that have similar values throughout the set of SDGs, instead of
those with a similar mean. This decision reduces the possibility of compensatory effects in
the classiﬁcation, and the choice of k is supported by elbow and silhouette diagnostics (see
Figure 5 in section 5).
The outputs of this step are the countries organized in clusters and the clusters’ centroids.
Step 3. In this step, the clusters that resulted from the previous step were ranked by
inputting their centroids into the PROMETHEE II algorithm to obtain the ranked clusters.
The PROMETHEE II, proposed in Brans et al. (1986) and described in algorithm 3 in
Appendix C, is a ranking algorithm based on the outranking non-compensatory aggregation
logic. Hence, we chose to use PROMETHEE II because its ranking procedure is able to reduce
compensatory effects. Also, the procedure is easier to explain than other non-compensatory
multi-criteria ranking methods, such as ELECTRE II (Roy & Bertier, 1971) and ELECTRE
III (Roy, 1978). For a deeper discussion about compensatory effects, we suggest reading
(Costa, 2016) and Costa et al. (2023).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Recent works that combine MCDA and clustering techniques
Source
Clustering Algorithm(s) MCDM/A Method(s)
Application Context
Preference aggregation Clustering problem
Cui et al. (2023)
K-means
CRITIC, MABAC, Monte Carlo MCDM sensitivity and robustness
Compensatory
Sorting Type A
Kandakoglu et al. (2022) K-medoids
PROMETHEE, SMAA
Portfolio optimization
Compensatory
Sorting Type A
Khani et al. (2023)
PAM
TOPSIS, EPSO-FAHP
Linguistic weighting in TOPSIS
Compensatory
Sorting Type A
Keskin (2022)
K-means
BWM
Sustainable supplier evaluation
Compensatory
Categori-zation
Kaya et al. (2023)
K-means
MARCOS, CRITIC, MEREC
Circular economy in the EU
Compensatory
Sorting Type A
Maghsoodi (2023)
K-means, DBSCAN
T-VIKOR, T-MULTIMOORA
Alternative selection with CLUS-MCDA II Compensatory
Sorting Type A
Nuri et al. (2021)
Ward
CRITIC, TOPSIS
Agricultural city clustering
Compensatory
Sorting Type A
Sahoo et al. (2024)
DBSCAN
TFNS-TOPSIS, Entropy
Cluster selection in RSSFs
Compensatory
Sorting Type A
Shahri et al. (2021)
PF K-means
PF-VIKOR
Failure mode analysis
Compensatory
Sorting Type A
Tewari et al. (2024)
K-means
AHP
MAR site selection
Compensatory
Sorting Type A
Lima et al. (2024)
K-means
Promethee II
Countries prosperity evaluation
non-Compensatory
Sorting Type B
Souza et al. (2021)
K-means
Electre III
Countries sustainability evaluation
non-Compensatory
Sorting Type B
Lima et al. (2024)
K-means
Promethee II
Countries poverty evaluation
non-Compensatory
Sorting Type B
Matos et al. (2024)
K-means
Promethee Scoring
Countries poverty evaluation
non-Compensatory
Sorting Type B
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Research steps
Step 4. The fourth step was to discuss the results, primarily through analyzing geo-
referenced maps assigning countries to each ranked cluster and the centroids’ coordinates of
each cluster.
Step 5. Based on the analysis from the previous step, we extended the discussion in a ﬁfth
step to provide a deeper discussion about extreme situations. To do this, we ran again Steps
2, 3 and 4 with K = 9, and then concentrated our analysis on the categories positioned at
the extreme opposite positions of the ranking.
5 Results and discussion
In this section, we describe and discuss the results from applying each step of the proposal
to the SDGs index scores.
5.1 Obtain and explore the data set D
We used the values of the 166 countries’ index scores from the 2023 edition of the Sustainable
Development Goals Report (Sachs et al., 2023) as the input data set D. These scores were
downloaded from the section "downloads" of the SDGs 2023 report.
For countries with missing index scores, we employed the same approach as adopted by
Lafortune et al. (2018), inputting the regional average value as the index score for those
countries. Table 2 presents an illustration of the scores of the instances or countries in the
variables (SDGs).
To better understand the data, we built the graphic that appears in Figure 4. By analyzing
this graphic, one should conclude that:
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 View of a fragment of
the dataset
Criteria
Countries
Goal 1
Goal 2
…
Goal 16
Goal 17
Afghanistan
12.4
46.9
…
44.8
45.3
Albania
98.6
59.3
…
60.7
66.1
...
...
...
...
...
...
Zimbabwe
21,5
48,5
…
40.5
47.8
Fig. 4 Average performance of the earth regarding the seventeen SDGs
• The world is performing well–over the score of 50% in all SDGs and around 75% in
most of them.
• Goals 12 (Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns) and 13 (Take urgent
action to combat climate change and its impacts) require only minor attention, as they
have the highest average scores, followed by Goal 1 (End poverty in all its forms every-
where) and Goal 4 (Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all).
As we describe in this article, these conclusions may be revised because they are based
on incomplete information from a procedure that conceals important details.
5.2 Obtain the clusters and their centroids
To perform the clustering, we uploaded the dataset with the SDG index scores into the Visual
Clustering APP (Costa & Costa, 2023) (found at https://visualclustering.streamlit.app) and
used the k-means described in algorithm 2 in Appendix C. In this step, we made some
decisions regarding the parameters of the k-means:
• The maximum number of iterations was deﬁned as Max Iter =10,0000, which provided
a sufﬁcient margin to guarantee convergence.
123

Annals of Operations Research
• For selecting the initial values (or "seeds") for the clusters’ centers, we used the algorithm
k-means++ proposed by Arthur and Vassilvitski (2007), which avoids occasional poor
results that can be generated by the aleatory deﬁnition of seeds.
• By analyzing the knee (or elbow) and the silhouette plots, which are presented in Figure 5,
we concluded that the choice of k = 4 clusters was reasonable. It resulted in assigning
countries into k = 4 clusters, whose centers are shown in Table 3.
The elbow or knee plot displayed in Figure 5 shows the inertia or Within-Cluster Sum of
Squares (WCSS) as a function of the number of clusters k. Analyzing this plot, we observe
that the curve shows a sharp decrease in WCSS from k = 1 to k = 4. But, at k = 4,
we observe an “elbow” point where the rate of decrease signiﬁcantly diminishes. Beyond
k = 4, the marginal improvement in WCSS becomes minimal, which means that adding
more clusters beyond 4 does not substantially improve cluster compactness. In other words,
while k = 2 and k = 3 show reduction in WCSS, the curve remains steep, indicating that
a greater number of clusters should result in higher gain. On the other hand, values beyond
k = 4 (e.g., k = 5, 6, . . .) show minimal WCSS improvement, suggesting over-segmentation
without meaningful gain.
In another stream of reasoning, the silhouette coefﬁcient (shown in the plot that appears
in the right side of Figure 5) measures how similar an object is to its own cluster and how
much it is from the other clusters. So, it works as a metric that measures how much a cluster
differs from the other ones. This metric ranges from −1 up to 1:
s(i) =
b(i) −a(i)
max{a(i), b(i)}
(4)
where a(i) is the mean intra-cluster distance and b(i) is the mean nearest-cluster distance.
From analyzing this silhouette plot we conclude that:
• While k = 2 achieves the highest silhouette score, this reﬂects the limitation of the
silhouette metric: it tends to favor fewer, more separated clusters
• k = 3 shows moderate silhouette values but does not align with the knee curve, suggesting
suboptimal partitioning
• At k = 4, the silhouette score remains reasonably as high as for k = 3 and has the best
alignment with the knee plot, indicating well-deﬁned, cohesive clusters
• Values beyond k = 4 exhibit declining or unstable silhouette scores, conﬁrming over-
segmentation
Although the elbow and silhouette plots show multiple potentially viable values for k
(particularly k = 2, 3, 4, 5), k = 4 was chosen to get clusters well-separated and internally
cohesive.
5.3 Apply PROMETHEE II to rank the clusters
In this step, we input the values of the cluster centers (C) as the matrix X into the
PROMETHEE II algorithm (see algorithm 3 in Appendix C) to generate the ranking clusters.
A CSV ﬁle containing C was uploaded to VisualOutDeck, an online application created by
Costa et al. (2023), accessible at https://visualoutdeck.streamlit.app and designed to support
multicriteria decision-making based on non-compensatory aggregation.
Table 4 displays the clusters’ ranking and the values of positive (φ+), negative (φ−), and
net (φ) ﬂows computed in Steps 5 and 6 of the PROMETHEE II.
We underline that we made the following decisions to apply PROMETHEE II to rank the
clusters:
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Sensitivity analysis about WCSS and Silhouette metrics according to the number of clusters k. The
Visual Clustering app provides the ﬁgure. Costa and Costa (2023)
Table 3 Coordinates of clusters’
centers for k = 4
SDGs
A
B
C
D
1
98.4
92.4
76.3
34.1
2
66.0
62.1
61.3
51.1
3
92.1
74.9
73.7
42.7
4
96.4
83.9
84.7
45.7
5
79.5
61.8
66.0
49.1
6
82.5
68.6
67.4
51.1
7
78.6
70.0
67.0
33.9
8
83.3
71.9
72.0
62.6
9
87.9
50.2
53.7
21.3
10
87.4
77.4
32.2
51.3
11
88.4
77.4
76.9
49.5
12
57.3
81.9
81.0
95.1
13
62.3
86.6
77.7
97.8
14
67.3
62.9
64.6
66.4
15
76.1
66.1
58.8
66.2
16
81.5
63.0
58.8
46.1
17
67.3
65.7
61.6
50.4
Table 4 Flows computed by PROMETHEE II and clusters ranked for k = 4
Flows
Positive ﬂow (φ+)
Negative ﬂow (φ−)
Net ﬂow (φ)
Ranking
Cluster 0
2.5882
2.4118
0.1765
2nd
Cluster 1
1.7471
3.3529
-1.7059
4th
Cluster 2
2.1176
2.8824
-0.7647
3rd
Cluster 3
3.6471
1.3529
2.2941
1st
123

Annals of Operations Research
• In Step 1 of PROMETHEE (Algorithm 3), we maintained the same uniform weighting
scheme for all SDGs as employed by Sachs et al. (2023) in the SDR report: all the seven-
teen SDGs have the same weight (w j = 1, ∀w jϵW). While our evaluation methodology
necessarily employed uniform SDG weights to ensure comparable and objective cluster
rankings, the transition from evaluation results to policy implementation should consider
differentiated priorities. Once clusters are objectively ranked, policymakers within each
cluster may assign different relative importance to speciﬁc SDGs based on their unique
socioeconomic contexts, developmental stages, and national priorities. in other words,
the uniform evaluation framework provides a common baseline for understanding rel-
ative cluster performance, while ﬂexible policy weights allow for tailored sustainable
development strategies that address cluster-speciﬁc needs.
• In step 2 of PROMETHEE, we adopted the preference function of type 1 in Table C.2:
Pj(d j) =

0 if d j ≤0
1 if d j > 0
(5)
where d j = g j(a) −g j(b) represents the difference between alternatives a and b on
criterion j.
As one can observe in Table C.2, PROMETHEE II (Brans & Vincke, 1985) allows the use
of 6 types of functions for modeling preferences, covering both true-criterion (function
type 1) and pseudo-criterion functions (type 2 up to 6). When using a true criterion
function, as the step function shown in Equation 5, any positive difference results in
strict preference. On the other hand, pseudo-criterion functions are addressed to reduce
the impact of minor or insigniﬁcant differences on the ranking, being very useful for
situations in which the performance of preferences are so close that the DM hesitates in
deﬁning strict preferences. for a deeper discussion about true and pseudo-criterion, we
recommend to read (Rogers et al., 2000) and Costa (2016).
The use of true-criterion preference modeling is useful when there is no indifference zone
among the alternatives and it implies in that no threshold parameters (q, p) are required
to be deﬁned. In other words, true criteria (step function) should only be used when
differences are objectively measurable with high precision and any positive difference is
genuinely signiﬁcant.
Therefore, the nature of K-means clustering has direct implications in the decision to
use to use a true criterion (function type 1 in Table C.2) for preference modeling in our
research:
– The K-means algorithm operates on the fundamental principle of maximizing
between-cluster separation while minimizing within-cluster variance. By design, the
resulting centroids are positioned to be as different as possible from each other in the
feature space
– Since the four centroids are constructed to be maximally separated across the 17
criteria dimensions, there is no ambiguity or hesitation about whether one alterna-
tive outperforms another on any given criterion. The differences are substantial and
unambiguous
– Pseudo-criterionpreferencefunctions(suchasthosecommonlyusedinPROMETHEE)
introduce preference thresholds (q) and indifference thresholds (p) to model zones of
hesitation where decision-makers are uncertain whether small differences constitute
true preference or mere indifference. However, when alternatives are by construction
maximally different, such hesitation zones do not exist
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Mapping the clusters for k = 4
– Given the separation among centroids, true criteria (Type I preference function
in PROMETHEE) are the appropriate choice. With true criteria, any difference
d j(a, b) > 0 on criterion j results in strict preference, reﬂecting the reality that
our alternatives are genuinely distinct without ambiguous intermediate zones
– Using pseudo-criteria with preference and indifference thresholds would introduce
unnecessary model complexity to handle a situation (near-indifference) that does not
exist in our problem. This would complicate interpretation without adding value
In summary, the K-means clustering process ensures that the four alternatives (centroids)
are clearly distinct and not near-indifferent. Therefore, simple true criteria appropriately
reﬂect the unambiguous differences among the alternatives.
5.4 Discussion about the results
Figure 6 offers a geo-referenced visualization of the results. An interactive version of this map
is provided as supplementary material, allowing readers to explore country names, clusters,
rankings within each cluster, geographical regions, and the performance of each country on
the SDG Index scores. Additionally, Table 3 displays the centroids of the categories used
to organize the countries, from the top-performing Category A to the lowest-performing
Category D, and Figure 7 presents a radar chart based on the clusters’ centroids, which
further aids in analyzing the results.
Countries categorized in Category A have reached better results in the overall SDGs Index
Scores. These countries are the US, Australia, European OECD members, and the United
Arab Emirates (from the Middle East and North Africa, MENA region). Most of these
countries entered the industrialization era in the 18th century and have access to higher levels
of services and industrial goods. Taking a look at the visual illustration of the categories’
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Spider visualization of clusters’ centers in the SDGs for k = 4
centers that appears in Figure 7, we observe that the main challenges for these countries are
improving their performance in SDGs 2, 12, 13, and 14.
• SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustain-
able agriculture.
• SDG 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns.
• SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.
• SDG 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sus-
tainable development.
Countries assigned to Category B primarily include those from East Europe and Asia, as
well as Cuba. It is important to note that while China and India are in Category C, Japan,
also an Asian country, is in Category A. As a whole, countries in Category B are part of the
second wave of industrialization that occurred in the mid-20th century. By analyzing Figure
7, we observe that the main challenges for these countries are to improve their performance
in SDGs 2, 5, 9, 14 and 15.
• SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustain-
able agriculture
• SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
• SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization
and foster innovation
• SDG 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sus-
tainable development
• SDG 15 : Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustain-
ably manage forests, combat desertiﬁcation, and halt and reverse land degradation and
halt biodiversity loss
Countries in the Category C are majorly from Latin America and south of Africa, along
with China and India. Most of these countries were also part of the second wave of industrial-
ization in the middle of the 20th century. Analysis of Figure 7 reveals signiﬁcant similarities
between the centers of groups B and C, although there is a notable difference in SDG 10.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Therefore, beyond prioritizing improvements in SDGs 2, 5, 9, 14 and 15, countries in Cate-
gory C should focus on enhancing their performance in SDG 10 (Reduce inequality within
and among countries).
Finally, countries in Category D, mainly from Sub-Saharan Africa along with Syria,
Pakistan, Myanmar, and Papua New Guinea, entered later (or have never entered) into the
industrialization era. By analyzing the Figure 7, we conclude that these countries face critical
issues that urgently need addressing: improving performance in SDGs 1, 7, and 9:
• SDG 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere.
• SDG 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all.
• SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization,
and foster innovation.
In addition to the SDGs mentioned in the previous paragraph, it is also urgently necessary
for countries in Category D to enhance their sustainable development performance in the
following SDGs:
• SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustain-
able agriculture
• SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote wellJbeing for all at all ages
• SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning
opportunities for all
• SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
• SDG 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all
• SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization
and foster innovation
• SDG 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries
• SDG 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
• SDG 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide
access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all
levels
• SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership
for Sustainable Development
Based on Figure 7, it is noted that Category D has the highest performance in SDG
12 (’Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns’) and SDG 13 (’Take urgent
action to combat climate change and its impacts’), with center coordinates equal to 95.1 and
97.8, respectively.
Beyond the discussions in the previous paragraphs, we emphasize the relevance of SDG
2 (’End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agri-
culture’) as an issue for all categories. This prompted a visual analysis of Figure 7, indicating
a negative correlation between the scores of SDG 12 and those of SDGs 2 and 3. This was
conﬁrmed by Pearson correlation values of -0.3 and -0.8, respectively, calculated using index
scores from all 166 countries in the dataset. Therefore, this dataset reveals that higher index
scores in SDGs 2 and 3 are associated with lower scores in SDGs 12 and 13. This analysis
suggests that the relevance of SDGs should vary according to the categories generated by
clustering countries based on their SDG index scores.
123

Annals of Operations Research
5.5 A discussion about the extreme categories
Our initial selection of k = 4 was based on both statistical evidence from elbow and sil-
houette analysis (Figure 5) and substantive interpretability for policy applications, providing
a balanced trade-off between: statistical validity (adequate silhouette and WCSS scores),
interpret-ability for initial sustainability categorization, and, manageable number of groups
for preliminary policy analysis. But, in another path of reasoning, aiming to provide better
support for policy decision-makers and to underline the discrepancies between categories at
the opposite ends of the ranking, we stressed the results by increasing the number of clusters
to k = 9. The expansion to k = 9 was intentionally designed as a sensitivity analysis to
address speciﬁc policy decision-making needs. This choice was motivated by:
• Extreme Position Identiﬁcation. With k = 9, we aimed to isolate countries at the extreme
ends of the categorization spectrum. This granular segmentation allows decision-makers
to:
– Identify positive benchmarks (top-performing clusters) that can serve as best practice
examples
– Highlight countries requiring urgent actions for increasing in sustainability (bottom-
performing clusters)
– Reduce the "averaging effect" that occurs with fewer clusters
• Driver-SpeciﬁcPolicyInsights.Eachextremeclusterrevealsdistinctimprovementdrivers
or SDGs to be prioritized according to each cluster.
We also notice that the decision to do k speciﬁcally equal to 9, instead of another value
greater than 4, is inspired by the research reported in Miller (1956) that expanded the Likert
scale (Likert, 1932) by showing that humans have more ability to use 7+
−2 categories when
dealing with subjective discrete judgments or evaluations.
As a synthesis, the adoption of k = 9 resulted in Figures 8, 9, and 10, as well as the
values presented in Table 5.
Figures 9 and 10 speciﬁcally display the coordinates of the centroids for categories posi-
tioned at the opposite extreme in ranking, Category A and Category I, which are respectively
at the ﬁrst and last positions. This was done with the purpose of exploring and highlighting
differences and inequalities between the categories at the extremes of the ranking.
We conclude that urgent measures are necessary to improve the performance of countries
in the Category I (Afghanistan, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo Dem Rep, Liberia,
Niger, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, and, Yemen Rep). The situation of these countries is
extremely critical, mainly in SDGs 1 and 9.
• SDG 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere
• SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization
and foster innovation
It is also critical for countries in Category I to improve their performances across other
SDGs such as 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 16 and 17. The centroid coordinates regarding these SDGs
are below the value of 50. The centroid for Category I shows a high value in SDG 12 (Ensure
sustainable consumption and production patterns). This ﬁnding appears paradoxical given
the poor scores in SDG 2 (End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and
promote sustainable agriculture) and SDG 6 (Ensure availability and sustainable management
of water and sanitation for all). This discrepancy raises a pertinent question: Does it make
sense to evaluate "sustainable consumption and production patterns" in countries where there
is signiﬁcant difﬁculty in accessing basic needs like food and water?
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 Mapping the clusters for k = 9
Fig. 9 Web graphic comparison of centroids’ coordinates of clusters A and I on the SDGs
On the other hand, changing our focus to the countries in Category A (composed of
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Arab
Emirates, and the United States), we observe that the centroid of this category has high
coordinates in most of the areas. However, the values regarding SDGs 12 and 13 are low.
Therefore, these countries are in the spotlight regarding these SDGs and urgently need to
concentrate efforts on improving their performance in these areas.
• SDG 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns.
• SDG 13: Take urgent actions to combat climate change and its impacts.
By comparing Categories A and I, we observe that countries in A have a gross domestic
product (GDP) much higher than those in Category I, and started their industrialization
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 10 Line graphic comparison of centroids’ coordinates of clusters A and I on the SDGs
Table 5 Categories’ centers for k = 9
SDGs
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
1
97.28
99.36
92.41
91.6
58.65
59.42
24.48
57.4
13.68
2
64.35
67.69
63.78
61.22
64.59
57.17
55.34
54.56
36.44
3
94.2
89.33
78.27
74.34
86.67
57.96
43.41
46.95
32.03
4
97.37
94.92
89.5
83.74
85.4
73.77
53
45.49
28.03
5
85.01
73.52
69.51
60.73
54
66.96
59.13
43.8
36.64
6
83.13
81.75
71.3
67.99
59.81
62.81
51.2
56.64
43.19
7
80.66
76.32
72.55
69.16
68.21
56.02
35.34
36.21
26.38
8
83.72
82.17
74.46
71.17
75.83
66.43
63.41
66.3
55.58
9
93.12
81.02
55.11
49.08
74.51
38.99
20.5
28.05
10.05
10
88.84
86.32
36.21
78.75
42.58
27.2
33.02
72.55
53.02
11
90.6
86.26
79.34
76.59
77.61
71.94
55
49.96
36.19
12
50.65
64.63
82.59
82.65
60.79
89.48
95.95
94.16
95.05
13
50.31
74.08
87.1
86.83
24.75
94.19
97.88
96.52
99.26
14
66.23
68.78
66.49
61.86
59.18
66.79
66.8
64.12
67.42
15
69.96
82.44
60.56
64.33
52.98
64
68.67
63.02
65.66
16
85.05
77.08
60.2
62.47
70.51
53.05
45.96
47.98
40.06
17
72.15
62.81
64.68
65.45
59.69
58.33
51.93
52.24
44.3
earlier. Citizens from countries in Category A have more access to basic needs (food, water,
and healthcare, for example), jobs, public services, technology, and goods as a whole, while
countries in Category I started later in the industrialization process, and, at the present stage,
their citizens have difﬁculty accessing basic needs such as food, health, and water, jobs,
public services, technologies, justice, and a good social environment—some of the countries
in this cluster are involved in serious conﬂicts.
123

Annals of Operations Research
6 Limitations and Future Work
While our methodology provides valuable insights for SDG-based country categorization
and decision support, we acknowledge the following limitations:
K-means sensitivity to initial centroids. The K-means algorithm’s results can vary
depending on the initial placement of centroids. To mitigate this limitation, we used the
algorithm k-means++, proposed in Arthur and Vassilvitski (2007) and that is part of the
sklearn package, to optimize seed initialization. As further work we suggest studying the
sensitivity to stochastic variations in the seed.
Spherical cluster assumption. K-means implicitly assumes that clusters have approxi-
mately spherical shapes in the feature space, which may not fully capture complex, irregular
patterns in SDG performance. While this assumption is reasonable for our 17-dimensional
SDG space–where countries naturally group around similar performance proﬁles–alternative
clustering methods (e.g., DBSCAN(Ester et al., 1996), hierarchical clustering (Toshniwal &
Roy, 2009)) could be explored in future work to verify whether non-spherical patterns exist
and warrant different algorithmic approaches.
Missing data and imputation bias. The SDG dataset contains missing values for some
countries and indicators, which were handled through regional mean imputation following
the methodology of Sachs et al. (2023). Countries with systematically missing data might
be incorrectly assigned to clusters. While this approach maintains consistency with the SDR
report and is commonly used in sustainability assessments, it may introduce bias by assuming
that missing values reﬂect regional average performance. Future research could explore sen-
sitivity analysis using alternative imputation methods (e.g., k-nearest neighbors imputation
(Batista & Monard, 2002) or genetic-kmeans imputation(Rodrigues et al., 2025)).
Static analysis and temporal robustness. Our analysis is based on a single-year period
of time and does not investigate the temporal evolution of SDG performance. As a direction
for future research, we propose extending this framework to longitudinal analyses, in which
temporal changes in cluster membership and associated transition patterns are systematically
tracked. Such an extension should enable a comprehensive understanding of the dynamics
of sustainable development.
7 Conclusion
The gap investigated in our research was the identiﬁcation and ranking of clusters or groups
of countries based on the similarity of their scores in the SDGs, instead of using clusters
based on the overall SDG Index Scores. In addition, we offer a methodological advancement
by introducing the algorithm (KRP2), which combines the K-means technique with the
PROMETHEE II approach to obtain ranked clusters.
We emphasize that the analytical outputs of this research should be used as inputs to policy
deliberation, not as complete policy proposals.
The application of K = 4 revealed signiﬁcant disparities between the centroids of the
cluster in the highest category and those classiﬁed in the lowest category (supported by Table
3 and Figure 7). This underlines that diversifying policy is based on creating just policies
tailored to speciﬁc groups of countries according to their footprint in the sustainable chal-
lenges. For instance, countries located in the Global South are poorer and less industrialized.
They have been experiencing centuries of unequal exchange (colonialism, imperialism, etc.)
123

Annals of Operations Research
and are less responsible for climate change. For this reason, they must prioritize justice in
developing policies to achieve sustainable development goals.
Using K = 9 highlights extreme differences between countries classiﬁed under Category
A and those classiﬁed under Category I (supported by Table 5, Figure 9, and Figure 10).
This comparison supports the following conclusions:
• Ignoring the differences between countries when deﬁning sustainable goals and policies
contributes to increasing inequalities.
• Countries classiﬁed under Category A possess high capacity to acquire and produce
products and services but have the lowest scores in SDG 12 (responsible consumption
and production) and 13 (implementing actions to mitigate climate change). Thus, the
primary concern regarding the SDGs for these countries is to enhance their performance
in these SDGs.
• For countries in Category I, it remains imperative to implement measures to eradicate
poverty and ensure access to fundamental human necessities, including food, water,
sanitation, and healthcare. Concerning the computation of the overall index score, we
suggest that it could be improved by varying the weights of the SDGs according to the
category, as an analytical input for policy deliberation. For instance:
• With respect to policies that should be implemented to promote balanced sustainable
development and that consider historical footprints and social justice, we suggest that:
– It may be worth considering the implementation of a compensation policy, imposing
ﬁnancial penalties for countries in Category A that fail to meet satisfactory standards
in SDGs 12 and 13.
– By adopting similar reasoning, slightly lighter ﬁnancial penalties could be applied
to countries in Category B. As shown in Table 5, the centroids of Categories A
and B are very close to each other, particularly for SDGs 12 and 13, suggesting
that Category B faces similar challenges to Category A in these dimensions. This
qualitative observation supports a differentiated but proportional penalty approach.
– The funds obtained from these penalties could then be allocated towards enhancing
the performance of countries in Category I in SDGs 1 and 9.
Highlights about the contributions of this work
The main improvements of our proposal when comparing it against the previous ones are:
• It highlights the contrasts between extreme categories (e.g., K = 9) as decision-support
inputs for differentiated policy deliberation.
• The proposed algorithm prevents compensatory effects that typically result from the usual
aggregation of preferences.
• It explores the contrasts between countries positioned at opposite ends of the clusters’
ranking.
• The clustering enables the customization of strategies for each category of countries.
• The use of web apps mentioned in the article makes the research easier to reproduce,
test, and extend by other researchers who do not have coding skills but have valuable
knowledge about SDGs.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Appendix A An overview of recent works approaching the SDGs
This appendix provides a non-exhaustive overview of recent research addressing various
aspects of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The studies are organized by thematic
areas to illustrate the breadth of current research and highlight different methodological
approaches used to analyze SDG-related challenges.
• Agriculture and food production
– The research by Jean-Petit et al. (2023) investigated the relationships and causes
between three parts of the sustainable development goals (SDGs) in Africa: envi-
ronmental factors, agricultural production and ﬁnancial development. The study
discovered that there are reciprocal causal impacts between these dimensions, prov-
ing their interconnections and highlighting the importance of including these aspects
in African sustainable development goals.
– The assessment conducted by Heiba et al. (2023) examined the irrigation systems
employed in tomato cultivation, taking into account the aspects of sustainability
related to the environment, economy, and society. A pot-scale experiment was under-
takentocomparetheeffectsofdrip-irrigation(DI)andfurrow-irrigation(FI)methods.
Therefore, the study effectively evaluated the irrigation systems according to the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), providing suitable recommendations to
improve the competitiveness of tomatoes.
• Climate change
– The study conducted by Xu (2023) establishes a connection between water-climate
change (WC) and the resulting impacts on various domains, encompassing refuse
management, energy transition, sewage treatment, land administration, and ocean
conservation. This article examines how WC interlinkages are utilized to achieve the
SDGs in the aforementioned domains.
– Kamran et al. (2023) analyzes environmental footprint trends in G7 economies, and
concludes that economic progress exacerbates environmental damage, such as eco-
logical footprints (EFP), and, that energy advances, digital trade, and environmental
legislation are effective in preventing environmental damage.
– Aiming to mitigate the worst consequences of climate warming, Gan et al. (2023)
explored how the global community can reduce GHG emissions and transition from
fossil fuels to renewable energy to mitigate climate warming’s worst effects. Achiev-
ing sustainable development goals (SDGs) is crucial for a resilient and healthy
environment for future generations, particularly SDG 7 - "Affordable and Clean
Energy" - which aims to develop modern renewable energy systems globally. The
study examined investment policies and patterns in developed and developing nations
for transitioning to renewable energy production.
– Davarpanah et al. (2023) modeled climate change interactions with food, water,
and energy systems in the ‘Sustainable Development and Climate’ (SDC) ontology
through semantic modeling. The domain ontology formalizes how events affect the
implementation of activities, plans, strategies, and policies based on the goals’ targets.
• Consumption and production behaviour
– Ortiz-De-Montellano et al. (2023) examined the inﬂuence of 27 circular economy
(CE) strategies on the 17 SDGs and their 169 goals. CE initiatives can support all
SDGs, but are most effective for SDGs 8, 12, and 13, and least effective for SDGs 4, 5,
123

Annals of Operations Research
10, and 16. These relationships require CE strategies to follow one of seven identiﬁed
pathways: 1) Reduced, traceable extraction; 2) Regenerative, biobased production;
3) Human inclusive industries; 4) Shareable longevity; 5) Consumers at the center;
6) Clean and effective end of life; and 7) Reduced and clean energy and transport.
Pathways 2, 4, and 6 were the most inﬂuential, contributing 66% of possible SDG
contributions. The investigation indicated that the CE concentrates on items and
materials, while the SDGs prioritize people and places (environment).
– The study by Alfaro Navarro et al. (2023) created an index that assesses the degree
of achievement of the sustainable development goals (SDGs) and looks at how they
relate to the circular economy (CE), and investigated the interrelationships among
different elements of the CE and the SDGs. The analysis of geographical areas of
Europe elicited that western European and EU-15 countries have a greater degree of
CE implementation. Luxembourg, Austria, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Belgium
consistently rank at the top, depending on the speciﬁc CE facet being evaluated.
The research concluded that it is imperative for the newly established European
nations as well as the countries in the eastern region to actively promote initiatives
aimed at enhancing economic implementation. Furthermore, there exists a robust
and noteworthy correlation between the implementation index of the overall Circular
Economy (CE) and the disaggregated indices of SDGs 8, 9, and 11. Conversely, there
is an inverse association with SDGs 7 and 15.
– Through the utilization of multiple indicators to evaluate Food loss and waste (FLW)
in China, Wang et al. (2023) discovered that, from a nutritional-economic standpoint,
vegetables are the most adversely impacted by inefﬁciencies in the food supply chain,
with meat, grains, and fruits following suit. Additionally, they found that post-harvest
handling and storage, as well as consumption, are stages in the supply chain that
have the highest potential to decrease food loss and waste in terms of nutrition and
economics.
– In their study, Mancini et al. (2023) employed Social Life Cycle Assessment (S-LCA)
to analyze the social sustainability dimensions of food production and consumption.
By integrating social indicators with data on production, trade, and consumption, they
were able to assess the social impact of European food production and consumption.
The ﬁndings indicate that there may be conﬂicts between the many aspects of sus-
tainability.
• Wang and Li (2024) applied mathematical algorithms to rank countries’ aid agencies
regarding climate aid projects, looking at the aspects that inﬂuence the capacity of donor
agency (CDA). This study concluded that climate investments encourage aid agencies to
improve sustainable development.
• Education
– The 2030 SDGs Game was introduced by Andreoni and Richard (2023) as an instruc-
tional instrument for promoting trans-disciplinary sustainability education. The game
asks participants to contemplate the social and environmental effects of their actions
and encourages them to explore the interconnections of the Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals by simulating potential world scenarios for the year 2030. The game’s
participatory nature, in which players acquire knowledge through active play, serves
to promote the collaborative creation of knowledge in the learner-centered approach.
– Angelaki et al. (2023) examined the difﬁculties associated with implementing sus-
tainability education in institutions of higher education, and investigated potential
solutions to these issues and key ideas that should be used to integrate education
123

Annals of Operations Research
for sustainable development into higher education. This research also investigated
the impact of education on the environmental consciousness of students at a Greek
University. They suggest implementing a range of awareness initiatives to foster their
active participation in sustainability matters in an inclusive manner.
– The research conducted by Pires and Pereira (2023) investigated the green behavior
of Brazilian higher education institutions (HEIs) ranked in Green Metrics (GM). This
work concluded that there is high potential for improving campus sustainability in
the sample analyzed, mainly in campus operations.
• Employability and tax rates
– The study by Moussa et al. (2022) looks at the most important policy question of
how the quality of the institutional environment might affect both modern slavery
and long-term human development. Based on data from 167 countries, this research
discovered that the quality of the institutional environment has a negative correlation
with the occurrence and susceptibility to modern slavery, and a positive correlation
with efforts to reduce the risk of modern slavery.
– Rahman (2022) analyzed the impact of corporation tax rates on sustainable devel-
opment in BRICS and CIVETS countries, by examining the impact of corporate tax
rate, personal income tax, sales tax, and effective tax rate on SDGs, both individu-
ally and collectively. In both circumstances, results indicate a considerable positive
correlation between business tax rates and sustainable development goals (SDGs).
– Bartelings and Philippidis (2024) analyzed the impact of targeted food waste behavior
taxes introduced by the EU on food loss and waste (FLW). The study concluded that
in order to enhance the public acceptance of waste behavior taxes and minimize
expected losses for EU farmers, it is important to visibly allocate the tax revenue
towards supporting incomes and employment retraining programs.
• Energy
– The study conducted by Oladapo et al. (2023) proposed a method for creating
self-powered implants that can harvest energy for intelligent orthopedic solutions.
Tackling the task of ensuring a dependable and conveniently available power supply
for functioning mechanical parts, while examining the design and effectiveness of
hip prosthesis utilizing piezoelectric technology. The revised hip implant integrates
three parallel vibration-based harvesters that capture energy during a typical human
stride by harnessing angular movements like ﬂexion, extension, and abduction.
– Rony et al. (2023) analyzed potential technologies to help the shipping industry
reduce carbon emissions in operations, leveraging alternative energy sources to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and support UN Sustainable Development Goals.
This article examines the challenges of using alternative energy sources in maritime
operations.Thisstudyconcludedthatusingbio-fuelslikebio-methanolandbio-diesel
can lower the transportation industry greenhouse gas emissions by 25-100%.
– In their research, Bhattarai et al. (2023) utilized a bottom-up multi-disciplinary
indicator-based approach to assess the perception of individuals regarding ﬁve
dimensions of a storage type (ST) hydropower project called the Budhi Gandaki
Hydropower Project (BGHP) in Nepal. Overall, the study investigated the potential
of ST projects in contributing to SDGs by addressing vulnerabilities.
– Mansour et al. (2023) examined the relationships in the water energy food nexus
(WEFN) model applying Pareto analysis and multi-objective optimization. This
study demonstrates how priorities inﬂuence interactions between competing goals
123

Annals of Operations Research
and highlights the trade-offs between nexus sectors. The importance of enforced
restrictions on the use of energy resources and their supply in accomplishing the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is shown by an examination of the SDGs.
• Gender inequalities
– The study by Saini et al. (2023) carefully examined the goals and indicators of SDG
5 (Gender Inequalities), and the Indian datasets on such SDG, looking to identify
patterns and relationships among the fourteen indicators of SDG 5. The correlation
between legal provisions for women and the rate of crimes against women is 100%,
indicating a strong relationship. In contrast, the correlation between legal provisions
for women and women who have experienced physical violence is 80%, suggesting
a somewhat weaker tie. The comprehensive analysis of the 14 indicators is thor-
oughly detailed and it is widely recognized that these indicators are mutually reliant.
This would enhance comprehension of gender inequality trends and facilitate the
development of well-informed perspectives among academics, the general public,
and governmental and non-governmental organizations regarding SDG 5.
– Refaat (2023) analyzed domestic violence modules from 40 nations’ latest Demo-
graphic and Health Surveys (DHS). In the research, women experiencing emotional,
physical, severe, or sexual abuse from their spouse were considered to have expe-
rienced Intimate Partner Violence (IPV). The proportion of newborns attended by
skilled medical personnel, prenatal care (eight or more visits from any provider),
and family planning satisfaction using current techniques were the SDG3 targets for
maternal health. The research discovered that one-third of women (37%) experienced
IPV, primarily physical (29%) and emotional (24%). The conclusion was that IPV
exposure negatively impacted all maternal health-related SDG3 services for women.
• Healthcare and pandemic
– The study conducted by Yuan et al. (2023) aimed to evaluate the potential conse-
quences of the pandemic on the achievement of each Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) by 2030. This assessment is done on a global, regional, and national level by
examining the relationships between different SDG indicators during the pandemic.
The objective is to understand the indirect and cascading impacts of COVID-19 on
the SDGs. The study conducted by Yuan (2023) determined that the COVID-19
pandemic had the greatest impact on poverty eradication, which is represented by
Sustainable Development Goal 1 (SDG 1).
• No-poverty
– Ahmadnezhad et al. (2023) researched impoverishment from out-of-pocket (OOP)
payments in Iran from 2011-2016, examining the impact of health expenditures
on national poverty rates before and after the Health Transformation Plan (HTP)
implementation, with a focus on monitoring the ﬁrst Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Results show low incidence of impoverishing health expenditures from
2011-2016. HTP adoption led to a decrease in the number of individuals falling
further into poverty. Approximately 12.5% of the impoverished population slipped
below the poverty level in 2016 due to OOP payments. Although health care costs are
not a major cause of impoverishment in Iran, the impact of OOP spending on health
is signiﬁcant. This study concluded that pro-poor measures reducing OOP payments
should be undertaken inter-sectorally to achieve SDG 1.
123

Annals of Operations Research
– The primary motivation for the study conducted by Ajeigbe et al. (2023) was to
investigate the disparity between developed and developing countries in terms of
their likelihood of achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The study
speciﬁcally focused on African countries and examined the inﬂuence of Sustainable
Tax Revenue and Expenditure on the attainment of the SDGs, utilizing secondary
data. The ﬁndings indicated that the coefﬁcients of grants received, different types
of taxes, and other sources of revenue had a favorable impact on economic growth,
while they have an adverse impact on poverty and unemployment.
Appendix B Description of the SDGs
Table B.1 The 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs)
Goal 1:
End poverty in all its forms everywhere
Goal 2:
End hunger, achieve food security and improved
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture
Goal 3:
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at
all ages
Goal 4:
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and
promote lifelong learning opportunities for all
Goal 5:
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and
girls
Goal 6:
Ensure availability and sustainable management of
water and sanitation for all
Goal 7:
Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all
Goal 8:
Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic
growth, full and productive employment and decent
work for all
Goal 9:
Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and
sustainable industrialization and foster innovation
Goal 10:
Reduce inequality within and among countries
Goal 11:
Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe,
resilient and sustainable
Goal 12:
Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
Goal 13:
Take urgent action to combat climate change and its
impacts
Goal 14:
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development
Goal 15:
Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of
terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests,
combat desertiﬁcation, and halt and reverse land
degradation and halt biodiversity loss
Goal 16:
Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, provide access to justice for all and
build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
at all levels
Goal 17:
Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize
the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development
123

Annals of Operations Research
8 Appendix C Algorithms
Algorithm 1 KRP2: K-means clusters ranked by PROMETHEE II
1: Inputs. The following inputs are required:
• Data matrix D ∈Rn×m, composed of the scalars xi j assigned to the ith instance or object xi ∈X
under the jth variable (attribute) v j ∈V .
• The number of categories nk as suitable to be introduced into the k-means algorithm (Algorithm 2).
• A vector W that contains the importance w j of each variable in D.
2: Step 1. Input D and nk into the k-means algorithm (Algorithm 2).
3: Step 2. Run the k-means clustering algorithm.
Step 2.a: Get the assignment of the instances to a cluster c j ∈C.
Step 2.b: Get the matrix Ct with the coordinates of the clusters’ centroids.
4: Step 3. Input into the PROMETHEE II algorithm (Algorithm 3).
• The set of clusters to be ranked C = {c1, c2, . . . cn}, as being the set of alternatives A.
• The set of variables (attributes) v j ∈V as F = { f1, f2, . . . fm}, a set composed of m crite-
ria/variables/factors.
• The matrix Ct that stores the coordinates of the clusters’ centroids as the matrix G.
• The vector W = {w1, w2, . . . wn}, which stores the relevance degree w j of each variable in V .
5: Step 4. Run the PROMETHEE II algorithm to get the clusters ranked.
6: Return
The instances in D organized into ranked clusters c j ∈C
The centroids Ct
The ranking of the clusters c j ∈C according to their centroid positions
123

Annals of Operations Research
Algorithm 2 K-Means algorithm (description based on Arthur and Vassilvitski (2007))
1: Inputs. The following inputs are required.
• Data matrix D ∈Rn×m, composed of the scalars xi j assigned to the ith instance or object xi ∈X
under the jth variable (attribute) v j ∈V .
• The number of clusters or categories nk.
2: Step 1. Read D ←
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
v1
v2
. . . vm
x1 x1,1 x1,2 . . . x1,m
x2 x2,1 x2,2 . . . x2,m
...
...
...
. . .
...
xn xn,1 xn,2 . . . xn,m
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
3: Step 2. Set up the algorithm by deﬁning:
• Step 2.1. nIter ←0
• Step 2.2. Maximum number of iterations ←Max Iter
4: Step 3. Read nk.
5: Step 4. C ←{C1 . . . Ck}, as the "seed" of the centroids.
6: Step 5. Run the clustering:
While nIter ≤Max Iter O R at least one xi ∈X moves to another cluster
for i = 1 to |X|
Assign or move xi to the cluster k ∈K, whose centroid Ck is nearest to xi
for k = 1 to |K|
Recompute the coordinates of the centroids Ck ⊂C of the new cluster
7:
Ck ←
1
|Sk|
|Sk|

1
xi
where Sk is the subset of instances assigned to cluster k
nIter ←nIter + 1
End While
8: Return
The set of clusters C with assignment of each instance xi ∈X to a cluster Cp ⊂C.
The centroids of the clusters Ct.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Algorithm 3 PROMETHEE II (description based on Brans et al. (1986))
1: Inputs. The following inputs are required.
• A = {a1, a2, . . . an}, a set composed of n alternatives or objects to be ranked.
• F = { f1, f2, . . . fm}, a family composed of m criteria or variables or factors used for building the
ranking.
• G, a matrix that stores the performance g j(ai) of each ai under each criterion f j.
• W, a vector that contains the importance w j of each criterion f j for making the ranking.
2: Step P1: Read the inputs A, F, G, and W.
3: Step P2: Compute the differences d j(au, av) between the performances of each pair of alternatives
4: for u = 1 to |A| do
5:
for v = 1 to |A| do
6:
for j = 1 to |F| do
d j(au, av) ←g j(au) −g j(av)
7:
end for
8:
end for
9: end for
10: Step 3: For each criterion f j, apply one of the preference functions that appears in Table C.2 (Algorithm
C), where w j is the weight of the criterion f j
11: Step P4: For each pair of alternatives, compute π(au, av) and π(av, au)
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
π(au, av) ←
k
j=1
Pj(au, av)w j
π(av, au) ←
k
j=1
Pj(av, au)w j
12: Step 5: Calculate the positive φ+ and negative φ−outranking ﬂows for each alternative:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
φ+(au) ←
1
n−1

av∈A\au
φ(au, av)
φ−(au) ←
1
n−1

av∈A\au
φ(av, au)
13: Step 6: Calculate the net outranking ﬂow φ0 of each alternative ai ∈A:
φ(ai) ←φ+(ai) −φ−(ai)
14: Step 7: Rank the alternatives ai ∈A by putting those with higher values of φ0 in the top positions
(descending order).
15: Return
The ranking of the alternatives in A.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table C.2 Preference Functions
(Brans & De Smet, 2016)
Type
Deﬁnition
Thresholds
1
Pj(d j) =

0, d j ≤0
1, d j > 0
–
2
Pj(d j) =

0, d j ≤q j
1, d j > q j
q j
3
Pj(d j) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
0,
d j ≤0
d j
p j , 0 < d j ≤p j
1,
d j > p j
p j
4
Pj(d j) =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
0,
d j ≤q j
1
2 , q j < d j ≤p j
1,
d j > p j
q j, p j
5
Pj(d j) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
0,
d j ≤q j
d j −q j
p j −q j , q j < d j ≤p j
1,
d j > p j
q j, p j
6
Pj(d j) =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
0,
d j ≤0
1 −e
d2
j
2s2
j , d j > 0
s j
Acknowledgements The authors manifest their acknowledgments to the authors of Sachs et al. (2023), that
provide the primary data that support this research.
Author Contributions The authors claim that they participated equally in the construction of the article.
Funding The Article Processing Charge (APC) for the publication of this research was funded by the Coor-
denação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Brasil (CAPES) (ROR identiﬁer: 00x0ma614).
This study was partially funded by: Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES),
Grant/Award Number: 001;
ConselhoNacionaldeDesenvolvimentoCientíﬁcoeTecnológico(CNPQ),Grant/AwardNumber:314953/2021-
3 and 421779/2021-7;
Fundação Carlos Chagas de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (FAPERJ), Grant/Award Number:
E-26/200.974/2022(270291).
DataAvailability The primary data that support this research was provided in Sachs et al. (2023) and is available
at https://dashboards.sdgindex.org/downloads/, licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 International License.
The secondary data which resulted from processing the primary data, and that supported the ﬁndings of this
study are included as the following supplementary ﬁles to this manuscript are available at Figshare (https://
doi.org/10.6084/m9.ﬁgshare.26082583), licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
International License:
1. Dataset SupSDG2023toInputVisualClusteringAPP.csv: this archive contains the result from ﬁlling blank
cells of in the 2023 Edition of SDG index Scores. The csv format of the data in this ﬁle is suitable to enter
into Visual Clustering APP.
2. Datasets SDGvkmeansk4 and SDGvkmeansk9: these ﬁles store, respectively for k = 4 and k = 9, the inputs
to Step 3 of algorithm KRP2 regarding the coordinates of clusters’ centroids. This format is suitable to be
uploaded by Visual Outdeck APP, to run the Step 3 which applies the PROMETHEE II algorithm (Brans et
al., 1986) to rank the clusters.
3. Dataset supSDGﬁnalResults.xlsx: This ﬁle summarizes the results and is composed by three worksheets.
The ﬁrst one with the countries name, code, geographical area, index scores, clusters, and categories in which
the countries were assigned. The second and third worksheets show the clusters’ coordinates for k = 4 and
k = 9, respectively. The data in this ﬁle were used for building the Figures 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Beyond these data ﬁles, we are also making available as supplementary ﬁles the Map 1 (ESM5.html) and
Map 2 (ESM6.html), which display in interactive maps (html) the clusters for, respectively, k = 4 and k = 9.
These dynamic maps show the countries clustering, countries’ names, the ranking of clusters, the geographical
region, and the countries’ performance in each SDG Index.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest/Competing interests The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent for publication Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Carson, R. (1962). Silent Spring. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Bruntland, G. (1987). Our Common Future, pp. 45–65. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. http://www.un-
documents.net/wced-ocf.htm
Elkington, J. (1994). Towards the Sustainable Corporation: Win-Win-Win Business Strategies for Sustainable
Development. California Management Review, 36(2), 90–100. https://doi.org/10.2307/41165746
UN: United Nations Millennium Declaration. Technical report, United Nations, New York (2000). https://
www.un.org/millenniumgoals/reports.shtml
Sachs, Jeffrey D., G.F. Guillaume Lafortune, & Drumm, E. (2023). Implementing the SDG Stimulus. Sustain-
able Development Report 2023, p. 534. SDSN and Dublin University Press, Dublin, Ireland. https://doi.
org/10.25546/102924
Gutmann, M., & Gorman, D. (2022). Before the UN Sustainable Development Goals: A Historical Companion.
Oxford University Press, New Orleans. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780192848758.001.0001
Caradonna, J.L. (2022). Sustainability: A History, Revised and Updated Edition. Oxford University Press,
Oxford. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780197625026.001.0001
Bruckmeier, K. (2020). The Historical Context: Sustainability in Modern Society, pp. 39–86. Springer, Cham.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-56627-2_2
Szreter, S. (2024). The history of inequality: the deep-acting ideological and institutional inﬂuences. Oxford
Open Economics 3(Supplement_1), 217–230 https://doi.org/10.1093/ooec/odad059
Guillaume Lafortune, Grayson Fuller, Moreno, J., Schmidttraub, G., & Kroll, C. (2018). SDG Index and
Dashboards. Detailed Methodological Paper, p. 56. Bertelsmann Stiftung and Sustainable Development
Solutions Network, Paris, France
Costa, L.F., Souza, L.A., Roboredo, M.C., & Costa, H.G. (2025). A guide for using mrlib: a web based app for
bibliographical data ﬁles merging. In: Bajaj, A., Mishra, P.M., Abraham, A., Kahraman, C. (eds.) Hybrid
Intelligent Systems, pp. 487–496. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-78934-2_47
Aria, M., & Cuccurullo, C. (2023). Biblioshiny: Bibliometrix for No Coders. R package version 1.7.4.9002.
https://www.bibliometrix.org/home/index.php/layout/biblioshiny
Aria, M., & Cuccurullo, C. (2017). bibliometrix: An r-tool for comprehensive science mapping analysis.
Journal of Informetrics, 11(4), 959–975. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2017.08.007
Mousseau,V.,Slowinski,R.,&Zielniewicz,P.(2000).Auser-orientedimplementationoftheelectre-trimethod
integrating preference elicitation support. Computers & Operations Research, 27(7–8), 757–777. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0305-0548(99)00117-3
Araz, C., & Ozkarahan, I. (2005). A multicriteria sorting procedure for ﬁnancial classiﬁcation problems: The
case of business failure risk assessment. In: Gallagher, M., Hogan, J.P., Maire, F. (eds.) Intelligent Data
123

Annals of Operations Research
Engineering and Automated Learning - IDEAL 2005, pp. 563–570. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https://
doi.org/10.1007/11508069_73
Souza, R.L.S., & Costa, H.G. (2021). K-means and multicriteria decision aid applied to sustainability evalu-
ation. In: Abraham, A., Piuri, V., Gandhi, N., Siarry, P., Kaklauskas, A., Madureira, A. (eds.) Intelligent
Systems Design and Applications, pp. 1198–1208. Springer, Cham.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
71187-0_111
Lima,D.,Matos,I.D.C.,&Costa,H.G.(2024).Ahybridmodelwithk-meansandelectre-iiitoanalyzecountries
considering prosperity indicators. In: Lesot, M.-J., Vieira, S., Reformat, M.Z., Carvalho, J.P., Batista,
F., Bouchon-Meunier, B., Yager, R.R. (eds.) Information Processing and Management of Uncertainty in
Knowledge-Based Systems, pp. 87–98. Springer, Cham.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-74003-9_8
Matos, I.D.C., Costa, H.G., & Lima, D. (2025). Evaluating countries’ prosperity using a hybrid approach
with electre iii and k-means: A comparison of pre and post-covid-19 pandemic scenarios. Pesquisa
Operacional 45, 292807 https://doi.org/10.1590/0101-7438.2025.045.00292807
Roy, B., & Hugonnard, J. C. (1982). Classement des Prolongements de Lignes de Stations en Banlieu Parisi-
enne. Cahiers du CERO, 24(2), 153–171.
Brans, J.-P., & Vincke, P. (1985). A preference ranking organisation method: (the promethee method for
multiple criteria decision-making). Management science, 31(6), 647–656.
Brans, J.-P., & De Smet, Y. (2016). Promethee methods. Multiple criteria decision analysis: state of the art
surveys, 187–219 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-3094-4_6
Cui, H., Dong, S., Hu, J., Chen, M., Hou, B., Zhang, J., Zhang, B., Xian, J., & Chen, F. (2023). A hybrid mcdm
model with monte carlo simulation to improve decision-making stability and reliability. Information
Sciences 647https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2023.119439
Kandakoglu, M., Walther, G., & Ben Amor, S. (2022). A robust multicriteria clustering methodology for
portfolio decision analysis. Computers & Industrial Engineering 174https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.
108803
Khani, M., Ghazi, R., & Nazari, B. (2023). An unsupervised learning based mcdm approach for optimal
placement of fault indicators in distribution networks. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
125https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2023.106751
Keskin,G.A.(2022).Anovelperspectivetosustainablesupplierperformanceevaluationproblem:Acasestudy
based on determining the optimum number of clusters. International Journal of Information Technology
& Decision Making, 21(04), 1349–1379. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219622022500195
Kaya, S. K., Aycin, E., & Pamucar, D. (2023). Evaluation of social factors within the circular economy concept
for european countries. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 31(1), 73–108. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10100-022-00800-w
Maghsoodi, A.I. (2023). Cryptocurrency portfolio allocation using a novel hybrid and predictive big data
decision support system. Omega-International Journal of Management Science 115https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.omega.2022.102787
Nuri, O., Akcakaya, O., & Akcakaya, E.D.U. (2021). Integrating cluster analysis with mcdm methods for
the evaluation of local agricultural production. Croatian Operational Research Review 12(2), 105–117
https://doi.org/10.17535/crorr.2021.0009
Sahoo, L., Sen, S.S., Tiwary, K., Moslem, S., & Senapati, T. (2024). Improvement of wireless sensor network
lifetime via intelligent clustering under uncertainty. IEEE Access 12, 25018–25033 https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2024.3365490
Shahri, M.M., Jahromi, A.E., & Houshmand, M. (2021). Failure mode and effect analysis using an integrated
approach of clustering and mcdm under pythagorean fuzzy environment. Journal of Loss Prevention in
the Process Industries 72https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2021.104591
Tewari, A., Singh, P.K., Gaur, S., Mishra, S., & Kumar, R. (2024). Cluster-based delineation of optimal sites for
managed aquifer recharge: a case study of lower betwa river basin, india. Environmental Earth Sciences
83(1) https://doi.org/10.1007/s12665-023-11308-0
Matos, I.D.C., Gomes Costa, H., Roboredo, M., & Lima, D. (2024). Reﬁning the promethee-scoring method:
Propositions and an economic freedom assessment. Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis 31(3-4),
1835 https://doi.org/10.1002/mcda.1835https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/mcda.1835
Arthur, D., & Vassilvitski, S. (2007). K-means++: The Advantages of Careful Seeding. In: Proceedings of the
18th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pp. 1027–1035. ACM-SIAM,
New Orleans
Brans, J. P., Vincke, P., & Mareschal, B. (1986). How to select and how to rank projects: The promethee
method. European Journal of Operational Research, 24(2), 228–238. https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-
2217(86)90044-5
Roy, B., & Bertier, B. (1971). Le methods electre ii: Une methode de classement en presence de criteres
multiples, note de travail no. 142. Direction Scientiﬁque, Groupe Metra
123

Annals of Operations Research
Roy, B. (1978). ELECTRE III: Un alghoritme de méthode de classements fonde sur une representation ﬂoue
des préfé-rences em présence de critéres multiples. Cahiers du CERO, 20(1), 3–24.
Costa, H. G. (2016). Graphical interpretation of outranking principles: Avoiding misinterpretation results
from ELECTRE I. Journal of Modelling in Management, 11(1), 26–42. https://doi.org/10.1108/JM2-
08-2013-0037
Costa, H.G., Silva, R.C., & Pessôa, L.A.M. (2023). An outranking ELECTRE-based modeling for setting the
naval core components of an amphibious task force. Pesquisa Opoeracional 43https://doi.org/10.1590/
0101-7438.2023.043.00262058
Costa, H.G., & Costa, L.F. (2023). A No-code Web App for Supporting Decision Modelling of Clustering
Problems. In: Miranda, P., Isaias, P. (eds.) International Conferences on Applied Computing 2023, pp.
222–226. IADIS Press, Funchal, Portugal. https://doi.org/10.33965/icwi_ac_2023_202307c004
Costa, H.G. (2023). Visual OutDecK: A Web APP for Supporting Multicriteria Decision Modelling of Out-
ranking Choice Problems. In: Abraham, A., Hong, T.-P., Kotecha, K., Ma, K., Manghirmalani Mishra,
P., Gandhi, N. (eds.) Hybrid Intelligent Systems, pp. 907–916. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-27409-1_83
Rogers, M., Bruen, M., & Maystre, L.-Y. (2000). ELECTRE and Decision Support, p. 208. Springer, New
York, NY. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-5057-7
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity for processing
information. Psychological Review, 63(2), 81–97. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0043158
Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology, 22(140), 1–53. https://
doi.org/10.4135/9781412961288.n454
Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J., & Xu, X. (1996). A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in
large spatial databases with noise. In: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. KDD’96, pp. 226–231. AAAI Press, Portland, Oregon
Toshniwal, D., & Roy, R. S. (2009). A hierarchical clustering scheme for unstructured text data. In H. R.
Arabnia, R. R. Hashemi, & F. I. Moxley (Eds.), IKE (pp. 640–646). Las Vegas, Nevada: CSREA Press.
Batista, G.E.A.P.A., & Monard, M.C. (2002). A study of k-nearest neighbour as an imputation method. In:
Abraham, A., Solar, J.R., Köppen, M. (eds.) HIS. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications,
vol. 87, pp. 251–260. IOS Press, Santiago, Chile
Rodrigues, B.E.S., Floriano, C.M., De Lima Silva, D.F., & Costa, H.G. (2025). Genetic k-means: An algorithm
to elicitate missing values in k-means clustering. In: 2025 12th International Conference on Soft Comput-
ing Machine Intelligence (ISCMI), pp. 142–146. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCMI67495.2025.11358483
Jean-Petit, S., Zheng, C., & Ullah, A. (2023). Causality and interdependencies among sustainable development
goals: assessing the nexus of agriculture, environment, and ﬁnance development. ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCE AND POLLUTION RESEARCH. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-023-29576-5
Heiba, Y., Nasr, M., Fujii, M., Mohamed, A. E. E., & Ibrahim, M. G. G. (2023). Improving irrigation schemes
using sustainable development goals (sdgs)-related indicators: a case study of tomato production in pot-
scale experimentation. Environment Development and Sustainability. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-
023-03357-z
Xu, Z. (2023). Water-climate change extended nexus contribution to social welfare and environment-related
sustainable development goals in China. ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND POLLUTION RESEARCH,
30(14), 40654–40669. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-023-25145-y
Kamran, H.W., Raﬁq, M., Abudaqa, A., & Amin, A. (2023). Interconnecting sustainable development goals 7
and 13: the role of renewable energy innovations towards combating the climate change. Environmental
Technology https://doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2023.2216903
Gan, K.E., Taikan, O., Gan, T.Y., Weis, T., Yamazaki, D., & Schuettrumpf, H. (2023). Enhancing Renew-
able Energy Systems, Contributing to Sustainable Development Goals of United Nation and Building
Resilience Against Climate Change Impacts. Energy Technology 11(11) https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.
202300275
Davarpanah, A., Babaie, H., & Dhakal, N. (2023). Semantic modeling of climate change impacts on the
implementation of the UN sustainable development goals related to poverty, hunger, water, and energy.
Earth Science Informatics, 16(1), 929–943. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12145-023-00941-9
Ortiz-de-Montellano, C.G.-S., Samani, P., & Meer, Y. (2023). How can the circular economy support the
advancement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)? A comprehensive analysis. SUSTAIN-
ABLE PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION 40, 352–362 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2023.07.003
Alfaro Navarro, J.-L., & Andres Martinez, M.-E. (2023). A proposal to measure the circular economy
implementation and sustainable development goals achievement using objectively weighted indices.
International Journal of Sustainable Development and World Ecology https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.
2023.2261007
123

Annals of Operations Research
Wang, R., Lu, S., Zhou, L., Yang, Z., Tang, Z., Zhao, M., & Cheng, G. (2023). Assessing nutritional and
economic aspects of food loss and waste in china. Sustainable Production and Consumption 42, 95–105
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2023.09.010
Mancini, L., Valente, A., Vignola, G.B., Mengual, E.S., & Sala, S. (2023). Social footprint of european food
production and consumption. Sustainable Production and Consumption 35, 287–299 https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.spc.2022.11.005
Wang, C., & Li, H. (2024). What inﬂuences the capacity of donor agency for sustainable development: a study
of climate aid projects. Environment, Development and Sustainability https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-
024-04618-1
Andreoni, V., & Richard, A. (2023). Exploring the interconnected nature of the sustainable development goals:
the 2030 SDGs Game as a pedagogical tool for interdisciplinary education. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
OF SUSTAINABILITY IN HIGHER EDUCATION. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-11-2022-0378
Angelaki, M. E., Bersimis, F., Karvounidis, T., & Douligeris, C. (2023). Towards more sustainable higher
education institutions: Implementing the sustainable development goals and embedding sustainability
intotheinformationandcomputertechnologycurricula.EducationandInformationTechnologies.https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10639-023-12025-8
Pires, L.P., & Pereira, B.B. (2023) . Are brazilian universities greening? an analysis of their performances in
an international sustainability ranking. Environment, Development and Sustainability https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10668-023-04172-2
Moussa, T., Allam, A., & Elmarzouky, M. (2022). Global modern slavery and sustainable development goals:
Doesinstitutionalenvironment quality matter? BusinessStrategy and the Environment,31(5),2230–2244.
https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.3018
Rahman, M.M. (2022). The effect of taxation on sustainable development goals: evidence from emerging
countries. Helyon 8(9) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e10512
Bartelings, H., & Philippidis, G. (2024). A novel macroeconomic modelling assessment of food loss and
waste in the eu: An application to the sustainable development goal of halving household food waste.
Sustainable Production and Consumption 45, 567–581 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2024.01.025
Oladapo, B.I., Bowoto, O.K., Adebiyi, V.A., & Ikumapayi, O.M. (2023). Energy harvesting analysis of hip
implantin achieving sustainable development goals. Structures 55, 28–38 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.istruc.
2023.05.150
Rony, Z.I., Moﬁjur, M., Hasan, M.M., Rasul, M.G., Jahirul, M.I., Ahmed, S.F., Kalam, M.A., Badruddin,
C.F.I.A., Khan, T.M.Y., & Show, P.-L. (2023). Alternative fuels to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
marine transport and promote UN sustainable development goals. Fuel 338https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.
2022.127220
Bhattarai, U., Devkota, R., Maraseni, T., Devkota, L., & Marahatta, S. (2023). Attaining multiple sustain-
able development goals through storage hydropower development amidst community vulnerabilities.
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, 31(5), 3913–3929. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.2634
Mansour, F., Al-Hindi, M., Najm, M.A., & Yassine, A. (2023) . Multi-objective optimization for comprehensive
water, energy, food nexus modeling. Sustainable Production and Consumption 38, 295–311 https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.spc.2023.04.013
Saini, M., Adebayo, S. O., Singh, H., Singh, H., & Sharma, S. (2023). Sustainable development goals for
gender equality: Extracting associations among the indicators of SDG 5 using numerical association rule
mining. Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems, 44(3), 5151–5162. https://doi.org/10.3233/JIFS-22238
Refaat, A. (2023). Global achievement of maternal health-related sustainable development goals targets
among women exposed to intimate partner violence. BMC Womens Health 23(1) https://doi.org/10.
1186/s12905-023-02577-9
Yuan, H., Wang, X., Gao, L., Wang, T., Liu, B., Fang, D., & Gao, Y. (2023). Progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals has been slowed by indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Communications
Earth & Environment 4(1) https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-00846-x
Ahmadnezhad, E., Dastan, I., Alvandi, R., & Abdi, Z. (2023). The impact of health reform on poverty estimates
in Iran: Implications for monitoring the ﬁrst goal of Sustainable Development Goals. International
Journal of Health Planning and Management, 38(3), 747–758. https://doi.org/10.1002/hpm.3622
Ajeigbe, K. B., Ganda, F., & Enowkenwa, R. O. (2023). Impact of sustainable tax revenue and expenditure
on the achievement of sustainable development goals in some selected African countries. Environment
Development and Sustainability. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-023-03730
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123