TITLE: Business Failure Prediction From Textual and Tabular Data With Sentence-Level Interpretations
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06574-z
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06574-z
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Business Failure Prediction From Textual and Tabular Data
With Sentence-Level Interpretations
Henri Arno1
· Klaas Mulier2 · Joke Baeck2 · Thomas Demeester1
Received: 1 March 2024 / Accepted: 7 March 2025 / Published online: 18 April 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Business failure prediction models are crucial in high-stakes domains like banking, insurance,
and investing. In this paper, we propose an interpretable model that combines numerical
and sentence-level textual features through a well-known attention mechanism. Our model
demonstrates competitive performance across various metrics, and the attention weights help
identify sentences intuitively linked to business failure, offering a form of interpretability.
Furthermore, our ﬁndings highlight the strength of traditional ﬁnancial ratios for business
failure prediction while textual data—particularly when represented as keywords—is mainly
useful to correctly classify corporate disclosures where the possibility of failure is explicitly
mentioned.
Keywords Decision support systems · Business failure prediction · Natural language
processing · Text analytics
1 Introduction
Business failure prediction models can be used to evaluate the ﬁnancial health of companies,
serving as a valuable tool for data-driven decision support (Borchert et al., 2023). Academic
interest in the development of such models dates back to at least the 1960s (Beaver, 1966;
Altman, 1968), and by now, business failure prediction models have applications in a wide
array of economic sectors. For instance, they are of great importance for loan ofﬁcers in
their corporate lending decisions, for insurance brokers in the pricing of their contracts,
for investment analysts to determine the risk of investing in a certain stock or bond, for
credit bureaus in advising their clients on the creditworthiness of other businesses, or for
banking regulators in their assessment of credit risks in the banking system. Having a highly
performing business failure prediction model is thus of great economic importance.
Research gap. Over the years, corporate disclosures have become increasingly more com-
plex and lengthy, mainly driven by stricter disclosure requirements (Dyer et al., 2017).
Moreover, corporate disclosures do not only contain numerical accounting data but also sub-
stantial amounts of text. At the same time, with artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), machine learning
B Henri Arno
Henri.Arno@UGent.be
1
Ghent University - imec, Technologiepark 126, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
2
Ghent University, Universiteitstraat 4, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
123

668
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
(ML) and large language models (LLMs) developing fast, the possibilities of incorporating
multi-modal data to predict business failure look promising. However, superior prediction
capabilities alone do not sufﬁce to ensure that business failure prediction models using ML
techniques will ﬁnd their way to practice. User trust is critical for the way that people make
sense of and use the output of AI systems (Glikson & Woolley, 2020). Recent insights show
that explainability and interpretability are strong determinants of such user trust (Shin, 2021;
Bauer et al., 2023). Therefore, we aim to ﬁll this gap by proposing a new multi-modal neural
architecture that is interpretable by design and we compare the performance of our model
with various classical and state-of-the-art classiﬁers.1
Research focus. The empirical setting in which we train and evaluate our models combines
three widely used data sources containing information on listed companies operating in the
United States: Edgar, Compustat, and the LoPucki Bankruptcy Research Database. The ﬁrst
data source provides us with the text from 10K’s that companies need to ﬁle to the Securities
and Exchange Commission each year. From these, we take the management discussion and
analysis section (MD&A), which contains textual information provided by top-management
about the state of the company in a given ﬁscal year. The text in the MD&A’s is relatively long,
with 6,810 words on average. The second data source provides us with numerical accounting
data from which we derive a number of ﬁnancial ratios representing the ﬁnancial state of the
company in a given ﬁscal year. The third data source provides us with information on whether
and when a company ﬁled for bankruptcy (either under chapter 7 or 11 of the U.S. bankruptcy
code). Our models predict if a company will ﬁle for bankruptcy during the next year, based
on the information contained in a 10K ﬁling. In total, the combined dataset contains textual
and numerical data relating to 84,652 observations, i.e. 10K ﬁlings, of which 662 were ﬁled
before bankruptcy.
Results. The model we propose combines numerical features and sentence-level tex-
tual features through an established attention mechanism, prevalent in transformer models
(Vaswani et al., 2017), and attains competitive results on a variety of performance metrics
(including the ROC-AUC). Notably, the sentences that received a particularly high attention
weight from disclosures that were assigned a high likelihood of business failure by our pre-
diction model contain information users may ﬁnd highly relevant. In these sentences, for
example, top-management refers to declining demand for the companies’ products, the clos-
ing of stores, the breaching of loan covenants, debt renegotiations with creditors, etc. As
a result, the model not only performs well in predicting business failure but also provides
interpretability as an additional functionality by highlighting the speciﬁc parts of the text
most indicative of such potential failure.
Our study further examines the impact of the different data modalities in corporate disclo-
sures on the performance of business failure prediction models. Our results underscore the
importance of numerical data, in particular traditional ﬁnancial ratios (liquidity, solvency and
proﬁtability ratios) as these features are the main drivers behind the best-performing models
(in terms of ROC-AUC). In contrast, the textual data—when represented as keywords—
enables the models to correctly classify a small subset of disclosures where the management
explicitly mentions in the MD&A that the company considers to ﬁle for bankruptcy. For these
particular instances, the prediction task based on keywords such as ‘chapter’ or ‘reorganisa-
tion’ becomes rather trivial. Additionally, we evaluated classiﬁers based on state-of-the-art
pretrained document embeddings, but they perform poorly on the task. This suggests that
these embeddings capture little information relevant to predict business failure and that tai-
lored textual features are better suited for this purpose.
1 The code to replicate the experiments is available at https://github.com/henriarnoUG/ECL
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
669
Contributions. We contribute to the literature in two ways. First, we contribute to the
growing body of research on eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Operations Research
(XAIOR) (see, e.g. De Bock et al., 2024; Sobrie et al., 2024; Coussement and Benoit, 2021)
by proposing an interpretable neural architecture for business failure prediction based on
numerical and sentence-level textual features. According to Rudin (2019), predictive models
that are interpretable by design might be preferred over post-hoc methods (such as LIME or
SHAP) that aim to explain the predictions of black-box models, especially for high-stakes
applications. As our proposed model is interpretable by design, we strengthen this part of the
literature.
Second, we contribute to the strand of Operations Research (OR) literature focused on
business failure prediction (see, e.g. Mai et al., 2019; De Bock, 2017; Du Jardin, 2021;
Borchert et al., 2023). We thoroughly evaluate a multitude of uni-modal and multi-modal
business failure prediction models and highlight the distinct role of numerical and textual
data in corporate disclosures in the context of this challenging task.
In summary, our study presents a new attention-based model for business failure prediction
that (1) is competitive on a variety of performance metrics (including ROC-AUC) and (2)
offers a form of interpretability since it can highlight the sentences that are indicative of
corporate distress. In addition, our ﬁndings highlight the importance of traditional ﬁnancial
ratios in predicting business failure and show that keyword-based textual features are mainly
useful to detect a subset of corporate disclosures close to failure, where this is explicitly
mentioned in the text.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Sect.2, we review the literature
on business failure prediction and more generally, the literature on predictive modelling
techniques related to our methodological contribution. Section 3 details the data used in our
study. In Sect.4, we elaborate on the design and training of our proposed model, and in
Sects.5 and 6, we cover the results and draw conclusions.
2 Literature review
2.1 Business failure prediction
2.1.1 Advancements in predictive modelling techniques
Business failure prediction was pioneered by Beaver (1966), who demonstrated that ﬁnan-
cial ratios can effectively be used to discriminate between failing and non-failing companies
through univariate analysis. The purpose of this foundational work was to empirically verify
the usefulness of accounting data, “...for any purpose, and not merely for solvency determi-
nation". Building on this, Altman (1968) introduced the Z-score, a multivariate predictive
model combining ﬁve ﬁnancial ratios, which became a widely adopted tool for failure pre-
diction in practice. Later, Ohlson (1980) proposed the O-score, a probabilistic model that
also relied on ﬁnancial ratios, a third key contribution in the ﬁeld.
Following this work, the ﬁeld has evolved in two directions. First, researchers have tried to
improve predictive performance by relying on more ﬂexible modelling techniques. Examples
include the application of feed-forward neural networks (Odom and Sharda, 1990), ensembles
(Cortés et al., 2007) or convolutional neural networks (Hosaka, 2019) to predict business
failure. Second, studies have explored the predictive value of variables beyond ﬁnancial
ratios, such as corporate governance variables (Liang et al., 2016), industry and country
123

670
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
characteristics (Doumpos et al., 2017), and more recently, textual features extracted from
corporate disclosures, which will be discussed further below.
2.1.2 The role of ensembles in failure prediction
The main idea behind ensembles is to combine multiple learning algorithms into a single
model that outperforms each individual component. Numerous ensemble methods have been
proposed for a variety of tasks and we refer to Sagi and Rokach (2018) for an overview.
These techniques have been extensively studied in the context of business failure prediction
due to their superior performance compared to single classiﬁers.
Cortés et al. (2007) were among the ﬁrst to use ensembles for failure prediction, and in their
experiments, AdaBoost (adaptive boosting) (Freund and Schapire, 1996) showed signiﬁcant
improvements over the decision tree baselines. Similarly, Alfaro et al. (2008) benchmarked
AdaBoost against feed-forward neural networks and also report improved performance. Kim
and Kang (2010) compared AdaBoost to bagging ensembles (bootstrapped aggregation)
(Breiman, 1996) and found that bagging yields the best results. More recently, García et
al. (2019) studied the predictive performance of various traditional ensemble methods—
including AdaBoost, bagging, random forest, and rotation forest—and conclude that the
optimal ensemble method depends on the properties of the dataset.
While these contributions highlight the strength of traditional ensembles for business
failure prediction, Du Jardin (2021) argues that the performance improvements over sin-
gle classiﬁers are often limited. Therefore, he proposed an ensemble technique tailored to
the task, based on self-organising neural networks, capable of modelling both general and
speciﬁc ﬁnancial patterns leading to failure, and showing improved results over various base-
lines. In addition, De Bock (2017) introduced spline rule ensemble—another non-traditional
ensembles method for business failure prediction—that effectively balances model strength
and interpretability.
2.1.3 The predictive value of textual disclosures
One of the ﬁrst studies examining the relationship between business failure and the textual
information in corporate disclosures was performed by Holder-Webb and Cohen (2007). They
ﬁnd evidence that managers increase the quality of the management discussion and analysis
section (MD&A) of 10K ﬁlings in the early stages of ﬁnancial distress, primarily for economic
reasons (e.g. to reduce the cost of capital). While this study established a link between textual
disclosures and ﬁnancial distress, subsequent work has directly incorporated features from
these texts into business failure prediction models. Initially, these features were extracted with
dictionary-based techniques, which produced promising results and established the predictive
value of disclosure texts for failure prediction (Cecchini et al., 2010; Mayew et al., 2015).
Recently, deep learning techniques have been used to represent the text as well, leading to
improved predictive performance, especially when combined with ﬁnancial ratios (Mai et
al., 2019; Arno et al., 2022).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
671
2.2 Multi-modal and explainable predictive modelling
2.2.1 Classiﬁcation from textual and tabular data
Our objective is the build an interpretable business failure prediction model capable of pro-
cessing the numerical and textual data from corporate disclosures. Recently, Sleeman et
al. (2022) introduced a taxonomy for multi-modal classiﬁcation systems, highlighting three
ways to combine the data modalities: before, during, or after the primary learning stage,
referred to as early, cross-modality, and late fusion, respectively. Most classiﬁcation models
using numerical and textual data rely on early or late fusion. For instance, Panda et al. (2020)
developed a model for emotion detection that combines electrical brain signals (numerical
data) and customer reviews (textual data) through early fusion. Manually extracted features
from both modalities were concatenated into a single representation to train the classiﬁer. In
contrast, Xu et al. (2019) used late fusion for diseases classiﬁcation based on multi-modal
electronic health records. They trained separate models for the textual and numerical data
and combine the outputs in their ﬁnal prediction. Drawing from this line of work, we will
include both early and late fusion classiﬁers as baselines to evaluate the performance of our
proposed model.
2.2.2 Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence in operations research
Numerous prediction tasks, including business failure prediction, have seen tremendous
performance improvements with the advent of modern deep learning. Nonetheless, deep
neural networks typically lack the ability to explain their inference processes or to provide
interpretable insights into their predictions (Xu et al., 2019). This is especially problematic
for predictive models deployed in high-stakes applications (Rudin, 2019). Consequently,
eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) has emerged as a prominent research area within
the AI community.
XAI is also gaining considerable attention in operations research. De Bock et al. (2024)
recently introduced a normative framework for eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Oper-
ations Research (XAIOR), emphasizing the need for solutions that are simultaneously
performant, attributable and responsible to enhance decision-making. A notable example of
XAIOR is the spline rule ensemble method, which enables ﬂexible modelling while ensuring
interpretability through human-understandable rules (De Bock, 2017; De Bock & De Caigny,
2021). Additionally, researchers have used model-agnostic methods like LIME and SHAP to
explain their model predictions (Sobrie et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). Our work contributes
to this emerging ﬁeld by proposing a business failure prediction model that is interpretable
by design.
3 Data and prediction task
In Sect.3.1 we cover the dataset used in our experiments. Section 3.2 expands on the business
failure prediction task, including our labelling strategy.
123

672
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
3.1 The Edgar-Compustat-LoPucki dataset
We aim to predict business failure from the numerical and textual data contained in corporate
disclosures. To this end, we focus on 10K ﬁlings, which are extensive documents prepared
annually by large—mostly listed—companies operating in the United States. These ﬁlings
are submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and contain detailed infor-
mation about the performance of the company in the past ﬁscal year. It is a primary source of
information for investors, analysts and other stakeholders. A 10K is organised in 15 different
sections (denoted items), each focusing on a particular topic such as a description of the busi-
ness (item 1), pending legal proceedings (item 3), the management discussion and analysis
(item 7) and the consolidated ﬁnancial statements (item 8). Most of this information is textual
while the included ﬁnancial statements (e.g., the balance sheet) are mainly numerical.
In recent work, Arno et al. (2023) presented the Edgar-Compustat-LoPucki (ECL) dataset,
which combines three established data sources.2 The dataset contains the textual and numer-
ical data from 170,139 10K records, ﬁled between 1993 and 2023. The text in these 10K
ﬁlings is relatively long, averaging 29,247 words per ﬁling, with the management discussion
and analysis (item 7) being the longest individual item, averaging 6,810 words per ﬁling.
Due to a size-related selection criterion in the LoPucki Bankruptcy Research Database, only
a subset of the 10K ﬁlings in the ECL dataset have associated bankruptcy labels, which is
further discussed in Sect.3.2 below.
3.2 The business failure prediction task
The studies discussed in Sect.2.1 have operationalized business failure in various ways. For
instance, Beaver (1966) classiﬁed a company as failing if it experienced bankruptcy, a bond
default, an overdrawn bank account or nonpayment of a preferred stock dividend. Similarly,
Cortés et al. (2007) also adopted a broad deﬁnition of failure by classifying companies in the
failing group not only in the case of bankruptcy or temporary receivership, but also when a
company was acquired or dissolved. In this paper, we follow the majority of previous studies
and use a more narrow deﬁnition of business failure. Speciﬁcally, the failing companies in
our sample are those that ﬁle for bankruptcy under chapter 7 (liquidation) or chapter 11
(reorganisation) of the United States bankruptcy code.
We only have bankruptcy information for a subset of the 10K ﬁlings in the dataset. Only
companies with a total asset value exceeding 100,000,000 (measured in 1980 dollars) are
considered eligible for inclusion in the LoPucki Bankruptcy Research Database. For eligi-
ble companies, we know if they ﬁled for bankruptcy or not, and we know the associated
bankruptcy ﬁling date (if applicable). Based on this information, binary bankruptcy labels
were assigned to the 10K ﬁlings of eligible companies following the strategy depicted in
Fig.1.
A 10K ﬁling covers a ﬁscal year (TFY ) that ends on the ﬁscal year-end (tFY ), and is
submitted to the SEC on the ﬁling date (tFD). While the accounting information in a 10K
strictly relates to the period TFY , the text could also contain information from the entire
pre-ﬁling period TP F. If the company ﬁled for bankruptcy in the year following the ﬁling
date (during TPrediction), the binary bankruptcy label is true, and false otherwise. This
strategy resulted in a labelled subset of 84,652 10K ﬁlings in the dataset, that can be used
to predict if a company ﬁled for bankruptcy in the next year (during TPrediction), given the
numerical and textual data in its 10K ﬁling.
2 See (Arno et al., 2023) for details on the construction of the dataset and descriptive statistics.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
673
Fig. 1 A timeline illustrating the ﬁscal year coverage (TFY ) and the ﬁling date (tFD) of the 10K ﬁlings in the
dataset. Based on this information, we assign binary labels to the 10K ﬁlings for the business failure prediction
task
Since bankruptcy of large listed companies does not occur often, only a small number of
10K ﬁlings in the labelled dataset were ﬁled in the year before bankruptcy (the ‘positive’
examples), which leads to a strong class imbalance. In fact, only 662 out of the 84,652 labelled
10K ﬁlings were ﬁled before bankruptcy. This means that we approximately have 1 positive
example for every 127 negative examples in the dataset.
We performed a temporal train, validation and test split that closely reﬂects how business
failure prediction models are constructed in practice. All 10K records ﬁled prior to 2012 are
used to train the models, the 10K records ﬁled between 2012 and 2015 are assigned to the
validation set and the remaining 10K records, ﬁled after 2015, comprise the test set. The
resulting dataset consists of 54,039 instances in the training set, 12,324 in the validation set,
and 18,289 in the test set, with 481, 59 and 122 positive examples in each set, respectively.
In line with the work of Mai et al. (2019), we include a selection of ﬁnancial ratios
(reported in item 8 of a 10K ﬁling) as numerical features in our experiments (see Appendix A
for an overview). For the text, we follow the majority of previous studies (Cecchini et al.,
2010; Mayew et al., 2015; Mai et al., 2019; Arno et al., 2023) and restrict our focus to the
management discussion and analysis section (item 7). This section contains a description of
the most important events of the past ﬁscal year as perceived by top-management (such as
market trends, strategic decisions and operational matters) and is therefore well suited for
business failure prediction.
4 Model design and experimental setup
In Sect.4.1, we describe the architecture of our proposed model, while the uni-modal and
multi-modal baselines are covered in Sects.4.2 and 4.3, respectively. The experimental setup
and evaluation metrics are detailed in Sect.4.4. For clarity, all models are assigned a name
that will be used throughout the work. A summary of these models and their deﬁning char-
acteristics is provided in Table 1.
4.1 Proposed model architecture
We propose a new interpretable model for business failure prediction, denoted
NT-att[num,sent-emb], that combines numerical features and sentence-level textual
features based on a well-known attention mechanism. To ensure reproducibility, we give a
detailed model description in the following paragraphs. A visual overview of the proposed
architecture is given in Fig.2.
123

674
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
Table 1 An overview of the models presented in this work. Numerical data is represented as normalised
ﬁnancial ratios
(num), while textual data is represented as keyword-based tfidf features (tfidf),
document-level embeddings (emb) or sentence-level embeddings (sent-emb). Preﬁxes N and T refer to
uni-modal models on numerical and textual inputs, respectively, while NT denotes multi-modal models using
both numerical and textual inputs
Model
Description
NT-att[num,sent-emb]
Attention-based model on the numerical features
and sentence embeddings
N-Z’[num]
Altman Z’-score obtained from the numerical
features
N-LR[num]
Logistic regression classiﬁer on the numerical
features
N-MLP[num]
Multi-layer perceptron classiﬁer on the numerical
features
N-XGB[num]
XGBoost classiﬁer on the numerical features
T-LR[tfidf]
Logistic regression classiﬁer on all tfidf features
T-XGB[tfidf]
XGBoost classiﬁer on selected tfidf features
T-LR[emb]
Logistic regression classiﬁer on the document-level
embeddings
NT-XGB[num+tfidf]
XGBoost classiﬁer on the combined numerical and
selected tfidf features
NT-stack[XGB(num),XGB(tfidf)]
Stacked combination of the N-XGB(num) and
T-XGB(tfidf) models
Fig. 2 The architecture of the proposed model NT-att[num,sent-emb], which predicts business failure
by combining numerical features and sentence-level textual features. The textual representation satt, is an
attention-weighted sum of theindividualsentenceembeddingssi (i = 1, . . . , N),reﬂecting their compatibility
with the numerical feature vector fnum or the prediction target (the business failure label)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
675
4.1.1 Sentence embeddings
By only focusing on the management discussion and analysis (MD&A) of the 10K ﬁlings,
we already drastically reduce the amount of text, ﬁltering out parts that are irrelevant for
business failure prediction. Nonetheless, we assume that the most useful information for the
task at hand is likely concentrated in only a few highly informative sentences. As a ﬁrst step,
we therefore identify individual sentences in the text, and separately encode them into dense
D-dimensional vector representations with a pretrained sentence embedding model.3
Since each MD&A has a different number of sentences, we initially encode the ﬁrst 300
sentences of each text, assuming that the most relevant content for business failure prediction
can be found at the beginning. This strategy allows us to fully process 52.7% of the MD&A’s
in the dataset, as they contain fewer than 300 sentences. Alternatively, we encode the ﬁrst
and last 250 sentences, based on the assumption that the conclusions at the end might also
contain useful information for the task. With this strategy, that encodes up to 500 sentences,
84.3% of the MD&A’s are fully processed. If an MD&A contains fewer than 300 or 500
sentences, we pad the sentence embeddings accordingly.
4.1.2 Attention-based cross-modality fusion
Given the sentence representations {s1, s2, . . . , sN} for all N sentences of a given text, the idea
is to let the model discover which of those are most compatible with the numerical feature
vector fnum (and therefore potentially interesting from an interpretability perspective), or
which ones are simply more strongly related to the prediction target than others and could
therefore bring complementary value to the numerical features alone. We ﬁrst construct a
so-called attention-weighted representation satt for the entire text as a weighted sum of all
sentence embedding vectors as follows:
satt =
N

i=1
αi si,
with αi =
e
1
√
d (WQfnum+bQ)·(WK si)
N
j=1 e
1
√
d (WQfnum+bQ)·(WK s j)
in which the attention weight αi of sentence embedding si is obtained by measuring how
compatible it is with the numerical feature vector fnum (compared to the other sentences),
through the standard scaled dot product attention. In particular, fnum ∈RF is mapped into
d-dimensional space through an afﬁne transformation with trainable weights WQ ∈Rd×F
and bias vector bQ ∈Rd, where it functions as the attention ‘query’ to detect compatible
sentences. Compatibility is measured by the scaled dot product—as is common practice
in transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017)—with the attention ‘keys’ obtained through a
linear projection of the sentence embeddings si ∈RD into d-dimensional space, with weights
WK ∈Rd×D.
Note that the bias term bQ allows the model to assign high attention weights to particular
sentences, even if there is no substantial contribution from the term involving the numerical
features. This expresses our intuition that some sentences may contain clear information on
business failure or ﬁnancial health, even when not reﬂected in the available ﬁnancial ratios.
Furthermore, we extended the list of sentence embeddings with an additional normalised
but trainable vector s0 ∈RD, which lends the model an interesting property in terms of
interpretation. If its corresponding attention weight α0 is higher than the weights of all of
3 We used the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 model from HuggingFace with an embedding dimension of D = 384.
For more details, see https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2.
123

676
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
the actual sentence embeddings, this can be interpreted as the model explicitly ignoring the
sentence embeddings, only taking into account the numerical features in making a prediction.
If, however, one or a few sentences contain clear information related to the ﬁnancial ratios
and / or the outcome, their corresponding attention weights will likely become much larger
than the others (including the attention weight for s0). Note that the sentences that lead to high
attention weights are considered by the model to be informative for the predicted outcome,
either hinting towards business failure, or instead, a very healthy ﬁnancial situation. This is
illustrated in Tables 6 and 9, and will be discussed further in Sect.5.2.1.
We subsequently concatenate satt, the attention-weighted sum of sentence representations,
with the representation (WQfnum + bQ) of the numerical features in d-dimensional space
(i.e., the query vector in the attention step), and ﬁnally add a logistic regression layer (linear
projection to a scalar, followed by a sigmoid activation) to predict business failure. The
training details of the model are given in Appendix B.
4.2 Uni-modal baselines
Inthissection,wecoverthebaselinemodelsthatpredictbusinessfailurefromeithernumerical
or textual inputs alone. These models helps us understand the predictive value of each data
modality in the corporate disclosures and their performance serves as a lower bound for the
performance of the multi-modal models.
4.2.1 Numerical baselines
The Z-score model (Altman, 1968)—introduced in Sect.2.1—remains a frequently used
businessfailurepredictionmodeltoday.However,theoriginalmodelrequiresbothaccounting
and market data as one of the included ﬁnancial ratios is based on the market value of equity.
In a revised version of the model, the Z’-score, the market value was replaced by the book
value of equity (Altman, 2013). This version of the Z-score model can be computed from
the accounting data in 10K ﬁlings, which is why N-Z’[num] is the ﬁrst baseline in our
experiments. For a more detailed formulation of this baseline model, we refer to Appendix C.
From the numerical features (see Appendix A for an overview), we have trained three addi-
tional baseline classiﬁers. An L2-regularised logistic regression classiﬁer (N-LR[num]), a
multi-layer perceptron classiﬁer (N-MLP[num]) and as ensemble method an XGBoost clas-
siﬁer (N-XGB[num]). The training details for these models are given in Appendix B.
4.2.2 Textual baselines
For the textual baselines, we used two techniques to extract meaningful features from the text.
First, we used term frequency-inverse document frequency (tfidf) features. This approach
starts by constructing a vocabulary that consists of all occurring unigrams and/or bigrams in
the training set. A text is then represented as a vocabulary-sized vector where each position
corresponds to a term in the vocabulary. The value at each position quantiﬁes how often
the term occurs in the text while also accounting for the rarity of this term over all training
documents(Manningetal.,2008).Inordertomanagethesizeofthevocabulary,weperformed
several standard text cleaning operations including removal of case, stopwords, punctuation,
numerals and inﬂected word forms. With these keyword-based features, we have trained two
baseline models. An L1-regularised logistic regression classiﬁer (T-LR[tfidf]) and an
XGBoost classiﬁer (T-XGB[tfidf]). The L1 regularisation serves as an automatic feature
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
677
selection method, retaining approximately 1,200 features after hyperparameter optimisation.
Based on these ﬁndings, we selected 1,500 tfidf features using a chi-squared test, serving
as input for the XGBoost classiﬁer.
Second, we represented the texts as dense vectors obtained from a pretrained and com-
mercially available text embedding model from OpenAI.4 This transformer-based neural
sequence encoder is capable of encoding documents up to 8,191 tokens into a single vec-
tor, capturing the semantic information of the texts (longer documents were truncated to ﬁt
within the token limit). Using these embeddings, we have trained an L2-regularised logistic
regression classiﬁer (T-LR[emb]) as our third textual baseline. For training details we refer
to Appendix B.
4.3 Multi-modal baselines
In this section, we cover the baselines that predict business failure from both numerical and
textual inputs. Following the taxonomy of Sleeman et al. (2022), we distinguish between early
and late fusion models, depending on whether the numerical and textual data is combined
before or after the primary learning stage. Both models are based on XGBoost classiﬁers,
given their strong performance on numerical and textual inputs individually (as discussed in
Sect.5.1).
For the early fusion model, we trained an XGBoost classiﬁer (NT-XGB[num+tfidf])
on the concatenated numerical features and selected tfidf features (based on a chi-squared
test). For the late fusion model, we follow a stacking approach (Wolpert, 1992). The numerical
and textual data are processed separately by their respective best-performing uni-modal
classiﬁers (N-XGB[num] and T-XGB[tfidf]). The normalised predictions from these
classiﬁers on the validation set are then used to train a stacking classiﬁer:
P(Business failure) = σ(β0 + β1Snumerical + β2Stextual)
where P(Business failure) is the likelihood of business failure assigned by the stacking clas-
siﬁer, σ(.) denotes the sigmoid transformation, Snumerical and Stextual are the normalised
scores of the uni-modal classiﬁers, and the βi’s are the parameters of the model (denoted as
NT-stack[XGB(num),XGB(tfidf)]). Training details are given in Appendix B.
4.4 Performance evaluation
The models discussed above output continuous scores, where a higher score indicates that
business failure is more likely. We could transform these scores into class labels (failure vs.
no failure) by using a ‘cut-off’ set to optimise some performance metric. Nonetheless, the
optimal cut-off will depend on the application of the model. Therefore, we decided to evaluate
the models in terms of their ranking performance through a variety of cut-off independent
performance metrics presented below.
4.4.1 Area under the receiver operating curve
The area under the receiver operating curve (ROC-AUC) is a metric commonly used to
evaluate the overall performance of binary classiﬁcation models. It summarises the receiver
4 We used the text-embedding-ada-002 model from OpenAI. For more details, see https://platform.
openai.com/docs/models/embeddings.
123

678
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
operating curve, plotting the true positive rate (or recall) against the false positive rate at
each possible cut-off. In our context, this metric can be interpreted as the probability that a
classiﬁer assigns a higher score to a randomly sampled 10K ﬁled in the year before failure (a
positive) compared to a randomly sampled 10K that was not ﬁled before failure (a negative)
(Fernández et al., 2018). Despite this intuitive interpretation, the ROC-AUC can be overly
optimistic with heavily imbalanced data (Davis and Goadrich, 2006), which is why we report
additional metrics as well.
4.4.2 Average precision
The average precision (AP) is a ranking metric that captures the performance of a classiﬁer
on the minority class. It summarises the precision-recall curve, plotting the precision against
the recall at each possible cut-off. The AP is calculated as the weighted mean of the precision
at each cut-off, where the increase in recall (from the previous cut-off) is used as weight.
4.4.3 Recall@100
The recall@100 reﬂects the ability of a model to detect 10K ﬁlings of failing companies
with a ﬁxed ‘budget’ (speciﬁcally when only 100 ﬁlings are considered). This performance
metric is the fraction of true positives in the 100 highest-ranked instances as predicted by
a model. In our context, it measures the proportion of 10K records ﬁled before failure that
appear in the 100 10K ﬁlings that were assigned the highest likelihood of failure by the model.
With a test set containing 122 positives, a perfect model would achieve a recall@100 of
81.97%, which is the highest achievable value for this metric given our dataset.
4.4.4 Cumulative accuracy proﬁle ratio
Finally, we report the cumulative accuracy proﬁle ratio (CAP ratio). This ratio summarises
the cumulative accuracy proﬁle curve, plotting the recall at various data proportions based
on the scores assigned by a model. Essentially, this curve shows the recall@k for varying
values of k. The metric is then computed as the ratio of (1) the area between the CAP curve of
the evaluated model and the CAP curve of a random model and (2) the area between the CAP
curve of a perfect model and the CAP curve of a random model. Similarly to the ROC-AUC,
the CAP ratio captures the overall ranking performance of a classiﬁer.
5 Results and discussion
In Sect.5.1 we discuss the results of our experiments. Afterwards, in Sect.5.2 we give an
in-depth analysis of these results, with a particular focus on the interpretabilty of the proposed
model and the predictive value of the numerical accounting data and the text in corporate
disclosures for business failure prediction.
5.1 Business failure prediction results
The results in Table 2 show that among the numerical baselines, the XGBoost classiﬁer
(N-XGB[num]) performs best on ROC-AUC and CAP ratio, while the MLP classiﬁer
(N-MLP[num]) achieves the highest AP. Both models perform equally well in terms of
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
679
Table 2 The results of the numerical baselines on the test set. To account for model speciﬁc variability and
data sampling, the mean results (± std.) are shown over 5 training runs. The best results for each metric are
shown in bold (within the table) or marked with a star (*) (across all experiments). If the difference between
the best models is statistically insigniﬁcant (p-value > 0.05, based on an independent samples t-test), both are
shown in bold or marked with a star (*)
Model
N-Z’[num]
N-LR[num]
N-MLP[num]
N-XGB[num]
ROC-AUC
74.93%
91.48%
92.61% (±0.16%)
93.73% (±0.02%)
AP
9.95%
11.50%
17.52% (±0.48%)
15.71% (±0.09%)
recall@100
17.21%
14.75%
19.84% (±1.47%)
19.18% (±0.45%)
CAP ratio
49.85%
82.97%
85.23% (±0.31%)
87.46% (±0.05%)
Table 3 The results of the textual baselines on the test set. See Table 2 for details on the notation
Model
T-LR[tfidf]
T-XGB[tfidf]
T-LR[emb]
ROC-AUC
87.94%
90.14% (±0.50%)
81.79%
AP
23.66%
26.89% (±1.33%)*
3.89%
recall@100
28.36%*
28.69% (±0.73%)*
5.41%
CAP ratio
75.88%
80.29% (±1.00%)
63.58%
Table 4 The results of the multi-modal baselines on the test set. See Table 2 for details on the notation
Model
NT-XGB[num+tfidf]
NT-stack[XGB(num),XGB(tfidf)]
ROC-AUC
94.94% (±0.17%)*
94.96% (±0.08%)*
AP
26.09% (±1.29%)*
27.24% (±1.51%)*
recall@100
27.38% (±0.84%)*
28.89% (±1.03%)*
CAP ratio
89.88% (±0.33%)*
89.93% (±0.16%)*
recall@100. For the textual baselines, we can see from Table 3 that the XGBoost classiﬁer
trained on selected tfidf features (T-XGB[tfidf]) is the best model on every metric,
although the logistic regression classiﬁer (T-LR[tfidf]) matches its performance in terms
of recall@100. If we compare all uni-modal baselines (Tables 2 and 3), the numerical
model N-XGB[num] attains the highest ROC-AUC and CAP ratio while the textual
model T-XGB[tfidf] is superior for recall@100 and AP.
Table 4 presents the results for the multi-modal baselines. These results show that
the early (NT-XGB[num+tfidf]) and late (NT-stack[XGB(num),XGB(tfidf)])
fusion models perform similarly across all metrics, which indicates that combining the numer-
ical and textual features before or after the primary learning stage leads to comparable results.
Furthermore, both models achieve the best results over all experiments, although the textual
baseline T-XGB[tfidf] performs equally well on AP and recall@100.
Finally, when evaluating our proposed model (Table 5), we notice that the strategy of
encoding the ﬁrst 300 sentences (NT-att[num,sent-emb-300]) outperforms the alter-
native where we encode the ﬁrst and last 250 sentences (NT-att[num,sent-emb-500])
(although both achieve the same AP and recall@100). Across all experiments, our
proposed model is competitive in terms of ROC-AUC and CAP ratio, although the perfor-
123

680
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
Table 5 The results of the proposed model on the test set (across the different strategies of encoding 300
sentences or 500 sentences, respectively). See Table 2 for details on the notation
Model
NT-att[num,sent-emb-300]
NT-att[num,sent-emb-500]
ROC-AUC
94.53% (±0.05%)
94.17% (±0.15%)
AP
16.15% (±1.02%)
16.91% (±0.66%)
recall@100
17.21% (±2.09%)
18.36% (±1.49%)
CAP ratio
89.06% (±0.09%)
88.33% (±0.30%)
mancedifferencewiththebest-performingmodel(NT-stack[XGB(num),XGB(tfidf)])
is statistically signiﬁcant.
5.2 In-depth analysis
In this section we provide an in-depth analysis of our results. We focus on the interpretability
of our proposed model in Sect.5.2.1 and we discuss the predictive value of the numerical
and the textual data in corporate disclosures for business failure prediction in Sect.5.2.2.
5.2.1 Attention-based model interpretability
In Sect.4.1 we have covered the design of our proposed model and argued that due to its
architecture, it offers a form of interpretability through the attention weights. Sentences
that are assigned a high attention weight are either informative to predict the outcome or
align well with the numerical features. To empirically validate this, we present in Table 6,
the sentences with the highest attention weights for the top ranked instances from the test
set (the 10K ﬁlings with the highest likelihood of business failure according to the model
NT-att[num,sent-emb-300]).
Table 6 reveals that the sentences with the highest attention weights cover a variety of
topics that can be intuitively linked to business failure such as liquidity or solvency issues,
declining demand, breaching of loan covenants and the closing of stores. Interestingly, the
model also tends to ignore the text for a number of 10K ﬁlings. This is the case for 24 out of
the 100 highest ranked instances by our proposed model.5
In order to fully understand the interpretability of the attention weights assigned by the
model, we have included the selected sentences for several randomly sampled 10K ﬁlings
from the test set in Appendix D as well. In contrast to the top ranked instances highlighted in
Table 6, the sentences within these randomly sampled 10K ﬁlings tend to have much lower
attention weights. This suggest that the model did not identify sentences that clearly signal
business failure (or clear signs of ﬁnancial health), but instead it distributed its attention more
evenly across the text. Although certain selected sentences do hint at either a healthy or a
poor ﬁnancial situation, no clear topics stand out.
Taking a closer look at the results from Tables 2- 5, another interesting ﬁnding emerges.
The competitive performance of our proposed model in terms of ROC-AUC and CAP ratio
contrasts with its poor results in terms of AP and recall@100. Furthermore, all models
trained with numerical features (num) outperform their counterparts trained without these
features in terms of ROC-AUC and CAP ratio. Additionally, the models trained with
5 From these 24 instances, 7 were ﬁled before failure (positives) and 17 were not (negatives).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
681
Table 6 For the 10 highest ranked 10K ﬁlings in the test set by the NT-att[num,sent-emb-300] model,
we give the rank, the business failure label, the predicted score ranging from 0 (perfect ﬁnancial health
predicted) up to 1 (certain failure predicted), and the 3 sentences with the highest attention weights. When the
model only attends to the trainable vector, no sentences are selected
Rank
Label
Score
Selected sentence (attention weight)
1
True
1.0
no sentences selected
2
True
0.99
no sentences selected
3
True
0.99
There can be no assurance that our efforts will result in any agreement or
what the terms of any agreement will be. (16.13%)
If we do not obtain a waiver or other suitable relief from the lenders under
the Credit Agreement or the Term Loan Agreement before the expiration
of the 30-day grace period, an event of default under each of the Credit
Agreement and Term Loan Agreement would occur. (7.85%)
If the company does not comply with the covenants in the Revolving
Credit Facility, the lenders may, subject to customary cure rights, require
immediate payment of all amounts outstanding under the Revolving
Credit Facility and may terminate any outstanding unfunded
commitments. (5.87%)
4
True
0.99
no sentences selected
5
False
0.99
no sentences selected
6
False
0.99
There can be no assurances that the securitization lenders will agree to any
extension of the Securitization Forbearance Agreement or that if such
forbearance agreement is terminated early or expires, that the
securitization lenders will not pursue any and all remedies available to
them. (11.51%)
There can be no assurance that these efforts will result in any agreement.
(10.92%)
There can be no assurance that any restructuring will be possible on
acceptable terms, if at all. (6.27%)
7
False
0.99
By March 2020, all of our operating stores were temporarily closed
(including our one new store that opened in March 2020). (8.40%)
Our store in [city] permanently closed in March 2019, as we did not
exercise the renewal option, and has been excluded from ﬁscal 2019 store
counts and comparable store sales. (6.10%)
Nearly all of our store workforce, with the exception of a small team of
essential personnel, were furloughed in mid-March 2020. (3.90%)
8
False
0.98
We cannot assure you that we will be successful in our recapitalization
efforts. (10.31%)
To date, we have not yet reached an agreement with [legal entity], and at
this juncture, it is too early to state with certainty whether the parties will
ever enter into such an agreement. (8.87%)
We do not currently have sufﬁcient funds legally available to be able to
satisfy the conditions for terminating the Voting Rights Triggering Event.
(4.81%)
9
True
0.98
On December 15th, the Loan Parties entered into a First Amendment to
Standstill Agreement and Second Amendment to Credit Agreement with
certain Standstill Lenders, pursuant to which the maximum duration of
the “Standstill Period” was extended from December to February.
(4.08%)
123

682
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
Table 6 continued
Rank
Label
Score
Selected sentence (attention weight)
As described in greater detail below, the extension of the Standstill Period
that prohibits the Administrative Agent and the Lenders from exercising
their default-related rights and remedies with respect to speciﬁed events
of default under the Term Loan Agreement will expire on the earliest of
the delivery of a notice of termination of the Standstill Period by the
Standstill Lenders upon the occurrence of (i) a default under the Term
Loan Agreement, or (ii) a breach of, or non-compliance with certain
provisions of the Second Amended Standstill Agreement. (3.70%)
The Company’s failure to comply with the Negative Covenants and
Excluded Milestones during the Standstill Period would permit the
Required Lenders to terminate the Standstill Agreement and constitute an
immediate Event of Default under the Term Loan Agreement. (3.52%)
10
False
0.98
There can be no assurance that our subscriber base will not continue to
decline and that the pace of such decline will not accelerate. (11.94%)
Given the devastation and loss of power, substantially all customers in
those areas were unable to receive our service as of September. (10.75%)
There can be no assurance that these additional services or other offers will
positively affect our results of operations or our [product] subscribers.
(3.24%)
keyword-based features (tfidf) excel in terms of AP and recall@100, compared to the
models trained without them. In the next section, we expand on this.
5.2.2 The predictive value of the numerical and textual data
Feature-speciﬁc ranking performance. In Fig.3, we show the receiver operating curves (ROC-
curves) and the precision-recall curves (PR-curves) for a selection of our models. From the
ROC-curves we can see that the models trained with numerical features (num) recall most
positives (e.g. 85%) at a lower false positive rate compared to the model trained without
numerical features. Furthermore, at low recall values (e.g. 10%), the PR-curves from the
models trained with keyword-based features (tfidf) show higher precision values than
the corresponding PR-curve from the model trained without keyword-based features. This
means that the keyword-based models are capable of detecting a relatively small fraction of
the positives (e.g. 10%), without generating many false positives, while this is not the case
for the models trained without keyword-based features.
The performance metrics from Tables 2, 3, 4 and 5 and the analysis of the performance
curves from Fig.3 suggest that (1) including numerical features (num) in a model leads to
a ranking of the 10K ﬁlings where most positives (10K ﬁlings of failing companies) are
positioned highly in the ranking, but not necessarily at the top; and (2) including keyword
features (tfidf) in a model leads to a ranking of the 10K ﬁlings where a subset of positives
(10K ﬁlings of failing companies) are positioned at the top, but the rest of the positives not
necessarily highly in the ranking. In order to clarify this ﬁnding, we expand on this with an
illustration in Appendix E.
The distinctive role of the numerical features and the keywords for business fail-
ure prediction can also be analysed by looking at the ﬁtted parameters of our stack-
ing classiﬁer. The β1 and β2 values (from the equation presented in Sect.1) of the
NT-stack[XGB(num),XGB(tfidf)] classiﬁer are (on average) 1.17 and 0.31, respec-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
683
Fig. 3 The performance curves for a selection of our models trained with numerical features (num), keyword-
based features (tfidf) or a combination of both
tively. This further highlights the importance of the numerical features (ﬁnancial ratios) for
business failure prediction.
Keyword-based business failure prediction. Now that we have an understanding of the
reported performance metrics and the corresponding performance curves, we question why
a subset of 10K ﬁlings appear ‘easy-to-classify’ with keyword-based features (tfidf).
To this end, we inspected the features with the highest coefﬁcients—retained after the L1-
regularisation—from the T-LR[tfidf] model. These includes terms such as ‘chapter
case’, ‘reorganization’ and ‘recovery’, enabling the model to assign a high likelihood of
business failure to 10K ﬁlings that contain passages such as “...it may be necessary for
us to seek protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code...".
Consequently, the strong performance of the models trained on these features (in terms of
AP and recall@100) can be attributed to their ability to detect 10K ﬁlings where the
management explicitly states that they consider ﬁling for bankruptcy.
We acknowledge that our proposed model is not as effective in detecting these cases
(where bankruptcy is mentioned) compared to the models trained with keyword-based fea-
tures. Instead, our model tends to focus on a wider range of topics in the disclosure texts
that are intuitively linked to business failure and that are potentially interesting from an inter-
pretability perspective. While this is an important limitation of our model, a stacking approach
(as discussed in Sect.4.3) can help overcome this issue. By combining the predictions of
our proposed model (NT-att[num,sent-emb-300]) and the best uni-modal baselines
(N-XGB[num] and T-XGB[tfidf]), we obtain a classiﬁer (denoted NT-stack[all])
that attains the best results overall (reported in Table 7).
Additionally, we observe that the textual baseline trained on document embeddings
(T-LR[emb]) performs worse than all other models trained with textual data across every
metric. This suggest that the embeddings capture very little information that is useful for
the task. It is worth noting that the encoder was not trained speciﬁcally for business failure
prediction and that it had to encode extremely long documents (over 6,000 words on average)
into a single representation.
123

684
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
Table 7 The results of a stacking classiﬁer that combines the predictions of our proposed model
(NT-att[num,sent-emb-300]) and those of the best uni-modal baselines (N-XGB[num] and
T-XGB[tfidf]). This model attains the best results on every metric, although the multi-modal baselines
perform equally well on AP and recall@100
Model
ROC-AUC
AP
recall@100
CAP ratio
NT-stack[all]
95.34% (± 0.07%)
26.68% (± 1.07%)
28.28% (± 1.42%)
90.68% (± 0.13%)
6 Conclusion
Corporate disclosures are growing in complexity, evolving into lengthy documents containing
both numerical accounting data and substantial amounts of text (Dyer et al., 2017). Concur-
rently, the advancements in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), and large language models (LLMs)
speciﬁcally, have equipped us with the means to develop high performing business failure
prediction models. However, given that such models are intended for high-stakes domains like
banking, insurance and investing, model interpretability is vital for their practical adoption
and offers a way to instill user trust (Bauer et al., 2023).
In this study, we have proposed a new neural network architecture for business failure
prediction from corporate disclosures, with an interpretable link between the numerical and
textual features. The model combines ﬁnancial ratios and sentence-level textual features
through a well known attention mechanism, commonly used in transformer models (Vaswani
et al., 2017), and achieves competitive results on a variety of performance metrics (including
ROC-AUC). The sentences that receive the highest attention weight can be intuitively linked
to business failure, covering topics such as debt renegotiations, breaching loan covenants or
declining product demand, among others.
Moreover, our work highlights the importance of traditional ﬁnancial ratios for business
failure prediction. These numerical features are the key drivers behind our best performing
models. Keyword-based textual features are mainly useful to detect speciﬁc cases where the
management explicitly states that they are considering to ﬁle for bankruptcy, making the
prediction task based on text trivial. Additionally, we have evaluated the performance of
commercially available, pretrained document embeddings in the context of our task. Their
poor results suggest that these embeddings capture little information relevant to predict
business failure and that tailored textual features are more suited to this end.
Finally, ensemble learning plays a crucial role in our ﬁndings. Through a stacking
approach, we demonstrate that combining predictions from models trained on different
data modalities can signiﬁcantly improve performance. This ensemble method leverages
the complementary strengths of each modality, resulting in our best-performing business
failure prediction classiﬁer. Additionally, we have used stacking to address the main limita-
tion of our proposed model, which struggles to detect cases where bankruptcy is explicitly
mentioned in the text. By incorporating predictions from models better suited for these cases,
we can effectively create a classiﬁer that retains the interpretability of our proposed model—
highlighting sentences intuitively linked to business failure—while also being able to detect
the more straightforward cases where the possibility of bankruptcy is mentioned.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
685
Appendix A: Financial ratios included in our experiments
The ﬁnancial ratios included in our experiments (the numerical features denoted as num) are
given in Table 8. These ratios were selected from the study of Mai et al. (2019). Speciﬁcally,
we only include those that can be constructed from the accounting information in a 10K
ﬁling. The ratios used by Mai et al. (2019) that require market information (such as stock
prices) are discarded.
Table 8 This table presents the ﬁnancial ratios included in our experiments (num) along with their formulas
in Compustat. These ratios were selected from the study of Mai et al. (2019). Speciﬁcally, we only include
those that can be constructed from the accounting information in a 10K ﬁling. The ratios used by Mai et al.
(2019) that require market information (such as stock prices) are discarded
Financial ratio
Compustat
Financial ratio
Compustat
current assets
current liabilities
ACT
LCT
current liabilities
sales
LCT
SALE
accounts payable
sales
AP
SALE
total liabilities
total assets
LT
AT
cash and short term investments
total assets
CHE
AT
log(total assets)
log(AT)
cash
total assets
CH
AT
log(sales)
log(SALE)
cash
current liabilities
CH
LCT
net income
total assets
NI
AT
(EBIT + depreciations and amortisations)
total assets
EBIT+DP
AT
net income
sales
NI
SALE
EBIT
total assets
EBIT
AT
operating income after depreciations
total assets
OIADP
AT
EBIT
sales
EBIT
SALE
operating income after depreciations
sales
OIADP
SALE
total debt
total assets
DLC+0.5×DLTT
AT
current assets−inventory
total current liabilities
ACT−INVT
SALE
inventory decrease
inventory
INVCH
INVT
retained earnings
total assets
RE
AT
inventory
sales
INVT
SALE
retained earnings
current liabilities
RE
LCT
current liabilities−cash
total assets
LCT−CH
AT
sales
total assets
SALE
AT
current liabilities
total assets
LCT
AT
total equity
total assets
SEQ
AT
current liabilities
total liabilities
LCT
LT
working capital
total assets
WCAP
AT
Appendix B: Training details
Proposed model
As explained in Sect.4.1, the sentence embeddings of the MD&A’s in the dataset with fewer
than 300 or 500 sentences were padded. We do not allow padded sentences to participate in the
attention operation by setting the dot product of the query vector and the key vector to −∞.
In order to handle the class imbalance, we treat the fraction of negative over positive exam-
ples in each batch as a hyperparameter that is adjusted by oversampling the positives. This
is optimised, along with model-speciﬁc hyperparameters, in a grid search procedure where
ROC-AUC on the validation set is the maximisation objective. After the optimal hyperpa-
rameters are selected, the model is retrained on the combined training and validation set and
evaluated on the test set. Furthermore, to account for the randomness caused by weight ini-
123

686
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
tialisation and data sampling, we repeated the entire training process ﬁve times with different
seed values, and report the mean results along with the standard deviations in our results
tables. The model was trained using mini-batch gradient descent with an Adam optimiser
and an unweighted binary cross entropy loss. As preprocessing steps, the numerical features
were mean-imputed, centered and scaled to unit variance. For a complete overview of the
hyperparameter optimisation and data preprocessing steps, we refer to our GitHub page.6
Uni-modal baselines
For the baselines using either numerical or textual features, the fraction of negatives over
positives in the training set was also treated as a hyperparameter, which is adjusted by
oversampling the positives. For each classiﬁer, we tuned this, along with model-speciﬁc
hyperparameters, to maximise the ROC-AUC on the validation set and retrain the ﬁnal model
on the combined training and validation set. The entire training process was repeated ﬁve
times with different seed values to account for model-speciﬁc variability and data sam-
pling. We report the mean performance metrics and the corresponding standard deviations
in our results tables. The numerical features were mean-imputed, centered and scaled to
unit variance, except for the XGBoost classiﬁers where mean-imputation is not performed.
The tfidf feature vectors have been normalised to unit length using their L2 norm to pre-
vent any feature from disproportionately affecting the regularisation process. For a complete
overview of the hyperparameter optimisation and data preprocessing steps, we refer to our
GitHub page.
Multi-modal baselines
The early fusion baseline is trained similarly to the uni-modal baselines. The fraction of neg-
atives over positives in the training set is a hyperparameter, tuned along with model-speciﬁc
hyperparameters, with ROC-AUC on the validation set as the maximisation objective. Train-
ing is repeated ﬁve times with different seed values to account for model-speciﬁc variability
and data sampling. Mean performance metrics and corresponding standard deviations are
reported in our results tables. The numerical features were centered and scaled to unit vari-
ance. For a complete overview, we refer to to our GitHub page. The late fusion baseline does
not require hyperparameter tuning. The class imbalance is handled by the base models and
no regularisation is applied.
Appendix C: Altman Z’-score model
As explained in Sect.4.2, the Z’-score is a revised version of the original Altman Z-score
that can be calculated from the accounting information in 10K ﬁlings. Therefore, it relies on
different ﬁnancial ratios compared to the other models included in our experiments. We have
6 The code to replicate the experiments is available at https://github.com/henriarnoUG/ECL
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
687
estimated the parameters of the following model:
Z’-score = β1
working capital
total assets

+ β2
retained earnings
total assets

+ β3

EBIT
total assets

+ β4

book value of equity
book value of total liabilities

+ β5

sales
total assets

Appendix D: Sentences with high attention weights for randomly sam-
pled 10K ﬁlings
In order to better understand the interpretability of the attention weights assigned by our
proposed model, we show the sentences with the highest attention weights for 5 randomly
sampled 10K ﬁlings in the test set (in Table 9 below).
Appendix E: Numerical versus keyword-based features in business fail-
ure prediction
In this section, we expand on the role of the numerical features (num) and the keyword-
based features (tfidf) for business failure prediction, as discussed in Sect.5.2.2, with an
illustration. Assume that we have a dataset consisting of 100 positive instances (representing
10K ﬁlings of failing companies) and 10,000 negative instances (representing 10K ﬁlings
from non-failing companies). This implies a class imbalance of 1 positive for every 100
negatives, similar to the class distribution in our dataset. Furthermore, assume that we have
trained two models, respectively representing our classiﬁers trained with numerical features
(denoted modelnum) and those trained with keyword-based features (denoted modeltfidf).
On the one hand, if we rank the instances in the dataset according to the scores assigned by
modelnum, all 100 positives are evenly distributed in the top 1,000 of the dataset (1 in the top
10, 2 in the top 20, 3 in the top 30, etc.). On the other hand, if we rank them according to the
scores assigned by modeltfidf, a subset of 20 positives make up the top 20 predictions. For
the remaining 80 positives, 60 are distributed evenly in the top 2,500 of the dataset while 20
are distributed evenly in the remaining (±) 7,500 instances of the dataset. The ranking metrics
in this hypothetical setting are shown in Table 10, while the PR-curves and the ROC-curves
are shown in Fig.4.
Since modelnum ranks all positives in the top 10% of the dataset, the ROC-curve attains
high recall values at a much lower false positive rate, compared to modeltfidf. In fact,
modeltfidf only recalls the subset of 20 positives quickly, while the remaining 80 positives
are only detected after having generated many false positives. By consequence, the ROC-AUC
of modelnum will be signiﬁcantly higher compared to the ROC-AUC of modeltfidf. A similar
reasoning holds for the CAP-curve and the corresponding CAP ratio.
If we turn our attention to the PR-curves, we can see that modelnum recalls all positives
with a precision of (±) 10%. This can be attributed to the even distribution of all 100 positives
in the top 10% of the dataset. In contrast, modeltfidf can recall the subset of 20 positives
at a precision of 100%. This area of the PR-curve signiﬁcantly contributes to the AP of
modeltfidf, making it much higher than the AP of modelnum, despite the fact that the
remaining 80 positives are recalled at a much lower precision. Lastly, it is also the subset
123

688
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
Table 9 For 5 randomly sampled 10K ﬁlings in the test set, we give the business failure label, the predicted
score by the NT-att[num,sent-emb-300] model and the 3 sentences with the highest attention weights
Label
Score
Selected sentence (attention weight)
false
0.01
For this year, our SG&A expenses increased 4.6% versus last year.
(2.12%)
The largest factor driving the increase in SG&A expenses (increase
year-over-year), is additional administrative expenses attributed to
higher incentive-based compensation (approximately 12 million
dollars) and performance-based stock compensation (approximately
10 million dollars), as performance targets were met this year to a
higher degree than last year. (1.79%)
Based on current interest rate and debt levels, we expect our aggregate
interest expense for next year to be between 6 million dollars and 9
million dollars. (1.78%)
false
0.03
In July, we entered into and currently maintain a ﬁve-year revolving
credit agreement. (1.42%)
This credit agreement provides for a 250 million dollars senior
revolving credit facility which may be increased up to 375 million
dollars. (1.21%)
Last year, we borrowed 100 million dollars under our credit facility that
we fully repaid in the next ﬁscal year. (1.14%)
false
0.20
The wholesale segment generally has less risk than the retail segment.
(1.65%)
In the event of a decrease in the company’s credit ratings or a
disruption in the ﬁnancial markets, the company may not be able to
reﬁnance its maturing debt in the ﬁnancial markets. (1.35%)
In such circumstances, the company would be exposed to liquidity risk
to the degree that the timing of debt maturities differs from the timing
of receivable collections from customers. (1.16%)
false
0.04
The company’s consolidated ﬁnancial statements are prepared on the
basis of GAAP. (0.71%)
Management generally measures the company’s operating results by
examining the company’s net income and return on equity, as well as
the loss and settlement expense, acquisition expense and combined
ratios. (0.65%)
The following estimates and assumptions are considered by
management to be critically important in the preparation and
understanding of the company’s ﬁnancial statements and related
disclosures. (0.61%)
false
0.01
Management believes that net income, as deﬁned by GAAP, is the most
appropriate earnings measurement. (1.30%)
In preparing the Consolidated Financial Statements, management is
required to exercise judgment and make assumptions and estimates
that may impact the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the
reported amounts of revenues and expenses. (1.10%)
If it is determined that the company is the primary beneﬁciary of a VIE,
the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements would include the
operating results of the VIE rather than the results of the variable
interest in the VIE. (1.09%)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
689
Table 10 The results of the hypothetical models from the illustration. It is clear that modelnum does signiﬁ-
cantly better in terms of ROC-AUC and CAP ratio compared to modeltfidf while the opposite holds for
AP and recall@100
model
ROC-AUC
AP
recall@100
CAP ratio
modelnum
95.45%
10.63%
10.00%
90.90%
modeltfidf
80.17%
24.61%
22.00%
60.34%
Fig.4 Performance curves of the hypothetical models from the illustration and a selection of our models trained
withnumericalfeaturesorkeyword-basedfeatures(the N-XGB[num]modelandtheT-XGB[tfidf]model,
respectively)
of 20 correctly classiﬁed positives by modeltfidf that causes its recall@100 to be much
higher, than the recall@100 of modelnum.
Although this illustration is an idealised representation of the behaviour of our mod-
els trained with numerical features (num) and those trained with keyword-based features
(tfidf), it provides the intuition necessary to understand the observed ranking metrics
and performance curves. The resemblance between the PR-curves and the ROC-curves of
our N-XGB[num] and T-XGB[tfidf] models and the corresponding curves from the
illustration (in Fig.4) is evident.
123

690
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
Acknowledgements We thank Marijn Verschelde and Matthias Bogaert for useful comments.
Funding This study was funded by Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) under Grant Numbers G006421N
and 11Q2C24N.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that there are no conﬂict of interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Alfaro, E., García, N., Gámez, M., & Elizondo, D. (2008). Bankruptcy forecasting: An empirical comparison
of adaboost and neural networks. Decision Support Systems, 45(1), 110–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
dss.2007.12.002
Altman, E. (1968). Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate bankruptcy. The
Journal of Finance, 23(4), 589–609. https://doi.org/10.2307/2978933
Altman, E. (2013). Chapter 17: Predicting ﬁnancial distress of companies: Revisiting the z-score and zeta
models. In Handbook of research methods and applications in empirical ﬁnance.
Arno, H. , Mulier, K. , Baeck, J., & Demeester, T. (2022). Next-year bankruptcy prediction from textual
data: Benchmark and baselines. In Proceedings of the 4th workshop on ﬁnancial technology and natural
language processing.
Arno, H. , Mulier, K. , Baeck, J., & Demeester, T. (2023). From numbers to words: Multi-modal bankruptcy
prediction using the ECL dataset. In Proceedings of the 6th workshop on ﬁnancial technology and natural
language processing.
Bauer, K., von Zahn, M., & Hinz, O. (2023). Expl(ai)ned: The impact of explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
on users’ information processing. Information Systems Research, 34(4), 1582–1602. https://doi.org/10.
1287/isre.2023.1199
Beaver, W. H. (1966). Financial ratios as predictors of failure. Journal of Accounting Research, 4, 71–111.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2490171
Borchert, P., Coussement, K., De Caigny, A., & De Weerdt, J. (2023). Extending business failure prediction
models with textual website content using deep learning. European Journal of Operational Research,
306(1), 348–357. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2022.06.060
Breiman, L. (1996). Bagging predictors. Machine Learning, 24, 123–140. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00058655
Cecchini, M., Aytug, H., Koehler, G., & Pathak, P. (2010). Making words work: Using ﬁnancial text as a
predictor of ﬁnancial events. Decision Support Systems, 50(1), 164–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.
2010.07.012
Chen, Y., Calabrese, R., & Martin-Barragan, B. (2024). Interpretable machine learning for imbalanced credit
scoring datasets. European Journal of Operational Research, 312(1), 357–372. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ejor.2023.06.036
Cortés, A., Martínez, G., & Rubio, G. (2007). A boosting approach for corporate failure prediction. Applied
Intelligence, 27, 29–37. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-006-0028-9
Coussement, K., & Benoit, D. (2021). Interpretable data science for decision making. Decision Support
Systems, 150, 113664. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2021.113664
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
691
Davis, J., & Goadrich, M. (2006). The relationship between precision-recall and roc curves. In Proceedings
of the 23rd international conference on machine learning.
De Bock, K. (2017). The best of two worlds: Balancing model strength and comprehensibility in business
failure prediction using spline-rule ensembles. Expert Systems with Applications, 90, 23–39. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.07.036
De Bock, K., Coussement, K., De Caigny, A., Słowi´nski, R., Baesens, B., Boute, R., & Weber, R. (2024).
Explainable ai for operational research: A deﬁning framework, methods, applications, and a research
agenda. European Journal of Operational Research, 317(2), 249–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2023.09.026
De Bock, K., & De Caigny, A. (2021). Spline-rule ensemble classiﬁers with structured sparsity regularization
for interpretable customer churn modeling. Decision Support Systems, 150, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.dss.2021.113523
Doumpos, M., Andriosopoulos, K., Galariotis, E., Makridou, G., & Zopounidis, C. (2017). Corporate failure
prediction in the European energy sector: A multicriteria approach and the effect of country characteris-
tics. European Journal of Operational Research, 262(1), 347–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.
04.024
Du Jardin, P. (2021). Forecasting corporate failure using ensemble of self-organizing neural networks. Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research, 288(3), 869–885. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.06.020
Dyer, T., Lang, M., & Stice-Lawrence, L. (2017). The evolution of 10-K textual disclosure: Evidence from
latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 64(2), 221–245. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jacceco.2017.07.002
Fernández, A., García, S., Galar, M., Prati, R., Krawczyk, B., & Herrera, F. (2018). Learning from imbalanced
data sets (Vol. 10). Berlin: Springer.
Freund, Y., & Schapire, R. (1996). Experiments with a new boosting algorithm. In Proceedings of the 13th
international conference on machine learning.
García, V., Marqués, A., & Salvador Sánchez, J. (2019). Exploring the synergetic effects of sample types on
the performance of ensembles for credit risk and corporate bankruptcy prediction. Information Fusion,
47, 88–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2018.07.004
Glikson, E., & Woolley, A. (2020). Human trust in artiﬁcial intelligence: Review of empirical research.
Academy of Management Annals, 14(2), 627–660. https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2018.0057
Holder-Webb, L., & Cohen, J. (2007). The association between disclosure, distress, and failure. Journal of
Business Ethics, 75, 301–314. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-006-9254-7
Hosaka, T. (2019). Bankruptcy prediction using imaged ﬁnancial ratios and convolutional neural networks.
Expert Systems with Applications, 117(1), 287–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2018.09.039
Kim, M., & Kang, D. (2010). Ensemble with neural networks for bankruptcy prediction. Expert Systems with
Applications, 37(4), 3373–3379. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2009.10.012
Liang, D., Lu, C., Tsai, C., & Shih, G. (2016). Financial ratios and corporate governance indicators in
bankruptcy prediction: A comprehensive study. European Journal of Operational Research, 252(2),
561–572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2016.01.012
Mai, F., Tian, S., Lee, C., & Ma, L. (2019). Deep learning models for bankruptcy prediction using textual
disclosures. European Journal of Operational Research, 274(2), 743–758. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2018.10.024
Manning, C., Raghavan, P., & Schütze, H. (2008). Introduction to information retrieval (Vol. 1). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mayew, W., Sethuraman, M., & Venkatachalam, M. (2015). MD&A disclosure and the ﬁrm’s ability to continue
as a going concern. The Accounting Review, 90(4), 1621–1651. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr-50983
Odom, M., & Sharda, R. (1990). A neural network model for bankruptcy prediction. In Proceedings of the
international joint conference on neural networks.
Ohlson, J. (1980). Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy. Journal of Accounting
Research, 18(1), 109–131. https://doi.org/10.2307/2490395
Panda, D. , Chakladar, D., & Dasgupta, T. (2020). Multimodal system for emotion recognition using EEG and
customer review. In Proceedings of the global artiﬁcial intelligence congress.
Rudin, C. (2019). Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use inter-
pretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(5), 206–215. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-
019-0048-x
Sagi, O., & Rokach, L. (2018). Ensemble learning: A survey. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,
8(4), 1249. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1249
Shin, D. (2021). The effects of explainability and causability on perception, trust, and acceptance: Implications
for explainable ai. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 146, 102551. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102551
123

692
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:667–692
Sleeman, W., Kapoor, R., & Ghosh, P. (2022). Multimodal classiﬁcation: Current landscape, taxonomy and
future directions. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(7), 1–31. https://doi.org/10.1145/3543848
Sobrie, L., Verschelde, M., & Roets, B. (2024). Explainable real-time predictive analytics on employee work-
load in digital railway control rooms. European Journal of Operational Research, 317(2), 437–448.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2023.09.016
Vaswani, A. , Shazeer, N. , Parmar, N. , Uszkoreit, J. , Jones, L. , Gomez, A., & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention
is all you need. In Proceedings of the 31st conference on neural information processing systems.
Wolpert, D. (1992). Stacked generalization. Neural Networks, 5(2), 241–259. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0893-
6080(05)80023-1
Xu, F. , Uszkoreit, H. , Du, Y. , Fan, W. , Zhao, D., & Zhu, J. (2019). Explainable ai: A brief survey on history,
research areas, approaches and challenges. In Proceedings of the 8th natural language processing and
Chinese computing conference.
Xu, K. , Lam, M. , Pang, J. , Gao, X. , Band, C. , Mathur, P., & Xing, E. (2019). Multimodal machine learning
for automated ICD coding. In Proceedings of the 4th machine learning for healthcare conference (pp.
197–215).
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123