TITLE: A new Twitter based credit rating model methodology
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07067-3
---

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07067-3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A new Twitter based credit rating model methodology
Leonie Goldmann1
· Jonathan Crook1
· Raﬀaella Calabrese1
Received: 31 January 2024 / Accepted: 16 January 2026 / Published online: 4 March 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel way to predict corporate credit ratings by showing how a new
type of data, Twitter, can be extracted and used for this purpose. We make three contributions
to knowledge. First, we relate tweets from the companies themselves and tweets about the
companies to the probability of a credit rating level. Second, we transform the tweets into two
different sentiment scores which are used as predictors for credit rating levels and compare
their predictive performance. The sentiment scores are calculated by using each of two
alternative word-lists. Third, we propose two approaches how alternative information from
Twitter, linguistic features in tweets, can be selected and incorporated into credit rating
models. We compare the performance between the models containing the sentiment scores
and the linguistic features. We analyze data relating to NASDAQ and NYSE listed companies
over 2011-2019. Overall, we ﬁnd that including information from Twitter gives a higher
predictive performance compared to those of models that omit them.
Keywords Risk Management · Credit Ratings · Forecasting · Social Media Data
1 Introduction
Over the last ten years the number of social media users has increased dramatically. For
example, according to Statista1 the number of monthly active Twitter users increased from
approximately 30 million in 2010 to around 370 million in 2022. Each social media platform
has a different objective, but what most of them have in common is that they constantly
generate massive amounts of textual data. Analyzing this type of data in order to discover
unknown structures has become a popular research stream among scientists from all types
of ﬁelds, such as medicine (e.g. Schmidt (2012)), politics (e.g. Cameron et al. (2016)) and
ﬁnance (e.g. Teplova et al. (2023)).
1 https://www.statista.com/statistics/303681/twitter-users-worldwide/; accessed 07.06.2023.
B Leonie Goldmann
leonie@goldmann.in
B Raffaella Calabrese
raffaella.calabrese@ed.ac.uk
Jonathan Crook
j.crook@ed.ac.uk
1
Credit Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, Business School, 29 Bucceleuch Place, EH8 9JS
Edinburgh, UK
123

168
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
This paper analyzes social media data from and about large listed US companies. More
speciﬁcally, we show how information from Twitter can be extracted and used to predict
corporate credit rating levels of large US companies. In particular, we analyze whether
information from Twitter can be used to predict credit rating levels and we show the effects
of using different sources of tweets and information contained in them. Predicting corporate
credit rating levels has been the focus of a large number of studies (e.g. Hwang et al., 2009
and Yuan et al., 2018), because the methods used by rating agencies to assign credit ratings
are not publicly revealed. Credit ratings are an independent measure of how likely a company
is to service its debt obligations and can be interpreted as a measure of a company’s riskiness
in this sense. Therefore, they are important to a variety of different entities, such as investors,
rating agencies and the companies themselves.
We are relating social media data to corporate credit rating levels since this type of data
conveys information that is not enclosed in conventional predictors. We use information from
Twitter and not any other social media platform since it is one of the largest social media
platforms by user numbers and since the data is publicly available. Additionally, Twitter
data has been used for predictive modeling in many different domains before, and especially
within ﬁnancial applications it has shown great results (e.g. Bollen et al., 2011 and Yuan et
al., 2018). We analyze tweets from and about companies, since both Twitter sources reﬂect
different aspects of the companies that could be predictive of credit rating levels. Tweets from
the companies themselves are information the companies strategically publish and hence give
internal information about the companies and their behavior. Tweets about the companies
are expressed by externals, and can therefore be interpreted as the public’s opinion about the
companies.
This paper adds to the existing literature in two ways. First, we relate tweets from the
companies themselves to corporate credit rating levels, which to our knowledge has not been
done before. Tweets from the companies themselves are a proxy for a company’s marketing
strategy and can reﬂect strategic communication efforts aimed at shaping public perception,
managing investor expectations, or signaling transparency and conﬁdence (e.g. Jung et al.
(2018)). Therefore, they could be predictive of credit rating levels.
Second, the information we extract from the tweets and the resulting predictors have not
been used to predict corporate credit rating levels before. More speciﬁcally, we relate the
tweet frequency and two different sentiment scores based on positive and negative word-
lists to the credit rating levels as well as selected linguistic features contained in tweets.
Sentiment scores have the advantage that they include all the information contained in the
tweets and give an overall indication of whether a tweet is positive or negative. However, they
rely heavily on the selected word-list. Hence, as an alternative approach we select speciﬁc
linguistic features and incorporate these as additional features into the model. For this, we ﬁrst
apply differential language analysis (DLA) (Schwartz et al., 2017) to show which linguistic
features contained in tweets from and about companies are correlated with corporate credit
rating levels. We then show how the identiﬁed linguistic features can be selected and used for
corporate credit rating level prediction. Differential language analysis has not been applied
within a ﬁnancial context before and has the advantage that it does not rely on an a priori
ﬁxed set of words. Additionally, the predictive n-grams reveal more subtle linguistic cues,
such as framing choices, repeated phrases, or tone shifts, that are not captured by traditional
sentiment dictionaries. We compare the models containing the different Twitter predictors
and analyze their performance.
In addition to these contributions to the literature, we use a unique annual data-set compris-
ing around 2000 observations on more than 300 different companies. This data-set contains
tweets from and about corporate Twitter accounts, S&P credit ratings and four ﬁnancial ratios
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
169
that have primarily been used in this context before. We compare the performance of models
with and without Twitter variables for predicting credit rating levels. Using a random forest
classiﬁer we show that including information from Twitter increases predictive performance
for almost all model speciﬁcations. We further ﬁnd that different sentiment scores lead to
different results and that therefore the choice of the word-list when calculating the sentiment
score is crucial. Last, we ﬁnd that using linguistic features contained in tweets as additional
predictors can lead to superior performance as opposed to using sentiment scores and the
tweet frequency.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 is a summary of the relevant literature.
Section 3 outlines the methodology, more speciﬁcally random forest, sentiment analysis and
differential language analysis. Section 4 describes the Twitter and credit rating data that we
use and the main empirical results. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusion of the research
and possible extensions of this paper.
2 Literature Review
Because rating agencies do not fully disclose the models underlying their rating decisions,
a substantial body of research has emerged that aims to predict credit ratings using observ-
able ﬁrm-level information. In the following, we organize this literature along two main
dimensions: the empirical methods applied and the types of input variables considered.
The existing literature on credit rating prediction employs both traditional statistical
approaches and machine learning techniques. Commonly used statistical methods include
ordered probit models (e.g. Hwang et al., 2009), ordinal logistic regression (e.g. Hwang et al.,
2009 and Yuan et al., 2018), and multiple discriminant analysis (e.g. Lee, 2007). In addition, a
range of machine learning methods has been applied, such as neural networks (e.g. Kumar &
Bhattacharya, 2006), support vector machines (e.g. Lee, 2007) and random forests (e.g. Yuan
et al., 2018). Overall, prior studies indicate that machine learning approaches, particularly
random forests, tend to achieve higher predictive accuracy than standard statistical methods
(Yuan et al., 2018). Accordingly, this paper adopts a random forest classiﬁer to predict credit
rating levels.
The selection of variables commonly associated with corporate credit ratings is largely
informed by the closely related bankruptcy prediction literature. Although a wide range of
input variables has been considered in prior bankruptcy studies, accounting-based measures
expressed as ﬁnancial ratios are generally identiﬁed as the most important determinants
of bankruptcy risk (Beaver, 1966; Altman, 1968; Ohlson, 1980). A prominent example is
the Z-score introduced by Altman (1968), one of the most widely used bankruptcy predic-
tion models in the literature (Niresh & Pratheepan, 2015; Altman et al., 2013; Jackson &
Wood, 2013 and Almamy et al., 2016), which combines four or ﬁve ﬁnancial ratios in a
linear framework. Beyond ﬁnancial ratios, previous studies have also incorporated market-
based variables (Merton, 1974; Bharath & Shumway, 2004; Hillegeist et al., 2004) as well
as macroeconomic variables (Hernandez Tinoco & Wilson, 2013; Nam et al., 2008; Qu,
2008).
Similarly to the bankruptcy prediction literature, the variables traditionally used for corpo-
rate credit rating prediction and widely accepted among researchers are accounting variables,
such as a company’s retained earnings and working capital (Kim & Sohn, 2008). Some stud-
ies also include market-based variables, such as the stock price (Hájek & Michalak, 2013)
123

170
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
or macroeconomic variables, such as the unemployment rate and GDP growth rate (Kim &
Sohn, 2008).
Accounting variables are typically obtained from a company’s quarterly or annual reports
and are commonly transformed into ﬁnancial ratios motivated by the Z-score framework
(Kim & Sohn, 2008). These measures are intended to capture a company’s overall ﬁnan-
cial condition (Kim & Sohn, 2008) and are therefore widely used as predictors of credit
rating levels. There are several additional reasons for their frequent use in corporate credit
rating prediction. First, such variables are readily available from publicly accessible ﬁnan-
cial statements. Second, they are standard inputs in corporate bankruptcy prediction studies
(Altman, 1968), which are closely related to the credit rating literature (Matthies, 2013).
Third, prior empirical evidence shows that commonly employed accounting variables are
statistically signiﬁcant and informative for predicting corporate credit ratings (see Kim &
Sohn, 2008; Hájek & Michalak 2013). Fourth, these variables capture key dimensions of a
company’s creditworthiness, such as leverage, ﬁrm size, and proﬁtability, and thus have a
direct relationship with corporate credit ratings.
Market-based variables capture how a company’s past performance and future prospects
are reﬂected in market assessments (Hájek & Michalak, 2013) and typically include mea-
sures such as the stock price and the high/low stock price. Compared to accounting variables,
market-based indicators are less frequently employed in credit rating studies; however, sev-
eral authors have documented their relevance for explaining corporate credit ratings. For
instance, (Hájek & Michalak, 2013) performed a variable selection analysis for credit rating
prediction and found that a range of different algorithms almost always selected the stock
price and the high/low stock price as important predictors. From a theoretical perspective, the
association between market-based variables and corporate credit ratings may be attributed to
their role as proxies for ﬁrm value, with higher-valued companies expected to exhibit greater
creditworthiness. At the same time, the existing literature applying market-based variables to
credit rating prediction remains limited, and the precise impact of these variables on corporate
credit ratings warrants further investigation.
Macroeconomic variables have also been considered as predictors of credit rating levels
(see for example Kim & Sohn, 2008). As these variables are widely used in bankruptcy
prediction studies (see Hernandez Tinoco & Wilson, 2013), their inclusion in credit rating
analyses is motivated by the close relationship between bankruptcy risk and credit risk. Amato
and Furﬁne (2004) further argue that macroeconomic conditions should be incorporated, as
a company’s creditworthiness is expected to decline during economic downturns. While
several studies include macroeconomic variables in credit rating prediction (e.g. Kim and
Sohn, 2008; Amato and Furﬁne, 2004), the empirical evidence on their impact is mixed. Kim
and Sohn (2008) show that exchange rates, consumer price inﬂation, changes in external
debt, as well as other indicators such as the discount rate, unemployment rate, and GDP
growth are not statistically signiﬁcant. Moreover, rating agencies state that credit ratings
are assigned on a through-the-cycle basis; consequently, issued ratings should, in theory, be
largely independent of shortterm macroeconomic ﬂuctuations.
Taken together, the literature indicates that accounting variables constitute the most robust
and widely accepted predictors of corporate credit rating levels. In contrast, evidence on the
incremental value of market-based and macroeconomic variables is less conclusive. Conse-
quently, we focus on accounting variables as core control variables in our empirical analysis.
Recently, there have been studies that show how novel data sources can be used for credit
rating predictions, such as social media data (Yuan et al., 2018), qualitative information from
annual reports (Hájek et al., 2017), the CEOs’ birth order (Park et al., 2022) and many others.
The use of variables from novel data sources is motivated by previous studies that showed
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
171
how these variables can successfully be used to predict related ﬁnancial variables, such as
stock returns (Bollen et al., 2011; Figa-Talamanca & Patacca, 2022; Oliveira et al., 2013),
bankruptcy or default (Cecchini et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2019; Putra, 2018) and credit default
swap spreads (González-Fernández & González-Velasco, 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Liebmann
et al., 2016). Since stock returns relate to a company’s performance which is closely related to
a company’s creditworthiness and since bankruptcy and credit default swap spreads directly
relate to a company’s credit risk, it is intuitive to include this information in corporate credit
rating studies as well.
The study by Yuan et al. (2018) is, to our knowledge, the only study where information
from Twitter has been used for corporate credit rating prediction. While our research is similar
in its overall aim, it diverges in two important and novel ways. First, rather than relying solely
on tweets about companies, we also incorporate tweets by the companies themselves. This
allows us to capture aspects of corporate communication strategy, such as tone, framing, and
consistency, which may provide soft signals relevant to creditworthiness. This may be impor-
tant to predictive accuracy if, for example, there is a sudden change in the future prospects
of a ﬁrm that is anticipated by management but not by external commentators. Asymmet-
ric information between managers and outsiders is extremely prevalent, hence predictions
based on statements from management communications may be more immediately predic-
tive than merely comments by external actors. Second, we adopt a very different method of
extracting latent information from tweets. Unlike Yuan et al. (2018), who matched words
to distributions of eight ’emotions’, we extract the most predictive n-grams from company-
related tweets using differential language analysis. This enables us to move beyond coarse
positive/negative sentiment to capture richer linguistic patterns that may convey nuance,
emphasis, or domain-speciﬁc terminology. Together, these extensions allow us to evaluate
not only the informational content of social media discourse but also how a company’s own
use of language contributes to credit rating prediction. For papers that discuss the usage of
Twitter data for predictions in related contexts, see the recent literature review by Cano-Marin
et al. (2023).
3 Methodology
In this paper we use a random forest classiﬁer to predict corporate credit rating levels, since
it has shown good results in the existing literature (e.g. Yuan et al., 2018). Furthermore, we
use sentiment analysis to transform the raw Twitter data into variables that can be included
as predictors in the model and differential language analysis to ﬁnd the linguistic features
in tweets that are most predictive of speciﬁc corporate credit rating levels. While these
methods may appear simpler compared to state-of-the-art NLP techniques such as large
language models (LLMs), they offer distinct advantages in terms of computational efﬁciency,
transparency, and domain relevance, particularly in high-stakes ﬁelds like ﬁnance and highly
regulated sectors like banking, where interpretability is essential. Sentiment scores derived
from dictionaries can be directly traced back to speciﬁc words, offering a clear and immediate
explanation for their values. In contrast, while interpretability techniques such as attention
maps (e.g., in transformer models like BERT) can provide insights into model behavior
(Wiegreffe & Pinter, 2019), these are post-hoc and often less intuitive, especially given the
multi-headed and layered structure of such models. Attention does not always equate to
explanation (e.g. Wiegreffe & Pinter, 2019), and interpreting these mechanisms remains an
ongoing area of research (Liu et al., 2022; Neely et al., 2022; Bussotti & Papotti, 2025).
123

172
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Fig. 1 Example of a simple decision tree with two features and three outcome categories
Moreover, we do observe predictive uplift from these linguistically derived features which
suggests that more complex NLP architectures may not be necessary for this task. While
lightweight transformer-based models could potentially be applied, our goal is not to outper-
form black-box approaches but to assess the incremental predictive value of Twitter features.
Finally, beyond the issue of interpretability, the computational demands of even moderately
sized LLMs can be substantial at inference time, whereas our approach requires minimal
resources, making it more practical and scalable for integration into real-world ﬁnancial
modeling pipelines.
3.1 Random forest
A random forest is a classiﬁcation algorithm, more speciﬁcally an ensemble-learning algo-
rithm that generates many tree predictors and aggregates the results (Breiman, 2001). Each
tree predictor depends on a generated random vector and the values of these random vectors
are independently sampled but follow the same distribution. For classiﬁcation, each of these
trees gives a decision and the class with the most votes determines the overall classiﬁcation.
Each tree consists of nodes which test the value of a certain attribute, branches which corre-
spond to the outcome of a test and connect to the next node or leaf and leaf nodes which are
the terminal node that predict the outcome. An example of such a decision tree for classiﬁ-
cation is shown in Figure 1. In this example we show a simple decision tree for classiﬁcation
with three categories j = 1, 2, 3. Assuming we have i = 1, .., n observations and covariates
X = X1, X2 with outcomes Y1, Y2, Y3. Each node has a binary decision based on whether
X1 > a1 and X2 > a2 or not for ﬁxed a1 and a2. The parameters a1 and a2 are therefore the
decision parameters and X1 and X2 are the two features.
The node on the top contains all observations which are subdivided among the branches
according to the classiﬁcation at that node. In our example this corresponds to X1 > a1.
This subdivision continues until all leaf nodes have observations of only one category. The
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
173
decision parameters a1 and a2 and the features X1 and X2 are chosen so that each following
node is as pure as possible, which means not having a lot of diversity in terms of categories Y j.
The diversity can be measured in different ways. The impurity function used in this analysis
is based on the Gini Index, which is deﬁned as:
iG(t) =
3

j=1
p( j|t)(1 −p( j|t)) = 1 −
3

j=1
p( j|t)2
(1)
where t is the node where the split is performed and p( j|t) the probability of randomly
picking an element of category j at this node. Therefore, the Gini based impurity function
measures how often a randomly chosen object would be classiﬁed incorrectly when randomly
labeling it according to the class distribution p(y|t). It can be seen as a criterion to minimize
the probability of misclassiﬁcation. More information on decision trees can be found in
Safavian and Landgrebe (1991). Notice that in simple trees, each node is usually split using
the best split among all variables (Friedl & Brodley, 1997). In a random forest, each node is
split using the best among a subset of predictors (mtry) randomly chosen at that node. This
strategy is used, since it is robust against overﬁtting and it has performed well compared to
other non-linear classiﬁers (Liaw & Wiener, 2002). It is also highly non-linear and allows
for interactions between the predictors. A more detailed description of the random forest
algorithm can be found in Breiman (2001).
For estimating the random forest classiﬁer we use the ’randomForest’ R package2, which
is based on Breiman (2001). We specify ntree = 1000 in order to ensure that every input
row gets predicted at least a few times and we choose the optimal value of predictors mtry
by using the R function tuneRF. This function returns the optimal mtry parameter with
respect to Out-of-Bag error estimates. Out-of-Bag error estimates are errors estimates for
observations that have not been used for training the algorithm. For calculating the Out-of-
Bag error estimates for different values of mtry the random forest algorithm is trained on a
random subset of the training data and predictions are made on the observations that were
not used for training the algorithm. Recent applications of random forests to corporate risk
include García et al. (2019) and Uddin et al. (2020) among others.
3.2 Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment analysis is the activity of classifying text into different types of sentiments, for
example into positive, negative or neutral sentiments. This is often done in order to ﬁnd out
a writer’s attitude towards a particular topic or to ﬁnd out a writer’s general mood. We use
sentiment analysis in order to transform the raw Twitter text into sentiment scores that can be
included as an explanatory variable into our models. In order to calculate such a sentiment
score we use a lexicon-based approach, that is based on a word-list. The list of words has
predetermined emotional directions (i.e. positive or negative) and text is classiﬁed into its
sentiment according to the occurrences of these words in the text.
Before we start with counting the occurrences, we ﬁrst clean up the text by removing
digits, punctuation characters and control characters. Next, we convert the text into lower
case and we split it into single words. Last, we apply an algorithm that counts the matches
of positive words and negative words for each text and subsequently calculates a score of
Npos −Nneg where Npos is the number of occurrences of positive words and Nneg is the
number of occurrences of negative words. This sentiment score gives a good indication of
2 https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/randomForest/randomForest.pdf.
123

174
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
how positive or negative the text is. Since we only count the positive and negative words
according to the word-lists, it is not necessary to remove stop words or URLs.
The sentiment score is calculated for each tweet and, if multiple tweets are considered
(i.e. all tweets of one day that mention a speciﬁc company), many authors calculate some
type of average and use it for prediction (see for example Kearney and Liu (2014) or Ranco
et al. (2015)). Our approach differs from this standard method, as we do not calculate a
score for each tweet within the year and take the average, but instead treat all tweets of
one year together and calculate one overall sentiment score. We think that this approach is
more sensible for the prediction of long-term credit ratings, since it reﬂects the sentiment of
tweets about or from companies without the risk of the score decreasing due to uninformative
tweets. For example, tweets from companies themselves are often advertisements that are not
likely to contain many negative words. Hence, averaging over such “uninformative” tweets
would lead to a decreased sentiment score that might not reﬂect the annual sentiment of the
tweets appropriately. We also expect that uninformative tweets are ignored by the public, and
only tweets that are informative and have a strong sentiment are perceived, which further
strengthens our approach of not averaging over the number of tweets.
We choose two different word-lists for the sentiment score calculation, both containing
positive and negative words. The ﬁrst word-list is from the opinion lexicon3 of Hu and Liu
(2004). We choose this word-list since it has been created speciﬁcally for social media texts
and has shown good results in a ﬁnance application before (Si et al., 2013). The list of positive
and negative words has been compiled by the authors over many years, starting from their
ﬁrst paper “Mining and summarizing customer reviews” (Hu & Liu, 2004). We refer to this
word-list as the “SM-Word-list” (Social Media Wordlist). Similarly, we refer to the sentiment
score that we calculate using this list as “SM score”. The second word-list was created by
Loughran and Mcdonald (2011) and contains ﬁnance speciﬁc positive and negative words.
For creating the word-list the authors ﬁrst developed a dictionary of words and word counts
from a large number of 10-Ks ﬁling reports during 1994 to 2008. Only words that occur in
at least 5% of the reports have been considered and carefully examined regarding their most
likely usage. More details on how the word-list has been created can be found in Loughran and
Mcdonald (2011). We choose this word-list as a comparison to the ﬁrst one, since the authors
showed that general word-lists often contain positive or negative words that are typically not
positive or negative in a ﬁnancial context, which could lead to biased results. We refer to this
word-list as the “Finance-Word-list” and we refer to the sentiment score that is calculated
using this list as “Finance score”. Since the words ’upgrade’ and ’downgrade’ are typically
used for a positive or negative change, respectively, in credit rating we add these words to
both word-lists.
Such lexicon-based approaches have shown great results in the literature, especially when
considering that no training data-sets are needed (e.g. Fernández-Gavilanes et al., 2016). A
disadvantage is that these algorithms rely heavily on the created or chosen word-list. For
instance, simple lexicon-based approaches cannot detect negations, and if the chosen word-
list is in some sense incomplete, not all positive or negative words can be detected. This may
result in an incorrect classiﬁcation of the text (Kolchyna et al., 2015).
3 Website: https://www.cs.uic.edu/~liub/FBS/sentiment-analysis.html.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
175
3.3 Differential language analysis
Differential language analysis (DLA) is an open-vocabulary approach that enables the identi-
ﬁcation of linguistic features in language which are individually most predictive of a discrete
outcome or that independently explain the most variance for continuous outcomes (Schwartz
et al., 2017). DLA is implemented in the differential language analysis toolkit (DLATK)
(Schwartz et al., 2017) that supports a number of different statistical algorithms for per-
forming DLA4, such as linear regression, logistic regression or Pearson correlation among
others.
Before applying DLA we tokenize the given sample of text in order to extract the lin-
guistic features. Tokenizing means splitting the sentences into tokens, which include words,
punctuation, emoticons as well as phrases. We refer to these linguistic features as n-grams,
which are adjoining sequences of n elements from a given sample of text. Hence, a 1-gram
is a single element (e.g. a word or a smiley), a 2-gram are 2 elements following each other
and a 3-gram are 3 elements following each other. We use 2-grams and 3-grams in addition
to 1-grams since groups of elements taken together can often give more insight into our extra
linguistic information than a single element. The emoticon-aware tokenizer we use was built
by Schwartz et al. (2013) and is based on Christopher Pott’s5 “happyfuntokenizer” that has
been extended in order to allow it to capture emoticons like < 3 (a heart) or :-) (a smile).
In the next step, we normalize the n-gram counts by the total n-gram use of each group:
f req(n-gram, group)
f req(∗, group)
.
(2)
The term in the numerator f req(n-gram, group) denotes the frequency of one n-gram in a
group and the term in the denominator f req(∗, group) denotes the frequency of all n-grams
in a group. This is done in order to get the proportion of each n-gram in the group. The
deﬁnition of the group depends on the dependent variable of the speciﬁc application. As we
are interested in linguistic features that are predictive of annual credit ratings, the tweets of a
company’s year form the groups. In other words, all tweets that relate to one observation of
the dependent variable (company A in year 2015) form one group. This holds for tweets from
companies as well as for tweets about companies. In the existing literature the dependent
variables are mostly sociological or psychological variables of one individual. Therefore, the
groups are mostly deﬁned by Twitter user (see for example Pang et al., 2019).
Before using the normalized frequencies of words and phrases as predictors for our inde-
pendent variables we eliminate uninformative phrases (2-grams and 3-grams). We do this
by applying a collocation ﬁlter based on point-wise mutual information, denoted as pmi
(Church & Hanks, 1990) on each phrase. This is necessary in order to determine the differ-
ence between the independent probability of a token and the joint-probability of two or three
successive tokens occurring together in a 2-gram or 3-gram (Schwartz et al., 2013a):
pmi(phrase) = log
p(phrase)

token∈phrase p(token)
(3)
In this equation pmi(phrase) denotes the point-wise mutual information of the phrase.
p(phrase) is the probability of the phrase in the text, which is the joint probability of the
tokens of that phrase, and 
token∈phrase p(token) is the product of the individual probabilities
of observing the tokens contained in the phrase. A high value of pmi(phrase) represents a
4 All our analyses been performed using functions from DLATK https://dlatk.wwbp.org/index.html.
5 http://sentiment.christopherpotts.net/code-data/happyfuntokenizing.py.
123

176
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
phrase that consists of tokens whose probability of co-occurrence is similar to the individual
probabilities of the tokens. A low value of pmi(phrase) represents a phrase that consists of
tokens whose probability of co-occurrence is considerably lower as opposed to the individual
probabilities of the tokens. In order to ensure that only phrases are kept that are informative
parts of speech, we eliminate phrases with point-wise mutual information smaller than 2. As
3-grams have higher pmi values than 2-grams we ﬁrst normalize the pmi values by dividing
the pmi by the number of words minus one. More information can be found in Bouma (2009).
Additionally, we exclude linguistic features that are used by less than 1% of groups in order
to avoid high dimensional issues and in order to prevent overﬁtting (Zamani et al., 2018).
After these pre-processing steps, we apply DLA by relating each remaining normalized n-
gram to our dependent variable. For a binary outcome we do this by using logistic regression
models. Since many features are explored at once6, we need to control the false discovery rate,
which is done by using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995)
at level α = 0.05 (Ferreira & Zwinderman, 2006). The Benjamini-Hochberg Procedure can
be explained as follows (Thissen et al., 2002):
• The p-values of each feature are ordered in ascending order and ranked.
• A Benjamini-Hochberg critical value is calculated for each p-value, using the p-value’s
rank r, the total number of features f and α = 0.05, so that r
f ∗α.
• Thefeaturewiththehighestp-value,thatisalsosmallerthanitscorrespondingBenjamini-
Hochberg critical value, is considered signiﬁcant as are all features with lower p-values.
AmoredetailedexplanationofthemethodologycanbefoundinSchwartzetal.(2013a).Since
analyzing thousands of linguistic features can result in many being statistically signiﬁcant,
it is helpful to visualize the results appropriately. The DLATK offers a visualization in the
form of n-gram clouds images. These n-gram clouds images, also called word-clouds, depict
statistically signiﬁcant linguistic features in terms of relative correlation strength or marginal
effect and relative frequency in the corpus7. The coefﬁcient that reﬂects the correlation
strength or effect of each n-gram depends on the statistical model that has been used for
estimating the relationship between each n-gram and the dependent variable. For example
when the Pearson correlation is used for estimating the relationship between each n-gram
and a continuous variable, the n-grams are represented in the word-clouds in terms of their
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient (Pearson’s r). When using linear or logistic regression8 for
performing DLA the n-grams are represented in terms of their β regression coefﬁcients9.
We note that the majority of the existing literature on DLA (Schwartz et al., 2017) does
not only relate to the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient as correlation strength, but also to
the β-coefﬁcients. We will refer to the β-coefﬁcients of the n-grams as marginal effects in
the remainder of this thesis, as this is a more accurate description. In a logistic regression
framework the β-coefﬁcients are generally described as the marginal effects with respect to
the logits.
Visualizing the n-grams in terms of correlation strength or marginal effect and in terms of
frequency in a word-cloud enables a better perception of the key results compared to simply
displaying the large number of signiﬁcant linguistic features and their key properties in a
table.
6 For example, in our study we explore around 13,000 features contained in tweets about companies and
around 60,000 features contained in tweets from companies.
7 This is done by adjusting the color intensity (frequency) and the size of each signiﬁcant language feature
(correlation strength/ effect).
8 These statistical algorithms are used if control variables need to be speciﬁed.
9 This setting cannot be changed.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
177
The representation in terms of Pearson correlation/marginal effects and frequency is sen-
sible when applying DLA to continuous outcomes using linear regression, but it is not a
sensible representation of logistic regression β-coefﬁcients, as β-coefﬁcients of different
logistic regression models cannot be compared. This is due to the unknown scaling because
the dependent variable is assumed to be latent. See for more details the paper by Allison
(1999). Therefore, we will not visualize our results using DLATK but instead propose another
visualization that is particularly suitable for results of logistic regression models. Instead of
displaying the Benjamini-Hochberg corrected signiﬁcant n-grams in terms of frequency and
β-coefﬁcient we display these n-grams in terms of frequency and p-value. We do this, as
p-values of different logistic regression models can be compared and are therefore a more
informative comparison for this application as opposed to the β-coefﬁcients.
4 Empirical analysis
In this section we outline the data collection process and analyze the data descriptively. Then,
we apply the methodology to the data and discuss the results.
4.1 Data
Our empirical analysis focuses on companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange10
(NYSE) and NASDAQ11. Credit rating and ﬁnancial statement data are obtained from Thom-
son Reuters Eikon and Datastream (Reﬁnitiv), while Twitter data are collected via Twitter’s
ofﬁcial API12.
Dependent variable
The dependent variable is a company’s grouped S&P credit rating level, as summarized in
Table 1. S&P assigns long-term issuer ratings ranging from AAA to D, with intermediate
categories distinguished by plus and minus notches13. To ensure a sufﬁcient number of
observations per category, we collapse these notches and aggregate ratings into ﬁve broader
groups, “Over AA”, “A”, “BBB”, “BB”, “Below B”, following common practice in the
literature (e.g., Kim and Sohn 2008).
Because credit ratings are intended to reﬂect a company’s long-term creditworthiness,
ratingchangestendtooccurinfrequently.Consistentwithpriorstudies,wethereforeconstruct
an annual dataset (e.g., Amato & Furﬁne, 2004; Blume et al., 1998). For each year, we assign
the rating observed at the end of the calendar year to the corresponding ﬁrm-year observation.
10 The NYSE is the biggest stock exchange by market capitalization of listed companies in the world and lists
over 3,000 companies, containing some of the biggest US companies.
11 The NASDAQ is the second biggest stock exchange in the world, listing around 2,700 companies, ranging
from small-cap to large-cap stocks.
12 Application-Programming-Interface https://developer.Twitter.com/en/docs/tweets/search/overview.
13 See https://www.standardandpoors.com/en_US/web/guest/article/-/view/sourceId/504352.
123

178
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Table 1 Grouping method of
S&P credit ratings
Grouped Credit Rating
Credit Rating
Over AA
AAA
AA+
AA
AA-
A
A+
A
A-
BBB
BBB+
BBB
BBB-
BB
BB+
BB
BB-
Below B
B+
B
B-
CCC+
CCC
CCC-
CC
C
D
Financial variables
In line with the existing literature (e.g. Kim & Sohn, 2008; Altman & Rijken, 2004; Doumpos
et al., 2015; Altman, 1968), we include annual ﬁnancial variables as control variables. Specif-
ically, we collect net working capital (WC), total assets (TA), retained earnings (RE), book
value of total liabilities (BL), earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT), and market value of
equity (MV), and construct the ratios WC/TA, RE/TA, EBIT/TA, and MV/BL. The variables
are all obtained annually from Reﬁnitiv14. Since the market value of equity MV is deﬁned
as the share price multiplied by the number of ordinary shares in issue it is not in fact an
annual variable that can be obtained from a company’s annual balance sheet, such as the
working capital, but is a daily variable. Therefore, we need to transform the market value
into an annual variable in order to ensure consistency among the ﬁnancial variables. Aligning
with the credit rating levels we use the market value of a company’s last day of the year as
reference point.
We choose these ratios because they have been commonly used in the existing literature
and because they are publicly available and hence we expect that rating agencies as well
as externals take them into account when evaluating the companies. We also include them
because there are strong a priori arguments as to why they would be predictive of credit rat-
14 https://www.reﬁnitiv.com/en/ﬁnancial-data/company-data/fundamentals-data/worldscope-fundamentals.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
179
ings. We limit our analysis to four ﬁnancial ratios15 as control variables. Huang et al. (2004)
showed that using a small subset of ﬁnancial indicators can achieve predictive performance
comparable to, or even exceeding, models that include larger sets of indicators. This approach
of focusing on a few key ﬁnancial variables is also common in the credit rating literature: for
instance, Kim and Sohn (2008) and Altman and Rijken (2004) each employed four ﬁnancial
indicators, while Yuan et al. (2018) used ﬁve. Moreover, credit rating prediction is closely
linked to bankruptcy prediction, where one of the most widely known models, the Altman
Z-score, relies on only four or ﬁve ﬁnancial ratios (Yuan et al., 2018). We do not include addi-
tional control variables such as macroeconomic indicators or corporate governance measures.
The inclusion of governance variables is beyond the scope of this study, and rating agen-
cies emphasize a through-the-cycle approach, suggesting that short-term macroeconomic
ﬂuctuations should have limited inﬂuence on assigned credit ratings.
Even though we would expect that the lagged credit rating would be a strong predictor of
credit ratings, we do not include the lagged credit rating as a predictor for two reasons. First,
we want to build a model that can be used for the prediction of credit ratings of companies
that have not been rated before. Second, we are interested in the predictive power of the
Twitter variables. If we would use the lagged credit rating level as a predictor, because of the
rarity of changes in credit rating, the ratings would be predicted close to perfectly. Hence,
when adding Twitter variables, even if they are powerful predictors, they may only marginally
increase predictive accuracy since there would be little additional accuracy available to be
gained. Additionally, we are interested in the determinants of a credit rating and therefore do
not want to build an autoregressive model but a model that explains well. Last, we also note
that including the lagged credit rating as a predictor of the credit rating does not seem to be
common practice in the credit rating literature (see for example Hájek & Olej, 2011; Bellotti
et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2004; Yuan et al., 2018)
Tweets from the Companies
After collecting the ﬁnancial variables and credit ratings, we check whether the companies
have an ofﬁcial Twitter account or not and remove all the companies that do not have an
ofﬁcial Twitter account16. For the companies that have a Twitter account we collect the
last 3200 tweets17 using Twitter’s search API. We then exclude all companies that have a
Twitter account but do not tweet (e.g. Apple). Given that we are able to scrape only 3200
tweets for each company at the time of data collection, for each company we also exclude all
observations that relate to times before the period of the earliest tweets that we were able to
capture18. This gives an unbalanced panel data-set19, where we use the ﬁrst collected tweet
15 Similar to the study by Kim and Sohn (2008).
16 We do this check by scraping Google search with the query “Company Twitter Account US”, where
“Company” is the respective company name. Since the ﬁrst search result is almost always the Twitter account
if it exists, and since the URL of that is always https://Twitter.com/company?lang=en where company is the
respective company name, we simply extract the URL of the ﬁrst search result for each query. Then, we delete
https://Twitter.com/ and url?lang=en in order to get the ofﬁcial Twitter account name for each company.
17 This is the limit set by Twitter at the time of data collection.
18 For example, we collect credit rating data and the ﬁnancial ratios for Company A from 2010 until 2019.
However, due to the 3200 tweet restriction we could not collect tweets that go further back than 2016. Hence,
we remove all the observations before 2016.
19 Other examples why the data-set is unbalanced: one company tweeted irregularly from 2011 until 2019.
For this company we have observations over 9 years, even though there are many days and even months when
the company did not tweet at all. Another company only tweeted a few times in 2017, hence we have only
123

180
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
and the last collected tweet as the cut-offs for each company’s individual time-line. Hence,
only companies that have a Twitter account and tweet are considered in our analysis. Since
we have an annual data-set we group these tweets into annual text variables. This means, that
we aggregate each company’s tweets on an annual scale20.
Tweets about the Companies
Here, we check again whether the remaining companies have an ofﬁcial Twitter account or
not, and remove all the companies that do not have one. In a next step, we collected all tweets
that mention one of the company’s Twitter accounts using “@” (for instance “@Apple”)
from 2011 until May 2019 from the University of Pennsylvania’s Twitter database21. We did
not collect the tweets that mention one of the company’s Twitter accounts using Twitter’s
ofﬁcial API, because Twitter’s ofﬁcial API did not allow to collect historical tweets using
“@” at the time of data collection. We again use the date of a company’s ﬁrst collected and
last collected tweet as cut-offs for their individual time-lines. Hence, only companies that
people tweet about are considered in our analysis. In the last step we again group the tweets
into an annual variable.
4.2 Data Preparation
It is common that Twitter users tweet irregularly. These irregularities can be arbitrary, and
we also notice this pattern in our data-set for most of the companies. For example, in our
data-set we have some years when there is no tweet. This means that in these years neither
the companies themselves nor others who tweet about companies issued tweets, which gives
a tweet frequency of zero for these years. Since we can not calculate a tweet sentiment score
for non-existing tweets, and since deleting these years would have led to a huge information
loss, we impute the missing sentiment scores with a value of zero.
We chose an imputation of zero and not any other imputation or interpolation method
for several different reasons. First, we argue that the sentiment of a non-existent tweet is
neutral and hence should be zero. Imputing or interpolating the sentiment scores with a value
different to zero would require a priori knowledge on whether or not tweeting is indicative of a
negative or a positive sentiment, which we do not have. Second, considering that we collected
each company’s last 3200 available tweets, there may be a speciﬁc reason why a company
did not tweet within a speciﬁc year which is why we should not interpolate the sentiment
scores of these months or years to a value that might indicate positiveness or negativeness,
while this might not necessarily be the case. For a similar reason we also imputed the years
where we did not collect any tweets about a company with a value of zero. The tweets about
companies were collected from a random 1% subset of all available tweets. Hence, contrary
to the collection of tweets from the companies, no tweets within a year does not necessarily
mean that there was no tweet, but could result from the fact that we were only able to obtain
the tweets from a random 1% sample. Since we do not know what the sentiment of the
missing tweets might look like and since this data restriction holds for all the tweets about
companies, an imputation of zero is also sensible for this dataset.
observations for 2017. Another company tweets a lot and hence the last 3200 tweets we were able to collect
only went back until 2018.
20 For example, all tweets from Company A in 2016 are aggregated into one text for the annual data-set.
21 A database where 1% of all tweets are randomly collected by month.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
181
Table 2 Data overview
Twitter Data
Observations
Companies
Above AA
A
BBB
BB
Below B
From Companies
2645
699
56
358
953
866
412
About Companies
2004
420
135
400
766
473
230
4.3 Data description
After the data collection and cleaning process we exclude all ﬁnancial service companies22
from our sample, since the relationship between their ratings and the predictors is likely to
differ from that for companies in other sectors (Hwang et al., 2010). We obtain two different
data-sets as described in Table 2.
Table 2 shows that the number of companies and number of observations is higher for the
data-set using tweets from companies compared to the data-set using tweets about companies.
We also notice that the number of observations is different within the different rating groups.
Hence, we have an unbalanced dependent variable.
In addition to the information contained in Table 2 we want to descriptively analyze the
differences between tweets from companies and tweets about companies in terms of their
sentiment score. We do this in order to check our assumption, that tweets from companies
are likely to contain a lot of advertisement and are overall more positive as opposed to tweets
about companies, which we expect to be critical as well as positive towards the companies
of interest. For this we calculate the average sentiment score AS of tweet sentiment scores
tw per year t and per company k:
ASkt = 1
fkt
fkt

l=1
twl
(4)
where fkt is the number of tweets about or from company k in year t and hence twl a single
sentiment score of a tweet by/from company k in year t. Using these different annual average
sentiment scores for the different companies we can calculate the overall mean, standard
deviation, minimum, and maximum for tweets from and about companies and compare the
results23. For example, the reported minimum is the minimum of the average annual sentiment
score when using either tweets from or about companies. Table 3 shows the summary statistics
of the general SM sentiment score and Table 4 the summary statistics of the Finance sentiment
score.
Table 3 shows that the general SM sentiment score of tweets from and about companies
is on average positive, where the average sentiment score using tweets about companies is
slightly higher as opposed to the average sentiment score using tweets from companies.
However, the standard deviation of tweets about companies is much higher as opposed
to the standard deviation of tweets from companies. This shows that the average annual
Twitter sentiment score has a much larger variation for tweets about companies. This higher
standard deviation of tweets about companies strengthens our hypothesis that tweets about
companies have a higher sentiment variability as opposed to tweets from companies, which
we expect to be positive, or negative to a lesser extent, since they are issued by the companies
22 Companies with SIC code between 6000-6799.
23 Since we used the average values for a single tweet, observations for which we did not obtain any tweets
are disregarded in this calculation.
123

182
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Table 3 SM sentiment score
Twitter Data
Minimum
Mean
Maximum
Standard Deviation
From Companies
-1
0.501
3
0.273
About Companies
-7.24
0.596
211
5.42
Table 4 Finance sentiment score
Twitter Data
Minimum
Mean
Maximum
Standard Deviation
From Companies
-1
0.157
2
0.159
About Companies
-37
0.04
8.75
1.09
Fig. 2 Training and test data speciﬁcations
themselves. Table 3 also conﬁrms our assumption that tweets from companies are likely to
contain advertisement, as such tweets are mostly positive or neutral as the minimum of “-1”
and the maximum of “3” shows.
Table 4 again conﬁrms our hypothesis that tweets from companies are mostly positive and
contain advertisement. Our hypothesis implies that their average annual sentiment scores
should hence have a smaller range while tweets about the companies are usually complaints
or compliments about the company, its products or its services, which we expect to have a
higher range. The results are conﬁrmed by the positive average Finance sentiment score of
tweets from companies, the small standard deviation and the minimum of −1 and maximum
of 2 which are relatively close to each other. The average annual ﬁnance sentiment scores
using tweets about companies have a higher range going from −37 to 8.75, while the mean
of 0.04 is lower as opposed to using tweets from companies and the standard deviation of
1.09 much higher.
4.4 Models
In this section we ﬁt the different models using a random forest classiﬁer. We compare the
predictive performance of the models with and without Twitter data using longitudinal test
samples (see Jones et al., 2015) as described in Figure 2.
We split the data in 2018 for the data-set containing tweets from the companies and 2017
for the data-set containing tweets about the companies in order to obtain approximately 75%
training and 25% test data.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
183
4.4.1 Models with sentiment scores
We estimate two sets of random forest classiﬁers; one set where the inputs are not lagged
and one set where they are lagged. In each case we estimate a base classiﬁer that has inputs
that consist of the four ﬁnancial ratios and we also estimate an enhanced classiﬁer which
includes the four ﬁnancial ratios plus the two twitter variables “Tweet Sentiment Score” and
“Tweet Frequency”. We estimate the latter model twice, once using the sentiment score from
the SM-Word-list as a predictor (SM score) and once using the sentiment score from the
Finance-Word-list as a predictor (Finance score).
We ﬁrst do not lag the inputs, since according to Kim and Sohn (2008) the ﬁnancial
variables are supposed to have an effect on the rating from the beginning of the year to the
end of the year. We simply assume this holds for the Twitter variables as well. In other words,
we use the explanatory variables obtained from the same year as the credit rating (t) to predict
the credit rating (t). Hence, this model performs a classiﬁcation rather than a prediction. We
refer to this model as “Non-Lagged”.
Other authors argue that the explanatory variables should be lagged, since current values
could contain information that was unknown at the time of the credit rating assignment
(Bellotti et al., 2011). Since this could especially be true for the tweets we additionally ﬁt all
models using the lagged explanatory variables.
Since the random forest classiﬁer samples different bootstrap samples each time, the model
results slightly change during each run. In order to report robust results we run each random
forest classiﬁer 100 times and report the average results.
For comparing the performance of the models we use the multiclass area under the curve
(AUC) (Hand & Till, 2001), the accuracy and the mean absolute error (MAE)24, which are
all performance metrics that are typically used for ordinal responses.
To assess whether the reported differences in performance metrics are signiﬁcant, we
additionally run each model on 100 different bootstrap samples of the test set25. We choose a
sample size of 400 observations without replacement for each test sample to avoid decreasing
the test data size too much, but still allow for enough variation between different samples.
We then test whether the difference between the models with Twitter features and the model
without Twitter features is signiﬁcant at 5% conﬁdence level, using a one-sided paired t-test26.
The asterisks in Table 5 indicate that the difference in performance metric is signiﬁcant. The
average results obtained from the different bootstrap test samples and the p-values of the
t-tests are reported in the Appendix.
The results are reported in Table 5 and show that including information from tweets from
the companies themselves and about companies improves the model performance using both
sentiment scores and for non-lagged and lagged explanatory variables in terms of AUC,
accuracy and MAE. Using tweets from companies, both Twitter models outperform the
baseline model, where the model with the SM score performs slightly better when non-
lagged predictors are used and the model with the Finance score when lagged predictors are
used. Since both sentiment scores perform well this suggests that the ﬁnance word-list as
well as the general word-list can successfully be used for this application. This result could
24 Assuming an equal distance between classes.
25 For computational reasons, we train each model in this experiment with a ﬁxed seed and disregard the
previously described changes that occur when using a random forest classiﬁer.
26 We use a paired test because for each observation we have a prediction from the model without Twitter
features and from the model with Twitter features.
123

184
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Table 5 Model results - The models that contain Twitter variables contain the tweet frequency and one of two
different tweet sentiment scores
Data
Classiﬁer
Performance
Measure
Without
Twitter
With Twitter
SM Score
With Twitter
Finance
Score
From Companies
Non-Lagged
AUC
0.794
0.813∗
0.816∗
Accuracy
0.515
0.538∗
0.531∗
MAE
0.595
0.556∗
0.561∗
Lagged
AUC
0.830
0.835∗
0.837∗
Accuracy
0.548
0.556∗
0.554∗
MAE
0.568
0.534∗
0.528∗
About Companies
Non-Lagged
AUC
0.810
0.829∗
0.827∗
Accuracy
0.532
0.546∗
0.545∗
MAE
0.598
0.556∗
0.556∗
Lagged
AUC
0.832
0.842∗
0.844∗
Accuracy
0.564
0.561
0.557
MAE
0.572
0.550∗
0.549∗
also indicate that credit rating agencies include information from company’s social media
accounts when performing their credit rating assessment.
Including information from tweets about companies also increases classiﬁcation per-
formance among all three performance measures for both sentiment scores when using
non-lagged explanatory variables. The results when using lagged explanatory variables also
show a better performance when including Twitter variables for the performance measures
AUC and MAE, where the model with the Finance score slightly outperforms the model with
the SM score. Only the accuracy of the baseline model is slightly higher as opposed to the
models containing the Twitter variables.
4.4.2 DLA - Application
In the next application, we evaluate how the performance of the models changes when
including linguistic features from the tweets into the model which we obtain by applying
DLA. We apply DLA to identify the linguistic features in tweets that are most predictive
of yearly credit rating levels. When applying DLA we initially also included the industry
division as control variable as we would expect that some linguistic features contained in
the tweets could be heavily used within one industry division. For example, n-grams such
as “drilling” or “mineral exploration” are more likely to occur in tweets about and from
companies within the mining industry division. If many companies within this industry
division would for instance have a credit rating level below B, these words would likely be
identiﬁed as correlated to a credit rating level below B, even though this might not hold for all
companies or companies within other industry divisions. By including the industry division
as control variables we prevent this problem. However, the industry division was not found
to be signiﬁcant and excluding it as a control variable did not change the results. Therefore,
we continue this analysis without including the industry division as a control variable. We
did not include other control variables, such as the industry, which is more speciﬁc than the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
185
industry division, since including such a large number of dummy variables would not have
been feasible.
Similar to the previous application, we apply DLA to lagged and non-lagged data-sets.
Since we are later interested in using the identiﬁed linguistic features for out-of-time predic-
tions, we apply DLA on a training data-set that is identical to the training data-set we will
use for model estimation.
Since DLA can only be applied to binary or continuous variables, we transform the ordinal
credit rating levels into binary variables as follows: “Over AA” vs. “Not Over AA”, “A” vs.
“Not A”, “BBB” vs. “Not BBB”, “BB” vs. “Not BB”, “Below B” vs. “Not Below B”. We
apply DLA on each of these binary variables, which results in different identiﬁed linguistic
features.
The Benjamini-Hochberg (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) corrected signiﬁcant linguistic
features are displayed in word-clouds, where the color represents the p-values of the n-grams
and the size represents the frequency of the n-grams in the corpus. The frequency is reported
from small (infrequent) to large (frequent) and the p-values are displayed increasingly from
red to blue. The word-clouds have been created using ggplot2, which uses a square root
scaling by default. We further scale the font of each label so that the text area is a function of
the raw size aesthetic. More information on the scaling can be found in the “ggwordcloud”
package27. As we cannot report all signiﬁcant linguistic features within one word-cloud, we
limit the visualization to the 50 most frequent signiﬁcant linguistic features28.
While analyzing the identiﬁed linguistic features within a ﬁnancial context (i.e. describing
which linguistic features seem sensible to be correlated to a speciﬁc credit rating level) is not
a primary aim of this paper, we would expect that higher credit rating levels and credit rating
upgrades are associated with words that might generally reﬂect good ﬁnancial performance
while lower credit rating levels and credit rating downgrades are associated with words
that might generally reﬂect bad ﬁnancial performance. However, since our primary aim is
prediction, we will analyze the word-clouds in a general framework and propose two different
strategies to select speciﬁc linguistic features that we will use as additional predictors, since
including all signiﬁcant linguistic features as predictors would lead to too many variables.
We use annual lagged and non-lagged tweets from the companies themselves and about
the companies and show which n-grams contained in these tweets are individually most
predictive of credit rating levels.
We choose only two n-grams from each resulting word-cloud to use as additional pre-
dictors. We propose to select two n-grams and not more, since this results in 10 additional
predictors already, and a large number of predictors would have led to overﬁtting.
As we cannot select the linguistic features in terms of their marginal effects (β-coefﬁcients
of different logistic regression models cannot be compared), we propose to select the lin-
guistic features in terms of their signiﬁcance (which can be meaningfully compared across
samples and models), their frequency and their generalizability across different companies
and industries. We propose two different selection approaches based on these criteria and
compare the results.
In the ﬁrst approach (Approach 1) we select the two linguistic features from the 50
most frequent linguistic features of the word-clouds that have the lowest p-value and that
do not relate to a speciﬁc company or industry. We have chosen these linguistic features
as potential predictors for three reasons. First, we consider only linguistic features with a
27 https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ggwordcloud/vignettes/ggwordcloud.html.
28 We focus on the 50 most frequent signiﬁcant n-grams, since n-grams with a high frequency are expected
to be more meaningful.
123

186
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
high frequency since these features are more representative within our sample and hence
can give more reliable results as opposed to linguistic features that are used only very rarely.
Second, we select features with a low p-value because this means that these linguistic features
are highly signiﬁcant which is a promising attribute in terms of predictive accuracy. In other
words, by selecting the n-grams with the lowest p-value we can be highly conﬁdent that these
have an effect on the dependent variable that is not zero. Third, we do not select features
that are either directly related to a speciﬁc company or industry, or that are heavily used by
only one company or one industry, since including such features in the predictive modeling
framework could lead to biased results. We do this by disregarding n-grams that directly
relate to a speciﬁc company or industry in the selection process. For example, we exclude
n-grams such as “kindle” since this is a product of the company “Amazon” and therefore
directly relates to it, and n-grams such as “vaccine” as this is a well-known product type
of pharmaceutical companies and therefore directly relates to the pharmaceutical industry.
Additionally, we exclude n-grams that are heavily used by only one industry or company. In
other words, we exclude n-grams from the selection process that are used by one industry or
company in more than 50% of observations that use this n-gram. For example, a n-gram that
is mostly used by only one company over multiple years which has credit rating A could be
found signiﬁcant with credit rating level A, while it is in fact not the case across all companies
in the sample. Similarly, this could happen with n-grams that are heavily used within one
industry (note that industry is different to industry division, as it is more speciﬁc) while the
companies within this industry all have the same credit rating.
In the second approach (Approach 2) we put more emphasis on the frequency when
selecting the linguistic features. More speciﬁcally, we select the two most frequent linguistic
features that are signiﬁcant (Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-value of < 0.05) and that do
not relate to a speciﬁc company or industry or that are not heavily used by only one company
or one industry. We propose this second approach since the proposed linguistic features are,
due to their frequency, even more representative within our sample. Furthermore, we employ
this second approach as an alternative to the ﬁrst approach since a very small p-value does
not necessarily mean that the linguistic feature has a high effect on the dependent variable.
In other words, the linguistic features selected in terms of p-value could be highly signiﬁcant
but could also have a small effect on the credit rating levels and therefore would not increase
the predictive power a lot.
We ﬁrst apply DLA to the binary credit rating level speciﬁcation “Over AA or not” and
the resulting word-clouds containing the 50 most frequent signiﬁcant n-grams are displayed
in Figure 3 for tweets from the companies themselves and in Figure 4 for tweets about the
companies. The results show that there is not a big difference between the lagged and non-
lagged word-clouds as the identiﬁed linguistic features mostly coincide. This holds especially
for the tweets from the companies themselves. This result is expected, as credit ratings change
rarely and hence are likely to stay the same over multiple years. Additionally, the results show
that some linguistic features directly refer to companies, such as “proctergamble” in Figure
3 or “amazon” in Figure 4. Also, some n-grams seem to be related to speciﬁc industries,
such as the word “diabetes” in Figure 3, which we would expect to mostly appear in tweets
from and about pharmaceutical (part of the Manufacturing industry division) or healthcare
companies (part of the Services industry division).
As the word-clouds contain the 50 most frequent signiﬁcant n-grams we can directly apply
the two proposed selection approaches by selecting 1) the two linguistic features that have
the smallest p-value from each word-cloud and 2) the two linguistic features that have the
highest frequency from each word-cloud. This corresponds to selecting the two 1) “most
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
187
Fig. 3 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with Over AA - From Companies
red” linguistic features from each word-cloud and 2) “largest” linguistic features from each
word-cloud.
The selected linguistic features of both approaches can be found in Table 6. Table 6 gives
not only an overview of the selected linguistic features but also shows their frequencies and
p-values. We have also marked the selected linguistic features for both approaches in the
word-clouds, where the green circled n-grams have been selected according to Approach 1
and the orange circled n-grams according to Approach 2. Using the ﬁrst approach we select
the n-grams “we’ll pass this” and “parties .” for the non-lagged tweets from the companies
themselves, as these are the n-grams with the lowest p-values that do not relate to an industry
or company. The same n-grams are selected for the lagged tweets, where only the p-values
slightly differ. In Figure 3 these n-grams are highlighted in green.
The signiﬁcantly correlated n-grams of the tweets about the companies are displayed in
Figure 4. We select the n-grams with the lowest p-values, which are “100%” and “a novel”
from the non-lagged word-cloud and “100%” and “to wish” from the lagged word-cloud.
Some n-grams have an even lower p-value, such as “ap” and “kindle”, but they directly refer
to a company (The associated press) or to a product of a speciﬁc company (amazon kindle).
Therefore, we did not select these n-grams.
123

188
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Fig. 4 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with Over AA - About Companies
Using the second approach we select the two most frequent signiﬁcant linguistic features
that do not relate to a company or industry, which are “along”/“along to” and “appropriate”
from the tweets from the companies themselves and “listed” and “trump” from the tweets
about the companies. We have highlighted these n-grams in Figure 3 and Figure 4 in orange.
We notice that the n-grams “for” and “amazon” in Figure 4 also have a high frequency but
we did not select them, since “for” is a preposition without a real meaning and “amazon” a
company name.
In a next step we apply DLA to the remaining binary credit rating level speciﬁcations
“A or not”, “BBB or not”, “BB or not” and “Below B or not”. The resulting word-clouds
containing the 50 most frequent signiﬁcant linguistic features can be found in the Appendix.
Again, we select from each word-cloud the two most signiﬁcant n-grams (Approach 1) and
the two most frequent n-grams (Approach 2) as potential predictors. We also make sure to
only select n-grams that do not relate to a speciﬁc company or industry and more information
on the selection process can be found in the Appendix. Similar to Table 6, Table 8, 9, 10 and
11 in the Appendix give an overview of the selected n-grams and their frequency.
Overall, we can summarize that the selected n-grams of the lagged and non-lagged tweets
are often identical, and that the frequency of n-grams from tweets from the companies
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
189
Table 6 Selected linguistic features for the dependent variable “Over AA or not”
Approach
Twitter Data
Lag
N-gram
P-Value
Frequency
Approach
1
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
we’ll pass this
parties .
1.962e-186
1.427e-185
596
602
Lagged
we’ll pass this
parties .
2.272e-184
1.160e-183
596
602
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
100%
a novel
4.250e-96
2.502e-63
137
104
Lagged
100%
to wish
3.389e-90
2.370e-37
137
234
Approach
2
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
along
appropriate
3.199e-02
1.127e-15
2809
1025
Lagged
appropriate
along to
1.846e-14
4.236e-18
1025
960
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
listed
trump
1.571e-17
3.122e-03
1880
1821
Lagged
listed
trump
2.546e-26
9.606e-03
1880
1821
themselves is overall higher as opposed to the frequency of n-grams from tweets about
the companies. Both these observations are sensible, since we have more tweets from the
companies themselves and since credit rating levels usually stay the same over many years.
Whilst we have no evidence that the important linguistic features contained in the word-
clouds change over time, because we did not consider this (and have no literature that does
this either), nevertheless this is possible. We might be able to detect this by investigating
word-clouds in different time-periods and by observing if the relationship between them and
credit rating levels change to be found by running cross-sectional regressions for different
time-periods. If we detect this, one might for example consider time-varying coefﬁcients for
the tweets in future research to account for this (as for example in Dangl & Halling 2012;
Bernoth & Erdogan 2012).
4.4.3 Models with linguistic features
As we are interested in the predictive power of the linguistic features, we ﬁt different models
using a random forest classiﬁer and compare the performance with and without the linguistic
features. We use the same model speciﬁcations as in Section 4.4.1, i.e., the same training and
test data speciﬁcations, lagged and non-lagged predictors and the same baseline models. The
linguistic features are included as normalized count-variables (see Section 3.3). This means
that we create a variable for each selected linguistic feature by counting the occurrences
of each linguistic feature over the total number of linguistic features in the tweets of a
company’s year. In other words, these additional Twitter variables reﬂect the proportional
number of times the n-grams are used by a company in the year. We initially also estimated
all models by including the linguistic features without normalizing by total n-gram usage,
which led to similar results.
We estimate the lagged and non-lagged model for both selections of linguistic features:
the linguistic features that have been selected according to Approach 1 and the linguistic
features which we selected according to Approach 2. We estimate each model using a ran-
123

190
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Table 7 Model results - The models that contain Twitter variables contain the linguistic features selected
according to Approach 1 or Approach 2
Data
Classiﬁer
Performance
Measure
Without
Twitter
Selected
N-grams
Approach 1
Selected
N-grams
Approach 2
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
AUC
0.794
0.810∗
0.838∗
Accuracy
0.515
0.518∗
0.577∗
MAE
0.595
0.591∗
0.494∗
Lagged
AUC
0.830
0.842∗
0.854∗
Accuracy
0.548
0.553∗
0.566∗
MAE
0.568
0.548∗
0.513∗
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
AUC
0.810
0.815∗
0.819∗
Accuracy
0.532
0.530
0.536∗
MAE
0.598
0.597
0.583∗
Lagged
AUC
0.832
0.837∗
0.845∗
Accuracy
0.564
0.551
0.564
MAE
0.572
0.587
0.568∗
dom forest classiﬁer and again we run the random forest classiﬁer 100 times and report
the average results, since these are more robust compared to the results of a single run. We
compare the performance of the models in terms of multiclass AUC, accuracy and MAE,
since we determine the success of a model in terms of predictive accuracy rather than test
hypotheses. Similarly to Table 5, the asterisk indicates whether or not the difference in results
is statistically signiﬁcant at 5% conﬁdence level.
The model results are displayed in Table 7. We ﬁnd, that the models containing the selected
linguistic features outperform the baseline models in terms of AUC, accuracy and MAE in
all cases when using linguistic features from tweets from the companies themselves and in
almost all cases when using linguistic features from tweets about the companies. The best
results are achieved when including the linguistic features that have been selected in terms
of frequency (Approach 2), as including these leads to an increase in AUC and accuracy and
a decrease in MAE across all model speciﬁcations. We conclude that overall the selection in
terms of frequency (Approach 2) is more appropriate as opposed to the selection in terms of
p-value (Approach 1). This is sensible since signiﬁcant n-grams with a higher frequency are
more representative in the corpus and hence more likely to have an effect.
Comparing these results with the sentiment score models from Section 4.4.1 (see Table
5) shows that the models containing the linguistic features from tweets from the companies
themselves perform better as opposed to the models containing the sentiment scores from
tweets from the companies themselves. This result conﬁrms the assumption that speciﬁc
linguistic features are more appropriate for prediction as opposed to an overall sentiment
score since tweets from companies are issued by the companies themselves which makes
them to some extend biased. Also, this result conﬁrms our overall assumption that infor-
mation from tweets from companies are predictive of credit ratings, since tweets from the
companies themselves reﬂect important aspects of the companies that could be related to
their performance and therefore also to their credit ratings, such as their marketing strategy.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
191
When comparing the results of the models using tweets about the companies with Table
5 we notice that even though the models containing the linguistic features outperform the
baseline models, in most cases they do not outperform the models containing the different
sentiment scores. Tweets about companies are often complaints or praises about their services
or products, which therefore reﬂect the companies popularity which relates to their ﬁnancial
performance and hence their credit rating. It makes sense that the models containing the
sentiment scores outperform the models containing the linguistic features, since an overall
sentiment score is calculated considering all words in a tweet, which is why it can better
capture a tweet’s message.
Overall, we summarize that linguistic features from tweets from and about companies are
predictive of credit rating levels, since models that contain these features outperform baseline
models that omit them. In most cases, the models containing the linguistic features also
outperform other models containing information from Twitter, such as the tweet frequency
or a tweet sentiment score.
While the observed improvements in model performance from incorporating Twitter-
based features may appear small in absolute terms, their implications can be ﬁnancially
signiﬁcant in applied settings. As formalized in the cost-sensitive loss function presented in
Appendix 5.2, even small gains in classiﬁcation accuracy can lead to a substantial reduction
in expected economic losses when large portfolio exposures are involved. Although credit
rating changes are relatively infrequent, their impact can be signiﬁcant. Avoiding even a small
number of costly misclassiﬁcations annually can justify the data acquisition and processing
costs associated with incorporating Twitter-based features.
The results overall conﬁrm the ﬁndings of Yuan et al. (2018) that information from Twitter
can increase the predictive accuracy of corporate credit rating levels. However, the improve-
ments in accuracy by Yuan et al. (2018) are larger than the improvements that we achieve
when using a random forest classiﬁer and information contained in tweets about companies
as predictors. For example, the highest improvement in accuracy we achieve for this model
speciﬁcation is 2.63% when including non-lagged Twitter variables, while Yuan et al. (2018)
achieved an improvement in accuracy of 4.02%. These improvement differences could result
from using different Twitter variables, annual data as opposed to quarterly data and only
having a random sample of 1% of tweets.
We extend the results by Yuan et al. (2018) by showing that not only information contained
in tweets about companies is predictive of credit ratings, but also information contained
in tweets from the companies themselves. For example, we show that using information
contained in tweets from the companies themselves as additional predictors can achieve an
improvement in accuracy that is close to Yuan et al. (2018) (4.46% for non-lagged predictors).
Additionally, we extend the study by Yuan et al. (2018) by showing that other information
from Twitter, such as simple dictionary based sentiment scores and the tweet frequency,
can improve the prediction of corporate credit ratings. Last, we also show that the Twitter
variables can improve the prediction of credit ratings not only in terms of accuracy, but also in
terms of AUC and MAE and we show that the improvements overall hold for non-lagged and
lagged predictors. We also extend the study by Yuan et al. (2018) by showing that linguistic
features in tweets can further improve the prediction of corporate credit ratings.
123

192
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
5 Conclusion
ThispapershowsthatnovelinformationfromTwittercanimprovetheprediction/classiﬁcation
of a company’s credit rating level and that different sources of tweets and information con-
tained in the tweets affect predictive accuracy to different extents. We estimate random forest
classiﬁer models and we include as inputs explanatory variables of the same year as the
dependent variable (non-lagged) and explanatory variables from the year before the depen-
dent variable (lagged). We estimate a baseline model and compare it to the performance of
models that additionally contain different Twitter sentiment scores and the tweet frequency or
linguistic features contained in the tweets. Additionally, we differentiate between tweets from
companies, which are a part of a company’s marketing strategy and tweets about companies,
which convey external evaluations by the public. We can draw ﬁve main conclusions.
First, we conclude that information contained in tweets from and about companies are
predictive of corporate credit rating levels, as the models that contain information from Twit-
ter have an overall higher AUC, Accuracy and MAE compared to models that omit these
features. This holds for models where we used non-lagged explanatory variables and for
models where we used lagged explanatory variables. Although the differences in perfor-
mance between models incorporating Twitter data and those excluding it are relatively small,
they are statistically signiﬁcant. The ﬁndings suggest that tweets contain valuable predictive
information about corporate credit ratings and consequently, ﬁrm risk, which aligns with
the wisdom of crowds theory (Lerner & Tirole, 2002) when considering information from
tweets about companies. When considering tweets from the companies themselves, this phe-
nomenon can be attributed to ﬁrms deliberately signaling their quality via Twitter, as also
shown in the work by Jung et al. (2018). Since both sources of tweets are publicly available,
they could both be considered in the rating assessment of credit rating agencies which could
also explain the predictive power.
Second,whenfocusingontheTwittersentimentscoresaspredictors,weconcludethateven
though the word-list choice gives slightly different results for different sources of tweets (e.g.
from the companies themselves or about the companies), both choices of word-lists perform
equally well. This result is sensible, since tweets are usually written in a more general
language, which explains why the SM word-list performs well, but since the predictions are
performed in a ﬁnancial context it makes sense that the Finance wordlist also performs well.
Third,weconcludethatwhenusinglinguisticfeaturesfromTwitterasadditionalpredictors
for corporate credit rating levels, selecting the features in terms of frequency, leads to better
results than selecting the features in terms of p-value only. As linguistic features with a high
frequency are more representative in the corpus, it makes sense that these linguistic features
have an overall greater effect.
Fourth, we conclude that the information contained in the tweets (i.e. sentiment scores or
linguistic features) that best predicts credit rating levels should be chosen according to the
source of the tweets (i.e. tweets from companies or about companies). For example, the results
show that the models containing linguistic features of tweets from the companies themselves
outperform the models containing the sentiment scores and the tweet frequency. This can
be explained by the fact that tweets from companies are largely positive and, therefore, a
sentiment score based on positive and negative words might not be as informative as speciﬁc
selected keywords. However, in most cases, the models containing the sentiment scores and
the tweet frequency using tweets about companies outperform those that contain linguistic
features from tweets about companies. This could be explained by the fact that tweets about
companies are issued by a large number of different people, and hence differ in terms of
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
193
language. Therefore, a sentiment score that roughly indicates whether a tweet is overall
positive or negative and the tweet frequency are slightly better indicators of credit rating
levels than speciﬁc linguistic features contained in these tweets are.
Fifth, we conclude that the performance between models containing lagged and non-
lagged predictors in terms of AUC, accuracy and MAE is very similar. We believe this result
is primarily driven by the relatively infrequent changes in credit ratings, especially since we
are using panel data. Hence, the lagged and non-lagged predictors are likely to predict the
same credit rating level and therefore should perform equally.
Different stakeholders in the credit rating industry could make use of the results that
we have obtained. While the incremental improvement in model accuracy from the new
features is small, the increase in predictive accuracy is statistically signiﬁcant. Therefore, the
additional data could lead to a more robust and reliable credit rating prediction model that
credit rating agencies could use when developing a credit rating classiﬁcation.
Investors could use our results to get an idea of what a company’s future credit rating level
might look like and make investment decisions based on this, as even a small improvement
in accuracy could signiﬁcantly reduce the risk of major investment losses due to misjudg-
ing creditworthiness. For instance, a 2% improvement in prediction accuracy could prevent
signiﬁcant losses in high-risk sectors, where the cost of misclassifying a company’s credit-
worthiness is much higher, especially when making large investments in extensive portfolios.
However, since Twitter data needs to be acquired, the beneﬁts of adding these features should
be weighed against their cost. This evaluation is unique to each investor’s portfolio and strat-
egy, making it difﬁcult to generalize; nevertheless, a cost-beneﬁt analysis and sensitivity or
scenario analysis are essential to quantify the ﬁnancial impact of improved accuracy and
compare it to the cost of acquiring the data.
In addition to the credit rating industry and investors, the companies themselves could
be interested in our ﬁndings, since they could adjust their social media behavior in order to
receive a higher credit rating level. However, our results could also be of interest to other
researchers that use Twitter for ﬁnancial predictions, as we show that not only standard
methods, such as sentiment analysis, can be successfully used to create predictors within a
ﬁnancial context, but also other methods, such as DLA. Researchers could explore whether
DLA can be applied to tweets for the prediction of other dependent variables, such as stock
price changes or bankruptcy.
While this study provides insights into the predictive ability of Twitter data for corporate
credit ratings, the feature space used can be further extended by incorporating LLMs, which
could provide a more comprehensive understanding. Speciﬁcally, LLMs may be leveraged
in future research to generate credit rating speciﬁc intents from the tweets. These intents
can then be used as additional predictors in the model. Finally, it would be interesting to
investigate whether ﬁne-tuning an LLM using the credit rating level as the target output
could provide even better results.
Funding ThisworkwassupportedbytheEconomicandSocialResearchCouncil[grantnumberES/R500938/1].
Additionally, Raffaella Calabrese is grateful for ﬁnancial support from the Economic and Social Research
Council [grant number ES/W010259/1].
Data availability statement We cannot directly share the data, as the ﬁnancial data was acquired from Reﬁnitiv
and the Twitter data was obtained via Twitter’s ofﬁcial API and from the University of Pennsylvania’s Twitter
database.WhencollectingthedataviaTwittertherearedownloadingrestrictionswhenusingthefreeAPIwhich
is why the same data cannot be acquired without a subscription (https://developer.twitter.com/en/products/
twitter-api). To recreate the dataset that was used for this study, we suggest following the data collection
process as described in Section 4.1. The exact variable names of the ﬁnancial variables from Reﬁnitiv are
123

194
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
WC03151 (Working Capital), WC03495 (Retained Earnings), WC02999 (Total Assets), WC18191 (Earnings
before interest and taxes), WC03351 (Total liabilities) and Market value.
Declarations
Competing interests Jonathan Crook is a Guest Editor of the Special Issue of Annals of Operational Research
on Credit Risk Modelling Innovations in a Changing World. He is also currently working jointly with Professor
Galina Andreeva (also a Guest Editor) on several research projects. Raffaella Calabrese is working jointly
with Professor Christophe Mues on a research project, who is also a Guest Editor of the same Special Issue.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix
Word-clouds of the remaining credit rating level specifications
A
The signiﬁcant linguistic features (p < 0.05, Bonferroni p-corrected) for the binary depen-
dent variable “Credit Rating A or not” are displayed in Figure 5 and in Figure 6. The results
in Figure 5 and Figure 6 show again that the non-lagged and lagged word-clouds are nearly
identical. In Figure 5 we notice that some of the identiﬁed linguistic features directly relate to
companies (e.g. homedepot, unilever), which we will not consider when selecting appropriate
n-grams as predictors. The linguistic features we select in terms of frequency and correlation
strength (Approach 1) are “ingredients .” and “our hiring” for both lagged and non-lagged
data using tweets from the companies themselves. The linguistic features we select in terms
of frequency (Approach 2) are “support” and “world” for both lagged and non-lagged data.
A summary of the selected linguistic features is displayed in Table 8.
Using tweets about companies we select the n-grams “unlocked” and “record” for the
lagged and non-lagged tweets when considering the p-value and the frequency (Approach 1)
and “unlocked” and “purchase” when only considering the frequency (Approach 2), which
are also displayed in Table 8. We did not select “hollywood” even though it has a high
frequency, as this word relates to a speciﬁc industry. Other n-grams with lower p-values have
also not been selected, as they directly relate to a company (starbucks) or are not part of the
English language (ich, habe).
BBB
The linguistic features that are individually most correlated with credit rating level BBB are
displayed in Figure 7 and Figure 8 for the different sources of tweets. The largest number of
companies has credit rating level BBB which is why the dependent variable “BBB or not” is
more balanced as opposed to the other binary dependent variables.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
195
Fig. 5 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with A - From Companies
We notice that the word-clouds between the lagged and non-lagged tweets are again very
similar, but not as similar as in the previous word-clouds.
From Figure 7 we select the n-grams “code and” and “volunteered” from the non-lagged
word-cloud when considering the frequency and the p-value (Approach 1), as the n-grams
with lower p-values are either relating to companies (toledo), industries (rpm) or are simply
not sensible (nread). For similar reasons we select the n-grams “article:” and “job at” from
the lagged word-cloud.
When considering only the frequency (Approach 2) we select “efﬁciency” and “sustain-
ability” from the non-lagged word-cloud and “volunteers” and “education” from the lagged
word-cloud.
From Figure 8 containing signiﬁcantly correlated n-grams from tweets about companies
we select the most signiﬁcant n-grams “survival” and “you like it” from the non-lagged
and the lagged word-cloud. In terms of frequency we select “fucking” and “reporting” from
the non-lagged word-cloud and “reporting” and “you like” from the lagged word-cloud. A
summary of the selected linguistic features is displayed in Table 9.
123

196
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
hollywood
unlocked
purchase
, en
, en ,
en ,
necessary
election
name
#rt
why don't
per
we need to
in the uk
record
von
fe
short
omg
believes
comment
site
140
ms
prime
light
ich
get it
board
false
#8217t
& #8217t
men's
this week
age
listen
#8211
& #8211
starbucks
habe
beauty
color
limited
welcome to
happening
: & #8220
crime
#news
shut
mention
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
P−value
hollywood
unlocked
purchase
, en
, en ,
en ,
necessary
election
name
#rt
why don't
per
we need to
in the uk
record
von
fe
omg
believes
comment
site
140
ms
prime
light
the day
ich
get it
supporting
happens
^
board
false
men's
age
listen
#8211
& #8211
sports
starbucks
habe
fiction
beauty
limited
welcome to
happening
: & #8220
crime
#news
shut
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
P−value
Fig. 6 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with A - About Companies
BB
The results of DLA applied to the credit rating level “BB or not” are displayed in Figure 9
for the linguistic features from the data-set using tweets from the companies themselves and
in Figure 10 for the linguistic features from the data-set using tweets about the companies.
Similar to the other obtained word-clouds, there are n-grams contained in Figure 9 and
10 that directly relate to a company (e.g. americanair) or industry (e.g. pharmaceuticals). We
will disregard these n-grams in order to avoid a bias in our results. Additionally, we notice
again a high similarity between the lagged and non-lagged word-clouds, especially when
tweets about the companies are used.
The linguistic features we select in terms of p-value and frequency are displayed in Table
10.
For the non-lagged tweets from the companies themselves the linguistic features “automa-
tion ,” and “following !” have been selected in terms of p-value and frequency, and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
197
Table 8 Selected linguistic features for the dependent variable “A or not”
Approach
Twitter Data
Lag
N-gram
P-Value
Frequency
Approach
1
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
ingredients .
our hiring
1.121e-106
1.045e-78
772
501
Lagged
ingredients .
our hiring
1.545e-95
9.829e-80
772
501
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
unlocked
record
1.206e-45
1.917e-36
881
347
Lagged
unlocked
record
3.862e-41
5.125e-37
881
347
Approach
2
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
support
world
2.835e-02
2.835e-02
12194
10122
Lagged
support
world
6.284e-03
3.493e-02
12189
10119
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
unlocked
purchase
1.206e-45
7.885e-06
881
752
Lagged
unlocked
purchase
3.862e-41
8.198e-07
881
752
per
efficiency
sustainability
county
volunteers
common
#otd
#paper
restore
: thanks to
trinity
complex
volunteer
cheers !
coca−cola
ryder
nread
\ nread
#vets
rpm
#sustainable
ohio ,
, ohio ,
the company
cp
. so we
. ca
you heard
post !
letters
shareholders
zip code
cheers ! '
. cheers !
stores .
launching
dm your contact
code and
every day .
sorry you
toledo
. photo by
volunteered
jd
read more at
to restore power
and i will
cco
pls email
structures
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
P−value
education
volunteers
common
, united
#otd
#paper
trinity
cheers !
ryder
nread
\ nread
#vets
rpm
ohio ,
, ohio ,
the company
cp
you heard
post !
letters
shareholders
cheers ! '
. cheers !
stores .
dm your contact
code and
every day .
toledo
. photo by
volunteered
jd
and i will
cco
pls email
give you a
tiffany
of food
. et
#otd in
fishing
m . et
! cheers
the video and
us w
dig
annual report
article :
us w /
cents
job at
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
P−value
Fig. 7 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with BBB - From Companies
123

198
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
fucking
g
_
reporting
russia
mr
excellent
k .
israel
justice
disney
mr .
inch
changes
magic
platform
@usatoday
restore
foster
they were
daughter
rich
@target
& lt &
lt &
choose
#socialmedia
taxes
loves
respect
if we
featured
hoping
@fifthharmony
self
@bbcnews
h &
necklace
legacy
workers
lt & lt
rose
memory
expand
and his
stephen
grade
replacement
survival
you like it
0.01
0.02
0.03
P−value
_
#8212
& #8212
reporting
russia
laser
you like
political
excellent
israel
mystery
justice
changes
magic
platform
@usatoday
restore
foster
a man
daughter
rich
@target
& lt &
lt &
choose
see it
taxes
loves
a full
respect
if we
featured
hoping
@fifthharmony
self
@bbcnews
necklace
hire
workers
lt & lt
rose
memory
expand
stephen
drinking
faith
replacement
survival
you like it
dick
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
P−value
Fig. 8 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with BBB - About Companies
“employees” and “sales” in terms of frequency. For the lagged tweets from the companies
themselves we select “#payments” and “hiring:” and “employees” and “sales” respectively.
The linguistic features we select from Figure 10 are the following: We select “fools” and
“liars” from the non-lagged word-cloud and “liars” and “notiﬁcations” from the lagged word-
cloud when using Approach 1 for selection. Using Approach 2 we select “fake” and “wonder”
from the non-lagged word-cloud and “a follow” and “end” from the lagged word-cloud.
Below B
The word-clouds that we have obtained when correlating the linguistic features in tweets to
the credit rating level “Below B” are displayed in Figures 11 and 12. The credit rating group
“Below B” is our lowest credit rating group which relates to the most risky companies in our
sample. Again, the word-clouds of the lagged and non-lagged tweets are very similar, which
holds especially for the tweets from the companies themselves.
Figure 11 contains the 50 most frequent signiﬁcantly correlated n-grams that result from
applying DLA to the tweets from the companies themselves. The n-grams with the lowest
p-values that do not relate to a speciﬁc industry or company are “corporation (” and “nasdaq”
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
199
Table 9 Selected linguistic features for the dependent variable “BBB or not”
Approach
Twitter Data
Lag
N-gram
P-Value
Frequency
Approach
1
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
code and
volunteered
9.077e-07
9.866e-04
392
367
Lagged
article :
job at
2.540e-08
4.898e-07
307
300
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
survival
you like it
1.173e-14
2.465e-14
91
90
Lagged
survival
you like it
8.921e-11
2.321e-10
91
90
Approach
2
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
efﬁciency
sustainability
4.844e-02
4.423e-02
2085
2000
Lagged
education
volunteers
3.509e-02
3.453e-03
2252
1572
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
fucking
reporting
3.861e-02
8.724e-09
439
263
Lagged
reporting
you like
4.756e-06
3.037e-02
263
194
Table 10 Selected linguistic features for the dependent variables “BB or not”
Approach
Twitter Data
Lag
N-gram
P-Value
Frequency
Approach
1
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
following ! ’
automation ,
5.455e-40
1.162e-34
426
441
Lagged
#payments
hiring:
1.011e-21
1.178e-11
645
515
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
fools
liars
7.842e-53
3.901e-47
138
401
Lagged
liars
notiﬁcations
2.457e-48
4.602e-43
401
182
Approach
2
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
employees
sales
2.699e-02
2.573e-03
7107
3768
Lagged
employees
sales
4.744e-03
7.654e-04
7100
3760
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
wonder
fake
4.675e-02
1.847e-02
448
410
Lagged
a follow
end
6.495e-09
2.360e-02
762
479
for the non-lagged word-cloud and “corporation (” and “providers can” for the lagged word-
cloud. We do not select features such as “...http://t.co” as they do not have a real meaning.
Considering only the frequency, we select “proud" and “health", and “health" and “model"
for the non-lagged and lagged tweets respectively. We further notice the n-gram “proud”
which is displayed in the middle of the non-lagged word-cloud. Additional analyses showed,
that the n-gram “proud”, which is displayed in the middle of the non-lagged word-cloud, has
a negative β-coefﬁcient. This is sensible, as we would assume that words that are generally
perceived as positive are more likely to be correlated with less risky companies as opposed
to high risk companies.
123

200
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Fig. 9 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with BB - From Companies
An overview of the selected linguistic features, their p-values and frequencies is displayed
in Table 11.
From Figure 12 we select the n-grams “checked in with” and “work at” from the non-
lagged and lagged word-cloud, as these n-grams have the lowest p-value (Approach 1). We
did not select n-grams with low p-values that are very similar to “checked in with”, such as
“i just checked” as these could exist jointly, as for example in “i just checked in with”. Using
the second approach we select “my account” and “update” from the non-lagged word-cloud
and “download” and “verify” from the lagged word-cloud (see Table 11).
5.1 Test set bootstrap sample results
Table 12 and Table 13 present the average results from the 100 bootstrap samples of the
test set. The tables also include the p-values from the one-sided t-tests applied to the results.
These t-tests compare the performance of the models with Twitter features against the model
without Twitter features and the null hypothesis assumes that the models with Twitter features
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
201
i'll which
wonder
would be
fake
liars
original
books
party
send
michael
move
i wonder
account of
streaming
cuenta
cant
delayed
author
do not
gone
intern
proven
notifications
i was in
killing
thieves
subscriptions
check it out
: once
to read
@nba
das
model
released
allow
column
hacked
for our
ball
fools
@americanair
available to
likes
and other
mini
millions
i really
jack
mad
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
P−value
i'll a follow
sent
end
fake
liars
ago
what the
books
party
send
bag
michael
move
i wonder
account of
streaming
cuenta
cant
delayed
author
do not
security
was in
portrait
intern
proven
brazilian
notifications
check it
dies
cancelled
i was in
thieves
subscriptions
check it out
: once
according
to read
@nba
according to
win an
das
model
released
allow
column
hacked
for our
@americanair
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
P−value
Fig. 10 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with BB - About Companies
perform equal to or worse than the model without Twitter features29. Overall, the results in
Table 12 and Table 13 align with the results derived from the full test set in Table 5 and Table
7. While the exact numbers may vary due to different test sets, the overall pattern and size
of the differences between models are comparable.
5.2 Cost-Sensitive Loss Function for Credit Rating Prediction
To assess the practical relevance of Twitter-based features, we deﬁne a cost-sensitive loss
function that reﬂects the economic consequences of misclassifying credit ratings. Let:
• yi ∈R be the true credit rating of ﬁrm i, where R = {Above AA, A, . . . , Below B},
• ˆyi be the predicted rating for company i,
• pi be the dollar exposure to company i (e.g., portfolio weight),
• r(y) maps rating y to an ordinal scale (e.g., Above AA = 1, ..., Below B = 5),
• α be a scaling factor (e.g., cost of one-notch error per $1 of exposure),
29 We change the direction of the t-test when applying it to the MAE, as a lower MAE indicates better
performance.
123

202
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Fig. 11 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with Below B - From Companies
• λ be the ﬁxed cost of acquiring Twitter data.
We deﬁne the misclassiﬁcation cost as:
C(yi, ˆyi) =

0
if yi = ˆyi
α · |r(yi) −r( ˆyi)| otherwise
The total expected economic loss for a model is then:
L =
N

i=1
C(yi, ˆyi) · pi + λ
We deﬁne two losses:
Lbaseline =
N

i=1
C(yi, ˆybase
i
) · pi
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
203
Fig. 12 N-grams signiﬁcantly correlated with Below B - About Companies
LTwitter =
N

i=1
C(yi, ˆytwitter
i
) · pi + λ
The net beneﬁt of using Twitter data is:
L = Lbase −Ltwitter
If L > 0, the use of Twitter features leads to a reduction in expected economic loss
despite their cost.
Illustrative Example. To demonstrate the economic relevance of the observed accuracy
improvement, we consider a realistic credit portfolio of $1billion distributed across 1,000
ﬁrms, implying an exposure of $1,000,000 per ﬁrm.
Including Twitter-based features increases the model’s accuracy from 0.515 to 0.538 for
the non-lagged model using tweets from the companies themselves and the Twitter SM score
(see Table 5). This is an improvement of 2.3 percentage points. Applied to 1,000 ﬁrms, this
corresponds to approximately 23 additional correct rating predictions.
To translate this into economic terms, we interpret these as avoided misclassiﬁcations.
Under a conservative assumption in which all corrected errors correspond to one-notch dif-
123

204
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Table 11 Selected linguistic features for the dependent variables “Below B or not”
Approach
Twitter Data
Lag
N-gram
P-Value
Frequency
Approach
1
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
corporation (
nasdaq
5.411e-148
1.940e-59
1030
1010
Lagged
corporation (
providers can
4.951e-126
1.772e-43
381
689
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
checked in with
work at
1.125e-93
1.056e-60
157
150
Lagged
checked in with
work at
2.523e-91
4.166e-60
157
150
Approach
2
From
Companies
Non-Lagged
proud
health
1.517e-02
2.319e-02
8947
5376
Lagged
health
model
1.440e-02
1.579e-02
5375
2355
About
Companies
Non-Lagged
update
my account
1.022e-14
1.981e-34
463
251
Lagged
download
verify
3.043e-02
2.033e-02
709
620
ferences, the associated savings are:
23 · (0.01 · 1,000,000) = 230,000.
Subtracting an annual Twitter data cost of $100,000 yields a net beneﬁt of approximately
$130,000.
This example illustrates that even modest statistical improvements in rating accuracy can
generate economically meaningful gains when applied to large credit portfolios. In addition
to making the predicted value of a portfolio more accurate and thus revealing opportunities for
proﬁtable arbitrage and trading of the bond portfolios themselves, more accurate valuation,
of the magnitude we have exempliﬁed, may affect the valuation of the underlying company
whose bonds are being rated. These magnitudes could inﬂuence the likelihood of the company
being acquired, its ability to issue more bonds or obtain other types of ﬁnancing, and the
willingness of suppliers to sign supply contracts.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
205
Table 12 Average bootstrap results - The models that contain Twitter variables contain the tweet frequency and one of two different tweet sentiment scores
Data
Classiﬁer
Performance Measure
Without Twitter
With Twitter SM Score
With Twitter Finance Score
From Companies
Non-Lagged
AUC
0.793
0.809
P < 2.2e-16
0.813
P < 2.2e-16
Accuracy
0.521
0.547
P < 2.2e-16
0.531
P = 5.9e-14
MAE
0.587
0.538
P < 2.2e-16
0.565
P < 2.2e-16
Lagged
AUC
0.829
0.835
P < 2.2e-16
0.836
P < 2.2e-16
Accuracy
0.544
0.556
P < 3.454e-15
0.552
P = 1.909e-08
MAE
0.577
0.526
P < 2.2e-16
0.534
P < 2.2e-16
About Companies
Non-Lagged
AUC
0.813
0.826
P < 2.2e-16
0.831
P < 2.2e-16
Accuracy
0.540
0.550
P = 1.054e-15
0.547
P = 7.036e-09
MAE
0.590
0.556
P < 2.2e-16
0.555
P < 2.2e-16
Lagged
AUC
0.833
0.846
P < 2.2e-16
0.841
P < 2.2e-16
Accuracy
0.569
0.563
P = 1
0.552
P = 1
MAE
0.569
0.567
P < 0.05045
0.541
P < 2.2e-16
123

206
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
Table 13 Average bootstrap results - The models that contain Twitter variables contain the linguistic features selected according to Approach 1 or Approach 2
Data
Classiﬁer
Performance Measure
Without Twitter
Selected N-grams Approach 1
Selected N-grams Approach 2
From Companies
Non-Lagged
AUC
0.793
0.828
P < 2.2e-16
0.840
P < 2.2e-16
Accuracy
0.521
0.557
P < 2.2e-16
0.579
P < 2.2e-16
MAE
0.587
0.542
P < 2.2e-16
0.503
P < 2.2e-16
Lagged
AUC
0.829
0.835
P < 2.2e-16
0.836
P < 2.2e-16
Accuracy
0.544
0.567
P < 2.2e-16
0.581
P < 2.2e-16
MAE
0.577
0.526
P < 2.2e-16
0.534
P < 2.2e-16
About Companies
Non-Lagged
AUC
0.813
0.815
P = 4.416e-14
0.821
P < 2.2e-16
Accuracy
0.540
0.529
P = 1
0.545
P = 2.155e-09
MAE
0.590
0.599
P = 1
0.568
P < 2.2e-16
Lagged
AUC
0.833
0.838
P = 4.416e-14
0.843
P < 2.2e-16
Accuracy
0.569
0.565
P = 1
0.570
P = 0.02856
MAE
0.569
0.565
P = 2.686e-07
0.548
P < 2.2e-16
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
207
References
Allison, P. D. (1999). Comparing logit and probit coefﬁcients across groups. Sociological Methods and
Research, 28(2), 186–208.
Almamy, J., Aston, J., & Ngwa, L. N. (2016). An evaluation of altman’s z-score using cash ﬂow ratio to predict
corporate failure amid the recent ﬁnancial crisis: Evidence from the uk. Journal of Corporate Finance,
36, 278–285.
Altman, E. I. (1968). Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate bankruptcy. The
Journal of Finance, 23(4), 589–609.
Altman, E. I., Danovi, A., & Falini, A. (2013). Z-score models’ application to italian companies subject to
extraordinary administration. Corporate Finance: Capital Structure & Payout Policies eJournal.
Altman, E. I., & Rijken, H. A. (2004). How rating agencies achieve rating stability. Journal of Banking &
Finance,28(11), 2679–2714. Recent Research on Credit Ratings.
Amato, J., & Furﬁne, C. (2004). Are credit ratings procyclical? Journal of Banking & Finance, 28(11), 2641–
2677.
Beaver, W. H. (1966). Financial ratios as predictors of failure. Journal of Accounting Research, 4, 71–111.
Bellotti, T., Matousek, R., & Stewart, C. (2011). A note comparing support vector machines and ordered choice
models predictions of international banks ratings. Decision Support Systems, 51(3), 682–687.
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach
to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 57(1), 289–300.
Bernoth, K., & Erdogan, B. (2012). Sovereign bond yield spreads: A time-varying coefﬁcient approach. Journal
of International Money and Finance,31(3), 639–656. Financial Stress in the Eurozone.
Bharath, S.T., & Shumway, T. (2004). Forecasting default with the kmv-merton model. AFA 2006 Boston
Meetings Paper.
Blume, M. E., Lim, F., & Mackinlay, A. C. (1998). The declining credit quality of u.s. corporate debt: Myth
or reality? The Journal of Finance,53(4), 1389–1413.
Bollen, J., Mao, H., & Zeng, X. (2011). Twitter mood predicts the stock market. Journal of Computational
Science, 2(1), 1–8.
Bouma, G. (2009). Normalized (pointwise) mutual information in collocation extraction. Proceedings of the
Biennial GSCL Conference, 2009 Normalized, 31–40.
Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–32.
Bussotti, J.-F., & Papotti, P. (2025). Reﬁning attention for explainable and noise-robust fact-checking with
transformers. In Christodoulopoulos, C., Chakraborty, T., Rose, C., and Peng, V., editors, Proceedings
of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 25487–25499,
Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Cameron, M. P., Barrett, P., & Stewardson, B. (2016). Can social media predict election results? evidence from
new zealand. Journal of Political Marketing, 15(4), 416–432.
Cano-Marin, E., Mora-Cantallops, M., & Sanchez-Alonso, S. (2023). Twitter as a predictive system: A sys-
tematic literature review. Journal of Business Research,157, Article 113561.
Cecchini, M., Aytug, H., Koehler, G. J., & Pathak, P. (2010). Making words work: Using ﬁnancial text as a
predictor of ﬁnancial events. Decision Support Systems, 50(1), 164–175.
Church, K. W., & Hanks, P. (1990). Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicography. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 16(1), 22–29.
Dangl, T., & Halling, M. (2012). Predictive regressions with time-varying coefﬁcients. Journal of Financial
Economics, 106(1), 157–181.
Doumpos, M., Niklis, D., Zopounidis, C., & Andriosopoulos, K. (2015). Combining accounting data and a
structural model for predicting credit ratings: Empirical evidence from european listed ﬁrms. Journal of
Banking & Finance, 50, 599–607.
Fernández-Gavilanes, M., Álvarez-López, T., Juncal-Martínez, J., Costa-Montenegro, E., & González-
Castaño, F. J. (2016). Unsupervised method for sentiment analysis in online texts. Expert Systems with
Applications,58, 57–75.
Ferreira, J. A., & Zwinderman, A. H. (2006). On the benjamini-hochberg method. Annals of Statistics, 34(4),
1827–1849.
Figa-Talamanca, G., & Patacca, M. (2022). An explorative analysis of sentiment impact on s&p 500 compo-
nents returns, volatility and downside risk. Annals of Operations Research.
Friedl, M., & Brodley, C. (1997). Decision tree classiﬁcation of land cover from remotely sensed data. Remote
Sensing of Environment, 61(3), 399–409.
García, V., Marqués, A. I., and Sánchez, J. S. (2019). Exploring the synergetic effects of sample types on the
performance of ensembles for credit risk and corporate bankruptcy prediction. Information Fusion,47,
88–101.
123

208
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
González-Fernández, M., & González-Velasco, C. (2020). An alternative approach to predicting bank credit
risk in europe with google data. Finance Research Letters,35, Article 101281.
Hájek, P., & Michalak, K. (2013). Feature selection in corporate credit rating prediction. Knowledge-Based
Systems, 51, 72–84.
Hájek, P., & Olej, V. (2011). Credit rating modelling by kernel-based approaches with supervised and semi-
supervised learning. Neural Computing and Applications, 20, 761–773.
Hájek, P., Olej, V., & Procházka, O. (2017). Predicting corporate credit ratings using content analysis of
annual reports - a naive bayesian network approach. In S. Feuerriegel & D. Neumann (Eds.), Enterprise
Applications, Markets and Services in the Finance Industry (pp. 47–61). Cham. Springer International
Publishing.
Hand, D., & Till, R. (2001). A simple generalisation of the area under the roc curve for multiple class
classiﬁcation problems. Machine Learning, 45, 171–186.
Hernandez Tinoco, M., & Wilson, N. (2013). Financial distress and bankruptcy prediction among listed
companies using accounting, market and macroeconomic variables. International Review of Financial
Analysis, 30, 394–419.
Hillegeist, S., Keating, E., Cram, D., & Lundstedt, K. (2004). Assessing the probability of bankruptcy. Review
of Accounting Studies, 9, 5–34.
Hu, M., & Liu, B. (2004). Mining and summarizing customer reviews. In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’04, pages 168–
177, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Huang, Z., Chen, H., Hsu, C.-J., Chen, W.-H., & Wu, S. (2004). Credit rating analysis with support vector
machines and neural networks: a market comparative study. Decision Support Systems,37(4), 543–558.
Data mining for ﬁnancial decision making.
Hwang, R.-C., Cheng, K. F., & Lee, C.-F. (2009). On multiple-class prediction of issuer credit ratings. Applied
Stochastic Models in Business and Industry, 25(5), 535–550.
Hwang, R.-C., Chung, H., & Chu, C. (2010). Predicting issuer credit ratings using a semiparametric method.
Journal of Empirical Finance, 17(1), 120–137.
Jackson, R. H., & Wood, A. (2013). The performance of insolvency prediction and credit risk models in the
uk: A comparative study. The British Accounting Review, 45(3), 183–202.
Jones, S., Johnstone, D., & Wilson, R. (2015). An empirical evaluation of the performance of binary classiﬁers
in the prediction of credit ratings changes. Journal of Banking & Finance, 56, 72–85.
Jung, M. J., Naughton, J. P., Tahoun, A., & Wang, C. (2018). Do ﬁrms strategically disseminate? evidence
from corporate use of social media. The Accounting Review, 93(4), 225–252.
Kearney, C., & Liu, S. (2014). Textual sentiment in ﬁnance: A survey of methods and models. International
Review of Financial Analysis, 33, 171–185.
Kim, Y., & Sohn, S. Y. (2008). Random effects model for credit rating transitions. European Journal of
Operational Research, 184(2), 561–573.
Kolchyna, O., Souza, T. T. P., Treleaven, P., & Aste, T. (2015). Twitter Sentiment Analysis: Lexicon Method,
Machine Learning Method and Their Combination.
Kumar, K., & Bhattacharya, S. (2006). Artiﬁcial neural network vs linear discriminant analysis in credit ratings
forecast. Review of Accounting and Finance, 5(3), 216–227.
Lee, Y.-C. (2007). Application of support vector machines to corporate credit rating prediction. Expert Systems
with Applications, 33(1), 67–74.
Lerner, J., & Tirole, J. (2002). Some simple economics of open source. The Journal of Industrial Economics,
50(2), 197–234.
Liaw, A., & Wiener, M. (2002). Classiﬁcation and regression by randomforest. R News, 2(3), 18–22.
Liebmann, M., Orlov, A. G., & Neumann, D. (2016). The tone of ﬁnancial news and the perceptions of stock
and cds traders. International Review of Financial Analysis, 46, 159–175.
Liu, Y., Li, H., Guo, Y., Kong, C., Li, J., & Wang, S. (2022). Rethinking attention-model explainability through
faithfulness violation test.
Loughran, T., & Mcdonald, B. (2011). When is a liability not a liability? textual analysis, dictionaries, and
10-ks. The Journal of Finance, 66(1), 35–65.
Matthies, A. B. (2013). Empirical research on corporate credit-ratings: A literature review. SFB 649 Discussion
Paper 2013-003, Berlin.
Merton, R. C. (1974). On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates. The Journal of
Finance, 29(2), 449–470.
Nam, C., Kim, T., Park, N., & Lee, H. (2008). Bankruptcy prediction using a discrete-time duration model
incorporating temporal and macroeconomic dependencies. Journal of Forecasting, 27, 493–506.
Neely,M.,Schouten,S.F.,Bleeker,M.,&Lucic,A.(2022).Asongof(dis)agreement:Evaluatingtheevaluation
of explainable artiﬁcial intelligence in natural language processing.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 361:167–209
209
Niresh, J. A., & Pratheepan, T. (2015). The application of altman’s z-score model in predicting bankruptcy:
Evidence from the trading sector in sri lanka. Forecasting Models eJournal.
Ohlson, J. A. (1980). Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy. Journal of Accounting
Research, 18(1), 109–131.
Oliveira, N., Cortez, P., & Areal, N. (2013). Some experiments on modeling stock market behavior using
investor sentiment analysis and posting volume from twitter. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics, WIMS ’13, pages 31:1–31:8, New York, NY,
USA. ACM.
Pang, D., Eichstaedt, J., Buffone, A., Slaff, B., Ruch, W., & Ungar, L. (2019). The language of character
strengths: Predicting morally valued traits on social media. Journal of Personality, 88, 287–306.
Park, J. W., Nam, G., Tsang, A., & Lee, Y.-J. (2022). Firstborn ceos and credit ratings. The British Accounting
Review,54(4), Article 101083.
Putra, S. G. P. (2018). Sme credit scoring using social media data. Master’s thesis, Delft University of Tech-
nology, Delft, the Netherlands.
Qu, Y. (2008). Macro economic factors and probability of default. European Journal of Economics, Finance
and Administrative Sciences, 13, 192–215.
Ranco, G., Aleksovski, D., Caldarelli, G., Grcar, M., & Mozetic, I. (2015). The effects of twitter sentiment on
stock price returns. PLOS ONE, 10(9), 1–21.
Safavian, S. R., & Landgrebe, D. (1991). A survey of decision tree classiﬁer methodology. IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 21(3), 660–674.
Schmidt,C.W.(2012).Trendingnow:Usingsocialmediatopredictandtrackdiseaseoutbreaks. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 120(1), a30–a33.
Schwartz, H., Eichstaedt, J., Dziurzynski, L., Kern, M., Blanco, E., Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D., Seligman, M.,
& Ungar, L. (2013a). Toward personality insights from language exploration in social media. 2013 AAAI
Spring Symposium. Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Schwartz, H. A., Eichstaedt, J. C., Kern, M. L., Dziurzynski, L., Ramones, S. M., Agrawal, M., Shah, A.,
Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D., Seligman, M. E. P., & Ungar, L. H. (2013). Personality, gender, and age in
the language of social media: The open-vocabulary approach. PLOS ONE, 8(9), 1–16.
Schwartz, H. A., Giorgi, S., Sap, M., Crutchley, P., Ungar, L., & Eichstaedt, J. (2017). DLATK: Differential
language analysis ToolKit. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 55–60, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Si, J., Mukherjee, A., Liu, B., Li, Q., Li, H., & Deng, X. (2013). Exploiting topic based twitter sentiment
for stock prediction. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), pages 24–29. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Teplova, T., Kurkin, A., & Baklanova, V. (2023). Investor sentiment and the nft market: prediction and inter-
pretation of daily nft sales volume. Annals of Operations Research, pages 1–25.
Thissen, D., Steinberg, L., & Kuang, D. (2002). Quick and easy implementation of the benjamini-hochberg
procedure for controlling the false positive rate in multiple comparisons. Journal of Educational and
Behavioral Statistics, 27(1), 77–83.
Uddin, M. S., Chi, G., Al Janabi, M. A. M., & Habib, T. (2020). Leveraging random forest in micro-enterprises
credit risk modelling for accuracy and interpretability. International Journal of Finance & Economics,
n/a(n/a).
Wiegreffe, S., & Pinter, Y. (2019). Attention is not explanation. In Inui, K., Jiang, J., Ng, V., and Wan, X.,
editors, Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages
11–20, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yang, S., Liu, Z., & Wang, X. (2020). News sentiment, credit spreads, and information asymmetry. The North
American Journal of Economics and Finance,52, Article 101179.
Yuan, H., Lau, R. Y. K., Wong, M. C. S., & Li, C. (2018). Mining emotions of the public from social
media for enhancing corporate credit rating. In 2018 IEEE 15th International Conference on e-Business
Engineering (ICEBE), pages 25–30.
Zamani, M., Buffone, A., & Schwartz, H. A. (2018). Predicting human trustfulness from facebook language.
In Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From
Keyboard to Clinic, pages 174–181. ACM.
Zhao, Y., Shen, Y., & Huang, Y. (2019). Dmdp: A dynamic multi-source default probability prediction frame-
work. Data Science and Engineering,4, 3–13.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123