TITLE: Optimisation of annual payments to public hospitals accounting for quality, access, and efficiency
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06785-4
---

SPECIAL: OR IN MEDICINE/ED. LEE
Received: 2 February 2022 / Accepted: 21 July 2025 / Published online: 25 August 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Optimisation of annual payments to public hospitals 
accounting for quality, access, and efficiency
The Portuguese case
Cristina Folgado Pinto1 · Ana Sara Costa2,3
 · Diogo Cunha Ferreira2 · 
Miguel Alves Pereira2
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06785-4
Abstract
Since the creation of the Portuguese National Health Service (SNS, from the Portuguese 
abbreviation of Serviço Nacional de Saúde), it is the State’s responsibility to ensure the 
access of the population to quality healthcare, regardless of its economic and social condi­
tions. Efforts for attaining efficiency and reducing wastage, brought along by the succes­
sive reforms of the SNS, continue, as the 2009 financial crisis still lingers its effects on the 
social performance of the provided health services (now again affected by the COVID-19 
pandemic). Public hospitals in Portugal are paid following a prospective budget scheme. 
These contracts define the level of production for each hospital through the computation 
of unitary costs but do not include variables concerning the access to and quality of health 
services, which, ultimately, may lead to inefficiencies and misallocation of resources. This 
study proposes a framework that considers the quality, access, efficiency, and complexity 
of the Portuguese public hospitals in their payments through the optimisation of the uni­
tary costs established in the contracts, by testing and adapting a ‘best practices payment-
based’ tool. Significant cost savings of 64 million €  arose for the inpatient service of a 
relatively small sample of nineteen hospitals, showing high potential for cost containment 
while aiming for quality, access, and efficiency improvements.
Keywords  Payment optimisation · Quality · Access · Efficiency · Portuguese public 
hospitals
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
1  Introduction
In 1976, the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic was approved, stating that all its citi­
zens have the right to health protection and the duty to defend and promote it (Article 
64)1. For this right to be guaranteed, the country’s National Health Service (SNS, from the 
abbreviation of Serviço Nacional de Saúde) was created in 1979, having as a principle to be 
universal, broad, and tendentiously free of charge (Ferreira & Nunes, 2019; Baganha et al., 
2002). It is, then, the State’s responsibility to assure access to quality healthcare, regardless 
of the citizens’ socio-economic conditions2.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO, World Health Organization, 2020), 
governments’ health expenditure per capita has grown over the last two decades and Portu­
gal is not an exception. The increasing longevity and disease burden of the population and 
emerging health technologies have a significant weight on health expenditure and it is no 
surprise that the health system is struggling to cope with providing quality health coverage 
to all (Bhat, 2005; Baxter et al., 2015; Pereira & Camanho, 2024). Moreover, especially in 
these trying times, public revenue is decreasing due to the economic crisis, which could 
have a lingering impact on health spending, forcing many countries to take on additional 
debt in order to ensure the functioning of healthcare services. The combined health and 
economic shocks caused by the COVID-19 pandemic will have direct and indirect conse­
quences concerning health expenditure and stress the need for better allocation of already 
scarce financial resources (Pereira et al., 2022).
There are many types of health financial schemes (Organization for Economic Coopera­
tion and Development et al., 2017) implemented to guarantee a more efficient application of 
public resources by the healthcare providers (Boadway et al., 2004). In Portugal, since the 
New Public Management (NPM) reform, public hospitals are financed through prospective 
contracts negotiated between the State as the contracting entity, the respective Regional 
Health Administration, and the healthcare provider in question (Simões et al., 2017). This 
mechanism was implemented to adjust the estimated production to the healthcare needs of 
the population by establishing levels of production that guarantee the equity, effectiveness, 
and efficiency of the system and, at the same time, the financial sustainability of the SNS 
(Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde, 2013a; Pederneiras et al., 2023).
The contracting mechanisms defined by the Portuguese Central Administration of Health 
Systems (ACSS, from the Portuguese abbreviation of Administração Central do Sistema de 
Saúde), in the terms of reference for contractualisation (Administração Central do Sistema 
de Saúde, 2020), comprise three main sections: delivery of care, incentives, and penalties. 
The most important component of this scheme concerns the budget regarding hired services. 
For this calculation, Diagnosis-Related Groups (DRG) and the Case Mix Index (CMI) are 
used to obtain the values of the different activity lines of production under the categories of 
performed medical and surgical procedures (see Expression (1)). This covers the majority 
of the billed activity.
1 Diário da República Eletrónico, Decreto de Aprovação da Constituição, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​r​e​.​p​t​/​w​e​b​/​g​u​e​s​t​/​l​e​g​i​s​l​a​c​a​
o​-​c​o​n​s​o​l​i​d​a​d​a​/​-​/​l​c​/​3​3​7​/​2​0​2​1​0​3​2​6​2​0​2​4​/​7​3​9​3​8​5​8​8​/​d​i​p​l​o​m​a​/​i​n​d​i​c​e (accessed August 18, 2021)
2 Diário da República Eletrónico, Law 56/79, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​r​e​.​p​t​/​d​r​e​/​l​e​g​i​s​l​a​c​a​o​-​c​o​n​s​o​l​i​d​a​d​a​/​l​e​i​/​1​9​7​9​-​7​5​0​7​9​8​4​9 
(accessed August 18, 2021)
1 3
1306

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
 
Payment =
∑
DRG
Equivalent patients × CMI × Unitary cost
(1)
The unitary cost is computed by averaging the unitary costs of the most efficient hospitals 
belonging to the same group. The groups in question were defined by the ACSS in the 
contract for 2013 and established six hospital groups via hierarchical clustering for finan­
cial purposes (Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde, 2013a). The construction of 
these clusters involved twenty-two variables, mainly focused on production and efficiency 
(Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde, 2013b). Neither quality nor access variables 
were considered. This way, quality and access indicators are only considered for the funding 
scheme in the following areas: emergency services, incentives, and penalties. This means 
that the main component of a payment lacks these important dimensions, jeopardising the 
main goal of the SNS of providing high-quality care for its users. It is important to bear in 
mind that the objective of these contracts is to ensure the system’s financial sustainability, 
without disregarding equity in the access to and quality of the services provided to the 
population by imposing NPM’s principles of transparency and accountability (Pereira & 
Marques, 2022).
In spite of the fact that efficiency consists of performing an activity in the most economic 
way possible, being a ratio between outputs and inputs (Burches & Burches, 2020), when 
it comes to hospital efficiency, the concept gets more complex and demanding. As stated 
before, being this a sector of high social importance, a hospital must aim for a certain level 
of quality while, at the same time, achieving efficient production at the lowest possible cost 
(Chletsos & Saiti, 2019). Lowering the costs and maximising production can compromise 
access and quality if these dimensions are not being held into consideration, compromising 
the effectiveness of the care services provided, as seen in Portugal after the recession and the 
subsequently adopted austerity measures (Legido-Quigley et al., 2016). These cost-reducing 
policies not only affected equity on access but also impacted the health system negatively by 
limiting the investment in equipment and infrastructures, leading to constraints regarding 
the availability, efficiency, and quality of service provision (Nunes & Ferreira, 2019).
Although significant budgetary cuts and improvements in operational efficiency can be 
associated with a quality deterioration of the healthcare services (Singaroyan et al., 2006; 
Matranga & Sapienza, 2015), it has been shown that this is not an exclusive trade-off (as seen 
in the works of Nayar and Ozcan (2008); Chang et al. (2011); Navarro-Espigares and Torres 
(2011); Khushalani and Ozcan (2017), and Arocena and García-Prado (2007)). Moreover, 
regarding access, Ferreira and Marques (2019) have shown that hospitals can improve the 
access to healthcare services without compromising the technical efficiency of the provid­
ers. Taking this into consideration, it seems to be essential to direct our efforts towards the 
improvement of the access to and quality of of hospitals without sacrificing their efficiency, 
being the goal of attaining an equilibrium of these three factors apparently achievable. It is 
important to highlight that this is of extreme relevance for the citizens, who do not want to 
see their taxes being applied to low-quality services, especially when it concerns something 
so vital as their healthcare (Ferreira et al., 2018). This is further emphasised when that leads 
to misallocation and waste of resources (Ferreira & Marques, 2015), which is the case of 
1 3
1307

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Portugal, presenting a rate of reported unmet needs higher than the European Union’s (EU) 
average over the last few years.3
As shown by Ferreira et al. (2020b), given the gap presented in the computation of the 
annual payments concerning quality and access dimensions and the fact that public hos­
pitals are the largest source of costs regarding public health expenses (30.5% in 2019)4, 
contracts can be used to address the potential problems of poor allocation of resources 
and inefficiency. The inconsideration of these dimensions in the unitary costs can lead to 
low-quality providers being considered as benchmarks, consequently leading to unreason­
able payments and impacting the social and financial performance of the providers (Busse 
et al., 2019). Moreover, the currently employed concept of efficiency does not seem to be 
based on the Pareto optimality definition (Pardalos et al., 2008), potentially leading to inef­
ficient payments considering the hospitals’ purpose. To tackle this problem, Ferreira et al. 
(2020b) developed a tool to optimise payments for Portuguese public hospitals, considering 
efficiency, quality, complexity, and heterogeneity for the computation of the unitary costs.
This research aims to study and improve the allocation of resources through the optimisa­
tion of the unitary costs of the Portuguese public hospitals, testing and adapting the afore­
mentioned tool while resorting to a multi-criteria approach to include quality and access 
dimensions in the payments and a benchmarking model to compare and consider the effi­
ciency of the providers. This way, we propose a framework that seeks a better allocation of 
resources considering the efficiency, quality, access, and complexity of the public hospitals 
in order to ensure the sustainability of SNS and, simultaneously, improve its performance.
2  Literature review
Before addressing the proposed framework aimed at optimising the annual payments to the 
Portuguese public hospitals, it is important to provide some context on the SNS (see Sect. 
2.1), discuss the existing literature regarding payment mechanisms for hospital funding (see 
Sect. 2.2), and detail the concepts of quality and access in healthcare as well as the most 
commonly used indicators to measure them (see Sect. 2.3).
2.1  The Portuguese National Health Service
The SNS is a complex structure, tax-financed and with decentralised management, that has 
suffered several reforms since its creation (Varela, 2019). These successive reforms aimed 
to optimise resource allocation, tackle health inequalities, and improve access to healthcare 
services. In 2002, motivated by the search for the SNS’s financial sustainability, a reform 
known as NPM was initiated. Its new measures allowed higher autonomy, mainly through 
new payment schemes introduced by means of contracts. Although the main objective was 
promoting efficiency and reducing costs with public health, the opposite occurred, with a 
3 Eurostat, ‘Self-reported unmet need for medical care by sex’, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​e​c​.​e​u​r​o​p​a​.​e​u​/​e​u​r​o​s​t​a​t​/​d​a​t​a​b​r​o​w​s​e​r​/​v​i​e​
w​/​t​e​s​p​m​1​1​0​/​d​e​f​a​u​l​t​/​b​a​r​?​l​a​n​g​=​e​n (accessed December 05, 2021)
4 Instituto Nacional de Estatística, ‘Conta Satélite da Saúde 2020’, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​i​n​e​.​p​t​/​x​p​o​r​t​a​l​/​x​m​a​i​n​?​x​p​i​
d​=​I​N​E​&​x​p​g​i​d​=​i​n​e​_​d​e​s​t​a​q​u​e​s​&​D​E​S​T​A​Q​U​E​S​d​e​s​t​_​b​o​u​i​=​4​7​3​1​3​8​4​0​5​&​D​E​S​T​A​Q​U​E​S​m​o​d​o​=​2 
(accessed 
December 01, 2021)
1 3
1308

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
considerable increase in public expenditure with healthcare of 39.1% from 2002 to 2010 
(Nunes & Ferreira, 2019).
It was possible to observe a steady rise in the total health expenditure in Portugal from 
7.5% to 10.4% of the gross domestic product (GDP) from 1995 to 2010, above the EU 
average of 9.8% of the GDP for 2010. Unfortunately, the economic recession and the con­
sequently implemented austerity measures seeking financial recovery led to the decrease 
of the amounts spent on healthcare in absolute and relative terms in the following years 
(Simões et al., 2017). This led to a significant downfall of self-reported access to healthcare, 
mostly in those who were not exempt from increased co-payments (Legido-Quigley et al., 
2016).
Furthermore, the post-austerity period was marked by the implementation of several 
recovery policies, aimed at improving access and efficiency while decreasing waiting lists 
and promoting better management of providers. There have been some improvements since 
2015 (Nunes & Ferreira, 2019), noticing an increase in healthcare spending following 2017. 
Nevertheless, it was still below the EU average and Portugal has been showing increasingly 
high out-of-pocket (OOP) spending (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Devel­
opment/European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies, 2019). This raises equity 
concerns, being estimated that about 8.1% of the households in Portugal have suffered from 
catastrophic health spending in 2016 and now 10.2% for 2020 (Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development, 2021). This leads the poorest segment of the population to 
face serious obstacles in terms of access to healthcare services and, consequently, to forego 
necessary treatments, colliding with the goal Portugal committed to in 1979.
This scenario of increasing public debt and cost containment was aggravated by the 
recent and ongoing health crisis since, even before 2020, global public debt had increased 
drastically to almost 60% of the GDP by 2019. It is an unsettling situation, as most countries 
entered the COVID-19 pandemic in a weaker position than they were in the 2009 financial 
crisis and their response had to be taking on additional debt. The increasing reliance on debt 
will bring long-term liabilities and seriously limit the budget for the health sector, increasing 
the need for efficient allocation of the available financial resources (World Health Organiza­
tion, 2020).
2.2  Payment mechanisms for hospital funding
There are several payment mechanisms created to impact hospital behaviour regarding its 
social performance and the efficient use of resources. This way, outcomes are a direct result 
of the implemented payment scheme (Dudley et al., 1998; Conrad & Christianson, 2004). 
However, traditional payment methods for healthcare do not seem to promote quality, such 
as salary, fee-for-service (FFS), bundled payments, and capitation (World Health Organiza­
tion, 2014). Hence, a growing number of new provider payments are emerging, with add-
ons to traditional methods, such as pay-for-performance (P4P) programmes (Kahn, 2011). 
These programs encourage hospitals to pay attention to a broad array of factors they are not 
used to address, rewarding them based on their performance through process, quality, and 
efficiency measures. The effects of P4P schemes are generally positive on quality-related 
processes but do not necessarily improve health outcomes. However, they can generate 
system-wide benefits, such as introducing better data collection or leading to more informed 
dialogues between purchasers and providers. These have been shown to improve quality and 
1 3
1309

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
cost savings in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) coun­
tries where they were implemented (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop­
ment, 2016).
From Table 1, on the one hand, it is clear that global budgets allow better expenditure 
control and an increase in management flexibility, but they do not guarantee the quality and 
efficiency of the delivered services; on the other hand, the inclusion of add-on schemes (e.g., 
P4P mechanisms) has shown to reduce the quality risk associated with the implemented 
payment system and improve the quality of care (Zhou et al., 2021; Meacock et al., 2014) 
even if they only result in moderate short-term improvements - not necessarily attributed to 
the programmes, but possibly to the side effects, such as public reporting and data record­
ing. Nevertheless, as shown by Milstein and Schreyoegg (2016) in their review of 34 P4P 
schemes implemented for the inpatient service in 14 OECD countries, it is necessary to bear 
in mind that the impact of P4P programmes is still unclear and policymakers should intro­
duce them in concordance with the national context at hand.
As seen above, Portuguese public hospitals are paid with global budgets based on DRGs 
(World Health Organization, 2018) through prospective contracts in which the inclusion 
of quality and access is mainly limited to a relatively small scheme of incentives. Bench­
marking techniques are implemented for gross production, disregarding social performance 
dimensions and making the concept of efficiency unclear or, at least, not based on the defi­
nition of Pareto optimality (Pardalos et al., 2008). The inclusion of a framework that con­
siders quality and access while improving efficiency in the global budget scheme, which 
already aims for cost control and rationing, is not only crucial but can also tackle the lack­
ing dimensions in such a payment method - P4P mechanisms can be used for this purpose. 
As mentioned by Berenson et al. (2016), “Mixed approaches can include some element of 
P4P based on achievement of a few high-level performance targets, such as reductions in 
the average length of stay, readmissions, hospital-acquired conditions, and patient safety 
measures, to ensure providers do not simply reduce quality and access to adhere to their 
budgets.” The framework proposed here takes into account a P4P programme focused on 
the access to and quality of healthcare services to establish benchmarks of efficiency and 
generate the best allocation scheme for the State, providers, and citizens.
2.3  Quality and access in healthcare
Defining quality of care has been a research ordeal for many years. Despite the vast litera­
ture base and the universal acknowledgement of its extreme importance to health systems, it 
remains a complex concept, not having a consensual definition among different authors but 
else presenting multiple dimensions of the domain (Busse et al., 2019; Donabedian, 1983; 
Arah et al., 2006). This allows the escape from the straightforward generic definitions, which 
are difficult to operationalise since they do not take into account the multiple and complex 
dimensions of the concept that allow for performance evaluation when put together. With 
this in mind, many national and international projects of indicators for assessing quality 
and access in healthcare followed disaggregated approaches (defining these according to 
individual components), each providing a partial picture of the concept when viewed on its 
own, but delivering a more specific and profound notion when combined (Campbell et al., 
2000; Groene et al., 2008).
1 3
1310

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Author(s) 
(Year)
Title
Conclusions
Organiza­
tion for 
Economic 
Coopera­
tion and De­
velopment 
(2016)
Better Ways to 
Pay for Health 
Care
Decreases the number of cases and 
services
per case. Allows for better expendi­
ture control.
It is neutral or unclear regarding 
technical
efficiency and quality. It is 
advantageous
regarding cost control and low 
transaction costs.
Presents disadvantages related with 
rationing of
services and increased waiting time, 
possible
skimping of care (fewer visits per 
patient and less
activity per patient) and possibly less
transparency in budget allocation
Conselho 
das Finan­
ças Públicas 
(2019)
Contratualiza­
ção com as
Empresas 
Públicas 
Prestadoras
de Cuidados de 
Saúde
Increases the flexibility in manage­
ment. Promotes
rationing of services. Decreases the 
number of cases
and services provided by case. Al­
lows for better cost
control. Expects no improvements 
in quality
and technical efficiency
Luca et al. 
(2019)
Price Setting 
and Price 
Regulation
in Health Care: 
Lessons for
Advancing 
Univer­
sal Health 
Coverage
Decreases the number of cases and 
services. Allows
for better expenditure control. Cre­
ates more
administrative ease and less trans­
parency. It is
unclear regarding the promotion of 
efficiency and
quality
Guan et al. 
(2020)
The impact of 
global budget 
on
expenditure, 
service volume, 
and
quality of care 
among patients 
with
pneumonia in 
a secondary 
hospital
in China: a 
retrospective 
study
Compared with FFS, it can control 
health
expenditure and improve the quality 
of care.
Decreases the service volume,
length of stay, and monthly 
admissions.
Proposes that the quality of care is
included in evaluations of the global 
budget
Table 1  Systematisation of find­
ings from the literature on global 
budgets in healthcare financing 
schemes
 
1 3
1311

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
In Portugal, performance evaluation in the healthcare sector was implemented fol­
lowing the Memorandum of Understanding, when, in 2013, the ACSS published its first 
benchmarking analysis report, aiming to evaluate hospital performance in the main areas 
of activity, identify the potential for improvement and the best practices among providers, 
and which programmes to launch in order to improve the system,5 published together with 
monthly reports in a benchmarking platform.6
As seen above, there is a tremendous amount of indicators to measure quality and access 
in healthcare in the literature. This way, a literature review on similar research as this one 
was conducted to assess which clinical indicators, matching the ones available for the Por­
tuguese hospitals in the ACSS database, and select the most used ones by experts (in Appen­
dix A). These will be later used for selecting the indicators for the multi-criteria component 
of the proposed framework (see Table 2).
3  Framework
This section covers the framework designed to optimise the unitary costs of public hospi­
tals in Portugal, considering quality, access, efficiency, and complexity dimensions. First, 
a categorisation of the hospitals in terms of quality and access is performed, to constrain 
our set of providers to the ones with acceptable levels of social performance (see Sect. 
5 Benchmarking ACSS, ‘Objetivos’, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​b​e​n​c​h​m​a​r​k​i​n​g​-​a​c​s​s​.​m​i​n​-​s​a​u​d​e​.​p​t​/​B​H​_​E​n​q​u​a​d​r​a​m​e​n​t​o​/​O​b​j​e​t​i​v​o​
s (accessed July 07, 2021)
6 Benchmarking ACSS, ‘Benchmarking hospitais’, https://benchmarking-acss.min-saude.pt/ (accessed July 
07, 2021)
Indicator
Fre­
quen­
cy 
(%)
Inpatient per full-time equivalent (FTE) doctor
50
Percentage of readmissions within 30 days after discharge
50
Occupancy rate
50
Postoperative septicaemia rate per 100 000 inhabitants
40
Postoperative pulmonary embolism/deep vein thrombosis 
rate per 100 000 inhabitants
40
Rate of inpatients staying more than 30 days
35
Percentage of hip surgeries in the first 48 h after fracture
35
Percentage of first non-urgent medical appointments within 
the maximum (legislated) guaranteed time
35
Percentage of caesarean deliveries
35
Outpatient surgeries on potential outpatient procedures
35
Average length of stay
30
Pressure ulcer / Decubitus ulcer rate / Number of bedsores 
per 100 inpatients
30
Ratio of vaginal births with 3rd and 4th degree lacerations 
(with or without instrumentation)
30
Average waiting time before surgery (in days)
25
Catheter-related bloodstream infections rate
25
Table 2  Selection of the most 
commonly used clinical indica­
tors in the literature that are 
simultaneously available in the 
ACSS database
 
1 3
1312

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
3.1). Afterwards, and using that subset, a benchmarking model is applied to compare and 
determine the relative efficiency of the providers (see Sect. 3.2). Lastly, the unitary costs 
are then determined for the hospitals of the aforementioned subset using the computed effi­
ciency scores and adapting the best practices payment-based tool developed by Ferreira et 
al. (2020b), calculating also the cost savings for each hospital of the subset to better analyse 
resource allocation (see Sect. 3.3).
3.1  Quality and access categorisation
The healthcare sector is one of the growing trends of multi-criteria decision analysis 
(MCDA) application over the last years (Frazão et al., 2018; Hansen & Devlin, 2019; Diaby 
et al., 2013) due to the fact that most decisions in this sector imply dealing with trade-offs 
regarding multiple, often conflicting, criteria, normally subjected to constraints, in order to 
rank or choose between alternatives. These techniques involve not only technical or eco­
nomic issues but also the human factor, with decisions such as choosing which health tech­
nologies to apply to a patient or where to allocate the available financial resources, seeking 
to improve the performance of the health services and public health in general. Thus, in 
this work, MCDA is applied to obtain a categorisation of the Portuguese public hospitals in 
terms of quality and access. Such methods take into consideration the reality of decision-
making, using science to guide complex decision-making processes by resorting to organ­
ised systems and considering the several involved actors - the decision-makers (DMs) (Roy, 
1999). In this framework, the Electre Tri-C (Electre stands for ELimination Et Choix 
Traduisant la REalité - ELimination and Choice Expressing the Reality -, Tri is read as 
‘Tree’, and C represents the “central” categories) method was the selected MCDA approach 
since it allows attributing each public hospital to one or more performance categories.
Within the family of Electre methods, it is possible to find different features and char­
acteristics among them, which one can resort to to deal with choice, ranking, and sorting 
MCDA problems (Greco et al., 2016; Figueira et al., 2013). As mentioned above, the one 
used in this framework is the Electre Tri-C method, which is a sorting method fit for deal­
ing with decision-aiding contexts where the categories are completely ordered and each of 
them is defined through a single characteristic reference action. For the assignment proce­
dure, the method makes use of two joint assignment rules - ascending and descending rules 
- resulting in a range of categories for each action to be assigned.
Let A = {a1, a2, ..., ai, ..., am} denote the set of m potential actions, which can be 
fully or partially known a priori. Each one of these actions will be assigned to a set of 
completely ordered categories, denoted by C = {C1, ..., Ch, ..., Cq}, with q ⩾2. For this 
assignment procedure, it is necessary to evaluate the actions in terms of a coherent fam­
ily of n criteria, denoted by F = {g1, ..., gj, ..., gn}, with n ⩾3. The performance of the 
action ai on criteria gj is denoted by gj(ai) and it is assumed that the higher the perfor­
mance, the larger the increase of preference, i.e., all criteria gj ∈ai are to be maximised. Let 
B = {B1, ..., Bh, ..., Bq} denote the set of reference actions which define the categories. 
The subset Bh = {br
h, r = 1, ..., mh} represents the reference actions used to characterise 
the category Ch, such that mh ⩾1 and h = 1, ..., q. The sets A, F, C, and B presented here 
contain the basic data to be considered when applying the Electre Tri-C method to an 
ordinal classification problem (Almeida-Dias et al., 2010). Additionally, we also need to 
consider the preference threshold, pj and the indifference threshold, qj, implemented to 
1 3
1313

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
model the imperfect character of the data, as well as the arbitrariness affecting the definition 
of the criteria. Veto thresholds, vj, can be used to increase the veto power of certain criteria 
and reinforce the non-compensatory character of the method. Then, binary relations are 
derived for each criterion. Preferences in Electre methods are modelled by building one 
or several of these binary outranking relations (Greco et al., 2016; Figueira et al., 2013). 
Moreover, a credibility index, λ, is considered to reflect the strength of the outranking rela­
tions, when considering all criteria from F. After constructing the outranking relations, the 
two proposed joint rules of the Electre Tri-C method are used to attribute each action to 
one or an interval of categories. These are the ascending and descending rules, which should 
be used conjointly and make use of a selecting function, ρ(a, Bh). In this procedure, each 
action is compared to the reference actions Bh, taking into consideration the credibility 
level, λ, and using the selecting function for the choice of one of two consecutive categories 
to be assigned to the action in question when using the two joint rules. It is clear that each 
rule attributes one possible category to each action. Nevertheless, since the two rules are 
used conjointly, the result of the assignment procedure can be an interval of categories for 
each action. Lastly, for this attribution, the relative importance of each criterion is taken into 
consideration resorting to criteria weights, obtained through the Simos-Roy-Figueira (SRF) 
procedure, further explained in Appendix 3.1.6.
In this study, the DM is a former advisor of the Portuguese Minister of Health, with 
a doctoral degree in Health Administration and a teaching position in policy-making and 
management in this area. The DM accompanied the selection of actions, categories, crite­
ria, and thresholds, as well as the construction of reference actions and the application of 
the weighting procedure for the ten selected criteria presented below. Data regarding qual­
ity and access criteria for each hospital considered in the study was obtained through the 
ACSS database [6]. The years 2018 to 2020 were chosen as the time interval. The objects 
of our study are the Portuguese public hospitals with a Corporate Public Entity (EPE, from 
the Portuguese abbreviation of Entidade Pública Empresarial) statute. Nevertheless, the 
list of hospitals was scrutinised in order to avoid the introduction of significant error, thus 
considering twenty-eight hospitals as further explained below. This set of hospitals will be 
categorised in one or more of five categories regarding quality and access: Very poor (C1), 
Poor (C2), Neutral (C3), Good (C4), and Very good (C5).
To assess the performance of each action a per criterion g, it is necessary to first establish 
the set of all possible performances that an action a can have on a criterion g (reference 
actions). It is important to mention that every selected criterion has a quantitative nature. 
Each criterion is composed of a scale, a preference direction, a weight, a preference, an 
indifference threshold, and, in some cases, a veto threshold. The construction of the multi-
criteria model and all of these parameters mentioned will be addressed in the following 
subsubsections.
3.1.1  Action set
The objects of our study, as previously mentioned, are the Portuguese public hospitals with 
the EPE statute, included in our model as actions. Nevertheless, not all public hospitals 
could be considered for this study, since the list of hospitals had to be scrutinised in order to 
avoid the introduction of significant error. With this in mind, the institutions excluded from 
the sample and the reasons for their exclusion are presented below:
1 3
1314

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
 
●
All public-private partnerships (PPPs) and Local Health Units, since their payment 
scheme differs from EPEs’ one (Pereira et al., 2021c; Amado et al., 2022) and, therefore, 
lie outside the scope of this study;
 
●
All oncology centres, as well as the Magalhães Lemos Hospital, the Centro Rovisco 
Pais Regional Reabilitation Center, the Arcebispo João Crisóstomo Hospital, the Dr. 
Francisco Zagalo Hospital, the Lisbon Psychiatric Hospital Center, and the Gama 
Pinto Institute (all specialised health institutions), since they have specific production 
technologies and their payment scheme contemplates different parameters;
 
●
Braga’s Hospital, since it only became an EPE in 2019;
 
●
Alto Ave Hospital Center, since it was rebranded as Senhora da Oliveira, Guimarães 
Hospital in 2015, which was considered in the model.
Bearing in mind the excluded institutions presented above, twenty-eight actions were 
selected and are presented in Table 3.
Action
Hospital
a1
Figueira da Foz District Hospital
a2
Santa Maria Maior Hospital
a3
Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital Centre
a4
Oeste Hospital Centre
a5
Médio Ave Hospital Centre
a6
Entre Douro e Vouga Hospital Centre
a7
Tâmega e Sousa Hospital Centre
a8
Senhora da Oliveira, Guimarães Hospital
a9
Baixo Vouga Hospital Centre
a10
Santarém District Hospital
a11
Cova da Beira University Hospital Centre
a12
Setúbal Hospital Centre
a13
Barreiro/Montijo Hospital Centre
a14
Médio Tejo Hospital Centre
a15
Leiria Hospital Centre
a16
Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho Hospital Centre
a17
Fernando Fonseca Hospital
a18
Garcia de Orta Hospital
a19
Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital
a20
Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro Hospital Centre
a21
Algarve University Hospital Centre
a22
Tondela-Viseu Hospital Centre
a23
Porto University Hospital Centre
a24
Lisboa Norte University Hospital Centre
a25
São João University Hospital Centre
a26
Lisboa Central University Hospital Centre
a27
Lisboa Ocidental University Hospital Centre
a28
Coimbra University Hospital Centre
Table 3  Portuguese public hospi­
tals selected as actions
 
1 3
1315

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
3.1.2  Criteria tree
The indicators selected in the literature review were presented to the DM in order to choose 
the most relevant ones and their corresponding direction of preference, thus obtaining the 
criteria tree of the ten criteria presented in Table 4.
3.1.3  Reference actions
In order to define what is considered to be a performance characteristic of each category in 
a certain criterion, one correspondent reference action for each category was defined by the 
DM. The characteristic reference actions are presented in Table 5.
3.1.4  Preference, indifference, and veto thresholds
Thresholds play a fundamental role in attenuating the imperfect knowledge of data and the 
arbitrariness of the defined criteria. This way, preference (pj) and indifference (qj) thresh­
olds were defined for each criterion. More specifically, veto thresholds (vj) were used to 
reduce compensatory effects and were defined in our study for specific criteria. The quanti­
tative nature of the criteria scales was taken into account in the definition of the thresholds 
(see Table 6).
Table 5  Reference actions per criterion and category
Reference action
Category
g1
g2
g3
g4
g5
g6
g7
g8
g9
g10
b1
Very poor (C1)
60
12
67
50
1000
300
75
0.0030
4.0
1.00
b2
Poor (C2)
70
10
75
55
750
200
80
0.0020
3.0
0.66
b3
Neutral (C3)
75
8
80
62
500
150
85
0.0015
2.0
0.50
b4
Good (C4)
85
7
85
70
300
100
90
0.0010
1.5
0.33
b5
Very good (C5)
100
6
90
75
200
50
100
0.0000
1.0
0.25
Indicator
Direction
Inpatient per FTE doctor (g1)
Minimise
Percentage of readmissions within 30 days after discharge 
(g2)
Minimise
Percentage of first non-urgent medical appointments 
within the maximum (legislated) guaranteed time (g3)
Maxi­
mise
Outpatient surgeries on potential outpatient procedures 
(g4)
Maxi­
mise
Postoperative septicaemia rate per 100 000 inhabitants 
(g5)
Minimise
Postoperative pulmonary embolism/deep vein thrombosis 
rate per 100 000 inhabitants (g6)
Minimise
Percentage of hip surgeries in the first 48 h after fracture 
(g7)
Maxi­
mise
Pressure ulcer rate / Decubitus ulcer rate / Number of 
bedsores per 100 inpatients (g8)
Minimise
Rate of inpatients staying more than 30 days (g9)
Minimise
Average waiting time before surgery (in days) (g10)
Minimise
Table 4  Indicators of the pro­
posed framework and respective 
directions of preference
 
1 3
1316

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
3.1.5  Credibility index
The credibility index (denoted as λ) can be interpreted as representing the required majority 
for establishing an outranking relation. The DM was inquired about this parameter using the 
following eliciting question from Dias and Mousseau (2018): “How strong must the major­
ity of the criteria that agree that a is at least as good as the lower profile of a category be, 
taking criteria weights into account, to warrant that an alternative can be sorted on that 
category, if not better? (in the absence of strong discordance)”. This way, a higher cutting 
level makes it more difficult for the alternatives to be classified in the best categories and 
vice-versa. Having this and our criteria set in consideration, the DM choose a credibility 
index of λ = 0.60.
3.1.6  Criteria weighting
To take into account the preferences of the DM regarding the importance of each criterion 
in the framework, it is necessary to resort to a weighting method. Simos (1990) proposed 
a procedure that allows for a numerical value to be attributed to the weights of a family of 
criteria used in Electre methods. Figueira and Roy later revised Simos’ procedure, creat­
ing the SRF procedure for intrinsic weights (Figueira & Roy, 2002). As stated by Figueira 
et al. (2010), the weight of a criterion can be presented as “the notion of more or less big 
importance between two criteria that makes natural sense in the head of the decision mak­
ers”. This procedure is supported by its own software and allows the collection, straight­
forwardly, of the different data sets and the quick processing of the information. It works by 
using a ‘deck of cards’ comprising the following steps: 
1. A set of cards is given to the DM, one for each criterion;
2. The DM is asked to order these cards, from the most to the least important, creating 
a hierarchy of the criteria. In the case some criteria are considered to have the same 
importance, they are grouped;
3. Afterwards, blank cards are given to the DM, who is then asked to place them between 
the successive criteria cards according to the difference in the importance they present. 
One blank card placed between two criteria represents a difference in the importance of 
two units, two blank cards represent three units, and so on. Placing no blank card means 
the difference in the importance of two consecutive criteria is of one unit. The DM can 
introduce as many cards as they consider fit;
4. Lastly, the DM is asked how many times they consider the last criterion to be more 
important than the first one. This allows the attainment of the ratio-z parameter (Figueira 
& Roy, 2002).
Table 6  Preference, indifference, and veto thresholds per criterion
Threshold
g1
g2
g3
g4
g5
g6
g7
g8
g9
g10
Indifference (qj)
2
1
2
2
20
5
2
0.0001
0.30
0.01
Preference (pj)
4
2
4
4
50
10
4
0.0002
0.50
0.02
Veto (vj)
–
4
–
–
–
–
–
–
2
0.5
1 3
1317

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
After this interactive phase, the calculations are performed using the DecSpace platform7 - a 
website where it is possible to compute the SRF procedure. A ‘DCM-SRF’ project is cre­
ated on this page with the information obtained with the DM, by applying the procedure 
described above. The user of the software can choose the number of decimal places (zero, 
one, or two) and weight type (normalised and/or non-normalised).
Hence, in our proposal, the SRF procedure was applied to obtain the numerical weights 
for the criteria, in co-operation with the DM. First, the DM ordered the criteria, starting with 
the access criteria as the most important ones, using the rationale that it is impossible to have 
quality healthcare without first being granted access to it. Criterion g3 (Percentage of first 
non-urgent medical appointments within the maximum (legislated) guaranteed time) con­
jointly with g9 (Rate of inpatients staying more than 30 days) were ranked first since these 
are the criteria that involve the biggest volume of patients. Criterion g10 (Average waiting 
before surgery (in days)) was ranked after, being the volume of patients a little lower. This 
was followed by criterion g1 (Inpatient per FTE doctor) and then g2 (Percentage of read­
missions within 30 days after discharge), since the number of doctors the hospital has avail­
able to treat its patients highly influences the level of care and could have, as a consequence, 
less dedication to each patient if this criterion is high, leading to more readmissions and, so, 
justifying the need to be placed first. After these five access criteria, the DM placed g4 (Out­
patient surgeries on potential outpatient procedures) since outpatient surgeries reduce the 
risk of septicaemia, pulmonary embolism, infections, and other complications (represented 
in the remaining criteria), compared with inpatient surgeries that also present higher wait­
ing time for surgery. Lastly, the DM ranked criterion g7 (Percentage of hip surgeries in the 
first 48 h after fracture) and ended the ranking with criterion g5 (Postoperative septicaemia 
rate per 100 000 inhabitants), g6 (Postoperative pulmonary embolism/deep vein thrombosis 
rate per 100 000 inhabitants), and g8 (Pressure ulcer rate / Decubitus ulcer rate / Number 
of bedsores per 100 inpatients) at the same level, being these more rare and presenting very 
low values. Also, both postoperative criteria are per inhabitant and not per inpatient, which 
constitutes a limitation of the study since it is common for patients to be sent to hospitals far 
from their residence for surgery and to be sent to their residence hospital for complications 
and infections that occur later related with the initial surgery they had at the first hospital. 
This way, these cases will count to the criterion of the hospital of their residential area and 
not for the one where they had the procedure that led to the infection or complication.
With all this information, it was possible to obtain the weights for the criteria set (Table 
7). For this, a DCM-SRF project was created in DecSpace and computed, using the criteria 
ranking and the added blank cards presented in Table 8 and the ratio-z defined by the DM, 
who gave the value of 10 for this difference in the importance from the criterion considered 
to be the most important to the least important one.
7 DecSpace (Pre-Alpha), ‘A multi-criteria decision analysis framework’, http://app.decspacedev.sysresearch.
org/#/ (accessed September 08, 2021)
Table 7  Normalised and non-normalised criteria weights obtained with the SRF procedure
Criteria
g1
g2
g3
g4
g5
g6
g7
g8
g9
g10
Normalised weight (%)
14.04
12.28
17.54
10.53
1.75
1.75
7.02
1.75
17.55
15.79
Non-normalised weight (%)
8
7
10
6
1
1
4
1
10
9
1 3
1318

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
3.2  Efficiency analysis
Having the results of the categorisation, it is possible to study and determine the relative 
efficiency scores of the hospitals in the subset, in order to avoid the use of low quality 
and access benchmarks in payments. For this, only the providers who are assigned to the 
categories of Neutral, Good, and Very good are used, considering the maximum attributed 
category. Tables 9, 10, and 11 show the units that were selected as our subset in 2018, 2019, 
and 2020, respectively.
Being hospitals complex human networks, to evaluate their efficiency it is necessary to 
define standards (benchmarks) among them through the comparison of the units at hand 
(Benson, 1994). This technique leads to the search for the sector’s best practices, aiming for 
a higher performance (Pereira et al., 2021a). Several benchmarking models can be applied 
to healthcare providers (Anand & Kodali, 2008). According to Hollingsworth (2008), Data 
Envelopment Analysis (DEA) and Stochastic Frontier Analysis (SFA) have been used fre­
quently in the analysis of the productive performance of healthcare services. While DEA 
is a non-parametric technique, SFA is a parametric one. Both methods estimate relative 
Action
Hospital
Classification
a7
Tâmega e Sousa Hospital Centre, EPE
Neutral
a9
Baixo Vouga Hospital Centre, EPE
Neutral
a19
Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital, EPE
Neutral
a2
Santa Maria Maior Hospital, EPE
Good
a3
Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital 
Centre, EPE
Good
Table 10  Subset of hospitals 
classified as Neutral, Good, and 
Very good in 2019
 
Action
Hospital
Classification
a2
Santa Maria Maior Hospital, EPE
Neutral
a9
Baixo Vouga Hospital Centre, EPE
Neutral
a14
Médio Tejo Hospital Centre, EPE
Neutral
a19
Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital, EPE
Neutral
a3
Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital 
Centre, EPE
Good
a4
Oeste Hospital Centre, EPE
Very good
Table 9  Subset of hospitals clas­
sified as Neutral, Good, and Very 
good in 2018
 
Ranking
Cards
1
g3, g10
2
g11
3
g1
4
g2
5
g5
6
blank card
7
g8
8
blank card, blank card
9
g6, g7, g9
10
g4
Table 8  Ranking of the criteria 
and blank cards added by the 
DM
 
1 3
1319

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
efficiency scores according to the distance of the real performances of the decision-making 
units (DMUs) in question to the constructed best practices frontier. Nevertheless, parametric 
methods need to assume a functional form of this frontier, while non-parametric techniques 
estimate it in an empirical way resorting to real data. This way, on the one hand, DEA 
allows for more flexibility in the modelling of the frontier and the incorporation of several 
assumptions regarding the relations in the frontier, the returns-to-scale, the availability of 
inputs and outputs, and the convexity function (Amado & Dos Santos, 2009); on the other 
hand, it is more sensitive to outliers and the size of the sample. Since it is a deterministic 
technique, it does not consider the stochastic variations of data as SFA, assuming any devia­
tion to the best practice frontier as an inefficiency (Jacobs et al., 2006). Nevertheless, DEA 
shows clear advantages in healthcare studies, not only by easily dealing with the complex­
ity of comparxing DMUs that present multiple inputs and outputs but also by allowing the 
computation of their complex comparison into a single measure, considering all available 
data to construct the best practice frontier and allowing the projection of the units against 
the frontier to be better adapted to the context of the problem (Amado & Dos Santos, 2009; 
Jacobs et al., 2006).
In this framework, a DEA model will be used to generate the relative efficiency scores 
(from 0 to 1, the latter denoting an efficient DMU) for the subset of hospitals in question. 
Globally, DEA models can have two possible orientations, being either input- or output-
oriented. The difference is that input-oriented models aim to minimise inputs for a desired 
level of output, while output-oriented models seek to maximise outputs keeping the inputs 
at a constant level (Rajasekar & Deo, 2014). Moreover, basic envelopment models can be 
classified into constant returns-to-scale (CRS) and variable returns-to-scale (VRS) (Nunes 
& Ferreira, 2018). The Charnes et al. (1978) (CCR) model is known as the CRS model, 
reflecting the change in the outputs by the same proportion as the inputs are changed and 
the Banker et al. (1984) (BCC) model is known as the VRS model, reflecting the fact that 
production technology may exhibit increasing, decreasing, and constant returns-to-scale, 
not allowing the assumption that the economies of scale do not change as the size of the 
service facility increases (Ozcan et al., 2008). Due to this, CCR models evaluate radial (pro­
portional) efficiency but do not take into consideration the excesses of inputs and lack of 
outputs when there is a case of non-zero slacks, which differs from BCC models. Besides, 
BCC models include the convexity condition ∑n
j=1 Λj = 1, Λj ⩾0, ∀j as a modelling 
constraint, being Λ the scale coefficient (Cooper et al., 2007).
Here, the aim is to assess the efficiency of the hospitals in question regarding resource 
allocation for the services they provide. This way, the input is defined as the variable total 
Action
Hospital
Classification
a2
Santa Maria Maior Hospital, EPE
Neutral
a7
Tâmega e Sousa Hospital Centre, EPE
Neutral
a9
Baixo Vouga Hospital Centre, EPE
Neutral
a19
Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital, EPE
Neutral
a26
Lisboa Central University Hospital 
Centre, EPE
Neutral
a3
Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital 
Centre, EPE
Good
a5
Médio Ave Hospital Centre, EPE
Good
a22
Tondela-Viseu Hospital Centre, EPE
Very good
Table 11  Subset of hospitals 
classified as Neutral, Good and 
Very good in 2020
 
1 3
1320

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
operational expenses, since the framework is intended to determine and minimise, when 
possible, the allocated budget for the Portuguese public hospitals. Therefore, a BCC input-
oriented DEA model will be used, focusing on the minimisation of the allocated resources 
to each hospital. Regarding the outputs, the total production will be considered. Neverthe­
less, a Pearson’s correlation test had to be conducted on the indicators regarding production 
in order to reduce the number of redundant variables (see C.2). This led to three outputs: 
Total of medical appointments, Total of urgency appointments, and Programmed surgical 
interventions. This reduction of variables and the use of the three years of analysis con­
jointly, considering each hospital as an individual DMU, allows for reduced discrimination 
problems between efficient and inefficient DMUs, which usually appear when there is a 
large number of variables compared to the number of DMUs in DEA models (Adler & 
Yazhemsky, 2010; Charles et al., 2019). It is important to mention that, once more, the data 
was retrieved from the ACSS database, some forecasting was performed (see C.1), and the 
homogeneity of the DMUs was considered to select the ones that exhibited similar produc­
tion technologies during the selection phase of the action set in co-operation with the DM.
DEA models use mathematical programming to handle large numbers of variables and 
constraints in order to obtain the desired relative efficiency score of each DMU. For this, 
let us consider a set of m inputs, xj
i, with i = 1, ..., m, and a set of s outputs, yj
r, with 
r = 1, ..., s, for n hospitals, with j = 1, ..., n (Nunes & Ferreira, 2018). This way, each 
hospital f is characterised by the array (xf
i , yf
r ).
The optimal targets will result from the linear combination of the efficient values. Denoting 
the optimal values with an asterisk and considering (xl
i, yl
r) as the array that defines a hospital l to 
be evaluated, let us consider xl∗
i = Λ1 · x1
i + ... + Λj · xj
i + ... + Λn · xn
i = ∑n
j=1 Λj · xj
i, 
for each i = 1, ..., m, and yl∗
r = Λ1 · y1
r + ... + Λj · yj
r + ... + Λn · yn
r = ∑n
j=1 Λj · yj
r, for 
each r = 1, ..., s. The coefficients Λj, with j = 1, ..., n are obtained from a linear combina­
tion and ∑n
j=1 Λj = 1. Being xl∗
i and yl∗
r the optimal values, xl∗
i ⩽xl
i, for each i = 1, ..., m, 
and yl∗
r ⩾yl
r, for each r = 1, ..., s. These slacks can be obtained by resorting to a constant, 
θ. The objective of the linear programming model is to obtain the minimum value of param­
eter θ. Hence, the relative technical efficiency of a hospital f is computed by minimising the 
objective function of the model. Having this in consideration, the mathematical formulation 
of the input-oriented VRS DEA model to evaluate the technical efficiency of hospital f can 
be described as follows in Model (2):
1 3
1321

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
 
min
θf
subject to
n
∑
j=1
Λjxj
i ⩽θfxf
i ,
i = 1, . . . , m
n
∑
j=1
Λjyj
r ⩾yf
r ,
r = 1, . . . , s
n
∑
j=1
Λj = 1
θf is free
Λj ⩾0,
j = 1, . . . , n

(2)
being the optimal input and output for hospital f described as
 
(xf
i )∗=
n
∑
j=1
Λjxj
i = θfxf
i
(yf
r )∗=
n
∑
j=1
Λjyj
r = θfyf
r

(3)
3.3  Payment optimisation
Having computed the relative efficiency scores of the subset of providers, it is now possible 
to resort to those values for calculating the optimal unitary cost, as well as the cost savings 
for each hospital. For this, an adaptation of the best practice payment-based tool from Fer­
reira et al. (2020b) will be used. This tool centres the improvement of the payment scheme 
around the computation of the optimal value of the unitary cost, trying to include quality and 
heterogeneity in such calculation, denoting it as Paid Price or Payment (PP), which becomes 
hospital-specific. Hence, the framework concerns the reference set composed of potential 
benchmarks for the hospital whose payment one wishes to optimise, avoiding unfair com­
parisons and the use of low-quality providers as potential benchmarks, just due to high effi­
ciency scores. In our case, the set of hospitals being analysed is evaluated in terms of quality 
and access resorting to an MCDA model, testing another approach to constrain the set of 
hospitals that perform above an established level of care. The benchmarks of the produc­
tive performance and efficiency scores obtained for this subset, Hh, through the application 
of the BCC input-oriented DEA model, will be inputted as the optimal coefficients for the 
computation of the optimal unitary cost.
Regarding the complexity of treated patients, this should be considered when dealing 
with benchmarking at a financial level, since the higher the complexity is, the higher the 
demand for more complex treatments and, consequently, the higher the hospital expenditure 
per patient. In our study, the standardised average inpatient delay was used for this adjust­
ment as a proxy of the CMI, in line with Ferreira et al. (2020b).
Let us consider hospital h ∈H and its overall comparability subset, Hh, with dimen­
sion Hh = N(⩽n), being N the size of the subset in study and n the size of the initial 
set of hospitals. For each observation j in Hh, a Λj will be associated with it, being the 
non-negative and normalised coefficient, Λj ⩾0 and ∑
j∈Hh Λj = 1, a reflection of the 
1 3
1322

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
relative contribution to the optimal price due to h and its activity. This way, for a technically 
efficient hospital h, Λh = 1. Using these coefficients, the optimal expenditure results from 
(xh)∗= ∑N
j∈Hh Λj · xj - a simplification of the optimal expenditure defined by Ferreira et 
al. (2020b), since we only consider the total operational expenses as an input (xh).
In turn, the optimal unitary cost for h, PP h, defined in this tool as the optimal expen­
diture, (xh)∗, per optimal number of patients to treat, (yh)∗, will be adapted for our case 
study. Similarly, the optimal unitary cost is computed considering approximations regard­
ing the hospitalisation area. First, the optimal inpatients cost is obtained considering that 
approximately 50% of hospital expenses are due to inpatient care (Azevedo & Mateus, 
2014), by multiplying the optimal expenditure, (xh)∗, by the approximate value of 0.50. To 
obtain the cost per inpatient, the efficiency scores and the discharged inpatients adjusted 
by the standardised average inpatient delay for each hospital h (yh) is used to obtain the 
optimal discharged inpatients, (yh)∗= ∑N
j∈Hh Λj · yj. Second, the optimal unitary cost is 
computed as the optimal inpatients cost per optimal discharged inpatients for the compara­
bility subset Hh for the considered period in analysis. The discharged inpatients adjusted 
by the standardised average inpatient delay (yh) and the indicators discharged inpatients 
and average inpatient delay are retrieved from the ACSS database. In our case, the average 
inpatient delay is applied to consider the complexity of patients each hospital treats, used 
as a proxy of CMI (the variable applied in the computation of the budget for each hospital 
in the contracts).
Resorting to the definitions presented above, the optimal unitary cost of h, PP h, is com­
puted as follows:
 
PPh =
(
N∑
j∈Hh
Λjxj) · 0.50
N∑
j∈Hh
Λjyj
=
Optimal inpatients costs
Optimal discharged inpatients 
(4)
The optimal unitary cost is defined for hospitalisation, thus the cost savings for hospital h, 
CSh, take this into consideration by adjusting the Total operational expenses considered as 
total hospitalisation expenses:
 
CSh = (0.5 xh) −yhPP h
(5)
This can be computed to evaluate the possible optimisation of payments for inefficient units, 
making a comparison with the current needs of the hospitals in terms of resources. A hos­
pital h is expected to have CSh > 0 whenever the optimal unitary cost is smaller than the 
current unitary price, meaning that it is possible to optimise its attributed annual budget.
4  Results
In this section, the results of the proposed framework are presented. First, the constructed 
MCDA model is executed using the MCDA-ULaval software, presenting and analysing the 
results of the obtained categorisation. Second, once the subset of hospitals classified at a 
1 3
1323

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
certain level of quality and access is determined, the selected DEA model is applied to this 
subset, resulting in relative efficiency scores for each hospital. Lastly, using these and resort­
ing to an adaptation of the tool developed by Ferreira et al. (2020b), the optimal unitary cost 
is computed, as well as the cost savings for each hospital of the subset, in order to study the 
best possible allocation of resources.
4.1  Electre Tri-C
The constructed model was implemented using the MCDA-ULaval software (Couture-Gre­
nier & Abi-Zeid, 2015). The results of the categorisation are presented in Table 12, after a 
robustness analysis of our model that confirmed its reliability (see B).
Looking at the categorisation results, one can conclude that most hospitals underper­
form in terms of quality and access. It is possible to assess that the percentage of hospitals 
assigned to categories between C1 and C2 is 78.57% for 2018, 82.14% for 2019 and 71.43% 
for 2020. Furthermore, it is observed that C2 is the category attributed to the majority of 
Table 12  Minimum and maximum categorisation results for the twenty-eight actions in 2018, 2019, and 2020
2018
2019
2020
Action
Min
Max
Min
Max
Min
Max
a1
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
a2
C3
C3
C4
C4
C3
C3
a3
C4
C4
C4
C4
C4
C4
a4
C2
C5
C2
C2
C2
C2
a5
C2
C2
C2
C2
C3
C4
a6
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
a7
C2
C2
C3
C3
C2
C3
a8
C1
C2
C2
C2
C1
C2
a9
C3
C3
C3
C3
C3
C3
a10
C2
C2
C1
C1
C1
C1
a11
C2
C2
C1
C2
C1
C1
a12
C2
C2
C2
C2
C1
C2
a13
C1
C2
C1
C2
C1
C2
a14
C2
C3
C2
C2
C2
C2
a15
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
a16
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
a17
C1
C2
C1
C2
C1
C2
a18
C2
C2
C1
C1
C1
C2
a19
C2
C3
C2
C3
C2
C3
a20
C1
C1
C1
C1
C1
C1
a21
C1
C2
C1
C2
C1
C2
a22
C1
C2
C1
C2
C1
C5
a23
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
C2
a24
C1
C1
C1
C1
C1
C2
a25
C1
C1
C2
C2
C2
C2
a26
C1
C1
C1
C2
C1
C3
a27
C1
C2
C1
C2
C1
C2
a28
C1
C1
C1
C1
C1
C2
1 3
1324

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
actions, followed by the interval of categories [C1, C2] and C1 - in essence, all actions 
maintain their categorisation from 2018 to 2020. It is also noticed that a20 is assigned to the 
worst category consistently.
From another perspective, it is noted that some providers were attributed to C3 or above 
consistently, being these a2, a3, and a9. The hospitals attributed to the best categories, C4 or 
above, were exclusively a3 and a2. a2 was attributed the C4 category in 2019 and a3 was the 
only provider that maintained the category of C4 over the years in the analysis. The highest 
category is only attributed to a4 in 2018 ([C2, C5]) and to a22 in 2020 ([C1, C5]). Neverthe­
less, in both cases, the actions were assigned to a large interval of categories, showing a 
more uncertain result and, this way, not allowing a robust assignment of the category C5 to 
any action.
Moreover, it is important to analyse the discrepancy between the minimum and maxi­
mum categories attributed to the actions. In 2018, it is observed that only 3.57% of the 
providers were assigned to more than two consecutive categories, none in 2019, and 7.14% 
in 2020. The low discrepancies reflect more certainty in the assignment of the categories, 
guaranteeing also a more reliable attribution.
It is possible to assess that 24 out of the 28 actions maintained their assigned interval of 
categories from 2018 to 2020, or presented very small differences, only differing in one con­
secutive category. The exceptions are a4, a5, a22, and a26, presenting higher fluctuations.
As seen in Sect. 2.1, the 2009 economic crisis in Portugal forced the government to 
reduce public funding, affecting the healthcare sector, namely with the measures estab­
lished in 2011 following the Memorandum of Understanding. These lead to the reduction 
of resources, creating barriers in access of the population to healthcare and disinvestment in 
the necessary equipment and infrastructure maintenance and renovation. As it has been pos­
sible to observe, the government started investing more in health since 2016, by hiring more 
medical staff, rehabilitating necessary equipment, and making a good trajectory in terms of 
recovery of the SNS after the budgetary cuts that disregarded social performance (Nunes 
et al., 2019). Nevertheless, not so long has passed since the last financial and social crisis 
and, unfortunately, the economic and health shocks caused by the COVID-19 pandemic do 
not seem to have allowed the necessary time to recover and tackle the barriers the auster­
ity period created. This can justify the low levels of quality and access shown in 2018 and 
their plateauing until 2020, having the pandemic introduced once again serious difficulties 
in terms of access to healthcare. Furthermore, regarding quality, due to the scarce resources 
available and the high demand for care during the pandemic, allied to the fear installed in 
the population, many have foregone necessary medical care, which will probably reflect in 
the indicators to a higher extent over the next few years (Table 13).
4.2  Data envelopment analysis
For the computation of the model established above, the Data Envelopment Analysis Tool­
box was employed via the MATLAB software (Álvarez et al., 2016).
According to these results, our best practice efficiency frontier is composed of six effi­
cient DMUs: DMU 1, DMU 3, and DMU 6 in 2018; DMU 7 in 2019; and DMU 16 and 
DMU 18 in 2020. Among the remaining thirteen inefficient DMUs, it is possible to see 
that, according to our model, DMU 15 was considered the least efficient. This way, the 
Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital was the least efficient hospital in 2020 and the Póvoa da 
1 3
1325

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital Centre in 2018 and 2019. Moreover, by combining the three 
years under analysis to compute the relative efficiency scores, it is possible to compare the 
efficiency of the same hospitals over the years. This is the case of the Santa Maria Maior 
Hospital, the Baixo Vouga Hospital Centre, the Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital, and the 
Póvoa da Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital Centre, that appear in all three years and showed 
a decreasing pattern of efficiency from 2018 to 2020. It is also the case of the Tâmega e 
Sousa Hospital Centre that emerged in two of the years in analysis (2019 and 2020). In 
general, the model showed higher efficiencies for 2018, decreasing in 2019 and 2020. The 
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on hospital performance may be the reason for such a 
decrease on their efficiency. Indeed, it drastically altered outpatient care delivery in 2020. 
A tight resource allocation was encountered by Portuguese hospitals during the COVID-19 
pandemic, and they were unable to use their resources efficiently. The negative influence 
on average outpatient visits, inpatient discharges, and emergency visits may also contrib­
ute to the decrease in efficiency in some hospitals. These results are in line with the recent 
literature (see, e.g., Nunes and Ferreira, 2022). In order to become more resilient, hospitals 
should make changes that are advantageous regardless of the challenges they confront and 
are even valuable during normal times.
Following the NPM, Portugal adopted management practices typical of the private sec­
tor for public healthcare providers, aiming to improve efficiency. The results of Ferreira 
and Nunes (2019) have shown that the hospital reform that began in 2002 led to noticeable 
efficiency improvements later in 2017, with more than one-third of the studied hospitals pre­
senting excellent performances. Similarly to these good efficiency scores, our results also 
revealed to be relatively high, with all units performing above 0.58 and mostly around 0.86. 
DMU
Hospital
Efficiency
1
Santa Maria Maior Hospital, 2018
1.0000
3
Médio Tejo Hospital Centre, 2018
1.0000
6
Oeste Hospital Centre, 2018
1.0000
7
Tâmega e Sousa Hospital Centre, 2019
1.0000
16
Lisboa Central University Hospital Centre, 
2020
1.0000
18
Médio Ave Hospital Centre, 2020
1.0000
2
Baixo Vouga Hospital Centre, 2018
0.9708
10
Santa Maria Maior Hospital, 2019
0.9368
13
Tâmega e Sousa Hospital Centre, 2020
0.9076
8
Baixo Vouga Hospital Centre, 2019
0.8783
12
Santa Maria Maior Hospital, 2020
0.8639
4
Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital, 2018
0.7837
5
Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital 
Centre, 2018
0.7793
9
Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital, 2019
0.7585
19
Tondela-Viseu Hospital Centre, 2020
0.7436
11
Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital 
Centre, 2019
0.7357
14
Baixo Vouga Hospital Centre, 2020
0.7263
17
Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital 
Centre, 2020
0.6514
15
Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital, 2020
0.5861
Table 13  Relative efficiency 
scores of the nineteen DMUs 
(ordered by efficiency score)
 
1 3
1326

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Moreover, six out of the nineteen DMUs were deemed to be efficient. As mentioned, there 
were more efficient units in 2018 and the tendency pointed to the decrease of the efficiency 
scores among the same units until 2020, which could be partly justified by the influence of 
the pandemic context.
In fact, as shown by the Movimento Saúde em Dia8, in 2020, it was observed a decrease 
of 14% in medical appointments, 24% in surgeries, 27% in urgency appointments, and 
16% in inpatient discharges. Moreover, less 31% in complementary means of diagnosis 
and therapy were used. This can explain the decrease in efficiency scores since a lower 
production was observed for the indicators used, as the providers were focused and burst­
ing with COVID-19 cases and the population was afraid to resort to hospitals for necessary 
treatments (Table 14).
4.3  Best practices payment-based tool
Having the optimal coefficients stemming from the relative efficiency scores and resorting 
to the methodology and variables presented before, the optimal unitary cost is computed, 
through the calculation of the optimal expenditure, optimal discharged inpatients and opti­
8 Movimento Saúde em Dia, ‘Estudo à população: acesso a cuidados de saúde em tempos de pandemia’, 
https://www.saudeemdia.pt/?p=estudo (accessed October 11, 2021)
DMU
Efficiency
Cost savings
15
0.5861
20 939 688 €
17
0.6514
13 122 241 €
14
0.7263
6 752 224 €
11
0.7357
12 671 131 €
19
0.7436
− 49 151 055 €
9
0.7585
15 551 567 €
5
0.7793
11 736 282 €
4
0.7837
5 074 786 €
12
0.8639
1 016 731 €
8
0.8783
− 3 147 366 €
13
0.9076
− 9 985 575 €
10
0.9368
655 519 €
2
0.9708
− 10 108 160 €
1
1.0000
4 641 €
3
1.0000
− 40 996 791 €
6
1.0000
− 1 605 355 €
7
1.0000
− 7 322 738 €
16
1.0000
61 456 997 €
18
1.0000
− 14 806 164 €
Table 15  Cost savings per hospi­
tal of the subset
 
Optimal expenditure
Optimal inpa­
tients cost
Optimal 
discharged 
inpatients
Optimal 
unitary 
cost
1 726 988 591 €
863 494 296 €
280 987
3 073 €
Table 14  Optimal costs of the 
subset of nineteen hospitals
 
1 3
1327

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
mal inpatients cost, considering the approximations for hospitalisation and the adjustments 
regarding the complexity of treated patients.
Having obtained the optimal unitary cost for inpatient care, it is possible to compute the 
cost savings for hospitalisation for the hospitals of our comparability subset.
By taking a look at Table 15, one can easily notice the predominance of cost savings 
higher than zero, in a ratio of 11/19. Nevertheless, eight of the hospitals in the subset pre­
sented negative cost savings - four of them being the efficient ones. It is possible to see a 
tendency of increasing the cost savings with the decrease of the efficiency score, but some 
outliers are found. The efficient hospitals were expected to present cost savings around zero, 
with some deviations due to the approximations and adjustments made. This is observed 
for the relatively small values of DMUs 1 and 6. Nevertheless, a few efficient hospitals 
showed high negative and positive values for cost savings and even some inefficient hospi­
tals showed negative cost savings. This is further discussed in Sect. 5.
Considering only the inefficient hospitals of the considered subset, which are the ones 
who show room for allocation improvement, using the calculated optimal unitary cost there 
was a total cost savings of 64 279 071 € for the three years of analysis: 6 702 909 € for the 
three inefficient hospitals in 2018, 25 730 852 € for the four inefficient hospitals in 2019, 
and 31 845 310 € for the six inefficient hospitals in 2020. Comparing our results with the 
ones obtained by Ferreira et al. (2020b) for the authors’ nineteen inefficient units in the set 
of twenty-seven units of the study, these have shown a total cost savings of 272 927 531 
€. Regarding the eleven inefficient units in the subset of nineteen, there was a total cost 
savings of 64 279 071 € for the inpatient service alone, as mentioned. The optimal unitary 
cost obtained for the inpatient care was 3073 €  per inpatient, which is inside the range of 
optimal unitary costs obtained by Ferreira et al. (2020b) (2732 €  to 3380 €  per inpatient). 
The percentage of cost savings was lower in this study, being 0.1% of the total expenditure 
with inpatient care, compared with 6% of Ferreira et al. (2020b). It is important to mention 
that in that study, the optimal coefficients for each hospital were computed using the best 
comparability subset for each provider, leading to finer results, while, here, one comparabil­
ity subset was established and tested. Furthermore, in this study, the cost savings were com­
puted for fewer units, as the units with low levels of quality and access were not assessed. 
Nevertheless, our optimal unitary cost and cost savings results have shown to be in concor­
dance with the results of the previously mentioned study, with the lower percentage of cost 
savings being possibly due to the considerations discussed above and the approximations 
and adjustments conducted for the inpatient service and hospital complexity. This allows 
us to reach the same ground conclusions regarding high potential cost savings that can be 
applied to Portuguese public hospitals and the existence of room for improvement regard­
ing resource allocation, by testing the best practice payment-based tool through the use of 
different methodologies to consider quality, access, and efficiency.
5  Discussion
This study proposes a framework for the computation of the optimal unitary costs of public 
hospitals in Portugal, taking into consideration an extension to the tool developed by Fer­
reira et al. (2020b) and the testing of additional methodologies to consider quality, access, 
and efficiency. Given that only a subset of hospitals was used for the analysis and only the 
1 3
1328

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
inpatient service was considered, the potential cost savings is expected to be much higher 
when considering the whole set of Portuguese public hospitals and the remaining health 
services. These are important results if we consider the scarce financial resources and the 
high demand the SNS faces. The objective is to promote the best possible exploitation of the 
allocated resources via the State budget since public hospitals do not seek profit, but instead 
aim to fulfil the State and population’s goals. This way, it is not relevant for the hospital to 
be efficient while sacrificing the quality of its services. Although the established contracts 
associate penalties and incentives for certain levels of quality and access, there is still a 
significant gap regarding the consideration of these dimensions in the current unitary cost 
of each healthcare unit, as demonstrated when defining these values by first determining the 
best practices in the sector. This shows room for optimisation of the payments attributed to 
the country’s public hospitals, with considerable cost savings emerging for the inefficient 
hospitals.
The first stage of the framework proposed here consisted of the categorisation of the 
Portuguese public hospitals in terms of quality and access, using the Electre Tri-C MCDA 
method. This method allows for an ordinal classification that is non-compensatory in a sys­
tematic way, ensuring that positive performances in some criteria do not make up for lower 
performances in others, which is crucial in an area such as healthcare. Moreover, it makes 
use of the two joint rules presented before to assign the categories, creating more flexibility 
and allowing for more than one category to be attributed to each action. Also, in order to 
tackle imperfect knowledge, thresholds were introduced, reinforcing the importance of each 
criterion and producing finer results. Finally, the MCDA model’s robustness was exten­
sively tested, which validates the credibility of our results. Nevertheless, although the data 
presented on the ACSS benchmarking website are reliable and detailed, they do not contain 
all of the clinical indicators seen as relevant according to the literature review. Moreover, to 
increase the credibility of our results, the criteria set could be expanded. It is also important 
to point out that these results are highly influenced by DM preferences, which, by resort­
ing to the judgements of additional DMs, could introduce different perspectives and avoid 
possible biases. Lastly, as remarked several times by the DM, clinical indicators can be 
interpreted in different ways, being subjective and not always representing the complexity 
of reality, which can also introduce further biases.
Regarding the efficiency evaluation, there are several methodologies for performing this 
type of assessment in the literature. Nevertheless, according to several authors in the area 
of operational research applied to healthcare, DEA is considered to be one of the best meth­
ods when the objective is to compare the efficiencies of providers (Kohl et al., 2019). This 
method was shown to be more attractive for this purpose, due to the multiple resources 
that compose the complex reality of a hospital and the easiness of considering multiple 
inputs and outputs using these models. Nevertheless, using this method, dimensionality was 
a problem to tackle, due to the small subset of hospitals at hand for each year. This led us to 
study the correlation among the selected variables and, consequently, reduce the considered 
production outputs. Also, and similarly to other DEA studies that suffered from the “curse 
of dimensionality”, it was necessary to join the three years of analysis, considering each 
DMU of each year as a separate DMU and comparing them all together. This allowed us to 
produce finer results and detect outliers that could have led to misleading efficiency find­
ings. Nevertheless, other DEA models could be explored, and a monthly analysis using DEA 
window analysis could be performed for finer results and better discrimination between 
1 3
1329

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
efficient and inefficient DMUs. Moreover, it has been shown that benchmarking exercises 
can present a source of bias in the case that no adjustment regarding the operational environ­
ment is considered (Ferreira & Marques, 2016; Ferreira et al., 2020b), which constitutes a 
limitation of this study. Variables such as population density, elderly rate, child mortality, 
population illiteracy and such demographic indicators have been shown a significant impact 
on hospitals’ performance and should be tested in a future study. Lastly, it is important to 
emphasise that this efficiency analysis was performed specifically with the hospitals in the 
comparability subset of quality and access, defining the efficiency frontier. This way, the 
efficiency scores of the subset of nineteen hospitals were determined for the three years in 
analysis rather than for the twenty-eight hospitals for each year, being of interest in a future 
study to project the low quality and access providers against the best practice frontier cre­
ated to allow for the study of the best resource allocation for these.
In the last stage, the optimal unitary cost for the inpatient service was obtained. Accord­
ing to the tool proposed by Ferreira et al. (2020b), “there are costs savings whenever the 
optimal payment lies below the current unitary cost of that hospital and level of care.” This 
tool allows not only to save public costs but also to study the best reallocation of resources, 
guaranteeing that not only efficiency but also quality, are improved. Since the hospitals with 
low quality and access were not assessed, it is expected to obtain cost savings around zero 
for the efficient units and above zero for the inefficient ones. Nevertheless, some deviations 
in the calculations of the cost savings and outliers were found, which can be justified by the 
considered approximations and adjustments. First, the complexity of the treated patients 
was taken into account using the standardised average inpatient delay. Although this indi­
cator is depicted as being a good possible adjustment for this matter, the most commonly 
used is the CMI, which would allow for a better comparison with the computed payments 
since it is the variable used for the adjustment established in the contracts. Also, in line with 
this, in the computation of the optimal unitary cost for the hospitalisation services, two 
approximations were made: it was considered that around 50% of the hospitals’ costs were 
due to inpatient care and the total number of inpatients was considered through the indicator 
discharged inpatients. These can be responsible for the fluctuations and deviations observed 
towards negative values for some of the cost savings, mostly for the efficient units but also 
for four of the inefficient ones since these are approximations made to model reality and 
may not represent it to the best extent possible.
Nevertheless, this does not undermine the importance of these findings, having obtained 
significant cost savings around 64 million for the relatively small sample of hospitals in 
question and demonstrating the possibility of introducing dimensions such as quality and 
access in the contracts while guaranteeing, at the same time, the financial sustainability of 
the SNS, in such a crucial time as this.
It is also important to analyse the specific and distinct advantages of the implementation 
of this framework in the payment method of Portuguese public hospitals, from the point of 
view of the different stakeholders. Since the main goal of the SNS is to ensure every citizen 
has access to quality healthcare, the government and policymakers work towards this goal, 
trying to guarantee that the implemented policies are improving the health gains of the 
population, namely through public hospitals’ funding, since the introduction of institutional 
interventions must be accompanied by the appropriate allocation of resources (Pereira et 
al., 2021d). This framework would allow for these to fulfil their objectives by identifying 
the best practices and focusing the allocation of funds on improving the services’ quality 
1 3
1330

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
and access, which, in the long run, could lead to better health outcomes for the population. 
Allied to these benefits, the framework would tackle poor resource allocation, inefficiencies, 
and wastage, which is also in the best interest of the government, especially in a period of 
economic crisis and shortage of public funds such as this. Besides, since the access to and 
quality of the services are highlighted with this tool, it would lead governments to make 
available the necessary funds to guarantee that the hospitals’ social performance is above an 
acceptable level, without constraining the healthcare provision ability.
For the citizens, as users of the SNS, the reallocation of hospitals’ funding would be of 
extreme relevance in order to improve the access to and quality of the provided services 
since it directly affects their health. Moreover, being a public service financed via taxa­
tion, it would also be in their best interest to reduce wastage and see their money being 
better applied. Moreover, a framework like this would allow for higher transparency and 
identification of the best practices among similar hospitals, which empowers the citizens, 
allowing them to make a more informed choice regarding where they want to be treated 
(Pereira & Marques, 2022). In turn, this would further motivate the hospitals to improve 
their performance, delivering in a more timely manner their services and improving their 
quality in order to compete with the other hospitals. This is also expected to, consequently, 
improve the population’s overall satisfaction towards the hospitals’ services, by improving 
their perception of quality in several key indicators (Ferreira et al., 2021).
For the hospitals’ administration, such a framework plays a vital role by enforcing man­
agers’ accountability for their hospital’s performance. It promotes transparency and leads 
the hospital management to direct its resources in the most efficient way possible towards 
meeting quality and access goals. Managers and administrative staff would start to focus on 
attaining the best practices, having now standards to guide their activity and more motiva­
tion to do so since the funding allocated for their hospital would take into account the effi­
cient use of resources and the improvement of their performance, all at the same time. If the 
resources are poorly used, it is the hospital’s responsibility to handle them, creating higher 
accountability for the good use of public funds, as mentioned. Combined with the penal­
ties and incentives already present in contracts, this motivates hospital boards to rationalise 
resources without disregarding the social performance of their services, which is one of the 
biggest problems global budgets’ payment schemes face and that could be tackled by the 
introduction of P4P frameworks like the one presented here.
This way, it is possible to observe that the inclusion of this framework meets several of 
the contracting mechanisms’ objectives (Ferreira et al., 2019). Nevertheless, the adoption 
of such a tool can face some obstacles, such as difficulties in the recording of hospitals’ 
data and parameters, which requires updated technologies, a higher administrative effort 
towards data collection, and the reporting to the responsible entities, creating also the need 
for better regulation. It could also face some resistance from the hospitals’ boards, since, in 
case resources are not efficiently allocated, there will be shortages and, also, low quality and 
access hospitals will probably be less attended by the citizens. Manipulation of the codifica­
tion of patients by DRG to more severe categories would continue to be a problem in this 
methodology and can be further emphasised by it to overcome mismanagement issues. The 
tampering of data is a problem to address in P4P methods and this way, an accountable 
and ethical recording of data has to be promoted when implementing such tools (Baxter 
et al., 2015). Moreover, it is still not clear if this framework would lead to lower costs 
for the government since the low quality and access hospitals were not assessed with this 
1 3
1331

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
tool. Although it allows the funds to be allocated having efficiency in consideration, which 
reduces the wastage and saves money, it also proposes the allocation of more funds, when 
necessary, to improve the social performance of the units, which could lead to higher costs. 
This would have to be further tested using also the low performers for further confirmation.
One can state that the payment method greatly influences the number, type, and intensity 
of services delivered by a hospital. Moreover, it plays a key role in the performance and 
outcomes of care (Blake & Carter, 2003). As mentioned by Baxter et al. (2015), it may be 
time to re-evaluate traditional financing methods that may not reflect the changing health­
care reality, moved by financial incentives and competition. P4P programmes as add-ons to 
complement and tackle breaches in the current contracting mechanisms could be a possible 
solution to deal with the complex adaptive system that is healthcare. Nevertheless, when 
implementing P4P models, it is necessary to be mindful of its potential unintended conse­
quences and the fact that its benefits are still being unveiled (Ferreira et al., 2019; Kondo 
et al., 2016).
6  Conclusions
The public healthcare sector, especially when it comes to hospitals, suffers mostly from high 
costs and high resource wastage. To tackle these issues, the search for efficiency and pro­
ductivity has been oriented towards the adoption of business management models for public 
services. Being a sector of high social importance, some dimensions cannot be ignored, 
such as the access to and quality of health services. To combine all these facets and model 
the complex reality of the sector, it is possible to use economic models and MCDA, as 
proposed here. Not only the efficiency but also the effectiveness of the public providers, are 
the fundamental goals to achieve, and the development and adoption of such frameworks 
in the established contracts could be crucial for a better allocation of public resources and 
the sustainability of the SNS, especially when facing an economic and health crisis like the 
one being lived.
The framework proposed and tested here leads to significant cost savings of around 
64 million € for a small sample of nineteen public hospitals in Portugal regarding their 
inpatient service. These results are of extreme importance, demonstrating the possibility 
of developing and introducing such methodologies in the contracts with public hospitals 
in order to promote a better allocation of the available resources and reduce the financial 
effort of the State and its citizens without compromising the quality, access, and efficiency 
of the services provided to the latter. This study intends to be a stepping stone to launch 
further research on the subject, showing that similar frameworks potentiate this improve­
ment, not only by reallocating the necessary resources to guarantee the performance of the 
providers but also by identifying the sector’s best practices, encouraging hospitals to pursue 
them. Moreover, our results corroborate the results of the tool that served as the basis of the 
framework (Ferreira et al., 2020b) since they indicate that contracts can be used for these 
objectives and payments can be optimised, having obtained significant cost savings.
1 3
1332

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Author(s) 
(Year)
Title
Period of 
analysis
Methodology
Description
Gandjour 
et al. 
(2002)
An evidence-
based evalua­
tion of quality 
and efficiency 
indicators
–
Review
Identify and appraise quality and
efficiency indicators relevant to 
hospital
physicians’ practices
Arah et al. 
(2003)
Conceptual 
frameworks for 
health systems 
performance: 
a quest for 
effectiveness, 
quality, and 
improvement
–
Literature
search
Explore the conceptual bases,
effectiveness and indicators, as 
well as
quality improvement dynamics, 
of the
performance frameworks of the
United Kingdom, Canada,
Australia, United States of America
(USA), WHO, and OECD
Friesner 
and 
Rosenman 
(2005)
The relationship 
between service 
intensity and 
the quality of 
healthcare: An 
exploratory data 
analysis
1990-1999
–
Empirical check of some 
assumptions
used to define the quality of care 
in the
health services literature. In 
particular:
whether service intensity
is the only important determinant 
of
a provider’s quality and whether 
higher
service intensity always causes 
higher
quality
Veillard et 
al. (2005)
A performance 
assessment 
framework for 
hospitals. The 
WHO regional 
office for Europe 
PATH project
2003-2005
Review
Describe the first step of PATH 
project:
to develop an overall framework 
for
hospital performance assessment
Weiner et 
al. (2006)
Healthcare qual­
ity indicators 
project 2006: 
data collection 
update report
2003-2006
–
Examine the association between 
the
scope of quality improvement
implementation in hospitals and 
hospital
performance on selected indica­
tors of
clinical quality
Groene et 
al. (2008)
An international 
review of proj­
ects on hospital 
performance 
assessment
1984-2003
Literature
search,
interviews
Review of indicator projects for 
hospital
performance assessment and 
compare
them to the Performance 
Assessment
Tool for Quality Improvement
in Hospitals (PATH), an
initiative by the WHO Regional
Office for Europe
Table 16  Literature review on quality and access healthcare indicators
1 3
1333

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Author(s) 
(Year)
Title
Period of 
analysis
Methodology
Description
Basu et al. 
(2010)
Clinical perfor­
mance indica­
tors: Intolerance 
for variety?
April/2006
to
March/2007
–
Analysis of the data regarding the
different clinical quality
performance indicators mentioned
in The Intelligent Board,
to determine whether the
results could be reliably
used to interpret a hospital’s
performance
Simou et 
al. (2014)
Developing a na­
tional framework 
of quality indica­
tors for public 
hospitals
1980-2010
Review
Describe the development of a
preliminary set of quality indicators
for public Greek National Health
System hospitals
Nwag­
bara et al. 
(2016)
An approach 
toward public 
hospital 
performance 
assessment
2006-2013
Cross-sectional
assessment,
panel data
analysis model
Study of hospital performance
assessment, examining the
impact of average length
of stay and bed turnover
rates on bed occupancy
rates
Ferreira 
and 
Marques 
(2019)
Do quality and 
access to hospital 
services impact 
on their technical 
efficiency?
2013-2016
DEA,
Principal
Component
Analysis
Analysis of the impact of quality
and access to healthcare services 
on
technical efficiency in Portugal
Ferreira 
and Nunes 
(2019)
Technical 
efficiency of 
Portuguese 
public hospitals: 
comparative 
analysis across A 
the five regions 
of Portugal
2017
DEA
Analysis of the efficiency
score of hospital units,
with reference to the
five Portuguese health
administrative regions
Nunes et 
al. (2019)
Financial Crisis 
in Portugal. 
Effects in the 
Health Care 
Sector
2013-2016
DEA
Analysis of the main policies
and measures undertaken by
the Portuguese Ministry of
Health with respect to the
bailout program associated with
the troika agreement, to
assess the impact on
quality and access in
healthcare services
Agency 
for 
Health­
care 
Research
and Qual­
ity 2020
AHRQ Quality 
Indicators: qual­
ity indicator em­
pirical methods
1997
Empirical
methods (e.g.,
risk
adjustment
and smoothing)
AHRQ Quality Indicators
program for the development
of these, using the
Healthcare Cost and Utilization
Project State Inpatient
Databases, regarding hospital
data from the USA
Table 16  (continued)
 
1 3
1334

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Author(s) 
(Year)
Title
Period of 
analysis
Methodology
Description
Carini et 
al. (2020)
Assessing hospi­
tal performance 
indicators. What 
dimensions? 
Evidence from 
an umbrella 
review
2002-2014
Umbrella
review
Identify and classify the
dimensions of hospital performance
indicators in order to
develop a common language
and identify a shared
evidence-based way to
frame and address performance
assessment
Ferreira 
et al. 
(2020a)
Operational 
efficiency vs 
clinical safety, 
care appropriate­
ness, timeliness, 
and access to 
healthcare
2013-2016
Gray Relational
Analysis, DEA,
double bootstrap
for multiple
regression
Study of the association
between the technical efficiency of
, access to and quality of
services of Portuguese
hospitals
Pereira et 
al. (2020)
Using multi-
criteria decision 
analysis to rank 
European health 
systems: The 
Beveridgian 
financing case
2016
MCDA,
M-MACBETH
Ranking of nine of the
European health systems with
Beveridgian financing, identifying
a set of fundamental points
of view
Ferreira 
and 
Marques 
(2021)
Public-private 
partnerships 
in healthcare 
services: Do 
they outperform 
public hospitals 
regarding qual­
ity and access? 
Evidence from 
Portugal
January/2013
to
October/2017
‘Benefit-of-the-
Doubt’
(BoD), Monte 
Carlo
Assessment and comparison of the
performance of PPPs in healthcare
versus public hospitals in Portugal,
regarding quality and access
Matos et 
al. (2021)
Economic 
Analysis of 
Portuguese 
Public Hospitals 
Through the 
Construction 
of Quality, Ef­
ficiency, Access 
and Financial 
Related Compos­
ite Indicators
2013-2017
DEA, BoD
Economic and financial analysis of
EPE Portuguese hospitals
Pereira 
et al. 
(2021a)
Incorporat­
ing preference 
information in a 
range directional 
composite indi­
cator: The case 
of Portuguese 
public hospitals
2018
BoD
Construction of DEA-based
composite indicators
incorporating desirable and 
undesirable
outputs to assess the
Portuguese public hospitals’ 
performance
under two perspectives:
the SNS’s users and providers
Table 16  (continued)
 
1 3
1335

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Quality and access healthcare indicators
As seen in Sect. 2.3, there are many publications in the literature using numerous quality 
and access healthcare indicators. Having presented the most common ones in Table 2, we 
now detail a more extended literature review on the subject in Table 16.
Robustness analysis of the Electre Tri-C model
The robustness analysis of the MCDA model consisted of testing twenty-seven scenarios 
by varying the credibility index three times (λ = 0.55, 0.60, and 0.65), the ratio-z three 
times (ratio-z = 9, 10, and 11), and both simultaneously. This allows assessing the changes 
produced in the results due to the comparison with the original values defined with the DM 
(λ = 0.60 and ratio-z = 10).
 
●
Varying the credibility level. First, the credibility index was tested. This induces changes 
in the assignment procedure, influencing directly the two joint rules used in the process. 
When increasing the credibility index, there is a tendency for coinciding in a unique 
category; when decreasing the credibility index, there is a tendency to generate an in­
terval of categories in this assignment procedure. To study the variations originated by 
this parameter, two analyses were conducted: λ = 0.55 and λ = 0.65. It was observed 
that no alterations occurred in 2019, but eight changes for λ = 0.55 and two changes for 
λ = 0.65 were revealed in 2018, and eight changes for λ = 0.55 and seven changes for 
λ = 0.65 were found in 2020. In total, 25 alterations occurred out of 504 possible ones.
 
●
Varying criteria weights. Second, it was tested how criteria weights influence the re­
sults. To do so, two variations of the ratio-z were tested: ratio-z = 9 and ratio-z = 11. 
This parameter influences the SRF procedure, responsible for assigning the weights to 
the criteria set. This way, the SRF procedure was performed two additional times in the 
DecSpace platform to obtain the corresponding weights, in order to apply it afterwards 
to the Electre Tri-C method in the MCDA-ULaval software with the new weights, 
ceteris paribus. The criteria weights obtained for the three ratio-z = 9, 10, and 11 are 
Table 17  Normalised criteria weights obtained using the SRF procedure for a ratio-z of 9, 10, and 11
Ratio-z
g1
g2
g3
g4
g5
g6
g7
g8
g9
g10
9
13.95
12.23
17.38
10.51
1.93
1.93
7.09
1.93
17.38
15.67
10
14.04
12.28
17.54
10.53
1.75
1.75
7.02
1.75
17.55
15.79
11
14.11
12.33
17.67
10.54
1.61
1.61
6.96
1.61
17.67
15.89
Author(s) 
(Year)
Title
Period of 
analysis
Methodology
Description
Rocha et 
al. (2021)
Quality as­
sessment of 
Portuguese 
public hospitals: 
A multi-criteria 
approach
2017-2018
Electre
Tri-nC and
Tri-C
Innovative approach using an 
Electre
Tri-based method to assess the 
quality
of Portuguese public hospitals
Table 16  (continued)
 
1 3
1336

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
presented in Table 17.
Having these sets of weights in consideration, two additional categorisations were performed 
for each year under analysis. Consequently, the results of those computations revealed that 
the ratio-z did not influence the categorisation assignments.
 
●
Varying the credibility level and criteria weights. Third, both changes were considered 
at the same time: the three credibility levels (λ = 0.55, 0.60, and 0.65) and the three 
ratios-z (9, 10, and 11) in order to assess the percentage of changes in the categorisation 
results. It was possible to denote that 25 alterations occurred in 1 512 attributed cat­
egories, representing 1.65% of changes in the categorisation results for the three years, 
conjointly. Furthermore, it is important to take into account that only the variations in 
the credibility level have led to these very small fluctuations since the variations in the 
criteria weights did not impact the results. This allowed us to conclude that our model 
is robust because it considers twenty-seven different scenarios and only less than 2% of 
alterations were observed.
Table 19  Pearson’s correlation coefficients for the seven selected outputs
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
A
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
B
0.7254
–
–
–
–
–
–
C
0.8832
0.6755
–
–
–
–
–
D
0.8320
0.6772
0.9922∗
–
–
–
–
E
0.9406
0.6466
0.9751∗
0.9399
–
–
–
F
0.9856∗
0.6984
0.8546
0.7940
0.9297
–
–
G
0.9752∗
0.8188
0.8720
0.8274
0.9179
0.9727∗
–
DMU
Hospital
Estimated
operational
expenses
1
Santa Maria Maior Hospital, EPE, 
December/2018
2 913 
790 €
12
Santa Maria Maior Hospital, EPE, 
December/2020
3 907 
615 €
13
Tâmega e Sousa Hospital Centre, EPE, 
December/2020
10 925 
283 €
14
Baixo Vouga Hospital Centre, EPE, 
December/2020
9 431 
662 €
15
Espírito Santo de Évora Hospital, EPE, 
December/2020
10 770 
413 €
16
Lisboa Central University Hospital Centre, 
EPE, December/2020
43 272 
600 €
17
Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde Hospital Cen­
tre, EPE, December/2020
4 564 
871 €
18
Médio Ave Hospital Centre, EPE, 
December/2020
6 936 
022 €
19
Tondela-Viseu Hospital Centre, EPE, 
December/2020
20 353 
233 €
Table 18  Forecast values of 
the total operational expenses 
for December/2020 for DMUs 
12-19 and for December/2018 
for DMU 1
 
1 3
1337

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Notes on the data envelopment analysis model
Forecasting of input values
At the time of the study, the ACSS benchmarking database had only available data regarding 
financial indicators until November/2020. This way, it was necessary to resort to the Fore­
cast tool of Microsoft Excel to estimate the values of the total operational expenses - acting 
as an input for the eight DMUs in December/2020 -, using data from the remaining months 
since January/2018. Moreover, the value of this indicator for DMU 1 was also estimated for 
December/2018, since it was missing in the database. Table 18 displays these results.
Sample dimension
In the literature, one of the major problems faced by DEA is the lack of discrimination 
between efficient and inefficient DMUs when there is a large number of variables compared 
to the number of DMUs, leading to misclassification of these. This occurs especially with 
small samples under the VRS assumption (Adler & Yazhemsky, 2010) and is known as the 
“curse of dimensionality” (Charles et al., 2019; Pereira et al., 2021b).
Our study faced this issue when, initially, we were considering one input and seven 
outputs to represent total hospital production: Total of medical appointments (A), Total of 
urgency appointments (B), Programmed surgical interventions (C), Outpatient programmed 
surgical interventions (D), Conventional programmed surgical interventions (E), Urgent 
surgical interventions (F), and Discharged inpatients (G), which did not validate any of the 
empirical rules suggested in the literature (see, e.g., Dyson et al. (2001) and Cooper et al. 
(2007)). Hence, first, a test was performed in order to try to lower the number of variables. 
For this, Pearson’s correlation coefficients were computed for the seven selected outputs to 
understand if there were any highly correlated variables, enabling the elimination of the out­
puts that provided redundant information. The computed Pearson’s correlation coefficients 
are presented below in Table 19.
The variables with a correlation higher than 95% were considered to be redundant 
(marked with ∗ in Table 19), viz.: (A)-(F), (A)-(G), (C)-(D), (C)-(E), and (F-G). Hence, 
Outpatient programmed surgical interventions, Conventional programmed surgical inter­
ventions, Urgent surgical interventions, and Discharged inpatients were eliminated, main­
taining the Total of medical appointments, Total of urgency appointments, and Programmed 
surgical interventions in the model.
Despite the reduction of variables, from eight to four inputs and outputs, the size of 
the sample of each year continued to be relatively small compared to these. This way, in 
order to avoid dimensionality issues, the estimation was performed taking into account the 
three years under analysis, increasing, therefore, the number of DMUs. This enriches our 
database, allowing us to achieve finer results for efficiency since the latter will be smaller 
or equal to the ones that would be achieved considering the years separately (Ferreira et al., 
2020b). Thus, the hospitals under analysis for each year were joined in a single analysis. 
Each hospital for each year was considered as an individual DMU, being also the case of 
hospitals that appeared in more than one year of the analysis and that, for the purpose of 
the study, were considered as separate DMUs. This is a possible solution mentioned in the 
1 3
1338

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
literature to avoid the “curse of dimensionality” in DEA models (Meng et al., 2014; Jia & 
Yuan, 2017).
Acknowledgements  We would like to thank the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT, 
from the Portuguese abbreviation of Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia) for supporting this research 
via the project ‘hSNS: Portuguese public hospital performance assessment using a multi-criteria decision 
analysis framework’ (PTDC/EGE-OGE/30546/2017). This work is funded by national funds through the 
FCT, under the project UIDB/04007. Ana Sara Costa, Diogo Cunha Ferreira, and Miguel Alves Pereira also 
thank the FCT for supporting this research via project UIDB/00097/2025. Furthermore, we would like to 
acknowledge the expert Alexandre Morais Nunes (from the Instituto Superior de Ciências Sociais e Políticas 
of the Universidade de Lisboa) for his invaluable contributions to this paper. At last, we would also like to 
leave a word of appreciation to the anonymous referee for their inestimable insights that improved earlier 
versions of this paper. Our views (and any errors) are our own responsibility.
Funding  Open access funding provided by FCT|FCCN (b-on). This research was generously supported by 
the project ‘hSNS: Portuguese public hospital performance assessment using a multi-criteria decision analy­
sis framework’ (PTDC/EGE-OGE/30546/2017), funded by the FCT. This work is funded by national funds 
through the FCT, under the project UIDB/04007. Ana Sara Costa, Diogo Cunha Ferreira, and Miguel Alves 
Pereira recognise the support from project UIDB/00097/2025 as well, also funded by the FCT.
Data availability  The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in the ACSS’s ‘Bench­
marking Hospitais’ database at https://benchmarking-acss.min-saude.pt/.
Declarations
 Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no Conflict of interest.
Code availability  MATLAB version R2020b was the software utilised in this work.
 Ethical approval  Not applicable.
 Consent to participate  Not applicable.
Consent for publication  Not applicable.
 Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adler, N., & Yazhemsky, E. (2010). Improving discrimination in data envelopment analysis: PCA-DEA or 
variable reduction. European Journal of Operational Research, 202(1), 273–284.
Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde .(2013a). Contrato-programa 2013. Metodologia para definição 
de preços e fixação de objetivos. Lisboa, Portugal: Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde.
Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde. (2013b). Modelo de financiamento dos hospitais. Definição 
dos grupos de financiamento e caracterização de variáveis utilizadas na formação de grupos. Lisboa, 
Portugal: Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde
1 3
1339

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde. (2020). Termos de referência para contratualização de cuida­
dos de saúde no SNS para 2020. Lisboa, Portugal: Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2020). Quality indicator empirical methods. MD: US Depart­
ment of Health and Human Services; Rockville.
Almeida-Dias, J., Figueira, J. R., & Roy, B. (2010). ELECTRE Tri-C: A multiple criteria sorting method 
based on characteristic reference actions. European Journal of Operational Research, 204(3), 565–580.
Álvarez, I., Barbero, J., Zofío, J. L., et al. (2016). A data envelopment analysis toolbox for MATLAB. Tech. 
rep.: Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (Spain), Department of Economic Analysis.
Amado, C. A. E. F., & Dos Santos, S. P. (2009). Challenges for performance assessment and improvement in 
primary health care: The case of the Portuguese health centres. Health Policy, 91(1), 43–56.
Amado, G. C., Ferreira, D. C., & Nunes, A. M. (2022). Vertical integration in healthcare: What does literature 
say about improvements on quality, access, efficiency, and costs containment? The International Jour­
nal of Health Planning and Management, 37, 1252.
Anand, G., & Kodali, R. (2008). Benchmarking the benchmarking models. Benchmarking: An International 
Journal., 15(3), 257–291.
Arah, O. A., Klazinga, N. S., Delnoij, D. M., Asbroek, A. T., & Custers, T. (2003). Conceptual frameworks 
for health systems performance: A quest for effectiveness, quality, and improvement. International 
Journal for Quality in Health Care, 15(5), 377–398.
Arah, O. A., Westert, G. P., Hurst, J., & Klazinga, N. S. (2006). A conceptual framework for the OECD health 
care quality indicators project. International Journal for Quality in Health Care., 18(suppl-1), 5–13.
Arocena, P., & García-Prado, A. (2007). Accounting for quality in the measurement of hospital performance: 
Evidence from Costa Rica. Health Economics, 16(7), 667–685.
Azevedo, H., & Mateus, C. (2014). Cost effects of hospital mergers in Portugal. The European Journal of 
Health Economics, 15(9), 999–1010.
Baganha, M. I., Ribeiro, J. S., & Pires, S. (2002). O sector da saúde em Portugal: Funcionamento do sistema 
e caracterização sócio-profissional. Oficina do CES, 182, 1–33.
Banker, R. D., Charnes, A., & Cooper, W. W. (1984). Some models for estimating technical and scale inef­
ficiencies in data envelopment analysis. Management Science, 30(9), 1078–1092.
Basu, A., Howell, R., & Gopinath, D. (2010). Clinical performance indicators: Intolerance for variety? Inter­
national Journal of Health Care Quality Assurance., 23, 436.
Baxter, P. E., Hewko, S. J., Pfaff, K. A., Cleghorn, L., Cunningham, B. J., Elston, D., & Cummings, G. G. 
(2015). Leaders’ experiences and perceptions implementing activity-based funding and pay-for-perfor­
mance hospital funding models: A systematic review. Health Policy, 119(8), 1096–1110.
Benson, H. (1994). An introduction to benchmarking in healthcare. Radiology Management, 16(4), 35–39.
Berenson, R. A., Upadhyay, D. K., Delbanco, S. F., & Murray, R. (2016). Global budgets for hospitals. The 
Urban Institute. Milbank Quarterly, 94(2), 255–59.
Bhat, V. N. (2005). Institutional arrangements and efficiency of health care delivery systems. The European 
Journal of Health Economics, 6(3), 215–222.
Blake, J. T., & Carter, M. W. (2003). Physician and hospital funding options in a public system with decreas­
ing resources. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 37(1), 45–68.
Boadway, R., Marchand, M., & Sato, M. (2004). An optimal contract approach to hospital financing. Journal 
of Health Economics, 23(1), 85–110.
Burches, E., & Burches, M. (2020). Efficacy, effectiveness and efficiency in the health care: The need for an 
agreement to clarify its meaning. International Archives of Public Health and Community Medicine, 
4, 1.
Busse R, Klazinga N, Panteli D, Quentin W, World Health Organization. (2019). Improving healthcare qual­
ity in Europe: characteristics, effectiveness and implementation of different strategies. Copenhagen, 
Denmark: World Health Organization, Regional Office for Europe.
Campbell, S. M., Roland, M. O., & Buetow, S. A. (2000). Defining quality of care. Social Science & Medi­
cine, 51(11), 1611–1625.
Carini, E., Gabutti, I., Frisicale, E. M., Di Pilla, A., Pezzullo, A. M., de Waure, C., Cicchetti, A., Boccia, S., & 
Specchia, M. L. (2020). Assessing hospital performance indicators. What dimensions? Evidence from 
an umbrella review. BMC Health Services Research, 20(1), 1–13.
Chang, S. J., Hsiao, H. C., Huang, L. H., & Chang, H. (2011). Taiwan quality indicator project and hospital 
productivity growth. Omega, 39(1), 14–22.
Charles, V., Aparicio, J., & Zhu, J. (2019). The curse of dimensionality of decision-making units: A simple 
approach to increase the discriminatory power of data envelopment analysis. European Journal of 
Operational Research, 279(3), 929–940.
Charnes, A., Cooper, W. W., & Rhodes, E. (1978). Measuring the efficiency of decision making units. Euro­
pean Journal of Operational Research, 2(6), 429–444.
1 3
1340

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Chletsos, M., & Saiti, A. (2019). Hospital efficiency and performance. Strategic Management and Economics 
in Health Care (pp. 233–255). Basel, Switzerland: Springer Nature Switzerland.
Conrad, D. A., & Christianson, J. B. (2004). Penetrating the “black box’’: Financial incentives for enhancing 
the quality of physician services. Medical Care Research and Review, 61(3–suppl), 37S-68S.
Conselho das Finanças Públicas. (2019). Contratualização com as empresas públicas prestadoras de cuida­
dos de saúde. Lisboa, Portugal: Conselho das Finanças Públicas.
Cooper, W. W., Seiford, L. M., & Tone, K. (2007). Data envelopment analysis: A comprehensive text with 
models, applications, references and DEA-solver software (Vol. 2). Berlin: Springer.
Couture-Grenier, N., & Abi-Zeid, I. (2015). MCDA-ULaval: A multi-platform multicriteria software. News­
letter of Euro Working Group on Multicriteria Decision Aiding - Software, 31, 8–11.
Diaby, V., Campbell, K., & Goeree, R. (2013). Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) in health care: A 
bibliometric analysis. Operations Research for Health Care, 2(1–2), 20–24.
Dias, L. C., & Mousseau, V. (2018). Eliciting multi-criteria preferences: ELECTRE models. Elicitation (pp. 
349–375). New York, NY: Springer International Publishing.
Donabedian, A. (1983). Quality assessment and monitoring: Retrospect and prospect. Evaluation & the 
Health Professions, 6(3), 363–375.
Dudley, R. A., Miller, R. H., Korenbrot, T. Y., & Luft, H. S. (1998). The impact of financial incentives on 
quality of health care. The Milbank Quarterly, 76(4), 649–686.
Dyson, R. G., Allen, R., Camanho, A. S., Podinovski, V. V., Sarrico, C. S., & Shale, E. A. (2001). Pitfalls and 
protocols in DEA. European Journal of Operational Research, 132(2), 245–259.
Ferreira, D., & Marques, R. (2021). Public-private partnerships in health care services: Do they outperform 
public hospitals regarding quality and access? Evidence from Portugal. Socio-Economic Planning Sci­
ences, 73, Article 100798.
Ferreira, D. C., & Marques, R. C. (2015). Did the corporatization of portuguese hospitals significantly change 
their productivity? The European Journal of Health Economics, 16(3), 289–303.
Ferreira, D. C., & Marques, R. C. (2016). Should inpatients be adjusted by their complexity and severity 
for efficiency assessment? Evidence from Portugal. Health Care Management Science, 19(1), 43–57.
Ferreira, D. C., & Marques, R. C. (2019). Do quality and access to hospital services impact on their technical 
efficiency? Omega, 86, 218–236.
Ferreira, D. C., & Nunes, A. M. (2019). Technical efficiency of Portuguese public hospitals: A comparative 
analysis across the five regions of Portugal. The International Journal of Health Planning and Manage­
ment, 34(1), e411–e422.
Ferreira, D. C., Marques, R. C., Nunes, A. M., & Figueira, J. R. (2018). Patients’ satisfaction: The medical 
appointments valence in portuguese public hospitals. Omega, 80, 58–76.
Ferreira, D. C., Marques, R. C., & Nunes, A. M. (2019). Pay for performance in health care: a new best 
practice tariff-based tool using a log-linear piecewise frontier function and a dual-primal approach for 
unique solutions. Operational Research., 21(3), 1–46.
Ferreira, D. C., Nunes, A. M., & Marques, R. C. (2020). Operational efficiency vs clinical safety, care appro­
priateness, timeliness, and access to health care: The case of Portuguese public hospitals. Journal of 
Productivity Analysis, 53, 355–375.
Ferreira, D. C., Nunes, A. M., & Marques, R. C. (2020). Optimizing payments based on efficiency, quality, 
complexity, and heterogeneity: The case of hospital funding. International Transactions in Operational 
Research, 27(4), 1930–1961.
Ferreira, D. C., Marques, R. C., Nunes, A. M., & Figueira, J. R. (2021). Customers satisfaction in pediat­
ric inpatient services: A multiple criteria satisfaction analysis. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 78, 
Article 101036.
Figueira, J., & Roy, B. (2002). Determining the weights of criteria in the ELECTRE type methods with a 
revised Simos’ procedure. European Journal of Operational Research, 139(2), 317–326.
Figueira, J. R., Greco, S., Roy, B., & Słowiński, R. (2010). ELECTRE methods: main features and recent 
developments. Handbook of multicriteria analysis (pp. 51–89). Heidelberg, Berlin: Springer.
Figueira, J. R., Greco, S., Roy, B., & Słowiński, R. (2013). An overview of ELECTRE methods and their 
recent extensions. Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, 20(1–2), 61–85.
Frazão, T. D., Camilo, D. G., Cabral, E. L., & Souza, R. P. (2018). Multicriteria decision analysis (MCDA) 
in health care: A systematic review of the main characteristics and methodological steps. BMC Medical 
Informatics and Decision Making, 18(1), 1–16.
Friesner, D., & Rosenman, R. (2005). The relationship between service intensity and the quality of health 
care: An exploratory data analysis. Health Services Management Research, 18(1), 41–52.
Gandjour, A., Kleinschmit, F., Littmann, V., & Lauterbach, K. W. (2002). An evidence-based evaluation of 
quality and efficiency indicators. Quality Management in Healthcare, 10(4), 41–52.
Greco, S., Figueira, J., & Ehrgott, M. (2016). Multiple criteria decision analysis, (Vol. 37). Springer.
1 3
1341

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Groene, O., Skau, J. K., & Frølich, A. (2008). An international review of projects on hospital performance 
assessment. International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 20(3), 162–171.
Guan, X., Zhang, C., Hu, H., & Shi, L. (2020). The impact of global budget on expenditure, service volume, 
and quality of care among patients with pneumonia in a secondary hospital in China: a retrospective 
study. BMC Public Health, 20(1), 1–6.
Hansen, P., & Devlin, N. (2019). Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) in healthcare decision-making. 
Economics and Finance. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​9​3​/​a​c​r​e​f​o​r​e​/​9​7​8​0​1​9​0​6​2​5​9​7​9​.​0​1​3​.​9​8
Hollingsworth, B. (2008). The measurement of efficiency and productivity of health care delivery. Health 
Economics, 17(10), 1107–1128.
Jacobs, R., Smith, P. C., & Street, A. (2006). Measuring efficiency in health care: analytic techniques and 
health policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jia, T., & Yuan, H. (2017). The application of DEA (Data Envelopment Analysis) window analysis in the 
assessment of influence on operational efficiencies after the establishment of branched hospitals. BMC 
Health Services Research, 17(1), 1–8.
Kahn, J. M. (2011). Linking payment to quality: Opportunities and challenges for critical care. American 
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 184(5), 491–492.
Khushalani, J., & Ozcan, Y. A. (2017). Are hospitals producing quality care efficiently? An analysis using 
Dynamic Network Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 60, 15–23.
Kohl, S., Schoenfelder, J., Fügener, A., & Brunner, J. O. (2019). The use of Data Envelopment Analysis 
(DEA) in healthcare with a focus on hospitals. Health Care Management Science, 22(2), 245–286.
Kondo, K. K., Damberg, C. L., Mendelson, A., Motu’apuaka, M., Freeman, M., O’Neil, M., Relevo, R., 
Low, A., & Kansagara, D. (2016). Implementation processes and pay for performance in healthcare: A 
systematic review. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 31(1), 61–69.
Legido-Quigley, H., Karanikolos, M., Hernandez-Plaza, S., de Freitas, C., Bernardo, L., Padilla, B., Mach­
ado, R. S., Diaz-Ordaz, K., Stuckler, D., & McKee, M. (2016). Effects of the financial crisis and troika 
austerity measures on health and health care access in Portugal. Health Policy, 120(7), 833–839.
Luca, L., Paul, O., et al. (2019). Price Setting and Price Regulation in Health Care: Lessons for Advancing 
Universal Health Coverage. Paris, France: OECD Publishing.
Matos, R., Ferreira, D. C., & Pedro, M. I. (2021). Economic analysis of portuguese public hospitals through 
the construction of quality, efficiency, access, and financial related composite indicators. Social Indica­
tors Research., 157(1), 1–32.
Matranga, D., & Sapienza, F. (2015). Congestion analysis to evaluate the efficiency and appropriateness of 
hospitals in sicily. Health Policy, 119(3), 324–332.
Meacock, R., Kristensen, S. R., & Sutton, M. (2014). The cost-effectiveness of using financial incentives to 
improve provider quality: A framework and application. Health Economics, 23(1), 1–13.
Meng, F., Zhou, P., Zhou, D., & Bai, Y. (2014). Inefficiency and congestion assessment of mix energy con­
sumption in 16 APEC countries by using DEA window analysis. Energy Procedia, 61, 2518–2523.
Milstein, R., & Schreyoegg, J. (2016). Pay for performance in the inpatient sector: A review of 34 P4P pro­
grams in 14 OECD countries. Health Policy, 120(10), 1125–1140.
Navarro-Espigares, J. L., & Torres, E. H. (2011). Efficiency and quality in health services: A crucial link. The 
Service Industries Journal, 31(3), 385–403.
Nayar, P., & Ozcan, Y. A. (2008). Data envelopment analysis comparison of hospital efficiency and quality. 
Journal of Medical Systems, 32(3), 193–199.
Nunes, A. M., & Ferreira, D. C. (2018). Eficiência na assistência hospitalar em Portugal: Um estudo com­
parativo. Jornal Brasileiro de Economia da Saúde, 10(3), 278–84.
Nunes, A. M., & Ferreira, D. C. (2019). The health care reform in Portugal: Outcomes from both the new 
public management and the economic crisis. The International Journal of Health Planning and Man­
agement, 34(1), 196–215.
Nunes, A. M., & Ferreira, D. F. C. (2022). Evaluating portuguese public hospitals performance: Any dif­
ference before and during COVID-19? Sustainability, 15(1), 294. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15010294
Nunes, A. M., Ferreira, D. C., & Fernandes, A. C. (2019). Financial crisis in Portugal: Effects in the health 
care sector. International Journal of Health Services, 49(2), 237–259.
Nwagbara, V. C., Rajah Rasiah, M., & Aslam, M. (2016). An approach toward public hospital performance 
assessment. Medicine, 95(36), Article e4688.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2016). Better Ways to Pay for Health Care. 
Tech. rep.: OECD Health Policy Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris, France.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2021). Health at a Glance 2021: OECD Indica­
tors. OECD Publishing, Paris, France: OECD Publishing.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Eurostat, World Health Organization. (2017). A 
system of health accounts 2011 (Revised). Paris, France: OECD Publishing.
1 3
1342

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, European Observatory on Health Systems and 
Policies,. (2019). Portugal: Country Health Profile 2019, State of Health in the EU. Brussels, Belgium: 
OECD Publishing Paris, France/European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies.
Ozcan, Y. A., et al. (2008). Health care benchmarking and performance evaluation. Berlin Heidelberg: 
Springer.
Pardalos, P. M., Migdalas, A., & Pitsoulis, L. (2008). Pareto optimality, game theory and equilibria (Vol. 17). 
Berlin: Springer Science & Business Media.
Pederneiras, Y. M., Pereira, M. A., & Figueira, J. R. (2023). Are the Portuguese public hospitals sustainable? 
A triple bottom line hybrid data envelopment analysis approach. International Transactions in Opera­
tional Research, 30(1), 453–475. https://doi.org/10.1111/itor.12966
Pereira, M. A., & Camanho, A. S. (2024). The ‘Healthcare Access and Quality Index’ revisited: A fuzzy data 
envelopment analysis approach. Expert Systems with Applications, 245, Article 123057. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​e​s​w​a​.​2​0​2​3​.​1​2​3​0​5​7​
Pereira, M. A., & Marques, R. C. (2022). Is sunshine regulation the new prescription to brighten up public 
hospitals in Portugal? Socio-Economic Planning Sciences., 84, Article 101219.
Pereira, M. A., Machete, I. F., Ferreira, D. C., & Marques, R. C. (2020). Using multi-criteria decision analysis 
to rank european health systems: The Beveridgian financing case. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 
72, Article 100913.
Pereira, M. A., Camanho, A. S., Figueira, J. R., & Marques, R. C. (2021). Incorporating preference infor­
mation in a range directional composite indicator: The case of portuguese public hospitals. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 294(2), 633–650.
Pereira, M. A., Ferreira, D. C., Figueira, J. R., & Marques, R. C. (2021). Measuring the efficiency of the Por­
tuguese public hospitals: A value modelled network data envelopment analysis with simulation. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 181, Article 115169.
Pereira, M. A., Ferreira, D. C., & Marques, R. C. (2021). A critical look at the Portuguese public–private part­
nerships in healthcare. The International Journal of Health Planning and Management, 36(2), 302–315.
Pereira, M. A., Marques, R. C., & Ferreira, D. C. (2021). An incentive-based framework for analyzing the 
alignment of institutional interventions in the public primary healthcare sector: The Portuguese case. 
Healthcare, 9(7), 904.
Pereira, M. A., Dinis, D. C., Ferreira, D. C., Figueira, J. R., & Marques, R. C. (2022). A network Data Envel­
opment Analysis to estimate nations’ efficiency in the fight against SARS-CoV-2. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 210, Article 118362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.118362
Rajasekar, T., & Deo, M. (2014). Is there any efficiency difference between input and output oriented DEA 
models: An approach to major ports in India. Journal of Business & Economic Policy, 1(2), 18–28.
Rocha, A., Costa, A. S., Figueira, J. R., Ferreira, D. C., & Marques, R. C. (2021). Quality assessment of the 
Portuguese public hospitals: A multiple criteria approach. Omega, 105, Article 102505.
Roy, B. (1999). Decision-aiding today: What should we expect? Multicriteria Decision Making (pp. 1–35). 
Boston, MA: Springer.
Simos, J. (1990). Evaluer l’Impact sur l’Environnement: Une Approche Originale par l’Analyse Multicritère 
et la Négociation. Lausanne, Switzerland: Presses Polytechniques et Universitaires Romandes.
Simou, E., Pliatsika, P., Koutsogeorgou, E., & Roumeliotou, A. (2014). Developing a national framework of 
quality indicators for public hospitals. The International Journal of Health Planning and Management, 
29(3), e187–e206.
Simões, J. A., Augusto, G. F., Fronteira, I., & Hernández-Quevedo, C. (2017). Portugal: Health system 
review. Health Systems in Transition, 19(2), 1–184.
Singaroyan, R., Seed, C. A., & Egdell, R. M. (2006). Is a target culture in health care always compatible 
with efficient use of resources? A cost-effectiveness analysis of an intervention to achieve thrombolysis 
targets. Journal of Public Health, 28(1), 31–34.
Varela, R. (2019). História do Serviço Nacional de Saúde em Portugal. A saúde e a força de trabalho do 
estado novo aos nossos dias (1st ed.). Âncora Editora, Lisboa, Portugal: Administração Central do 
Sistema de Saúde.
Veillard, J., Champagne, F., Klazinga, N., Kazandjian, V., Arah, O., & Guisset, A. L. (2005). A performance 
assessment framework for hospitals: The WHO regional office for Europe PATH project. International 
Journal for Quality in Health Care, 17(6), 487–496.
Weiner, B. J., Alexander, J. A., Shortell, S. M., Baker, L. C., Becker, M., & Geppert, J. J. (2006). Qual­
ity improvement implementation and hospital performance on quality indicators. Health Services 
Research, 41(2), 307–334.
World Health Organization. (2014). Paying for Performance in Health Care Implications for Health Sys­
tem Performance and Accountability: Implications for Health System Performance and Accountabil­
ity. Open University Press - McGraw-Hill, Berkshire, United Kingdom: OECD Publishing/European 
Observatory on Health Systems and Policies Series.
1 3
1343

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 353:1305–1344
World Health Organization (2018) Health system review: Portugal: Phase 1 final report. Tech. rep., World 
Health Organization. Regional Office for Europe. Copenhagen, Denmark.
World Health Organization. (2020). Global spending on health 2020: Weathering the storm. Geneva, Swit­
zerland: World Health Organization.
Zhou, W., Jian, W., Wang, Z., Pan, J., Hu, M., & Yip, W. (2021). Impact of global budget combined with 
pay-for-performance on the quality of care in county hospitals: a difference-in-differences study design 
with a propaensity-score-matched control group using data from guizhou province, china. BMC Health 
Services Research, 21(1), 1–8.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Cristina Folgado Pinto1 · Ana Sara Costa2,3
 · Diogo Cunha Ferreira2 · 
Miguel Alves Pereira2
 
 Ana Sara Costa
ana.sara.domingues@uevora.pt
Cristina Folgado Pinto
cristina.f.pinto@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
Diogo Cunha Ferreira
diogo.cunha.ferreira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
Miguel Alves Pereira
miguelalvespereira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
1 
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Rovisco Pais 1, 1049-001 Lisbon, 
Portugal
2 
CEGIST, Instituto Superior Técnico, Av. Rovisco Pais 1, 1049-001 Lisbon, Portugal
3 
Universidade de Évora, Centro de Estudos e Formação Avançada em Gestão e Economia 
(CEFAGE), Évora, Portugal
1 3
1344