TITLE: A data-driven system for cooperative-bus route planning based on generative adversarial network and metric learning
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04842-w
---

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04842-w
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A data-driven system for cooperative-bus route planning
based on generative adversarial network and metric learning
Jiguang Wang1,2 · Yilun Zhang3 · Xinjie Xing4 · Yuanzhu Zhan5 ·
Wai Kin Victor Chan1,2
· Sunil Tiwari6
Accepted: 10 June 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Faced with dynamic and increasingly diversiﬁed public transport requirements, bus operators
are urged to propose operational innovations to sustain their competitiveness. In particular,
ordinary bus operations are heavily constrained by well-established route options, and it is
challenging to accommodate dynamic passenger ﬂows effectively and with a good level of
resource utilization performance. Inspired by the philosophy of sharing economy, many of
the available transport resources on the road, such as minibuses and private vehicles, can offer
opportunities for improvement if they can be effectively incorporated and exploited. In this
regard, this paper proposes a metric learning-based prediction algorithm which can effec-
tively capture the demand pattern and designs a route planning optimizer to help bus operators
effectively deploy ﬁxed routing and cooperative buses with trafﬁc dynamics. Through exten-
sive numerical studies, the performance of our proposed metric learning-based Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) prediction model outperforms existing ways. The effectiveness
and robustness of the prediction-supported routing planner are well demonstrated for a real-
time case. Further, managerial insights with regard to travel time, bus ﬂeet size, and customer
service levels are revealed by various sensitivity analysis.
Keywords Data-driven route planning · Generative adversarial network · Urban
transportation system · Mixed-integer programming
B Wai Kin Victor Chan
chanw@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518005, China
2
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518005, China
3
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China
4
Management School, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
5
Birmingham Business School, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
6
Operation Management & Decision Science Department, ESSCA School of Management, 4 Pont
Pasteur, 69007 Lyon, France
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
/ Published online: 30 September 2022

1 Introduction
Recent decades have witnessed signiﬁcant improvements in urban public trafﬁc systems to
satisfy dynamic and ever-increasing traveling demand including launching new bus lines (Lyu
et al., 2019), developing more intelligent trafﬁc signals (Liang et al., 2019), and designing
innovative bus scheduling strategies (Wang et al., 2017). Unfortunately, the performance of
above measurements is probably to be restricted since the buses still travel along ﬁxed route
lines, accompanied with insufﬁcient capability to cope with dynamic passenger ﬂows from
time to time and place to place (Bouton et al., 2015). Hence, the gap between ﬂuctuating
demand and ﬂeet capacity during rush hours arises, unbalanced utilization among all buses
occurs, which can further result in poor customer satisfaction (e.g., ride difﬁculties, including
catching the bus, and onboard crowdedness for passengers in busy bus lines) and low return
on investment (e.g., the empty or under-utilized bus runs). To overcome these difﬁculties, one
may choose to adjust the routes. Nevertheless, a wide-range bus route adjustment on ordinary
buses cannot be effective and cost-saving in implementation (Chen et al., 2009). On the other
hand, bus companies can invest in additional capabilities to buffer surge demand instead of
performing wide-ranged changes to bus route design. However, purchasing new buses will
sharpen the unbalanced ﬂeet utilization from both spatial and temporal perspectives, and
bring an intensive ﬁnancial burden. Thus, we can conclude that it is not an effective choice
to completely rely on ordinary buses to enhance transportation capabilities. Motivated by the
sharing economy, we tend to employ ﬂexible and shareable resources (e.g. minibuses and
private vehicles) which are not dedicated to the public transportation operation previously,
viewed as the part-time collaborators to assist the ordinary buses. This offers an effective and
economic solution for the underlying capacity bottlenecks during peak times, improves the
utilization and reduces the cost to better close the gap between the demand and capacity.
We assign new routes which are intrinsically different from the ordinary bus routes to
overcome the shortcomings of ﬁxed routes. The key feature of new routes should be traveling
across different ordinary bus lines to meet dynamic demand. In this regard, the new vehicles
collaborate with ordinary buses in respective ways, and the existing ﬁxed routes are linked
to each other by the new vehicles. For easy reference, we name these vehicles “Cooperative-
bus” (“Co-bus” as an abbreviation). Note that the Co-bus reserves some capacity for their
regular commitments (e.g., shuttle service for some companies, or other own purposes) and
deploy the ﬂexible capacity to serve ordinary bus lines whenever necessary and possible.
This constitutes an innovative public transportation system operation scheme displayed in
Fig. 1, which differs from previous research.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the purple lines represent the original commuting scheme for
the shuttle bus, these shuttle buses provide a commuting service to employees of a certain
company. In the new scheme, these shuttle buses can be used as the to-be-deployed Co-bus.
Speciﬁcally, the purple lines depict the commuting routes of the shuttle bus, which start
from the parking yard, init, to a residential area, W1, and transit employees to the company
C1. Subsequently, the shuttle bus will be idle until its night shift, when it starts to move
employees back to W1 and performs the shift at the yard init. However, this is not an ideal
scheme because the capacity of the shuttle bus is not fully utilized. As a comparison, the
Co-bus is shown in the green lines in the ﬁgure. The Co-bus can operate normal bus lines R1
and R2 sequentially after accomplishing the commuting task and returning to the company
C2. Hence, higher vehicle utilization can be achieved through this scheme compared with
the ordinary one.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
428

Fig. 1 Diagram of scheme interplayed by a normal bus and a Co-bus
To implement the new scheme, a decision support model needs to be established for
Co-bus route planning. It aims at minimizing the gap between the demand and capacity,
which is deﬁned as the total demand divided by the total capacity of all vehicles for each bus
line. We formulate this problem as a mixed-integer programming (MIP) model considering
ﬂow balance constraints, rationality constraints and time continuity constraints, which is an
NP-hard problem and accompanied by complexity reduction and acceleration techniques to
achieve better accuracy and efﬁciency in real-world applications.
To obtain high-quality ﬁnal solutions, an accurate prediction of the passenger traveling
demand is required (Kumar et al., 2018). Conventionally, most existing papers are devoted to
developing complicated machine learning models (e.g. deep graph convolutional networks)
to enhance prediction accuracy. However, since our input data contains various distributions
from different time and space segments (or equivalently, different scenarios), the perfor-
mance improvement brought by conventional approaches might not be signiﬁcant in our
setting. This is because most supervised learning models are not capable of distinguishing
mixed distributions, where learnings from one distribution can be distorted by the learning
process from others, so that they might unwittingly switch to learn another distribution while
recognizing the pattern of one distribution. Alternatively, we need to ﬁrstly process our input
to be almost one distribution. In this regard, we propose a preliminary scenario segmen-
tation, and then train various models corresponding to each scenario (Yu et al., 2019). In
most current studies, scenario segmentation can be realized by clustering algorithms (Davis
et al., 2016), such as K-means. However, the conventional K-means algorithm might per-
form poorly because the difference among each feature has been neglected (Xu et al., 2016),
leading to a biased distance metric. We develop an approach to identify the importance of
each feature (represented by the weights) according to the clustering result, and modify the
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
429

objective of clustering algorithms with respect to the updated feature importance. Note that,
this procedure must be iteratively operated since the obtained feature weights also contribute
to ﬁne-tuning the clustering procedure by modifying the objective function. In our research,
we propose an ensemble learning-based algorithm to learn the best distance metric in the
objective, by updating the weights of all features adaptively. The numerical results illus-
trate that the proposed metric learning technique outperforms similar approaches in existing
studies.
In summary, our contributions are two-fold. First, we propose a new operation scheme
for the public transportation system by incorporating Co-buses to better fulﬁll the commut-
ing demand through cooperating with ordinary buses in the existing routes and enhancing
ﬂexibility and utilization of the entire transportation resources. Accordingly, a large-scale
complex optimization problem is proposed and solved. Second, we adopt metric learning to
modify the clustering algorithm used for scenario segmentation of trafﬁc ﬂow with updat-
ing the weights of all features adaptively, it facilitates the GAN to characterize the demand
pattern in each scenario, and each GAN model is fed by a corresponding dataset where all
samples follow similar distribution. This results in considerable improvement in prediction
accuracy and makes full use of the value of data for decision-making support.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy reviews relevant
literature in this ﬁeld. Section 3 explains the prediction procedure for travel demand. Section 4
describes the research problem and proposes the mathematical formulation. Section 5 brieﬂy
introduces the solution strategy. The numerical experiments are presented in Sect. 6. Finally,
the managerial insights, limitations, and future research are presented and discussed in Sect. 7.
2 Literature review
The core of our proposed research is determining a set of optimal routes performed by Co-
buses with limited capacity and operational constraints to serve the surging demand in ﬁxed
ordinary bus lines. As a variant of the vehicle routing problem (VRP), our research considers
the routing choice together with ﬂeet allocation for Co-buses based on existing ﬁxed bus lines
(Ning et al., 2017). To articulate our contributions, we summarize the VRP in bus transport
both operating on ﬁxed bus lines and ﬂexible routes. In addition, with respect to the dynamic
daily demand, we propose a deep-learning-based prediction method for citizen travel demand
to enhance the quality of the corresponding routing and capacity allocation decisions. In the
following section, we review relevant studies in the domain of demand prediction algorithms
and identify the research gaps accordingly.
2.1 VRP in bus transport
VRP in bus transport comprises two types of variants. First, all vehicles are repeatedly
operated on ﬁxed routes. Most studies are devoted to bus route planning of ﬁxed routes
that constitute a complex urban bus network (Mathew et al., 2015). Borndörfer et al. (2007)
propose a multicommodity ﬂow model for line planning and optimizing corresponding depar-
ture frequencies to minimize operating costs and travel times. A passenger-oriented approach
called the “trip coverage model” has been proposed by Laporte et al. (2007) to integrate the
steps of the transit planning model (trip attraction and generation, trip distribution, mode
choice, and trafﬁc equilibrium) into an optimization procedure.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
430

Second, vehicle routes vary with time instead of being static or ﬁxed. This is because
uncertain demand in the urban network is involved. In related studies, “taxi route planning”
and the “shared bus” (Cohen & Kietzmann, 2014) are two typical cases. Marin and Codina
(2008) present a taxi planning network design (TPND) model. The TPND model is formu-
lated as a binary multicommodity network ﬂow problem with additional side constraints
under a multi-objective approach. Choi et al. (2018) propose a Dantzig–Wolfe decomposi-
tion approach to decide the transportation routes and the number and types of vehicles. For
the shared bus, Kong et al. (2018) employ a two-stage approach, which comprises travel
requirement prediction and dynamic route planning to generate dynamic routes for shared
buses. Ning et al. (2021) construct a joint bus scheduling and route planning framework to
maximize the number of passengers, minimize the total length of routes and the number of
buses required for the “last mile” scenario.
Regarding the above reviewed studies, their approaches have the following gaps that
challenge their direct application into our problem. The ﬁxed routing problem fails to meet
the dynamic nature of traveling demand (Cordeau & Laporte, 2007), leading to serious
resource waste and low operational efﬁciency. The varying routing type needs to design and
operate new dynamic routes and ignore cooperation with buses on current routes (Pillac et al.,
2013), which concentrates on internal ﬂeet resources but overlooks the possibility of using
the external bus ﬂeet. However, if both can be incorporated, a better synergy of all the vehicle
resources can be achieved.
2.2 Learning-based travel demand prediction
Traveldemandpredictionisessentiallyatime-seriespredictionbecauseofthetime-dependent
property of trafﬁc systems, which requires well-performed models to characterize the demand
distribution pattern across temporal and spatial views. Thus, the key issue has become ﬁnding
approaches with a high accuracy level. In recent years, a variety of publications have proposed
abundant alternatives for this purpose, which can be roughly divided into two categories:
discriminative models (Eachempati et al., 2021) and generative models (Banerjee et al.,
2020). Discriminative models yield predictions directly rather than generating and learning
the distribution explicitly (Gordon & Hernández-Lobato, 2020). These models are less likely
to be compatible with our dataset containing multi distributions, due to the weak capability
of identifying different distributions to prevent unstable performance. In contrast, generative
models can be more suitable for our problem and have the appealing ability to learn from the
distribution characteristics of unlabeled data.
In general, discriminative models focus on ﬁtting the decision boundary between the
classes. Cyprich et al. (2013), in the bus industry, extend Reg-ARIMA to incorporate trading
days and holidays. Wang et al. (2013) compare the gray model against elastic coefﬁcient
models to predict yearly passenger volume. Jiang et al. (2015) use a gray support vector
machine with empirical mode decomposition for passenger ﬂow prediction in high-speed
rail. In the past decade, with the improvement of computing power, deep learning models
have been able to map complex nonlinear relationships, which reduce errors by iterating to
make calculations and predictions, so deep neural networks are increasingly used in traf-
ﬁc time-series prediction. Zhang et al. (2016) propose a deep-learning-based trafﬁc ﬂow
prediction model—the stacked autoencoder method. By fusing the convolutional neural net-
work (CNN) and long short-term memory (LSTM) techniques, Ke et al. (2017) formulate
a deep learning approach to forecast short-term taxi-passenger demand. Despite the excel-
lent predictive performance of deep discriminative models, several shortcomings exist. First,
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
431

overﬁtting is more likely to be observed and thus produce highly conﬁdent predictions due
to the limited ﬁtting capabilities in capturing complicated relations and nonlinear patterns,
compared with the sample size. Therefore, they require massive labeled data sets for training
and validation (Tu, 2007). Further, discriminative models can only derive point estimation
without distribution description, and accuracy loss may arise because we do not fully utilize
the information extracted from historical data.
In contrast, generative models explicitly quantify the actual distribution pattern, providing
more overall proﬁles of the entire data set. In this aspect, the GAN is frequently utilized.
Liang et al. (2018) extend the original GAN proposed by (Goodfellow et al., 2014) to a two-
level LSTM neural network, which is capable of capturing the spatial–temporal correlation
of network-wide trafﬁc statement estimation. Yu et al. (2019a) use conditional GAN-driven
learning approaches to predict taxi-based mobility demand. Ai et al. (2019) propose a D-
GAN model via a deep implicit generative model and an unsupervised manner to predict
spatiotemporal data. Naji et al. (2021) use a GAN comprised of the recurrent network model
and the conventional network model with multi-source data to forecast taxi demand.
Regarding the above reviewed papers, two main research gaps are identiﬁed here. First,
sample segmentation is not implemented in some of them, which might lead to unstable
prediction results caused by mixed distributions. Second, most existing studies fail to reﬂect
true feature importance but use predeﬁned weight for each feature based on experience.
2.3 Summary
To demonstrate the academic signiﬁcance of our study, the following research gaps are
presented. First, most existing studies focus on ﬁxed routes or routes that vary from time
to time. These approaches do not lead to a synergy effect of the entire vehicle resource
and are hard to manage with dynamic scheduling. It can further lead to an inappropriate
conﬁguration when demand is time-dependent. Second, most existing urban transportation
forecasting generative models ignore the difference of feature importance or predeﬁne static
weight for each feature, which is hard to capture the true metric distance and leads to biased
results.
3 Prediction for travel demand
The accuracy of demand prediction will signiﬁcantly affect the quality of route planning
(Chen et al., 2021). Thus, we need to develop a well-performed algorithm to hourly predict
travel demand with respect to the time-dependent pattern characterized by the 24-dimensional
vector. Each dimension in the vector quantiﬁes the number of customers boarding buses in
each hour during a day, respectively. To this end, we choose the generative model instead
of the discriminative model, because the generative model can fully explore the potential of
data and provide a better proﬁle of distribution patterns. In other words, we tend to generate
the demand rather than estimate the value. Thanks to the outstanding learning capability to
extract the pattern, we adopt the modiﬁed GAN for demand generation, with trafﬁc scenario
segmentation boosted by metric learning, as illustrated in Fig. 2. We need to ﬁt different
GANs with the data corresponding to each scenario, yielding better outcomes for demand
prediction because the sample distribution varies among different scenarios.
We then elaborate on the key procedures to perform demand prediction, including data
preprocessing, trafﬁc scenario segmentation, and GAN-based generation.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
432

Fig. 2 Framework of generation for travel demand
3.1 Data preprocessing
Typical trafﬁc data preprocessing operations include data cleaning, imputation, and outlier
detection (Kumar et al., 2016). We ﬁrst perform the data cleaning operation to extract use-
ful information from raw data. Subsequently, the Bayesian tensor decomposition approach
(Chen et al., 2019) for spatiotemporal trafﬁc data imputation is appropriate to deal with the
missing raw data from the automatic card reader and camera. Speciﬁcally, this approach
extends the Bayesian matrix factorization model to learn the underlying statistical patterns
in spatiotemporal trafﬁc data, which can make good use of Bayesian inference for parameter
estimation, updating factor matrices and parameters (or hyperparameters) iteratively. The
entire structure of the data generation process of Bayesian matrix decomposition is shown
in Fig. 3. Then we clear out errors and identify the outliers by using the modiﬁed isolation
forests method. In this method, the probability of outliers occurring in the sparsely distributed
region is very low. The data set is randomly divided recursively until all sample points are
isolated, and outliers usually have shorter paths under this random segmentation strategy.
Finally, the outliers are replaced using the interpolation method.
3.2 Traffic scenario segmentation
Before predicting travel demand, it is necessary to understand different trafﬁc scenarios
(Kumar et al., 2022). Further, different distributions need to be distinguished when predict-
ing travel demand using GAN; otherwise, the performance will be poor as a result of losing
distribution consistency between training and application environments. The segmentation
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
433

Fig. 3 The entire structure of the data generation process of Bayesian matrix decomposition
for trafﬁc scenarios is essentially a clustering problem, which requires deﬁning a feature
vector to characterize behavior and determine the weights for each feature. Most existing
clustering algorithms applied for this purpose assume equal weight or assign predeﬁned
weights to each feature. However, this fails to reﬂect the true difference among all feature
importance and could be not effective because the manual setting only considers prior expe-
rience without a theoretical guarantee, leading to unrealistic clustering results as well as poor
clustering performance as measured by some popular metrics, such as the Davies–Bouldin
index (Demiriz et al., 1999) or the silhouette coefﬁcient (Aranganayagi & Thangavel, 2007)
based on the Euclidean metric or Manhattan distance. Motivated by this, we propose a metric
learning method to assign proper weights for each feature, which enhances the effectiveness
of the clustering algorithm.
The proposed method can learn the distance metric by updating all features’ weights of a
clustering algorithm (e.g., K-means) adaptively after justifying the importance by a classiﬁer
(e.g., random forests). Our proposed metric learning algorithm combines an unsupervised
learning algorithm with a supervised learning algorithm. Figure 4 exhibits the framework of
trafﬁc scenario segmentation via metric learning; each step is explained below.
More speciﬁcally, we design a modiﬁed K-means algorithm, aiming to maximize the
mean silhouette coefﬁcient of each cluster for the entire data set. The silhouette coefﬁcient
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
434

Fig. 4 The framework of trafﬁc scenario segmentation by metric learning
measures how similar a feature vector is to its cluster compared with neighboring clusters
(Aranganayagi & Thangavel, 2007). To compute the silhouette coefﬁcient, we apply the
weighted Euclidean distance to quantify the similarity.
As previously stated, it is critical to determine the proper weight of each feature. Hence, we
need to adopt metric learning to adjust the distance expression to obtain a more reasonable
clustering outcome. Metric learning relies on a supervised learning algorithm to interpret
the importance of each feature. To this end, we employ random forest, which requires the
label of cluster belongings. Note that not all cluster labels deserve high conﬁdence, and only
those vectors that are sufﬁciently close to the cluster center should be declared to be “well-
clustered”; that is to say, the cluster label can be highly likely to reﬂect the ground truth.
We select these vectors through a threshold-based rule that restricts the rank threshold (a
proportion) of all vectors ranked in ascending order by distance to the corresponding cluster
center. Each cluster constitutes the sample set for training, which can guarantee the reliability
of random forest.
The random forest will display each feature’s importance, variable importance measures
(VIMs), which can be obtained by computing the average change of the Gini index before
and after branching in each node of the forest, and the branching process performs splitting
in terms of the selected feature. We take normalized VIMs as the feature weight to derive
the distance. Once we acquire the new weights by training the random forest, the distance
deﬁnition also changes, and we need to modify the K-means algorithm, which also updates
the input for the next training of random forest. Conclusively, this is essentially an iterative
process when updating the weights until convergence meets, which refers to the gap of each
weight compared with the last iteration being smaller than a predeﬁned stopping threshold.
Note that the new weights need to be logarithmically transformed and normalized before the
next update. The pseudocodes are shown in Table 1.
3.3 GAN-based generation
GAN quantiﬁes the actual distribution pattern and provides more overall proﬁles of the data
set based on trafﬁc scenario segmentation. On this basis, we split the data set into several
groups, each of which corresponds to one speciﬁc scenario and can be employed to train a
GAN, which will improve accuracy and convergence.
In particular, GAN consists of a generator and a discriminator (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
as shown in Fig. 5.
The generator is a fully connected network. The input features of the generator model
cover the time-series distribution of the trafﬁc scenario, length of the bus line, number of bus
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
435

Table 1 Framework of weight adaptive metric learning algorithm
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
436

Fig. 5 The framework of GAN
Table 2 Quantitative description of the predictive features
Feature
Deﬁnition
Length of the bus line
The length of a bus line from the origin to the terminal
Number of bus stations
The number of stations on a bus line
Number of subway stations
The number of subway stations near the bus station on a bus line
Day type
Of Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday,
Saturday, Sunday, and Holiday, the one the target day belonged to
Weather
Of Sunny day, Rainy day, and Foggy day, the one the target day belonged to
stations, number of subway stations, day type, and weather, all of which need to be processed
by min–max normalization. Table 2 presents the deﬁnition of these predictive features. The
output is the generative travel demand distribution.
(1) Length of bus line: The length of a bus line reﬂects the operational characteristics of
a line to a certain extent. Generally, longer lines will result in lines spanning different
areas, representing the dependence of travel behaviors on station location. This property
can also reﬂect the space law from a new perspective.
(2) The number of bus stations: The number of bus stations on a line is a signiﬁcant factor in
demand prediction because the predicted demand can be accumulated from all stations
on the line. The number of passengers boarding at each station will affect the total
demand.
(3) The number of subway stations: The subway stations near the bus stop on a line will
affect passenger choice because of the high commuting efﬁciency of the subway. In many
cases, passengers need to transfer between buses and subways to reach their destinations,
leading to large passenger movements occurring at adjacent subway stations and bus
stops. Consequently, the number of subway stations adjacent to bus stations is also vital
in forecasting.
(4) Day type: The weekly nature of travel demand is also signiﬁcant. The travel demand of
people on weekdays follows “peak–valley” patterns. At weekends and holidays, their
travel demand is relatively scattered. Even on all weekdays, the travel rule for each day is
not the same (Xu et al., 2016). Further, discrete numeric values are labeled on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Holiday.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
437

(5) Weather: The inﬂuence of weather attributes on ground trafﬁc cannot be ignored. Low
visibility, heavy rain, and snowstorms all affect people’s travel choices. Therefore, Sunny
days, Rainy or Snowy days, and Foggy days can be labeled discretely to represent
weather information.
The discriminator is a CNN. The inputs of the discriminator comprise the generative
travel demand distribution and the real demand distribution, labeled as fake or real. The
discriminator is a classiﬁer used to distinguish the real and the fake. When the discriminator
fails to tell whether it is true or fake, the distribution generated by the generator is sufﬁciently
close to the real distribution.
The generator and discriminator will be trained simultaneously, and a combat game occurs
in this procedure. That is to say, the generator aims to cheat the discriminator, and the
discriminator puts every effort into distinguishing the samples from the generator and real
data. To implement the training process, we use the stochastic gradient descent method,
with the loss function deﬁned as a minimax form. We adjust parameters for G to minimize
log(1 −D(G(z))) and adapt parameters for D to minimize logD(x).
min
G max
D

Ex∼pdata(x)[logD(x)] +Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))]

(1)
4 Mathematical formulation for the route planning model
We formulate this problem as a mixed-integer programming model, aimed at minimizing the
gap between time-dependent demand and ﬂeet capacity, to determine the sequence of tasks
(existing bus line) for each Co-bus. Note that one bus line might be executed by different
Co-buses at the same time, and one Co-bus can serve a bus line more than once.
Our formulation allows the inclusion of practical planning assumptions such as the fol-
lowing:
a. Normal buses and Co-buses own the same capacity, they are homogeneous vehicles in
our model.
b. Customer preference for these buses remains constant.
We then elaborate the objectives, constraints, and parameters below, summarized in the
framework shown in Fig. 6.
To address our problem, we introduce the following notations in Table 3 for easy reference.
Then we deﬁne the following decision variables:
Xitn: 1 if Co-bus n operates task i in operating time t ∈T , 0 otherwise.
Yi jn: 1 if Co-bus n operates task j after task i, 0 otherwise.
Zin: 1 if Co-bus n operates task i, 0 otherwise.
In this scheme, the Co-bus is designed to cooperate with ordinary buses to ﬁll the gap. To
better understand this we establish a corresponding network, G, where each node represents
the event of running a bus line, consisting of a set of stations in successive order at a certain
time, which can be regarded as a task i ∈R executed by the Co-bus, where R is deﬁned
as the set of all candidate line tasks. Each arc refers to the transfer process from one bus
line to another. For instance, one Co-bus n ∈N has been scheduled to undertake two tasks
successively, which generates a successive task pair (1, 2). Task 1 is a node in the network
that represents bus line No. 36 is executed between 10 to 11 AM, while task 2 is another
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
438

Fig. 6 Framework of route planning
Table 3 Notations
Symbol
Description
G
The bus service network (R, L)
R
Set of all candidate line tasks
L
set of all origin–destination pairs (i, j), ∀i, j ∈R
P
Set of all periods
Rp
Set of all candidate line tasks in the period p ∈P
N
Set of all Co-buses
T
Set of all time slots
mn
The company morning shuttle task for Co-bus n
en
The company evening shuttle task for Co-bus n
M
A sufﬁciently large value
pi
Number of ordinary buses in task i ∈R
γ
Driver rest time
bi
Travel time of a single task i ∈R
Bi j
Transfer time associated with (i, j) ∈L
Di
Total customer demand for the task i ∈R
node that stands for bus line No. M562 is operated at 11 AM to 12 AM. The arc shows the
transfer process from task 1 to task 2, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
To this end, a more detailed mathematic example is introduced to describe the entire
process of the Co-bus. Co-bus n is a shuttle bus providing a commuting service to employees
of a speciﬁc company. The Co-bus will be idle in the periods between its morning commuting
task and its evening task. In our scheme, Co-bus n departs from the company morning shuttle
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
439

Fig. 7 Diagram of network
task, mn, then chooses some candidate line tasks in sequence, such as i, j ∈R, in its available
idle time, and returns to the company evening shuttle task, en. We denote that the transfer
processes as (mn, i), (i, j), ( j, en) ∈L need to be operated, and the ordinary bus always
runs on a ﬁxed bus line. The demand of each task is represented by parameters Di, referring
to the number of total passengers on board in the entire bus line, which is one dimension
in the vector produced by GAN in the previous section. The parameter bi is the travel time
of a bus line, which is derived using historical averages based on stationarity tests. The
transfer time Bi j quantiﬁes the time consumption switching from tasks i to j, which could
be calculated from the distance and average travel speed after veriﬁcation of the stationarity
by the augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test.
On this basis, we derive the objective function in Formula (2).
max

i∈R
pi + 
n∈N Zin
Di
(2)
We aim to maximize the average service level, which characterizes the gap between
demand and capacity. In general, the service level depicts the demand-capacity ratio (Liu
et al., 2021). It represents the average amount of resources available to each passenger.
Therefore, we adopt the ratio to quantify the service level simplicity, and thus we obtain a
linear form. Let pi + 
n∈N Zin be the total number of buses for a task i, containing the
number of ordinary buses pi and Co-buses 
n∈N Zin, which measures the capacity.
In addition, we consider some restrictions in real-world applications, such as the ﬂow
balance and time continuity conditions.
a. Flow balance.

i∈R
Ymnin  1 ∀n ∈N
(3)
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
440


i∈R
Yienn  1 ∀n ∈N
(4)

i∈R
Yi jn −

k∈R
Y jkn  0 ∀j ∈R, ∀n ∈N
(5)
Similar to the idea of modeling techniques in VRP problems (Dror, 1994), we derive ﬂow
balance constraints from characterizing different types of nodes. Constraint (3) ensures
that each Co-bus departs at the predeﬁned origin node. Constraint (4) ensures that the
Co-bus bus line tasks may eventually terminate at their destination. Flow conservation
conditions for the rest nodes are deﬁned by constraint (5), resulting in equal ﬂow between
the input and output of each node.
b. Rationality statement.
To guarantee the rationality of this model, we need to specify the following relation:

i∈Rp
Xitn≤1 ∀t ∈T , ∀n ∈N, ∀p ∈P
(6)
Constraint (6) guarantees that each Co-bus will not operate more than one task in a
period. Moreover, the decision variables should be correlated through the corresponding
constraint.

t∈T
Xitn≤M · Zin
∀i ∈R, ∀n ∈N
(7)

t∈T
Xitn≤Zin
∀i ∈R, ∀n ∈N
(8)
Constraints (7) and (8) indicate the relationship between Xitn and Zin. Constraint (7)
ensures that if a task i is not assigned to Co-bus n, the operating time for Co-bus n is
zero. That is to say, Co-bus does not operate the line task that is not selected. Since Xitn
can be utilized to record the operating time of the Co-bus, constraint (8) can also be
interpreted to mean that the operation time is at least 1 if the bus line task is selected.

i∈R
Yi jn≤Z jn
∀j ∈R, ∀n ∈N
(9)
Constraint (9) means that the bus line task is not operated if it is not selected.
c. Time continuity.
Co-bus needs to run continuously until the ending time of this task when task i is being
started. For better instructions, we use constraint (11) to address the above requirement,
under condition (10), which identiﬁes the start time of the task i.
If:
Xitn −Xi(t−1)n  1 ∀n ∈N, ∀i ∈R, ∀t ∈T
(10)
t0+bi

tt0
Xitn  bi
∀n ∈N
(11)
Then and;
Yi jn  1 ∀j ∈R
(12)
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
441


i∈Rp
t0+bi+Bi j+γ

tt0+bi
Xitn  0 ∀n ∈N
(13)
X j(t0+bi+Bi j+γ +1)n  1 ∀n ∈N
(14)
Further, the characteristics when the task j is operated after task i should also be addressed.
Condition (12) indicates that the successive task of i is j. If the task j will be operated after
task i ∈R, the transfer process will occur. Note that it should not be regarded as an extension
of task i ∈R. That is to say, during the transfer process and rest time, the Co-bus runs with no
task, imposed by constraint (13), and task j will start in the next period, as stated in constraint
(14). Constraints (6)–(14) can guarantee that the subtour is eliminated.
In summary, we formulate the problem as mixed-integer linear programming through the
above deﬁnition and transformation.
5 Solution strategy
Regarding the above formulation, Eqs. (10)–(14) are nonlinear constraints, leading to a
signiﬁcant computation burden. To cope with this issue, linearization techniques are applied
concerning the structural properties of each scenario. In particular, we take the speciﬁc value
of the variables under the proposed condition to perform the linearization process and simplify
the model calculation. Consequently, we obtain Eqs. (15)–(17).
t0+bi

tt0
Xitn −bi≥−M ·

1 −

Xitn −Xi(t−1)n

∀n ∈N, ∀i ∈R, ∀t ∈T
(15)
t0+bi+Bi j+γ

tt0+bi
Xitn≤M ·

2 −

Xitn −Xi(t−1)n + Yi jn

∀n ∈N, ∀i, j ∈R, ∀t ∈T
(16)
X j(t0+bi+Bi j+γ +1)n≥1 −

2 −

Xitn −Xi(t−1)n + Yi jn

∀n ∈N, ∀i, j ∈R, ∀t ∈T
(17)
In these equations, the big-M method is used to support the linearization process, and M
should be sufﬁciently large. Speciﬁcally, for Eq. (15), M should be greater than the upper
bound of t0+bi
tt0 Xitn, or bi since Xitn are all binary variables. For Eq. (16), M should be
greater than the upper bound of t0+bi+Bi j+γ
tt0+bi
Xitn, or Bi j + γ .
After Eqs. (10)–(14) are linearized as Eqs. (15)–(17), the original nonlinear model can be
fed into state-of-the-art solvers for optimization.
6 Numerical experiment
In this section, we test the performance of the proposed scheme and validate its superiority.
Section 6.1 shows that the proposed deep learning algorithm produces accurate prediction
results for travel demand. In Sect. 6.2, we provide a detailed numerical experiment of the Co-
bus, then compare the performance of the proposed scheme to some frequently-used schemes.
Finally, we analyze the sensitivity for different uncertainties in Sect. 6.3. All numerical
experiments are implemented using Python and the Gurobi solver v9.1 on a 2.90 GHz AMD
Ryzen 7 4800H PC with 16 GB RAM.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
442

The data set was collected by bus card readers and cameras from 159 bus lines in Shenzhen,
ametropolisinChina,betweenJanuary1andJanuary31,2021.Eachsamplecontainsdetailed
travel information, including the ID of devices (anonymized), passengers’ boarding time, bus
station ID, address of bus station, and bus line ID. This ﬁne-grained data set guarantees the
credibility of our travel demand analysis and modeling.
6.1 Travel demand prediction
First, the K-means algorithm is operated on all min–max normalized data, and the Euclidean
distance measures the distance between vectors. The optimal number of clusters K  4 is
determined by the elbow method (Bholowalia & Kumar, 2014).
We then improve the performance of GAN prediction using metric learning. The proposed
metric learning algorithm parameters are shown in Table 4.
We use the silhouette coefﬁcient, the maximum value of the mean s(i) overall data of the
entire data set, to measure the quality of clustering. A higher silhouette coefﬁcient indicates
that a sample is well matched to its cluster and poorly matched to its neighboring clusters.
s(i) 
b(i) −a(i)
max{a(i), b(i)}
(18)
where a(i) can be interpreted as a measure of how well i is assigned to its cluster (the smaller
the value, the better the assignment), and b(i) can be interpreted as the smallest distance of
i to all points in any other cluster.
The performance of clustering based on our method is compared with the predeﬁned
weights by experience. Speciﬁcally, the ratio of the predeﬁned weight in peak periods (7–10
AM and 6–9 PM) and other periods is set to 2:1. At the same time, we test the inﬂuence
of different rank thresholds on the algorithm. The performance is shown in Fig. 8. The pro-
posed approach outperforms the experience-based approach, since the silhouette coefﬁcient
is improved under a rank threshold of 0.5 from 0.3125 to 0.3722.
As illustrated in Fig. 9, we visualize the clustering results on distribution patterns under the
selected rank threshold of 0.5. The solid line is the center of each cluster, and the shaded parts
are used to outline ﬁgures to show each cluster’s boundaries (the upper and lower bounds).
In Fig. 10, we visualize the weights for each feature under the selected rank threshold of
0.5. These weights can be further employed in identifying the key trafﬁc patterns effectively.
For a GAN, the two neural networks—discriminator D and generator G—could be for-
mulated in any type (Yu et al., 2019a). In this study, to capture the proﬁle of distribution, a
CNN is used as the discriminator D. A fully connected neural network is used as the gener-
ator G. The CNN consists of four convolutional layers with 1, 16, 32, and 8 channels, three
Table 4 Parameters of metric
learning algorithm
Parameter
Value
The number of clusters K
4
Learning rate
0.1
Decay rate
0.95
Iterations
100
Rank threshold
0.4/0.5/0.6
Accuracy threshold
0.9
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
443

Fig. 8 The performance of silhouette coefﬁcient by metric learning
Fig. 9 The travel demand distribution for each cluster
pooling layers with 3 kernel sizes, and four fully connected layers with 96, 32, 8 and 1 neu-
rons respectively. The activation functions of every middle layer are ReLU, while the ﬁnal
layer connects with a sigmoid activation function. A batch-normalization layer (Saxena &
Cao, 2019) and a dropout layer are added after each convolutional layer to avoid overﬁtting.
Generator G has ﬁve fully connected layers with 6, 128, 64, 32, and 24 neurons respectively.
The activation function of every middle layer is ReLU, while the ﬁnal layer connects with
a sigmoid activation function, and trains GAN separately for each type of travel demand
distribution.
The performance of GAN based on metric learning is shown in Fig. 11, exhibiting better
ﬁtting results than that of GAN without metric learning. We then compare the performance of
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
444

Fig. 10 The weight for each feature
Fig. 11 The performance of the proposed GAN with the metric learning method
the original method with the proposed method, including the mean absolute error and mean
absolute percentage error, as shown in Table 5.
In conclusion, the performance of GAN is greatly boosted by metric learning. These
results can be further fed to the route planning model.
6.2 Route planning case study
Weconsideronly5buslinesand10Co-busesforrouteplanningtosimplifythedemonstration.
Module information and model inputs are given as follows.
Travel demand parameters can be derived from Sect. 6.1. The travel time bi, is set to the
mean of historical travel time in each period for all tasks, which we will justify using the
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
445

Table 5 The result of the
proposed method
MAPE
MAE
Proposed method
14.285
73.06
GAN without metric learning
24.605
141.109
Fig. 12 The travel time in the period
Table 6 The result of ADF
Index
Reference value
Test value
10% rejection region
−3.454355
−4.98979
5% rejection region
−2.872108
−4.98979
1% rejection region
−2.572401
−4.98979
P-value
2.32e−05
ADF test. We take the M176 bus running time from 9 to 10 AM over a month as an example
for ADF analysis, as shown in Fig. 12, and the result is exhibited in Table 6.
The test results are all less than the reference values of the boundaries of 1, 5, and 10%,
and the p-value is very close to 0. Therefore, we believe that the stationarity of the series
is signiﬁcant. The travel time of each line in each period is conﬁrmed to be stable by the
ADF test with a small variance. Hence, the average is desirable based on a large amount of
historical data.
Since it is difﬁcult to collect the actual transfer time data for Co-buses, we generate them
by calculating the ratio of the between-task distance interval to the average travel speed. Note
that this generation technique may affect the performance because the travel time in peak
periods is longer than average in general. This effect will be discussed in detail later through
sensitivity analysis.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
446

Table 7 The information of each
Co-bus
Parameter
Value
The number of bus lines
5
The number of Co-buses
10
The number of periods
6
The number of timeslots
12
Rest time
10 min
The company for 10 Co-buses
respectively
[0, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4]
The start time for 10 Co-buses
respectively
[9:10, 9:20, 9:30, 9:20, 9:00,
9:10, 9:20, 9:10, 9:20, 9:30]
The end time for 10 Co-buses
respectively
[20:00, 20:20, 19:30, 19:50,
20:40, 19:20, 19:10, 20:00,
20:50, 21:00]
Fig. 13 Diagram of the route of Co-bus No. 4
The number of buses in each period of the original line is set to the number of departures in
each period in historical data. Other parameters for the model are listed in Table 7, including
(a) the number of bus lines, Co-buses, periods, and timeslots, (b) rest time, and (c) the
company, the start time and the end time for each Co-bus.
Figure 13 shows the route of Co-bus No. 4 serving Company 2 (i.e., this Co-bus departs
from and returns to Company 2). During these periods, it runs in the order of lines 3, 4, 0, 4,
1, 4, 2, and 3, respectively. All Co-bus timetables are shown in Fig. 14 and All Co-bus routes
are shown in Table 8.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
447

Fig. 14 Diagram of the timetable of all Co-buses
Table 8 The optimal route for
each Co-bus
Co-Bus No
Route
Co-Bus 0
Company 0, line 2, line 4, line 2, line 4, line 1, line 0,
line 2, Company 0
Co-Bus 1
Company 0, line4, line 4, line 1, line 0, line 4, line 0,
line 2, Company 0
Co-Bus 2
Company 1, line 2, line 3, line 1, line0, line 4, line 0,
line 1, Company 1
Co-Bus 3
Company 1, line 2, line 4, line 3, line 4, line 1, line 2,
line 0, Company 1
Co-Bus 4
Company 2, line3, line 4, line 0, line 4, line 1, line 4,
line 2, line 3, Company 2
Co-Bus 5
Company 2, line 3, line 4, line 2, line 4, line 4, line 2,
line 0, Company 2
Co-Bus 6
Company 3, line 2, line 4, line 3, line 4, line 1, line 0,
line 2, Company 3
Co-Bus 7
Company 3, line 2, line 4, line 2, line 4, line 4, line 2,
line 0, Company 3
Co-Bus 8
Company 4, line 1, line 4, line 1, line 0, line 4, line 2,
line 0, Company 4
Co-Bus 9
Company 4, line 0, line 0, line 4, line 4, line 1, line 4,
line 2, line 3, Company 4
We then compare the optimization results under three different schemes: (a) Co-bus with
the proposed scheme, (b) Co-bus with the nearby-service scheme, which means the Co-
bus only assists on the nearest ordinary bus line to the company, and (c) without Co-bus.
Speciﬁcally, we compare their service level, average Co-bus utilization rate (in (a) and (b)),
and the maximum difference in Co-bus utilization rate (in (a) and (b)), as shown in Fig. 15.
Note that the utilization rate is deﬁned as the ratio of the travel time on all bus line tasks to
the total idle time. The proposed scheme (a) outperforms the scheme without Co-buses (c)
by 56.2% and the nearby-service scheme (b) by 25.1% in service level. At the same time, the
mean of the Co-bus utilization rate is also improved by 30.1% from the nearby-service scheme
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
448

Fig. 15 The performance of the proposed scheme compared with other schemes
Fig. 16 The sensitivity analysis on travel time in the peak periods
(b). The utilization rate among all 10 Co-buses is balanced, with a maximum difference of
13.8% in this scheme.
6.3 Sensitivity analysis
Trafﬁc environments in peak times are quite complicated, we take the morning peak in Shen-
zhen as an example for sensitivity analysis, as the morning peak period is more concentrated
while the evening peak period in Shenzhen is much longer. More speciﬁcally, we perform
sensitivity analysis on the inﬂuence of different parameters in the morning peak period (8
AM to 10 AM) such as travel time, transfer time, and the number of departures on ordinary
lines.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
449

Fig. 17 The sensitivity analysis for transfer time in the peak periods
Fig. 18 The sensitivity analysis for the number of departures on ordinary line in the peak periods
First, we compare the situation in which the model’s travel time in morning peak times
increases or decreases by 20%. The results are shown in Fig. 16. It is found that the additional
travel time in a short period does not damage the performance of the ﬁnal result; on the con-
trary, the service level actually increases from 0.478 to 0.494 when the travel time increases
by 20%. Empirical observations can explain that Co-buses will adjust their long-term deci-
sions toward a more optimal service level when facing a current disadvantage in short-term
travel time. Meanwhile, the transportation system can still maintain a balance among the
utilization rates of different Co-buses.
We then compare the situation in which the transfer time in morning peak times increases
or decreases by 20% on the model. The results are illustrated in Fig. 17. It is found that the
variation of transfer time in a short time has little inﬂuence on the ﬁnal result of the model,
including the services level and Co-bus utilization. This can be explained by the fact that
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
450

the object of our study is a region in a city, which means that the bus lines are relatively
concentrated, and the transfer process does not need to stop and pick up passengers along the
bus line. Therefore, the overall inﬂuence is slight regardless of the variation in transfer time.
Finally,wecomparethesituationinwhichthenumberofdeparturesonordinarybuslinesin
morning peak periods increases or decreases by 20% on the model. The results are illustrated
in Fig. 18. It suggests that the change will have little impact on the route planning of Co-buses.
The service level will increase as the number of ordinary buses increases simultaneously,
which indicates that the operation of the Co-bus has strong robustness and will not ﬂuctuate
signiﬁcantly due to the ﬁne-tuning of bus companies to the original bus line departure strategy.
Brieﬂy, we have demonstrated the superiority and robustness of our proposed Co-bus
scheme, and that the route planning model can improve the service level and utilization efﬁ-
ciency of Co-buses. Therefore, our proposed scheme (Co-bus) can provide effective solutions
for urban bus management.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a new scheme “Co-bus” for urban bus transportation, which con-
siders that cooperation with ordinary buses to improve the service level and reduce the gap
between travel demand and capacity. To support our decision model, we use GAN with trafﬁc
scenario segmentation by metric learning, which can learn the weights of features adaptively
to facilitate predictive performance. Based on the actual bus data, we conduct extensive exper-
iments to verify that our scheme can generate effective routes to optimize the operation of
Co-buses. The experiment results show that our planning routes can signiﬁcantly improve the
service level and Co-bus utilization rate. Our proposed Co-bus scheme effectively alleviates
the imbalance between urban demand and capacity.
In addition, some managerial implications are obtained through our study. First, public
transport operators are supposed to consider expanding the supply of Co-bus, to promote a
more ﬂexible new norm with the idea of sharing paradigm, so that the passenger transport
resources are more likely to adapt to the changing passenger demand. Second, insightful
strategic and operational decision-making can be facilitated by not only an accurate prediction
model but also proper processing skills to enhance the data quality. This will completely
convey the value of data and enable better prediction performance. To realize that, we need
to reduce the overﬁtting risk and better reﬂect the ground truth, by including but not limited
to carrying out rational segmentation and exploiting the synergy effect by ensemble learning,
which also implies the key idea of “data-driven”.
Finally, we list some extensions to this work. (1) The integration of both the Co-bus
and other available transport resources, such as minibuses and private vehicles, in the road
transportation system. Through using these additional resources, the joint optimization of
the overall resources of the entire city can be studied, combined with the prediction of time-
dependent passenger demand. (2) Improved prediction algorithm to enhance the model’s
ability to capture and recognize wave patterns through representation learning and automatic
feature engineering. (3) Better acceleration strategies for the MIP, e.g., some cutting planes
can be customized according to the scenario characteristics and optimal structures, in order
to minimize the feasible domain and accelerate the solution.
Acknowledgements The authors Jiguang Wang and Yilun Zhang contribute to this work equally. This
research is funded by the Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Commission (Grant No.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
451

JCYJ20210324135011030), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 71971127), the
Guangdong Pearl River Plan (2019QN01X890), and the ECR fund of the University of Liverpool.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ai, Y., Li, Z., Gan, M., Zhang, Y., Yu, D., Chen, W., & Ju, Y. (2019). A deep learning approach on short-
term spatiotemporal distribution forecasting of dockless bike-sharing system. Neural Computing and
Applications, 31(5), 1665–1677.
Aranganayagi, S., & Thangavel, K. (2007). Clustering categorical data using silhouette coefﬁcient as a relo-
cating measure. In International conference on computational intelligence and multimedia applications
(ICCIMA 2007)
Banerjee, N., Morton, A., & Akartunalı, K. (2020). Passenger demand forecasting in scheduled transportation.
European Journal of Operational Research, 286(3), 797–810.
Bholowalia, P., & Kumar, A. (2014). EBK-means: A clustering technique based on elbow method and k-means
in WSN. International Journal of Computer Applications, 105(9).
Borndörfer, R., Grötschel, M., & Pfetsch, M. E. (2007). A column-generation approach to line planning in
public transport. Transportation Science, 41(1), 123–132.
Bouton, S., Knupfer, S. M., Mihov, I., & Swartz, S. (2015). Urban mobility at a tipping point.**
Chen, J., Lim, C. P., Tan, K. H., Govindan, K., & Kumar, A. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence-based human-
centric decision support framework: an application to predictive maintenance in asset management under
pandemic environments. Annals of Operations Research, pp 1–24.
Chen, X., He, Z., & Sun, L. (2019). A Bayesian tensor decomposition approach for spatiotemporal trafﬁc data
imputation. Transportation Research Part c: Emerging Technologies, 98, 73–84.
Chen, X., Yu, L., Zhang, Y., & Guo, J. (2009). Analyzing urban bus service reliability at the stop, route, and
network levels. Transportation Research Part a: Policy and Practice, 43(8), 722–734.
Choi, J., Lee, C., & Park, S. (2018). Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition approach to the vehicle assignment problem
with demand uncertainty in a hybrid hub-and-spoke network. Annals of Operations Research, 264(1),
57–87.
Cohen, B., & Kietzmann, J. (2014). Ride on! Mobility business models for the sharing economy. Organization
& Environment, 27(3), 279–296.
Cordeau, J.-F., & Laporte, G. (2007). The dial-a-ride problem: Models and algorithms. Annals of Operations
Research, 153(1), 29–46.
Cyprich, O., Koneˇcný, V., & Kilianova, K. (2013). Short-term passenger demand forecasting using univariate
time series theory. PROMET-Trafﬁc Transportation, 25(6), 533–541.
Davis, N., Raina, G., & Jagannathan, K. (2016). A multi-level clustering approach for forecasting taxi travel
demand. In 2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC).
Demiriz, A., Bennett, K. P., & Embrechts, M. J. (1999). Semi-supervised clustering using genetic algorithms.
Artiﬁcial neural networks in engineering, pp 809–814.
Dror, M. (1994). Note on the complexity of the shortest path models for column generation in VRPTW.
Operations Research, 42(5), 977–978.
Eachempati, P., Srivastava, P. R., Kumar, A., Tan, K. H., & Gupta, S. (2021). Validating the impact of accounting
disclosures on stock market: A deep neural network approach. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 170, 120903.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., .Courville, A., Bengio, Y.
(2014). Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27.
Gordon, J., & Hernández-Lobato, J. M. (2020). Combining deep generative and discriminative models for
Bayesian semi-supervised learning. Pattern Recognition, 100, 107156.
Jiang, X., Pang, Y., Pan, J., & Li, X. (2015). Flexible sliding windows with adaptive pixel strides. Signal
Processing, 110, 37–45.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
452

Ke, J., Zheng, H., Yang, H., & Chen, X. M. (2017). Short-term forecasting of passenger demand under
on-demand ride services: A spatio-temporal deep learning approach. Transportation Research Part c:
Emerging Technologies, 85, 591–608.
Kong, X., Li, M., Tang, T., Tian, K., Moreira-Matias, L., & Xia, F. (2018). Shared subway shuttle bus route
planning based on transport data analytics. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering,
15(4), 1507–1520.
Kumar, A., Shankar, R., Choudhary, A., & Thakur, L. S. (2016). A big data MapReduce framework for
fault diagnosis in cloud-based manufacturing. International Journal of Production Research, 54(23),
7060–7073.
Kumar, A., Shankar, R., & Thakur, L. S. (2018). A big data driven sustainable manufacturing framework for
condition-based maintenance prediction. Journal of Computational Science, 27, 428–439.
Kumar, A., Gopal, R. D., Shankar, R., & Tan, K. H. (2022). Fraudulent review detection model focusing on
emotional expressions and explicit aspects: investigating the potential of feature engineering.Decision
Support Systems, 113728.
Laporte, G., Marín, Á., Mesa, J. A., & Ortega, F. A. (2007). An integrated methodology for the rapid transit
network design problem. In Algorithmic methods for railway optimization (pp. 187–199). Springer.
Liang, X. Y., Du, X. S., Wang, G. L., & Han, Z. (2019). A Deep Reinforcement Learning Network for
Trafﬁc Light Cycle Control. Ieee Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 68(2), 1243–1253. <Go to
ISI>://WOS:000458803200017
Liang,Y.,Cui,Z.,Tian,Y.,Chen,H.,&Wang,Y.(2018).Adeepgenerativeadversarialarchitecturefornetwork-
wide spatial-temporal trafﬁc-state estimation. Transportation Research Record, 2672(45), 87–105.
Liu, F., Niu, B., Xing, M., Wu, L., & Feng, Y. (2021). Optimal cross-trained worker assignment for a hybrid seru
production system to minimize makespan and workload imbalance. Computers & Industrial Engineering,
160, 107552.
Lyu, Y., Chow, C. Y., Lee, V. C. S., Ng, J. K. Y., Li, Y. H., & Zeng, J. (2019). CB-Planner: A bus line planning
framework for customized bus systems. Transportation Research Part C-Emerging Technologies, 101,
233–253. <Go to ISI>://WOS:000466060900014
Marín, A., & Codina, E. (2008). Network design: Taxi planning. Annals of Operations Research, 157(1),
135–151.
Mathew, N., Smith, S. L., & Waslander, S. L. (2015). Planning paths for package delivery in heterogeneous
multirobot teams. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science Engineering, 12(4), 1298–1308.
Naji, H. A., Xue, Q., Zhu, H., & Li, T. (2021). Forecasting taxi demand using generative adversarial networks
with multi-source data. Applied Sciences, 11(20), 9675.
Ning, Z., Sun, S., Zhou, M., Hu, X., Wang, X., Guo, L., Kwok, R. Y. (2021). Online Scheduling and Route
Planning for Shared Buses in Urban Trafﬁc Networks. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems.
Ning, Z., Xia, F., Ullah, N., Kong, X., & Hu, X. (2017). Vehicular social networks: Enabling smart mobility.
IEEE Communications Magazine, 55(5), 16–55.
Pillac, V., Gendreau, M., Guéret, C., & Medaglia, A. L. (2013). A review of dynamic vehicle routing problems.
European Journal of Operational Research, 225(1), 1–11.
Saxena, D., & Cao, J. (2019). D-gan: Deep generative adversarial nets for spatio-temporal prediction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:.08556
Tu, Z. (2007). Learning generative models via discriminative approaches. In 2007 IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Wang, Y., Chen, X., Han, Y., & Guo, S. (2013). Forecast of passenger and freight trafﬁc volume based on
elasticity coefﬁcient method and grey model. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 96, 136–147.
Wang, Y., Zhang, D. X., Hu, L., Yang, Y., & Lee, L. H. (2017). A Data-Driven and Optimal Bus Schedul-
ing Model With Time-Dependent Trafﬁc and Demand. Ieee Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 18(9), 2443–2452. <Go to ISI>://WOS:000408755500015
Xu, F., Li, Y., Wang, H., Zhang, P., & Jin, D. (2016). Understanding mobile trafﬁc patterns of large scale
cellular towers in urban environment. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 25(2), 1147–1161.
Yu, H., Chen, X., Li, Z., Zhang, G., Liu, P., Yang, J., & Yang, Y. (2019). Taxi-based mobility demand formula-
tion and prediction using conditional generative adversarial network-driven learning approaches. IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 20(10), 3888–3899.
Zhang, Y., Guo, H., Li, C., Wang, W., Jiang, X., & Liu, Y. (2016). Which one is more attractive to traveler,
taxi or tailored taxi? An empirical study in China. Procedia Engineering, 137, 867–875.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 339:427–453
453