TITLE: Multi-source ensemble method with random source selection for virtual metrology
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06179-y
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06179-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Multi-source ensemble method with random source selection
for virtual metrology
Gejia Zhang1 · Tianhui Wang1 · Jaeseung Baek2 · Myong-Kee Jeong1
·
Seongho Seo3 · Jaekyung Choi3
Received: 1 September 2023 / Accepted: 18 July 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
In the era of Industry 4.0, the complexity of semiconductor production is growing very fast,
raising the possibility of unnoticed defective wafers and subsequent wasteful use of resources.
One of the key advantages of Industry 4.0 is the accessibility to big data, which can be
obtained from a number of sensors, including multiple sensor data and extensive data reposi-
tories. Recently, engineers have developed data fusion strategies for virtual metrology (VM)
prediction models to effectively handle data from multiple sources. This research explores
a novel approach for data-driven VM prediction model for multi-source data, namely multi-
source ensemble method with random source selection. By utilizing the bagging principle
for multi-source data and tree-based prediction paradigms, the proposed approach randomly
selects subsets of data sources to construct each tree learner, thus reducing interdependence
among the trees and minimizing the risk of overﬁtting, which can be a challenge faced by
existing tree-based prediction models. To validate and illustrate the practical applicability of
our proposed method, we use real-world data from the plasma etching process, aiming to
provide potential beneﬁts and effectiveness of our methodology.
B Jaeseung Baek
jbaek@nmu.edu
B Myong-Kee Jeong
mjeong@soe.rutgers.edu
Gejia Zhang
gejia.zhang@rutgers.edu
Tianhui Wang
tianhui.wang@rutgers.edu
Seongho Seo
shseo@kisti.re.kr
Jaekyung Choi
jk@kisti.re.kr
1
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Rutgers University, 96 Frelinghuysen Road,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
2
College of Business, Northern Michigan University, 1401 Presque Isle, Marquette, MI 49855, USA
3
Division of Data Analysis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information, 66 Hoegiro,
Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 02456, South Korea
123

Annals of Operations Research
Keywords Data fusion · Ensemble method · Multi-sensor · Multi-source bagging · Virtual
metrology
1 Introduction
Semiconductor manufacturing is a complex and precise process that produces integrated
circuits (ICs) or microchips (Mönch et al., 2011). It ranks among the fastest growing and
most competitive industries in today’s global market (Yugma et al., 2015). These microchips
produced in semiconductor manufacturing are the fundamental building blocks of numerous
electronic devices that almost everyone uses daily, including computers, smartphones, and
homeappliances.Inbroaderindustries,theyarealsoessentialfortelecommunicationsystems,
healthcare equipment, automotive electronics, and many more. Manufacturing of ICs can
usuallybecompletedinfourstates,namelywaferfabrication,waferprobe,assembly,andﬁnal
functional test as well as burn-in (Chen et al., 1988). The manufacturing production process
initiates with a raw wafer. This wafer, typically a slim disc, is usually composed of silicon or
gallium arsenide (Mönch et al., 2011). According to Moore’s Law, which was proposed by
Intel co-founder Gordon Moore in 1965, the quantity of transistors and resistors incorporated
on an IC chip is observed to double approximately every 2 years or approximately 12–
24 months (Burg & Ausubel, 2021; Moore, 2006). Nowadays, Moore’s Law persists as a
foundational benchmark that researchers endeavor to uphold in their investigative pursuits,
and this is achieved by ﬁtting an increasing number of components on a semiconductor chip
(Abe et al., 2008). Given the rapid miniaturization of ICs, achieving high precision in the
measurement of the critical dimension (CD) has become of utmost importance.
One of the most common approaches to guarantee a speciﬁc yield in production processes
is the use of metrology, a method for quality monitoring in the semiconductor industry (Boin
& Lerch, 1998; Bunday et al., 2007; Kang et al., 2011; Su et al., 2007). In our paper, metrol-
ogy is deﬁned as the scientiﬁc study of measurement, ensuring precision and consistency
in the ﬁeld of engineering and manufacturing. While current metrology systems have been
extensively utilized in controlling the semiconductor manufacturing process, they have cer-
tain limitations. Firstly, measuring metrology values relies exclusively on a small sample
of wafers. The presumption underlying sampling-based metrology is that a few randomly
selected wafers can serve as a proxy for the entire batch and that production equipment can
consistently output components of the same quality even in complex situations. However,
this assumption contradicts the reality of semiconductor production. Mitigating this issue by
inspecting each wafer after every procedure is not feasible or practical, as it would require a
vast quantity of metrology tools (Cheng et al., 2007; Khan et al., 2007; Kang et al., 2011; Lin
et al., 2006). Moreover, it is important to consider that metrology elongates the duration of the
complete manufacturing process. During the metrology procedure, while one wafer is being
processed, the remaining wafers are left in an inactive state. As a result, this delay signiﬁ-
cantly diminishes the operational efﬁciency of the production equipment, thereby adversely
affecting overall productivity (Chang et al., 2006; Kang et al., 2011; Yung-Cheng & Cheng,
2005).
Due to the aforementioned drawbacks in physical metrology systems, virtual metrology
(VM) has emerged as a critical technique in semiconductor manufacturing. VM is speciﬁed as
the practice of predicting metrological data using process parameters and sensor data, with-
out direct measurement, to enable rapid assessment and control of manufacturing processes.
In VM, sensing refers to the use of sensors to acquire data related to speciﬁc parameters or
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Virtual metrology for multi-source data
environmental conditions and monitoring is the continuous surveillance of processes or sys-
tems, typically involving the recording and analysis of data over time. The utilization of VM
enhances quality control by ensuring uniformity and minimizing variations among wafers.
Furthermore, it enhances manufacturing efﬁciency and cost-effectiveness by reducing cycle
times and alleviating the production costs usually associated with physical measurements.
Especially in high-precision production, where real measurements are costly and slow, VM
streamlines the process and reduces operational expenses (Chen et al., 2005; Kang and Kang,
2017; Yung-Cheng & Cheng, 2005).
With technological progress, VM in semiconductor manufacturing has evolved into a
complex and sophisticated procedure, encompassing hundreds of unique sensors to utilize
multiple data sources to predict metrology values accurately (Kang et al., 2009, 2011). Fig-
ure 1 depicts the general process of constructing a VM prediction model by leveraging data
from diverse sources. Notably, it emphasizes utilizing multi-source data, wherein informa-
tion is collected from various sensors or sources. The rationale behind utilizing multiple data
sources is to enhance the precision of VM predictions, surpassing the limitations of relying
solely on a singular data stream, which might provide a narrow or biased perspective. How-
ever, as each data source possesses unique characteristics in predicting the metrology values
and a large number of data sources to be considered, effectively incorporating multiple data
sources into the VM prediction model becomes a challenging task to achieve more accurate
predictions.
Several VM prediction models with the aid of sensor data have been proposed by utilizing
statisticalandmachinelearningapproaches.Commonlyutilizedmethodologiesincludelinear
regression, support vector regression (SVR), neural network (NN), and tree-based methods
(Kang et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2017). Owing to its simplicity and capability to intuitively
understand the relationship between the response and predictor variables, linear regression
has often been used in VM (Kang et al., 2009). However, its limitation lies in its incapability to
explain a certain degree of nonlinear relationships between response and predictor variables
(Kim et al., 2017). SVR is an extension of support vector machines for regression problems.
It extends the capabilities of linear models to handle non-linear data through the use of kernel
functions. SVR is particularly valued in VM for its robustness and the ability to generalize
123

Annals of Operations Research
wellfromlimitedorhigh-dimensionaldata,makingitanessentialtoolforcomplexmetrology.
It works by mapping input features into a high-dimensional space where linear regression
is performed. Meanwhile, NN has the ability to model intricate patterns and dynamics in
data through layers of interconnected neurons, making them powerful for some of the VM
tasks. NN consists of layers of interconnected nodes or neurons, which are units that compute
weighted sums of their inputs and apply an activation function. NNs can approximate any
continuous function with enough neurons and layers, making them ﬂexible for modeling
complex relationships. Recently, SVR and NN have been utilized in VM owing to their
capability of handling nonlinearity between variables and their adaptability to process various
shapes of data patterns. Yung-Cheng and Cheng (2005) and Hung et al. (2007) proposed
VM systems based on NN, including feed-forward NN (FFNN), backpropagation NN, and
radial basis function NN, to predict metrology values in wafer chemical vapor decomposition
(CVD) process. Furthermore, Kang et al. (2009) developed a VM system for the wafer etching
process. Their approach extracted summary statistics, such as mean, variance, minimum, etc.,
from multi-source sensors for each subprocess. Then, these statistics were combined into a
single vector, which serves as an input vector for SVR and FFNN models. Lenz and Barak
(2013) utilized SVR to develop a VM model for predicting the dielectric layer thickness in the
CVD process. Yang et al. (2016) adopted back-propagation neural network and partial least
square techniques to build automatic VM models for wheel quality prediction. In addition,
Kang et al. (2016) proposed a semi-supervised SVR-based VM system using unlabeled and
labeled data to improve prediction accuracy. However, SVR is sensitive to noise data, and
the sensor data can be noisy in VM, which reduces the accuracy of the predictions (Sabzekar
and Hasheminejad, 2021). In addition, when faced with high-dimensional sensor data with
noise and various data patterns across the observations, NN may learn irrelevant patterns,
leading to a decrease in performance on unseen data even if they exhibit high accuracy on
the training set (Chen et al., 2020).
However, when dealing with multi-source sensor data for predicting VM in the semi-
conductor manufacturing process, applying the approaches mentioned above may not fully
capture the distinct characteristics present in each data source. More speciﬁcally, existing
approaches transform multi-source data or features into a combined data source, which is
represented by a single vectorized format, and use it as an input for constructing a single
prediction model. In such cases, the unique characteristics of the individual data source could
be overlooked by combining them all together in the model. Thus, it is crucial to investigate
an appropriate architecture of the input data and source-speciﬁc prediction model capable of
distinguishing between various data sources.
In this paper, we introduce an innovative fusion scheme speciﬁcally designed for multi-
source data based on an ensemble method called the multi-source ensemble method with
random source selection (MSEM-RSS). The MSEM-RSS is speciﬁcally designed for han-
dling multi-source data, demonstrated by its process of randomly selecting various data
sources and then merging them to construct decision trees. The random selection of data
sources allows MSEM-RSS to generate diverse trees. MSEM-RSS provides improved gen-
eralization across different sources. This adaptability ensures the model is not biased toward
one particular source, a critical factor when dealing with diverse multi-source data. Further-
more, for each tree learner, another subset of data sources is randomly selected for each tree
node split. The inherent randomness introduced within MSEM-RSS reduces the susceptibility
of individual trees to overﬁtting and simultaneously minimizes the correlation between trees.
In essence, MSEM-RSS offers an advantageous solution for addressing complex problems
that require the integration of multiple data sources while avoiding issues linked to overﬁt-
ting and high inter-tree correlation. In addition, compared to existing VM prediction models
123

Annals of Operations Research
that construct a single prediction model by utilizing combined data sources, the proposed
prediction model based on MSEM-RSS creates multiple prediction models, each capable
of capturing different aspects of the data from different sources. This strategy improves
accuracy since each model is specialized in handling the unique characteristics and patterns
present in different sources. Experiments on a real-world semiconductor dataset demonstrate
that the proposed approach achieves high accuracy in predicting wafer CD measurements,
outperforming alternative benchmarking approaches.
The structure of this paper is as follows: In Sect.2, we review the related work regarding
the tree-based methods utilized in VM. Section3 dives into the speciﬁc details of our proposed
MSEM-RSS method. In Sect.4, we introduce a real-world case study in the semiconductor
plasma etching process and present the performance of the proposed and existing approaches.
Finally, Sect.5 concludes the paper, encapsulating our ﬁndings and proposing directions for
future research.
2 Related work
Predictive modeling techniques are crucial in VM, with various statistical methods developed
to improve accuracy. Tree-based methods, widely used in VM, offer ﬂexibility in handling
both linear and nonlinear data (Chen et al., 2020). Their hierarchical structure provides clear
insights for VM applications. Here, we brieﬂy review these methods.
2.1 Decision tree in regression
Decision trees offer a ﬂexible approach, capable of modeling non-linear relationships and
interactions between variables. They primarily operate on the concept of recursive division
of the data space, dividing the data based on predeﬁned conditions to enhance the accuracy
of estimating speciﬁc parameters or measurements, such as the thickness of a wafer. Their
hierarchical structure makes them intuitive to understand and implement, providing clear and
actionable insights for VM applications.
A decision tree resembles a ﬂowchart-like structure, where the internal nodes represent
tests on attributes, branches represent the outcomes of the tests, and leaf nodes represent class
labels. The paths from the root to the leaf nodes represent classiﬁcation rules. Mathematically,
the decision tree partitions the feature space into distinct regions, and the decision at each
node is made based on the criterion that provides the best split, commonly measured by Gini
impurity or information gain (Loh, 2011). The classiﬁcation and regression tree is a widely
recognized method within the realm of tree-based models (Quinlan, 1986). Unlike models
that are strictly linear, these tree-based VM models can adapt to a variety of data shapes
and structures, making them ﬂexible tools to deal with sensor data (Chen et al., 2020). Choi
and Jeong (2018) introduced metrology prediction models based on regression tree and lasso
utilizing multi-source sensor data collected from multiple etching subprocesses. Throughout
their experimental result, the performance of the regression tree-based prediction model
outperforms other algorithms, showing the adaptability of the decision tree across various
data types.
Despitetheadvantagesofthedecisiontreemethodintermsofinterpretabilityandintuitive-
ness, there are several drawbacks associated with single-tree models. Firstly, single decision
trees are prone to overﬁtting, especially when trained on limited data or in the presence of
signiﬁcant noise. Due to their tendency to excessively partition the data space, single decision
123

Annals of Operations Research
trees can become overly sensitive to minor variations in the training data, thus reducing their
ability to generalize to unseen data. Secondly, single decision trees may fail to capture com-
plex non-linear relationships in the data, leading to poor model performance. Additionally,
decision trees are high-variance models, meaning that even when trained on the same data
multiple times, they may yield different results, necessitating cautious application (Breiman,
2001; Friedman, 2001).
2.2 Ensemble methods
To address the limitations brought by a single tree, various improvement methods have been
proposed, such as ensemble learning techniques. Ensemble learning combines multiple base
decision tree models to mitigate the risk of overﬁtting, improve model generalization, and
achieve signiﬁcant performance improvements. Techniques like bootstrap aggregating (bag-
ging) and boosting are frequently utilized in ensemble learning to enhance the performance
of tree-based models. By integrating multiple single tree-based models, ensemble techniques
bolster the predictive power and stability of tree-based models (Breiman, 1996).
Furthermore, tree-based ensemble models are robust to noisy data by averaging the noise
across multiple trees, resulting in reliable predictions (Breiman, 1996; Chen et al., 2020;
Quinlan, 1986). Therefore, the efﬁcacy of tree-based ensemble models in terms of their
ﬁtting capacity for different data patterns and robustness against noise makes them a highly
commendable choice in analyzing various types of sensor data in VM applications. Common
tree-based ensemble models include bagging trees, random forests, Extra-Trees, GBDT,
XGBoost, etc. Kim et al. (2017) adopted random forests in their VM system to predict
process quality in copper-clad laminate manufacturing. They utilized sensor data collected
from multiple sources and manufacturing variables from experts as input to the VM system.
Additionally, Chen et al. (2020) introduced the VM system by utilizing multiple tree-
based ensemble learners. In their approach, different sources of data, including temperature,
air humidity, voltage, etc., were collected from various sensors in the semiconductor physical
vapor decomposition process and integrated as input data for the model. Then, tree-based
learners, i.e., random forest, Extra-Trees, XGBoost, and lightGBM, are subsequently con-
structed, and the ultimate model is derived by integrating the outputs of the learners. Choi et
al. (2022) employed random forest and XGBoost algorithms to classify etch proﬁles using
recipe-based equipment status variable identiﬁcation (SVID) data, while predictive etch depth
models, constructed with neural network models, incorporated both equipment SVID data
and optical emission spectroscopy data, providing crucial chemistry information about the
plasma during etching. Li et al. (2019) proposed a tree-based ensemble learning algorithm
for predicting the material removal rate of wafers in the chemical mechanical planarization
process. Statistical features and frequency domain features were extracted from each sen-
sor signal. Then, extracted features were combined to form an input dataset for training a
predictive model based on the stacking ensemble technique, which combines multiple base
learners, including random forest, gradient boosting trees, and extremely randomized trees.
However, when handling multi-source data, traditional tree-based models, such as deci-
sion trees, random forests, and AdaBoost, exhibit several limitations. These models typically
integrate variables from all data sources for modeling without distinguishing the character-
istics of different sources. Consequently, the model may fail to fully utilize the information
from each source, potentially overlooking the unique characteristics of individual sources.
Moreover, the model’s generalization ability can be limited due to its susceptibility to being
inﬂuenced by the characteristics of speciﬁc data sources. Furthermore, the construction of
123

Annals of Operations Research
traditional tree-based models often entails building numerous trees, each considering all fea-
tures. In the case of multi-source data, where the total number of features can be substantial,
determining each tree involves signiﬁcant computational overhead.
3 Multi-source ensemble method with random source selection
In this section, we present a novel approach, MSEM-RSS, which effectively utilizes multiple
data sources through an innovative fusion technique using a tree-based method. We ﬁrst
propose the multi-source decision tree (MS-DT), the foundation of MSEM-RSS. Unlike
traditional decision trees that consider all features at each split, MS-DT selectively employs
a random subset of features. This promotes diversity within the feature space at each split
and mitigates the risk of overﬁtting. To further enhance the robustness of the model and
reduce error variance, we propose multi-source bagging (MS-bagging). MS-bagging selects
a random subset of data sources with replacement to create a new dataset on which an
MS-DT is trained. This process is repeated, generating multiple decision trees, each trained
on a distinct combination of data sources. This ensemble approach ensures that our model
beneﬁts from diverse perspectives, contributing to a more accurate prediction model. Finally,
we present the MSEM-RSS method based on MS-DT and MS-bagging.
3.1 Multi-source decision tree
A given multi-source data D contains a total of M data sources and has the following data
structure:
D =

y(n), xm
p (n)

, n = 1, . . . , N; p = 1, . . . , P; m = 1, . . . , M

(1)
where y(n) represents the critical dimension (CD) of the nth wafer and xm
p (n) denotes the
sensor measurement collected at pth time point from mth data source (i.e., sensor) of the
nth wafer. In this study, we assume that all sensors collect measurements within a consistent
time frame, leading to uniform p time-steps across the M number of data sources. Consider
a regression tree T built upon data D. In the initial phase, the raw data D undergoes a
cleaning process by addressing if any missing values present. Then, principal component
analysis (PCA) is utilized to transform the data into a lower dimensional space for efﬁcient
calculation and remove noise present in real-life sensor data. The resulting feature set Z
extracted from data D is then represented as:
Z = [z1
1, z1
2, . . . , z1
q1, z2
1, z2
2, . . . , z2
q2, . . . . . . , zM
1 , zM
2 , . . . , zM
qM ]
The notation zm
i
denotes the ith extracted feature from the mth data source, where i ∈
{1, . . . , qm} and qm refers to the total number of the features extracted from the mth data
source. In this study, the principal components (PCs) that account for 90% of the variance are
chosen for each data source to preserve the majority of the information required to present
the data, resulting in varying numbers of features, i.e., qm for each data source (Jolliffe &
Jolliffe, 1986; Rocchi et al., 2006; Zhu & Martinez, 2006).
ˆ(t) = 1
Nt

n∈St
(y(n) −¯yt)2
(2)
123

Annals of Operations Research
where t denotes the node in the regression tree T of the MS-DT; St denotes the set of
observations under the node t and n ∈St means nth observation is in the node t. Nt is the
number of observations in the node t; y(n) is the response variable for nth observation; and
¯yt =
1
Nt

n∈St (y(n)) is the sample mean of the response variable for node t.
Deﬁne tL to be the left split or left child node of node t and similarly deﬁne tR to be the
right split or right child node of node t. StL ⊂St and StR ⊂St. The sample variance for the
two child nodes tL and tR can be calculated as the following according to Eq. (2):
ˆ(tL) =
1
NtL

n∈StL
(y(n) −¯ytL )2,
ˆ(tR) =
1
NtR

n∈StR
(y(n) −¯ytR)2.
(3)
where tL represents the left child node of node t in T ; NtL is the number of observations in
the node tL; ¯ytL =
1
NtL

n∈StL (y(n)) is the sample mean for node tL. And similarly for the
right child node tR.
The parent node t is split into two child nodes to minimize the impurity by considering
randomly selected features and split points. In the MS-DT, the feasible set of features for
each parent node is derived from a subset of the available data sources. Speciﬁcally, rather
than utilizing all M data sources, r out of M data sources are randomly chosen without
replacement. The possible feature set for splitting each parent node is then restricted to the
features present within these selected r data sources. For a candidate split s for selected
feature zm
qm, the decrease in impurity equals
ˆ(s; t) = ˆ(t) −

ˆP(tL) ˆ(tL) + ˆP(tR) ˆ(tR)
 
(4)
where ˆP(tL) =
NtL
Nt and ˆP(tR) =
NtR
Nt .
The procedure for constructing an MS-DT based on D involves several stages, illustrated
in Fig. 2. The building of MS-DT is started by setting the feature set Zused = ∅, where Zused
signiﬁes the set of previously selected features from node splits. The third step is random
data source selection. From the M total data sources, r sources are chosen randomly without
replacement. All the features from these selected data sources are included in a set named
Zselected. Mathematically, Zselected is expressed as
Zselected = [z(1)
1 , z(1)
2 , . . . , z(1)
q(1), z(2)
1 , z(2)
2 , . . . , z(2)
q(2), . . . . . . , z(r)
1 , z(r)
2 , . . . , z(r)
q(r)]
(5)
where (i) represent ith order from a total of r data sources, which are randomly selected from
M available data sources. The fourth step is best feature identiﬁcation and node splitting.
To identify the best feature, zbest, and its optimal split point for a given node, the algorithm
sequentially evaluates the impurity reduction achieved by each potential split of every feature
from the combined set Zselected ∪Zused. Each feature, represented as zm
qm, can be seen as a
candidate to split the node, with every unique value of zm
qm considered as a potential split
point. For each potential split point of zm
qm, the dataset is bifurcated into two hypothetical child
nodes, tL and tR, based on whether the feature value is less than or equal to (for tL) or greater
than (for tR) the candidate split point. The impurity or variance for these hypothetical splits
is determined using the formulas given by Eq. (3). To determine the quality of this potential
split, the algorithm calculates the decrease in impurity using Eq. (4). This quantiﬁes the
improvement in impurity that would be achieved if the node were split using the current
feature and split point. After evaluating all possible features and their potential split points,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Flowchart of MS-DT
the feature and split point that provide the largest reduction in impurity, signifying the most
optimal split, are selected. This selected feature is then denoted as zbest. Fifth, the chosen
feature, zbest, is appended to Zused. Steps three through ﬁve are executed recursively to
formulate the MS-DT structure. The recursion halts when the tree achieves its maximum
depth. Upon reaching a terminal node in the context of MS-DT regression, its prediction
value is ascertained as the mean of the response variable values for the observations in that
node.
Although MS-DT can handle multi-source data, one of the challenges associated with
using MS-DT is the risk of overﬁtting. By employing only a single prediction model, there is
a risk that the model could capture not only the underlying patterns but also the noise present
in the training data. In such a case, the model could perform exceptionally well on the training
data but poorly on new, unseen data. In addition, as a single MS-DT lacks the robustness of
123

Annals of Operations Research
Begin MS-bagging construction
Input: D
Randomly select W sources from D
D =
y(n), xm
p (n)

where n = 1, · · · , N; p = 1, · · · , P; m = 1, · · · , M

Merge the selected W sources to get Dk
Dk =
y(n), xw
p (n)

, where n = 1, · · · , N; p = 1, · · · , P; w = 1, · · · , W

Obtain the predictor φk(Dk)
K times?
MS-bagging construction complete
Output the ﬁnal prediction model:
E(φ(D)) = K
k=1 φk(Dk)/K
No
Yes
Fig. 3 Flowchart of MS-bagging
ensemble methods, it may suffer from high variance and thus yield unreliable predictions,
especially when dealing with a large number of variables in the multi-source data. Therefore,
we propose an ensemble method, namely MS-bagging, in the following subsection.
3.2 Multi-source bagging
By sampling different data sources with replacement, the proposed MS-bagging consistently
generates a diverse set of training data. In other words, unlike MS-DT which produces a single
decision tree, MS-bagging creates multiple trees, with each tree handling randomly selected
sources of datasets to decorrelate the trees and reduce the impact of variable dependencies
from highly correlated sources. In addition, by combining predictions of multiple trees, MS-
bagging not only enhances the robustness of the model but also overcomes the limitations of
relying on a single tree, resulting in improved prediction accuracy.
Let a dataset D contain a total of M numbers of data sources with the same data structure
showninEq.(1).MS-baggingfollowstheproceduresshowninFig.3.Beginwiththeentireset
of M data sources. Each of these sources is a potential candidate for inclusion in our ensemble
prediction model. Secondly, for each iteration, randomly select W data sources from the set
of M sources, ensuring that W ≤M. This selection is performed with replacement, meaning
a particular data source can be chosen more than once across different iterations. Thirdly, the
data from the selected W sources are merged to produce a multi-source dataset, denoted as
Dk. Mathematically, this dataset can be expressed as:
Dk =

y(n), xw
p (n)

, n = 1, . . . , N; p = 1, . . . , P; w = 1, . . . , W

(6)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fourth, utilizing the regular regression tree, we derive a predictor denoted as φk(Dk) for
the merged dataset Dk. Steps two through four are replicated K times, and an ensemble of
K predictors is constructed. The aggregate prediction from this ensemble is computed by
averaging the outputs of all K predictors. Formally, the ensemble prediction is given by:
E(φ(D)) =
K

k=1
φk(Dk)/K
(7)
The following arguments explain why acquiring multiple prediction models for MS-
bagging surpasses MS non-bagging (i.e., MS-bagging with a single prediction model),
highlighting the advantages of the proposed bagging principle for multi-source data. For
comparison, we deﬁne a MS non-bagging prediction model as follows: Let a dataset D con-
tain a total of M numbers of data sources with the same data structure shown in Eq. (1). W data
sources are randomly selected with replacement, ensuring W ≤M. These selected sources
are then combined to form a dataset denoted as Dc = {(y(n), xw
p (n)), n = 1, . . . , N; p =
1, . . . , P; w = 1, . . . , W}. The prediction model that utilizes Dc is represented as φ(Dc).
Contrasting with MS-bagging, which entails the repeated random selection of W data sources
from M over K iterations, the MS non-bagging model performs this random selection only
once. Thus, φ(Dc) yields our ﬁnal prediction value.
Let the set of random variables be represented as V = {X1, . . . , XW , Y} with X’s being
variables and Y being the response value. An observation from the set V is denoted as V .
Deﬁne the learning set as L. The learning set L consists of samples that are drawn randomly
and independently from the original data without replacement. The aggregated predictor
φA(V ) is deﬁned as the expected value over the learning set, i.e., φA(V ) = ELφ(V ). Given
that the learning set L is sampled l times, we have l distinct learning sets: L1, L2, . . . , Ll.
The empirical aggregated predictor φA(V ) can be estimated as
φA(V ) =
l
i=1 φ(V , Li)
l
which approaches ELφ(V ) as l becomes sufﬁciently large, assuming the samples are i.i.d.
(independent and identically distributed) from the underlying distribution. Deﬁne in the
MS-bagging prediction model, the error in the aggregated predictor is
errorA = EV (Y −φA(V ))2
Deﬁne in the MS non-bagging prediction model, the average prediction error is
error = ELEV (Y −φ(V , L))2
where φ(V , L) is deﬁned as prediction value of V from the learning set L.
Proposition 1 The error associated with the aggregated predictor in the MS-bagging
approach is consistently less than or equal to the average prediction error in the MS
non-bagging model. i.e.:
errorA ≤error
The proof of proposition 1 utilizes Jensen’s inequality and Fubini’s theorem (see appendix
for details). From the proof of proposition 1, φA has a lower mean-squared prediction error
than φ, and the difference depends on how unequal the two sides of
[ELφ(V , L)]2 ≤ELφ2(V , L)
123

Annals of Operations Research
If φ(V , L) remains constant across different replicates of L, then both sides of the inequality
become equivalent. However, achieving such constancy in real-world models is implausible.
If the values of φ(V , L) exhibit instability, meaning the values of φ(V , L) vary signiﬁcantly
with different replicates of L, then the beneﬁts or improvements offered by the MS-bagging
model become particularly pronounced.
3.3 Multi-source ensemble method with random source selection
The MSEM-RSS is speciﬁcally designed for multi-source datasets. It is a pioneering approach
designed to harness the power of multiple data sources in making accurate predictions.
By combining the MS-DT and MS-bagging, MSEM-RSS stands out in its adaptability and
precision.
In MSEM-RSS, the ﬁrst step entails randomly selecting W (W ≤M) data sources out of
the total M available from the data D, the structure of D is shown in Eq. (1). This random
selection is done with replacement. These selected data sources are then merged to obtain
a combined data set, denoted as Dk; the structure of Dk is shown in Eq. (6). With this
combined data, the MS-DT is then employed to derive a predictor, referred to as φ(Dk).
The construction of this decision tree involves speciﬁc processes, and the details are shown
in Sect.3.1. Notably, for each node split in the tree, a random selection of r out of the W
data sources is made, resulting in a subset of features denoted as Zselected as shown in Eq.
(5). Subsequently, the most optimal feature is identiﬁed and chosen as the split criterion
for that particular node. Once the MS-DT construction is completed, the ﬁnal prediction is
derived using the predictor φ(Dk). This entire sequence of operations, from random data
source selection to the construction of the decision tree and eventual prediction, is reiterated
K times. The ﬁnal prediction model is determined as Eq. (7). Figure 4 depicts the schematic
representation of the MSEM-RSS, and its algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 MSEM-RSS
Require: A multi-source dataset D = {(y(n), xmp ), n = 1, . . . , N; p = 1, . . . , P; m = 1, . . . , M}, K, W,
maximum depth of MS-DT
1: Initialize an empty set of predictors H = ∅
2: for k in 1 : K do
3:
Randomly select W out of M data sources without replacement to form Dk
4:
while MS-DT has not reached the maximum depth do
5:
Randomly select r out of W data sources
6:
Initialize Zused = ∅
7:
Obtain Zselected
8:
Identify the best feature, zbest, and its optimal split point to split the node
9:
Split the current node into two child nodes, tL and tR, using the selected feature zbest and its split
point
10:
Append zbest to Zused
11:
end while
12:
Obtain the predictor φk(Dk)
13:
Append the predictor φk(Dk) to H
14: end for
15: return the ﬁnal predictor of MSEM-RSS: E(φ(D)) = K
k=1 φk(Dk)/K
The MSEM-RSS introduces a novel approach to virtual metrology by crafting multiple
MS-DTs, each dedicated to a unique, randomly chosen set of data sources. This randomness
serves a dualfunction, enhancing both the model’s predictive power and its robustness. Firstly,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Begin MSEM-RSS construction
Randomly select W sources from D
Merge the selected W sources to get Dk
Dk =
y(n), xw
p (n)

where n = 1, · · · , N; p = 1, · · · , P; w = 1, · · · , W

Construction of MS-DT
Input: Dk
Features of Dk: Z = [z1
1, z1
2, · · · , z1
q1, · · · · · · , zW
1 , zW
2 , · · · , zW
qW ]
Initialize: Zused = ∅
Randomly select r data sources from W: Zselected
Zselected = [z(1)
1 , z(1)
2 , · · · , z(1)
q(1), z(2)
1 , z(2)
2 , · · · , z(2)
q(2), · · · · · · , z(r)
1 , z(r)
2 , · · · , z(r)
q(r)]
Combine Zselected and Zused: Zselected ∪Zused
Identify the optimal feature: zbest from Zselected ∪Zused
Determine the optimal split point
Node of MS-DT constructed
Maximum
depth
reached?
Append zbest to Zused
MS-DT construction complete
Output = MS-DT trained based on Dk
K times?
MSEM-RSS construction complete
Output the ﬁnal prediction model:
E(φ(D)) = K
k=1 φk(Dk)/K
Data cleaning, Feature extraction
Yes
No
No
Yes
Fig. 4 Flowchart of MSEM-RSS
the random source selection minimizes the impact of variable dependencies that could arise
from correlated data sources, such as interlinked sensors measuring related parameters. By
distributing these correlated sources across different trees, the MSEM-RSS mitigates poten-
tial biases that might otherwise distort the model’s predictions. Secondly, the randomization
ensures that individual trees maintain a high degree of independence from one another. This
independence reduces the risk of model overﬁtting and allows for more accurate predictions.
In contrast to traditional VM models, which merge data into a single predictive model, the
MSEM-RSS advocates for a multi-model approach. By crafting numerous decision trees,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Selected samples of plasma etching process
each focusing on its assigned data sources, the MSEM-RSS can identify and exploit the
unique details and patterns inherent in each dataset.
4 Case study: VM system for semiconductor plasma etching process
In this section, the performance of the proposed MSEM-RSS is validated through a real-life
dataset obtained from the semiconductor etching process. Then, the results are compared
with the benchmark methods to show the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
4.1 Real-world virtual metrology data and data processing
The dataset used for the experiments is collected from a real semiconductor manufacturing
plasma etching process. The status of the process, such as pressure, temperature, voltage, and
ﬂow rate, is monitored by several equipment sensors in the chamber to monitor the etching
process. During the plasma etching process, sensors are utilized to monitor the chemical
composition of the plasma and its concentration level. Figure 5 illustrates partial sensor mea-
surements obtained from multiple sensors deployed throughout the plasma etching process.
This process involves sequential steps of etching utilizing ionized gas (plasma) within the
chamber, with the gray lines in the ﬁgure denoting the completion of subprocesses. Various
sensor measurements such as chamber gas pressure, RF power, gas ﬂow rates (e.g., CF4 and
CHF3), and temperature are collected from different sensors. After the etching process, the
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 a Scatter plot of the response variable and its corresponding index b Normal probability plot of the
response variable
Table 1 Summary statistic of the
response variable
Mean
Median
Variance
25 Percentile
75 Percentile
3.174
1.859
52.002
0.797
3.186
CD, such as the thickness of the wafer, is measured. This measurement plays an indispens-
able role in assessing the wafer quality and the success of the process since it offers feedback
on the effectiveness of the etching process under the monitored parameters and conditions,
ensuring they are within the acceptable range. Secondly, by comparing the CD with the design
speciﬁcations, manufacturers can determine if the process achieves its intended result or if
any adjustments need to be made. Furthermore, monitoring the CD enables early detection
of possible process drifts or anomalies, allowing proactive measures to prevent a large batch
of defective wafers. If the CD measurements deviate signiﬁcantly from the standard, it can
signal problems with the process or equipment, which need to be rectiﬁed promptly to prevent
further losses.
The observations in the data set are collected from 298 wafers, and each observation
is a process monitored by 85 sensors. Figure 5 shows visual representations of the part of
the data used in the experiment. The sub-ﬁgures from top to bottom illustrate sensor data
of ﬁve different sensors, each spanning a duration of 648 seconds. Within each sub-ﬁgure,
data from three wafers are represented using blue, red, and green colors, respectively. The
horizontal axis represents process time in seconds, while the vertical axis represents the
corresponding sensor values. Figure 6 displays the scatter plot of CD (response variable)
and its corresponding index (left) and its normal probability plot (right), indicating that the
response variable does not follow a normal distribution. Moreover, Table 1 presents the
summary statistics of the CD values utilized in the experiment. The sample data consists
of 85 sensor measurements and CD values of wafers, where T represents sampling time
moments. Thus, the raw input data can be described as a 3D array dataset X N×M×T , where
N = 1, 2, . . . , 298 is the number of observations, M = 1, 2, . . . , 85 is the number of
sensors, and T = 1, 2, . . . , 648 is the sampling time moments. Each sensor is considered as
one data source, a total of 85 data sources, and the number of input variables in the raw data
is 55, 080 = M × T . The 298 observations are randomly divided into training, validation,
and test data with a ratio of 3 : 1 : 1 for each experiment. In addition, PCA is adopted to
123

Annals of Operations Research
input data for dimension reduction purposes. For each data source, 14 features are extracted
when the cumulative explained variance is greater than 90%; otherwise, more features are
extracted until the cumulative explained variance reaches 90% or a total of 40 features are
extracted. Eventually, 2, 706 features are extracted from all 85 data sources. The reduction
from 55, 080 to 2, 706 input variables using PCA can lead to a substantial decrease in the
model complexity. To address the point on computational complexity, we have measured
the running time of the model. With PCA, the running time is 14, 278 seconds, whereas
without PCA, it is 262, 389 to train the model (Operating System: Windows 10; Processor:
Intel64 Family 6 Model 186; Memory: 31.68GB; Cores: 16), demonstrating that PCA can
signiﬁcantly improve the computational efﬁciency of the model. During our experiment,
given the fact that the CD is inherently small in real-world scenarios, we have scaled up the
CD values by a factor of 1, 000 for the purpose of analysis. This adjustment aids in a clearer
presentation of the model’s predictive capabilities. However, it is important to note that this
scaling does not affect the relative performance comparison of different models.
4.2 Performance comparison
In the experiment, two performance measures have been utilized to evaluate the performance
of the proposed and existing fusion schemes. Mean square error (MSE) is a widely used
metric for quantifying the difference between values implied by an estimator or a predictor
and the actual values from the data. MSE measures the average squared difference between
the estimated and true values. A low MSE indicates a high level of accuracy of the estimator
or predictor in reﬂecting the data. MSE can be calculated as follows:
MSE = 1
N
N

n=1

y(n) −ˆy(n)
2
where N is the number of observations, y(n) is the actual value and ˆy(n) is the predicted
value. The second performance measure is a mean absolute error (MAE). MAE measures
the average absolute difference between each predicted and actual CD value, and it can be
calculated as:
MAE = 1
N
N

n=1
|y(n) −ˆy(n)|
We compare the performance of different scheming approaches for multi-source dataset
basedondecisiontrees,namelycombinedsourcesdecisiontree(CS-DT)andmultiplesources
decision tree (MS-DT). In CS-DT, illustrated in Fig. 7a, the initial input data D comprises
M data sources. To synthesize the M data sources, we employ an integration process that
ensures the retention of all observations while expanding the variable space to accommodate
the aggregate of explanatory variables from all sources, resulting in a dimensionality of
M × P. Following the implementation of the procedures outlined for the feature extraction
technique, PCA, the resultant data is denoted as ZCS−DT . The ﬁnal predictor φ∗
CS−DT of CS-
DT is determined through the regular decision tree model on the data ZCS−DT . In MS-DT,
illustrated in Fig. 7b, similar to the CS-DT, the initial input data D comprises M data sources.
For each data source, PCA is applied, and a regular regression tree analysis is performed on
each transformed data source. The ﬁnal predictive model is constructed by averaging these
M predictors, yielding a composite predictor φ∗
MS−DT . To show the effectiveness of the
123

Annals of Operations Research
Input: D = y(n), xm
p (n)

DMS−DT
ZCS−DT
φ∗
CS−DT
Data Concatenation
PCA
(a) Flowchart of CS-DT
D1
MS−DT
Z1
MS−DT
φ1
MS−DT1
D2
MS−DT
Input: D =
y(n), xm
p (n)

Z2
MS−DT
φ2
MS−DT2
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
DM
MS−DT
ZM
MS−DT
φM
MS−DTM
φ∗
MS−DT =
M
i=1 φMS−DTi
M
PCA
PCA
PCA
Regression Tree
Regression Tree
Regression Tree
(b) Flowchart of MS-DT
Fig. 7 Flowchart of a and CS-DT and b MS-DT
Table 2 Summary of the critical parameters utilized in different models
Critical parameter
FFNN
Hidden layer size = (50, 30)
Random forest
Number of trees = 100
Adaboost
Number of iterations = 50
CS-DT
Tree depth = 4
MS-DT
Tree depth = 4
MS-bagging
W = 55, Tree depth = 4, K = 100
MSEM-RSS
W = 55, r = 30, Tree depth = 4, K = 100
proposed MSEM-RSS, we also compared our method with MS-bagging, which is described
in Sect.3.2.
For parameter optimization, the parameter selection for established methodologies is
accomplished via grid search. Essentially, this involves systematically adjusting various
parameter combinations within these methodologies on the validation dataset to identify
the optimal parameter set. The criteria for this optimization is the attainment of the MSE,
thereby yielding the most accurate predictions. Table 2 presents a summary of the critical
parameters for each predictive model employed in our experimental analysis. This summary
includes key settings such as tree depths, number of layers, and other speciﬁc conﬁgura-
tions that signiﬁcantly inﬂuence model performance. These parameters are essential for the
structural differences between models and their potential impact on the results.
In Table 3, the performance differential between the proposed MSEM-RSS approach and
other prevalent methods is evident. Distinctly, MSEM-RSS boasts a higher efﬁcacy both in
terms of MSE and MAE. FFNN, which are capable of modeling complex non-linear relation-
ships within the dataset, typically demand a large amount of dataset for effective model ﬁtting.
Therefore, the approach may be impractical or inefﬁcient in semiconductor contexts where
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Performance comparison
between benchmark and
proposed methods
MSE
MAE
FFNN
0.998
0.847
Random forest
1.290
0.855
Adaboost
1.288
0.854
CS-DT
2.574
0.993
MS-DT
1.418
0.965
MS-bagging
1.494
0.928
MSEM-RSS
0.985
0.834
data availability is limited, often due to the high costs associated with data collection. In addi-
tion, since the random forest model selects a random subset of features at each split point in
the decision tree, it may not effectively capture the complex dependencies present among the
multi-source dataset, particularly those found in interlinked sensor data. Furthermore, while
Adaboost is designed to improve the model performance by addressing the limitation of indi-
vidual weak learners through adjustment in observation weight, it is not specially designed to
handle multi-source data. Consequently, correlated or insigniﬁcant data sources may remain
selected during a weak learner training process, leading to potential overﬁtting and reduced
performance. Considering CS-DT, a single predictive model that merges all data sources to
form a more extensive dataset may encounter issues, particularly when data sources have
inherent dependencies. Such an approach might gloss over these dependencies, potentially
leading to compromised predictions. If these sources are merged without consideration for
their inter-dependencies, it can introduce subtle biases or inaccuracies.
In contrast, MSEM-RSS employs an architecture of multiple predictive models, each
dedicatedtoharnessingthedistinctiveattributesfromeachsource.Constructingeachdecision
tree from a randomly chosen set of data sources minimizes variable dependencies that could
emerge from correlated sources. This strategic approach ensures a more nuanced and accurate
representation of the data. MS-DT, on the other hand, limits each prediction model to a
singular data source. While each model does gain insights from its dedicated source, it
lacks the comprehensive perspective that multi-source models can offer. A model based on
a singular source cannot harness the diverse and intricate patterns present across multiple
sources, making its predictions potentially less accurate than a model informed by multi-
source data. MSEM-RSS leverages multiple sources for each prediction model, enabling it
to analyze and cross-reference diverse sources. This approach heightens its accuracy and
offers adaptability by identifying speciﬁc details and patterns inherent to the assigned data
sources. Regarding MS-bagging, although it demonstrates signiﬁcant efﬁciency, especially
with multi-sensor data in VM, its performance doesn’t match up to MSEM-RSS in our case
study. While MS-bagging utilizes the bagging principle to enhance stability, it is important
to note that in each iteration of building a regression tree, the features used are solely from
the selected sources. In other words, each tree’s features are ﬁxed from selected sources.
This approach may lead to certain sources dominating the construction of the majority of
trees, resulting in trees that are highly similar and consequently reducing the ensemble’s
generalization ability. By contrast, MSEM-RSS addresses this issue by randomly selecting
subsets of features, ensuring diversity among the trees and mitigating the risk of over-reliance
on particular sources. This enhances the ensemble’s ability to capture different aspects of
the data and maintain accuracy across various predictive scenarios. In conclusion, while VM
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Effect of feature
numbers on model performance
Percentages of variance explained by the PCs
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
MSE
3.872
2.654
2.109
1.781
0.908
0.876
0.870
MAE
1.930
1.782
1.574
0.928
0.832
0.799
0.794
Table 5 Effect of the parameter W on model performance
W, the number of randomly selected data sources for each tree
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
MSE
1.289
1.002
0.912
0.875
0.882
0.879
0.874
0.901
0.878
0.892
MAE
0.908
0.890
0.859
0.829
0.840
0.839
0.821
0.856
0.839
0.851
multi-source data presents unique challenges, MSEM-RSS has been designed explicitly for
such datasets, combining the newly proposed methods of MS-DT and MS-bagging.
4.3 Effect of the parameters on the performance
In this section, we discuss the effect of parameters involved in the proposed MSEM-RSS. In
the MSEM-RSS, the number of PCs for PCA, parameters W, r, K, and tree depth need to
be predetermined before assessing the performance.
The parameter K refers to the number of leaeners of MSEM-RSS, which is set to be 100.
The law of large numbers states that as the number of trials or observations increases, the
average outcome converges to the expected value. In the context of our model, having 100 tree
models ensures that the collective prediction converges to a more stable and accurate average,
mitigating the potential for erratic predictions from individual learners. The dimensionality
of the selected features from the PCA is determined by the number of PCs that capture
a predeﬁned percentage of variance. We have expanded our analysis to examine how the
model’s performance metrics, i.e., MSE and MAE, vary with the proportion of variance
explained by the PCs. The proportions we considered are 65%, 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%,
and 95%, while keeping other parameters constant (W = 55, r = 30, tree depth= 4,
K = 100).
Table 4 shows the impact of feature numbers on model performance. As shown in the
table, selecting the number of PCs for data D that explains 90% of the variance resulted in
an MSE of 0.876 and an MAE of 0.799. When we increase the proportion to 95%, the MSE
and MAE decreased slightly to 0.870 and 0.794, respectively. Although the model with 95%
variance explained performs marginally better in terms of these metrics, the improvement is
not substantial. Therefore, the decision to select a dimension with 90% variance explained is
driven by a trade-off between model complexity and performance. By choosing this threshold,
we aim to build a model that maintains a balance between accuracy and computational
efﬁciency since including additional PCs (i.e., moving from 90% to 95% variance explained)
would increase the model complexity, leading to higher computational time.
Table 5 shows the effect of the parameter W on model performance while maintaining
other parameters constant (r = 30, tree depth=4, K = 100). The parameter W refers to the
random selection of data sources for each decision tree within the ensemble. It diminishes
the effects of variable dependencies that could emerge due to correlated data sources, like
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 6 Effect of the parameter r on model performance
r, the number of randomly selected data sources at each node
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
MSE
2.690
1.969
0.951
0.934
0.901
0.876
0.897
0.889
0.880
MAE
1.576
0.987
0.885
0.867
0.856
0.829
0.847
0.838
0.832
Table 7 Effect of tree depth on model performance
Tree depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
MSE
10.789
3.458
0.902
0.876
0.897
0.998
1.298
2.357
MAE
3.291
1.580
0.842
0.779
0.829
0.914
0.979
1.857
interlinked sensors. However, increasing W may increase computational complexity and
training time. Therefore, we recommend selecting reasonable W to achieve the best trade-off
between error metrics (e.g., MSE, MAE) and computational cost. As shown in the table,
although W = 70 exhibits a marginally lowest MSE and MAE compared to other values, we
opted for W = 55 in our ﬁnal model. This decision was inﬂuenced by the similar predictive
performance of W = 55 and W = 70, and choosing a low value of W offers the advantage
of faster model execution. This approach aligns with our goal to optimize not only for error
metrics like MSE and MAE but also for computational efﬁciency, thereby ensuring a balanced
model performance.
Tables 6 and 7 show the impact of the parameter r and the maximum tree depth on model
performance while maintaining other parameters constant. The parameter r refers to the
random selection for each node split in the tree, which reduces interdependence between
individual trees by mitigating potential data correlations and inter-tree dependencies. How-
ever, increasing r may also increase computational complexity and training time, as more
data sources need to be considered. Additionally, the maximum tree depth controls the com-
plexity of the decision tree model. Increasing the tree depth can lead to overﬁtting, where the
model captures noise in the training data rather than the underlying patterns. On the other
hand, if the tree depth is low, the model may underﬁt the data, failing to capture the important
patterns of the multi-source data. Therefore, a reasonable r (i.e., r = 30) and maximum
tree depth (i.e., tree depth = 4) that result in a low MSE and MAE have been selected in the
experiment.
To illustrate the effectiveness of incorporating Zused, we have compared the performance
of our model with and without this feature. Zused represents the set of previously selected
best split features and it plays a crucial role in our model’s iterative process. The key reason
for incorporating Zused is to maintain a cumulative record of the most informative features
identiﬁed in previous iterations. This strategy ensures that even if a previously best fea-
ture is not included in the current subset of selected data sources, it still contributes to the
decision-making process in later iterations. Essentially, Zused serves as a memory mecha-
nism, allowing the model to build upon and reﬁne its previous decisions, thereby enhancing
the overall accuracy. Table 8 shows the comparison between MSEM-RSS and MSEM-RSS
without Zused, which includes features selected in the current iteration without considering
past optimal features. As demonstrated from the table, the improvements in both MSE and
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 8 Performance comparison
between MSEM-RSS without
Zused and MSEM-RSS
MSE
MAE
MSEM-RSS without Zused
1.023
0.892
MSEM-RSS
0.985
0.834
MAE further indicate a more accurate model prediction when Zused is included.MSEM-RSS
without Zused.
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we propose a novel method named MSEM-RSS for VM. The distinctive strength
of MSEM-RSS lies in its capacity to effectively utilize the inherent advantages of multi-
source data. To address the prevalent issue of overﬁtting commonly observed in standard
decision trees, we propose the concept of MS-DT. The integration of randomized feature
selection at each node split inherently enhances the diversity of the resulting tree. This aug-
mentation heightens the robustness of the tree and increases the accuracy of the prediction
result. Furthermore, we propose MS-bagging which successfully reduces the error variance
among MS-DTs, further enhancing prediction accuracy. The MSEM-RSS approach effec-
tively combines the strengths of both MS-DT and MS-bagging. The case study demonstrates
our method MSEM-RSS exhibits superior performance compared to the CS-DT, MS-DT,
and MS-bagging model. The comparative evaluation based on the MSE and MAE metrics
validated our initial hypothesis that the employment of bagging strategies and the selective
use of multiple data sources would yield more precise predictions. In addition, strategically
selecting random data sources and applying multiple prediction trees in the MSEM-RSS
method have signiﬁcantly mitigated the overﬁtting problem.
For future research, we plan to incorporate the concept of boosting into our model. Instead
of merely selecting data sources randomly, we intend to assign distinct weights to each data
source. This targeted approach could ensure that each data source contributes to the model
in proportion to its relevance and reliability, thereby enhancing the overall accuracy and
robustness of the predictive model.
Appendix A
Proof for Prop. 1
Proof
errorA = EV (Y −φA(V ))2
= EV

Y 2 −2YφA(V ) + φ2
A(V )

= EV(Y 2) −2 · EV(Y · φA(V )) + EV(φ2
A(V ))
error = ELEV (Y −φ(V , L))2
= ELEV

Y 2 −2Yφ(V , L) + φ2(V , L)

= ELEV(Y 2) −ELEV (2Yφ(V , L))
+ ELEV

φ2(V , L)

123

Annals of Operations Research
= EV(Y 2) −2 · EV (Y · φA(V )) + EV EL

φ2(V , L)

1. Claim that 2 · EV(Y · φA(V )) = ELEV (2Yφ(V , L))
Suppose that the contributions of individual learners φk(V ) for k = {1, . . . , K} to
the average φA(V ) are unbiased and evenly distributed. An unbiased estimator means
that the expected value of the estimator of the parameter equals to the truevalue of
the parameter. In the context of the ensemble model φA(V ), if each learner’s predictor
φk(V ) is an unbiased estimator of some true parameter θ related to Y, then the aver-
age of these predictors φA(V ) will also be an unbiased estimator of θ (Pham, 2022).
Mathematically, this can be expressed as: E[φk(V )] = θ for all k, which implies
that E[φA(V )] = E[ 1
K
k=K
k=1 φk(V )] =
1
K
k=K
k=1 E[φk(V )] = θ. Evenly distributed
implies that no single learner’s predictor φk(V ) dominates the ensemble prediction φA(V ).
Under these assumptions:
2 · EV(Y · φA(V ))
=2 · EV(Y · 1
K
k=K

k=1
φk(V ))
= 2
K
k=K

k=1
EV(Y · φk(V ))
ELEV (2Yφ(V , L))
=EL[2 · EV (Yφ(V , L))]
= 2
K
k=K

k=1
EV(Y · φk(V ))
2. Claim that ELEV

φ2(V , L)

= EV EL

φ2(V , L)

This is a direct result from Fubini’s theorem under the assumption that E[|φ2(V , L)|] =
E[φ2(V , L)] is ﬁnite (Billingsley, 2017). This condition means that the second moment
of φ(V , L) is ﬁnite. Under this assumption, Fubini’s theorem allows us to interchange the
order of the expectations: ELEV

φ2(V , L)

= EV EL

φ2(V , L)

.
Given that the differing terms between errorA and error are φ2
A(V ) and EL

φ2(V , L)

.
Jensen’s inequality states that for a convex function f and a random variable X (Horn &
Johnson, 2012):
f (E[X]) ≤E[ f (X)]
The function f (x) = x2 is convex, evident from its second derivative which is always
positive. Therefore, using this property, we can deduce:
φ2
A(V ) ≤EL

φ2(V , L)

Therefore, combining the above results, we conclude that:
errorA ≤error
The proof illustrates that bagging leverages the power of aggregation to stabilize predictors,
especially when they are derived from unstable learning algorithms. This notion of instability
refers to scenarios where minor changes in the learning set can drastically alter predictions
(Breiman, 1996).
⊓⊔
123

Annals of Operations Research
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no Conﬂict of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abe, H., Yoneda, M., & Fujiwara, N. (2008). Developments of plasma etching technology for fabricating
semiconductor devices. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 47(3R), 1435.
Billingsley, P. (2017). Probability and measure. Wiley.
Boin, M., & Lerch, W. (1998). New methods of metrology data analysis during semiconductor processing
and application to rapid thermal processing. Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing, 1(3–4),
195–200.
Breiman, L. (1996). Bagging predictors. Machine Learning, 24, 123–140.
Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning, 45, 5–32.
Bunday, B. D., Allgair, J. A., Caldwell, M., Solecky, E. P., Archie, C. N., Rice, B. J., & Emami, I. (2007).
Value-added metrology. IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, 20(3), 266–277.
Burg, D., & Ausubel, J. H. (2021). Moore’ s law revisited through intel chip density. PLoS ONE, 16(8), 1–18.
Chang, Y.-J., Kang, Y., Hsu, C.-L., Chang, C.-T., & Chan, T. Y. (2006). Virtual metrology technique for
semiconductor manufacturing. In The 2006 IEEE international joint conference on neural network
proceedings (pp. 5289–5293).
Chen, C.-H., Zhao, W.-D., Pang, T., & Lin, Y.-Z. (2020). Virtual metrology of semiconductor pvd process
based on combination of tree-based ensemble model. ISA Transactions, 103, 192–202.
Chen, H., Harrison, J. M., Mandelbaum, A., Van Ackere, A., & Wein, L. M. (1988). Empirical evaluation of
a queueing network model for semiconductor wafer fabrication. Operations Research, 36(2), 202–215.
Chen, P., Wu, S., Lin, J., Ko, F., Lo, H., Wang, J., & Liang, M. (2005). Virtual metrology: A solution for wafer
to wafer advanced process control. In Issm 2005, IEEE international symposium on semiconductor
manufacturing, 2005 (pp. 155–157).
Cheng, F.-T., Huang, H.-C., & Kao, C.-A. (2007). Dual-phase virtual metrology scheme. IEEE Transactions
on Semiconductor Manufacturing, 20(4), 566–571.
Choi, J. E., Park, H., Lee, Y., & Hong, S. J. (2022). Virtual metrology for etch proﬁle in silicon trench etching
with sf6/o2/ar plasma. IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, 35(1), 128–136.
Choi, J., & Jeong, M. K. (2018). Deep autoencoder with clipping fusion regularization on multistep process
signals for virtual metrology. IEEE Sensors Letters, 3(1), 1–4.
Friedman, J. H. (2001). Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine. Annals of Statistics,
29, 1189–1232.
Horn, R. A., & Johnson, C. R. (2012). Matrix analysis. Cambridge University Press.
Hung,M.-H.,Lin,T.-H.,Cheng,F.-T.,&Lin,R.-C.(2007).Anovelvirtualmetrologyschemeforpredictingcvd
thickness in semiconductor manufacturing. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 12(3), 308–316.
Jolliffe, I., & Jolliffe, I. (1986). Generalizations and adaptations of principal component analysis. Principal
Component Analysis, 223–234.
Kang, P., Kim, D., & Cho, S. (2016). Semi-supervised support vector regression based on self-training with
label uncertainty: An application to virtual metrology in semiconductor manufacturing. Expert Systems
with Applications, 51, 85–106.
Kang, P., Kim, D., Lee, H.-J., Doh, S., & Cho, S. (2011). Virtual metrology for run-to-run control in
semiconductor manufacturing. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(3), 2508–2522.
Kang, P., Lee, H.-J., Cho, S., Kim, D., Park, J., Park, C.-K., & Doh, S. (2009). A virtual metrology system for
semiconductor manufacturing. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(10), 12554–12561.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Kang, S., & Kang, P. (2017). An intelligent virtual metrology system with adaptive update for semiconductor
manufacturing. Journal of Process Control, 52, 66–74.
Khan, A. A., Moyne, J. R., & Tilbury, D. M. (2007). An approach for factory-wide control utilizing virtual
metrology. IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing, 20(4), 364–375.
Kim, M., Kang, S., Lee, J., Cho, H., Cho, S., & Park, J. S. (2017). Virtual metrology for copper-clad laminate
manufacturing. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 109, 280–287.
Lenz, B., & Barak, B. (2013). Data mining and support vector regression machine learning in semiconductor
manufacturing to improve virtual metrology. In 2013 46th Hawaii international conference on system
sciences (pp. 3447–3456).
Li, Z., Wu, D., & Yu, T. (2019). Prediction of material removal rate for chemical mechanical planarization
using decision tree-based ensemble learning. Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering, 141(3),
031003.
Lin, T.-H., Hung, M.-H., Lin, R.- C., & Cheng, F.-T. (2006). A virtual metrology scheme for predicting
cvd thickness in semiconductor manufacturing. In Proceedings 2006 IEEE international conference on
robotics and automation, 2006. ICRA 2006 (pp. 1054–1059).
Loh, W.-Y. (2011). Classiﬁcation and regression trees. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, 1(1), 14–23.
Mönch, L., Fowler, J., Dauzère-Pérès, S., Mason, S., & Rose, O. (2011). A survey of problems, solution
techniques, and future challenges in scheduling semiconductor manufacturing operations. Journal of
Scheduling, 14, 583–599.
Moore, G. E. (2006). Cramming more components onto integrated circuits (reprinted from electronics, volume
38, number 8, april 19, 1965, pp.114 ff). IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society Newsletter, 11(3), 33–35.
Pham, H. (2022). Statistical reliability engineering. Springer.
Quinlan, J. R. (1986). Induction of decision trees. Machine Learning, 1, 81–106.
Rocchi, L., Chiari, L., Cappello, A., & Horak, F. B. (2006). Identiﬁcation of distinct characteristics of postural
sway in Parkinson’s disease: A feature selection procedure based on principal component analysis.
Neuroscience Letters, 394(2), 140–145.
Sabzekar, M., & Hasheminejad, S. M. H. (2021). Robust regression using support vector regressions. Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals, 144, 110738.
Su, A.-J., Jeng, J.-C., Huang, H.-P., Yu, C.-C., Hung, S.-Y., & Chao, C.-K. (2007). Control relevant issues in
semiconductor manufacturing: Overview with some new results. Control Engineering Practice, 15(10),
1268–1279.
Yang, H.-C., Tieng, H., & Cheng, F.-T. (2016). Automatic virtual metrology for wheel machining automation.
International Journal of Production Research, 54(21), 6367–6377.
Yugma, C., Blue, J., Dauzère-Pérès, S., & Obeid, A. (2015). Integration of scheduling and advanced process
control in semiconductor manufacturing: Review and outlook. Journal of Scheduling, 18, 195–205.
Yung-Cheng, J. C., & Cheng, F.-T. (2005). Application development of virtual metrology in semiconductor
industry. In 31st annual conference of IEEE industrial electronics society, 2005. IECON, 2005 (pp. 6–pp).
Zhu, M., & Martinez, A. M. (2006). Selecting principal components in a two-stage lda algorithm. 2006 IEEE
computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (cvpr’06) (Vol. 1, pp. 132–137).
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123