TITLE: Transparency of combinatorial optimisations via machine learning and explainable AI
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06684-8
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 1 August 2023 / Accepted: 27 May 2025 / Published online: 2 July 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
 
 Wolfgang Garn
w.garn@surrey.ac.uk
Mehrdad Amirghasemi
mehrdad@uow.edu.au
1 
Surrey Business School, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK
2 
School of Business, University of Wollongong, 1 Northfields Ave, Wollongong, NSW 
2522, Australia
Transparency of combinatorial optimisations via machine 
learning and explainable AI
Wolfgang Garn1
 · Mehrdad Amirghasemi2
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06684-8
Abstract
In this golden age of artificial intelligence, transparency and responsible decision-making 
are paramount. While machine learning (ML) and operational research (OR) optimisations 
are fundamental aspects of AI, the benefits of explainable AI (XAI) for combinatorial 
optimisations remain underexplored. This study investigates the convergence of XAI and 
OR, emphasising the importance of transparency in combinatorial optimisations. Using 
the Knapsack problem as an example, we demonstrate that interpretable ML models can 
effectively solve combinatorial optimisation challenges and enhance transparency. Ad­
ditionally, we illustrate the application of post-hoc XAI methods to OR optimisations 
solved with ML, providing transparent, human-friendly explanations. The key contribu­
tions of this work include proposing the application of the SAGE framework for trans­
parent OR, demonstrating the integration of XAI with combinatorial optimisations, and 
offering practical guidelines for creating transparent explanations. These contributions can 
aid decision-makers in understanding, communicating, and trusting combinatorial optimi­
sation solutions, paving the way for enhanced transparency in operational research across 
various sectors.
Keywords  Operational research · Combinatorial optimisations · Knapsack · 
Transparency · Interpretable machine learning · Explainable artificial intelligence
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
1  Introduction
We are experiencing the golden age of artificial intelligence, with generative AI and self-
driving cars appearing (Kaynak, 2021; Zhang & Lu, 2021). This growing adaptation of AI 
necessitates government bodies, health sectors, and businesses to understand AI’s solutions 
and workings through transparent and responsible AI (Buiten, 2019). While AI is predomi­
nantly associated with machine learning, operational research optimisations (i.e. combina­
torial optimisations) are a fundamental part of AI (Russell & Norvig, 2020; Garn, 2024). 
Explainable AI offering transparency and responsibility building on machine learning has 
been investigated extensively (Arrieta et al., 2020; Mill et al., 2023, 2024a). Yet, the link, 
applications and benefits of explainable AI in conjunction with operational research optimi­
sations constitute a significant gap in the body of knowledge.
Machine learning (ML) is a data-driven approach based on learning algorithms such as 
decision trees, neural networks and support vector machines. Optimisations in Operational 
Research (OR) are often formulated via linear programs (LP), integer programs (IP) or 
mixed integer linear programs (MILP), which use exact approaches or metaheuristics to find 
solutions. Therefore, we distinguish operational research optimisation (aka combinatorial 
optimisation) from machine learning optimisation. Whilst machine learning optimisation 
(MLO) is mainly concerned with minimising a loss function for predictions or classifica­
tions, operational research optimisations (ORO) often have a real-world objective subject 
to constraints. This work investigates the synergies between the ML and OR domains and 
their implications for explainable artificial intelligence (XAI), which results in transparency.
Similar to the need for ML algorithms to be transparent, there is a growing demand for 
combinatorial optimisations to be more transparent. The transition from Industry 4.0 to 5.0 
has placed a greater emphasis on human-centric AI, further motivating the need for trans­
parency in AI and optimisation solutions (Turner & Garn, 2022). Turner and Garn (2022) 
emphasised the need to integrate explainable AI and utilise combinatorial optimisations in 
the next generation of discrete event simulators to provide transparency to decision-makers.
Incorporating transparency into analytical techniques used in operational research to 
improve interpretability, accountability, and the reliability of data-driven decision-making 
has been a relatively unknown territory to researchers and practitioners. While transparency 
in the context of machine learning has been explored (Arrieta et al., 2020), operational 
research (OR) literature lacks a definition of transparent OR. Some literature links OR to 
transparent machine learning but lacks tangible approaches in the context of operational 
research optimisations (Behl et al., 2023; Sabharwal et al., 2024). Turner and Garn (2022) 
show the need for more human-centric transparent discrete event simulators (DES) for 
manufacturing systems by suggesting a framework that includes XAI and combinatorial 
optimisations.
Combinatorial optimisations are applied in many practical applications such as public 
transport, environmental services, supply chain logistics and health care analytics. For 
instance, policymakers and decision-makers must justify why bus or train stations will or 
will not be serviced with a certain frequency or why a specific bus service is required (Ahern 
et al., 2022). The tool for their decision support may be based on underlying combinato­
rial optimisations, and the mathematical program’s complexity and solution need a simple 
explanation. In this case, explanations can be on economic and sustainable grounds.
1 3
428

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Another example is environmental services (Beltrami & Bodin, 1974; Datta & Kapoor, 
2023), which are required to collect recyclable waste from households. The underlying 
combinatorial optimisation is a type of vehicle routing problem (VRP). Here, the environ­
mental services must validate and justify to the authorities that the routes are economic and 
sustainable and consider societal needs. The solutions must consider aspects such as school 
zones and essential main roads being serviced at an appropriate time. Transparent opera­
tional research must demonstrate the fulfilment of these requirements.
Consider, for example, the growing use of optimisation algorithms in supply chain 
logistics. These algorithms decide on vehicle routing or warehouse stocking policies with 
real-world financial and operational impacts (Rohani et al., 2022). However, the lack of 
transparency in these decisions-particularly when they produce unexpected or counterintui­
tive results-can lead to confusion and reduced trust among human decision-makers. Sup­
pose a logistics manager cannot understand why an algorithm chooses a specific route that, 
on the surface, seems suboptimal. In that case, they may be reluctant to implement the solu­
tion, even if it is mathematically optimal.
Resource allocation is another domain in the healthcare sector where transparency is 
vital (Das, 2022). Optimisation models allocate scarce medical resources, such as ICU beds 
or organ donations. Still, decision-makers must be confident that these solutions optimise 
efficiency and adhere to ethical and legal standards. Without transparency, stakeholders may 
question the fairness of the algorithm’s decisions, particularly in high-stakes environments 
where human lives are affected. In these cases, explainable AI can illuminate the decision-
making process, offering insights into how and why certain solutions were reached.
The real-world scenarios above highlight the importance of transparent and explainable 
operational research optimisations. Although recent studies in the health (Bastani et al., 
2022) and property sector (Nyawa et al., 2023) show transparent and explainable methods 
in an operational research context, they miss the link to combinatorial optimisations.
In effect, while transparency in machine learning has been explored extensively (Arrieta 
et al., 2020), there remains a significant lack of tangible and general methodologies that 
integrate explainable AI (XAI) with combinatorial optimisations, particularly in operational 
research contexts. This paper addresses this gap by introducing novel applications of the 
SAGE framework to create transparent, interpretable solutions for combinatorial problems. 
Unlike prior works that offer transparency in machine learning but not for OR-specific chal­
lenges (Molnar, 2023a, b; Schmidt et al., 2020), our approach provides practical insights for 
real-world OR problems. Further, by incorporating post-hoc XAI methods in novel ways 
and adapting them to combinatorial optimisation, we aim to push the boundaries of what 
XAI can achieve in OR contexts.
Table 1 summarises the above articles regarding focus area and transparency.
In sum, this paper addresses several knowledge gaps: (1) the lack of a clear link between 
interpretable ML and combinatorial optimisations with a focus on transparency, (2) the 
limited application of post-hoc XAI techniques to combinatorial optimisation solutions 
derived from ML models, and (3) the scarcity of transparent, human-friendly explanations 
for complex OR optimisation problems. We aim to bridge these gaps by providing concrete 
approaches that offer transparency to combinatorial optimisations using machine learning 
and explainable AI.
This work aims to apply machine learning and explainable AI to operational research 
optimisations to gain transparency. In this respect, the key objectives are to (i) Contextual­
1 3
429

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
ise transparency for OR applications using the SAGE framework (Mill et al., 2024a), (ii) 
Demonstrate that combinatorial optimisations can be solved using interpretable machine 
learning methods, (iii) Show and apply relevant XAI methods in the context of optimisa­
tions, and (iv) Offer human-friendly explanations to enhance transparency.
Hence, the key contributions of this paper are as follows:
 
●
Demonstrating how interpretable machine learning can be applied to combinatorial op­
timisations;
 
●
Proposing the use of a general framework (SAGE) to gain transparency;
 
●
Illustrating the usage of explainable AI to combinatorial optimisations and
 
●
Providing pointers to create transparent human-readable explanations.
References
Focus 
area (ML, 
OR, CO)
Transparency 
method
Key contribution to 
transparency in OR
 Ahern et al. 
(2022)
Bus 
services, 
OR, CO
Result based 
(Pareto)
Pareto front solutions 
for decision-makers 
but do not cover XAI 
and ML
 Arrieta et 
al. (2020)
ML
Post-hoc XAI
Focuses on machine 
learning transparency 
but lacks OR-specific 
applications
 Bastani et 
al. (2022)
Health­
care, ML
Empirical Bayes
Demonstrates the need 
for trust and transpar­
ency for policymakers 
but lacks context to CO
 Behl et al. 
(2023)
Supply 
Chain, 
OR, ML
High-level 
respon­
sible AI & XAI 
needs-analysis
Emphasises fairness 
and accountabil­
ity in supply chain 
performance, not 
focusing on tangible 
CO transparency but 
on organisational needs 
and insights
 Rohani et 
al. (2022)
Logistics, 
OR, CO
Visualisations 
(VR)
Embed trust by al­
lowing managers to 
interact with the CO 
analysis tool, but lacks 
ML and XAI
 Sabharwal 
et al. (2024)
ML
XAI (LIME, 
SHAP)
Suggests integration of 
XAI with OR but does 
not offer a framework 
for CO transparency
 Turner 
and Garn 
(2022)
OR (DES, 
CO)
XAI in DES 
framework
High-level framework 
for next-generation 
DES integrating CO 
and XAI
Our work
OR, CO, 
ML
SAGE Frame­
work with Post-
hoc XAI
Introduces a general 
methodology for com­
binatorial optimisa­
tion transparency 
with human-readable 
explanations
Table 1  Comparison of our work 
with existing literature
 
1 3
430

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 reviews literature about explainable 
AI and transparency to provide foundations and highlight potential extensions related to the 
paper’s aim. SAGE is especially reviewed as the framework used in this work, which gives 
XAI the transparency dimension. Furthermore, it introduces the Knapsack problem and its 
applications, as this will be the guiding example throughout the paper. In Sect. 3, we begin 
by contextualising transparency to show the importance of the intended audience. This sec­
tion applies the SAGE framework and offers a convenient way to structure setting, audience, 
goal and ethics, supporting the creation of transparent, human-readable explanations later. 
To benefit from XAI methods, and out of general importance, Sect. 4 investigates the appli­
cation of an interpretable machine learning approach to operational research optimisations, 
highlighting synergies between these two areas. Explainable AI is then investigated in the 
context of combinatorial optimisation in Sect. 5. Finally, Sect. 5.2 gives pointers to create 
transparent human-readable explanations, and Sect. 6 provides some concluding remarks.
2  Related work
Artificial intelligence (AI) is the ability to think and act like humans or more rationally. We 
proposed this definition in Turner and Garn (2022, s5) which was derived from the defini­
tions of the AI term in Russell and Norvig (2020) and Buiten (2019). The advantage of this 
definition is its compactness. Yet, to understand what is behind AI, it is more appropriate 
to consider the typical topics covered in the AI literature. In Garn (2024, s9.1) we gave an 
overview of these areas and showed that machine learning and combinatorial optimisations 
are essential topics in the AI domain. Yet, topics such as explainable and responsible AI are 
still fairly recent. In this section, we briefly introduce the interrelated concepts of respon­
sible AI, responsible analytics, and explainable AI and how these concepts relate to or act as 
building blocks for better transparency. This work aims to bridge the generic transparent AI 
domain and combinatorial optimisations using the knapsack problem as an example. Hence, 
we review the knapsack problem (amongst other OR optimisations) and its applications 
with a focus on ML approaches (e.g. neural networks) as solution methods.
2.1  Explainable AI
Explainable AI is a research field that aims to make AI systems’ results more understandable 
to humans. Thus, it increases the transparency of the system. An explainable AI method pro­
vides a “convincing” argument (explanation) to the audience about the result, encouraging 
trust in the underlying method. Sometimes, explainable AI provides a narrative or indication 
of major algorithm steps, increasing transparency (Ehsan et al., 2021). Their work encour­
ages social transparency using scenarios, a view we share in this work. Gilpin et al. (2018) 
treat XAI as an umbrella term to summarise reasons for neural network behaviour, gain 
users’ trust or produce insights about the causes of their decisions. Gunning and Aha (2019) 
see XAI as “AI systems that can explain their rationale to a human user...”. The understand­
ing of what explainable should constitute is still divided, with some still focusing on experts 
as the audience. Back in 2017, Miller’s survey found that XAI was primarily for researchers 
rather than the audience (Miller et al., 2017). Later, he provided several interesting insights 
from social sciences supporting the development of the XAI domain (Miller, 2019). This 
1 3
431

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
work allows researchers from “traditional” AI to access the social science (psychology, 
cognitive sciences, philosophy,...) knowledge base of explanations. For instance, for an AI 
to produce better explanations, one can make use of the paradigms of explaining, such as (1) 
explaining by contrasting events, (2) explaining by selecting only a few (two or three) facts, 
(3) use causal explanations rather than probabilistic arguments, and (4) tailor explanations 
according to the audience. Now, explanations have found their way to a far wider audience 
than researchers, such as the gaming industry. For instance, human-friendly explanations 
for chess moves are provided in chess.com and can be used for Stockfish (Hertl, 2022). It 
provides human-friendly analysis explanations such as “The pawn is adequately defended. 
This is the only good move!...” (Garn, 2023). We observe that it makes use of the explaining 
paradigms mentioned above. In Sect. 5.2, we discuss human-frindly explanations in more 
detail. Fraud detection is often found as an XAI research case study, but there is limited 
evidence that it is being used by the industry (Mill et al., 2023). To encourage the uptake of 
XAI in this industry, Mill et al. (2023) research agenda encourages to (1) give explanations 
within a specific context, (2) increase focus on intrinsic models, (3) measure the faithful­
ness of explanations, and (4) investigate human interaction with explanations. However, as 
we see in this work, the agenda also applies to the operations XAI industry. Other literature 
has listed many more XAI applications in the areas of business, manufacturing, energy and 
others (Ahmed et al., 2022; Le et al., 2023), which benefit from the agenda. Section 3.1, 
shows the SAGE framework that integrates aspects such as context, audience, paradigms of 
explanations and human-friendliness. Systems and methods capable of integrating this will 
be called second-generation XAI methods.
Considering the current taxonomy of XAI methods, we can observe a good starting point 
for the mentioned agenda. We will call them the first-generation XAI methods.
Figure 1 shows the taxonomy of XAI methods; a more refined view can be found in 
Arrieta et al (2020, Fig. 6). Our work will primarily deal with specific local methods. Gen­
erally, XAI methods are classified via their model type or scope. Most research focuses on 
model-agnostic methods, meaning the XAI method is independent of the underlying ML 
model. In this approach, an AI method learns a model, which can be treated as a black box, 
after which a post-hoc XAI method derives an explainable model. In contrast, instead of 
being model-agnostic, the XAI method can be model-specific. These methods, also known 
as intrinsic methods, are inherently interpretable from the outset. In Sects. 4.3 and 4.4, we 
use decision trees to interpret feasible solutions, a prime example of intrinsic XAI. The 
advantage of intrinsic XAI is that the model can be built with an explanation in mind. In 
the XAI literature, intrinsic XAI is relatively less considered than post-hoc XAI. Models 
resulting from intrinsic XAI are known as transparent models. Table 2 provides a short list 
of popular intrinsic XAI methods.
Typically, intrinsic XAI sacrifices accuracy in favour of interpretability.
Fig. 1  XAI taxonomy of methods
 
1 3
432

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Abbr
Name
Description
Applications
Strengths
DT
Decision 
tree
A tree-struc­
tured model 
that splits 
data into de­
cision nodes 
to arrive 
at a target 
prediction
Business, health­
care, customer 
analytics
Highly 
interpreta­
ble, intui­
tive visual 
represen­
tation of 
decisions
LM
Linear 
model
Models the 
relationship 
between a 
dependent 
variable and 
one or more 
independent 
variables 
using linear 
equations
Finance, eco­
nomics, opera­
tions research
Easy to 
interpret, 
widely 
used in 
regression 
analysis
GAM
Generalized 
additive 
model
Extends 
linear models 
by allowing 
non-linear 
relationships 
between de­
pendent and 
independent 
variables 
using 
smoothing 
terms
Energy, environ­
ment, medicine
Balances 
flexibility 
and inter­
pretability, 
suitable 
for non-
linear 
patterns
kNN
k-nearest 
neighbors
A non-
parametric 
method that 
classifies or 
predicts by 
looking at 
the closest k 
neighbours to 
a point
Image recogni­
tion, stock 
prediction, fraud 
detection
Simple, 
highly in­
terpretable 
for low-
dimension­
al data, 
effective 
for small 
datasets
LogR
Logistic 
regression
Predicts 
binary out­
comes based 
on a logistic 
function, 
often used for 
classification 
tasks
Medical diagno­
sis, marketing, 
credit scoring
High inter­
pretability 
in binary 
classifica­
tion tasks, 
easy to 
implement
BM
Bayesian 
models
utilizes 
bayesian 
inference 
to estimate 
parameters 
based on 
prior distri­
butions and 
observed data
Decision-
making, weather 
forecasting, risk 
analysis
Offers 
uncertainty 
estimates 
and robust 
decision-
making 
in the pres­
ence of 
uncertainty
Table 2  Intrinsic XAI methods: 
overview and applications for 
interpretability and transparency 
in decision-making
 
1 3
433

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
The scope of the XAI may be global or local. A global XAI model gives an explanation 
for the entire population (all instances). Table 3 gives a list of methods and examples.
Local XAI models explain a single instance, which should be stable in its neighbour­
hood. Table 4 gives a few examples of local model-agnostic methods.
LIME and SHAP are the most popular local-model agnostic methods (Mill et al., 2024b, 
Table 2). Hence, we discuss them in more detail and use LIME Sect. 5.1 to explain the fea­
sibility and optimality of combinatorial optimisation solutions.
Local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) were first introduced by 
(Ribeiro et al., 2016). LIME finds an explanation for an instance by generating several cases 
around it using a given model (e.g. random forest). The explanation is typically in the form 
of an interpretable model (e.g. k-LASSO). Typically, these models reduced the model’s 
complexity, especially regarding the number of features used. However, approaches and 
implementations dealing with creating features and aggregating the feature’s domain are 
sparse, with Biecek (2018) providing ideas. Section 5.2 addresses this shortcoming. In the 
context of combinatorial optimisations, we use LIME in Sect. 5.1 to explain an instance’s 
feasibility and to interpret the solution’s optimality.
In 1951, Lloyd Shapley introduced a solution concept for cooperative game theory. This 
concept is based on Shapley values, which have been successfully applied in the machine 
learning domain to explain predictions. It determines the contribution of all features fairly 
for a prediction, while LIME does not guarantee this. The Shapley values allow contrast­
ing explanations by changing the comparison from average to a single data point (Molnar, 
2023a, b). Sabharwal et al. (2024) discuss the benefits of Shapley additive explanations 
(SHAP), which provide finance managers with explanations for detected anomalies. They 
follow the classic machine-learning roadmap similar to Garn (2024, s5.3) and provide 
SHAP XAI visualisations. This demonstrates the power of using XAI methods to obtain 
local explanations. The work suggests the context of transparency, AI, XAI and OR in a 
general manner, and stops at the well-established first-generation XAI methodology suitable 
for an expert audience.
A comprehensive review of tabular XAI methods can be found in Sahakyan et al. (2021). 
Molnar (2023a) provides an introduction to some of the XAI methods. Overall, we can see 
that we are entering the area of second-generation XAI methods, whereas first-generation 
methods such as LIME and SHAP are the basis for offering the next level of human-friendly 
explanations. The call for responsible AI is becoming an integrated part of the second-
generation XAI.
2.2  Responsible AI
Typically, the previously mentioned XAI methods use features without considering whether 
they are responsible from an ethical or societal perspective. This has triggered regulators 
and policymakers to demand them and introduce more transparency (Buiten, 2019). Trans­
parency is essential in sectors such as health and social care, criminal justice and finan­
cial services (Centre for Data, Ethics and Innovation, 2020). Arrieta et al. (2020) specify 
responsible artificial intelligence as a methodology for the large-scale implementation of AI 
methods in real organisations with fairness, model explainability and accountability at its 
core. Similarly, Mikalef et al. (2022) argue that safer and more effective technologies can 
be developed by considering responsible AI principles such as algorithmic transparency.
1 3
434

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Abbr
Name
Description
Applications
Strengths
PDP
Partial de­
pendence 
plot
Plots the 
relationship 
between the 
target and 
one or more 
features 
while 
averaging 
out other 
features
Credit scoring, 
marketing
Offers 
visual 
insights 
into the 
influence 
of features 
across a 
global 
population
ALE
Accumu­
lated local 
effects
Like PDP 
but better 
suited for 
correlated 
features, 
showing the 
marginal 
effects of 
features
Predictive 
maintenance, 
healthcare
Handles 
feature 
dependen­
cies better 
than PDP, 
making re­
sults more 
reliable
FIRM
Feature 
importance 
ranking 
measure
Ranks the 
importance 
of features 
based on 
their impact 
on model 
perfor­
mance or 
prediction 
accuracy
Fraud detec­
tion, customer 
analytics
Provides 
clear and 
inter­
pretable 
rankings 
of feature 
contribu­
tions
SP-LIME
Submodu­
lar pick 
LIME
An exten­
sion of 
LIME that 
selects a set 
of explana­
tions to 
explain 
multiple 
instances in 
a dataset
Text classifica­
tion, medical 
imaging
Covers 
multiple 
instances 
with 
diverse ex­
planations, 
increases 
model 
generalis­
ability
FD
Functional 
decompo­
sition
Breaks 
down 
complex 
functions 
into simpler 
components 
to under­
stand how 
individual 
elements 
contribute 
to the 
whole
Energy, signal 
processing
Allows 
for fine-
grained 
under­
stand­
ing of 
complex 
systems 
and 
processes
Table 3  Global model-agnostic 
methods: overview and applica­
tions for overall model behaviour 
based on entire dataset
 
1 3
435

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Further, Behl et al. (2023) investigate the role of responsible AI in improving the perfor­
mance of supply chains. They received responses from 414 decision-makers who deploy AI 
in supply chains, which allowed them to link responsible AI to fairness, accountability, sus­
tainability and transparency. Furthermore, a line to supply chain performance was derived, 
where the term performance is generic.
De Bock et al. (2023) define responsible analytics as the development or improvement of 
advanced methods for transforming data into insights in pursuit of compliance with societal 
expectations, such as ethical, legal, or frugal norms. Responsible AI or Responsible Analyt­
ics complements or extends current XAI by adding aspects such as fairness, ethics, and legal 
considerations. This work uses the SAGE framework (Sect. 3.1), which covers Responsible 
AI using the “Ethics” dimension.
Abbr
Name
Description
Applications
Strengths
LIME
Local in­
terpretable 
model-agnostic 
explanations
Explains 
individual 
predictions 
by approxi­
mating the 
black-box 
model lo­
cally with 
interpreta­
ble models
Text classifica­
tion, image 
analysis
Simple, 
effective 
for under­
standing 
local 
decisions, 
works 
for any 
model 
type
SHAP
SHapley 
additive 
exPlanations
Provides 
fair, addi­
tive feature 
importance 
values by 
allocating 
contribu­
tions fairly 
across 
features
Finance, fraud 
detection
Consis­
tent and 
theo­
retically 
grounded, 
ensures 
fairness 
in feature 
contribu­
tions
An­
chors
Scoped rules
Uses high-
precision 
rules to ex­
plain local 
instances 
by showing 
the parts 
of input 
that are 
critical for 
prediction
Healthcare, law 
enforcement
High 
precision 
in identi­
fying key 
features 
in local 
predic­
tions, 
robust to 
changes
CF
Counterfactual 
explanations
Provides 
examples 
of how a 
feature’s 
change 
would 
alter the 
prediction, 
enhancing 
interpret­
ability
Loan approval, 
insurance claims
Helps 
users un­
derstand 
causality, 
show­
ing how 
small 
changes 
impact 
predic­
tions
Table 4  Local model-agnostic 
methods: overview and applica­
tions for explaining individual 
predictions and end-users look­
ing for actionable insights on 
specific instances
 
1 3
436

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
A few studies have provided frameworks and roadmaps for integrating XAI with OR. 
For instance, De Bock et al. (2023) introduced a framework based on machine learning and 
XAI for some operational research challenges. Their work summarised machine learning 
and XAI methods. It suggested considering performance analytics, responsible analytics 
and attributable analytics. These three domains can be associated with prescriptive ana­
lytics, transparent AI and explainable AI. Their proposed framework covers most of the 
classic machine-learning roadmap (Garn, 2024, s5.3). Additionally, they offer an experi­
mental design stage, an interpretation and an evaluation stage. Unfortunately, the provided 
OR examples are too generic to explain how transparent and explainable AI output can be 
achieved for combinatorial optimisations.
2.3  Transparency
Approaches to explain AI can be divided into those offering more transparency about the AI 
model’s outcomes and AI’s methods. Guidotti et al. (2018) offer the following four “opening 
the black box” types: (1) an explanation of the model, (2) an explanation of the outcome, 
(3) an inspection of the model, and (4) designing a transparent model. This constitutes a cat­
egorisation of explanations as argued in Mill et al. (2023). Lipton (2018) considers transpar­
ency with respect to machine learning’s model workings. Here, he distinguishes the model’s 
entirety (which they call simulatability), its components (decomposability), and its training 
algorithm. He suggests that transparency is a form of inseparability in textual or visual form. 
This is associated with algorithmic transparency. Generally, a goal of transparent AI is to 
increase trust in the system, but it has been shown that it can lead to the opposite (Schmidt 
et al., 2020).
The audience, such as stakeholders, developers, and users affected by AI decisions, is 
essential when designing and deploying transparent AI systems (Felzmann et al., 2020). 
Here, it is necessary to ensure the processes, decisions, and actions are clear and com­
prehensible to the audience to ensure trust, accountability, and ethical use. Felzmann et 
al. (2020) suggest using the principle of transparency by design, which provides imple­
mentable measures.
Visualisation techniques can provide transparency for black box models such as neural 
networks, support vector machines and random forests using sensitivity analysis (Cortez & 
Embrechts, 2013).
Solutions of optimisation models for problems concerning the shortest path, travelling 
salesman, and vehicle routing can be visualised as graphs or in geographical information 
systems (Garn, 2021, 2020). Familiar to most is the implementation of shortest path algo­
rithms within SatNavs. Here, transparency is provided by seeing the type of road used, con­
gestion and alternative routes. Solutions for transportation and trans-shipment models can 
also be displayed efficiently (Garn, 2020). Generally, the OR literature displays the prob­
lems and solutions of optimisation challenges through graphs. For instance, Garn (2021) 
visualises forklifts in a warehouse and maps it to the balanced travelling salesmen problem 
(TSP) to increase algorithmic and conceptual transparency.
1 3
437

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
2.4  Machine learning solves combinatorial optimisations
In 1999, Smith reviewed a decade of research about neural networks for combinatorial opti­
misations (Smith, 1999). The TSP was the focus point, and numerous successful approaches 
were used here. Applications of neural networks for solving assignments, constraint sat­
isfaction, cutting stock and packing problems were cited. The practical importance of the 
Knapsack problem and its ML literature were discussed. More than 20 years later, Bengio et 
al. (2021) reviewed the usage of machine learning to support combinatorial optimisations. 
They themed the ML techniques by (1) end-to-end learning, (2) learning-to-configure and 
(3) ML alongside optimisation. Here, end-to-end learning is defined as learning a machine 
learning model that provides a solution for a given optimisation problem instance. Learning-
to-configure provides additional information for a combinatorial optimisation algorithm to 
adjust its performance. Running machine learning alongside optimisation algorithms allows 
the repeated application of the learning-to-configure ML model. For our work’s aim, end-to-
end learning is most appropriate, also recognising that the themes (2) and (3) could be used 
in conjunction with (1). Vinyals et al. (2015) propose a pointer network based on recurrent 
neural networks to solve operations research optimisations. They demonstrated that solu­
tions for travelling salesman problems (TSP), convex hulls and Delaunay triangulations 
can be found. However, existing TSP algorithms were used to learn the machine-learning 
models. A recent work, published during this paper’s revisions, proposes XAI and a large 
language model (LLM) for the vehicle routing problem (VRP) (Kikuta et al., 2024). Addi­
tionally, they discuss counterfactual explanations.
2.5  Knapsack problem
The Knapsack problem is a classic problem in OR. Given a set of items, each with an 
associated weight and value, and a knapsack with a weight capacity limit, the objective is 
to select a combination of items to ’pack’ in the knapsack such that the (i) total weight does 
not exceed the capacity and (ii) the total value is maximised.
The knapsack problem has a wide range of real-life applications, from resource allocation 
in manufacturing to portfolio optimisation and investment management in finance (Salkin & 
De Kluyver, 1975; Assi & Haraty, 2018). Additionally, the knapsack problem can be utilised 
in online advertising to optimise selecting ads to display on a webpage, considering factors 
such as ad revenue, relevance, and available ad space (Langendoen et al., 2024). In logistics 
and transportation, the knapsack problem can be used to optimise the selection of items to 
be transported in a vehicle with limited carrying capacity, considering factors like weight, 
volume, or profit (Piedra de la Cuadra, 2023). Similarly, in shipping and logistics, the knap­
sack problem can be used in Container Loading to efficiently load containers with various 
goods to utilise space optimally and minimise shipping costs (Chien et al., 2009). Lee and 
Hsu (1989) are among the first to solve the multi-constraint knapsack problem using neural 
networks. They demonstrated a faster runtime of the neural network model than the optimal 
solution found by a branch-and-bound algorithm. Other early work using neural networks 
focused on the mathematical aspects of solving the knapsack problem (Aourid et al., 1995) 
where Ohlsson et al. (1993) solved problems of up to 10,000 items. The problem continues 
to be analysed and solved with neural networks (Hertrich & Skutella, 2023). Recently, some 
work has been done in the domain of XAI on counterfactual explanations for the knapsack 
1 3
438

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
problem (Korikov & Beck, 2021; Korikov et al., 2021; Segal et al., 2023). A counterfactual 
explanation originates from a contrastive question such as “Why was the decision A and not 
B?” where the differences in the underlying reasons are used. A counterfactual explanation 
provides “what-if” information in terms of which alterations of the input features could 
change the output of a predictive model. A counterfactual explanation is then defined as the 
smallest change to the “world” (as captured by the input data) that can be made to obtain a 
desired outcome (Wachter et al., 2017; Confalonieri et al., 2020).
It can be summarised that the current research about responsible AI, in conjunction with 
operations research, captures the well-established domains of AI and explainable AI and 
provides an extension into social sciences. To date, the OR applications of transparent and 
explainable AI implementations appear to be too abstract to be used or too similar to com­
puter science challenges. This indicates we have not been able to find implementations that 
generate actual transparent or responsible AI solutions that associate the above to classic 
Operational Research optimisation challenges such as the MILP.
3  Transparency for OR via SAGE
Based on the analysed literature in Sect. 2, the following four approaches can be used and 
applied to increase the transparency of optimisation solutions. First, a visualisation of 
the problem and its solution can be provided. This can include a graph or chart showing 
the problem’s components and their interaction. Second, the logic behind the solution is 
explained. This includes explaining and elaborating on the assumptions and calculations to 
arrive at the solution. Third, a detailed explanation of the constraints and objectives used to 
formulate the problem is provided. Fourth, a step-by-step approach to explaining the solu­
tion is used. This could include a flowchart or a series of diagrams showing the different 
steps to arrive at the solution. Finally, the audience is involved in the process and is invited 
to provide feedback and input on the solution. This will help to ensure that the solution is 
transparent and meets the needs of all involved. While these actions are a viable starting 
point for explaining optimisation solutions, they lack the theoretical support and structure 
required for the XAI discipline. Hence, we apply the SAGE framework to the Knapsack 
challenge as preparation for creating an XAI that has the audience as its centre. We then 
introduce the Knapsack problem and demonstrate how to increase its operational research 
transparency without needing XAI.
3.1  SAGE framework
The SAGE framework was introduced initially in Mill et al. (2024a), which serves as a 
design aid for researchers and practitioners in the application-specific development of XAI. 
Figure 2 provides an overview of the framework.
We briefly define the most important terms before applying them to our specific XAI 
context. The audience is defined as the immediate recipient of the system-delivered expla­
nation. As noted in Mill et al. (2024a), two roles interact mainly with the explanation: the 
creator, i.e., the business analyst or researcher proposing a solution strategy, and the opera­
tor, who applies and uses the proposed strategy and directly interacts with the system inputs 
and outputs (Mill et al., 2024a). Goals satisfy the questions of a specific audience, and Set­
1 3
439

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
ting refers to factors that affect the usability and comprehension of the explanation. Finally, 
Ethics is based on truthfulness and fairness. The SAGE framework was derived by consid­
ering the context identified from various views in the literature. In Mill et al. (2024b), the 
real-world efficacy of explainable artificial intelligence using the SAGE framework and 
Scenario-Based Design (SBD) is demonstrated, which is well aligned with the work pre­
sented here. However, we use the framework in an OR optimisation context in this work.
The framework is kept general and open to accommodate different authors’ viewpoints. 
Generally, the view is that explanations are contextual (Miller et al., 2017). A scenario-
based example of contextualising the SAGE terms in a production setting is as follows:
 
●
Audience—“Who I am”: I am the logistics manager.
 
●
Goals—“It tells me what I need to know”: I want to know why this is a feasible alloca­
tion, why this is an optimal selection of items to be packed, and why these items were 
packed. I am obtaining a textual and visual answer.
 
●
Setting—“I can use it”: The model is used in industry. The combinatorial model is ac­
curate. The interpretable model and post-hoc AI are reliable. The explanations should 
be text-based and human-friendly. They should be based on the system’s components.
 
●
Ethics—“I trust it”: The provided arguments are conclusive and transparent. The sus­
tainability and responsibility arguments are convincing. The explanations correspond to 
the workings of the model.
Generally, SBD is well established in human interactions (Carroll, 1997) and operations 
(Freeman et al., 2016), but its link to XAI is scarce, with only a handful of publications 
available at the time of writing. Wolf (2019) gives a case study demonstrating that the link­
age leads to more effective solutions for the audience. Sun et al. (2022) apply SBD with XAI 
in the context of generative AI for code.
Fig. 2  The SAGE framework - a design 
aid for researchers and practitioners in the 
application-specific development of XAI. 
[Source: Mill et al. (2024a)]
 
1 3
440

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Before we discuss the above XAI guiding principles and link the SBD to XAI, we will 
consider the general OR transparency approaches introduced at the beginning of this section 
for the knapsack problem.
3.2  Knapsack
The Knapsack problem is a well-known problem in Operational Research as a combinato­
rial optimisation challenge. It will be used as an example to support the previous four state­
ments about increasing transparency. We mentioned that visualisations, logic, constraints & 
objectives, step-by-step approach, and audience increase transparency. The objective of the 
knapsack challenge is to pack items to maximise the value of the knapsack.
 
We begin by introducing the visualisations and logic for the Knapsack example (Fig. 3).
The visualisation shows the components. The physical components are the items and the 
sack (including their identifiers), with their related contextual components, the weights and 
values. Furthermore, we illustrate the components’ interactions with each other, such as 
whether to pack an item, the adding activity, and the knapsack’s weight limit check. These 
interactions demonstrate the solution’s conceptual logic. This can be identified with the set­
ting within the SAGE framework.
Formulating the constraints and objectives improves the conceptual logic.
In operational research, a mathematical program specifies the problem formulation. A 
formal definition for the Knapsack problem, in the form of a binary program, is
 
max
x∈Bn
n
∑
i=1
vixi
subject to
n
∑
i=1
wixi ≤ˆw

(1)
where vi represents the value of the item i, wi the corresponding weight1 and ˆw the weight 
limit. The decision variable xi is one when an item is packed and zero otherwise.
1 Other authors, e.g. Wolsey and Nemhauser (1999) use cost instead of weight.
Fig. 3  Visualisation of compo­
nents, their interaction and the 
solution’s logic
 
1 3
441

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
An operational researcher may be content with the mathematical problem formulation. 
An industry analyst, however, may prefer to see the actual data and formula in a familiar 
tool such as Excel. Table 5 shows a Knapsack instance. This can be associated with the goal 
dimension within the SAGE framework.
Additionally, addressing the targeted audience increases transparency, which is the cen­
trepiece of the SAGE framework. When stating the objective and constraints, we introduce 
common language terms such as item, pack, weight and value. While a worker may only 
want to know which items need to be packed, a statement such as “pack items one and four” 
may suffice. A manager’s information must be communicated with the worker, the industry 
analyst, and other stakeholders. An informal introduction to this challenge offers transpar­
ency aspects, which can be used to motivate human-readable concepts. These concepts can 
be linked to traditional XAI methods. Hence, we must offer a story rather than merely a 
formal definition. The SAGE framework provides such a conceptualisation. In Mill et al. 
(2024a), the SAGE framework was proposed with the audience as the centrepiece tran­
scending to transparent OR and XAI. Sections 4 and 5 return to the classic machine learning 
and XAI domain but demonstrate the linkage to combinatorial optimisations with overall 
guidance by the SAGE framework.
4  Intrinsic XAI for combinatorial optimisations
There is a well-established body of knowledge about approaching supervised learning 
challenges and its extension to XAI. Our literature review indicates that there is a lack of 
interpretable machine learning to offer transparency for combinatorial optimisations. It is 
interesting to note that black-box models specifically adapted to combinatorial optimisa­
tions have been the preferred approach in the reviewed literature in Sect. 2. However, as 
our key methodological contribution, we propose an approach based on the well-established 
machine learning roadmap (Garn, 2024, s5.3) to derive one associated with solving combi­
natorial optimisations via ML.
In this section, we demonstrate the details of our OR-ML methodology (as a step-wise 
procedure) using a Knapsack example and discuss its theoretical and practical implications. 
The learning algorithm generates an interpretable model, allowing us to benefit from intrin­
sic XAI and link it to the SAGE framework. When accuracy measures are of greater impor­
tance than intrinsic explainability, a black-box algorithm (see Sect. 2.1) should be used 
instead, followed by the XAI approach introduced in Sect. 5.
4.1  OR-ML methodology
We propose the following procedure, serving as a practical guideline: 
Table 5  Knapsack instance in Excel with problem and solution visualisation
1 3
442

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
1. Formulate optimisation challenge (e.g. Knapsack, Dynamic Lot Sizing, etc.),
2. Generate a dataset of random solutions (feasible and infeasible),
3. Determine feasibility,
4. Learn to predict (classify) feasibility (e.g. Classification tree),
5. Synthetic Oversampling of Minority Class (assert feasibility),
6. Compute solution values for “feasible” solutions,
7. Learn to predict (regress) solution value (on the feasible data set), and,
8. Compare with the actual optimum.
The details of this methodology are given in the subsequent subsections.
4.2  Formulation and random solutions
Optimisation challenge: At this step, we formulate the OR problem. In Sect. 3.2, we pro­
vided the Linear Program 1 defining the optimisation challenge. Additionally, we must 
specify the optimisation instance and provide the underlying data. Here, we will use a small 
dataset to demonstrate the principle better. Assume that n = 7 items are available. The cor­
responding weights and values are the same as in Fig. 5. That means the weights are:
 
w′ = (2, 3, 6, 7, 5, 9, 4).
(2)
The weight limit is ˆw = 9. Hence, all items qualify to be packed. The corresponding values 
are:
 
v′ = (6, 5, 8, 9, 6, 7, 3).
(3)
As can be seen, the item weights and values do not follow any particular order.
Furthermore, the weights determine the solution’s feasibility. To have meaningful fea­
sibility ranges, it appears to be natural to order the items by weight. This allows cutting off 
heavy features (= items = elements) and identifying small gap-filling elements. The newly 
ordered weight and value vectors are:
 
w = [2
3
4
5
6
7
9]
(4)
and
 
v = [6
5
3
6
8
9
7] .
(5)
The associated decision variables will adapt to this new order. For instance, item two has 
weight w2 = 3, value v2 = 5 and decision variable x2. However, when learning how to 
predict the solution value, ordering by value or benefit is appropriate– the benefitbi of item 
i is defined as its value-to-weight ratio bi = vi
wi .
Random solutions: ML algorithms are data-driven. Hence, we must generate sample data 
to learn whether a solution is feasible. In our initial Knapsack example, we have got n = 7 
items. That means the solution space consists of 2n elements. In other words, there are 128 
ways to pack seven items without considering a weight limit. We will generate a random 
1 3
443

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
sample X = (xij) of ns = 100 solutions without repetition, where i is the row (aka. record 
or observation) and j is the column (aka. feature or decision variable). Here is an illustration 
of the first six rows of X.
 
X1:6,: =


1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1


(6)
Typically, in machine learning, we denote a column j of X as xj. This could be confused 
with the naming of the decision variable. However, we hope this fine distinction will be clear 
from the context. That means, in the OR domain xi ∈B and in the ML domain xj ∈Bns. 
A technical remark on the generation of X is as follows. First, we generated ns random 
integers between 0 and 2n −1 without repetition, and then each integer was converted into 
a binary number. This triggers the idea of using integers in the first place for optimisations 
and machine learning. However, we will leave this idea for future research.
Generally, the sample size for a machine learning challenge is an interesting topic. The 
interested reader is referred to Hastie et al. (2009). Here are a few technical pointers. Mem­
ory can be an issue. For instance, 30 decision variables can exhaust 1GB (1,073,741,824B) 
of RAM (however, the presence of infeasible solutions reduces the space). A workaround 
is to consider only parts of the solution space. The second issue is time and associated CPU 
speed. Depending on the application, results must be found in seconds or hours. An alter­
native to the sampling approach could be a canonical selection of features or a systematic 
combinatorial feature generation.
4.3  Feasibility space
Determine feasibility: The sample can be divided into feasible and infeasible solutions using 
the program’s constraints.
In the Knapsack example, the weights determine the feasibility of the solution. A solution 
i is feasible when
 
n
∑
j=1
wijxij ≤ˆw.
(7)
We denote the feasibility of a solution with yi a 0-1 variable. A statistic of unexplored features 
may be good: a feature xj is unexplored when all its elements are zero, i.e. ∑ns
i=1 xij = 0. 
Insights that can be gained by considering the feasible solutions are:
 
●
Likeliness of features (decision variables) being present in a feasible solution;
 
●
Maximum number of features present in a feasible solution and
 
●
Average number of features in a feasible solution.
1 3
444

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
These insights increase the transparency of solutions. Furthermore, they can be used to 
provide human-friendly explanations. For instance, if the audience requires an explanation 
of a solution’s infeasibility, a statement like “too many items were packed” could be offered.
Learn feasibility: At this stage, we have derived X and y, and can learn whether a solu­
tion is likely feasible or infeasible. This is important when the solution space is too large. 
What are the benefits of knowing the likely characteristics of feasible solutions? Later, these 
insights can be used when we want to provide human-friendly explanations.
Classification trees are famed for their interpretability. For the Knapsack example, the 
classification tree is shown in Fig. 4.
As is common in ML, the data was split into training and test data. The tree was learned 
using 70% of the training data. A standard classification tree algorithm (Therneau & Atkin­
Fig. 5  Feasibility tree stating the decisions and number of solutions
 
Fig. 4  Classification tree for feasible solutions
 
1 3
445

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
son, 2023) with its default control parameters was used to learn the classification tree model. 
Let us quickly interpret the tree. The root node tells us that 83% of the observations are 
infeasible, i.e. only 17% have feasible solutions. The decision to pack item 7 leads to 46% 
infeasible solutions (without any feasible solutions in the sample).
On the other hand, if we do not pack this item, 29% of the feasible solutions are in the 
54% subsample. We can interpret the most right leaf node as, when not packing items five, 
six and seven, we increased the chance of the solution being feasible to 80%. The training 
data contains 70 observations, of which 11 observations were modelled (see Fig. 5).
Let us compare the decision tree with the optimal solution displayed in Table 6.
Table 6 tells us that decision variables x1 and x6 must be one for an optimal solution. 
By definition, the optimal solution is feasible. The feasibility tree (Fig. 5) agrees with this 
knowledge. We did not exclude these variables. The balanced training accuracy of 81.6% 
looks promising and induces some trust. The balanced test accuracy of this illustrative 
example is 79.6%, enhancing the trust. However, these values may be misleading since we 
are dealing with a single test data sample, which is small (30 observations). That means 
different data partitions lead to other accuracies. A more objective approach is obtained 
using repeated cross-validation (CV). Hence, we use a 5-fold CV with ten repetitions (i.e. 
50 sample splits), learning classification trees with complexity parameters (CP) between 
0.01 and 0.15, and investigated several quality measures, giving us a balanced accuracy 
B = 68.7%, F1 = .448 and κ = .377( Cohen Kappa) on average (based on the 50 data 
splits and the chosen (CP). The final models were all identical and identical to the tree struc­
ture displayed previously. This enhances the trust in the initial and current models. This, on 
its own, demonstrates that essential characteristics about the feasible region of an optimi­
sation challenge can be derived using machine learning. The decision tree is interpretable 
and agrees with the intuitive knowledge that packing heavy items leaves fewer options for 
packing lighter items. Yet, it does not exclude packing the heavy item four (x6) required for 
the optimal solution.
Synthetic oversampling: We could attempt to oversample the minority class (feasible) 
solutions to obtain a better prediction model. Interestingly, popular software packages such 
as SMOTE and ROSE do not offer methods for oversampling binary feature spaces. This 
is an interesting challenge on its own and can be addressed using local neighbourhood 
searches or other heuristics. Here, the immediate neighbourhood can be defined by flip­
ping one bit (i.e. a changing one decision). Additionally, the previously learned feasibility 
classifier can help derive feasible solutions. This allows a targeted approach for under and 
oversampling. Later, when using XAI’s LIME, the neighbourhood proves to be an impor­
tant aspect. Admittedly, feasible solutions can be easily obtained in simple examples such 
as the Knapsack problem with few items (e.g. n ≤20 ⇒2n ≤1, 048, 576 solutions). For 
larger instances, algorithmic solutions that consider runtime and memory are needed. At this 
Table 6  Knapsack instance in Excel with problem and solution visualisation using ordered weights
1 3
446

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
point, the objective function could guide the selection of higher-quality solutions. Overall, 
synthetic oversampling helps us to generate more feasible solutions.
4.4  Interpretable machine learning solutions
Interpretable machine learning (IML) models are part of explainable AI. Classic examples 
of IML are decision tree models, linear regression models and logistic regression models. In 
machine learning, a model is a solution from a learning algorithm for a given target (output) 
and input features. Now, we will derive a machine learning model, predict its best solution 
value and compare it with the actual OR optimum.
A regression tree (Fig. 6) is learned using a standard ML algorithm such as the one from 
the rpart library (Therneau & Atkinson, 2023). However, the input data is restricted to fea­
sible solutions only (see Sect. 4.3). A technical note: The algorithm’s control parameters 
allow splitting nodes with two observations, the tree can grow to a maximum depth, and leaf 
nodes can contain one observation.
The tree gives us insights into the constellation of decision variables to the solution 
value. First, we observe that the decision tree provides the optimal solution (highlighted in 
red). It is easy to interpret by reading pack items one and six, resulting in the leaf node with 
solution value 15. Hence, we have successfully demonstrated that machine learning can be 
used to solve combinatorial optimisation challenges. The root node shows that the average 
solution value is ¯y = 9.3 given n = 15 feasible solutions. In this example, we created a 
decision tree that determines values for all solutions. In cases with many items, having sev­
eral items in the leaf nodes will be preferable. This enables the system to communicate the 
average solution for a limited number of decision variables. However, expanding the tree for 
the optimal solution might be necessary.
Fig. 6  Regression tree predicting solution value
 
1 3
447

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
4.5  Summary and implications
In this section, we derived two interpretable decision trees to explain the feasibility and 
solution. An interpretable technique/model/result is “easy” to explain to people (even to 
those without technical training) without ambiguity. Moreover, an interpretable system is 
one in which a user can, not only see but also study and understand how inputs are mapped 
to outputs. The first DT can be used to interpret feasible and infeasible solutions. The sec­
ond DT is used to interpret the solution value. Generally, interpretable AI/ML may sacrifice 
accuracy in favour of interpretability.
This has theoretical implications. For instance, the OR-ML methodology introduced here 
outlines a novel application of intrinsic XAI in combinatorial optimisation (CO), providing a 
basis for future studies that explore machine learning techniques to enhance interpretability 
and explainability in CO. This offers a methodological contribution by structuring the steps 
needed to link optimisation problems with XAI, contributing to the theory of explainability 
in optimisation contexts, which can advance transparency frameworks in OR. Previously, 
we argued that feasibility classifications can be used to support explanations. However, 
learning machine learning models to classify feasible sub-spaces within combinatorial 
optimisation can also enhance our understanding of search spaces. This provides insights 
into how classification models capture the optimisation’s constraints. This could potentially 
benefit combinatorial optimisation, especially those based on meta-heuristics (e.g., genetic 
algorithm). However, this also opens up the observed issue that a region classified as infea­
sible can contain feasible or even optimal solutions. Future studies could explore this in 
more detail. This work demonstrates the synergy between machine learning (focusing on 
predictions and classifications) and combinatorial optimisation. This initiated the acquisi­
tion of theoretical knowledge about how these fields interact, suggesting novel approaches 
for solving CO problems while offering transparency.
A practical implication of the OR-ML steps is the capability of real-time decision-mak­
ing. The trained machine learning models can predict solution feasibility and values faster 
than CO algorithms. That means informed real-time decision-making for complex optimisa­
tion problems is possible. This is particularly valuable in environments such as traffic man­
agement (e.g., re-routing of buses, road closures, etc.) and emergency response planning. 
Rapid decision-making is required in such situations, and the ability to justify these deci­
sions is critical for operational transparency and accountability. The importance of transpar­
ency warrants another practical implication: transparent decision support systems (TDSS). 
The provided OR-XAI procedure may assist in the creation of such systems for real-world 
applications requiring CO. These applications may deal with resource allocations, lot-sizing 
and supply chains. This can support practitioners to understand the reason behind decisions, 
which in turn can enhance trust and encourages the use of responsible AI.
5  Discussion: Post-hoc XAI in the context of combinatorial 
optimisation
In this Section, we will focus on local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) 
and human-friendly explanations, with their application to the knapsack example.
1 3
448

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
5.1  LIME
Local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) are popular. The explanation ξ(x) 
for instance x is obtained by:
 
ξ(x) = argmin
g∈G
L(f, g, πx) + Ω(g),
where f is the predictor (f : Rm →R, m number of features), g an interpretable model 
(from a class G of such models), πx(z) a proximity measure between x and z and Ω(g) 
is the complexity of g. LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) - in its basic form, attempts to find a 
simple “explanation” for a single instance. It is in the form of a linear regression or decision 
tree with a few features. LIME uses the classifier on a sample and weighs the output by 
its proximity. In its original version (Ribeiro et al, 2016, Alg. 1, Sparse linear explanation 
using LIME) an interpretable version of x is used, abbreviated by x′. Ribeiro et al (2016, 
S3.1) intention seems to have been g : Bm′ →B, but in later implementations, it appears 
that a selection of features was preferred - driven by Ω(g). LIME is model agnostic, which 
allows us to explain black-box models such as random forests or deep neural networks. Still, 
it also works on already interpretable models like the ones we derived earlier in this text. 
We apply LIME to the feasibility tree as an example. We need to specify the instance for 
which we want an explanation. An instance is a single observation (record). This should not 
be confused with an OR test instance, where we refer to the entire problem data. We want 
an explanation, for instance, ten x10 = [1
1
1
0
0
0
0]. Figure 7 displays such 
an explanation.
As we can see it agrees with the previously derived decision tree’s explanation. Instance 10 is 
feasible because the features x5, x6 and x7 values are zero. The underlying method is k-LASSO 
with the equation ˆy10 = −.271 + .340[x7 = 0] + .242[x6 = 0] + .19[x5 = 0] = .502. We 
have not gained any new insights because we used an interpretable model previously. How­
ever, if it had been a black-box model, this would have been an insightful explanation. 
Similarly, we can obtain an explanation for the optimal case. It is interesting to observe that 
the neighbourhood size and its sampling size are important. A larger size can introduce a 
negative support of x4 = 0 and x2 = 0, reducing the explanation fit to 0.65. Generally, the 
definition of the neighbourhood for LIME is a debated topic in machine learning.
Fig. 7  LIME explanation for (a) feasibility of instance ten and (b) optimality of instance seven
 
1 3
449

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Overall, we showed that LIME delivers an interpretable model with reduced model com­
plexity for specified instances.
In the next section, we return to (probably) the original intention of LIME to generate 
locally interpretable human-readable explanations.
5.2  Transparent human-friendly explanations
Here, we provide a simple procedure to translate LIME into natural language for the audi­
ence as one objective of this work. Humans prefer short explanations, such as one or two 
sentences (Molnar, 2023a). A human-friendly explanation can be contrasting. That is, 
the current and its “inverse” are considered. Humans tend to focus on abnormal causes 
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1981), which pertains to the domain of counterfactual explana­
tions. Another important aspect is the “social” interaction between the explainer and the 
explainee. In contrast, it is not human-friendly if an explanation requires all features. In 
Sect. 3.1 we provided more theoretical background about explanations and pointed to litera­
ture such as Miller (2019).
Let us return to the procedure that translates LIME into natural language. At this point, it 
is important to reconsider mapping the feature names (decision variables) to human-under­
standable terms. In the Knapsack problem, this can be as simple as naming the decision 
variable x as item. If there are numerous features, with some having similar characteristics, 
then a feature reduction via aggregation may be needed. In the Knapsack example, this may 
happen due to their weight, value, or benefit (“valuability”). For instance, in our “proof-of-
concept” Knapsack example with n = 7 items, decision variables x1,x2 and x3 could be 
represented as a single feature named “light items”. Even if the features are not aggregated, 
the eventual explanations may use such a coding approach. Table 7 shows human-friendly 
terms for the Knapsack problem.
In the Knapsack problem, the variables weight and value are used, and benefit (valuabil­
ity) is used indirectly. Their domain ranges are mapped to readable expressions, and their 
general form is shown in Table 7’s neutral column.
Furthermore, the domains of each feature need to be reconsidered. In our Knapsack 
example, the 0-1 domain can be recoded in “leave” and “pack”. Additionally, the parameter 
terms should be taken into account. This concept can be similar to or the same as what 
is used for feature naming. Generally, they will differ. To transform continuous numeric 
monotone-increasing values into predefined ordered language terms, we could use the map­
ping function shown in Code 1, assuming the language terms map to a uniformly distributed 
domain. 
Valuable
Weight
Value
Neutral
Most valuable
Very heavy
Very high value
Very high
Very valuable
Heavy
High value
High
Valuable
Normal weight
Normal value
Medium
Less valuable
Light
Low value
Low
–
Very light
Very low value
Very low
Table 7  Human-friendly terms 
for the Knapsack problem
 
1 3
450

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Table 8 shows the output of Code 1 for the weight and benefit terms.
For instance, the normal weight term is mapped to the right-open interval [4.8, 6.2) and 
applies to items four and five. After recoding, each item has the following human-friendly 
terms associated with it (Table 9).
The concept of mapping numeric values to human-readable terms can be easily extended 
to accommodate other distributions, such as the normal, exponential or Weibull distribution. 
The target can even be recoded, and its domain can be adapted as before. Another interesting 
approach to providing human-friendly explanations is discussed in Hagras (2018), where 
they propose the use of fuzzy logic systems (FLS). Their work confirms the fuzziness of 
human-language terms such as heavy and light and how well humans can deal with them. 
The FLS may utilise our procedure to generate human-readable systems or vice versa. These 
approaches are related to a rudimentary concept-based perspective. Kazhdan et al. (2021) 
and Ghorbani et al. (2019) discuss concept-based approaches in more detail. The search 
for human-readable explanations is not new. Confalonieri et al. (2020) provide a historical 
perspective of explainable AI, which reminds the reader of Expert Systems, Recommender 
Systems and Neuro-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning, besides the popular Machine 
Table 8  Language terms mapped to ranges (a) weights; (b) benefits
(a) Weight terms
Lower
Upper
Items
(b) Benefit terms
Lower
Upper
Very light
-Inf
3.4
1, 2
Less valuable
-Inf
1.3125
Light
3.4
4.8
3
Valuable
1.3125
1.8750
Normal weight
4.8
6.2
4, 5
Very valuable
1.8750
2.4375
Heavy
6.2
7.6
6
Most valuable
2.4375
Inf
Very heavy
7.6
Inf
7
Table 9  Human-readable terms for the Knapsack problem
Item
Weight
Value
Benefit
Weight term
Value term
Benefit term
1
2
6
3.00
Very light
Normal value
Most valuable
2
3
5
1.67
Very light
Low value
Valuable
3
4
3
0.75
Light
Very low value
Less valuable
4
5
6
1.20
Normal weight
Normal value
Less valuable
5
6
8
1.33
Normal weight
Very high value
Valuable
6
7
9
1.29
Heavy
Very high value
Less valuable
7
9
7
0.78
Very heavy
High value
Less valuable
1 3
451

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Learning area using explanations and XAI. Furthermore, their work details the explanation 
aspects for each area. For instance, for Expert Systems, they show how explanations can be 
derived as a problem-solving activity. Unfortunately, in the Machine learning domain, they 
stop at LIME as the “human readable” explanation. Yet, it may be worthwhile exploring the 
approaches from the other areas mentioned to derive a unified way to derive explanations. 
Generative AI is an exciting and popular domain. Schneider (2024) explores its relationship 
to XAI and provides a research agenda. The work captures some of the above-mentioned 
concepts and many more, basically indicating that the here proposed human-friendly expla­
nation is just the tip of the iceberg.
Now, let us return to our proposed explanation system. There are several general, concrete 
approaches that should be considered when creating human-friendly explanations. The first 
general idea is that features with common characteristics can be identified via clustering. 
In our case, this was done indirectly by introducing a mapping from numerical to language 
terms (clusters). Obviously, other clustering techniques, such as k-means, could have been 
used, leading to fewer decision variables. In our example, for the feasibility analysis, we can 
reduce the dimensionality from seven to three weight decisions (light, normal, heavy). This 
becomes more impressive with the knapsacks of thousands of decision variables. The reduc­
tion of decision variables could have also used the value and benefit. The second general 
idea is to reduce the parameter space. This dimensionality and parameter space reduction 
has also been applied to the study of explainability in clustering algorithms (Rodriguez et 
al., 2019; Bandyapadhyay et al., 2023). For instance, the proposed mapping can be used to 
discretise the continuous range domains.
We can now return to our case study (scenario) and derive explanations for case 7 using 
the above mappings and natural language models, which can be derived from natural lan­
guage processing (NLP). Let us begin by explaining the optimal solution using the param­
eter space reduction and textual representation:
 
●
“Item one was packed because it is most valuable”,
 
●
“Item six was packed because it has a very high value”,
 
●
“Item two was not packed because it is not valuable”, and
 
●
“The packed items provide the highest value”.
Returning to the SAGE framework, we can see that the logistics manager (audience) 
received a textual explanation (goal) of why this is an optimal selection of the packed items. 
For the optimal solution (case 7), explaining the varying characteristics by using the deci­
sion variable reduction approach is challenging. However, we can derive an explanation for 
the feasibility by introducing weight decision variables. For instance:
 
●
“Case 10 is feasible because no heavy items were packed”, and
 
●
“Case 10 is feasible because light items were packed”.
Here, we are not concerned with omitting some information. Instead, we promote it to favour 
simplicity because humans prefer short explanations (one or two sentences). It is worth not­
ing that we are touching upon counterfactual explanations here (see Sect. 3.2). Once again, 
the SAGE’s goal is met by explaining why a solution is feasible. Another expected expla­
1 3
452

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
nation concerning the setting of the SAGE framework is regarding the components of the 
system (Mill et al., 2024a, b).
 
●
“The weight of the packed items does not exceed the knapsack’s limit”.
5.3  Implications
Generally, with respect to explainability, the combination of machine learning and opera­
tional research optimisation offers several advantages: (1) Solutions can be explained in a 
meaningful way to the audience providing the appropriate context in an accessible human-
friendly way. (2) Results can be effectively contrasted. That means the characteristics of 
good and bad solutions can be learned. Additionally, feasible and infeasible solution proper­
ties can be differentiated. (3) Counterfactual explanations can be used in the context of the 
operations, describing the effects of using different inputs and values and their effects on 
the solution values.
The theoretical implications of this research include the development of a framework 
that integrates XAI into combinatorial optimisations in an operational research context. 
This is achieved by utilising XAI methods such as LIME and SHAP, building on SAGE and 
human-friendly explanations to provide transparency of OR solutions for decision-makers. 
Thus, our methodology is paving the way for new transparency frameworks. Furthermore, 
we advance post-hoc XAI methods by demonstrating their applicability to operational 
research scenarios. The work challenges the limitation of XAI methods from traditional 
prediction and classification tasks to being usable for explaining combinatorial optimisation 
search spaces and solutions.
The practical implications of this work include enhanced decision-making in industries 
such as manufacturing, finance and logistics. For instance, in resource allocation in manufac­
turing, using XAI for combinatorial optimisations helps decision-makers better understand 
how factors like value, volume and weight influence the operations. Another implication 
is the improved trust in AI and OR systems utilising our work by offering human-readable 
explanations. This can benefit non-experts of AI and OR, such as stakeholders in govern­
ment and managers, allowing them to sense check solutions from these decision support 
systems quickly. This is especially important for sectors where transparency is legally or 
ethically required, e.g. in healthcare and critical public energy and transport infrastructure.
In summary, operational research optimisation solutions can be translated into trans­
parent, human-friendly explanations. Overall, the arguments provided are conclusive, sus­
tainable, and transparent, addressing the ethical dimension of the SAGE framework. This 
allows us in this golden age of artificial intelligence to make responsible decisions that 
are easy to understand and validate by the targeted audience, inducing trust in operational 
research optimisations.
6  Conclusion
This work emphasised the significance of transparency and responsible decision-making, 
particularly by applying machine learning (ML) to operational research (OR) optimisations 
with explainable AI (XAI). Using the SAGE framework, we highlighted the importance of 
1 3
453

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
generating human-friendly explanations tailored to the audience’s context, thereby increas­
ing trust and transparency in OR solutions. We addressed the key objectives by:
 
●
Contextualising transparency for OR applications: Using the SAGE framework, we 
guided the generation of XAI in generating transparency in OR, ensuring that the expla­
nations provided are audience-specific and enhance trust.
 
●
Demonstrating interpretable ML for combinatorial optimisations: Through the Knap­
sack problem example, we showed that interpretable ML models could solve combina­
torial optimisation challenges, providing transparent and interpretable solutions. This 
intrinsic XAI provides transparency by featuring interpretable models. Additionally, 
they offer valuable insights into the solution space, detecting feature relationships and 
concepts that facilitate the generation of transparent solutions.
 
●
Applying post-hoc XAI methods: We illustrated how post-hoc XAI methods, like 
LIME, can be applied to ML solutions for OR optimisations, visualising and explaining 
the solutions.
 
●
Offering human-readable explanations: We proposed practical guidelines to improve 
the human readability of XAI methods in the context of OR challenges, guided by the 
SAGE framework.
Limitations: While our findings showed that interpretable ML techniques can estimate the 
feasibility space and find the optimal solution for a Knapsack problem instance, there are 
some limitations to our study. Although we provide a general methodology, it was only 
tested on one CO challenge. That means (i) the generalisability and applicability to other 
operational research optimisation problems, such as vehicle routing, dynamic lot sizing and 
facility location problems, need to be further investigated. Furthermore, our approach and 
analysis were methodological, preparing the way for (ii) a theoretical study. Many ques­
tions with a theoretical direction arose during this study, including: Are the information 
gain and minimum-squared error appropriate loss functions? What are the mathematical 
differences between the objective and loss functions? What are the algorithmic similarities 
between decision trees and branch-and-bound algorithms? What is the difference between 
data-driven function estimation of the feasible region and solution-specific search? Our 
approach still shares the limitations associated with using ML to solve combinatorial opti­
misation problems, namely (iii) reduced accuracy, as ML methods often fail to capture 
subtle problem-specific nuances, and (iv) the challenge of incorporating complex real-world 
constraints into ML algorithms. This may constitute challenges when exploring complex 
OR scenarios.
Nevertheless, this study demonstrated that combinatorial optimisations could ben­
efit from ML because of the enhanced transparency of solutions achieved by using XAI 
enhanced with human-friendly concepts. This research opens up opportunities for increased 
transparency in operational research across various sectors.
Future research directions include:
 
●
Exploring multiple XAI methods: Applying various XAI methods to other classic OR 
problems.
 
●
Utilising diverse ML techniques: Different ML techniques, such as logistic regressions, 
random forests, or neural networks, can be used to learn the feasible region of the search 
1 3
454

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
space.
 
●
Investigating metaheuristics: Examining metaheuristics in OR problems from the per­
spectives of interoperability, explainability, and transparency, for both traditional and 
parallel (Amirghasemi, 2022) approaches.
 
●
Exploring generative AI and large language models (LLMs): We are investigating the 
potential of generative AI and LLMs, trained on data from the OR problem search 
space, to provide human-friendly explanations. These future directions will further ad­
vance transparency by means of interpretability and explainability in OR optimisations, 
leveraging the benefits of ML and XAI.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors have no conflict of interest to disclose. All co-authors have seen and agree 
with the contents of the manuscript and there is no financial interest to report.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ahern, Z., Paz, A., & Corry, P. (2022). Approximate multi-objective optimization for integrated bus route 
design and service frequency setting. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological,155, 1–25. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2021.10.007
Ahmed, I., Jeon, G., & Piccialli, F. (2022). From artificial intelligence to explainable artificial intelligence 
in industry 4.0: A survey on what, how, and where. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,18(8), 
5031–5042. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2022.3146552
Amirghasemi, M. (2022). An effective parallel evolutionary metaheuristic with its application to three optimi­
zation problems. Applied Intelligence,53(5), 5887–5909. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-022-03599-w
Aourid, S., Dai Do, X., & Kaminska, B. (1995). Penalty formulation for 0-1 linear programming problem: 
A neural network approach. In Proceedings of ICNN’95—international conference on neural networks 
(vol. 4, pp. 1690–1693). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNN.1995.488873
Arrieta, A. B., Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Del Ser, J., et al. (2020). Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI): Con­
cepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Information Fusion,58, 82–115. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2019.12.012
Assi, M., & Haraty, R. A. (2018). A survey of the knapsack problem. In 2018 International arab conference 
on information technology (ACIT) (pp. 1–6). https://doi.org/10.1109/ACIT.2018.8672677.
Bandyapadhyay, S., Fomin, F. V., Golovach, P. A., et al. (2023). How to find a good explanation for cluster­
ing? Artificial Intelligence,322, 103948. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2023.103948
Bastani, H., Drakopoulos, K., Gupta, V., et al. (2022). Interpretable operations research for high-stakes deci­
sions: Designing the greek COVID-19 testing system. INFORMS Journal on Applied Analytics,52(5), 
398–411. https://doi.org/10.1287/inte.2022.1128
Behl, A., Sampat, B., Pereira, V., et al. (2023). The role played by responsible artificial intelligence (RAI) in 
improving supply chain performance in the MSME sector: An empirical inquiry. Annals of Operations 
Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05624-8
Beltrami, E. J., & Bodin, L. D. (1974). Networks and vehicle routing for municipal waste collection. Net­
works,4(1), 65–94.
Bengio, Y., Lodi, A., & Prouvost, A. (2021). Machine learning for combinatorial optimization: A method­
ological tour d’horizon. European Journal of Operational Research,290(2), 405–421.
1 3
455

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Biecek, P. (2018). DALEX: Explainers for complex predictive models in R. Journal of Machine Learning 
Research,19(84), 1–5.
Buiten, M. C. (2019). Towards intelligent regulation of artificial intelligence. European Journal of Risk Regu­
lation,10(1), 41–59. https://doi.org/10.1017/err.2019.8
Carroll, J. M. (1997). Scenario-based design. In Handbook of human-computer interaction (pp. 383–406). 
Elsevier. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​B​9​7​8​-​0​4​4​4​8​1​8​6​2​-​1​.​5​0​0​8​3​-​2
Centre for Data, Ethics and Innovation. (2020). Review into bias in algorithmic decision-making. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​a​s​s​e​
t​s​.​p​u​b​l​i​s​h​i​n​g​.​s​e​r​v​i​c​e​.​g​o​v​.​u​k​/​g​o​v​e​r​n​m​e​n​t​/​u​p​l​o​a​d​s​/​s​y​s​t​e​m​/​u​p​l​o​a​d​s​/​a​t​t​a​c​h​m​e​n​t​_​d​a​t​a​/​f​i​l​e​/​9​5​7​2​5​9​/​R​e​v​i​e​w​
_​i​n​t​o​_​b​i​a​s​_​i​n​_​a​l​g​o​r​i​t​h​m​i​c​_​d​e​c​i​s​i​o​n​-​m​a​k​i​n​g​.​p​d​f
Chien, C. F., Lee, C. Y., Huang, Y. C., et al. (2009). An efficient computational procedure for determining the 
container-loading pattern. Computers & Industrial Engineering,56(3), 965–978. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​
6​/​j​.​c​i​e​.​2​0​0​8​.​0​9​.​0​1​9​
Confalonieri, R., Coba, L., Wagner, B., et al. (2020). A historical perspective of explainable Artificial Intel­
ligence. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,11(1), Article e1391. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1391
Cortez, P., & Embrechts, M. J. (2013). Using sensitivity analysis and visualization techniques to open black 
box data mining models. Information Sciences,225, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2012.10.039
de la Cuadra, R. P. (2023). Knapsack models applied to the solution of complex problems in transport plan­
ning. Ph.D. thesis, Universidad de Sevilla, Spain, European Union, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​i​a​l​n​e​t​.​u​n​i​r​i​o​j​a​.​e​s​/​s​e​r​v​l​e​t​/​d​
c​t​e​s​?​c​o​d​i​g​o​=​3​1​7​7​3​4
Das, S. (2022). Local justice and the algorithmic allocation of scarce societal resources. In Proceedings of 
the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence (pp. 12250–12255). ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​6​0​9​/​a​a​a​i​.​v​3​6​i​1​1​
.​2​1​4​8​6​
Datta, S., & Kapoor, R. (2023). Clean India mission: Building nation through sustainable waste management 
practices. Vision,27(1), 135–141. https://doi.org/10.1177/09722629221111841
De Bock, K. W., Coussement, K., Caigny, A. D., et al. (2023). Explainable AI for operational research: A 
defining framework, methods, applications, and a research agenda. European Journal of Operational 
Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2023.09.026
Ehsan, U., Liao, Q. V., Muller, M., et al. (2021). Expanding explainability: Towards social transparency in AI 
systems. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1–19). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445188
Felzmann, H., Fosch-Villaronga, E., Lutz, C., et al. (2020). Towards transparency by design for artificial intelli­
gence. Science and Engineering Ethics,26(6), 3333–3361. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-020-00276-4
Freeman, N. K., Melouk, S. H., & Mittenthal, J. (2016). A scenario-based approach for operating theater 
scheduling under uncertainty. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management,18(2), 245–261. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2015.0557
Garn, W. (2020). Introduction to management science: Modelling, optimisation and probability. Smartana 
Ltd.https://www.smartana.org/ims
Garn, W. (2021). Balanced dynamic multiple travelling salesmen: Algorithms and continuous approximations. 
Computers & Operations Research,136, Article 105509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2021.105509
Garn, W. (2023). An explainable AI framework with applications to fraud detection and operational research. 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.25400.93445
Garn, W. (2024). Data analytics for business: AI-ML-PBI-SQL-R. Routledge. https://www.smartana.org/da
Ghorbani, A., Wexler, J., Zou, J. Y., et al. (2019). Towards automatic concept-based explanations. In H. Wal­
lach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, et al. (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems 
(vol. 32). Curran Associates, Inc., ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​p​r​o​c​e​e​d​i​n​g​s​.​n​e​u​r​i​p​s​.​c​c​/​p​a​p​e​r​_​f​i​l​e​s​/​p​a​p​e​r​/​2​0​1​9
Gilpin, L. H., Bau, D., Yuan, B. Z., et al. (2018). Explaining explanations: An overview of interpretability of 
machine learning. In 2018 IEEE 5th international conference on data science and advanced analytics 
(DSAA) (pp. 80–89). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/DSAA.2018.00018
Guidotti, R., Monreale, A., Ruggieri, S., et al. (2018). A survey of methods for explaining black box models. 
ACM Computing Surveys,51(5), 1–42. https://doi.org/10.1145/3236009
Gunning, D., & Aha, D. (2019). DARPA’s explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) program. AI Maga­
zine,40(2), 44–58. https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v40i2.2850
Hagras, H. (2018). Toward human-understandable, explainable AI. Computer,51(9), 28–36. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​1​0​9​/​M​C​.​2​0​1​8​.​3​6​2​0​9​6​5​
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J. H., et al. (2009). The elements of statistical learning: Data mining, 
inference, and prediction (Vol. 2). Springer.
Hertl, B. V. (2022). Explanatory analysis of the chess game. Brno University of Technology.
Hertrich, C., & Skutella, M. (2023). Provably good solutions to the knapsack problem via neural networks 
of bounded size. INFORMS Journal on Computing,35(5), 1079–1097. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​2​8​7​/​i​j​o​c​.​2​0​
2​1​.​0​2​2​5​
1 3
456

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1981). The simulation heuristic. National Technical Information Service. ​h​t​t​p​
s​:​/​/​a​p​p​s​.​d​t​i​c​.​m​i​l​/​s​t​i​/​t​r​/​p​d​f​/​A​D​A​0​9​9​5​0​4​.​p​d​f
Kaynak, O. (2021). The golden age of artificial intelligence: Inaugural editorial. Discover Artificial Intel­
ligence. https://doi.org/10.1007/s44163-021-00009-x
Kazhdan, D., Dimanov, B., Terre, H. A., et al. (2021). Is Disentanglement all you need? Comparing Con­
cept-based & Disentanglement Approaches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06917https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2104.06917
Kikuta, D., Ikeuchi, H., Tajiri, K., et al. (2024). RouteExplainer: An explanation framework for vehicle rout­
ing problem. In Pacific-asia conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 30–42). Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-2259-4_3
Korikov, A., & Beck, J. C. (2021). Counterfactual explanations via inverse constraint programming. In 27th 
international conference on principles and practice of constraint programming (CP 2021), Schloss 
Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
Korikov, A., Shleyfman, A., & Beck, C. (2021). Counterfactual explanations for optimization-based deci­
sions in the context of the GDPR. In ICAPS 2021 workshop on explainable AI planning. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​o​p​e​n​r​e​
v​i​e​w​.​n​e​t​/​f​o​r​u​m​?​i​d​=​Y​i​R​1​N​I​o​j​U​2​q​
Langendoen, E., Frasincar, F., Riezebos, M., et al. (2024). Revenue maximization for multiple advertisements 
placement on a web banner using a pixel-price model. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​4​-​0​5​9​2​0​-​x​
Le, T. T. H., Prihatno, A. T., Oktian, Y. E., et al. (2023). Exploring local explanation of practical industrial 
AI applications: A systematic literature review. Applied Sciences,13(9), 5809. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​9​0​/​
a​p​p​1​3​0​9​5​8​0​9​
Lee, H. M., & Hsu, C. C. (1989). Neural network processing through energy minimization with learning 
ability to the multiconstraint zero-one knapsack problem. In IEEE international workshop on tools for 
artificial intelligence, IEEE computer society (pp. 548–549). https://doi.org/10.1109/TAI.1989.65366
Lipton, Z. C. (2018). The mythos of model interpretability. Communications of the ACM,61(10), 36–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3233231
Mikalef, P., Conboy, K., Lundström, J. E., et al. (2022). Thinking responsibly about responsible ai and ‘the 
dark side’of ai. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​0​9​6​0​0​8​5​X​.​2​0​2​2​.​2​0​2​6​6​2​1
Mill, E., Garn, W., Ryman-Tubb, N., et al. (2023). Opportunities in real time fraud detection: An explainable 
artificial intelligence (XAI) research agenda. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and 
Applications (IJACSA). ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​4​5​6​9​/​I​J​A​C​S​A​.​2​0​2​3​.​0​1​4​0​5​1​2​1
Mill, E., Garn, W., Ryman-Tubb, N., et al. (2024). The SAGE framework for explaining context in explain­
able artificial intelligence. Applied Artificial Intelligence,38(1), 2318670. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​0​8​8​3​
9​5​1​4​.​2​0​2​4​.​2​3​1​8​6​7​0
Mill, E., Garn, W., & Turner, C. (2024). Real-world efficacy of explainable artificial intelligence using the 
SAGE framework and scenario-based design. Applied Artificial Intelligence,38(1), 2430867. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​
i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​0​8​8​3​9​5​1​4​.​2​0​2​4​.​2​4​3​0​8​6​7
Miller, T. (2019). Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artificial Intelli­
gence,267, 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2018.07.007
Miller, T., Howe, P., & Sonenberg, L. (2017) Explainable AI: Beware of inmates running the asylum Or: 
How I learnt to stop worrying and love the social and behavioural sciences. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​4​8​5​5​0​/​a​
r​X​i​v​.​1​7​1​2​.​0​0​5​4​7​
Molnar, C. (2023a). Interpretable machine learning (2nd edn). Leanpub, Munich, Germany, European 
Union. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​c​h​r​i​s​t​o​p​h​m​.​g​i​t​h​u​b​.​i​o​/​i​n​t​e​r​p​r​e​t​a​b​l​e​-​m​l​-​b​o​o​k
Molnar, C. (2023b). Interpreting machine learning models with SHAP. Chistoph Molnar c/o MUCBOOK, 
Heidi Seibold. https://christophmolnar.com/books/shap/
Nyawa, S., Gnekpe, C., & Tchuente, D. (2023). Transparent machine learning models for predicting deci­
sions to undertake energy retrofits in residential buildings. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​3​-​0​5​2​1​7​-​5​
Ohlsson, M., Peterson, C., & Söderberg, B. (1993). Neural networks for optimization problems with inequal­
ity constraints: The knapsack problem. Neural Computation,5(2), 331–339. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​6​2​/​n​e​
c​o​.​1​9​9​3​.​5​.​2​.​3​3​1​
Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S., & Guestrin, C. (2016). “Why should i trust you?”: Explaining the predictions of any 
classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery 
and data mining (pp. 1135–1144). https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939778
Rodriguez, M. Z., Comin, C. H., Casanova, D., et al. (2019). Clustering algorithms: A comparative approach. 
PLoS ONE,14(1), 1–34. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0210236
1 3
457

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:427–458
Rohani, V. A., Peerally, J. A., Moghavvemi, S., et al. (2022). Illustrating scholar-practitioner collaboration 
for data-driven decision-making in the optimization of logistics facility location and implications for 
increasing the adoption of AR and VR practices. The TQM Journal,34(2), 280–302. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​1​0​8​/​T​Q​M​-​0​6​-​2​0​2​1​-​0​1​9​4​
Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (2020). Artificial intelligence: A modern approach. Pearson.
Sabharwal, R., Miah, S. J., Wamba, S. F., et al. (2024). Extending application of explainable artificial intel­
ligence for managers in financial organizations. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​
7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​4​-​0​5​8​2​5​-​9​
Sahakyan, M., Aung, Z., & Rahwan, T. (2021). Explainable artificial intelligence for tabular data: A survey. 
IEEE Access,9, 135392–135422. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3116481
Salkin, H. M., & De Kluyver, C. A. (1975). The knapsack problem: A survey. Naval Research Logistics 
Quarterly,22(1), 127–144. https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.3800220110
Schmidt, P., Biessmann, F., & Teubner, T. (2020). Transparency and trust in artificial intelligence systems. 
Journal of Decision Systems,29(4), 260–278. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​2​4​6​0​1​2​5​.​2​0​2​0​.​1​8​1​9​0​9​4
Schneider, J. (2024). Explainable generative AI (GenXAI): A survey, conceptualization, and research agenda. 
Artificial Intelligence Review,57(11), 289. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-024-10916-x
Segal, M., George, A. M., Yu, I., et al. (2023). Robust recourse for binary allocation problems. In XAI in 
action: Past, present, and future applicationshttps://openreview.net/forum?id=qt9yTS7TKc
Smith, K. A. (1999). Neural networks for combinatorial optimization: A review of more than a decade of 
research. INFORMS Journal on Computing,11(1), 15–34. https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.11.1.15
Sun, J., Liao, Q. V., Muller, M., et al. (2022). Investigating explainability of generative AI for code through 
scenario-based design. In Proceedings of the 27th international conference on intelligent user interfaces 
(pp. 212–228). https://doi.org/10.1145/3490099.3511119
Therneau, T., & Atkinson, B. (2023). rpart: Recursive partitioning and regression trees. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​C​R​A​N​.​R​-​p​r​o​
j​e​c​t​.​o​r​g​/​p​a​c​k​a​g​e​=​r​p​a​r​t​, r package version 4.1.23
Turner, C. J., & Garn, W. (2022). Next generation DES simulation: A research agenda for human centric 
manufacturing systems. Journal of Industrial Information Integration,28, Article 100354. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​i​i​.​2​0​2​2​.​1​0​0​3​5​4​
Vinyals, O., Fortunato, M., & Jaitly, N. (2015). Pointer networks. In Advances in neural information process­
ing systems 28. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​p​r​o​c​e​e​d​i​n​g​s​.​n​e​u​r​i​p​s​.​c​c​/​p​a​p​e​r​_​f​i​l​e​s​/​p​a​p​e​r​/​2​0​1​5​/​f​i​l​e​/​2​9​9​2​1​0​0​1​f​2​f​0​4​b​d​3​b​a​e​e​8​4​a​1​
2​e​9​8​0​9​8​f​-​P​a​p​e​r​.​p​d​f
Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., & Russell, C. (2017). Counterfactual explanations without opening the black 
box: Automated decisions and the GDPR. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology,31, 841.
Wolf, C. T. (2019). Explainability scenarios: Towards scenario-based XAI design. In Proceedings of the 24th 
international conference on intelligent user interfaces (pp. 252–257). ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​4​5​/​3​3​0​1​2​7​5​
.​3​3​0​2​3​1​7​
Wolsey, L. A., & Nemhauser, G. L. (1999). Integer and combinatorial optimization (Vol. 55). Wiley.
Zhang, C., & Lu, Y. (2021). Study on artificial intelligence: The state of the art and future prospects. Journal 
of Industrial Information Integration,23, Article 100224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2021.100224
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
458