TITLE: Data-driven subjective performance evaluation: An attentive deep neural networks model based on a call centre case
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04874-2
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Accepted: 15 July 2022 / Published online: 26 October 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
 
 Abdelrahman Ahmed
A.ahmed110@bradford.ac.uk; Abdolrahman.salem@gmail.com
 
 Uthayasankar Sivarajah
U.Sivarajah@bradford.ac.uk
Zahir Irani
Z.Irani@bradford.ac.uk
Kamran Mahroof
K.Mahroof@bradford.ac.uk
Vincent Charles
C.Vincent3@bradford.ac.uk
1 
School of Management, University of Bradford, BD7 1DP Bradford, UK
Data-driven subjective performance evaluation: An attentive 
deep neural networks model based on a call centre case
Abdelrahman Ahmed1
 · Uthayasankar Sivarajah1 · Zahir Irani1 · Kamran Mahroof1 · 
Vincent Charles1
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04874-2
Abstract
Every contact centre engages in some form of Call Quality Monitoring in order to im­
prove agent performance and customer satisfaction. Call centres have traditionally used 
a manual process to sort, select, and analyse a representative sample of interactions for 
evaluation purposes. Unfortunately, such a process is marked by subjectivity, which in turn 
results in a distorted picture of agent performance. To address the challenge of identifying 
and removing subjectivity, empirical research is required. In this paper, we introduce an 
evidence-based, machine learning-driven framework for the automatic detection of sub­
jective calls. We analyse a corpus of seven hours of recorded calls from a real-estate call 
centre using Deep Neural Network (DNN) for a multi-classification problem. The study 
establishes the first baseline for subjectivity detection, with an accuracy of 75%, which 
is comparable to relevant speech studies in emotional recognition and performance clas­
sification. We conclude, among other things, that in order to achieve the best performance 
evaluation, subjective calls should be removed from the evaluation process or subjective 
scores deducted from the overall results.
Keywords  Subjective evaluation · Agent Performance · Customer Behaviour · Deep 
neural network · Call Centre
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
1  Introduction
Effective and efficient call centre operations are key ingredients to success and a good repu­
tation. Every call centre draws a baseline that measures overall performance according to 
the ultimate call centre objectives and strategies based on quantitative and qualitative meth­
ods (Abbott, 2004; Rubingh, 2013). The quantitative method considers the first call resolu­
tion, average handling time of the call, wrap-up time, and adherence time (Reynolds, 2010). 
The qualitative method is performed by the quality team, which listens to the recorded calls 
and evaluates the delivered services (Judkins et al., 2003). The quantitative and qualitative 
methods aim to fulfil the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) widely used to measure agent 
performance and, in turn, overall call centre productivity (Reynolds, 2010).
However, objectively evaluating the call centre agents’ performance is difficult. The 
quantitative method and relevant KPIs measure the efficiency of the agent rather than the 
quality of service, so customer satisfaction is not taken into account (Willis & Bendixen, 
2007). On the other hand, the qualitative method is dependent on the prior experience of 
the quality team, which is based on finesse standards such as communication and language 
skills. As a result, the qualitative method allows for style and individuality while also leav­
ing room for interpretation (Cleveland, 2012). There is a common stereotype in call centres 
that the job is basic and simple, which deceives management when seeking to fairly evalu­
ate agents by measuring their productivity (Bain & Taylor, 2000). The second challenge 
is that call centres are dynamic and frantic, with customer interactions and massive calls 
coming in through various communication channels (Cleveland, 2012). The manual sorting 
of recorded calls over a given period is critical, impractical, and unaffordable. The third 
challenge is the diversity of the evaluators’ perceptions, as different people can evaluate the 
same agent’s performance differently. When the baseline is overlooked, the absence of a 
unified evaluation system can have a significant and negative impact on a call centre.
From a theoretical perspective, the resource-based theory (RBT) asserts that firms can 
achieve a sustained competitive advantage by collecting and integrating rare, valuable, 
inimitable, and nonsubstitutable resources (Barney, 1991). Sirmon (2007) discussed this 
subject and stated that acquiring rare, inimitable, and nonsubstitutable resources is neces­
sary but insufficient; firms have to manage the resources efficiently to achieve competitive 
advantage. The resources portfolio structuring (tangible/intangible), bundling of equipment, 
technology, and human capital to build capabilities and leverage capabilities all contribute 
to the creation of value (Sirmon et al., 2011). Value creation in operations management is a 
process that involves developing or implementing operational strategies, ensuring efficient 
performance and high-quality products, and increasing customer satisfaction through the 
use of a diverse range of resources and skills (Gunasekaran & Ngai, 2012). The firm main­
tains a sustained competitive advantage as long as its resources are immobile and heteroge­
neous. Heterogeneity exists when the resource mix of one organisation differs greatly from 
that of another. Immobile means that the resources cannot be moved from the organisation 
to a competitor in order for rivals to imitate the value.
The RBT proposes a relationship between resources and competitive advantage. How­
ever, it does not propose a mechanism to ensure regular and objective choices for keep­
ing the competitive edge, i.e., management perception of a valuable resource that may not 
be valuable (Bromiley & Rau, 2016; Wegge et al., 2006). Secondly, subjective evaluation 
occurs when management is unable to objectively judge or assess the resources because of 
1 3
940

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
the ambiguity effect. Causal ambiguity (characteristic/lexical) is a critical factor causing 
subjective decisions due to the effect of uncertainty (ambiguity) (Powell et al., 2006; Mosa­
kowski, 1997) argued that ambiguity does not reside in the resources but in the people them­
selves, so that the managers perceive the performance of resources and causes differently. 
The disadvantage of RBT is that it creates ambiguity in the management’s understanding of 
the resources’ competency, which is likely to be the same as it is with competitors but with a 
difference in form and substance: (1) The difference in form is because the management has 
the advantage of full access to the process flow, documents, and reports to reveal the ambi­
guity much more than competitors. (2) The difference in substance is the management’s 
differing perspectives from rivals. For example, regardless of the actual evaluation, man­
agement assesses resources above the average for self-serving purposes, i.e., management’s 
self-interest (Powell et al., 2006). When it comes to management perceptions of rivals’ 
competencies, they are subject to self-judgement bias by ignoring competitors’ competen­
cies even when there is a significant difference (Klar & Giladi, 1999).
The previous challenges broaden the evaluation aspects by conducting a thorough analy­
sis of customer calls. As a core communication channel for the call centre business, customer 
recorded or live calls represent an important aspect of agent performance. The analysis 
should focus on the most salient aspects of the agents’ conversations that are relevant to 
performance evaluation. The customer call includes numerous temporal features such as the 
call script, appropriate responses, communication skills, and emotional control (Cleveland, 
2012). Defining the salient features of the calls and determining their relationships using 
legacy quantitative methods, such as regression, is difficult due to the exclusion of subjec­
tive factors. Assuming, for the sake of argument, that it is possible to construct a comprehen­
sive regression analysis between the performance features and relevant coefficients, there is 
still a gap in dealing with unstructured data such as text and speech, which is questionable. 
Furthermore, when using inferential instruments such as regression analysis in classifica­
tion studies as machine learning, the research paradigm is misplaced (Li & Tong, 2020). 
According to Li & Tong (2020), regression analysis is concerned with hypothesis testing 
and determining the factors’ relationships, among others. The classification problem, on the 
other hand, is dedicated to data-driven analysis by focusing on similarities and anomalies 
in their structures. It implies that the role of the machine learning paradigm is to deal with 
massive amounts of recorded calls for classification while excluding subjectivity.
Machine learning is capable of performing a variety of tasks in a sophisticated manner, 
including self-learning and adaptation for performance enhancement (Bengio et al., 2003). 
The tasks performed by machine learning either reduce human intervention for repetitive 
and daily tasks or go beyond human capabilities for large and complex data sets that cannot 
be articulated by humans (Alzubi et al., 2018). According to Alzubi et al., (2018), machine 
learning can perform a variety of complex tasks such as problem classification, anomaly 
detection, regression, clustering, and reinforcement learning. As a result, a deep learning 
classification algorithm will be used in the study to model and classify unstructured data and 
extract the subjectivity factors embedded in speech features.
Data modelling and analytics have become the core aspects of performance evaluation 
and enhancement (Akter et al., 2016). Machine learning has achieved significant contribu­
tions in operations management for performance evaluation and data modelling (Choi et al., 
2018; Wamba et al., 2017). Data-driven machine learning approaches dominate the stud­
ies concerned with innovations, especially in rapid operations like call centres, where big 
1 3
941

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
data agglomerates (Akter et al., 2020). Furthermore, call centres have become an effective 
communication channel that provides rich data sets and creates outstanding data-driven 
informational opportunities in various industries, like telecom, banking, healthcare, and the 
public sector (Zillner et al., 2016). Much innovation and research seek to take advantage 
of the data collected in call centres, with significant contributions to performance measure­
ment (Echchakoui & Baakil, 2019; Helper, 2019a; Hudson et al., 2017; Ibrahim et al., 2019; 
Karakus & Aydin, 2016; Shire et al., 2017).
Machine learning data modelling is booming in emotional recognition (Busso et al., 
2008; Hifny and Ali, 2019), complaint analysis (Bae et al., 2005), performance applications 
(Ahmed et al. 2016; Ahmed et al., 2018; Perera et al. 2019), and quality of service (Karakus 
& Aydin, 2016; Sudarsan & Kumar, 2019). As a result, several attempts have been made to 
apply machine learning algorithms to the objective performance evaluation of call centre 
agents using data mining, predefined factors, speech recognition for transcription, word 
analysis, language modelling, and customer feedback analysis (Ahmed et al. 2016; Ahmed 
et al., 2018; Ahmed et al., 2020; Ahmed et al., 2021; Helper, 2019b; Ibrahim et al., 2019; 
Paprzycki et al., 2004; Wöllmer, 2013). Unfortunately, previous studies did not take subjec­
tive factors into account during the evaluation process, making them less useful because the 
resulting evaluations are most likely collections of individual evaluators’ subjective per­
ceptions. Avoiding subjectivity based on automated detection is essential to ensuring that 
the resulting calls can be considered fair evaluation. Furthermore, these studies focused on 
specific predefined evaluation factors, i.e., slang words out of context for text processing. 
Also, previous studies ignored contextual speech features and the vocal tract in favour of 
focusing on limited aspects such as energy, rhythm, and emotion detection. Considering 
the entire call or long speech segments to train the machine for a comprehensive view of 
the conversation rather than spotting minor factors is essential. Consequently, giving the 
machine the role of detecting eminent utterances and shedding light on significant parts of 
the call is critical for better revealing the aspects of performance and subjectivity embed­
ded in the call. As a result, the study aims to close the gap between subjective performance 
evaluation and agents’ performance in a more objective manner. It is possible to achieve this 
by detecting and eliminating the calls that most likely comprise the subjective factors and 
focusing solely on the objective calls for evaluation.
The study is built on the concept that eliminating subjective calls results in better perfor­
mance evaluation. To accurately model and classify subjective factors, data modelling using 
machine learning is required. Long-short term memory (LSTM) is used in this study to 
consider the temporal propagation of speech with the corresponding feature relations (train­
ing weights). The CNN achieved a significant improvement in speech processing, where it 
was proposed in the experiment to extract the best representation of the speech features. In 
addition, an attention layer is added in front of the CNN/LSTM combination to allow the 
machine to distinguish the most informative segments of the call that are most likely classi­
fied as subjective. All of these methods will be discussed in detail in the following sections.
This empirical study aims to automate the detection of subjective calls from a call centre. 
We seek to answer the following research questions:
 
●
RQ1: What are the subjective factors embedded in the recorded calls that distort or bias 
the performance measurement of the call centre agent?
1 3
942

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
 
●
RQ2: How can data-driven modelling be used to determine the subjective factors using 
machine learning?
In line with the above research questions, the first study objective is to develop a machine 
learning model that can detect subjective calls. The second is to determine the study base­
line for the best classification accuracy of the subjective factors. Finally, the study sets out to 
investigate how the deep learning model can detect subjectivity. Furthermore, it proposes a 
graphical representation of the paralinguistic features of speech segments, which contribute 
to subjective factors not considered in data modelling. The study should be able to detect 
and eliminate the subjective segments, which is the main contribution of the research. Sub­
jectivity detection can be extended to several counter-subjective studies, including discourse 
analysis and public speech. The study concludes with several recommendations for call cen­
tre supervisors and managers regarding the deployment and use of the evaluation system. 
The study also aims to contribute to the data-driven innovations in operations management 
and competitive advantage based on resource-based theory (Sultana et al., 2021, 2022). It 
tries to close the gap in performance measurement that affects the efficiency of operations 
and leads to biased strategic decisions. Moreover, the study proposes several bias detection 
and elimination techniques that are a common problem in the age of AI (Akter et al., 2021).
The next sections cover (1) a literature review about subjective evaluation, relevant fac­
tors, and an overview of machine learning performance measurement, (2) the proposed 
machine learning framework for subjectivity classification using the attention layer and 
paralinguistic attribute analysis, and (3) discussions and conclusions.
2  Literature review
2.1  Search procedure
A systematic review is proposed in this study to review the literature on performance mea­
surement in the call centre domain. The systematic literature review is carried out in three 
stages (Tranfield et al., 2003): planning the review, conducting the review, and reporting and 
dissemination. The stages are illustrated in Fig. 1.
The next three sections are organised according to the stages, with each stage contain­
ing several phases. The first stage discusses subjective performance evaluation as well as 
relevant studies. The second stage focuses on subjective performance evaluation factors and 
their associated outcomes. The final stage identifies gaps in previous studies and explores 
the best methods for performance modelling to be used in the experiment.
2.2  Stage-1: Exploring subjective performance evaluation in call centres
Subjective evaluation is a broad study area in business that deals with different paradigms. 
Firstly, it is essential to clarify the definition of performance evaluation between human 
resources management and operations management. Performance evaluation is a significant 
part of human resource management (HRM) and centres around motivation, well-being, 
emotional labour, and performance appraisal (Flamholtz & Lacey, 1981; Hackman & Old­
ham, 1975, 1980; McKelvey & Aldrich, 1983). HRM theories try to interpret the work­
1 3
943

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
place environment and determine the factors that reflect people’s performance (Grégoire 
& Lachance, 2015; Taylor, 1998). Operations management (OM) is concerned with per­
formance from a different perspective of productivity, efficiency, quality of service, and 
resources’ capabilities (Aksin et al., 2007; Gunasekaran & Ngai, 2012). Productivity is com­
monly understood as the ratio of outputs produced to resources consumed (Card, 2006). 
Therefore, the current study is concerned with performance measurement from an opera­
tions management (OM) perspective.
The subjective evaluation process has many drawbacks because of the evaluators’ per­
ceptions (Judkins et al., 2003). Subjective performance evaluation is limited by collusion 
(Tirole, 1986), influence costs (Milgrom, 1988), bias (Prendergast & Topel, 1993), leniency 
in rating efficiency (Kane et al., 1995) and favouritism (Breuer et al., 2013; Prendergast & 
Topel, 1996). Research has shown that subjective performance evaluation is sometimes 
biased toward recent performance, which is not comprehensive; or towards future perfor­
mance, which has not happened yet (Frederiksen et al., 2017). Because of common stereo­
typing, the evaluator’s perception has a severe and prominent effect on biasing the agent’s 
evaluation. The management, including evaluators, has a stereotype that ‘call centres are 
neither complicated nor demanding and most of the interactions are basic, simple and 
scripted’ (Wegge et al., 2006, p. 61). On the other hand, the agents perceive their job nature 
as ‘demanding and almost needing high attention through simultaneous subtasks’, such as 
listening and asking questions, operating the keyboard for data input, reading data on the 
screen, and answering the customer (Wegge et al., 2006, p. 61).
Subjective evaluation in call centres is different according to the resource type. For human 
resources, subjective evaluation is the essence of the qualitative method, which is performed 
by monitoring and evaluating the interactions between the agent and the customer according 
to the evaluator’s perception (Frederiksen et al., 2017). It is performed by listening to the 
agent’s recorded call, taping a live call or a test call, i.e., a mystery shopper (Rubingh, 2013). 
The quality team listens to the agents’ recorded calls and uses predefined evaluation forms 
(evaluation checklist) (Reynolds, 2010). It is concerned with the communication style, like 
if the agent listens carefully to the customer or if the agent’s tone of voice is clear, and with 
the agent’s knowledge and their competency in performing the task (Marr & Neely, 2004). 
Fig. 1  Stages of a systematic literature review (Tranfield et al., 2003)
 
1 3
944

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
Those standards are subjective because they allow for style and individuality and provide/
require room for interpretation (Cleveland, 2012, p. 343).
The subjective evaluation is not limited to human resources (agents) but is extended to 
include the process structure (Angelovski et al., 2016), the applied technology (technolo­
gies) (Shachaf, 2008), the management perception (Powell et al., 2006), and customer feed­
back (Abbott, 2004). Management may overestimate or underestimate the technological 
capability for achieving strategic goals. For customer satisfaction, many call centres have 
fallen into the trap of believing that the call duration and the average time to answer are 
objective measures of customer satisfaction (Marr & Neely, 2004). On the contrary, those 
factors measure efficiency and financial performance rather than actual performance. It is 
obvious that most of the common practices in call centres are subjected to individual evalu­
ation, which leads to a biased evaluation process. It implies that subjective evaluation has 
a high impact on strategic decisions and may cause substantial inefficiencies, reflecting the 
competitive advantage.
A typical challenge in performance evaluation studies is that true performance is not 
observable to the researcher. Hence, it is hard to assess the gap and detect evaluation distor­
tions (Breuer et al., 2013). The subjective evaluation may underestimate the agent when 
his performance could be better. On the other hand, the agent may be overestimated in the 
evaluation because of other factors that may not be relevant to the true performance or the 
quality of service.
The literature review planning in this section has been conducted based on the three main 
strategies illustrated in Fig. 2.
The keywords are a combination of several synonyms and words used in subjective call 
centre evaluation. Table 1 lists the keywords and their corresponding search results.
The reduction criteria were applied by locating intersections between the aforementioned 
topics where the most relevant journals contribute the greatest number of keywords.
Table 2 presents relevant previous studies on subjective evaluation, the domain, and the 
paradigm.
Table 2 presents three categories of studies that are concerned with performance mea­
surement. The first category is about operations management theories like Resource-Based 
Theory (RBT) (Bromiley & Rau, 2016; Hitt et al., 2016; Ketokivi, 2016) and the subjective 
factors that reside therein due to, i.e., causal ambiguity (Brito & Sauan, 2016; Powell et al., 
2006). The second category is about the studies of performance measurement in call centres 
and its influence on workers’ performance and well-being (Ahmed et al., 2018; Deery et 
Fig. 2  The Literature Review Strategies
 
1 3
945

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
al., 2002; Wegge et al., 2006). The third category discusses subjective performance evalu­
ation and related factors in different perspectives (Breuer et al., 2013; Frederiksen et al., 
2017). The previous studies formulate the cornerstone of subjectivity performance evalua­
tion, especially in call centres. Accordingly, the problem statement can be formulated under 
the following aspects; firstly, it is essential to determine the factors that impact the subjec­
tive performance evaluation in call centres. Secondly, eliminating subjective factors from 
the performance evaluation may lead to a better performance evaluation in the call centres. 
Thirdly, extracting the subjective factors from the call may lead to automating the subjective 
detection to better evaluate the agents’ performance.
2.3  Stage-2: Conducting the review for the subjective factors
Referring to Stanton’s categorisation of performance monitoring, he mentioned three types 
of monitoring: the source (i.e., supervisory, peer, or self-monitoring), the frequency of mon­
itoring, and the target of monitoring (Stanton, 2000). The source and frequency of moni­
toring are relevant to management perception. The target of monitoring is concerned with 
three types of evaluations: the task itself, the context, and the situations behind the task 
(Sonnentag & Frese, 2003). The job-specific proficiency factor can be considered objective 
because the agent’s answers can be “yes” or “no” or itemised. The evaluator gives a score 
for each item fulfilled out of the required items. For example, when the customer asks about 
the balance in a bank checking account, assuming the answer is a set of five main items 
(verifying caller identity, mentioning the account currency, the date of final balance update, 
pending transactions, and the amount). When the agent misses one of the answer items, the 
score is deducted by one point. The second type of task performance is non-job-specific task 
proficiency, which includes written and oral communication proficiency (Campbell, 1990). 
The non-job-specific task proficiency is irrelevant to the call centre’s technical core. The 
technical core is related to the cognitive ability of the agent to grasp knowledge and per­
form the task correctly (Sonnentag & Frese, 2003). A non-specific-job task is an individual 
skill, such as communication, oral, or listening skills. Non-specific-job proficiency creates 
room for individual evaluation because behaviour and attitude cannot be standardised like 
technical tasks (Deery et al., 2002). For example, listening skills are those parts of com­
munication skills concerned with conversation switching points (Wooffitt, 2005). The agent 
knows when he/she can start talking without interruption to the customer. As the agent can 
be trained to respect and carefully handle the conversation, repeated interruptions by the 
customer may confuse the evaluator, who might consider it a sign of a lack of listening 
#
Keywords
The Initial 
Search Re­
sults Count 
(papers)
1
Call centres’ agents
1900
2
Performance evaluation
1200
3
Subjective evaluation
350
4
Resource-based theory (or ‘resource-
based view’)
220
5
Productivity measurement
2000+
6
Management perception
320
Table 1  Keywords and search 
results
 
1 3
946

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
skills. All the aforementioned skills are equivocal and evaluated according to antecedent 
experience and perceptions.
Table 2  Relevant subjective evaluation studies
#
The Study
Domain
Paradigm
Reference
1
The effect of subjective evaluation on 
the employee’s career.
Economic 
Behaviour & 
Organisations 
– Economic 
Reviews
HRM
(Frederiksen et al., 
2017)
2
The study discusses how bias or dis­
crimination affects how agents are paid 
and how their performance is measured.
(MacLeod, 2003), 
(MacLeod & Tan, 
2016)
3
The social ties between the hiring man­
agers and the employees.
(Angelovski et al., 
2016)
4
The study is about the bias in paying 
employees’ compensation.
(Prendergast & 
Topel, 1993)
5
The social ties between managers and 
employees in the workplace.
Management 
Science
(Breuer et al., 2013)
6
The subjective evaluation of organisa­
tional performance and its reflection on 
marketing orientation.
Marketing 
management
(González-Benito 
& González-Benito, 
2005)
7
The effect of performance evaluation 
on people’s performance and work 
experience.
Human 
Resources
(Deery & Kinnie, 
2002)
8
People’s motivation and well-being in 
call centres. Other studies are focusing 
on emotional exhaustion and the reflec­
tion on performance and evaluation, as 
well.
HRM
(Wegge et al., 2006);
(Taylor et al., 2002)
(Bain & Taylor, 
2000)
(Taylor & Bain, 
1999)
(Taylor, 1998)
(Grebner et al., 2003)
9
The studies are trying to determine 
performance through language features 
and machine processing.
IS
(Friginal, 2013); 
(Ahmed et al., 2018);
(Carmel, 2005);
(Anton et al., 1999)
(Ahmed et al., 2020; 
Ahmed et al., 2021)
10
The study examined service providers’ 
behavioural discretion regarding the 
length of service time and the variables 
that affect their discretion over 225 call 
centre employees.
Operations 
Management
(Gil et al., 2015)
11
The management system architecture 
and reliability in call centres.
(Andrade et al., 
2018)
12
Examining the usefulness of RBV/RBT.
Operations 
management
(Ketokivi, 2016)
13
The level of management practices and 
their relationship with the three signifi­
cant dimensions of firms’ performance 
(profitability, growth, and productivity).
General 
Business
(Brito & Sauan, 
2016)
14
The effect of subjective evaluation and 
causal ambiguity on performance.
Operations 
Management
(Powell et al., 2006)
15
The RBT in operations management.
Operations 
Management
(Hitt et al., 2016), 
(Bromiley & Rau, 
2016)
1 3
947

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
The second factor is the customer’s behaviour during the call or series of calls. Manage­
ment may perceive a call as successful when an angry customer becomes calm or funny, and 
vice versa. Controlling customer behaviour is an outstanding effort by the agent. Neverthe­
less, considering it as an evaluation factor is unadvisable because the causes are not tightly 
relevant to agent performance. Even in cases of ‘phone rage’ (Deery et al., 2002), it should 
ultimately be considered a subjective case to be excluded from the evaluation.
Wilson (2009) discusses handling anger over the phone and suggests four steps to treat­
ing an angry customer. The steps are: (1) listening, (2) asking appropriate questions, (3) 
proposing a solution, and (4) checking agreement with the customer. When offering a solu­
tion, the anger may soften or erupt again due to the proposed solution: ‘The problem is that 
[agents] are not the person delivering the solution nor have they the responsibility of system 
design’ (Wilson, 2009: 144). The customer behaviour fallacy proposes that the evaluator 
links customer behaviour to agent performance. For instance, when the caller’s behaviour 
changes from being angry to being calm, the evaluator assumes that the agent has delivered 
excellent service and vice versa. Sometimes, the call is adequately performed with smooth 
and calm communication between the customer and the agent. However, the customer is 
left anxious, disappointed, or unhappy as a result rather than the manner of communication 
itself (Rychalski & Palmer, 2017).
Many studies highlighted subjective factors like favouritism (Breuer et al., 2013), ste­
reotyping (Angelovski et al., 2016; Breuer et al., 2013; Stangor & Walinga, 2010; Taylor 
et al., 2002), self-evaluation (Suls & Wheeler, 2013), and self-serving (Bertini et al., 2019; 
Powell et al., 2006), as well as the customer’s behaviour and non-specific job tasks. Table 3 
summarises the studies discussing the subjective factors in call centres and similar domains 
like service disks. The factors contribute to subjective evaluation from agents’ evaluations, 
customer behaviours, technology effects, and management perception.
The next step is to select the factors relevant to the subjective performance detection 
that can be applied to the selected data set, the call centre recorded calls. The next section 
discusses the review results and the literature review outcomes.
2.4  Stage-3: Reporting the selected factors and the proposed modelling approach
Many research studies are still motivated to objectively evaluate call centres’ overall perfor­
mance using machine learning technology. ML modelling can be divided into generative, 
discriminative, and deep learning approaches based on the features of text, speech, or both. 
The generative approach has been developed by Ahmed et al. (2016a), who transcribed the 
recorded calls into text using a speech recognition engine, then binary classified them into 
productive/nonproductive. The productivity modelling was based on a Naïve Bayes gen­
erative model, determining the posterior probability of the text given a productivity class 
with an accuracy of 67% (Ahmed et al., 2016b). A similar study was conducted based on a 
discriminative approach (Ahmed et al., 2018), employing Logistic Regression and Linear 
Support Vector Machines (LSVM). The discriminative approach could improve text clas­
sification accuracy to 83%. Another application has been developed to automatically handle 
call centre agent performance (Perera et al., 2019a). It is built on predefined factors like 
speech rate, voice intensity level, and emotional state and uses them to evaluate the perfor­
mance of contact centre agents via a Support Vector Machine (SVM). However, the features 
1 3
948

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
were limited to these predefined factors, which creates a need for more investigation into 
other hidden factors.
A similar study has been developed to evaluate call centre representatives (Sudarsan & 
Kumar, 2019). It uses several transcription system APIs (google, wit, sphinx) to analyse per­
formance based on emotions, banned words, greeting words, and competitors’ names. Also, 
data analytics research has been conducted on recorded calls to detect the quality of service 
delivered to the customer. This was based on the Hadoop Map Reduce framework and uti­
lised text similarity algorithms such as Cosine and n-gram (Karakus & Aydin, 2016). It also 
integrated slang word lists into the monitoring system. Previous studies relied on Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) as a modelling strategy, based on legacy machine learning 
approaches (generative/discriminative) and transcribed text, to measure agent performance. 
Speech processing studies have been conducted using Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) 
(Neumann & Vu, 2017; Hifny and Ali, 2019; Ahmed et al., 2020). DNN is required for 
Table 3  The subjective factors concluded from the performance evaluation literature and call centres
Category
Factors(s)
Definition
References
Agents
- Non-specific job 
task
- Traits
- Individual skills such as communication 
skills, oral proficiency, or listening skills.
- Altruism, conscientiousness, civic virtue, 
courtesy, and sportsmanship
- Helping co-workers and protecting the 
organisation
- (Sonnentag & 
Frese, 2003)
- (Viswesvaran & 
Ones, 2000)
Process 
Structure
- The job designs
- Contradictory 
Standards
- Intersubjectivity
- Standards formulation, orientation, script 
generation, performance [on calls], monitor­
ing, and feedback.
- The contradiction between the standards for 
an action
- Evaluator feedback for the agent’s 
performance and feedback about his/her 
evaluation.
- Frese and Zapf 
(1994: 288)
- (Wilson, 2009)
- Cleveland 2013
Customer 
Experience
- Customer 
Behaviour
- Customer 
Sovereignty
- Behaviour changes through the call
- The customer relationship with manage­
ment and power
- (Wilson, 2009; 
Rychalski & 
Palmer, 2017)
- (Frenkel, 1999)
Technology 
Development
- Channels 
Development
- Technology 
Acceptance
- The channels complexity and evaluation 
challenges (Dynamic Capability)
- Performance expectancy
- (Sirmon et al., 
2007)
- (Venkatesh et 
al., 2003; Foroudi 
et al., 2018)
Management 
Perception
- Stereotyping
- Cognitive bias
- Self-evaluation
- Self-serving
- Evaluation 
exhaustion
- Management perception toward workers
- Availability, Representativeness, Anchor­
ing Bias
- Evaluation based on the evaluator’s skills
- Evaluation based on self-interest or 
advantage
- Evaluator exhaustion
- (Breuer et al., 
2013)
- (Ehrlinger & 
Kim, 2016)
(Suls & Wheeler, 
2012, 2013)
(Bertini et al., 
2019)
(Deery et al., 
2002)
Gender 
Differences
- Gender 
differences
- The non-specific task, contextual per­
formance, job design, intersubjectivity, 
customer behaviour, channels development, 
and stereotyping
- (Belt, 2002; 
Mirchandani, 
2005; Connerley 
& Wu, 2016; 
Wang et al., 2016)
1 3
949

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
unstructured data modelling conducting multilayer training for model parameters. Speech 
modelling replaces speech recognition and detects productivity directly from the voice fea­
tures. It requires 13 features extracted in the frequency domain to determine Mel Frequency 
Cepstral Coefficient (MFCC) features, which outperform the NLP/legacy approaches. Fur­
thermore, a multimodal approach has been developed to combine text and speech models 
for performance measurement (Ahmed et al., 2021). That study extended the speech fea­
tures from 13 MFCC to 65 Low-Level Descriptors (LLD) and the text from a bag of words 
to embedded words, outperforming the previous baseline with an accuracy of 93%. Table 4 
lists the statistical data modelling for performance measurement in call centres.
The drawback of the previous studies is that they did not consider subjective factors 
through the evaluation process. Hence, the resulting evaluations most likely comprise the 
evaluators’ perceptions, making them less useful. Avoiding subjectivity is critical to ensure 
that the resulting calls can be considered fair evaluations. The next section proposes the 
Table 4  The statistical data modelling for performance evaluation in call centres
SN
The Study 
Approach
Features
Reference
1
Statistical 
Analysis
Structured data Rychalski and A. Palmer, ‘Customer Satisfaction and Emotion in the 
Call Centre Context,’ in The Customer is NOT Always Right? 2017
D. Chicu, M. del Mar Pàmies, G. Ryan, and C. Cross, ‘Exploring 
the influence of the human factor on customer satisfaction in call 
centres,’ 2019
2
Data Mining 
approach
Data mining 
for structured 
data
M. Paprzycki, A. Abraham, R. Guo, and S. Mukkamala, ‘Data min­
ing approach for analysing call centre performance,’ 2004
3
Dis­
criminative 
approach
Unstructured 
data- speech 
processing
K. Perera, Y. Priyadarshana, K. Gunathunga, L. Ranathunga, P. 
Karunarathne, and T. J. I. J. S. R. P. Thanthriwatta, ‘Automatic 
evaluation software for contact centre agents’ voice handling perfor­
mance,’ 2019
V. Sudarsan and G. Kumar, ‘Voice call analytics using natural 
language processing,’ 2019
Unstruc­
tured Data 
– language 
processing
A. Ahmed, Y. Hifny, S. Toral, and K. Shaalan, ‘A call center agent 
productivity modelling using discriminative approaches,’ 2018
4
Deep learn­
ing and 
generative 
approach
Speech recog­
nition, n-gram
B. Karakus and G. Aydin, ‘Call centre performance evaluation using 
big data analytics,’ 2016
Generative 
approach
Unstructured 
data – genera­
tive approach­
es – language 
processing
A. Ahmed, S. Toral, and K. Shaalan, ‘Agent productivity measure­
ment in a call centre using machine learning,’ 2016
G. Mishne, D. Carmel, R. Hoory, A. Roytman, and A. Soffer, ‘Auto­
matic analysis of call-centre conversations,’ 2005
M. A. Valle, S. Varas, and G. A. J. E. S. w. A. Ruz, ‘Job performance 
prediction in a call centre using a naive Bayes classifier,’ 2012
5
Deep 
learning
Unstructured 
data – speech 
processing
Multimodal 
for text 
and speech 
processing
A Multimodal Approach to improve Performance Evaluation of Call 
Center Agent
Agent Productivity Modelling in a Call Center Domain Using At­
tentive Convolutional Neural Networks
1 3
950

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
study framework for subjectivity detection. It discusses the experimental procedures for 
data preparation, modelling, and classification.
3  Method
We approach the problem as one of design and position it in view of Design Science 
Research Methodology (DSRM). We develop a simple artefact, an evidence-based machine 
learning-driven framework. The artefact possesses two essential characteristics: relevance 
and novelty (Geerts, 2011; Hevner et al., 2004). On the one hand, it is relevant. It solves the 
ongoing problem posed by subjectivity in the traditional Call Quality Monitoring evaluation 
process through a machine-learning framework. On the other hand, it is novel in the sense 
that although there have been previous speech processing studies using a machine-learning 
framework, they did not consider the subjective factors present in the evaluation process.
In line with the above, the design problem (see, for example, Wieringa, 2014) can be 
formulated as follows: Improve the Call Quality Monitoring evaluation process by design­
ing an evidence-based machine learning-driven framework that can automatically detect 
subjective calls in order to measure agent performance more accurately. In Table 5, we dis­
cuss the nominal sequence of activities (Peffers et al., 2008) relevant to the present study’s 
context of creating the artefact. The first column lists the DSRM activities. The second 
describes each of these activities. The third indicates the materials or resources (i.e., models, 
methods, theories, instruments, and frameworks) from and through which the activities are 
executed (Hevner et al., 2004).
Proceeding further with a description of our approach, the study aims to classify the 
recorded calls as subjective or nonsubjective. Then, the nonsubjective calls are forwarded to 
productivity models to classify them as productive or nonproductive. The proposed frame­
work is shown in Fig. 3.
Table 5  DSRM applied to the current study
DSRM activities
Activity description
Knowledge base
Problem identifica­
tion and motivation
Failure to evaluate agent performance correctly 
due to the existence of subjectivity in the Call 
Quality Monitoring evaluation process.
Literature review.
Understanding the shortcomings 
of the traditional manual process 
of sorting, selecting, and analys­
ing calls for evaluation purposes.
Real-world problem.
Define the objec­
tives of a solution
Design an approach that can automatically 
detect subjective calls.
Literature review.
Knowledge of existing tools.
Design and 
development
Design an evidence-based, machine learning-
driven framework for subjectivity classification 
using Deep Neural Networks.
Convolutional Neural Network, 
Long-Short Term Memory 
Network, Attention Layer
Demonstration
Case study demonstration. The proposed ap­
proach is used to detect subjective calls in a 
corpus of seven hours of recorded calls from a 
real-estate call centre in Egypt.
Applying the proposed approach 
to a real-world case study.
Evaluation
Comparative analysis.
Understanding of the current 
solution and its advantages.
Note. The DSRM activities described here follow the arrangement that can be found in the works by 
Peffers et al. (2008), Charles et al. (2019), and Tsolas et al. (2020)
1 3
951

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
Figure 3 illustrates the complete framework for productivity measurement. First, as illus­
trated later, the calls go through cascaded preparation stages of annotation, diarisation, and 
feature extraction. Then, data modelling is conducted for the annotated calls to classify them 
as subjective/nonsubjective. Finally, the nonsubjective calls are forwarded to productivity 
models for evaluation. The experiment focuses on subjectivity classification, for which pro­
ductivity evaluation, elaborated in (Ahmed et al., 2016b, 2018; Ahmed et al., 2020; Ahmed 
et al., 2021), has been excluded. The study proposes a DNN using cascaded Convolutional 
Neural Networks (CNNs), Long-Short Term Memory Networks (LSTMs) and an attention 
layer to determine the best accuracy for subjectivity classification. The study framework is 
illustrated in Fig. 4. The next section briefly discusses the CNN, LSTM, and attention layers.
The cascaded methods are proposed to provide the ultimate training weights to achieve 
the highest accuracy. The CNN is proposed to highlight the best prominent weights through 
several iterations, similar to feature extraction. To consider the context over a long stream 
of training weights, the DNN weights are propagated to the cascaded BLSTM. Then finally, 
the attention layer prioritises the most informative and distinguished weights in the voice 
frame over the remaining vector values. Each layer is eager to highlight the best part of the 
subjective aspects and pass them on to the classifier for the final and highest classification 
accuracy. The next sections go over each DNN layer and its mathematical representation.
3.1  Long short-term memory networks (LSTMs)
The LSTM is a type of neural network based on cell processes, where the state of the pre­
vious cell is used to produce the new state Ct, as shown in Fig. 5. The output state Ct is 
controlled by three gates, each of which serves to control the amount of information in the 
cell: the input gate determines which information to add to the current memory, the forget 
gate determines which to delete, and the output gate determines which to output from the 
current memory. When the sigmoid function ftis small and multiplied by the previous state, 
Ct−1 is eliminated and marked as a repeated state, thus making room for a newer state. A 
Fig. 4  The study framework
 
Fig. 3  The proposed framework for productivity measurement
 
1 3
952

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
high value for the sigmoid function means it accumulates previous states, meaning that this 
is a newer state that has never been repeated.
The state equations at each time step t are as follows:
 
it = σ (wiht−1 + Uixt)
(1)
 
ft = σ (wfht−1 + Ufxt)
(2)
 
ot = σ (woht−1 + Uoxt)
(3)
 
Ct = ft ⊙Ct−1 + it ⊙tanh (wcht−1 + Ucxt)
(4)
 
ht = ot ⊙tanh (Ct)
(5)
Where itis the input gate, ft is the forget gate, ot is the output gate, Ct is the cell state and ht is the 
hidden state. ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. Wi, Ui, Wf, Uf, Wo, Uo, Wc, and Uc 
are the weight matrices (parameters) of the LSTM network. A variant of LSTM known as 
bidirectional BiLSTM (Graves & Schmidhuber, 2005) allows the integration of both past 
and future information. It combines LSTMs operating in two directions: one forward and 
the other backward. Hence, each input word at time t is aware of the past and future con­
texts, which improves accuracy. The LSTM replaces RNN for temporal dependencies lon­
ger than simple RNNs and helps overcome the gradient vanishing problem, which occurs 
when the gradient becomes very small for long stretches, preventing the weights from being 
updated (Hochreiter, 1998).
3.2  Convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
CNN is a modified version of DNN for cases of a massive volume of data, i.e., image 
processing, which requires a big network, vast parameters, many resources, and a lot of 
Fig. 5  The LSTM cell
 
1 3
953

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
time. The CNN structure forms the layers into processing parts, i.e., image dimension, and 
generates the corresponding parameters in terms of filters. A filter is a vector of trainable 
parameters concerned with a smaller part of the whole image, for faster and more accurate 
processing.
Data training based on CNNs is split into three stages. The first stage is feature extrac­
tion using the filters (called the kernel) multiplied with a part of the data features, i.e., voice 
frames, before summing them up to produce a more concentrated and better data definition 
than the original (Albawi et al., 2017; Teow, 2017). The second stage sees the weights pro­
duced from the extracted features propagated to the neural networks for training to deter­
mine the weights that best match the input data. This is performed by forward or backward 
propagation of the data. Forward propagation is concerned with randomly initiated weights 
multiplied by input data and passed to the activation function. Backward propagation uses 
gradient descent to determine the optimum weights (Murugan, 2017). The third stage is the 
classifier, using the sigmoid function for binary classification or the Softmax function for 
multiple classes.
3.2.1  Attention layer
The attention layer focuses on the critical parts of the hidden weights. It converts the 
sequence of frames into a context vector for the final layer (the classifier).
Figure 6 illustrates the role of the attention layer in the modelling process:
 
●
The modelling layers are shown in solid grey.
 
●
The attention layer is the dotted box, including the circles representing the calculation of 
the attention weights. The Softmax function calculates the attention weights and gener­
ates the context vector C .
 
●
The context vector is fed into a dense layer with a tanh activation function.
 
●
The output layer is another Softmax function for the three-class classification outlined 
below in Sect. 4.2.
The context vector is the weighted average of the weights of the hidden layer and the input 
data. The Softmax function is used in the attention layer to determine the strength of frame 
occurrence for the remaining frames at time t . It is similar to the probability determination 
of a vector occurrence among the remaining vectors in a stream when the total counts are 
equal to 1. For each frame vector xt in a sequence of inputs x1, x2, . . ., xT , given activation 
function f,the attention weight αt is given by Eq. (6):
 
αt =
ef(xt)
T
j=1 ef(xj)
(6)
The context vector generated is calculated as in Eq. (7):
 
C =
T

t=1
αtxt 
(7)
1 3
954

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
4  Data analytics and inferences
4.1  The data
The availability and accessibility of the data set are challenges that require exposing a contact 
centre’s internal and confidential data for modelling. Hence, recorded calls were collected 
by Luminous Technologies for research purposes from a real estate call centre in Egypt. A 
VoIP call centre with a built-in call recording system was deployed between 2014 and 2015 
to collect real calls over landline phones with a sampling rate of 8 kHz. The selected random 
calls consisted of seven hours and over 30 calls (14 min per call on average), which was 
considered adequate compared to similar studies (Hifny & Ali, 2019; Ahmed et al., 2020). 
The corpus comprised six different agents, between 25–35 years old; two females and four 
Fig. 6  The attention layer
 
1 3
955

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
males. The calls were diarised previously in Ahmed et al. (2020), and the talking time was 
40% for females and 60% for males. The naming convention for the recorded calls was 
built from the metadata: Date, Time, Agent ID, Speaker ID (by the diariser), call direction 
(Inbound, Outbound). The modelling process goes through sequential stages: data prepara­
tion, data modelling, and classification, as elaborated upon in the next sections.
4.2  Stage 1: Data preparation
Data preparation is an essential process for data modelling (Richert et al., 2013). It first 
requires focusing on the targeted data to be processed. This is the raw data fed to the machine 
for processing. It usually excludes irrelevant, noisy, and corrupted content. Arranging, pre­
paring, and cleaning the data is essential to getting optimal outcomes. The machine learning 
experiment will be applied to the two study variables: non-specific-job and customer behav­
iour reflected in two classes. An additional class is required for the nonsubjective cases, 
classified as ‘nonsubjective’, for a total of three classes.
The first step, as per Fig. 4, is data annotation for the seven hours of recorded calls. The 
annotation is performed using 2–3 participants based on ‘the technical core’, which is con­
sidered ‘nonsubjective’. If the participant’s response is not part of the technical core, such as 
oral proficiency or customer frustration, it will then be considered ‘subjective’ and catego­
rised under the corresponding variable. The annotation procedure is performed on recorder 
files (calls) located in the system folder. The participant is requested to copy the file to the 
destination folder (the annotated class folder, i.e., agent-subjective). The annotation process 
is vulnerable to subjective evaluation, impacting the practical application via possible bias 
in the results. Hence, the annotation should be verified by Cohen’s Kappa (for two raters) or 
Krippendorff’s Alpha (for more than two raters).
Two raters are selected as a minimum for Cohen’s Kappa, with five and eight years of 
experience in call centres, respectively. They are full-time supervisors with experience in 
the real estate domain. First, they had an orientation session on subjectivity and how sub­
jective factors can be defined by listening to recorded calls. Then, they started rating the 
recorded calls as nonsubjective, non-specific-job tasks for the agent (subjective), or issues 
of customer behaviour (subjective). Finally, they were asked to move each audio file to a 
folder belonging to the designated class (agent folder, customer folder, and nonsubjective 
folder). The Cohen’s Kappa method is used to verify the raters’ agreement using IBM SPSS 
for data analysis.
For the nonsubjective class, rater 1 and rater 2 agreed on 580 audio files and disagreed 
on 33 files for the customer class and 37 files for the agent class. They agreed on 52 files 
for customer behaviour, 140 for agent differences and 580 for nonsubjective calls. They 
disagreed on 87 files. The Kappa agreement was α = 0.767, and the total number of files 
N = 859. The agreement between the raters should be more than 80% (α > 0.8) to consider the 
annotation valid (Hayes & Krippendorff, 2007). However, the value of α = 0.767 is deemed 
acceptable because of the small difference (less than 3.35%). A Krippendorff’s alpha can be 
calculated using the Python Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) and its library ‘Agreement’ 
for two raters or more.
The second step in data preparation is feature extraction, which is the most challenging 
part, not only in this study but in machine learning as a whole (Dave, 2013). The features 
may include word-based language models; letters, or lexicon models; or speech signals 
1 3
956

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
for acoustic modelling. MFCC conversion is a way to convert audio signals into numbers 
(frequencies) to identify the salient features (coefficients) from the audio file and ignore 
unimportant features (noise). MFCC extraction goes through multiple stages: windowing, 
discrete Fourier transform, and extraction of the voice coefficients. The Essentia toolkit is 
used to extract 13 MFCCs (Bogdanov et al., 2013). MFCC feature extraction is performed 
by going through the audio files with a 25 millisecond (ms) window size and 10ms steps 
for each window (overlapped) (Zheng et al., 2001). Each frame is represented by 13 MFCC 
features, forwarded to the model input layer for training.
4.3  Stage 2: Modelling and data analytics
In the experiment, the deep neural network (DNN) is constructed with the following lay­
ers: the input layer, the convolutional neural network (CNN) layer, the long short-term 
memory network (LSTM) layer, the attention layer, and the output layer for classification. 
The CNN layer is required to squeeze the features and expedite the data processing. The 
second layer comprises the bidirectional LSTMs, two networks, one in each direction (for­
ward-backward), to improve the training parameters. The LSTMs can efficiently process a 
long sequence of dependencies as compared to the legacy recurrent neural network (RNN) 
(Graves & Schmidhuber, 2005). LSTMs also overcome the gradient vanishing problem, 
which occurs when the updates to the training weights are so tiny that the network is stuck 
in an endless loop or prolonged training rate (∆w) (Hochreiter, 1998). The next layer is the 
attention layer, for highlighting the most probable frames.
The neural network structure and hyper-parameters are set following the configuration 
defined in the Interactive Emotional Dyadic Motion Capture Database (IEMOCAP) (Busso 
et al., 2008), which is followed by various previous studies in emotional recognition and 
performance measurement (Hifny and Ali, 2019; Ahmed et al., 2020; Ahmed et al., 2021). 
The model summary presents the layers and the size per layer (Table 6).
Table  6 illustrates the layer type and the size of the corresponding parameters/units 
for each layer. The model is read from top to bottom, indicating the data flow sequence 
through the training process. The model starts with an input layer that should be adjusted 
to the training feature size (13 features). As mentioned in the previous section, file duration 
is unknown, so frames are taken sequentially, with overlapping between the sequences. 
The feature size is known (13 features), but the model can accept an unknown number of 
sequential frames. The frames are forwarded to the first layer of the CNN. The CNN size 
is 256 filters for processing the frames of one-dimensional CNNs, denoted by (1D-CNNs). 
Layer
CNN-LSTM-Attention
Input
13
CNN-1
256
Max Pooling-1
256
CNN-2
64
Max Pooling-2
64
BiLSTM-1
128
BiLSTM-2
128
Attention
128
Dense
64
Output (Classifier)
3
Table 6  Machine Learning 
Parameters Summary
 
1 3
957

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
The CNN architecture consists of 256 filters for layer 1, 64 filters for layer 2, five kernel 
sizes each, and a ReLU activation function. The CNN neuron output is the dot product 
between randomly selected weights (initial weights for the training) and part of the frame. 
ReLU is a linear activation function (max(0,x)), so the output excludes the negatives and 
continues to the next layer.
The bidirectional LSTMs (BiLSTMs) comprise 128 neurons each. A max-pooling layer 
is required to downsample the CNN’s output and reduce the dimension to match the size 
of the next layer. The dense layer is 64 units to convert the dimensions of the vectors and 
forward them to the output layer. The data modelling starts by splitting the data randomly 
into training (90%) and test (10%) sets, then determining the optimum parameters. The test 
set is smaller because it is required only for model verification. Every iteration (epoch) is 
a one-time training on a batch size of 32 files from the data set to determine the test set’s 
accuracy. The training keeps iterating until it reaches the optimum weights of the model. 
The model created is called ‘Fold’. At this point, part of the data had not been trained (test 
data), so the data was shuffled and re-split into training and test sets. This process is called 
cross-validation, to recompose the training and test sets into the corresponding folds. The 
models created are denoted by ‘Fold_Number_iterations_accuracy’.
The training is performed on a dual-processor server supported by 24 cores, with 2.1 GHz 
and 97 GB RAM. Three Nvidia cards (GPUs) have been used—TESLA k80, Quadro 
M4000, and M5000—to process the data on an Ubuntu 18.04 LTS operating system. The 
code was developed using Python 3.7, based on the Conda virtual environment, KERAS 
library 2.2, and TensorFlow backend 1.14.
4.4  Stage 3: Classification and validation
The Softmax function is used in the final layer for classification. The Softmax function uses 
Eq. (6)’s attention weights but on the class level. The output will be classified into three 
classes: nonsubjective, agent (non-specific-job tasks), and customer (customer behaviour). 
The five cross-validations have been applied and forwarded to the F1 score to verify the 
model accuracy. The annotation process may lead to an imbalanced data set when the anno­
tated class sizes are quite different. An imbalanced data set may bias the accuracy, favouring 
the largest class (Guo et al., 2008). Imbalanced data should therefore be re-adjusted with a 
bigger corpus and re-annotated. Because the experiment is limited to only seven hours, the 
F1 score is used to verify the model’s accuracy on the data set. It is based on the average 
precision and recall of the resulting label as compared to the annotated class (Wardhani et 
al., 2019).
4.5  The experiment findings
The model accuracy is calculated using the average of the accuracies of the folds gener­
ated. The accuracy of a subjective evaluation is 82.53%, so the error rate is around 17.46%. 
Table 7 states the accuracy for each fold in the experiment. The total number of folds (mod­
els) is five.
When reaching the ultimate accuracy, an early stopping configuration is used to stop 
modelling the current fold and move to the next fold. Several optimisation methods, such as 
1 3
958

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
ADAM and SGD (Kingma & Ba, 2014), have been used. So, the iterations start at 2 itera­
tions and progress to 58.
The main concern in the previous experiment was the imbalanced data set for each class. 
The file segments for each class are as follows, out of a total of 859 files: non-subjective = 650 
files (75%), agent = 156 files (18%), and customer = 53 files (7%). The Scikit-learn Python 
library has been used to measure this imbalanced data set (Raschka, 2015). By applying the 
F1 score to each of the five models’ folds, the accuracy of the model is determined based on 
the average score over the five folds – see Tables 8 and 9.
The accuracy is less (75%) than the cross-validation accuracy (82.5%), with a difference 
of 7.48%. This is an effect of the imbalanced data set. By extending the corpus size in call 
centres, the data set may become more balanced with fewer classification errors. As there is 
no other study in the same context (subjectivity) using machine learning, the resulting accu­
racy is the baseline for subjective performance, considering the agent and customer factors. 
Nevertheless, a semi-comparison can be applied to other studies, like emotional recognition 
using speech processing and productivity measurement using text and speech classification. 
The accuracy of subjectivity modelling is comparable (75%) to that of emotional recogni­
tion (82.5%), performance measurement–speech-based (83%) and productivity measure­
ment–text-based (82.69%). Table 10 summarises the subjective classification accuracy as 
compared to other studies.
The attention layer generates the context vector of the frames computed by the input data 
and attention weights. By applying Eq. (6) to the attention weights, a graphical presenta­
tion is generated of the attention weights versus the frames for all training segments. The 
attention weights may help indicate the linguistic and paralinguistic features relevant to the 
subjective factors. The four sample graphs selected are illustrated in Fig. 7.
The attention weight graphs, plotted using the ‘Plotly’ python library, have peaks for 
specific frames, which indicate high attention for those frames. Revising the peaks over the 
calls/segments prompts the following observations:
 
●
The attention weights are high for some irrelevant parts of the call, like telephone line 
noise, crowd background, silence, etc. Therefore, this part is dropped from the analysis.
 
●
The attention weights are high for high tones, especially for angry customers, which 
indicates a high level of subjectivity.
 
●
The attention weights are high in the cross-talk parts, indicating poor listening skills or 
an issue in handling the switching points of the conversation between the agent and the 
caller.
 
●
The nonsubjective folder, the customer folder, and the agent folder have almost the 
same call content. The differences are only relevant at the tone level, which indicates 
#
The Fold name
Iterations
Accuracy
Fold-1
Fold0-030-0.82558
30
0.82558
Fold-2
Fold1-002-0.83721
2
0.83721
Fold-3
Fold2-020-0.81977
20
0.81977
Fold-4
Fold3-053-0.84884
53
0.84884
Fold-5
Fold4-058-0.79532
58
0.79532
Total
163
Average = 0.8253
Table 7  Subjectivity models and 
corresponding accuracies
 
1 3
959

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
Table 8  F1-score for the Five Models’ Folds
Fold-1
Fold-2
Fold-3
Fold-4
Fold-5
Class
Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score
Agent
0.667
0.25
0.364
0.8
0.5
0.615
0.667
0.5
0.571
0.444
0.5
0.471
0.625
0.625
0.625
Customer
0.667
0.857
0.75
0.667
0.857
0.75
0.6
0.857
0.706
0.75
0.857
0.8
0.778
0.99
0.875
Non-subjective
0.778
0.875
0.824
0.84
0.875
0.857
0.826
0.792
0.809
0.818
0.75
0.783
0.864
0.792
0.826
Accuracy
0.744
0.795
0.744
0.718
0.795
Weighted Average
0.716
0.782
0.741
0.722
0.794
1 3
960

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
that tone is a subjective factor in the agent and customer parts, but that the content 
remains the same.
5  Discussion
The study is inspired by the resource mix of RBT to define call centre resources that con­
tribute to subjective performance evaluation. It has been concluded that two variables (agent 
non-specific task and customer behaviour) have a direct influence on subjective perfor­
mance. Accordingly, the theoretical contribution to the RBT theory is providing a mecha­
nism to prevent causal ambiguity from influencing performance evaluation and, in turn, the 
management strategies for sustained competitive advantage (Barney, 1991, 2001; Barney et 
al., 2001). It is recommended that RBT states that “the valuable, rare, inimitable, nonsub­
stitutable resources that are objectively evaluated and positioned lead to an organisation’s 
sustained competitive advantage” or that “the sustained competitive advantage is created 
by the contribution and fair judgement of valuable, rare, inimitable, and nonsubstitutable 
resources".
The study supports Powell’s (2006) study about how management perceptions about per­
formance are influenced by the organisation’s resources (agents). Furthermore, it expands 
on Breuer’s (Breuer et al., 2013) findings about the subjective evaluation due to stereotyp­
ing and social attachment to include other external factors like customer behaviour. The 
study outcomes help mitigate common issues in call centres of the finer standards like com­
munication skills, tone, and language proficiency that allow for style and individuality and 
provide room for interpretation (Cleveland, 2012, p. 343). The study highlighted significant 
customer behaviour issues in call centres (Rychalski & Palmer, 2017; Wilson, 2009). It pro­
poses excluding those variables from the evaluation, which are known to have a long debate 
in the literature on call centres. Furthermore, the study helps measure performance with less 
subjectivity based on the conceptual model.
Machine learning is a cutting-edge technology currently being used to train models 
for specific human behaviour. Based on the theoretical model variables (factors), it could 
automatically classify subjectivity in evaluation. Subjectivity detection is not the same as 
emotion recognition, which served as a baseline for this study. The data modelling process 
is divided into three steps: data preparation, data modelling, and data classification. The 
machine requires manual annotation to train each class and create the final model. In cases 
of detected subjectivity, the data-driven model specifies the classification classes as either 
agent class or customer behaviour class. It can also combine data from various communica­
tion channels, such as evaluation forms, manager meetings, chats, emails, and social media, 
in a manner similar to recorded calls. The model can be extended to include additional anno­
tation classes for classifications based on the extraction of relevant features. It can explore 
additional information about subjectivity that the literature review may have missed. To 
study the results, the classification process can be exposed to graphical presentations or 
charts. The attention layer was used in the current study to draw attention weights to focus 
on the most informative features in the recorded calls. These subjective features, which 
were divided into linguistic and para-linguistic features, were relevant to a specific frame 
in the call. In a subjective manner, the study concluded with para-linguistic features from 
1 3
961

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
the conceptual model, such as cross-talk, the agent’s tone, and the customer’s loudness of 
voice. To contribute more knowledge, the modelling process can be re-tested using different 
hypotheses (factors) and other statistical instruments.
The experiment proves that subjectivity can be automatically detected and classified 
under each study construct. The baseline generated is close to relevant studies in emotional 
recognition and performance classifications, which encourages further investigation in this 
area. The next recommended study for objective performance evaluation is to annotate and 
model the nonsubjective recorded call and conclude the productivity model/classifier as 
mentioned in previous studies (Ahmed et al., 2020; Ahmed et al., 2021).
Machine learning’s proposed structure is eligible to be extended for a sequence of com­
plicated events, actions, streams, or repetitive activity patterns. The application can classify 
those patterns under the level of conformity (accuracy), extending the application continuity 
for many different domains in the social sciences. Therefore, the application is not limited to 
subjectivity detection but can be extended to many other applications to assist performance 
management. Machine learning opens the door to examining human behaviour and attitudes 
in the workplace for action prediction. The application may give robust findings as long as 
the training data set is plentiful (features extraction from photos, videos, structured data, 
etc.) and the annotation is performed according to rigorous studies and hypotheses tests.
Where unsupervised learning can be applied, machine learning can be used for induction 
or abduction approaches. Similar to statistical correlation, the uncategorised data set can be 
linked to different categories. The researcher can investigate and validate the relationships 
by listing hypotheses based on the classified classes. Thousands of phone calls, for exam­
#
Study
Clas­
sification 
method
Type
Accuracy
References
1
Productivity 
Measurement
Naïve 
Bayes
Text
67.3%
(Ahmed et 
al., 2016b)
2
Productivity 
Measurement
Logistic 
Regression
Text
80.76%
(Ahmed et 
al., 2018)
3
Productivity 
Measurement
Linear Sup­
port Vector 
Machine 
(LSVM)
Text
82.69%
(Ahmed et 
al., 2018)
4
Emotional 
Recognition
CNN-
LSTM
Speech
82.5%
(Hifny and 
Ali, 2019)
5
Performance 
Measurement
LSVM
Speech
83%
(Perera et 
al., 2019b)
5
Subjectivity 
Modelling
CNN-
LSTM-Att
Speech
75%
The Cur­
rent Study
Table 10  Relevant studies ac­
curacy comparison
 
#
The Fold name
Weighted scoring
Fold-1
Fold0-030-0.82558
0.716
Fold-2
Fold1-002-0.83721
0.782
Fold-3
Fold2-020-0.81977
0.741
Fold-4
Fold3-053-0.84884
0.722
Fold-5
Fold4-058-0.79532
0.794
Total
Average = 0.75
Table 9  F1-Score average for the 
five folds
 
1 3
962

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
ple, linked to demographic data sets, locations, regions, and seasons may help researchers 
develop hypotheses based on the resulting classes. As a result, the research’ application is 
based on more robust and justified constructs.
6  Conclusions
Data-driven subjectivity classification is an automatic technique to detect the subjectivity 
of recorded calls from call centres using machine learning. Subjectivity modelling com­
prises three main stages: data preparation, data modelling, and classification. As a part of 
data preparation, data annotation was performed based on a quantitative study to determine 
Fig. 7  Attention weight graphs (x-axis is the time in milliseconds, y-axis is the attention weights)
 
1 3
963

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
the subjective factors. The model used a cascaded CNN-LSTM-attention layer for the best 
classification accuracy. The experiment was based on seven hours of recorded calls from a 
real estate call centre. The data was annotated manually and verified using Cohen’s Kappa 
method. To the best of our knowledge, there are no previous studies regarding subjectiv­
ity modelling; so, the study contributes a baseline for subjectivity with 82.5% classifica­
tion accuracy. Due to an imbalanced data set, F1 scoring was applied to determine that the 
model’s accuracy is 75%. The accuracy suggests a preliminary baseline for subjectivity, as 
there is no comparable antecedent baseline based on machine learning. However, a semi-
comparison with several speech studies in emotional recognition and performance measure­
ment is useful. The attention layer aims to focus on the highest frame probabilities resulting 
from the SoftMax function. Furthermore, the attention weights provide an outlook on the 
paralinguistic features embedded in the calls, relevant to subjective and nonsubjective per­
formance. The paralinguistics can be summarised as a high tone, indicating, as compared 
to a low tone, wakefulness and enthusiasm on the part of the agent; cross-talk, a subjective 
factor for the agent; and a loud customer voice, a subjective factor on the customer side.
The study contributes in several ways in the context of data-driven innovations. First, 
there is the mixed approach of combining the work of the human participants through the 
annotation process to achieve a more accurate classification. The raters’ agreement should 
be significant to ensure a consistent data set for modelling. Then, the initial annotation can 
be extended and automated using the K-means method for distance measurement with the 
centroids of the annotated data. Second, the study examines the theoretical variables and 
data modelling using machine learning for detection and classification. Moreover, the study 
proposes a graphical presentation that pays attention to the significant attributes of data 
‘subjectivity’.
Supervised machine learning is limited to human subjective evaluation through the anno­
tation process. This limitation is rectified by using several raters with a good reliability 
check (Krippendorff’s alpha). Feature extraction using MFCC is commonly used to detect 
the vocal tract, ignoring the contextual and prosodic information. Therefore, it is highly 
recommended to extend the speech features by considering prosodic features for better 
classification and detection. Furthermore, it is recommended for future research to include 
classifications over other channels (chat, SMS, and social media) and to combine classifica­
tion techniques (speech-text) through multimodal approaches to detect subjectivity overall 
across call centre channels. Cross-validation can be tested alongside other techniques such 
as zero-shot learning to validate classification accuracy due to an imbalanced data set where 
the test is set in the same domain but in a different context.
6.1  Study implications
The study resolves critical problems in call centre operations arising from unfair judg­
ment about agent performance. Underestimating agent performance, frivolous orientations, 
and narrow annual raises lead to emotional exhaustion, burnout, and high turnover, which 
impact the business and the quality of customer service. On the other hand, less subjective 
evaluation keeps workers confident and loyal. It helps maintain their well-being as every 
piece of work is monitored and evaluated based on a unified and robust baseline. The base­
line assists in uncovering customer complaints by considering the attention weights and 
corresponding performance attributes on the customer side. Spotting a specific part of the 
1 3
964

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
call with the corresponding subjectivity level instantly reduces the time and effort necessary 
to identify weak points for corrective action.
Nevertheless, closely monitoring performance has several drawbacks. The panopticon 
concept is applied to agents through performance monitoring and evaluation, similar to how 
prisoners are monitored by guards. Unfortunately, this can also result in exhaustion, burn­
out, and turnover. It is highly recommended that agents participate in the evaluation process 
by sharing evaluation results with them in order to provide feedback and justify the results. 
This helps agents overcome their fears, improve their performance, and brilliantly enhance 
the ML modelling based on their experience.
Based on the resource-based theory, the study adds another chapter to the data-driven 
innovations in operations management and competitive advantage (Sultana et al., 2021, 
2022). It draws attention to the grey area of performance measurement, which leads to 
evaluation bias and misguided strategic decisions. The study proposes several techniques 
for detecting and eliminating bias, which is a common problem in the age of AI (Akter et 
al., 2021).
Acknowledgements  The authors are grateful to the Editor-in-Chief, the Special Issue Editors, and the anony­
mous reviewers for their valuable feedback on the previous version of this manuscript.
Authors’ contributions:  Conceptualization, A.A., U.S., and V.C.; methodology, A.A., U.S., and V.C.; soft­
ware, A.A.; validation, A.A., and V.C.; writing—original draft preparation, A.A.; visualization, A.A.; super­
vision, U.S., and Z.I.; project administration, K.M., and U.S. All authors have read and agreed to the pub­
lished version of the manuscript.
Funding:  No funding to declare.
Data Availability  Private data set for internal use.
Code Availability  The code is custom developed using Python.
Declarations
Conflicts of interest/competing interests:  The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, 
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the 
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is 
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory 
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abbott, J. C. (2004). The executive guide to call center metrics. Robert Houston Smith Publishers
Ahmed, A., Hifny, Y., Shaalan, K., & Toral, S. (2016a). Lexicon free Arabic speech recognition recipe. Inter­
national Conference on Advanced Intelligent Systems and Informatics. Springer
Ahmed, A., Hifny, Y., Toral, S., & Shaalan, K. (2018). A Call Center Agent Productivity Modeling Using 
Discriminative Approaches. Intelligent Natural Language Processing: Trends and Applications (pp. 
501–520). Springer
1 3
965

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
Ahmed, A., Shaalan, K., Toral, S., & Hifny, Y. J. S. (2021). A Multimodal Approach to improve Performance 
Evaluation of Call Center Agent. Sensors, 21(8), 2720
Ahmed, A., Toral, S., & Shaalan, K. (2016b). Agent productivity measurement in call center using machine 
learning. International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Systems and Informatics. Springer
Ahmed, A. T., Shaalan, S., & Hifny, K., Y (2020). Agent Productivity Modeling in a Call Center Domain 
Using Attentive Convolutional Neural Networks. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), 20(19), 11
Aksin, Z., Armony, M., & Mehrotra, V. (2007). The modern call center: A multi-disciplinary perspective on 
operations management research. Production and Operations Management, 16(6), 665–688
Akter, S., McCarthy, G., Sajib, S., Michael, K., Dwivedi, Y. K., D’Ambra, J., & Shen, K. (2021). Algorithmic 
bias in data-driven innovation in the age of AI. Elsevier
Akter, S., Michael, K., Uddin, M. R., McCarthy, G., & Rahman, M. (2020). Transforming business using 
digital innovations: The application of AI, blockchain, cloud and data analytics. Annals of Operations 
Research, 1–33
Akter, S., Wamba, S. F., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2016). J. I. J. o. P. E. How to improve 
firm performance using big data analytics capability and business strategy alignment? International 
Journal of Production Economics, 182, 113–131
Albawi, S., Mohammed, T. A., & Al-Zawi, S. (2017). Understanding of a convolutional neural network. 2017 
International Conference on Engineering and Technology (ICET), Antalya, Turkey
Alzubi, J., Nayyar, A., & Kumar, A. (2018). Machine learning from theory to algorithms: an overview. Jour­
nal of Physics: Conference Series, 1142(1), 012012
Andrade, R., Moazeni, S., & Ramirez-Marquez, J. (2018). Contact Center Operations Management Systems 
Architecture and Reliability. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3320821
Angelovski, A., Brandts, J., & Sola, C. (2016). Hiring and escalation bias in subjective performance evalua­
tions: A laboratory experiment. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 121, 114–129
Anton, J., Bapat, V., & Hall, B. (1999). Call center performance enhancement using simulation and model­
ing. Purdue University Press
Bae, S. M., Ha, S. H., & Park, S. C. (2005). A web-based system for analyzing the voices of call center cus­
tomers in the service industry. Expert Systems with Applications, 28(1), 29–41
Bain, P., & Taylor, P. (2000). Entrapped by the ‘electronic panopticon’? Worker resistance in the call centre. 
New technology work and employment, 15(1), 2–18
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 17(1), 
99–120
Barney, J., Wright, M., & Ketchen Jr, D. J. (2001). The resource-based view of the firm: Ten years after 1991. 
Journal of Management, 27(6), 625–641
Barney, J. B. (2001). Is the resource-based “view” a useful perspective for strategic management research? 
Yes. Academy of Management Review, 26(1), 41–56
Belt, V. (2002). A female ghetto? Women’s careers in call centres. Human Resource Management Journal, 
12(4), 51–66
Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., Vincent, P., & Janvin, C. (2003). A neural probabilistic language model. Journal 
of Machine Learning Research, 3, 1137–1155
Bertini, M., Halbheer, D., & Koenigsberg, O. (2019). Price and quality decisions by self-serving managers. 
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 37(2), 236–257.
Bogdanov, D., Wack, N., Gómez Gutiérrez, E., Gulati, S., Boyer, H., Mayor, O., Roma Trepat, G., Salamon, 
J., Zapata González, J. R., & Serra, X. (2013). Essentia: An audio analysis library for music information 
retrieval. Britto A, Gouyon F, Dixon S, editors. 14th Conference of the International Society for Music 
Information Retrieval (ISMIR); 2013 Nov 4–8; Curitiba, Brazil.[place unknown]: ISMIR; 2013. p. 493-
8. International Society for Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR)
Breuer, K., Nieken, P., & Sliwka, D. (2013). Social ties and subjective performance evaluations: an empirical 
investigation. Review of Managerial Science, 7(2), 141–157
Brito, L. A. L., & Sauan, P. K. (2016). Management practices as capabilities leading to superior performance. 
BAR-Brazilian Administration Review, 13(3), e160004
Bromiley, P., & Rau, D. (2016). Operations management and the resource based view: Another view. Journal 
of Operations Management, 41, 95–106
Busso, C., Bulut, M., Lee, C. C., Kazemzadeh, A., Mower, E., Kim, S., Chang, J. N., Lee, S., & Narayanan, 
S. S. (2008). IEMOCAP: Interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database. Language Resources 
and Evaluation, 42(4), 335–359
Campbell, J. (1990). Modeling the performance prediction problem in industrial and the impact of HR prac­
tices on the performance of business units organizational psychology. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough 
(Eds.), Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology (pp. 687–732). Palo Alto, CA: Consult­
ing Psychologists Press
1 3
966

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
Card, D. N. (2006). The challenge of productivity measurement. Proceedings of the Pacific Northwest Soft­
ware Quality Conference
Carmel, D. (2005). Automatic analysis of call-center conversations. Proceedings of the 14th ACM CIKM 
International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 453–459. Bremen, Germany
Charles, V., Aparicio, J., & Zhu, J. (2019). The curse of dimensionality of decision-making units: A simple 
approach to increase the discriminatory power of data envelopment analysis. European Journal of 
Operational Research, 279(3), 929–940
Choi, T. M., Wallace, S. W., & Wang, Y. (2018). Big data analytics in operations management. Production 
and Operations Management, 27(10),1868–1883
Cleveland, B. (2012). Call Center Management on Fast Forward: Succeeding in the New Era of Customer 
Relationships. ICMI Press
Connerley, M. L., & Wu, J. (2016). Handbook on Well-Being of Working Women. Springer
Dave, N. (2013). Feature extraction methods LPC, PLP and MFCC in speech recognition. International 
Journal for Advance Research in Engineering and Technology, 1(6), 1–4
Deery, S., Iverson, R., & Walsh, J. (2002). Work relationships in telephone call centres: Understanding emo­
tional exhaustion and employee withdrawal. Journal of Management Studies, 39(4), 471–496
Deery, S., & Kinnie, N. (2002). Call centres and beyond: a thematic evaluation. Human Resource Manage­
ment Journal, 12(4), 3–13
Echchakoui, S., & Baakil, D. (2019). Emotional Exhaustion in Offshore Call Centers: A Comparative Study. 
Journal of Global Marketing, 32(1), 17–36
Ehrlinger, J., Readinger, W. O., & Kim, B. (2016). Decision-Making and Cognitive Biases. Encyclopedia of 
Mental Health (2nd ed.), 5-12.
Flamholtz, E., & Lacey, J. M. (1981). Personnel management, human capital theory, and human resource 
accounting. Institute of Industrial Relations, University of California, Los Angeles.
Foroudi, P., Gupta, S., Sivarajah, U., & Broderick, A. (2018). Investigating the effects of smart technology on 
customer dynamics and customer experience. Computers in Human Behavior, 80, 271–282
Frederiksen, A., Lange, F., & Kriechel, B. (2017). Subjective performance evaluations and employee careers. 
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 134, 408–429
Frenkel, S. (1999). On the front line: Organization of work in the information economy. Cornell University 
Press
Frese, M., & Zapf, D. (1994). Action as the core of work psychology: A German approach. In H. C. Triandis, 
M. D. Dunnette, & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology (pp. 
271–340). Consulting Psychologists Press.
Friginal, E. (2013). Evaluation of oral performance in outsourced call centres: An exploratory case study. 
English for Specific Purposes, 32(1), 25–35
Gil, L., Iddo, G., & Dana, Y. (2015). Spending more time with the customer: service-providers’ behavioral 
discretion and call-center operations. Service Business, 9(3), 427–443
González-Benito, Ó., & González-Benito, J. (2005). Cultural vs. operational market orientation and objective 
vs. subjective performance: Perspective of production and operations. Industrial Marketing Manage­
ment, 34(8), 797–829
Graves, A., & Schmidhuber, J. (2005). Framewise phoneme classification with bidirectional LSTM and other 
neural network architectures. Neural networks, 18(5–6), 602–610
Grebner, S., Semmer, N., Faso, L. L., Gut, S., Kälin, W., & Elfering, A. (2003). Working conditions, well-
being, and job-related attitudes among call centre agents. European Journal of Work and Organizational 
Psychology, 12(4), 341–365
Grégoire, S., & Lachance, L. (2015). Evaluation of a brief mindfulness-based intervention to reduce psycho­
logical distress in the workplace. Mindfulness, 6(4), 836–847
Gunasekaran, A., & Ngai, E. W. (2012). The future of operations management: an outlook and analysis. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 135(2), 687–701
Guo, X., Yin, Y., Dong, C., Yang, G., & Zhou, G. (2008). On the class imbalance problem. 2008 Fourth 
international conference on natural computation. Vol. 4. IEEE
Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1975). Development of the job diagnostic survey. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 60(2), 159-170
Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. (1980). Work redesign. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Hayes, A. F., & Krippendorff, K. (2007). Answering the call for a standard reliability measure for coding data. 
Communication methods and measures, 1(1), 77–89
Helper, C. C. (2019a). White Paper: 2019 Contact Centre Trends You Need to Know
Helper, C. C. (2019b). White Paper: Quality Management Automation – ROI Calculation Guide
Hifny, Y., & Ali, A. (2019). Efficient Arabic Emotion Recognition Using Deep Neural Networks. ICASSP 
2019–2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). 
IEEE
1 3
967

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
Hitt, M. A., Xu, K., & Carnes, C. M. (2016). Resource based theory in operations management research. 
Journal of Operations Management, 41, 77–94
Hochreiter, S. (1998). The vanishing gradient problem during learning recurrent neural nets and problem solu­
tions. International Journal of Uncertainty Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems, 6(02), 107–116
Hudson, S., González-Gómez, H. V., & Rychalski, A. (2017). Call centers: is there an upside to the dissatis­
fied customer experience? Journal of Business Strategy, 38(1), 39–46
Ibrahim, S. N. H., Suan, C. L., & Karatepe, O. M. (2019). The effects of supervisor support and self-efficacy 
on call center employees’ work engagement and quitting intentions. International Journal of Manpower, 
40(4), 688–703
Judkins, J. A., Shelton, M., & Peterson, D. (2003). System and method for evaluating agents in call center. 
Google Patents
Kane, J. S., Bernardin, H. J., Villanova, P., & Peyrefitte, J. (1995). Stability of rater leniency: Three studies. 
Academy of Management Journal, 38(4), 1036–1051
Karakus, B., & Aydin, G. (2016). Call center performance evaluation using big data analytics. 2016 Interna­
tional Symposium on Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC). IEEE
Ketokivi, M. (2016). Point–counterpoint: Resource heterogeneity, performance, and competitive advantage. 
Journal of Operations Management, 41, 75–76
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980
Klar, Y., & Giladi, E. E. (1999). Are most people happier than their peers, or are they just happy? Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25(5), 586–595
Li, J. J., & Tong, X. J. P. (2020). Statistical Hypothesis Testing versus Machine Learning Binary Classifica­
tion: Distinctions and Guidelines. Patterns, 1(7), 100115
MacLeod, W. B. (2003). Optimal contracting with subjective evaluation. American Economic Review, 93(1), 
216–240
MacLeod, W. B., & Tan, T. Y. (2016). Optimal Contracting with Subjective Evaluation: The Effects of Timing, 
Malfeasance and Guile. National Bureau of Economic Research
Marr, B., & Neely, A. (2004). Managing and measuring for value: the case of call centre performance. Cran­
field School of Management
McKelvey, B., & Aldrich, H. (1983). Populations, natural selection, and applied organizational science. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 28(1), 101–128
Milgrom, P. R. (1988). Employment contracts, influence activities, and efficient organization design. Journal 
of political economy, 96(1), 42–60
Mirchandani, K. (2005). Gender eclipsed? Racial hierarchies in transnational call center work. Social Justice, 
32(102), 105–119
Mosakowski, E. (1997). Strategy making under causal ambiguity: Conceptual issues and empirical evidence. 
Organization Science, 8(4), 414–442
Murugan, P. J. a. p. a. (2017) Feed forward and backward run in deep convolution neural network. Available 
at https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.03278
Neumann, M., & Vu, N. T. (2017). Attentive convolutional neural network based speech emotion recognition: 
A study on the impact of input features, signal length, and acted speech. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.00612
Paprzycki, M., Abraham, A., Guo, R., & Mukkamala, S. (2004). Data mining approach for analyzing call 
center performance. In B. Orchard, C. Yang, & M. Ali (Eds.), Innovations in Applied Artificial Intelli­
gence (pp. 1092–1101). IEA/AIE 2004. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 3029. Springer, Berlin
Perera, K. K. A. N. N., Priyadarshana, Y. H. P. P., Gunathunga, K. I. H., Ranathunga, L., Karunarathne, P. 
M., & Thanthriwatta, T. M. (2019a). Automatic Evaluation Software for Contact Centre Agents’ voice 
Handling Performance. International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, 5(1), 1–8
Perera, K. K. A. N. N., Priyadarshana, Y. H. P. P., Gunathunga, K. I. H., Ranathunga, L., Karunarathne, P. 
M., & Thanthriwatta, T. M. (2019b). Automatic Evaluation Software for Contact Centre Agents’ voice 
Handling Performance
Powell, T. C., Lovallo, D., & Caringal, C. (2006). Causal ambiguity, management perception, and firm per­
formance. Academy of Management Review, 31(1), 175–196
Prendergast, C., & Topel, R. (1993). Discretion and bias in performance evaluation. European Economic 
Review, 37(2–3), 355–365
Prendergast, C., & Topel, R. H. (1996). Favoritism in organizations. Journal of Political Economy, 104(5), 
958–978
Raschka, S. (2015). Python Machine Learning. Packt Publishing
Reynolds, P. (2010). Call center metrics: Best practices in performance measurement and management to 
maximize quitline efficiency and quality. North American Quitline Consortium
Richert, W., Chaffer, J., Swedberg, K., & Coelho, L. (2013). Building Machine Learning Systems with Python 
(1 vol.). GB: Packt Publishing
1 3
968

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
Rubingh, R. (2013). Call Center Rocket Science: 110 Tips to Creating a World Class Customer Service Orga­
nization. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform
Rychalski, A., & Palmer, A. (2017). Customer Satisfaction and Emotion in the Call Centre Context. The 
Customer is NOT Always Right? Marketing Orientationsin a Dynamic Business World (pp. 67–70). 
Springer
Shachaf, P. (2008). Cultural diversity and information and communication technology impacts on global 
virtual teams: An exploratory study. Information & Management, 45(2), 131–142
Shire, K., Holtgrewe, U., & Kerst, C. (2017). Re-organising customer service work: an introduction. Re-
organising Service Work: Call Centres in Germany and Britain: Call Centres in Germany and Britain, 1
Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. A., & Ireland, R. D. (2007). Managing firm resources in dynamic environments to 
create value: Looking inside the black box. Academy of Management Review, 32(1), 273–292
Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. A., Ireland, R. D., & Gilbert, B. A. (2011). Resource orchestration to create competi­
tive advantage: Breadth, depth, and life cycle effects. Journal of Management, 37(5), 1390–1412
Sonnentag, S., & Frese, M. (2003). Performance concepts and performance theory. In S. Sonnentag (Ed.), 
Psychological Management of Individual Performance (pp. 1-25). John Wiley & Sons
Stangor, C., & Walinga, J. (2010). Introduction to psychology. Flatworld Knowledge
Stanton, J. M. (2000). Reactions to employee performance monitoring: Framework, review, and research 
directions. Human Performance, 13(1), 85–113
Sudarsan, V., & Kumar, G. (2019). Voice call analytics using natural language processing. International 
Journal of Statistics and Applied Mathematics, 4(6), 133–136
Suls, J., & Wheeler, L. (2012). Social comparison theory. Handbook of theories of social psychology, 1, 
460–482
Suls, J., & Wheeler, L. (2013). Handbook of social comparison: Theory and research. Springer Science & 
Business Media
Sultana, S., Akter, S., & Kyriazis, E. (2022). How data-driven innovation capability is shaping the future 
of market agility and competitive performance? Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 174, 
121260
Sultana, S., Akter, S., Kyriazis, E., & Wamba, S. F. (2021). Architecting and developing big data-driven 
innovation (DDI) in the digital economy. Journal of Global Information Management (JGIM), 29(3), 
165–187
Taylor, P., & Bain, P. (1999). ‘An assembly line in the head’: work and employee relations in the call centre. 
Industrial Relations Journal, 30(2), 101–117
Taylor, P., Mulvey, G., Hyman, J., & Bain, P. (2002). Work organization, control and the experience of work 
in call centres. Work Employment & Society, 16(1), 133–150
Taylor, S. (1998). Emotional labour and the new workplace. Workplaces of the Future. Springer. 84–103
Teow, M. Y. (2017). Understanding convolutional neural networks using a minimal model for handwritten 
digit recognition. 2017 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Automatic Control and Intelligent Sys­
tems (I2CACIS). IEEE
Tirole, J. (1986). Hierarchies and bureaucracies: On the role of collusion in organizations. Journal of Law 
Economics & Organization, 2(2), 181–214
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. J. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed 
management knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of Management, 14(3), 207–222
Tsolas, I. E., Charles, V., & Gherman, T. (2020). Supporting better practice benchmarking: A DEA-ANN 
approach to bank branch performance assessment. Expert Systems with Applications, 160, 113599
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). A Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use 
of Technology. MIS Quarterly, 27(3), 425–478
Viswesvaran, C., & Ones, D. S. (2000). Perspectives on models of job performance. International Journal of 
Selection and Assessment, 8(4), 216–226
Wamba, S. F., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Ren, S. J., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. (2017). Big data analytics and 
firm performance: Effects of dynamic capabilities. Journal of Business Research, 70, 356–365
Wang, P., Wagner, T. A., Boyar, S. L., Corman, S. A., & McKinley, R. B. (2016). The Relationship Between 
Organizational Family Support and Burnout Among Women in the Healthcare Industry: Core Self-
Evaluation as Moderator. Handbook on Well-Being of Working Women (pp. 283–296). Springer
Wardhani, N. W. S., Rochayani, M. Y., Iriany, A., Sulistyono, A. D., & Lestantyo, P. (2019). Cross-validation 
Metrics for Evaluating Classification Performance on Imbalanced Data. 2019 International Conference 
on Computer, Control, Informatics and its Applications (IC3INA). IEEE
Wegge, J., Van Dick, R., Fisher, G. K., Wecking, C., & Moltzen, K. (2006). Work motivation, organisational 
identification, and well-being in call centre work. Work & Stress, 20(1), 60–83
Willis, S. J., & Bendixen, M. (2007). A Review of Call Center Measurements. Production and Operations 
Management Society. Available at https://www.poms.org/conferences/cso2007/talks/30.pdf
1 3
969

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:939–970
Wilson, J. P. (2009). The Call Centre Training Handbook: A Complete Guide to Learning & Development in 
Contact Centres. Kogan Page
Wöllmer, M. (2013). Context-Sensitive Machine Learning for Intelligent Human Behavior Analysis. 
München: Universitätsbibliothek der TU
Wooffitt, R. (2005). Conversation analysis and discourse analysis: A comparative and critical introduction. 
Sage
Zheng, F., Zhang, G., & Song, Z. (2001). Comparison of different implementations of MFCC. Journal of 
Computer science and Technology, 16(6), 582–589
Zillner, S., Becker, T., Munné, R., Hussain, K., Rusitschka, S., Lippell, H., Curry, E., & Ojo, A. (2016). Big 
data-driven innovation in industrial sectors. New Horizons for a Data-Driven Economy (pp. 169–178). 
Cham: Springer
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
970