TITLE: Evaluating Energy Security using Choquet Integral: analysis in the southern E.U. countries
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05748-x
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05748-x
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Evaluating Energy Security using Choquet Integral: analysis
in the southern E.U. countries
Amelia Bilbao-Terol1
· Verónica Cañal-Fernández2
· Carmen Gónzalez-Pérez3
Received: 18 March 2023 / Accepted: 21 November 2023 / Published online: 27 December 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to introduce a novel approach for assessing the risks to the continuous
availability of cost-effective energy sources by proposing a Multi-Criteria Decision Making
method that considers the interdependence between the indicators utilised in the measure-
ment process. The paper focuses on Spain and Portugal into the EU energy market and
investigates the consequences of their particular conditions. To account for the signiﬁcance
of each criterion and its subsets, the Choquet Integral is integrated into the analysis. The
ﬁndings demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach in incorporating expert knowledge
into Energy Security evaluations, which can be utilised to develop enhancement policies.
Keywords Energy Security · Multi-criteria decision making · Choquet Integral · Climate
risk · Risk of poverty
Abbreviations
APERC
Asia Paciﬁc Energy Research Centre
ARPR
At Risk of Poverty Rate
B
Ratio between GDP per capita and the price of a barrel of oil
D
Diesel price
E
Electricity prices for household consumers
EID
Energy imports dependency
ElC pc
Electricity capacity per capita
ElGD
Electricity generation diversity measured by the Shannon index
B Amelia Bilbao-Terol
ameliab@uniovi.es
Verónica Cañal-Fernández
vcanal@uniovi.es
Carmen Gónzalez-Pérez
carglezperez@gmail.com
1
Department Quantitative Economics, Faculty of Commerce Tourism and Social Sciences
Jovellanos, University of Oviedo, Laboral Ciudad de la Cultura, Gijón, Spain
2
Department Quantitative Economics, Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Oviedo,
Avda. Del Cristo s/n, Oviedo, Spain
3
Faculty of Commerce Tourism and Social Sciences Jovellanos, University of Oviedo, Laboral Ciudad de
la Cultura, Gijón, Spain
123

722
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
En
Electricity prices for nonhousehold consumers
ERD
Energy reserves diversity Shannon index
ES
Energy Security
ESP
Energy Security Performance
ESS rate
Energy self-sufﬁciency rate
FEC pc
Final energy consumption per capita
G
Gasoline price
GCRI
Global climate risk index
GGpc
Greenhouse gas emissions per capita
IEA
International energy agency
NEI pc
Net energy imports per capita
NG
Natural gas prices for household consumers
NGn
Natural gas prices for nonhousehold consumers
PNEC
National energy and climate plan (Portugal)
PNIEC
National energy and climate plan (Spain)
TES pc
Total energy supply per capita
TREl
Time required to get electricity
UNS&S-CI
Unsupervised and Supervised Choquet Integral
SDGs
Sustainable development goals
ShRWC
Share of renewables in total ﬁnal energy consumption
ShRWG
Share renewable energy generation
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
WDI
World development indicators
1 Introduction
Energy Security (ES) has long been a concern for any policymaker. According to Sovacool
and Brown (2010), the notion of Energy Security emerged in the early nineteenth century as
the mechanisation of warfare accelerated the energy requirements for coal-powered warships
and vehicles. These authors present a historical review of political events related to ES issues.
Indeed, the development and well-being of a population are strongly linked to the availability
of reliable and affordable energy sources. The ﬁrst attempts to deﬁne and measure ES in its
modern sense were made at the beginning of the twentieth century when it received special
attention from energy policy scholars and professionals. The cause was the shift from local
energy sources to imports in industrialised countries.
World War II emphasised the importance of uninterrupted energy supply for national ES
even more. And by the mid-century, governments of various nations became aware of the
vulnerability posed by the inability of many nations to independently secure sufﬁcient energy
resources to meet their increasingly broad and demanding needs.
In that context, and following the war, six European countries (Belgium, France, Italy,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands) signed the Treaty
establishing the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in Paris on April 18, 1951
(which would come into effect in 1952 for a period of 50 years). This treaty later evolved into
the European Economic Community in 1957 and ﬁnally into the European Union in 1993. The
main aim was to organise the free movement of coal and steel and ensure unrestricted access
to sources of production, essentially guaranteeing energy access for the signatory countries.
However, in that same decade of the 1950s, the coal consumption had begun to decline,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
723
replaced by other fuels (oil, gas). Faced with the potential threat of an energy dependence
on other countries, in the pursuit of securing supply, the six countries of the ECSC signed,
in Rome in 1957, along with the Constitutive Treaty of the European Economic Community
(EEC), the Treaty of the European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC or Euratom), whose
strategic objective was to promote research on the emerging atomic energy and to achieve
supply security for the EEC.
Notwithstanding, among all the signing countries, only France ﬁrmly decided to opt for
this path, designing a complex system of electricity generation from nuclear power plants,
whose high production costs and possible accidents discouraged the rest of the countries,
which chose oil as their energy source instead; oil was abundant, cheap, and readily available
in a stable market.
Concern about ES increased sharply in the 1970s following supply disruptions and price
volatility, which resulted from the OPEC oil embargoes in 1973 and the Iranian revolution
in 1979.
Returning to the European Union there was no common energy policy in the aftermath of
these crises. Why? Mainly due to the rejection of several Member States, which considered
energy to be a “strategic asset”, prioritising a nationalist vision of the different energy models
of each nation: type of market, composition of primary energy, supply sources, efﬁciency
and so forth. However, at that time, the conﬂuence between energy policy and environmental
policywasbeingconsolidated,which,curiouslyenough,wasnotconsidered“strategic”bythe
majority of Member States (which posed a contradiction when legislating or recommending
on ecological issues, knowing the impact it should have on national energy aspects).
But it was not until the Treaty of Lisbon of 13 December 2007 that common energy
policies began to be established in a speciﬁc title on energy (Title XX). The document “An
Energy Policy for Europe”1 (European Commission, January 2007) is where the concept of
strategic supply security is consolidated, although it had already appeared six years earlier
in the draft of the Commission’s Green Paper of November 29, 2000, “Towards a European
strategy for the security of energy supply”.2
“The European Union’s long-term strategy for energy supply security must be geared
to ensuring, for the well-being of its citizens and the proper functioning of the economy,
the uninterrupted physical availability of energy products on the market, at a price which is
affordable for all consumers (private and industrial), while respecting environmental concerns
and looking towards sustainable development, as enshrined in Articles 2 and 6 of the Treaty
on European Union”.
This deﬁnition did not come to fruition, despite (or perhaps because of) incorporating the
threemainaspects:sustainability,competitiveness,securityofsupplyandincludingallactors:
consumers (citizens, enterprises, industries, and so on), producers (market, industrialists) and
regulators (welfare, affordability, environmental requirements, sustainable development).
In 2014, the European Council identiﬁed the creation of an energy union as one of the
main priorities of the EU, which was a consequence of the rise of various types of gas supply
problems. In 2015, the Energy Union Strategy (2015) was published, which aims to provide
EU consumers with a secure, sustainable, competitive and cheap energy supply. At the same
time, the entire energy system is to be ultimately environmentally neutral by 2050 (Tutak &
Brodny, 2022).
1 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/summary/an-energy-policy-for-europe.html.
2 https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/0ef8d03f-7c54-41b6-ab89-6b93e61fd37c/
language-en., which was not published in the Ofﬁcial Journal and contains one of the best deﬁnitions
of Energy Security:
123

724
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
The International Energy Agency (IEA) deﬁnes Energy Security as the uninterrupted
availability of energy sources at an affordable price. Energy Security has many aspects.
Long-term Energy Security mainly deals with timely investments to supply energy in line
with economic developments and environmental needs. On the other hand, short-term Energy
Security focuses on the ability of the energy system to react promptly to sudden changes in
the supply–demand balance.
A consensus regarding the deﬁnition of ES (see, e.g. (Axon & Darton, 2021)) has yet to
be reached due to its context dependence. This concept has evolved into a wide variety of
fragmented interpretations in scholarly and policy literature where ES means different things
in different countries and for different people. An inﬂuential skin for classifying ES consensus
proposed by the Asia Paciﬁc Energy Research Centre (APERC) in 2007 includes what is
called the ‘four As’ of Energy Security: Availability (geological and physical elements),
Accessibility (geopolitical elements), Affordability (economic elements) and Acceptability
(socialandenvironmentelements).These‘fourAs’havegivenrisetodifferentinterpretations;
in particular, they reﬂect the issues related to energy reserves, infrastructures, pollution, prices
and political interest, among other things. This broadened approach has become the basis
for our empirical study, where 21 ES indicators were selected within the included four
dimensions. However, we emphasise that the methodology presented applies to alternative
deﬁnitions of ES.
The aim of this paper is to propose a process for evaluating ES taking into account a plural-
ity of indicators related to the set dimensions for ES. The complex concept that encompasses
ES in all its different deﬁnitions should be measured by a dashboard of suitable indicators.
The non-aggregate handling of the set of indicators implies a complicated interpretation,
and it would be very difﬁcult for policymakers to identify common trends among various
individual indicators. For ease of understanding and comparison, a possible solution would
be to aggregate the entire plethora of indicators into a composite index. The construction
of such indexes has been used in many research areas. In addition, global institutions (e.g.
the OECD, the World Bank, the EU, etc.) have widely used these types of measures (Greco
et al., 2019). The most critical steps in the construction of a composite index refer to the
weighting and aggregation of the individual indicators. A crucial aspect in both steps is the
degree of intervention of the decision-maker/expert/stakeholders, from no intervention apply-
ing data-driven methodologies based on statistical techniques such as, for example, principal
components analysis or entropy, to more interventionist methodologies with a key role of the
decision maker (DM) (e.g., in the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP)). Indeed, there is not an
ideal weighting methodology. On the contrary, it is up to the modeller to choose a weighting
system that is best ﬁtted to the goal of the construction.
Multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) techniques have been extensively used to build
composite indices (Liern & Pérez-Gladish, 2022). Speciﬁcally, MCDM methodologies allow
for explicitly identifying the relevant criteria of each ES dimension and the integration of
said criteria into the decision-making process (Belton & Stewart, 2010). However, in most
MCDM studies applied to ES, it is assumed that criteria are mutually independent, while
in practice, they are interrelated. The use of the Choquet Integral (CI) with non-additive
measure (Choquet, 1953; Grabisch et al., 2008; Abastante et al., 2018; Duarte, 2018; Pelis-
sari & Duarte, 2022; de Oliveira et al., 2022; Divsalar et al., 2022) offers the possibility of
including interactions between criteria in the aggregation process, which serves to improve
the modelling. The choice of the CI solves the two critical steps mentioned above. First, the
weighting system is based on considering the importance of each subset of criteria and, there-
fore, allows to model synergies between criteria and, second, an aggregation operator based
on a CI discrete. To highlight the relevance of aspects related to synergy and redundancy,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
725
we consider, for example, two indicators. The ﬁrst is the share of renewable energy in total
ﬁnal energy consumption, and the second measures CO2 emissions. In this case, there is a
redundancy between the two indicators since one can expect that a signiﬁcant participation
of renewable energy in energy consumption yields a decrease in CO2 emissions. Therefore,
in this case, to avoid an over-evaluation, it is reasonable to reduce the score that the usual
weighted sum would give. By contrast, the case of synergy occurs when one faces the two
As representing Affordability and Acceptability. This is a case of synergy between the two
criteria; hence, it appears natural to give a bonus if there are good performances for both As.
The price of enriching the model by abandoning the preferential independence hypothesis
is that it could signiﬁcantly increase the cognitive effort of the DM. Here, assigning a measure
to each subset of indicators is necessary. Such measure must verify the monotonicity property
that models the rationality that any subset of indicators containing another has a greater or
equal measure. As mentioned above, there are two main ways of approaching the determina-
tion of the necessary parameters. Unsupervised methods have advantages; for example, the
output does not contain any degree of subjectivity, and are comfortable for the developer, as
the inquiry to the DM is not required. Of course, these advantages become disadvantages if
the incorporation of expert knowledge in the evaluation is considered valuable. More mod-
elling effort is required when a supervised method is applied. However, given the complexity
and geographical and chronological dependence of the concept of Energy Security, we con-
sider it advantageous that our proposal can allow expert knowledge in the evaluation. In the
context of the supervised CI methods, it is necessary to have previous information about
the behaviour of the alternatives. This is a drawback to our proposal since we do not have
that information. As discussed below, our contribution overcomes this obstacle and makes
modelling more ﬂexible, allowing comparison between evaluations driven exclusively by
data and those in which expert intervention exists.
In this study, we propose a supervised method combined with the unsupervised one pro-
posed by Rowley et al. (2015). Firstly, an initial capacity is obtained based on principal
components analysis. This proposal objectively carries out the whole estimation and uses no
external information about the searched capacity. The second step is devoted to identifying
a capacity that veriﬁes as far as possible preferential information ((the country situation))
and is ‘close’ to the CI scores found in the ﬁrst step. This capacity is the necessary input for
applying the CI to the Energy Security assessment to obtain a global score for each coun-
try. To the best of our knowledge, we are unaware of any previous study that combines the
methodology described above with CI for this speciﬁc topic. Furthermore, this combination
provides a framework for an optimal design of policies.
The proposed methodology takes advantage of the assignment of indicators to the ES
dimensions to build a hierarchical structure in the evaluation process. In the ﬁrst stage, we
score each country in the considered dimensions. In the second stage, an aggregation process
of the evaluated dimensions is carried out that considers each country’s situation measured
by public access indices. Speciﬁcally, we have used the Global Climate Risk Index (GCRI)
and the At Risk of Poverty Rate (ARPR). We have deﬁned four proﬁles based on the scores
on these two indices, and each country is classiﬁed in one of these four proﬁles. Then, the
supervised capabilities are built according to these proﬁles that determine the preferences on
the ES dimensions.
Our proposal allows several strategies: a pure unsupervised evaluation is available, a mixed
unsupervised and supervised evaluation and a pure supervised evaluation. Also, a feature of
our method is related to the nature of the interactions, they can be data-driven or set by the
DM.
123

726
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
We summarise our contribution in the following points. We have proposed modelling the
interactions between ES indicators. We have overcome the difﬁculty of applying the CI in
the evaluation of ES of countries by proposing a hybrid methodology between modelling
without expert information and with it. The methodology makes it possible to assess Energy
Security by considering each country’s behaviour in matters that affect the dimensions of ES.
In this paper, we apply the methodology described above to analyse the evolution of ES in
the Iberian Peninsula. In order to compare with the situation of other Mediterranean countries,
we build a panel composed of three more countries, two of them belonging to the EU, France
and Italy, and Turkey.
The situation of the Iberian Peninsula is more adverse than it is in the EU as a whole
(Sovacool & Brown, 2010) since neither Spain nor Portugal have reserves of oil or natural
gas, and their geographical position makes gaining full access to the internal European market
more difﬁcult. This leaves these countries with the EU’s highest energy dependency rates. For
this reason, the National Energy and Climate Plan for the period 2023-2030, called PNIEC
(2020) in Spain and PNEC (2020) in Portugal, comply with Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the governance of the
Energy Union and Climate Action, proposed by the Spanish and Portugal Governments aim
to reduce this rate by 15 pps and 35 pps by 2030, respectively, mainly through a reduction in
energy intensity and greater use of renewable energies.
Primary energy production in Spain and Portugal is practically based on renewable ener-
gies, and solid bio-fuels stand out in both cases, followed by wind energy. At this time, the
governments of Spain and Portugal have requested the EU to implement a measure to improve
the affordability of their energy (limiting the price of gas). These policies are criticised from
several forums because it is argued that they introduce rigidity in the energy market. Our
work entails comparing our ﬁndings with neighbouring countries like France and Italy. Addi-
tionally, we analyse Turkey as a country with distinct characteristics from the four previously
studied. For these countries, 21 ES indicators have been obtained for the 4As for the period
2017–2020, the last year in which data for the chosen indicators were available. These chosen
indicators have allowed us to identify the strengths and weaknesses of each country’s energy
system and the potential areas for improvement. According to them, the results display that
France has a high level of ES in terms of Availability, Accessibility and Affordability but
faces some challenges in terms of Acceptability. France has a target to reduce the share of
nuclear energy in its electricity mix to 50% by 2035 and to increase the share of renewable
energy to 40% by 2030. Also, it strongly focuses on reducing greenhouse gas emissions
and air pollution to ensure the energy transition. 3 On the opposite side, Portugal has to
improve in Availability, Accessibility and Affordability. However, it has a high Acceptability
of its energy system thanks to its expanding renewable generation. According to IEA (2022),
Portugal has developed a broad policy framework with robust measures to achieve emission
reductions. Italy has to improve on Acceptability and Accessibility. However, Italy has always
achieved good results in Availability, a dimension with poor performance in Spain, Turkey
and Portugal. Spain has improved considerably in 2020 in Acceptability, on the contrary, this
dimension has suffered a sharp deterioration that year in Turkey.
The rest of this research is organised as follows. The next section presents a literature
review that provides the motivation for this research. The methodology is presented in Sect. 3.
The empirical application is described in Sect. 4. Section5 concludes.
3 https://www.iea.org/reports/france-2021/executive-summary.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
727
2 Literature review
Related studies published from 2018 to 2022 were extensively reviewed, both the ones where
the deﬁnition of Energy Security was analysed (see Azzuni and Breyer (2018), Axon and
Darton (2021), Esfahani et al. (2021) and references therein) and the works where Energy
Security was indeed evaluated. Studies with Energy Security evaluations are summarised in
Table 1. Models based on Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) methods are predom-
inant. Several authors use classical multi-criteria methods such as weighted arithmetic and
geometric means, while others apply more recent methodologies. Among the ﬁrst, Amin et
al. (2022) analysed Bangladesh’s Energy Security level using the 4As framework for 2014–
2019. They normalise the data of the indicators by the min–max method. From normalised
data, exploratory analysis is carried out. Azzuni and Breyer (2020) propose a methodology
for preparing the Energy Security index based on 15 dimensions. It was highlighted that due
to the heterogeneity across countries, single-approach techniques to improve Energy Secu-
rity across the globe should be avoided. Bekhrad et al. (2020) compared the Energy Security
variables of Andalusia with those of Spain, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and Slovenia.
To facilitate the comparison, they calculated the normalised values of 12 Energy Security
variables for each country and used the arithmetic mean of the indicators within each aspect
(reliability, affordability, and sustainability). In their study, Fuentes et al. (2020) developed a
composite index using a normalisation method that calculated the ratio to a reference level.
They used the equal weight model to assign the same weight value to each variable within
the index. The aggregation process was conducted by applying a weighted geometric mean.
Coutinho et al. (2020) applied an Energy Security index adjusted to the context of Cape
Verde using a weighted average mean calculation method. They used the Delphi method to
obtain the weighting system by surveying key actors in Cape Verde’s energy sector. Sixteen
individuals were interviewed in total in two rounds of the survey. In the ﬁrst round, the panel-
lists were asked to distribute 100 points among the ﬁve dimensions of Energy Security used
by the authors, whereas, in the second round, the panellists had access to the average scores
of the ﬁrst round, which were converted into weights and used for calculating the index.
The compound weight of each component was determined by multiplying its weight by the
weight of its corresponding dimension. Alternatively, Tutak and Brodny (2022) belong to
the second group of papers using state-of-art MCDM methodologies and suggest utilising a
combination of the Grey Relational Analysis with CRITIC, Entropy, and Standard Deviation
methods to derive weights for the 17 indicators that deﬁne the Energy Security of analysed
nations across economic, environmental, energy, and social dimensions. Fuzzy AHP is used
by Zhang et al. (2021) to assess the signiﬁcance of dimensions and indicators and the hybrid
model of Grey Relation Analysis (GRA)-TOPSIS is introduced to evaluate Energy Security
performance. Further, a qualitative root cause analysis is conducted with the Why-Why Dia-
gram to identify the possible causes affecting Energy Security. Ziemba et al. (2021) seek to
establish a novel approach to evaluate current and future Energy Security issues based on
a complex security index supported by the computationally transparent fuzzy multi-criteria
decision analysis method. The utilisation of fuzzy MCDA methods allows for the quantiﬁca-
tion of uncertainty in evaluations and forecasts. The forecasts, which were generated using
Holt’s method, relied on the International Energy Security Risk Index as the primary data
source.
Regression methods are used by Bamisile et al. (2021), Podbregar et al. (2020), Le and
Nguyen (2019), Lee et al. (2022), Gong et al. (2021), Wang et al. (2020). Bamisile et al. (2021)
construct the dynamics of China’s Energy Security index and analyse using comprehensive
123

728
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
functional data analysis (FDA) techniques. The Energy Security indices of 30 provinces in
China between 2004 and 2017 are considered. The main goal of the study by Podbregar et al.
(2020) is to analyse the reliability of the International Energy Security Risk Index. The Index
is composed of 29 aggregated variables (grouped into eight categories), and the research is
conducted on a research sample of 25 countries over 36 years. The reliability assessment
is performed using Multiple Regression Analysis—the methodological validation involves
conducting Multicollinearity tests, including a Multicollinearity test with Variance Inﬂation
Factors. The test results indicate the Index’s high degree of unreliability based on the observed
errors. These errors primarily relate to a high degree of multicollinearity in all variables,
whereby independent variables lose their independence and thus jeopardise the reliability of
the total Index.
Another set of studies employs Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Abdullah et al.
(2020) assess Pakistan’s Energy Security performance based on a study of its Energy Security
index during 1991–2018. The indicators were normalised using the z-score method and
weighted based on PCA. Supply, consumption and import indicators played a key role in the
Energy Security performance in the studied period.
Filipovi´c et al. (2018) present a method of measuring Energy Security that includes eco-
nomic and environmental indicators and the political and social aspects within the composite
indicator of country risk. The new Energy Security Index is constructed applying PCA.
Analysis of the values of a new indicator shows that Energy Security is greatly inﬂuenced
by GDP per capita, country risk, carbon intensity, energy intensity, ﬁnal energy consump-
tion per capita and electricity prices; the geographical scope of application is the European
Union. Karatayev and Hall (2020) develop an Energy Security estimation model applying a
methodology of integrated estimation: a multiplicative form of the integrated index, a for-
malised deﬁnition of the safe existence limits in order to provide scientiﬁc substantiation of
the threshold vector, a modiﬁed rationing method, the PCA method and the sliding matrix
method to substantiate dynamic weighting coefﬁcients. Wu et al. (2021) introduce an evalu-
ation technique based on the integrated application of PCA and Data Envelopment Analysis
- Assurance Region (DEA-AR) for determining the Energy Security Performances (ESPs)
of each country was proposed. In addition to the ESP results and rankings for 125 countries,
a cluster analysis was conducted based on the ESP trend results, with the main objective of
identifying a benchmark group of countries.
3 Methodology
As indicated already, in this study, an MCDM methodology based on Choquet Integral is
used to assess countries’ Energy Security. The methodology runs in two phases. Firstly, a
capacity is identiﬁed according to data behaviour. Secondly, a distance minimisation process
is applied to ﬁnd a capacity close to the one previously found, verifying several constraints
established by the expert on the importance of the indicators and interactions among them.
3.1 Choquet Integral
Let X = {a1, ..., am} be a set of alternatives (countries in this study) and a set C = {c1, ..., cn}
of characteristics/criteria over which alternatives are evaluated. In this context, each country
ak ∈X is identiﬁed with its proﬁle of partial scores sk = (sk
1, ..., sk
n) with sk
i taking a
value between 0 and 1. In multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM), a search is undertaken
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
729
Table 1 Energy Security: previous studies
Author
Region
Technique
Research purpose
Abdullah et al. (2020)
Pakistan
Normalisation (z-score) and weighting (PCA)
Pakistan’s Energy Security performance based on a
study of its Energy Security index during 1991–2018
is assessed via 22 indicators
Amin et al. (2022)
Bangladesh
Linear transformation to normalise indicators
Compare and quantify the Energy Security level (4As)
in Bangladesh between 2014 and 2019
Azzuni and Breyer (2020)
229 World countries
Normalisation
Create an Energy Security index comprehensive on a
global scale using 78 indicators
Bamisile et al. (2021)
China
Functional regression models
Analysis of Energy Security index of the provinces in
China (2004–2017) and the effect of investment in
energy sector on these indices
Bekhrad et al. (2020)
Andalusia (Spain)
Normalisation of 12 indicators grouped in 3
aspects and aggregation by arithmetic mean
To evaluate Andalusia’s renewable energy potential and
its impact on the security of energy supply
Brodny and Tutak (2021)
Central EU
MCDM: TOPSIS, VIKOR, MOORA and
COPRAS)
Study and assess the level of sustainable energy
development in the Central and Eastern European
Countries using 21 indicators between 2008 and 2018
Coutinho et al. (2020)
Cape Verde
Multi-criteria analysis and the Delphi survey
Develop an Energy Security index adjusted to Cape
Verde
Filipovi´c et al. (2018)
EU-28
PCA to create the Index and Kruskal–Wallis test
for evaluating the relationship between Energy
Security and macroeconomic stability
Create new Energy Security index including social and
political aspects to rank EU-28 for the period
2006-2015
Fuentes et al. (2020)
Argentina
Normalisation, Weighting and Aggregation
Develop, apply and compare (to 2002) a tool based on
the Power System Security Index, for the evaluation of
policies affecting the security of the supply of
electrical energy
Gong et al. (2021)
China
Functional data analysis entropy weight method
Quantitatively measure the Energy Security levels of 30
provinces in China from 2004 to 2017
123

730
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Table 1 continued
Author
Region
Technique
Research purpose
Gong et al. (2021)
China
Weighting methods
Evaluate Energy Security by constructing a
comprehensive Energy Security index based on the
Belt and Road countries’ data during the period from
1995 to 2017
Karatayev and Hall (2020)
Russia
Normalisation (z-score)
Comparison of the Energy Security performance in six
Caspian Sea countries individually and collectively
Kharazishvili et al. (2021)
Ukraine
A multiplicative form of an integrated index, the
combined rationing method, and dynamic
weights by a combination of a PCA method
and a ‘sliding matrix’ method
To support strategic scenarios of the future security
situation of the energy sector in the context of
sustainable development, determining the relevant
macro indicators in each year for a given perspective
Le and Nguyen (2019)
74 countries
Panel data analysis
Examine from a benchmark model based on an extended
version of the Cobb-Douglas whether Energy Security
contributes to economic growth for a global sample of
74 countries covering the period from 2002 to 2013.
Conduct the panel data analysis on subsamples of
countries based on different income levels
Lee et al. (2022)
68 countries
Dynamic panel threshold approach
Explore via global panel data the relation between
Energy Security and income inequality by analyzing
whether income distribution is affected by 6 indicators
selected for 68 countries over 2001–2018
Li et al. (2019)
19 G20 countries
Weighting (PCA) and Aggregation
Universal, multidimensional index system and
comparing Energy Security systems of different
countries using 14 indicators
Lin and Raza (2020)
Pakistan
MARKAL model
Estimation of Energy Security indicators for long-term
energy supply using 11 indicators
Malik et al. (2020)
Pakistan
Normalisation and average
Analyze Pakistan’s Energy Security under the 4-As
framework over the six-years period 2011-2017 with
16 indicators
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
731
Table 1 continued
Author
Region
Technique
Research purpose
Podbregar et al. (2020)
25 OECD countries
Stepwise regression, principal component
analysis, and Promax oblique rotation
Analyze model settings of the International Energy
Security Risk Index developed by the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce, covering data for 25 countries over the
period 1980–2016
Ragulina et al. (2019)
Russia
Normalisation (z-score)
Analysis of Energy Security performance made by the
Russian Federation in 1990-2015 based on an
aggregated index that includes 12 indicators across
four dimensions
Razmjoo et al. (2019)
12 countries
Normalisation and Correlation
Present new 17 effective indicators to enhance
sustainable energy development index
Shah et al. (2019)
South Asian countries
Multiplicative Data Envelopment Analysis
(MDEA)
Develop a new index, i.e., Energy Security and
Environmental Sustainability Index, which combines
11 energy and environmental indicators over the
period 2006–2017
Song et al. (2019)
China
Normalisation, Weighting and Aggregation
Introduction of a new aggregated indicator to the China
Energy Security index, for evaluating how China’s
Energy Security has changed over years
Stavytskyy et al. (2021)
RF, EU, USA, China, UK
Geometric mean and clustering
Develop a methodology for calculating the Energy
Security index of a state, based on 29 indicators,
according to the World Bank data from 1991 to 2019
Tutak and Brodny (2022)
European Union (EU-12)
Multi-criteria decision methods: The Grey
Relational Analysis
To determine the level of Energy Security in the Three
Seas Initiative countries in relation to the EU energy
and climate and social policy
123

732
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Table 1 continued
Author
Region
Technique
Research purpose
Wang et al. (2020)
China
Functional Data Analysis (FDA) method
A dynamic Energy Security index for China by
introducing FDA techniques into the Energy Security
Index calculation, including 17 indicators over
2000–2017
Wang et al. (2021)
China
GPCA
An evaluation index system for regional energy
economic security is constructed over the period
2009–2017
Wang and Zhan (2019)
China (30 provinces)
Weighting (PCA)
Construction of an evaluation index system of regional
energy economic security from four dimension, based
on panel data of 30 provinces in China from 2009 to
2017
Wu et al. (2021)
125 countries
PCA and data envelopment analysis (DEA)
This study sought to assess Energy Security
performances of countries over a long period of time
Yang et al. (2022)
China
DPSIR (Driving
forces-Pressures-State-Impacts-Responses)
and entropy weight TOPSIS models
To construct an index system and use TOPSIS model to
comprehensively evaluate the index system, so as to
accurately grasp the Energy Security situation in
China
Yuan and Luo (2019)
China
Multi criteria decision making method based on
set pair analysis and TOPSIS
Evaluating Chinese provinces Energy Security,
analyzing reasons and providing policy implications
using 14 indicators from 2013 to 2017
Zhang et al. (2021)
China
Fuzzy AHP, GRA-TOPSIS and Why-Why
diagram
To establish a methodological framework based on
quantitative and qualitative approaches for measuring
and improving Energy Security from a broad sense
Ziemba et al. (2021)
25 countries and the OECD as a group
Fuzzy MCDA
Develop a new approach for assessing current and future
Energy Security issues based on a complex security
index based on data from 1980 to 2015
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
733
to obtain a global utility M(sk) that associates a real number for any alternative. The form
of the global utility function M depends on the hypotheses on which the MCDM model is
based. When mutual preferential independence (see, e.g., Vincke (1992) and Kojadinovic
(2007)) for criteria is being assumed, frequently the global utility function is additive and
takes the form of a weighted arithmetic mean. This operator gives a global score for the
proﬁle s = (s1, ..., sn) according to:
Mw(s) =
n

i=1
wisi
(1)
where wi ≥0 is the weight of criterion ci and n
i=1 wi = 1.
However, mutual preferential independence is rarely veriﬁed in real applications (Keeney
& Raiffa, 1976; Pasi et al., 2019). In order to model the interaction among criteria, it has been
proposed to substitute a monotone set function on C, called capacity (Choquet, 1953) or fuzzy
measure (Michio, 1974), for the weight vector appearing in the calculation of the weighted
arithmetic means (1). Using a capacity function involves considering the importance of each
subset of criteria. A natural extension of the weighted arithmetic mean in such a context is
the Choquet integral w.r.t. the deﬁned capacity (Grabisch, 1996; Marichal, 2000; Grabisch
& Labreuche, 2016).
The deﬁnition of a fuzzy measure as a set function with the monotony propriety with
respect to the inclusion is set out as follows.
Fuzzy measure or capacity
Let P(C) be the power set of C, a fuzzy measure fuzzy on the set C is a function μ : P(C) →
[0, 1] verifying μ(∅) = 0, μ(C) = 1 and for any S ⊆T ⊆C implies μ(S) ≤μ(T ), for
any subset of criteria S, μ(S) can be interpreted as a measure of the importance of the
combination of criteria included in S. In this way, by replacing the vector of weights w
with a fuzzy measure μ, it is possible to represent the importance of each subset of criteria
rather than working solely with the individual importance of the criteria. The capacity allows
modelling the magnitude of the interaction between criteria. For any pair of criteria (ci, c j),
the difference between μ(ci, c j) and μ(ci)+μ(c j) reﬂects the degree of interaction between
ci and c j. If the capacity of the pair (ci, c j) is greater than the sum of the two individual
capacities, then there is a positive interaction. Otherwise, the interaction will be negative, or
if equality is achieved, there will be no interaction between the two criteria. As we discussed
earlier, the Choquet integral is an appropriate aggregation operator for the criteria interaction,
and it generalises the weighted average.
The Choquet integral of the vector sk with respect to the capacity μ is deﬁned by
Cμ(sk) =
n

i=1
(sk
(i) −sk
(i−1))μ(A(i)) =
n

i=1
sk
(i)(μ(A(i)) −μ(A(i+1)))
(2)
where sk = (sk
1, ..., sk
n) is the proﬁle of country ak on n criteria; and the sub-index (i) is a
permutation of the indices i = 1, ..., n such that 0 ≤sk
(1) ≤... ≤sk
(n) with sk
(0) = 0 and
where A(i) = {c(i), ..., c(n)}.
Below, we show some indices associated with a capacity which are useful in interpreting
the interactions between criteria and allow alternative formulations of the Choquet integral.
The importance of a criterion depends not only on that criterion at the individual level, but the
contribution it makes towards the rest of the criteria in which it participates is also important.
The relevance of the criterion is not determined only by its capacity but also by the
capacities of all the subsets containing that criterion. For this reason, it is necessary to
123

734
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
introduce the deﬁnitions of the importance of a criterion and the interaction index for each
pair of criteria. Shapley (1953) proposed a coefﬁcient that measures this importance.
Shapley value
Let μ be a capacity, the Shapley index Sμ for a criterion ci with respect to μ is deﬁned as
follows:
Sμ(ci) =

A⊆C−{ci}
(n −#A −1)!#A!
n!
[μ(A ∪{ci}) −μ(A)]
(3)
where A is any set of criteria that does not contain ci; #A is the cardinal of A. The factorial
normalises the values, such that n
i=1 Sμ(ci) = 1. The Shapley value of μ is the vector
v(μ) = (Sμ(c1), ..., Sμ(cn)).
The Shapley index Sμ(ci) can be interpreted as a kind of average value of the marginal
contribution μ(A ∪{ci}) −μ(A) of the criterion ci to a subset A that does not contain it.
Therefore, the Shapley index expresses the relative importance of a single criterion within
the decision problem (Marichal & Roubens, 2000). The information provided by the Shap-
ley importance index should be complemented with information on the interaction among
criteria to accurately describe the decision problem. It is possible to distinguish three kinds
of interaction. A positive interaction between two criteria is present when the importance of
a single criterion is very small, but the importance of the pair is large. The criteria are called
complementary. A negative interaction is present when the coalition of criteria has no effect,
and the importance of the pair is almost the same as the importance of the single criteria. The
criteria are called redundant. Lastly, the importance of the pair is more or less the sum of the
individual importance of each criterion, in this case, referred to as independent criteria.
Shapley interaction index (Murofushi & Soneda, 1993)
The phenomenon of interaction between criteria ci and c j can be detected from the difference:

μ(A ∪{ci, c j}) −μ(A ∪{ci})

−

μ(A ∪{c j}) + μ(A)

for any subset of criteria A ⊆C−{ci, c j}. If the marginal contribution of c j to every coalition
of criteria that contains ci is greater (resp. less) than the marginal contribution of c j to the
same combination when ci is excluded, then the above expression is positive (resp. negative),
and the criteria ci and c j are called complementary. This difference is called the marginal
interaction between ci and c j, subject to the presence of criteria of coalition A. Setting
({ci,c j}μ)(A) = μ(A ∪{ci, c j}) −μ(A ∪{ci}) −μ(A ∪{c j}) + μ(A),
(4)
the Shapley interaction index Iμ of the pair of criteria ci and c j with respect to the capacity
μ is deﬁned by:
Iμ(ci, c j) =

A⊆C−{ci,c j}
(n −#A −2)!#A!
(n −1)!
({ci,c j}μ)(A)
(5)
Analogously to the Shapley index, the Shapley interaction index between two criteria, ci and
c j, can be interpreted as an average value of their marginal contributions.
ItisimportanttonotethattheShapleyinteractionindextakesvaluesbetween-1and1,withthe
value 1 (resp. -1) corresponding to the maximum complementarity (resp. redundancy). The
presentation of the Choquet integral’s basic tools highlights the need for a capacity function.
The capacity identiﬁcation is a problem in practical applications. Several approaches have
beenproposedtodealwiththisproblem(e.g.,Lourenzuttietal.(2017)andreferencestherein).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
735
3.2 Our proposal: capacity identification process
In order to determine the capacity that intervenes in the calculation of Choquet’s utility
integral, we propose to use a supervised method combined with the unsupervised method
proposed by Rowley et al. (2015). Therefore, our identiﬁcation process is carried out in two
steps. Firstly, an initial capacity is obtained using principal components analysis.
Unsupervised methodology
Rowley et al. (2015) use Pearson correlation matrices, which describe the correlation between
criteria in the following way. Let RS be the correlation matrix between the criteria of a
coalition S ⊆C calculated from a sufﬁcient number of proﬁles. Then, the eigenvalues of
RS, λq, are used for deﬁning μ(S) according to the following ratio:
μ(S) = J(S)
J(C)
(6)
where J(S) = 
λq<1 λq +#({λq/λq ≥1}). The amount J(S) provides an estimation of the
number of non-interacting criteria within the coalition S. Rowley et al. (2015) that the ratios
μ(S) determine a capacity for the set C by applying the Cauchy Interlace theorem (Hwang,
2004). The resulting algorithm is very efﬁcient regarding computational complexity (Duarte,
2018). This proposal carries out the whole estimation objectively, and it does not use any
external information about the searched capacity (unsupervised method).
Supervised methodology
The second step is devoted to identifying a capacity that reﬂects, as far as possible, the expert’s
opinion and, moreover, is ‘close’ to the capacity found in the ﬁrst step. The approach is based
on a minimum quadratic distance principle (Kojadinovic, 2007).
Oursupervisedmethodusesthreetypesofinputs:thecorrespondingoverallscoresforeach
country, additional linear constraints expressing the importance of criteria and interaction
between them and a capacity function. The overall score of each country is the Choquet
integral w.r.t. the capacity determined in the ﬁrst step.
The schedule of the unsupervised and supervised Choquet Integral (UNS&S-CI) method-
ology
According to what was stated above, the method is executed according to:
Step I: Unsupervised identiﬁcation
1. Identify an unsupervised capacity on each set of criteria related to the corresponding con-
cept (either indicators within each dimension or the dimensions themselves: Availability,
Affordability, Acceptability, Accessibility) using the Rowley-Geschke-Lenzen (R-G-L)
method: μRGL.
2. Calculate the Shapley value for each selection criterion corresponding to the R-G-L capac-
ity determined in Step I.1.
3. Calculate the Choquet integral for the corresponding concept of each country w.r.t. the
capacity obtained in Step I.1: CμRGL (sk).
Step II: Supervised identiﬁcation
1. Set linear constraints for the Shapley values for signiﬁcant criteria.
2. Identify a supervised capacity, μmdci, using the minimum distance capacity identiﬁcation
(m.d.c.i) method (Kojadinovic, 2007; Grabisch et al., 2008) for minimising the sum of
squared distances between overall scores obtained in Step I.3, CμRGL (sk), and the output
of the Choquet integral for those proﬁles, Cμmdci (sk) verifying the constraints set in II.1.
123

736
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
3. Calculate the Shapley indices for the criteria.
4. Rank the countries for each concept from the overall scores Cμmdci (sk).
3.3 Our proposal: a procedure in two stages
Following the proposal detailed above, at the ﬁrst stage, we score each country with respect
to the Availability, Affordability, Acceptability and Accessibility according to their metrics
and using the UNS&S Choquet integral. Then, in order to evaluate the Energy Security of
the countries, we need a second stage consisting of aggregating the ‘four As’ by the UNS&S
Choquet integral, where the process is repeated to have a relative measure of Energy Security.
Therefore, a global schema of the methodology applied is summarised below:
1. First Stage: Evaluating each A.
Each country is evaluated in each of the 4As using the UNS&S Choquet Integral method-
ology, a hybrid methodology for the capacity identiﬁcation process that combines a
supervised method with an unsupervised one:
(a) Step I: Unsupervised method (Rowley et al., 2015) Capacity is identiﬁed according
to data behaviour (PCA, Pearson correlation ).
(b) StepII:Supervisedmethod(Kojadinovic,2007)quadraticdistanceminimisationcom-
bined with expert information.
2. Second Stage: Aggregating four As.
Rank each country on the ‘four As’ simultaneously, applying UNS&S Choquet Integral
methodology for measuring Energy Security:
(a) Step I: Unsupervised method (Rowley et al., 2015). Capacity is identiﬁed according
to data behaviour (PCA, Pearson correlation).
(b) Step II: Supervised method (Kojadinovic, 2007). Constraints on the importance and
interplay of the elements being aggregated can be imposed by utilising various pro-
ﬁles, which are determined based on each country’s Global Climate Risk Index
(GCRI) as established by GERMANWATCH (2022) and At Risk of Poverty Rate
(ARPR). These proﬁles can be customised for individual experts or groups of experts.
4 Empirical study
The Asia Paciﬁc Energy Research Center (APERC) (2022) deﬁned Energy Security as “the
ability of an economy to guarantee the availability of energy resource supply in a sustainable
and timely manner with the energy price being at a level that will not adversely affect the
economic performance of the economy.” Based on the above deﬁnition, APERC proposed
the four-dimensional/4As concept of Energy Security, in which availability, accessibility,
acceptability, and affordability were included. The Energy Security dimensions of this study
were based on these 4As dimensions, described as follows:
• Availability. This dimension refers to the proven reserves and potential of exploiting
energy sources. Availability is the dimension that appears the most in the literature
(Fuentes et al., 2020). The focus is on energy availability, regardless of domestic tapping
of energy sources, imports or reserves and stresses a country’s energy independence (Wu
et al., 2021). The importance of energy availability lies in its support of economic and
welfare growth (Blum & Legey, 2012); when availability is weakened, it limits economic
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
737
expansion (Azzuni & Breyer, 2018). To sum up, Energy Security encompasses both the
availability of energy resources and the availability of energy consumers, e.g., the public’s
use of energy or industrial usage.
• Accessibility. This dimension refers to the completeness of energy supply chains/infras-
tructure. It measures the ability to access energy resources to provide a stable and
uninterrupted supply of electrical energy (Fuentes et al., 2020). For instance, the indi-
cator of energy supply diversiﬁcation can be utilised as a measure of combining various
energy production capabilities, along with using electricity accessibility as an indicator
of the overall completeness of energy infrastructure.
• Affordability. This dimension pertains to factors regarding energy prices and expenditures
on energy products and services (Zhang et al., 2021). It is crucial for countries to take
into account their capacity to offer reasonable and affordable energy while implementing
national energy policies. Along with decreasing energy prices, boosting a country’s GDP
is also a way to attain energy affordability.
• Acceptability. This dimension relates to adopting of green energy to mitigate environ-
mental impacts. It encompasses energy combinations that have minimal effects on human
health, decrease energy consumption and CO2 emissions, and strive to attain sustainabil-
ity in energy consumption in line with the United Nations’ Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) (Razmjoo et al., 2019).
In this study, the relevant literature drove the selection of indicators for each dimension.
The selection of these indicators was based on the priorities set out in the energy policy of
the EU (2014), as well as their availability and completeness (Tutak & Brodny, 2022). The
panel dataset was built for 5 European countries (Spain, Portugal, France, Italy and Turkey)
from 2017–2020. A total of 21 indicators related to the ‘4As’ (Availability, Accessibility,
Affordability, and Acceptability) of Energy Security were collected, as well as the GCRI
and ARPR. The data sources are ofﬁcial organisms: Eurostat (2014; 2020), World Bank
(2022), The Global Economy (2022), BP Statistical Review of World (2022), IEA Atlas
of Energy + World Energy Balances Highlights (2022), World Energy Council (2021) and
GERMANWATCH (GERMANWATCH, 2022).
We have designed an assessment model using the UNS&S Choquet Integral. In the ﬁrst
stage, we evaluate the four dimensions based on the selected indicators. In order to measure
EnergySecurity,wecombinethe‘fourAs’usingtheUNS&SChoquetIntegralinasubsequent
stage.
It should be noted that prior to calculating the Choquet Integral, the data needs to be
normalised. The Min-Max method is employed for data normalisation in this study. The
equation is as follows for criteria of the type ‘the more better’:
I c∗
r
=
xc∗
r −min{xc
r }
max{xcr } −min{xcr }
(7)
where I c∗
r
is the normalised value for indicator r of country c∗; xc∗
r
is the value prior to
normalisation;max{xc
r }andmin{xc
r }representthemaximumandminimumvalueofindicator
r across all countries c, respectively. The normalisation for criteria of the type ‘the less the
better’ is as follows:
I c∗
r
=
max{xc
r } −xc∗
r
max{xcr } −min{xcr }
(8)
123

738
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
4.1 Stage 1: scoring‘four As’for each country during the years 2017 to 2020
4.1.1 Evaluating Availability
The dimension of Availability refers to the geophysical existence of energy resources and
its potential ability to satisfy regional demands for energy resources. It can be decomposed
into four components: energy production, energy potential, energy independence and energy
diversiﬁcation. All these components deal with the relationships between energy supply and
demand (Zhang et al., 2021). For Availability (see Table 2), the indicators were chosen
based on geological and physical elements. The six indicators are: Total Energy Supply per
capita (TESpc), Energy Self-Sufﬁciency (ESS), Net Energy Imports per capita (NEIpc), Final
Energy Consumption per capita (FECpc), Electricity Capacity per capita (ElCpc) and Energy
Reserves Diversity Shannon index (ERD). The energy self-sufﬁciency rate is deﬁned as the
ability of a country to meet its own energy needs. It is calculated as production relative to
the total primary energy supply.
Although we calculate the Shannon index to measure the diversity of the country’s energy
means across all dimensions, we speciﬁcally computed the Shannon index for energy reserves
in the Availability dimension, considering the percentage of oil, coal and natural gas reserves
with respect to the total reserves:
E RD = −

pilnpi
where pi is the proportion of reserves i.
The preferential information that has been included in detecting the capacity (Step II.2)
is the following:
• ‘Net energy imports pc’ is more important than ‘Diversity energy reserves’.
• ‘Total energy supply pc’ is more important than ‘Diversity energy reserves’.
• ‘Energy self-sufﬁciency’ is more important than ‘Diversity energy reserves’.
• A positive interaction between ‘Net energy self-sufﬁciency" and “Electricity capacity
pc’ is set.
This preferential information has been set according to the prevalence of the indicators in our
literature review. On the other hand, our database shows that Net energy self-sufﬁciency and
Electricity capacity pc indicators go in the opposite direction. Therefore, a positive synergy
between them should be modelled. This is an example of how preferential information can
be introduced. If there is no preferential information, we obtain the scores of the countries
in Availability from the unsupervised method. Table 3 shows data about the six indicators
for each country for the initial and last years of the database (the complete database is
available upon request to the authors). It is worth noting that Portugal has seen a signiﬁcant
improvement in Energy self-sufﬁciency, whereas Spain has shown an improvement in Net
energy imports per capita. The remaining values have remained relatively stable. France
scored zero on the reserve diversity indicator in all years, as all its reserves during the study
period were oil. Italy consistently performs best on the reserve diversity indicator, with values
above 0.6. It has oil and natural gas reserves in all years analysed. Turkey is the best performer
on the NEIpc indicator in all years but achieves poor results on the TESpc, FECpc and ElCpc
indicators. In this latter, it scores half of the best result obtained by Spain.
Table 4 displays the normalised data for each indicator—country and the results of differ-
ent aggregation operators for all years of the database. In 2017, France surpassed Italy with
the most straightforward aggregation operator, the average. Besides, the rankings obtained
from the unsupervised and ﬁnal Choquet methods interchanged the two ﬁrst ranks (France
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
739
Table 2 Indicators for Availability
Indicator
Unit
Deﬁnition
Source
References
TESpc
GWh/Pop
Production + imports -
exports−international
aviation bunkers +-stock
changes.
World Energy Balances
Highlights (IEA)
Abdullah et al. (2020), Brodny and Tutak (2021),
Gong et al. (2021), Karatayev and Hall (2020),
Tutak and Brodny (2022), Wang et al. (2021),
Yuan and Luo (2019).
ESS
%
Total energy production/Total
energy supply.
World Energy Balances
Highlights (IEA)
Bamisile et al. (2021), Brodny and Tutak (2021),
Gong et al. (2021), Le and Nguyen (2019), Li et
al. (2019), Ren and Sovacool (2014), Tutak and
Brodny (2022), Wang et al. (2020), Wang et al.
(2021), Wu et al. (2021), Yuan and Luo (2019).
NEIpc
(Thousand tonnes of oil
equivalent)/ Pop
Energy use less production. It
is equal to indigenous
production plus imports and
stock changes, minus
exports and fuels supplied
to ships and aircraft
engaged in international
transport.
World Energy Balances
Highlights (IEA)
Abdullah et al. (2020), Azzuni and Breyer (2020),
Bekhrad et al. (2020), Brodny and Tutak (2021),
Lin and Raza (2020), Podbregar et al. (2020),
Stavytskyy et al. (2021), Wang et al. (2021).
FECpc
GWh/pc
Total energy consumed by
end users, such as
households, industry and
agriculture.
EUROSTAT
Abdullah et al. (2020), Bamisile et al. (2021),
Filipovi´c et al. (2018), Gong et al. (2021), Gong et
al. (2021), Karatayev and Hall (2020),
Kharazishvili et al. (2021), Le and Nguyen (2019);
Lee et al. (2022), Li et al. (2019), Podbregar et al.
(2020), Razmjoo et al. (2019), Shah et al. (2019),
Tutak and Brodny (2022), Wang et al. (2020),
Wang et al. (2021), Wang and Zhan (2019), Yang
et al. (2022), Yuan and Luo (2019), Ziemba et al.
(2021).
123

740
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Table 2 continued
Indicator
Unit
Deﬁnition
Source
References
ElCpc
kW per capita
Installed capacity to produce
electricity from fossil fuels
(including oil, coal, and
natural gas), wind, sunlight,
hydroelectricity, nuclear
electricity, geothermal
electricity.
The Global Economy
Amin et al. (2022), Coutinho et al. (2020), Li et al.
(2019).
ERD
Number between 0 and 1
Determines the diversity of
the energy reserves. Its
greater value indicates
greater diversiﬁcation of
energy reserves.
BP Statistical Review and
The Global Economy
Azzuni and Breyer (2020), Tutak and Brodny
(2022), Wu et al. (2021)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
741
Table 3 Data for Availability
dimension (Years 2017 and 2020)
TESpc
ESS
NEIpc
FECpc
ElCpc
ERD
2017
France
0.0431
52
0.0019
0.0260
1.853
0
Italy
0.0295
22
0.0021
0.0221
1.695
0.618
Portugal
0.0257
23
0.0019
0.0187
1.701
0
Spain
0.0314
27
0.0022
0.0212
1.970
0.135
Turkey
0.0214
25.12
0.0015
0.0156
1.010
0.0420
2020
France
0.0376
55
0.0015
0.0225
1.911
0
Italy
0.0269
25
0.0018
0.0200
1.747
0.630
Portugal
0.0227
30
0.0014
0.0170
1.821
0
Spain
0.0267
32
0.0017
0.0181
2.164
0.135
Turkey
0.0206
29.87
0.0013
0.0148
1.084
0.0456
TESpc: Total Energy Supply per capita
ESS: Energy Self-Sufﬁciency
NEIpc: Net Energy Imports per capita
FECpc: Final Energy Consumption per capita
ElCpc: Electricity Capacity per capita
ERD: Energy Reserve Diversity Shannon index
and Italy). This is due to the difference between the Shapley values assigned to the diversity
Shannon index by the unsupervised (0.28) and the supervised (0.17) CI methods. The two
CI operators give the same ranking for the rest of the years. In addition, the average inter-
changed the two last ranks in 2017, 2018 and 2019. In 2020, all three operators produced the
same ranking. Portugal and Turkey always occupy the last positions. In 2017, Portugal had a
better average than Turkey, but it was worse in both the unsupervised and supervised meth-
ods. Turkey outperforms Portugal in the two most important indicators for the unsupervised
method, the ERD and NEIpc indicators, respectively. In the supervised method, the most
important indicator is the NEIpc, where Turkey always scores best. In 2020, Portugal was
better than Turkey in all three aggregation operators. The results for the Iberian Peninsula
show the situation of inferiority with respect to neighbouring EU countries.
In Fig.1, the results for all years and countries are displayed. The good results of France
are noted. This country ranks the ﬁrst and Italy the second. A special situation is observed
for Portugal, which was always situated in the last place except in 2020 due to improving
its score in NEIpc indicator. According to its Shapley value, it is one of the most important
indicators in both CI methods. Spain consistently ranks third and improves its NEIpc indicator
in 2020. It is noted in Fig.1 that the worst positions are much more concentrated than the
best positions, i.e. France and Italy are further away than the three countries at the bottom,
Spain, Portugal and Turkey.
In the case of Spain, a policy objective in its energy plans should be to improve the NEIpc
indicator.Inthisrespect,SpainshouldfollowtheEU’senergypolicyrecommendations.These
include promoting, with public and private investment, infrastructures that enhance the use of
renewable energy sources, as well as improving energy transport and distribution systems that
contribute to improving the security and efﬁciency of electricity supply, facilitating access
to diversiﬁed and complementary energy sources, and reducing energy losses in the process.
The critical indicators in which Portugal should improve are TESpc and ESS. Turkey should
improve the three indicators where it scores zero, i.e. TESpc, FECpc and ElCpc indicators.
123

742
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Table 4 Results for Availability dimension
TESpc
ESS
NEIpc
FECpc
ElCpc
ERD
Average
UNS CI
Final CI
Ranking
2017
France
1
1
0.41
1
0.88
0
0.72
0.70
0.82
1
Italy
0.37
0
0.17
0.63
0.71
1
0.48
0.72
0.63
2
Portugal
0.20
0.03
0.35
0.30
0.72
0
0.27
0.35
0.33
5
Spain
0.46
0.17
0
0.54
1
0.22
0.40
0.54
0.50
3
Turkey
0
0.10
1
0
0
0.07
0.20
0.42
0.40
4
2018
France
1
1
0.46
1
0.88
0
0.72
0.73
0.84
1
Italy
0.37
0
0.18
0.70
0.73
1
0.50
0.73
0.65
2
Portugal
0.19
0.13
0.42
0.38
0.80
0
0.32
0.41
0.41
5
Spain
0.47
0.13
0
0.62
1
0.21
0.40
0.54
0.51
3
Turkey
0
0.16
1
0
0
0.07
0.20
0.43
0.42
4
2019
France
1
1
0.41
1
0.82
0
0.71
0.75
0.85
1
Italy
0.39
0
0.11
0.73
0.67
1
0.48
0.72
0.65
2
Portugal
0.18
0.13
0.42
0.43
0.75
0
0.32
0.39
0.40
5
Spain
0.44
0.16
0
0.63
1
0.21
0.41
0.55
0.52
3
Turkey
0
0.26
1
0
0
0.06
0.22
0.46
0.47
4
2020
France
1
1
0.56
1
0.77
0
0.72
0.77
0.84
1
Italy
0.37
0
0
0.68
0.61
1
0.44
0.73
0.67
2
Portugal
0.13
0.17
0.74
0.28
0.68
0
0.33
0.44
0.45
4
Spain
0.36
0.23
0.17
0.43
1
0.21
0.40
0.55
0.52
3
Turkey
0
0.16
1
0
0
0.07
0.21
0.43
0.43
5
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
2017
2018
2019
2020
years
CI_Score
Country
France
Italy
Portugal
Spain
Turkey
Fig. 1 Results for Availability dimension by the UNS&S Choquet integral
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
743
4.1.2 Evaluating Accessibility
The indicators for this dimension were constructed based on geopolitical elements. The three
indicators are (see Table 5): Time required to get electricity (TREl), Energy imports depen-
dency (EID) and Electricity generation diversity (ElGD) measured by the corresponding
Shannon index. The TREl captures the median duration that the electricity utility and experts
indicate is necessary in practice, rather than required by law, to complete a procedure. The
EID is calculated as the ratio of the imports minus exports between the gross available energy,
being all these magnitudes measured in thousand tonnes of oil equivalent. Similarly to Avail-
ability, for Accessibility, we have computed the Shannon index of the electricity generation,
considering the electricity generation of Share Fossil fuels, Share Wind, Share Solar, Share
Hydroelectricity, Share Nuclear and Share Geothermal.
Similarly to the Availability dimension, we have considered the following preference
relationships to be applied in the supervised method:
• ‘Diversity index’ is more important than ‘Time required to get electricity’.
• ‘Energy imports’ is more important than ‘Time required to get electricity”.
• Positive interaction between ‘Energy imports dependency’ and ‘Diversity index’ is estab-
lished.
Table 6 shows the scores and rankings for all countries for Accessibility. In 2017, the
results were remarkably consistent, with all three aggregation operators producing the same
ranking. However, in 2018, the three rankings are different. The loss of positions of Portugal
with respect to the average operator is observed because the ’Time needed to obtain electric-
ity’ indicator reaches low Shapley values, both in the UNS and the Final CI, compared to
the ’Imports of energy dependency’ indicator. In 2019, the differences between the two CI
operators appear; this is because the ﬁrst two indicators are the most important according to
Table 5 Indicators for Accessibility
Indicator
Unit
Deﬁnition
Source
References
TREl
Days
Number of days to
obtain a permanent
electricity
connection.
World Development
Indicators (WDI):
World Bank
Wang and Zhou
(2017), Wu et al.
(2021).
EID
(Imports–Exports)/
(Gross available
energy)
The share of total
inland energy needs
met by imports from
other countries.
EUROSTAT
Abdullah et al.
(2020), Filipovi´c et
al. (2018), Fuentes
et al. (2020),
Karatayev and Hall
(2020), Tutak and
Brodny (2022),
Wang and Zhan
(2019).
ElGD
Number between 0
and 1
Determines the
diversity of the
energy mix. Its
greater value
indicates greater
diversiﬁcation of
electricity
generation.
The Global Economy
Azzuni and Breyer
(2020), Tutak and
Brodny (2022), Wu
et al. (2021).
123

744
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Table 6 Results for Accessibility dimension
TREla
EIDb
ElGDc
Average
UNS
Final
Ran-
CI
CI
king
2017
France
0.6
1
0.08
0.56
0.78
0.69
1
Italy
0.5
0.034
0.32
0.28
0.27
0.26
5
Portugal
0.75
0
0.21
0.32
0.38
0.37
4
Spain
0
0.14
1
0.38
0.55
0.57
2
Turkey
1
0.027
0
0.34
0.51
0.49
3
2018
France
1
1
0
0.67
0.90
0.75
1
Italy
0.48
0
0.33
0.27
0.29
0.29
5
Portugal
0.71
0.02
0.39
0.38
0.44
0.44
4
Spain
0
0.09
1
0.36
0.63
0.59
3
Turkey
0.95
0.09
0.08
0.37
0.60
0.61
2
2019
France
0.69
1
0
0.56
0.77
0.63
2
Italy
0.33
0
0.30
0.21
0.23
0.20
5
Portugal
0.49
0.12
0.40
0.34
0.37
0.35
4
Spain
0
0.08
1
0.36
0.57
0.58
3
Turkey
1
0.25
0.31
0.52
0.68
0.70
1
2020
France
0.69
1
0
0.56
0.75
0.65
1
Italy
0.33
0
0.18
0.17
0.18
0.17
5
Portugal
0.49
0.28
0.35
0.37
0.39
0.39
4
Spain
0
0.19
1
0.40
0.55
0.59
2
Turkey
1
0.10
0.18
0.42
0.55
0.55
3
a TREl: Time required to get electricity (days)
b EID: Energy imports dependency
c ElGD: Electricity Generation Diversity
the UNS Choquet, and the last two are the most important according to the Final Choquet. In
2020, the average operator caused Spain and Turkey to switch places. Spain obtains the best
results in the Diversity of Electricity Generation indicator in all the years of the database.
This good performance is because Spain generates electricity from all possible sources except
geothermal and with percentages in all of them below 47%. On the contrary, France has poor
results in this indicator, with a large share of nuclear power generation falling from 73%
in 2017 to 68% in 2020. However, France obtains the best results in the Energy imports
dependency indicator.
Spain achieved the worst results in the time needed to get electricity (95 days). On the
contrary, Turkey obtains the best results in TREl. In the case of Spain, speciﬁc regulations
establish the criteria and procedures for the concession of access and connection licences, as
well as the maximum time limits for their processing. In addition, Spain has a diverse geog-
raphy and extensive territory, which implies greater complexity in developing and managing
electricity grids. Furthermore, there are differences between the Autonomous Communities
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
745
0.2
0.4
0.6
2017
2018
2019
2020
years
CI_score
Country
France
Italy
Portugal
Spain
Turkey
Fig. 2 Results for Accessibility dimension by the UNS&S Choquet integral
regarding competence over access to networks, which may affect the time taken to process
applications. 4
Lastly, Italy always occupies the last position in this A, with the worst results in the Energy
imports dependency indicator. It is remarkable the superiority of France in the EID indicator
that moves in the interval [44%, 49%] while the rest of the countries take values in the interval
[65%, 78%]. In 2020, Spain and Portugal reduced import dependency in line with the targets
proposed in their National Energy and Climate Plans, improving w.r.t. this indicator.
Figure2 illustrates that Portugal and Italy always occupy the fourth and ﬁfth positions,
respectively. Except for 2019, the arithmetic mean and unsupervised Choquet operators place
France in the top position, while Spain and Turkey compete for second and third.
4.1.3 Evaluating Affordability
The indicators were constructed, including economic elements (see Table 7). The seven
indicators are Diesel price (D), Gasoline price (G), Electricity prices for household consumers
(E), Electricity prices for nonhousehold consumers (En), Natural gas prices for household
consumers(NG),Naturalgaspricesfornonhouseholdconsumers(NGn)andtheratiobetween
GDPpercapitaandthepriceofabarrelofoil(B).’Electricitypricesforhouseholdconsumers’
is the average national price in Euro per kWh, including taxes and levies applicable for the
ﬁrst semester of each year for medium-size household consumers (Consumption Band DC
with annual consumption between 2500 and 5000 kWh). Until 2007, the prices refer to the
4 Formoreinformationabouttheaccessandconnectiontothenetworks,seeRealDecreto1183/2020intheweb
of Ministry for the Ecological Transition and the Demographic Challenge, https://energia.gob.es/electricidad/
acceso-y-conexion/Paginas/acceso-conexion.aspx.. However, compared to France, Italy, Portugal, and Spain,
Turkey ranks below average, as these countries have longer times to get electricity. Some possible reasons
for this good performance could be the liberalisation of the wholesale and retail market, the establishment
of an independent regulatory authority or the splitting of power generation, transmission and distribution
activities. In addition, Turkey has a modern electricity infrastructure and a simpliﬁed procedure for requesting
and obtaining an electricity connection.
123

746
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
status on 1st January of each year for medium-size consumers (Standard Consumer DC with
annual consumption of 3500 kWh).
As an example of introducing preferential information, we have proposed an Affordability
measure that places great importance on affordable access to electricity for households.
Speciﬁcally, we have included the following relationships in the process of detecting the
capacity (Step II.2):
• ‘Electricity prices for household consumers’ is more important than ‘Diesel price’,
‘Gasoline price’, ‘Electricity prices for nonhousehold consumers’, ‘Natural gas prices
for household consumers’, ‘Natural gas prices for nonhousehold consumers’ and
‘GDPpc/Price oil barrel’ criteria.
• Positive interaction between ‘Gasoline price’ and ‘Natural gas prices for household con-
sumers’ is set.
Table 8 shows the rankings and scores for all countries regarding Affordability from 2017
to 2020. It is worth noting that Spain and Portugal consistently hold the lowest rankings.
Table 8 also displays the normalised data for each indicator and country, as well as the results
of various aggregation operators for all the years of the database. The rankings obtained
by the unsupervised and ﬁnal Choquet methods do not coincide in 2018 and 2020. This
is a situation in which the preferential information does not adjust to that obtained by the
unsupervised method, which places ‘Natural gas prices for household consumers’ as the most
important criterion rather than ‘Electricity prices for household consumers’. Speciﬁcally, in
the unsupervised method, ‘Natural gas prices for household consumers’ reaches an average
in the four years equal to 0.315, and the least important criterion is ‘Natural gas prices
for nonhousehold consumers’ with an average of 0.084. In addition, ‘Electricity prices for
household consumers’ achieves an average of 0.129. The ﬁnalChoquetmethod gives averages
equal to 0.218 and 0.208 for ‘Electricity prices for household consumers’ and ‘Natural gas
prices for household consumers’, respectively, and they are the most important criteria. The
least important indicator is ‘Natural gas prices for nonhousehold consumers’, with an average
of 0.093. The rest of the criteria are sorted very similarly by both methods. Differences are
found when the average operator ranks Italy third except in 2017, when it is in second place
and Turkey in fourth position except in 2020, when it is ﬁfth. If we consider this operator,
Spain occupies the second position, except in 2017, when it ranked third.
It deserves comment on the special situation of Spain as it always presents much worse
results in the prices of household consumers than those of non-household consumers. Spain
obtained the worst results in the Electricity prices for household consumers indicator during
2017 and 2018 and has improved signiﬁcantly in the last two years. Portugal and Spain
obtained low scores in the ‘Natural gas prices for household consumers’ indicator throughout
the entire period analysed. As in the case of Availability, the Iberian Peninsula is in a worse
situation in Affordability than neighbouring EU countries. France scores low marks for oil
and diesel prices. This may be due to the high taxation of these fuels, which represents more
than 50% of the ﬁnal price, with the aim of discouraging their consumption and encouraging
the ecological transition. 5
However, it scores best on electricity and natural gas prices for
consumers and industry. One of the reasons for this low electricity price is the production of
nuclear power in the French energy mix, which represents almost 70% in 2020. Moreover,
according to the IEA, the fact that France has one of the lowest natural gas prices in the
EU is due, among other reasons, to the fact that high nuclear energy production allows it
to generate electricity at low cost and reduce the demand for natural gas for this purpose.
5 https://ec.europa.eu/energy/maps/maps_weekly_oil_bulletin/latest_taxation_oil_prices.pdf.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
747
Table 7 Indicators for Affordability
Indicator
Unit
Deﬁnition
Source
References
D
EUR/litre
The diesel prices, published by the
European Commission’s Oil Bulletin
for EU countries.
The ofﬁcial portal for European data
(2022)
Azzuni and Breyer (2020), Karatayev
and Hall (2020),Ragulina et al. (2019),
Wu et al. (2021).
G
EUR/litre
The gasoline prices, published by the
European Commission’s Oil Bulletin
for EU countries.
European Commission - Energy Policy
Bekhrad et al. (2020), Karatayev and
Hall (2020), Malik et al. (2020),
Ragulina et al. (2019), Wu et al. (2021).
E
EUR/kWh (Average of two
semester price)
Average national price in Euro per kWh
including taxes and levies applicable
for the ﬁrst semester of each year for
medium size household consumers.
EUROSTAT
Amin et al. (2022), Brodny and Tutak
(2021), Filipovi´c et al. (2018), Fuentes
et al. (2020), Karatayev and Hall
(2020), Malik et al. (2020), Podbregar
et al. (2020), Ragulina et al. (2019),
Tutak and Brodny (2022), Wang and
Zhan (2019), Zhang et al. (2021),
Ziemba et al. (2021)
En
EUR/kWh (Average of two
semestral price)
Non-household consumers are deﬁned as
medium-sized consumers with an
annual consumption between
500MWH and 2000MWH.
EUROSTAT
Bamisile et al. (2021), Bekhrad et al.
(2020), Gong et al. (2021), Karatayev
and Hall (2020).
123

748
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Table 7 continued
Indicator
Unit
Deﬁnition
Source
References
NG
EUR/kWh (Average of two
semester natural gas price)
For household consumers in the EU
deﬁned as medium-sized consumers
with an annual consumption between
20 Gigajoules (GJ) and 200 GJ).
EUROSTAT
Malik et al. (2020), Tutak and Brodny
(2022).
NGn
EUR/kWh (Average of two
semester natural gas price)
For non-household consumers in the EU
(deﬁned for the purpose of this article
as medium-sized consumers with an
annual consumption between 10 000
GJ and 100 000 GJ).
EUROSTAT
–
B
Number of oil barrels pc
Ratio between GDP per capita at constant
prices of 2015 and Price oil barrel
WDI (World Bank)
Azzuni and Breyer (2020), Bekhrad et al.
(2020), Brodny and Tutak (2021),
Filipovi´c et al. (2018), Gong et al.
(2021), Kharazishvili et al. (2021), Le
and Nguyen (2019), Shah et al. (2019),
Stavytskyy et al. (2021), Tutak and
Brodny (2022), Wang and Zhan
(2019), Wu et al. (2021), Yang et al.
(2022),Ziemba et al. (2021).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
749
Table 8 Results for Affordability dimension
Da
Gb
Ec
End
NGe
NGnf
Bg
Ah
Ui
Fj
Rk
2017
France
0.49
0.48
1
1
0.91
0.91
1
0.83
0.85
0.85
1
Italy
0
0
0.65
0.68
0.70
1
0.75
0.54
0.62
0.60
3
Portugal
0.49
0.23
0.66
0.38
0
0.33
0.33
0.34
0.35
0.42
5
Spain
0.86
1
0
0.23
0.09
0.60
0.60
0.48
0.50
0.47
4
Turkey
1
0.93
0.29
0
1
0
0
0.46
0.64
0.68
2
2018
France
0
0.29
1
1
0.82
1
1
0.73
0.87
0.87
1
Italy
0
0
0.69
0.66
0.54
0.99
0.75
0.52
0.66
0.67
3
Portugal
0.37
0.26
0.83
0.58
0
0.60
0.34
0.43
0.46
0.56
4
Spain
0.87
1
0
0.38
0.1
0.73
0.60
0.53
0.53
0.51
5
Turkey
1
0.92
0.38
0
1
0
0
0.47
0.72
0.76
2
2019
France
0.02
0.11
1
1
0.69
1
1
0.69
0.76
0.82
1
Italy
0
0
0.46
0.77
0.60
0.98
0.75
0.51
0.67
0.66
3
Portugal
0.18
0.18
0.49
0.69
0.10
0.62
0.36
0.37
0.39
0.44
5
Spain
0.46
0.50
0.52
0.75
0
0.85
0.60
0.53
0.48
0.55
4
Turkey
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0.43
0.75
0.77
2
2020
France
0.12
0.10
1
1
1
0.98
1
0.74
0.85
0.85
1
Italy
0
0
0.78
0.89
0.86
1
0.73
0.61
0.77
0.75
3
Portugal
0.12
0.017
0.79
0.84
0
0.84
0.33
0.42
0.40
0.53
5
Spain
0.70
0.39
0.84
0.87
0.09
0.94
0.54
0.63
0.58
0.71
4
Turkey
1
1
0
0
0.85
0
0
0.41
0.76
0.76
2
a D: Diesel price
b G: Gasoline price
c E: Electricity prices for household consumers
d En: Electricity prices for nonhousehold consumers
e NG: Natural gas prices for household consumers
f NGn: Natural gas prices for nonhousehold consumers
g B: GDP pc/Price oil barrel
h A: Average
i U: UNS Choquet
j F: Final Choquet
k R: Ranking
Another reason is that it is well diversiﬁed in the sources of natural gas it imports, which
allows it to have greater security of supply and less dependence on a single supplier. Finally,
France has a good natural gas transmission and distribution infrastructure, which allows it to
optimise the use of the network and reduce losses and costs.
Figure3 displays the results for this dimension across all years and countries, with France
consistently being the top-performing country while Portugal and Spain are at the bottom.
The second position goes to Turkey in all years. Turkey achieves always good scores in three
indicators (‘Diesel price’, ‘Gasoline price’ and ‘Natural gas prices for household consumers’)
123

750
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
2
0
2
9
1
0
2
8
1
0
2
7
1
0
2
years
CI_score
Country
France
Italy
Portugal
Spain
Turkey
Fig. 3 Results for Affordability dimension by the UNS&S Choquet integral
4.1.4 Evaluating Acceptability
The indicators related to the Acceptability dimension were chosen based on social and
environmental elements. The ﬁve indicators are Share of renewables in total ﬁnal energy
consumption (ShRWC), CO2 emissions per capita (CO2pc), Greenhouse gas emissions per
capita (GGpc)6, PM2.5 air pollution and Share of renewable energy generation in total elec-
tricity generation (ShRWG) (see Table 9).
The preferential information that has been included in the process of detecting the capacity
(Step II.2) is the following:
• ‘CO2 emissions pc’ is more important than ‘Share of renewables in total ﬁnal energy
consumption’.
• ‘Greenhouse gas emissions pc’ is more important than ‘Share of renewables in total ﬁnal
energy consumption’.
• ‘PM2.5 air pollution’ is more important than ‘Share of renewables in total ﬁnal energy
consumption’.
• ‘CO2 emissions’, ‘Greenhouse gas emissions pc’ and ‘PM2.5 air pollution’ criteria are
more important than ‘Renewable energy generation/total electricity generation’.
• Positive interaction between ‘Share of renewables in total ﬁnal energy consumption (%)’
and ‘CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)’ is established.
6 For this indicator each gas’ individual global warming potential, they are being integrated into a single
indicator expressed in units of CO2 equivalents. The indicator does not include emissions and removals
related to land use, land-use change and forestry; it does not include emissions reported as a memorandum
item according to United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Guidelines but does
include emissions from international aviation as well as indirect CO2 emissions.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
751
Table 9 Indicators for Acceptability
Indicator
Unit
Deﬁnition
Source
References
ShRWC
%
Share of renewable energy in
total ﬁnal energy
consumption.
IEA and EUROSTAT
Filipovi´c et al. (2018), Fuentes et
al. (2020), Gong et al. (2021),
Le and Nguyen (2019), Malik
et al. (2020), Razmjoo et al.
(2019), Shah et al. (2019), Song
et al. (2019), Stavytskyy et al.
(2021), Tutak and Brodny
(2022), Wang and Zhan (2019),
Wang et al. (2020), Ziemba et
al. (2021).
CO2pc
Metric tons pc
Carbon dioxide emissions are
those stemming from the
burning of fossil fuels and
the manufacture of cement.
They include carbon
dioxide produced during
consumption of solid,
liquid, and gas fuels and gas
ﬂaring.
WDI (World
Development Indicators
from World Bank) and
https://github.com/
owid/co2-data
Abdullah et al. (2020), Amin et
al. (2022), Bamisile et al.
(2021), Bekhrad et al. (2020),
Brodny and Tutak (2021),
Filipovi´c et al. (2018), Gong et
al. (2021), Karatayev and Hall
(2020), Kharazishvili et al.
(2021), Le and Nguyen (2019),
Lin and Raza (2020), Malik et
al. (2020), Podbregar et al.
(2020), Ragulina et al. (2019),
Razmjoo et al. (2019); Wang et
al. (2020), Wang and Zhan
(2019), Wang et al. (2021),
Ziemba et al. (2021).
123

752
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Table 9 continued
Indicator
Unit
Deﬁnition
Source
References
GGpc
CO2 equivalents pc
Total national emissions of
the so called ’Kyoto basket’
of greenhouse gases,
including carbon dioxide,
methane, nitrous oxide, and
the so-called F-gases
(hydroﬂuorocarbons,
perﬂuorocarbons, nitrogen
triﬂouride and sulphur
hexaﬂuoride).
The reporting under the
United Nations
Framework Convention
on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).
EUROSTAT
Brodny and Tutak (2021),
Coutinho et al. (2020), Fuentes
et al. (2020), Tutak and Brodny
(2022), Wang and Zhan (2019).
PM2.5 air pollution
mcg per m3; Exposure is
calculated by weighting
mean annual concentrations
of PM2.5 by population in
both urban and rural areas.
Population-weighted
exposure to ambient PM2.5
pollution is deﬁned as the
average level of exposure of
a nation’s population to
concentrations of
suspended particles
measuring less than 2.5
microns in aerodynamic
diameter.
EUROSTAT
Li et al. (2019), Wu et al. (2021).
ShRWG
%
Renewable energy generation
as a percentage of total
electricity generation.
EUROSTAT
Wang et al. (2021), Wu et al.
(2021).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
753
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2017
2018
2019
2020
years
CI_score
Country
France
Italy
Portugal
Spain
Turkey
Fig. 4 Results for Acceptability dimension by the UNS&S Choquet integral
Table 10 presents the rankings and scores for all countries regarding Acceptability from
2017 to 2020. It is worth noting that Portugal consistently holds the best rankings as one of
the leading countries in Europe in developing renewable energies, especially hydroelectric
and wind power. In particular, it has set up the gigabattery on the Tâmega river, a branch
of the Douro, in Porto, one of the largest hydroelectric projects in Europe, consisting of
the construction of three hydroelectric plants, one of which is a pumped storage plant, and
two wind parks. This clean energy project improves SE indicators since it optimises the use
of land and the electricity grid and allows for a more stable energy supply and a reduction
in dependence on imports. Table 10 also displays the normalised data for each indicator
and country, and the results of the three aggregation operators for all years of the database.
The rankings obtained by the unsupervised and ﬁnal Choquet methods were the same. The
improvement of Spain is noteworthy, as it moved up from the last position in 2017 and
2018 to the second position in 2020 thanks to its improvement in the CO2 emissions and
Greenhouse gas emissions pc indicators (see also Fig.4). In this dimension, France never
occupies the ﬁrst position and reaches the worst performance in the share renewable energy
generation ratio. Besides, it achieves low scores in the share of renewable in total ﬁnal energy
consumption and the concentration of PM2.5 particulate emissions. However, this country
achieves good results in CO2 emissions due to its large share of nuclear power generation.
Italy ranked in the last position in the last two years due to its bad performance in CO2
emissions and Greenhouse gas emissions. Turkey got worse in 2020. According to the World
Health Organisation’s 2020 report, it was the country with the highest concentration of PM2.5
particles in Europe. In addition, it increased its greenhouse gas and CO2 emissions.
4.1.5 Overall results
When summarising the scores for the ‘four As’ related to each country each year, we obtain
Fig.5. Some relevant conclusions:
123

754
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Table 10 Results for Acceptability dimension
Sha
CO2
GGb
PM
Shc
Average
UNS
Final
Ran-
RWC
pc
pc
2.5
RWG
CI
CI
king
2017
France
0.21
1
0.44
0.28
0
0.39
0.50
0.49
3
Italy
0.39
0.23
0.33
0.46
0.76
0.43
0.48
0.48
4
Portugal
1
0.51
0.33
1
1
0.77
0.75
0.73
1
Spain
0.33
0
0
0.62
0.73
0.34
0.37
0.37
5
Turkey
0
0.57
1
0
0.66
0.45
0.59
0.62
2
2018
France
0.22
1
0.67
0
0
0.38
0.56
0.56
3
Italy
0.34
0.16
0.22
0.29
0.59
0.32
0.38
0.38
4
Portugal
1
0.75
0.67
1
1
0.88
0.87
0.87
1
Spain
0.36
0
0
0.33
0.63
0.26
0.30
0.29
5
Turkey
0
0.56
1
0.01
0.45
0.40
0.62
0.62
2
2019
France
0.10
0.80
0.56
0.17
0
0.32
0.39
0.41
4
Italy
0.22
0
0
0.42
0.55
0.24
0.30
0.29
5
Portugal
1
1
0.67
1
1
0.93
0.99
0.98
1
Spain
0.22
0.24
0.11
0.53
0.56
0.33
0.42
0.41
3
Turkey
0
0.86
1
0
0.81
0.53
0.69
0.73
2
2020
France
0.25
0.74
0.75
0.36
0
0.42
0.42
0.43
3
Italy
0.31
0
0
0.50
0.47
0.26
0.30
0.30
5
Portugal
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Spain
0.36
0.52
0.75
0.56
0.63
0.56
0.65
0.65
2
Turkey
0
0.35
0.13
0
0.60
0.21
0.36
0.36
4
a ShRWC: Share of renewables in total ﬁnal energy consumption
b GG pc: Greenhouse gas emissions per capita
c ShRWG: Share renewable energy generation
• France is the best in Availability in all years. The only bad result France obtains in this A
is in the reserve diversity indicator due to its total concentration in oil. Whereas Turkey
and Portugal score poorly in this dimension. Turkey has zeroed on ’Total Energy Supply
per capita’, ’Electricity Capacity per capita’ and ’Final Energy Consumption’ indicators.
Portugal has bad scores in Energy self-sufﬁciency and Energy reserves diversity indica-
tors. The rankings remain very stable throughout the four years. There is only one change
in the fourth and ﬁfth positions. Spain occupies the third position in this A in all years,
consistently below France and Italy, its strong point being Electrical Capacity per capita.
• Italy is the worst in Accessibility, which means its ability to access energy sources is
improvable. France keeps its ﬁrst position in all years except in the year 2019, which is
surpassed by Turkey.
• The Iberian Peninsula runs worse in Affordability, a dimension deﬁned mainly by ‘Energy
price for consumers’.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
755
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
2017
2018
2019
2020
years
CI_Av
0.2
0.4
0.6
2017
2018
2019
2020
years
CI_Accessi
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
2017
2018
2019
2020
years
CI_Affor
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2017
2018
2019
2020
years
CI_Accep
Country
France
Italy
Portugal
Spain
Turkey
Fig. 5 The 4As for Energy Security
Table 11 At risk of poverty rate
(%)
2017
2018
2019
2020
Spain
21.6
21.5
20.7
21
France
13.2
13.4
13.6
13.8
Italy
20.3
20.3
20.1
20.0
Portugal
18.3
17.3
17.2
16.2
Turkey
22.2
22.2
22.4
23.0
• In Acceptability, Portugal is the best in using of energy that cares for the environment,
and Spain improved its position in 2020 compared to previous years, reaching second
place.
• France consistently scores higher in all A’s except Acceptability.
4.2 Stage 2: Aggregating the‘four As’by the UNS&S Choquet Integral
As mentioned before, to evaluate the countries’ Energy Security, we aggregate the ‘four
As’ by the UNS&S Choquet integral. The process is the same, consisting of combining the
unsupervised method proposed by Rowley et al. (2015) with a supervised method where we
have taken into account the expert consensus of climate risk and the risk of poverty, measured
by the Global Climate Risk Index (GCRI) (GERMANWATCH, 2022) and the At Risk of
Poverty Rate (ARPR) (2022), respectively. ARPR (cut-off point: 60% of median equivalised
income after social transfers) is measured in percentage. The GCRI quantiﬁes the impacts of
extreme weather events -in terms of the fatalities and the economic losses that occurred. Data
of ARPR and GCRI for analysed countries are recovered in Tables 11 and 12, respectively.
Four distinct proﬁles have been deﬁned based on speciﬁc thresholds set for the values
of ARPR and GCRI. These proﬁles help to establish constraints on the signiﬁcance and
interaction between the four dimensions.
123

756
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Table 12 Global climate risk
index (%)
2017
2018
2019
2020
France
61.17
46.17
52.5
NA
Italy
45.33
33.67
43.5
NA
Portugal
17.33
70.67
48.33
NA
Spain
54.17
47.67
42.83
NA
Turkey
69.17
79.17
66
NA
Table 13 Proﬁles of Countries
France
Italy
Portugal
Spain
Turkey
Year 2017
At Risk of Poverty Rate
0
1
0
1
1
Climate Risk Index
0
0
1
0
0
Proﬁle
4
2
1
2
2
Year 2018
At Risk of Poverty Rate
0
1
0
1
1
Climate Risk Index
0
1
0
0
0
Proﬁle
4
3
4
2
2
Year 2019
At Risk of Poverty Rate
0
1
0
1
1
Climate Risk Index
0
1
0
1
0
Proﬁle
4
3
4
3
2
Year 2020
At Risk of Poverty Rate
0
0
0
1
1
Climate Risk Index
0
1
0
1
0
Proﬁle
4
1
4
3
2
• Proﬁle 1: GCRI less than 45. Acceptability is the most important dimension in this proﬁle,
and a positive interaction between Affordability and Acceptability is set.
• Proﬁle 2: ARPR greater than 20. In this situation, Affordability is the most important
dimension, and it is set positive interaction between Affordability and Accessibility.
• Proﬁle 3: Proﬁle 1 + Proﬁle 2. Acceptability and Affordability are the most important
As, and two positive interactions are set between Affordability and Acceptability and
Affordability and Accessibility.
• Proﬁle 4: All those not included in 1, 2 and 3. Relationships of importance and interactions
are not set.
Based on the data presented in Table 13, France consistently performs well in both ARPR
and GCRI indicators throughout all years. Portugal also shows promising results. On the
other hand, Spain has an ARPR slightly above 20% in all years and experienced a decline in
its GCRI score in 2019, which is comparable to Turkey’s decline.
Table 14 presents the scores for all countries regarding Energy Security in all years of the
database. In 2017, France occupied the ﬁrst position and Spain the last. Turkey achieves a
good position due to the good results in Affordability (only below Francia). Its worst result
is related to Availability (see Table 4). The top two positions (France and Turkey) hold for
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
757
Table 14 Results for Energy Security
Acceptability Accessibility Affordability Availability Average UNS Choquet UNS&S Choquet
2017
France
0.335
1
1
1
0.834
0.814
0.814
Italy
0.289
0
0.422
0.604
0.329
0.359
0.380
Portugal 1
0.237
0
0
0.309
0.453
0.527
Spain
0
0.728
0.123
0.330
0.295
0.372
0.314
Turkey
0.683
0.531
0.615
0.132
0.490
0.573
0.584
2018
France
0.465
1
1
1
0.866
0.844
0.845
Italy
0.151
0
0.451
0.559
0.290
0.297
0.299
Portugal 1
0.330
0.131
0
0.365
0.489
0.489
Spain
0
0.656
0
0.227
0.221
0.286
0.200
Turkey
0.564
0.694
0.696
0.040
0.499
0.570
0.622
2019
France
0.166
0.866
1
1
0.758
0.828
0.828
Italy
0
0
0.584
0.565
0.287
0.305
0.259
Portugal 1
0.294
0
0
0.324
0.517
0.517
Spain
0.174
0.761
0.293
0.267
0.374
0.458
0.349
Turkey
0.628
1
0.862
0.159
0.662
0.788
0.816
2020
France
0.188
1
1
1
0.797
0.880
0.880
Italy
0
0
0.680
0.567
0.312
0.334
0.261
Portugal 1
0.456
0
0.054
0.378
0.569
0.569
Spain
0.502
0.868
0.564
0.204
0.534
0.600
0.594
Turkey
0.090
0.789
0.707
0
0.396
0.499
0.523
all aggregators. However, the intermediate positions change depending on the operator used.
For example, UNS Choquet places Spain in the fourth position; however, UNS&S places
Spain in the last.
In 2018, France was quite far from the rest of the countries. The rankings obtained by the
three aggregation operators are the same. Turkey occupies the second place, and its weakness
is in Availability, on which it achieves a very low score. Spain ranks last position due to its
zero in Acceptability and Affordability.
In Table 14, the scores for Energy Security in the year 2019 show the two top positions
(France and Turkey) and the bottom (Italy) hold for all aggregators. The difference between
the scores of France and Turkey decreased this year due to Turkey’s improvement in Afford-
ability and Accessibility. Note that Affordability is the most important criterion in proﬁle 2.
The rankings obtained by both the UNS and UNS&S Choquet methods were the same, but
the average operator swaps the third and fourth places (Portugal and Spain).
In 2020, the rankings obtained by both the unsupervised and UNS&S Choquet methods
were the same, but the average operator changed the ranking of the intermediate ranks. Turkey
lost its third position in in favour of Portugal due to bad results in Acceptability. Again, as
in 2018, France moved away from the rest of the countries.
123

758
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
2
0
2
9
1
0
2
8
1
0
2
7
1
0
2
years
CI_score
Country
France
Italy
Portugal
Spain
Turkey
Fig. 6 Results for Energy Security using the UNS&S Choquet Integral
A graphic summary of the results obtained can be seen in Fig.6. The predominance of
France is clear, and the inferiority of Spain and Italy is also notable. However, Spain has
improved substantially in the last year of the database.
5 Conclusions
The modelling of the Energy Security assessment of the countries is an appealing research
question that we have addressed by applying a new hybrid methodology, UNS&S-CI, which
introduces preferential/expert information into a multi-criteria technique. In addition, this
hybrid methodology allows modelling the interaction between criteria which is a very inter-
esting research issue where not only the importance of each criterion but also the importance
of each subset of criteria is taken into account. In this context, the Choquet Integral is an
alternative tool to the weighted arithmetic mean that incorporates the preferential priority
of each subset of criteria. The methodology based on Choquet Integral runs in two phases.
Firstly, a capacity is identiﬁed according to data behaviour; secondly, a distance minimisation
process is applied in order to ﬁnd a capacity close to the one found early, verifying several
constraints established by the expert on the importance of the indicators and interactions
among them.
The proposed methodology is applied to the ﬁve countries for the period 2017–2020.
Results show the special situation of the Iberian Peninsula, rated in the worst positions in
Affordability. It is worth highlighting the improvement of Spain in Acceptability (from the
last position in 2017 to the second one in 2020). France consistently performs well in both
climate resilience and risk poverty rate. When Energy Security is evaluated using the Choquet
aggregation of the 4As over several years, France consistently ranks ﬁrst. However, Italy and
Spain have consistently ranked low in Energy Security during this time period.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
759
The governments of Spain and Portugal have proposed National Energy and Climate Plans
for the period 2023-2030, PNIEC and PNEC, respectively, in compliance with Regulation
(EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the
governanceoftheEnergyUnionandClimateAction.Bothplansaimtofulﬁlthecommitments
made under the EU framework and the Paris Agreement, as well as to contribute to the
transition to a low-carbon and climate-resilient economy.
It was noted that only France had opted for electricity generation from nuclear power
plants, which is why its current energy dependency rate (44.4) is below the European aver-
age and much lower than that of Spain and Portugal. This may explain France’s objections
to building the MidCat gas pipeline (gas interconnection between Spain and France through
the Pyrenees), considering it “useless to confront the current crisis and harmful to the envi-
ronment.” However, Spain and Germany see the construction as useful and beneﬁcial. The
same context explains that “France and around twenty OECD countries are promoting an
alliance to relaunch nuclear power.”
The main conclusion of the empirical study is that the energy independence of these
countries can only be achieved with the use of renewable energy or nuclear energy due to
the scarcity of fossil energy resources. However, the availability that renewable energies
can offer may come at a high price, worsening affordability. Renewables can be expensive
and, in most cases, produce non-dispatchable energy that has to be supported by traditional
dispatchable energy. Strong innovation would be needed to improve some issues in the
application of renewables. Furthermore, the acceptance of renewable energies should be
thoroughly analysed by broadening the criteria for the social acceptance of such energies.
In addition, each country’s idiosyncrasy should be considered when choosing which type
of renewable energy is most comfortable for the population. In-depth research should be
carried out to include more criteria in the Acceptability dimension that take into account the
well-being of citizens, public concerns on climate change, inequality, depopulation, among
others.
Taking into account (and being able to take into account) these “peculiarities” when
modelling Energy Security would undoubtedly bring advantages in planning. The citizens’
knowledge of the criteria of the decision-makers, their constraints, collisions of interests, and
imbalances will guarantee fair Energy Security for all stakeholders.
Funding Open Access funding provided thanks to the CRUE-CSIC agreement with Springer Nature. Open
Access funding provided thanks to the CRUE-CSIC with Elsevier. This work was supported by "Fundación
para el Fomento en Asturias de la Investigación Cientíﬁca Aplicada y la Tecnología (FICYT)", Project
AYUD/2021/50878.
Declarations
Conﬂictofinterest Amelia Bilbao-Terol declares that she has no conﬂict of interest. Verónica Cañal-Fernández
declares that she has no conﬂict of interest. Carmen Gónzalez-Pérez declares that she has no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

760
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
References
Abastante, F., Corrente, S., Greco, S., Ishizaka, A., & Lami, I. M. (2018). Choice architecture for architecture
choices: Evaluating social housing initiatives putting together a parsimonious AHP methodology and the
Choquet integral. Land Use Policy, 78, 748–762. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2018.07.037
Abdullah, F. B., Iqbal, R., Hyder, S. I., & Jawaid, M. (2020). Energy security indicators for Pakistan: An
integrated approach. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 133, 110122. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.RSER.2020.110122
Amin, S. B., Chang, Y., Khan, F., & Taghizadeh-Hesary, F. (2022). Energy security and sustainable energy
policy in Bangladesh: From the lens of 4As framework. Energy Policy, 161, 112719. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.ENPOL.2021.112719
APERC: Asia Paciﬁc Energy Research Center (APERC). Accessed on 20 June 2022 (2022). https://aperc.or.
jp/
Axon, C. J., & Darton, R. C. (2021). Sustainability and risk—A review of energy security. Sustainable Pro-
duction and Consumption, 27, 1195–1204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2021.01.018
Azzuni, A., & Breyer, C. (2018). Deﬁnitions and dimensions of energy security: A literature review. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment, 7(1), 268.
Azzuni, A., & Breyer, C. (2020). Global energy security index and its application on national level. Energies.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en13102502
Bamisile, O., Ojo, O., Yimen, N., Adun, H., Li, J., Obiora, S., & Huang, Q. (2021). Comprehensive functional
data analysis of China’s dynamic energy security index. Energy Reports, 7, 6246–6259. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.EGYR.2021.09.018
Bekhrad, K., Aslani, A., & Mazzuca-Sobczuk, T. (2020). Energy security in Andalusia: The role of renewable
energy sources. Case Studies in Chemical and Environmental Engineering, 1, 100001. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.CSCEE.2019.100001
Belton, V., & Stewart, T. (2010). In M. Ehrgott, J. R. Figueira, & S. Greco (Eds.), Problem structuring and
multiple criteria decision analysis. Springer.
Blum, H., & Legey, L. F. (2012). The challenging economics of energy security: Ensuring energy beneﬁts
in support to sustainable development. Energy Economics, 34(6), 1982–1989. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eneco.2012.08.013
BP: Statistical Review of World. Accessed on 20 June 2022 at https://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/business-
sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/energy-economics/statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2022-full-report.
pdf (2022).
Brodny, J., & Tutak, M. (2021). Assessing sustainable energy development in the central and eastern European
countries and analyzing its diversity. Science of the Total Environment, 801, 149745. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.SCITOTENV.2021.149745
Choquet, G. (1953). Theory of capacities. Annales de L’institut Fourier, 5, 131–295.
Coutinho, G. L., Vianna, J. N., & Dias, M. A. (2020). Alternatives for improving energy security in Cape
Verde. Utilities Policy, 67, 101112. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JUP.2020.101112
de Oliveira, H. E., Duarte, L. T., & Romano, J. M. T. (2022). Identiﬁcation of the Choquet Integral parameters
in the interaction index domain by means of sparse modeling. Expert Systems with Applications, 187,
115874. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.115874
Direção-Geral de Energia e Geologia.: Plano Nacional Energia e Clima 2021-2030 (PNEC 2030). https://
commission.europa.eu/system/ﬁles/2023-07/EN_PORTUGAL%20DRAFT%20UPDATED%20NECP.
pdf (2020)
Divsalar, M., Marzieh Ahmadi, M., Ebrahimi, E., & Ishizaka, A. (2022). A probabilistic hesitant fuzzy Cho-
quet integral-based TODIM method for multi-attribute group decision-making. Expert Systems with
Applications, 191, 116266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.116266
Duarte, L. T. (2018). A novel multicriteria decision aiding method based on unsupervised aggregation via the
Choquet Integral. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 65(2), 293–302. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TEM.2017.2743064
Esfahani, A. N., Moghaddam, N. B., Maleki, A., & Nazemi, A. (2021). The knowledge map of energy security.
Energy Reports, 7, 3570–3589. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2021.06.001
EU Open Data Portal (2022). Energy statistical datasheets for the eu countries. Accessed on 1 July 2022 at
https://data.europa.eu/en
European Commission (2014). Directorate-General for Energy: EU Energy in Figures: Statistical Pocketbook.
Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union.
European Commission: 2030 climate and energy goals for a competitive, secure and low-carbon eu economy.
Accessed on 30 June 2022 at http://europa.eu/rapid/pressrelease_IP-14-54_en.htlm. (2014)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
761
Eurostat (2020). Statistical Books: Energy Data-2020 Edition. Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union
Luxembourg.
Eurostat (Accessed on 12 July 2022). https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/ILC_LI02/default/
table?lang=en
Filipovi´c, S., Radovanovi´c, M., & Golušin, V. (2018). Macroeconomic and political aspects of energy
security—Exploratory data analysis. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 97, 428–435. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.08.058
Fuentes, S., Villafaﬁla-Robles, R., & Lerner, E. (2020). Composed index for the evaluation of the energy
security of power systems: Application to the case of Argentina. Energies. https://doi.org/10.3390/
en13153998
GERMANWATCH. Global Climate Risk Index 2021. Accessed on 20 June 2022 at https://www.germanwatch.
org/en/19777 (2022)
Gong, X., & Wang, Y. (2021). Using a new method to evaluate energy security: Evidence from the Belt and
Road countries. Technical report.
Gong, X., Wang, Y., & Lin, B. (2021). Assessing dynamic China’s energy security: Based on functional data
analysis. Energy, 217, 119324. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENERGY.2020.119324
Grabisch, M., & Labreuche, C. (2016). Fuzzy measures and integrals in mcda. Multiple criteria decision
analysis: state of the art surveys, 553–603.
Grabisch, M. (1996). The application of fuzzy integrals in multicriteria decision making. European Journal
of Operational Research, 89(3), 445–456. https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(95)00176-X
Grabisch, M., Kojadinovic, I., & Meyer, P. (2008). A review of methods for capacity identiﬁcation in choquet
integral based multi-attribute utility theory: Applications of the kappalab r package. European Journal
of Operational Research, 186(2), 766–785. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2007.02.025
Greco, S., Ishizaka, A., Tasiou, M., & Torrisi, G. (2019). On the methodological framework of composite
indices: A review of the issues of weighting, aggregation, and robustness. Social Indicators Research,
141, 61–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-017-1832-9
Hwang, S.-G. (2004). Cauchy’s interlace theorem for eigenvalues of Hermitian matrices. The American Math-
ematical Monthly, 111(2), 157–159. https://doi.org/10.2307/4145217
International Energy Agency (IEA). Portugal 2021. Energy Policy Review. 2021. Portugal’s energy policies
set a clear pathway towards 2050 carbon neutrality, according to new IEA review - News - IEA. Accessed
on 28 September 2023 at https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-product/world-energy-balances-
highlights (2022)
International Energy Agency (IEA). World Energy Balances Highlights. Accessed on 12 July 2022 at https://
www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-product/world-energy-balances-highlights (2022).
Karatayev, M., & Hall, S. (2020). Establishing and comparing energy security trends in resource-rich exporting
nations (Russia and the Caspian Sea region). Resources Policy, 68, 101746. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
RESOURPOL.2020.101746
Keeney, R. L., & Raiffa, H. (1976). Decision making with multiple objectives preferences and value tradeoffs.
Wiley.
Kharazishvili, Y., Kwilinski, A., Sukhodolia, O., Dzwigol, H., Bobro, D., & Kotowicz, J. (2021). The systemic
approach for estimating and strategizing energy security: The case of Ukraine. Energies. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en14082126
Kojadinovic, I. (2007). Quadratic distances for capacity and bi-capacity approximation and identiﬁcation.
4OR, 5(2), 117–142. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10288-006-0014-4
Lee, C. C., Xing, W., & Lee, C. C. (2022). The impact of energy security on income inequality: The key role
of economic development. Energy, 248, 123564. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENERGY.2022.123564
Le, T. H., & Nguyen, C. P. (2019). Is energy security a driver for economic growth? Evidence from a global
sample. Energy Policy, 129, 436–451. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2019.02.038
Liern, V., & Pérez-Gladish, B. (2022). Multiple criteria ranking method based on functional proximity index:
Un-weighted TOPSIS. AnnalsofOperationsResearch,311,1099–1121. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-
020-03718-1
Lin, B., & Raza, M. Y. (2020). Analysis of energy security indicators and CO2 emissions. A case from a
developing economy. Energy, 200, 117575. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENERGY.2020.117575
Li, J., Wang, L., Li, T., & Zhu, S. (2019). Energy security pattern spatiotemporal evolution and strategic
analysis of G20 countries. Sustainability (Switzerland). https://doi.org/10.3390/su11061629
Lourenzutti, R., Krohling, R. A., & Reformat, M. Z. (2017). Choquet based TOPSIS and TODIM for dynamic
and heterogeneous decision making with criteria interaction. Information Sciences, 408, 41–69. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2017.04.037
123

762
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
Malik, S., Qasim, M., Saeed, H., Chang, Y., & Taghizadeh-Hesary, F. (2020). Energy security in Pakistan:
Perspectives and policy implications from a quantitative analysis. Energy Policy, 144, 111552. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2020.111552
Marichal, J.-L. (2000). An axiomatic approach of the discrete Choquet Integral as a tool to aggregate interacting
criteria. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 8(6), 800–807. https://doi.org/10.1109/91.890347
Marichal, J.-L., & Roubens, M. (2000). Determination of weights of interacting criteria from a refer-
ence set. European Journal of Operational Research, 124(3), 641–650. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-
2217(99)00182-4
Michio, S. (1974). Theory of fuzzy integrals and its applications. Tokyo Institute of Technology.
Ministerio para la Transición Ecológica y el Reto Demográﬁco: Plan Nacional Integrado de Energía y Clima
(PNIEC) 2021-2030. https://www.miteco.gob.es/es/prensa/pniec.aspx (2020)
Murofushi, T., & Soneda, S. (1993) Techniques for reading fuzzy measures (iii): interaction index. In: In 9th
Fuzzy System Symposium, Sapporo, Japan, 5, pp. 693–696
Pasi, G., Viviani, M., & Carton, A. (2019). A multi-criteria decision making approach based on the Choquet
Integral for assessing the credibility of user-generated content. Information Sciences, 503, 574–588.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.07.037
Pelissari, R., & Duarte, L. T. (2022). SMAA-Choquet-FlowSort: A novel user-preference-driven Choquet
classiﬁer applied to supplier evaluation. Expert Systems with Applications, 207, 117898. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.eswa.2022.117898
Podbregar, I., Šimi´c, G., Radovanovi´c, M., Filipovi´c, S., & Šprajc, P. (2020). International energy security risk
index-analysis of the methodological settings. Energies. https://doi.org/10.3390/en13123234
Ragulina, Y. V., Bogoviz, A. V., Lobova, S. V., & Alekseev, A. N. (2019). An aggregated energy security index
of Russia, 1990–2015. International Journal of Energy Economics and Policy, 9(1), 212–217. https://
doi.org/10.32479/ijeep.7209
Razmjoo, A. A., Sumper, A., & Davarpanah, A. (2019). Development of sustainable energy indexes by the
utilization of new indicators: A comparative study. Energy Reports, 5, 375–383. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.EGYR.2019.03.006
Ren, J., & Sovacool, B. K. (2014). Quantifying, measuring, and strategizing energy security: Determining the
most meaningful dimensions and metrics. Energy, 76, 838–849. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2014.
08.083
Rowley, H. V., Geschke, A., & Lenzen, M. (2015). A practical approach for estimating weights of interacting
criteria from proﬁle sets. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 272, 70–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fss.2015.01.011.
Theme: Optimisation, Decision and Games.
Shah, S. A. A., Zhou, P., Walasai, G. D., & Mohsin, M. (2019). Energy security and environmental sustainability
index of South Asian countries: A composite index approach. Ecological Indicators, 106, 105507. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.ECOLIND.2019.105507
Shapley, L. S. (1953). A value for n-person games. Annals of Mathematics Studies, 28, 307–317.
Song, Y., Zhang, M., & Sun, R. (2019). Using a new aggregated indicator to evaluate China’s energy security.
Energy Policy, 132, 167–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2019.05.036
Sovacool, B. K., & Brown, M. A. (2010). Competing dimensions of energy security: An international per-
spective. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 35(1), 77–108. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
environ-042509-143035
Stavytskyy, A., Kharlamova, G., Komendant, O., Andrzejczak, J., & Nakonieczny, J. (2021). Methodology
for calculating the energy security index of the state: Taking into account modern megatrends. Energies.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en14123621
TheEnergyUnionStrategy.CommunicationfromtheCommissiontotheEuropeanParliament,theCouncil,the
European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee OF the regions and the European Investment
Bank: A Framework Strategy for a Resilient Energy Union with a Forward-Looking Climate Change
Policy (2015)
The Global Economy Accessed on 12 July 2022 at https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/ (2022).
The World Bank Accessed on 12 July 2022 at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator (2022).
Tutak, M., & Brodny, J. (2022). Analysis of the level of energy security in the three seas initiative countries.
Applied Energy, 311, 118649. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2022.118649
Vincke, P. (1992). Multicriteria decision-aid. Wiley.
Wang, J., Shahbaz, M., & Song, M. (2021). Evaluating energy economic security and its inﬂuencing factors
in China. Energy, 229, 120638. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENERGY.2021.120638
Wang, D., Tian, S., Fang, L., & Xu, Y. (2020). A functional index model for dynamically evaluating China’s
energy security. Energy Policy, 147, 111706. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111706
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:721–763
763
Wang, Q., & Zhan, L. (2019). Assessing the sustainability of renewable energy: An empirical analysis of
selected 18 European countries. Science of The Total Environment, 692, 529–545. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.SCITOTENV.2019.07.170
Wang, Q., & Zhou, K. (2017). A framework for evaluating global national energy security. Applied Energy,
188, 19–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.11.116
World Energy Council: World Energy Trilemma Index. Accessed on 30 June 2022 at https://www.worldenergy.
org/ (2021).
Wu, T. H., Chung, Y. F., & Huang, S. W. (2021). Evaluating global energy security performances using an
integrated PCA/DEA-AR technique. Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments, 45, 101041.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SETA.2021.101041
Yang, B., Ding, L., Zhan, X., Tao, X., & Peng, F. (2022). Evaluation and analysis of energy security in China
based on the DPSIR model. Energy Reports, 8, 607–615. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EGYR.2022.01.229
Yuan, J., & Luo, X. (2019). Regional energy security performance evaluation in China using MTGS and
SPA-TOPSIS. Science of the Total Environment, 696, 133817. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.
2019.133817
Zhang, L., Bai, W., Xiao, H., & Ren, J. (2021). Measuring and improving regional energy security: A method-
ological framework based on both quantitative and qualitative analysis. Energy, 227, 120534. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.120534
Ziemba, P., Becker, A., & Becker, J. (2021). Forecasting and assessment of the energy security risk in fuzzy
environment. Energies. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14185934
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123