TITLE: An integrated framework for modeling pharmaceutical supply chains with disruptions and risk mitigation
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06381-y
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06381-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
An integrated framework for modeling pharmaceutical
supply chains with disruptions and risk mitigation
Aman Goswami1
· Alok Baveja2
· Xin Ding1
· Benjamin Melamed2
·
Fred Roberts3
Received: 18 December 2023 / Accepted: 30 October 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Supply-chain disruptions have numerous causes, including criminal actions, as well as natural
disasters and human errors. The complexity of modern supply chains makes it challenging
to detect, mitigate, or resolve disruptions. This paper presents an integrated framework for
modeling pharmaceutical supply chains (PSCs), incorporating disruptions and mitigations.
Based on extensive discussions with supply chain SMEs (subject matter experts) and federal
government security ofﬁcials, this framework unfolds in two steps: (1) a mapping process
constructs a supply chain map from a focal ﬁrm’s perspective, and (2) the supply chain map
is overlaid with various types of disruptions that can occur at supply chain locations. To
this end, the paper systematically classiﬁes PSC disruptions based on historical data and
expert opinion. The paper discusses various pre-disruption and post-disruption mitigations
andreportsgleanedinsightsintotheirefﬁcacy.Finally,thepaperdiscussesthegeneralizability
of this integrated framework to other supply chains, such as medical devices and satellite
solar panels.
Keywords Supply chain mapping · Supply chain disruptions · Pharmaceutical supply
chains · Disruption mitigation strategies
1 Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed vulnerabilities in supply chains worldwide (Choi
et al., 2020; Queiroz et al., 2022; Shih, 2020). Challenges experienced by businesses and
customers included a lack of supply chain visibility, global shortages, supply delays, port
congestion, backlogged deliveries, increased transportation costs, and labor shortages. The
B Aman Goswami
ag1814@business.rutgers.edu
1
Department of Supply Chain Management, Rutgers Business School - Newark and New Brunswick,
Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA
2
Department of Supply Chain Management, Rutgers Business School - Newark and New Brunswick,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
3
Department of Mathematics and CCICADA, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
123

Annals of Operations Research
extent and severity of the crisis were unprecedented, with over 90% of Fortune 1000 compa-
nies reportedly facing supply chain disruptions during 2020–23 (Sherman, 2020). To a large
extent, disruptions to supply chains can be expected to continue beyond the pandemic unless
new insights are gained into understanding disruptions and developing mitigation strategies.
Criminal activity picked up during the pandemic, as it usually does during major disruptions,
and compounded supply chain challenges, thereby increasing ﬁnancial and societal costs
(Moosavi et al., 2022). An FBI and United States Secret Service (USSS) press release early
in the pandemic pointed out that criminals were devising and executing supply-chain attacks
of greater severity and frequency (FBI, 2020). Such attacks on supply chains can be expected
to continue after the pandemic, and consequently, timely indicators and warnings of such
attacks is of paramount importance.
The pharmaceutical industry is a case in point. This industry plays a key role in ensuring
the availability of life-saving drugs and healthcare products worldwide. However, complex
pharmaceuticalsupplychains(PSCs)aresusceptibletodisruptionsthatimpacttheavailability
of essential medications (Marucheck et al., 2011). Some drug shortages have persisted in the
post-pandemic period due to ongoing supply disruptions and demand spikes. The American
Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) reported 309 active, ongoing drug shortages
in 2023, the highest number in nearly a decade (ASHP, 2023). Despite the Food and Drug
Administration’s (FDA) efforts to address drug shortages by expediting reviews of new
drug production sources (FDA, 2023), shortages have persisted in the US (IQVIA, 2023).
Moreover,theincidenceofdisruptionshasincreasedsigniﬁcantlyinthepost-pandemicperiod
due to ongoing criminal activities, such as counterfeit drug production and cyberattacks
capitalizing on existing PSC vulnerabilities (Stecke & Kumar, 2009) and emerging ones
(Ziavrou et al., 2022). The COVID-19 pandemic profoundly impacted the pharmaceutical
industry in terms of demand and consumption, R&D, as well as regulatory rules (Velásquez,
2022). Hence, the industry operations management and the research community are faced
with the critical challenges of understanding the broad range of disruptions, assessing their
impacts on PSCs, and devising mitigations.
Disruptions and their causes may only be observable ex-post (Brenner, 2015). However,
disruption-warning tools can help not only in disruption detection, but also in predicting
disruption scenarios and their impacts, as well as in developing mitigation strategies. To assist
in developing a comprehensive understanding of various disruptions and their impacts, this
research provides a classiﬁcation of disruptions including counterfeit goods and packaging;
adulteration of raw materials, active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), and excipients (drug
additives); transportation thefts; cyberattacks; and campaigns to propagate misinformation
about drug products.
During the pandemic, President Biden tasked a Supply Chain Disruptions Task Force with
addressing vulnerabilities in critical supply chains, including pharmaceuticals and APIs, by
increasing the transparency of sourcing, tracking, and labeling (The White House, 2021).
Even before the onset of the pandemic, disruptions to PSCs were already a primary concern of
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). At the beginning of the pandemic, the network
of DHS University Centers of Excellence (COEs) launched a ‘COVID-19 Supply Chain
Initiative’ to identify appropriate tools and technologies to proactively address supply chain
vulnerabilities (CCICADA, 2020). Multiple COEs collaborated and organized workshops
focusing on increased crime during the pandemic, medicine and vaccine shortages, and
adulteration, as well as other disruptions to PSCs. At these workshops, speciﬁc concerns
about disruptions to PSCs were raised by representatives from various DHS agencies and the
pharmaceutical industry, including the following: (a) thefts from licit PSCs, (b) counterfeit
pharmaceuticals, (c) hoarding and price gouging, (d) the ability of transnational criminal
123

Annals of Operations Research
organizations to transform and adapt rapidly to exploit PSC vulnerabilities, and (e) limited
ability of early fraud detection. The representatives described industry-wide efforts to detect
counterfeit drugs through tracking ﬁnancial transactions and called for the development of
new tools to help law enforcement identify counterfeit pharmaceuticals. The calls for such
PSC disruption-detection tools motivated a DHS-funded study reported in this paper. To
this end, a research team was assembled, consisting of DHS COEs, SMEs (subject matter
experts), academic and practitioner faculty members, and doctoral students across multiple
disciplines, as well as executives from a US-based large pharmaceutical ﬁrm.
In order to understand supply-chain disruptions and identify mitigation strategies, extant
literature was reviewed. Supply chain disruptions and resilience have been extensively stud-
ied by operations researchers (Hosseini & Ivanov, 2022; Ivanov, 2022; Katsaliaki et al.,
2021). An important component of such research involves the task of mapping supply chains
(MacCarthy et al., 2022; Mubarik et al., 2023). This paper’s contribution to the literature is
the incorporation of disruptions into the supply chain mapping process, and providing an
integrated framework for mapping and modeling such supply chains and disruptions. Specif-
ically, the PSC modeling process of the integrated framework was carried out as follows:
1. A PSC map of operational logistics of facilities, transportation, and information ﬂows
was created. Since PSCs are typically complex and dynamic (Marucheck et al., 2011),
building a comprehensive map is often a challenging task. To address this issue, the
core PSC processes were modeled in some detail while components external to it were
simpliﬁed by judicious aggregation that preserved the ability to study disruptions. The
PSC map was then validated by pharmaceutical executives from the studied ﬁrm and two
other leading pharmaceutical companies.
2. A general model of disruptions was constructed in terms of the timeline and impact
of disruptions. For every disruption, this timeline consists of the distributions of the
disruption’s inter-arrival time, the time to detect the disruption, and the time to mitigate its
impact. Furthermore, the disruption’s impact was modeled as a change of an operational
parameter.
3. A large volume of data was collected in order to parameterize the baseline (disruption-
free) PSC model (with baseline operational parameters). The process of data collection
was aided by referring to the PSC map from step 1. The requisite data included distribu-
tions of sourcing times, production and testing times at various facilities, transportation
times, replenishment lead times, as well as failures and rework probabilities, etc. Sanity
checks were applied to the data to ensure the operational stability of the baseline PSC
model.
4. A comprehensive classiﬁcation of supply chain disruptions was compiled, based on his-
toricaldata, and supplemented with plausible potentialdisruptions pointed outby industry
SMEs.
5. Finally, the individual disruptions were overlaid on the PSC map by location and class.
Further, each PSC model parameter, impacted by each disruption class, was identiﬁed.
Supply-chain disruptions have been extensively studied in the supply chain management
literature (Dong & Tomlin, 2012; Hosseini & Ivanov, 2022; Ivanov, 2022; Katsaliaki et al.,
2021; Kleindorfer & Saad, 2005; Penna et al., 2019; Tang, 2006; Tomlin, 2006). However,
there is limited research on integrating disruptions with supply chain maps for assessing
disruption impacts and developing mitigation strategies. This literature gap motivated the
integrated framework of this paper, developed in close collaboration with industry SMEs
over a 12-month period. Speciﬁcally, the research team conducted extensive interviews with
SMEs from a large US-based pharmaceutical company, which served as a focal ﬁrm. This
123

Annals of Operations Research
ﬁrm provided information for developing a generic PSC model consisting of a supply-chain
mapping, parameters, and disruptions. Further, SMEs from additional pharmaceutical com-
panies, outside the focal ﬁrm, were asked to vet the model to assess its generalizability and
applicability to the pharmaceutical industry at large. These SMEs were senior executives
from ﬂagship pharmaceutical companies with extensive experience in managing, planning,
and securing supply chains. More speciﬁcally, the selected SMEs had experiential knowledge
across a broad range of PSC functions, including strategic planning, sourcing, production,
operations, quality assurance, regulatory compliance, security, customer relationship man-
agement, and ﬁnancial management. The vetting process with the executives comprised
in-depth structured and semi-structured sessions which explored the validity of the inte-
grated framework and its utility to their respective organizations. The SMEs conﬁrmed the
validity and generalizability of the integrated framework for modeling PSC disruptions.
This paper describes the integrated framework in terms of PSC modeling, including a
detailed PSC map and parameters, and a comprehensive classiﬁcation of PSC disruptions (see
also Domeniconi et al., 2022; Rana et al., 2024). It further discusses mitigation strategies and
insights gleaned from the study. Further work using the integrated framework demonstrated
its applicability to other industries, such as medical devices (Domeniconi et al., 2023a) and
satellite solar panels (Domeniconi et al., 2023b).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is a literature review of supply
chain disruptions, PSC-speciﬁc disruptions, and supply chain mapping. Section 3 presents the
generic PSC model, including the modeling methodology of the integrated framework, supply
chain mapping, disruptions, parameters, and a summary of mitigation strategies. Finally,
Sect. 4 concludes with operational and managerial insights, limitations, and directions for
future work.
2 Literature review
In this section, we brieﬂy review relevant literature on supply chain disruptions, including
those in the pharmaceutical industry, and supply chain mapping.
2.1 Supply chain disruptions
In the literature, supply chain disruptions are “unplanned events or incidents that disrupt
the normal ﬂow of goods, services, or information in a supply chain…, which expose ﬁrms
within the supply chain to operational and ﬁnancial risks” (Craighead et al., 2007: p.132;
Kleindorfer & Saad, 2005). Such disruptions are either due to natural causes (e.g., hurricanes,
tsunamis, earthquakes, etc.), accidents (e.g., ﬁres, spillage, unplanned contamination, etc.),
or effectuated by criminal agents (e.g., counterfeits, thefts, cyberattacks, etc.). Supply chain
disruptions, whether natural, accidental, or criminal, can also signiﬁcantly impact a ﬁrm’s
ﬁnancial and brand values (Hendricks & Singhal, 2005; Kleindorfer & Saad, 2005).
The literature on supply chain disruptions has grown in the past two decades. Tang (2006)
introduced the notion of operational and disruption risks, where the former are caused by
demand and supply mismatches, while the latter are caused by major incidents, man-made
or natural. Catastrophic events affecting supply chains, whether natural or man-made, sig-
niﬁcantly disrupt the ﬂow of products (Kleindorfer & Saad, 2005; Knemeyer et al., 2009).
Disruption management has been of particular interest to researchers, including planning,
detecting,respondingto,andrecoveringfromsuchdisruptions(Craigheadetal.,2007;Snyder
123

Annals of Operations Research
et al., 2016; Tang, 2006). Planning for potential disruptions is part of risk management. As the
complexity and frequency of disruptions grows, ﬁrms are increasingly focused on developing
resilience to mitigate disruption impacts (Ambulkar et al., 2015; Jüttner & Maklan, 2011).
Rice and Caniato (2003) introduced the concept of resilience in supply chains. A literature
review of supply-chain resilience appears in Kamalahmadi and Parast (2016). Dong et al.
(2005) studied supply-chain risk identiﬁcation, the role of supply chain coordination, and
the design of disaster-resilient supply chains. While risk mitigation strategies tend to treat
disruptions as homogenous events, DuHadway et al. (2019) proposed that the endogenous
or exogenous sources of disruptions should dictate the effective risk management strategies.
Speier et al. (2011) presented frameworks for examining potential supply chain disruptions,
supply chain design strategies, and associated mitigation strategies. Hosseini and Ivanov
(2022) developed a new resilience measure for supply chains that accounted for the ripple
effects of disruptions.
Assessing how disruptions affect supply chains is difﬁcult due to the growing complex-
ity and opaqueness of supply chains (Snyder et al., 2016). The ever-growing supply-chain
complexity has spurred research on understanding system vulnerabilities, disruption types,
and their impacts. For example, Papadakis (2006) compared Make-To-Order (MTO) and
Make-To-Forecast (MTF) supply chains and reported that the former are more vulnerable
to disruptions. Schmidt and Raman (2012) recognized the importance of how various types
of disruptions and organizational factors impact performance outcomes. In addition, Bode
and Wagner (2015) studied the upstream complexity characteristics of supply chains and
the frequency of supply chain disruptions, and found that they are positively correlated. A
systematic review of the COVID-19 pandemic-related supply chain disruptions revealed the
need for further research on the causes and impacts of supply chain disruptions (Chowdhury
et al., 2021).
2.2 Pharmaceutical supply chain disruptions
PSC disruptions have been examined both empirically and analytically in the literature.
Sabouhi et al. (2018) analyzed the impacts of operational and disruption risks to PSCs
utilizing Data Envelopment Analysis and mathematical programming methods. Azghandi
et al. (2018) leveraged a simulation-based analysis of drug shortages in PSCs to identify the
best inventory policies for various disruption types. Mathematical modeling, including the
Bayesian network approach, has been used to analyze supplier vulnerabilities and to identify
operational strategies for managing PSCs subject to disruptions (Lawrence et al., 2020).
The extant literature on disruptions has focused on understanding/modeling the impact
of “on/off” disruption scenarios. While the impact of disruptions has been studied in the
operations management research literature, a systematic classiﬁcation of PSC disruptions is
lacking. Accordingly, Sect. 3.3 of this paper addresses this lacuna in the literature by provid-
ing a comprehensive classiﬁcation of supply chain disruptions, based on publicly available
information and plausible disruptive scenarios, validated by pharmaceutical industry and
security SMEs.
2.3 Supply chain mapping
Extant literature has presented supply chain mapping as a tool for connecting business strate-
gies with supply chain strategies (Gardner & Cooper, 2003). At an operational level, value
stream maps have been leveraged to understand planning, management, disruptions, and
123

Annals of Operations Research
resilience of supply chains (Barroso et al., 2011). A recent study presented a hierarchi-
cal classiﬁcation scheme for various types of supply-chain maps (MacCarthy et al., 2022).
Furthermore, Mubarik et al. (2023) used exploratory factor analysis to address upstream,
midstream, and downstream supply chain mapping.
Generating supply chain maps involves signiﬁcant time and effort. Gaur et al. (2022)
reported on a case study, where teams of over one hundred people took more than a year to map
the ﬁrm’s supply networks. However, supply chain mapping provides a core knowledge asset
for understanding material and information ﬂows, internal processes, external entities, and
linkages, as wellas compliance and testing procedures (Vakil,2021). Supply chain visibility is
a key determinant in managing supply chain risks (Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020). Choi et al. (2020)
highlighted the importance of mapping supply chains and described how companies that had
invested in mapping their supply chain emerged better prepared during the pandemic. The
success of such proactive preparedness was due to the enhanced visibility, gained by supply
chain mapping and digital technologies, which facilitated tracking of upstream, downstream,
and process value chains (Mubarik et al., 2021).
In a similar vein, supply chain mapping in the agribusiness and automotive industry was
used as a tool for understanding supply chain vulnerabilities, risks, resilience, and mitigation
strategies (Barroso et al., 2011; Carvalho et al., 2012). In contrast, there is limited litera-
ture on pharmaceutical supply chains mapping and disruptions. Yankus (2006) developed
an inﬁltration map of the US pharmaceutical supply chain displaying drug ﬂows to the mar-
ketplace. This map advanced the understanding of pathways through which illicit drugs can
inﬁltrate licit PSCs. However, it did not consider the perspective of a pharmaceutical focal
ﬁrm and its interactions with sources of disruption, and the subsequent exposure of ﬁrms to
operational and ﬁnancial risks. Accordingly, the integrated framework of this paper focuses
on supply-chain mapping that integrates PSC disruptions with PSC operations. Compared
with prior supply chain mapping studies, this paper’s PSC modeling approach represents
in detail a focal ﬁrm’s internal processes, while aggregating each class of external entities,
such as licit suppliers, illicit suppliers, and customers. The integrated framework produces
a comprehensive model of manageable complexity for evaluating the pharmaceutical focal
ﬁrm’s disruption mitigation strategies.
3 The PSC model
This section describes the generic baseline PSC model, including its map (ﬂow diagram)
and individual components (Sect. 3.1), the generic disruption model (Sect. 3.2), disruptions
classiﬁcation (Sect. 3.3), and disruption mitigations (Sect. 3.4).
The PSC map bears similarity to value-stream maps (Barroso et al., 2011) which incorpo-
ratesupplychainactors,(thefocalﬁrmanditsexternalentitiesandlinkages),includingsupply
chain processes and inbound/outbound ﬂows of unﬁnished/ﬁnished products (MacCarthy
et al., 2022). The baseline PSC model (without disruptions) was developed and parameter-
ized in collaboration with functional and security SMEs in the pharmaceutical industry. The
PSC disruption classiﬁcation is based on a database of historical disruption instances from
various publicly available sources, as well as plausible future disruptions identiﬁed through
discussions with SMEs. Disruption categories were encoded on the generic PSC map.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.1 The generic PSC baseline model
Like any supply chain, a pharmaceutical supply chain consists of structure (layout of supply-
chain components, such as facilities, suppliers, consumers, etc.) and behavior (supply-chain
processes, such as demand, production, testing, transportation, etc.) The structural complex-
ity of supply chains combined with the inherent randomness in many of the supply-chain
processes render it difﬁcult to analyze how disruptions affect supply chain performance.
The integrated framework utilizes Eisenhardt’s approach to building and reﬁning theories
from in-depth case studies (Eisenhardt, 1989). Eisenhardt’s approach aims to glean theoretical
insights through strategic case-study selection and employs diverse data sources including
interviews. It constructs a conceptual framework that uncovers relationships among phe-
nomena, and validates ﬁndings by replicating in other case studies. This approach has been
effectively applied in multiple settings, including large ﬁrms seeking innovative expansion to
new markets (Dougherty, 1990), investigating the integration-versus-autonomy dilemma in
technology ﬁrm acquisitions (Graebner et al., 2004), examining deﬁnitional perspectives and
applications of big data (Wamba et al., 2015), determining the necessary dynamic capabilities
for successful circular economy implementations using blockchain technology (Meier et al.,
2023), and exploring how ﬁrms achieved supply chain agility by building ad hoc supply
chains (Müller et al., 2023).
Following Eisenhardt’s approach, the research reported here started by selecting a phar-
maceutical case-study focal ﬁrm. An advisory team of SMEs comprising senior executives
was assembled from this ﬁrm, with expertise in manufacturing processes, supply chain man-
agement, and supply chain security. The advisory team’s makeup, in terms of background and
expertise, complied with the aforesaid Eisenhardt approach. The model was further vetted
and reﬁned by various departments of the focal ﬁrm in multiple iterations to obtain compre-
hensive feedback. Following model development, multiple interviews were conducted with
additional pharmaceutical ﬁrms, other than the case-study focal ﬁrm, for further validation
of the model. Finally, consistent with the Eisenhardt approach, the integrated framework
was replicated in other supply-chain case studies, beyond the pharmaceutical industry, as
described in Sect. 1.
Speciﬁcally, for the development of the PSC model, we interviewed SMEs who are both
active and retired senior executives from three major pharmaceutical companies, as well as
SMEs from various federal agencies, as follows:
1. Company 1: Senior Director of Information Security, Director of Security Architecture,
and retired Vice President for Global Supply Chain.
2. Company 2: Executive Director for Product Integrity.
3. Company 3 (the focal ﬁrm): Retired Director and Team Lead of Supply Chain Logistics.
4. DHS: Assistant Director, Operational Technology and Cyber Division, Homeland Secu-
rity Investigations (HSI).
5. DHS: Deputy Director, DHS Joint Task Force – West.
6. DHS: Head of the ICE-HSI National Intellectual Property Rights Coordination Center.
7. US Department of Justice: Deputy Director, Consumer Protection Branch.
The SME from Company 3 was the key information provider on model structure and
parameters, as described in the PSC modeling process in Sect. 1. Speciﬁcally, this SME was
interviewed about the PSC network structure, physical and information ﬂows, manufacturing
and testing processes, and inbound and outbound logistics. All SMEs validated the supply
chain model, as well as the identiﬁed disruptions and their locations. They conﬁrmed that their
companies follow a similar supply chain structure and suggested certain disruptions unique
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Generic PSC Map with Disruptions
to their ﬁrms, which were incorporated into the supply chain model and the disruption clas-
siﬁcation presented in Sect. 3.3. Finally, SMEs from federal agencies provided information
on the identiﬁcation of criminal disruptions to supply chains and assisted in gleaning model
insights.
PSCs tend to have complex, multi-tiered supply networks, random demand, a large assort-
ment of product types, and an elaborate distribution network. To handle this complexity, this
paper’s integrated framework modeled the internal operations of a pharmaceutical focal ﬁrm
with aggregated external entities and linkages. Accordingly, multiple suppliers of the same
commodity are modeled as a corresponding supplier pool, drug products are similarly pooled
into product categories, and drug consumption is aggregated into end-consumer pools by
product category. For example, raw material suppliers are aggregated into a pool, and drugs
are aggregated into two categories: solid oral dose (SOD) and injectables (INJ). Figure 1
depicts the structure of the generic PSC model from the viewpoint of a pharmaceutical focal
ﬁrm.
The map in Fig. 1 consists of color-coded icons representing supplier pools, contract
manufacturer organization (CMO) pools, wholesaler pools, hospital/pharmacy pools, and
end-consumer pools. Icon labels of nodes indicate their functionality, and the inclusion of
the word “Pool” in a label indicates aggregation of corresponding external entities. For
example, the Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node aggregates hospitals and pharmacies that fulﬁll
demand from the End-Consumer Pool node. Suppliers may be trusted or untrusted based on
their compliance reliability. Grey icons designate focal-ﬁrm facilities, while orange icons and
red icons designate, respectively, trusted, and untrusted entities external to the focal ﬁrm. For
example, counterfeit suppliers, diverters, and third-party wholesalers are all aggregated into
the Untrusted Supplier Pool node. Generally, suppliers are considered by the focal ﬁrm to
be “untrusted” because the focal company does not have sufﬁcient evidence to the contrary.
Blue and red arrows correspond, respectively, to trusted and untrusted linkages (physical
transportation links involving transport times), while black arrows represent instantaneous
information ﬂows. Diamond icons that follow testing nodes represent a routing decision of
ﬂowunits(e.g.,batchesofrawmaterial,API,drugs,etc.)Speciﬁcally,arrowslabeledGoodput
123

Annals of Operations Research
carry ﬂows of units that passed testing, while arrows labeled Badput or Reprocess/Rework
carry ﬂows of units that failed testing, to be discarded or reworked, respectively. Tested
materials include raw material, API, excipients, packaging, and drug end-products. Yellow
triangles designate inventories. Finally, a possible disruption at a particular map location is
shown on the map as a “hand grenade” icon with an adjacent disruption category code of the
form “X-n,” where “n”  1, 2, …, 13, are categories to be described in Sect. 3.3.
Pharmaceutical ﬁrms maintain large safety buffers (safety stocks) to support production
continuity in times of short supplies, with associated carrying costs. To keep adequate supplies
on hand, many pharmaceutical facilities use the Make To-Stock (MTS) replenishment policy
with a reorder point and target level. Whenever the inventory level hits or down-crosses the
reorder point, a replenishment order is placed to bring up the inventory level to the target
level.
Every material type (raw material, API, excipients, and drugs) has a user-speciﬁed expi-
ration period. On production, each material unit (batches, and end-units) is stamped with its
production date and expiration date. Each unit is checked for expiration when it is moved,
and expired units are discarded. To minimize unit expiration, inventory units are managed in
ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) order. Accordingly, incoming units to an inventory are placed at the
tail of the inventory storage, while outgoing units are taken from the head of the inventory
storage.
Node parameters consist of user-speciﬁed scalars and distributions. For example, the
reorder point and the target level of an MTS inventory are scalar parameters, while random
delays in manufacturing, testing, and transportation, as well as demand sizes, are modeled
by user-speciﬁed distributions. Such parameters are based on historical data, as provided
by SMEs from the case-study focal ﬁrm, and those correspond to a baseline model of PSC
operation without disruptions.
The remainder of this section describes the structure of the generic PSC map by functional
components of the supply chain (the nodes in Fig. 1).
3.1.1 End-consumer demand
The end-consumer demand for SOD and INJ drugs is modeled in the End-Consumer Pool
node and drives all PSC operations. This node issues daily orders of SOD and INJ drugs to
the Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node. The order sizes are drawn from a triangular distribution,
with three user-speciﬁed parameters: minimum value, maximum value, and mode. If the
Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node has sufﬁcient stocks on hand in its inventories, it fulﬁlls the
orders at the end of the day; otherwise, it fulﬁlls what it can and backorders the shortage.
3.1.2 Hospital/pharmacy pool operations
The Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node is replenished by the Distribution Center and Wholesaler
Pool nodes using the MTS policy. More speciﬁcally, the Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node
replenishes all its SOD from the Wholesaler Pool node, but an INJ replenishment is split into
two orders: one to the Wholesaler Pool node and the other to the Distribution Center node.
The split percentages are user-speciﬁed. All replenishment lead times follow a user-speciﬁed
triangular distribution.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.1.3 Wholesaler pool operations
The Wholesaler Pool node fulﬁlls orders from the Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node using the
MTS policy. When replenishment is needed, it ﬁrst sends orders to the Distribution Center
node. However, if a replenishment order of the Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node cannot be
completelyfulﬁlled,theWholesalerPool nodeordersthebalancefromtheUntrustedSupplier
Pool node, and when this shipment arrives (possibly containing some non-compliant or illicit
end-units), it forwards that shipment to the Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node. All replenishment
lead times follow a user-speciﬁed triangular distribution.
3.1.4 Untrusted supplier pool operations
The Untrusted Supplier Pool node is assumed to have an essentially unlimited supply of
drug end-units (SOD and INJ), and therefore, it can always replenish the Wholesaler Pool
node, whenever the Distribution Center node cannot completely fulﬁll supply orders. Every
shipment from the Untrusted Supplier Pool node has a random fraction of illicit end-units
modeled as a user-speciﬁed triangular distribution. To keep track of licit and illicit end-
items, time-stamped buckets of drug end-units are maintained separately for SOD and INJ
replenishments.
3.1.5 Distribution center operations
The Distribution Center node fulﬁlls orders from the Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node and the
Wholesaler Pool node. Each month it sends a replenishment order for SOD and INJ end-units
to the Pharma Firm node. The order sizes are the average total demand (in terms of orders
sizes) received by the Distribution Center node from the Hospital/Pharmacy Pool node and
the Wholesaler Pool node over the previous four months.
3.1.6 Pharmaceutical Focal-Firm Operations
The Pharma Firm node receives monthly orders in SOD and INJ end-units from the Distribu-
tion Center node. It breaks each order size (in end-units) into batches of user-speciﬁed sizes,
separately for SOD and INJ drug orders. It then sends messages to all suppliers involved in
drug production and packaging to provide the respective supplies. These suppliers are the
Raw Material Supplier Pool node, Excipient Supplier Pool node, and Packaging Supplier
Pool node. The order sizes to these suppliers are adjusted to account for expected losses due
to badput to be discarded at testing nodes.
3.1.7 Raw material supply
The Raw Material Supplier Pool node receives monthly orders (in batches) from the Pharma
Firm node. It processes each batch sequentially and tests each batch at the focal ﬁrm’s Raw
Material Testing node. Raw material-related delays of SOD and INJ batches at the production
and testing steps follow user-speciﬁed distributions, as is the probability of badput after
testing. The stream of goodput raw material batches emerging from the Raw Material Testing
node is split between the focal ﬁrm’s internal production and the CMO Pool node, which is a
pool of CMOs, according to user-speciﬁed split probabilities. Goodput raw material batches
routed to the focal ﬁrm enter the API Production node with no delay, while those routed to
the CMO Pool node are shipped with a user-speciﬁed transportation delay distribution.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.1.8 API production
The API Production node produces API batches from raw material batches. A ﬂow control
mechanism informs the node as to how many API batches to produce per order, following
which API production is suspended until the next order arrives. The API Production node
produces API batches sequentially, each of which is tested at the focal ﬁrm’s API Testing node.
API-related delays of SOD and INJ batches at the production and testing steps follow user-
speciﬁed distributions. Tested batches are designated as goodput, badput (to be discarded),
or reprocess/rework (to be routed back to the API Production node for reprocessing) with
respective user-speciﬁed probabilities. The stream of goodput API batches emerging from
the API Testing node is split between the focal company and the CMO Pool node according
to user-speciﬁed probabilities. Goodput API batches, routed to the focal company, enter the
Drug Production node with no delay, while those routed to the CMO Pool node are shipped
following a user-speciﬁed transportation delay distribution.
3.1.9 Excipients supply
Excipients are compounds (inactive ingredients) that are mixed with API to produce drugs.
The Excipients Supplier Pool node receives monthly orders (in batches) from the Pharma
Firm node. It produces batches sequentially and ships each for testing at the focal ﬁrm’s
Excipients Testing node with a user-speciﬁed transportation delay distribution. Excipients-
relateddelaysofSODandINJbatchesattheproductionandtestingstepsfollowuser-speciﬁed
distributions, as is the probability of badput after testing. The stream of goodput excipients
batches emerging from the Excipients Testing node enters the Drug Production node.
3.1.10 Drug production
Drug production takes place in the Drug Production node, which maintains two inventories
for SOD drugs and two inventories for INJ drugs: one for API safety stocks and the other for
excipients safety stocks. To produce one batch of drugs, one API batch is combined with one
excipients batch. If either inventory is empty, drug production is suspended until both types
of batches become available. A ﬂow control mechanism informs the Drug Production node
how many drug batches to produce per order, following which drug production is suspended
until the next order arrives. The Drug Production node produces drug batches sequentially
and ships each for testing at the focal ﬁrm’s Drug Testing node. Drug-related delays of SOD
and INJ batches at the production and testing steps follow user-speciﬁed distributions, as is
the probability of badput after testing. The stream of goodput drug batches emerging from
the Drug Testing node is split between the focal company and the CMO Pool node according
to user-speciﬁed probabilities. Goodput Drug batches, routed to the focal company, enter the
Drug Packaging node with no delay, while those routed to the CMO Pool node are shipped
with a user-speciﬁed transportation delay distribution.
3.1.11 Packaging material supply
Packaging material is used to package individual end-units of SOD and INJ drugs. The Pack-
aging Supplier Pool node receives monthly orders (in batches) from the Pharma Firm node.
It produces each batch sequentially and ships each for testing at the focal ﬁrm’s Packaging
Testing node with a transportation delay. Packaging material related delays of SOD and INJ
123

Annals of Operations Research
batches at the production and testing steps follow user-speciﬁed distributions, as does the
probability of badput after testing. However, only badput packaging-material end-units are
discarded rather than the entire packaging batch. The stream of goodput packaging-material
batches emerging from the Packaging Testing node enters the Drug Packaging node.
3.1.12 Drug packaging
Drug packaging takes place in the Drug Packaging node, which maintains two inventories
for SOD drugs and two inventories for INJ drugs: one for drug safety stocks and the other
for packaging-material safety stocks. To produce one unit of packaged drugs, one drug unit
is combined with one packaging-material unit. If either inventory is empty, drug packaging
is suspended until both types of units become available. A ﬂow control mechanism informs
the node as to how many packaged drug units to produce per order, following which drug
packaging is suspended until the next order arrives. The Drug Packaging node packages
drugs in sequential batches and ships each batch for testing at the focal ﬁrm’s Packaging
Testing node. Packaged-drug-related delays of SOD and INJ batches at the packaging and
testing steps follow user-speciﬁed distributions, as does the probability of badput after testing.
However, only packaged drug end-units are discarded rather than the entire packaged drug
batch. The stream of goodput drug batches emerging from the Packaging Testing node is
shipped to the Distribution Center node.
3.1.13 CMO production
To increase its production capacity (and cost-efﬁciency), the focal ﬁrm outsources all or some
of the production operations to a pool of CMOs, represented by the CMO Pool node. The
outsourced work forms multiple streams as follows:
1. Thestreamofrawmaterialbatchesfromthefocalﬁrm’sRawMaterialTesting nodeissplit
into two production sub-streams with user-speciﬁed probabilities. The ﬁrst production
sub-stream converts raw material batches to API batches and ships them to the focal
ﬁrm for testing at the API Testing node. The badput probabilities for outsourced API
batches at the API Testing node are likely higher than for insourced batches because the
focal ﬁrm cannot directly control outsourced production. The second production sub-
stream converts raw material batches to packaged-drug end-units and ships them to the
focal ﬁrm’s Product Testing node with user-speciﬁed production and transportation delay
distributions.
2. The stream of API batches from the focal ﬁrm’s API Testing node is converted into batches
of packaged-drug end-units and shipped to the focal ﬁrm’s Product Testing node with
user-speciﬁed production and transportation transportation delay distributions.
3. The stream of drug batches from the focal ﬁrm’s Drug Testing node is converted into
batches of packaged-drug end-units and shipped to the focal ﬁrm’s Product Testing node
with user-speciﬁed production and transportation delay distributions.
Again, because the focal ﬁrm has no control over outsourced production and each stream
includes different numbers of production steps, the badput probabilities for the outsourced
streams of end-unit batches at the focal ﬁrm’s Product Testing node are correlated with the
respective numbers of steps in each stream.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.2 Disruption model
In the generic PSC model in Fig. 1, all disruptions were incorporated, using a user-
parameterized model. Speciﬁcally, a given disruption stream consists of multiple disruption
instances of the same type, occurring in the same location (node) of the PSC, such that only
one disruption in the stream is active at any given time (concurrent multiple streams of distinct
disruptions are permissible). A given disruption instance in a disruption stream comprises
three consecutive abutting periods and their associated impacts as follows:
1. The inactive period is the time interval separating the arrivals of successive disruption
instances in the same stream. On arrival, the disruption changes the value of a user-
speciﬁed parameter at the arrival node. For example, the mean production time of a
product batch may be increased, thereby reducing the production capacity of the node.
2. The detection period is the time it takes to detect the disruption instance, starting from
its arrival time. At detection time (the end-time of this period), any further impact may
be null, or the user-speciﬁed value of the parameter may change again. For example, the
mean production time of a product batch may further increase due to deterioration during
the detection period.
3. The restoration period is the time it takes to resolve the disruption or at least mitigate it,
starting from its detection time. At the restoration time (the end-time of this period), any
further impact may be null, or the value of the parameter may change again. For example,
the mean production time is typically restored to its original value before the disruption,
or there may be only a partial restoration, or the restoration may fail, and the parameter
could further deteriorate.
All period durations are user-speciﬁed, typically as distributions that model their random
nature. All impacts are also speciﬁed as distributions of percent changes (negative, positive,
or zero) of the associated parameter.
3.3 Disruption classification
To create a disruption classiﬁcation, a literature review was performed of past pharmaceutical-
related supply chain disruptions, and interviews were conducted with SMEs, supply chain
researchers, and government agency ofﬁcials. Further, information was gathered from SMEs
on plausible future disruptions, and these were also included in the classiﬁcation presented
in this paper. Typical supply chain disruptions include reduced production capacity, reduced
quality, and longer transportation times. The classiﬁcation presented in this section helps
in understanding threats related to pharmaceutical drugs, and subsequently in developing
preparedness and mitigation strategies.
PSC disruption categories are classes of disruptions that have similar impacts on system
performance, regardless of their underlying causes. The PSC disruption classiﬁcation con-
sists of 13 disruption categories and includes both historical and potential instances of such
disruptions, obtained from various publicly available sources. Figure 1 overlays disruption
categories on the PSC map at potential occurrence locations, based on empirical ﬁndings
from the open literature and expert opinion. For example, the Category 1 disruption (raw
material adulteration) is denoted X-1 and is located at the Raw Material Supplier Pool node.
The motivation for this paper’s classiﬁcation approach is twofold. First, modeling supply
chain logistics to assess the severity of disruptions only needs to consider the impacts of
disruptions rather than their causes. Second, adding causal sources to the classiﬁcation, such
123

Annals of Operations Research
as weather events, factory closures, labor disputes, etc., would spawn an undesirable pro-
liferation of disruption categories. Accordingly, this paper characterizes disruptions by the
functional nature of their impact on a PSC node. A description of each of the disruption
categories is presented next.
Disruption Category 1: Raw Material Adulteration. Pharmaceutical drugs can be con-
taminated by adulterated raw material from poor-quality suppliers or criminal ones. An
example of this type of disruption is the infamous Heparin recall of 2008 (Hedlund et al.,
2013). Heparin is used as an anticoagulant in the treatment of heart attacks. The majority of
its ingredients are sourced from pig intestines processed by farmers in China. Baxter Inter-
national was responsible for about half of the US’s Heparin market. Its contractor, Scientiﬁc
Protein Labs, used counterfeit precursors (a contaminant, called “over sulfated chondroitin
sulfate,” OSCS for short) to create the chemicals, which resulted in an adulterated product
that killed 81 people and severely injured 785 others (Ramacciotti et al., 2011). The OSCS
was supplied by a still-unknown criminal third party, which deliberately selected it precisely
because it mimics Heparin and can pass state-of-the-art tests (Bogdanich, 2008). Various
strategies have been employed by the pharmaceutical industry to ensure drug quality by
improving the processing of raw materials, such as the process of Continuous Production,
which has gained traction in recent years. This process manufactures drugs continuously
rather than in traditional batches. Analytical methods have been developed to improve the
performance of production-inventory systems. For example, Shi (2022) studied continuous
production-inventory systems and developed optimal solutions for production systems, par-
ticularly for pharmaceutical ﬁrms, focusing on their production process validation (FDA,
2020). Similarly, Chang et al. (2019) quantiﬁed the stockout risk of production-inventory
systems.
Disruption Category 2: API Adulteration. Recall that APIs are the pharmacologic active
components of drugs with desired therapeutic beneﬁts. APIs are typically classiﬁed into syn-
theticchemicalAPIscomprisingsmallmoleculesthatconstitutealargepartofthecommercial
pharmaceutical market, or natural chemical APIs comprised of biologics. API adulteration
refers to sourcing adulterated synthetic chemical APIs from untrusted suppliers. An example
of this type of disruption was the Valsartan recall (Farrukh et al., 2019). Generic versions of
angiotension-receptor blockers (ARBs), high blood-pressure/heart-failure medicines, were
recalled due to nitrosamine impurities. Such impurities are considered likely carcinogens;
they include N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) and N-Nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), which
are probable human carcinogens (World Health Organization, 2019). In 2018, the FDA
learned that a certain API product (manufactured by Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical Co.
Ltd., in a factory for some generic Valsartan-containing medicines) contained NDMA. The
FDA investigation found that a manufacturing change likely led to this impurity, which
had gone undetected by global regulators (FDA, 2021). In order to enhance drug quality
through consistent supply of drugs, reduced stockouts, and optimized production processes,
Production-Inventory systems with continuous replenishment models can be leveraged. Such
models were studied by Shi et al. (2014) and Katehakis et al. (2022). More generally, the
quality of API is crucial in ensuring the safety, efﬁcacy, and quality consistency of drugs.
Consequently, there has been a concerted effort of reshoring drug production to the US, using
continuous production processes (Malhotra, 2015; Shi, 2022), to ensure API quality com-
pliance and cost effectiveness, along with bolstering domestic supply chains. Blockchain
technology (see Chang et al., 2022 for a review) can also be leveraged to improve trace-
ability and address quality issues with APIs. A study by Chang et al. (2021) demonstrated
how blockchain technology adoption impacts optimal ordering decisions and the associated
optimal proﬁt.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Disruption Category 3: Excipients Adulteration. Recall that excipients are inactive but
essential drug ingredients that assist with binding and coating during the manufacturing
process and stabilize unstable components such as proteins. Most drugs have a higher per-
centage of excipients, such as lubricants, ﬁllers, binding agents, coatings and disintegrants,
as compared to API ingredients. There are almost 500 excipients in the US Pharmacopeia’s
National Formulary, and the global market for such excipients was about $8.37 billion in
2023 (Precedence Research, 2024). Excipient adulteration refers to the addition of any type
of toxic impurity to the manufacturing process. An example of this type of disruption is
diethylene glycol (DEG) poisoning, which has been prevalent since the 1937 Elixir sulfa-
nimide incident. The Elixir sulfanimide was an improperly prepared antibiotic that caused
mass poisoning and killed over 100 people in the US. The 1938 Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act required drug producers to demonstrate acceptable safety before marketing a
product. DEG is commonly used as a solubilizer both in cosmetics and in oral, transdermal,
and injectable drugs. The ﬁrst known case of counterfeiters exploiting the compound was in
Panama in 2006, where DEG was substituted for glycerin in a cold medicine, killing over 100
people (Schier et al., 2011). Recently, the FDA has recognized the excipient adulteration risk
of ingredients, such as guar gum (a disintegrant used in extended-release tablets; Srivastava
et al., 2016), gelatin (used as glue but carrying the risk of adulteration with melamine), and
talc (used for anticaking, lubrication, and coating), which was found to include contaminants
such as asbestos (Kemsley, 2014). The analysis of excipients requires high performance
chromatography to detect adulteration.
Disruption Category 4: Counterfeit. Counterfeit drugs are deﬁned as “products deliber-
ately and fraudulently produced and/or mislabeled as to identity and/or source to make them
appear to be a genuine product” (World Health Organization, 2018). For example, a counter-
feit drug can contain no API, an incorrect amount of API, an inferior-quality API, incorrect
API formulation, toxic contaminants, or completely expired drugs that are re-packaged. The
high demands for chemotherapeutic drugs, antibiotics, vaccines, lifestyle drugs, weight loss
drugs, antimalarials, antihistamines, and antivirals provides lucrative opportunities for coun-
terfeiters. There are six categories of counterfeit as follows:
1. Counterfeit product and packaging occur when both the drug product and its packaging
are counterfeited. Counterfeit-packaged drugs may contain the correct API and excipi-
ents, in which case illicit imports cause economic harm, or they may contain a wrong
composition of API and excipients or no API at all. The latter can introduce harmful or
toxic substances into a patient, possibly leading to fatal consequences.
2. Counterfeit product in genuine or reusable/recyclable packaging material refers to
materials collected via illicit activities such as “trash-diving.” Waste material from phar-
maceutical facilities can be stolen by criminals for the purpose of using them in counterfeit
products.
3. Counterfeit packaging with repackaged or relabeled genuine product arises from illicit
activities such as counterfeit packaging.
4. Counterfeit product in relabeled packaging is carried out by re-packagers in foreign
markets to introduce the relabeled product back into local licit pharmaceutical supply
chains.
5. Counterfeit product refers to tampering with the chemical formulation of the product,
via dilution of its component-mix or modifying the dosage form.
6. Counterfeit with an unapproved/in-development/in-testing product occurs when drug
products, which are yet to be introduced into the market, are counterfeited. Criminal
agents are known to steal trade secrets and Intellectual Property information to create
counterfeits of this type. An example of this type of disruption was the Viagra and Cialis
123

Annals of Operations Research
counterfeiting of erectile dysfunction drugs. In 2005, 440,000 counterfeit Viagra and
Cialis tablets were imported from China and distributed in the US (Nelson et al., 2006).
An innovative proposed solution to tackle the counterfeit drug problem is the use of
blockchain technology (Chang et al., 2021, 2022), which ensures the traceability and
authenticity of drugs, and facilitates regulatory compliance by providing data security.
Blockchain technology can aid in detecting counterfeit pharmaceuticals (Haq & Esuka,
2018) and can also be integrated with IoT devices and embedded sensors in packaging
to identify tampering (Rastogi et al., 2022).
Disruption Categories 5, 6, and 7: Internal Losses, External Losses, and Transportation
Losses. These disruption categories involve, respectively, stealing cargo from a warehouse;
“trash-diving” to get waste material, discarded packaging or product ingredients; and cargo
thefts during transportation inside and outside facilities. These could also involve losing
material or cargo due to natural disasters (earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes, etc.), events
like ﬁre, trafﬁc accidents, spills, or other ways in which physical inventory is destroyed or
lost. The largest known pharmaceutical heist occurred in an Eli Lilly warehouse in 2010,
where criminals stole popular supplies of Cymbalta and Prozac. The same criminals had
also conducted heists in a GSK warehouse in Virginia worth $13.3 million (Roberts, 2014).
Transportation thefts are common at truck stops or parking points where truck drivers take a
break. The stolen goods can be further modiﬁed and re-introduced into licit supply chains at
higher prices.
Disruption Category 8: Diversion. This category involves situations where drug products
are diverted out of a licit supply chain. Diversions can occur when a licit wholesaler buys
drug products from an untrusted supplier and proceeds to sell or resell them. Diversion of
medicines, sold at a discount for use in government sponsored programs, can be counterfeited
as well. In addition, such disruptions include consumer-consumer exchanges or business-
business unauthorized operations, where sales representatives are hired to call doctors to
prescribe these diverted drug products to patients. However, the most prevalent form of drug
diversion occurs through fake online pharmacies. An example of this type of disruption was
the case of Andrew J. Strempler, a Canadian citizen operating the company Medical Health
Consulting Inc., also known as RXNorth.com. He ﬁlled prescription orders in The Bahamas
with labels stating they were made in Canada (Attaran & Beall, 2014).
Disruption Category 9: Cyberattacks. A cyberattack is an attack of malware, ransomware,
or virus of some sort, attacking the information systems of a PSC to gather personal informa-
tion or create supply-chain disruptions. Cyberattacks are almost always intentional, though
accidental disruptions of cyber systems can have similar effects. Importantly, their impact
can be more widespread than disruptions that only impact single nodes in the PSC, and
their impact can be hard to gauge given the stealthy nature of such attacks. A recent Health-
ISAC report directed at pharmaceutical company chief information security ofﬁcers stressed
increasing concern about bad actors targeting operating technology (OT) systems used to run
the manufacturing ﬂoor, labs, R&D facilities, warehouses, and distribution centers (Health-
ISAC, 2022). The proliferation of cyberattacks has greatly increased during and since the
COVID-19 pandemic. Typically, hackers demand ransom to unlock a computer system they
had attacked. For example, this kind of attack impacted United HealthCare services, affecting
400 US and UK hospitals (Landi, 2020). An attack on the UVM Medical Center locked out
electronic health records and payroll, among other things. Damages were estimated at $50
million (Diaz, 2022). Attacks on information systems of healthcare providers, which are an
integral part of the PSCs, can have a disruptive impact on the operations of multiple PSCs
simultaneously.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Disruption Category 10: Wholesaler Price Discrimination. Wholesalers are an integral
part of the pharmaceutical industry, engaging in bulk buying and selling of brand-name and
generic drugs, in addition to providing a wide variety of services to manufacturers and phar-
macies. About 92% of prescription drugs in the US are distributed through wholesalers, who
make most of their revenues primarily through selling generic drugs (The Commonwealth
Fund,2022).Asigniﬁcantpercentageofgenericdrugsarehandledbyonlyahandfulofwhole-
salers (AmerisourceBergen, Cardinal Health, and McKesson), which act as “price-setters,”
thereby leading to pricing-based disruption opportunities (e.g., during drug shortages, smaller
wholesalers can sell their inventory to larger wholesalers, driving up the prices of drugs.) An
example of this type of disruption involved McKesson, which posted inﬂated pricing data to
First Databank (a publisher of drug prices) and proceeded to charge anti-competitive prices
for generic drugs. McKesson was implicated in a price-ﬁxing scandal, where company exec-
utives engaged in a massive insider-trading scheme and misled investors by falsely attributing
higher prices to supply disruptions (Sagonowsky, 2019).
Disruption Category 11: Disinformation Campaigns. These are campaigns by domes-
tic or foreign agencies that spread disinformation about medical products. Disinformation
campaigns can create false demand with no scientiﬁc backing for certain drugs, thereby
impacting the supply and demand of genuine counterparts. An example of this type of
disruption involved the drug Ivermectin. The COVID-19 pandemic saw an avalanche of dis-
information on Ivermectin and its ability to treat COVID-19. Social media websites such as
Facebook, microblogging websites such as Twitter, and various podcasts assisted in spreading
inaccurate information about Ivermectin’s efﬁcacy. Ivermectin was touted as a miracle-cure
for COVID-19 on Florida-based telehealth websites promoting its use (Robins-Early, 2021),
though the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the FDA put advisory
warnings against using Ivermectin for treatment of COVID-19.
Disruption Category 12: Illicit Reverse Logistics. Reverse logistics has become a key
competency in modern supply chains (Rogers et al., 2013), encompassing returns, refur-
bishment, repackaging, unsold goods, and end-of-life goods. Criminals steal expired drugs
and divert them to secondary markets for resale. Expired drugs still have API of signiﬁcant
potency, making the resale and misuse of the drug product easy to accomplish. These issues
are further exacerbated in low-income and middle-income economies where such drugs can
ﬁnd their way into drug donation programs, thereby impacting licit PSCs.
Disruption Category 13: Intellectual Property (IP) Theft. The pharmaceutical industry
is built on a complex high-risk and high-cost process of research, development, and com-
mercialization of drugs. These high costs incent companies and employees to engage in IP
theft. Theft of IP in the form of research material, data, methods, possibly in collaboration
with criminal organizations, can lead to severe economic harm to the affected pharmaceutical
ﬁrm. Pharmaceutical ﬁrms are prime targets for IP theft by insiders, driven by the economic
value of IP due to high demand for prescription drugs. An example of this type of disruption
was the subject of the Pﬁzer lawsuit against two of its employees for stealing information
and setting up a competitive ﬁrm (Sagonowsky, 2021). Another example is the case of Glax-
oSmithKline (GSK) employees who tried selling sensitive cancer data to multiple companies
in China, backed by the Chinese government (Dunleavy, 2022).
3.4 Mitigation
This research studied both post-disruption mitigation (in reaction to the advent of disruptions)
and pre-disruption mitigations (in preparedness for anticipated disruptions).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Starting with post-disruption mitigation, safety stocks are an important case in point.
Safety stocks serve as a buffer of inventory available for emergency use in response to supply
disruptions. The importance of safety stocks as a primary post-disruption mitigation tool
against disruptions is well-documented (Amirjabbari & Bhuiyan, 2014; Graves & Willems,
2000). PSCs typically carry high levels of safety stocks, given the long sourcing and man-
ufacturing times of Key Starting Materials (KSMs) and APIs (Shah, 2004). Thus, safety
stocks serve as an important safeguard of continued pharmaceutical supply, especially drugs
essential to public health. In the generic PSC model, a receiving node typically contains the
safety stocks of materials from one or more incoming nodes. For example, the Drug Produc-
tion node, as a receiving node, carries safety stocks of API incoming from the API Testing
node and safety stocks of excipients from the incoming Excipients Testing node. Recall that
all inventories are managed by the MTS replenishment policy, and inventory units are used
in FIFO order (the oldest items are used before more recent ones) to ensure that the safety
stocks are continually refreshed.
Pre-disruption mitigation strategies primarily aim to increase the efﬁcacy of real-time
disruption detection and involve activities that improve the transparency and visibility of
the supply chain. Incorporating real-time sensors at key locations of the supply chain is an
important pre-disruption mitigation strategy (Lechler et al., 2019). Sensors do not have to
be physical devices, but can include actions, such as more thorough and ongoing vetting of
suppliers,andothermeasurestobediscussedinSect.4.Further,supplier-baseddiversiﬁcation
is another effective pre-disruption mitigation strategy (Hendricks et al., 2009). In practice,
the deployment of sensors and the diversiﬁcation of the supplier base make the supply chain
more resilient to disruptions, thereby increasing supply reliability.
To study the model’s behavior and efﬁcacy of mitigation strategies, a baseline PSC sim-
ulation was ﬁrst created (see Sect. 3.1 for model details). Next, disruptions were injected
into the baseline simulation model, and it was run without and with mitigations. Speciﬁcally,
experiments were conducted to understand the impact of disruptions and identify the most
effective mitigation strategies. The details of the simulation, experiments, and mitigation
strategies are discussed in Domeniconi et al. (2022) and Rana et al. (2024). These details
are not included in this paper for the sake of brevity and to keep the primary focus on the
integrated framework for modeling complex supply chains with disruptions, along with the
insights gleaned in the course of the modeling process.
The ability to understand and quantify resilience is instrumental in emergency planning
and response (Zobel & Khansa, 2014). The literature provides various deﬁnitions of supply
chain resilience (Ponomarov & Holcomb, 2009; Rice & Caniato, 2003; Shefﬁ& Rice, 2005;
Tukamuhabwa et al., 2015), including the important concept of resilience triangle which
measures the impact of disruptions on supply-chain nodes (Bevilacqua et al., 2017; Tierney &
Bruneau, 2007). Bevilacqua et al. (2017) and Shefﬁand Rice (2005) provided comprehensive
frameworks for applying the resilience triangle concept to supply chains. Figure 2 is a generic
depiction of the resilience triangle concept.
Figure 2 shows the generic evolution of a disruption consisting of pre-disruption, disrup-
tion, post-disruption phases. Here, the horizontal axis is time, and the vertical axis is the
performance metric. The green curve is a graph of the performance metric (e.g., a production
quantity over time at the Distribution Center node). The dashed vertical red line marks a
disruption onset followed by the disruption’s impact over the disruption phase (a period of
declining drug production followed by recovery). The disruption phase includes the follow-
ing time markers: start of the disruption (S), point of maximal impact (M), and the time
when recovery is complete (R). The resilience triangle is formed by connecting the points
S, M, and R, where the resilience triangle’s height represents the severity of the disruption,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Generic resilience triangle (Adapted from Bevilacqua et al. (2017), originally from Shefﬁand Rice
(2005))
its horizontal length represents the recovery time, and its area represents the “magnitude” of
the disruption’s impact: The smaller the resilience triangle’s area, the higher the resilience.
Thus, the goal of a ﬁrm is to minimize the area of the resilience triangle associated with the
disruption.
4 Insights and conclusions
Our interactions with DHS university centers of excellence, pharmaceutical ﬁrm execu-
tives, security experts, and other practitioners yielded several key operational and managerial
insights into PSC functioning, disruptions, and attendant mitigations. These insights are dis-
cussed in this section.
First, our work showed that the integrated framework provides a systematic way of
compactly mapping out complex supply chains, such as PSCs. To this end, the integrated
framework uses detailed modeling of the focal ﬁrm’s internal processes (production, testing,
distribution, etc.) and aggregation of the focal ﬁrm’s external entities into supplier pools,
wholesaler pools, hospital pools, etc. The visualized supply chain map, overlaid with dis-
ruption icons, and viewed from a focal ﬁrm’s vantage point, is conducive to understanding
the PSC, while maintaining manageable complexity, thereby facilitating gleaning actionable
insights into disruption indicators and warnings and corresponding mitigation strategies. Fur-
thermore, the integrated framework developed in this research can be leveraged to model and
analyze other PSCs, as well as supply chains in other industries.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Second, the supply chain map can serve as the basis for developing simulation models
to quantify the impact of disruptions on supply chain performance and the efﬁcacy of miti-
gation strategies that address threats and vulnerabilities. Such a simulation model would be
parameterized to represent a baseline model without disruptions, whose performance would
be compared to counterparts with deployed mitigation strategies.
Third, since disruptions tend to have a cascading impact on the supply chain (Dolgui et al.,
2018), it is important to detect disruptions as soon as possible throughout the supply chain.
Consequently, placing capable sensors (e.g., with blockchain technology) at various points
in the supply chain can provide early warning of disruption onset indicators.
Fourth, safety stocks are essential in mitigating PSC disruptions (Talluri et al., 2004). The
rightsizing of safety stocks depends on factors such as lead times, material costs, and the
number of suppliers, and supports business continuity at optimal costs (Grahl et al., 2016;
Ivanov & Rozhkov, 2020). For example, early in the COVID-19 pandemic, there was a critical
shortage of glass vials (Ganti, 2022). The pharmaceutical industry relies on borosilicate glass
which is used for industrial purposes as opposed to the common soda-lime glass which is used
ineverydayglassobjects.GlassvialsarealsotypicallymanagedusingtheMTSreplenishment
strategy, subject to the assumption that they are readily available with short lead times, so
manufacturers can keep low levels of safety stocks. However, the COVID-19 pandemic
uncovered a supply vulnerability in that the borosilicate-glass suppliers could not satisfy
the demand spike. Moreover, the problem was further exacerbated by the shortage of raw
materials, and speciﬁcally the type of sand used to create borosilicate glass. The extensive
inter-connectedness of supply chains and combinations of concurrent supply disruptions
and demand spikes are often unanticipated. Accordingly, a future research direction is the
investigation of multiple concurrent disruptions, extending to higher-tier suppliers. and their
supply-chain performance impacts.
Fifth, data accuracy, reliability, and security are critical to PSC management. Disrup-
tions to PSCs that compromise data integrity can severely impact supply chain performance
and compliance with regulatory mandates. Modern pharmaceutical ﬁrms face data integrity
challenges inherent in the ecosystem of disparate suppliers and distributors. Consequently,
pharmaceutical ﬁrms resort to digitizing data (Chen et al., 2020), and encrypting it has become
commonpractice(Health-ISAC,2022).OneofthepharmaceuticalSMEsweinterviewedsug-
gested that a disruption that replaces accurate data with false data can be extremely difﬁcult
to detect or may even go undetected for an extended period of time. In fact, the SME noted
that it sufﬁces to create distrust in data in order to impact PSC performance negatively. The
research described here highlights the need to develop processes and procedures to ensure
data accuracy, reliability, and security to maintain trust in data.
Sixth, PSC security includes surveillance, vetting of partners, and testing across the supply
chain. Surveillance can be carried out by deployment of sensors throughout the supply chain,
as mentioned earlier, to provide early warnings of disruptions in progress, which afford the
opportunity of early activation of mitigations. During discussions with DHS and SMEs, it
was pointed out that PSC security would be improved by enhanced vetting of suppliers and
their processes, hiring more inspectors, adding penalties to supply contracts for failure to
implement improved security, and judicious use of smart technology (Bocek et al., 2017).
Security also includes extensive testing, which is an established practice in PSCs, in part due
to the need to comply with regulatory agencies. Accordingly, our PSC model incorporated
testing nodes at each production step. Testing nodes, however, are vulnerable to disruptions
that make the tests unreliable.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Finally, the integrated framework presented in this paper offers a roadmap to modeling
other supply chains, their disruptions, and attendant mitigations by mapping and parame-
terization, as well as classifying disruptions and overlaying them on the supply-chain map.
Once a baseline model is created, one can study the impact of disruptions using simulation.
The PSC map in Fig. 1 facilitated data collection, such as distributions of demand, pro-
duction times, testing times, transportation times, replenishment lead times, and routing
probabilities of work-in-progress. A detailed discussion of the corresponding simulation
model, experiments, and mitigation strategies can be found in Domeniconi et al. (2022) and
Rana et al. (2024). Furthermore, our subsequent work has demonstrated the extendibility
of the integrated framework beyond PSCs to a variety of supply chains, such as medical
devices (Domeniconi et al., 2023a), satellite solar panels (Domeniconi et al., 2023b), and
food processing (in progress). We believe that this general methodology (further described
in Domeniconi et al., 2023c) holds out the promise of furthering empirical and analyti-
cal studies of diverse supply chains subject to disruptions. We hope that the collaborative
Industry-Government-Academia synergistic model, outlined in this research, can provide a
useful three-way stakeholder partnership approach to ﬁnding rigorous solutions to emerging
operational and societal supply chain challenges.
Acknowledgements The authors thank their collaborators from George Mason University – Jim Jones,
Abhisekh Rana, Rajhersh Patel, Sean Luke, and Carlotta Domeniconi for their contributions to this research.
Funding This research has been funded in whole or in part with Federal funds from the Department of
Homeland Security under BOA No. 70RSAT18G000000001, task order no. 70RSAT21FR00000127.
Declarations
Conﬂict of Interest The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ambulkar, S., Blackhurst, J., & Grawe, S. (2015). Firm’s resilience to supply chain disruptions: Scale devel-
opment and empirical examination. Journal of Operations Management, 33, 111–122.
Amirjabbari, B., & Bhuiyan, N. (2014). Determining supply chain safety stock level and location. Journal of
Industrial Engineering and Management (JIEM), 7(1), 42–71.
ASHP (2023). Severity and Impact of Current Drug Shortages. ASHP Newsletter, June/July 2023. https://www.
ashp.org/-/media/assets/drug-shortages/docs/ASHP-2023-Drug-Shortages-Survey-Report.pdf
Attaran, A., & Beall, R. (2014). Internet pharmacies: Canada’s transnational organized crime. Health Law in
Canada, 34(4), 93–120.
Azghandi, R., Grifﬁn, J., & Jalali, M. S. (2018). Minimization of drug shortages in pharmaceutical supply
chains: A simulation-based analysis of drug recall patterns and inventory policies. Complexity, 2018,
1–14.
Barroso, A. P., Machado, V. H., & Machado, V. C. (2011). Supply chain resilience using the mapping approach.
Supply Chain Management, INTECH Open Access Publisher, 161–184.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Bevilacqua, M., Ciarapica, F. E., & Marcucci, G. (2017). Supply chain resilience triangle: The study and
development of a framework. International Journal of Economics and Management Engineering, 11(8),
2046–2053.
Bocek, T., Rodrigues, B. B., Strasser, T., & Stiller, B. (2017, May). Blockchains everywhere-a use-case of
blockchains in the pharma supply-chain. In 2017 IFIP/IEEE symposium on integrated network and
service management (IM) (pp. 772–777).
Bode, C., & Wagner, S. M. (2015). Structural drivers of upstream supply chain complexity and the frequency
of supply chain disruptions. Journal of Operations Management, 36, 215–228.
Bogdanich, W. (2008). Heparin is now suspected in 62 fatalities across US. New York Times April 10, 2008.
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/10/health/policy/10heparin.html
Brenner, V. (2015). Causes of supply chain disruptions: An empirical analysis in cold chains for food and
pharmaceuticals. Springer.
Carvalho, H., Cruz-Machado, V., & Tavares, J. G. (2012). A mapping framework for assessing supply chain
resilience. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 12(3), 354–373.
CCICADA (2020). The DHS Centers of Excellence COVID-19 Supply Chain Initiative. CCICADA Report
August 14, 2020. https://ccicada.org/2020/08/14/the-dhs-centers-of-excellence-covid-19-supply-chain-
initiative/
Chang, A., El-Rayes, N., & Shi, J. (2022). Blockchain technology for supply chain management: A compre-
hensive review. FinTech, 1(2), 191–205.
Chang, A., Lu, H., & Shi, J. J. (2019). Stockout risk of production-inventory systems with compound Poisson
demands. Omega, 83, 181–198.
Chang, J. A., Katehakis, M. N., Shi, J. J., & Yan, Z. (2021). Blockchain-empowered Newsvendor optimization.
International Journal of Production Economics, 238, 108144.
Chen, Y., Yang, O., Sampat, C., Bhalode, P., Ramachandran, R., & Ierapetritou, M. (2020). Digital twins in
pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical manufacturing: A literature review. Processes, 8(9), 1088.
Choi, T. Y., Rogers, D., & Vakil, B. (2020). Coronavirus is a wake-up call for supply chain management.
Harvard Business Review, 27(1), 364–398.
Chowdhury, P., Paul, S. K., Kaisar, S., & Moktadir, M. A. (2021). COVID-19 pandemic related supply chain
studies: A systematic review. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 148,
102271.
Craighead, C. W., Blackhurst, J., Rungtusanatham, M. J., & Handﬁeld, R. B. (2007). The severity of supply
chain disruptions: Design characteristics and mitigation capabilities. Decision Sciences, 38(1), 131–156.
Diaz, N. (2022). How UVM Medical Center continued care after ransomware attack took down its IT network.
Becker’s Hospital Review Newsletter June 14, 2022. https://www.beckershospitalreview.com/cybersecur
ity/how-uvm-medical-center-continued-care-after-ransomware-attack-took-down-its-it-network.html
Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2018). Ripple effect in the supply chain: An analysis and recent
literature. International Journal of Production Research, 56(1–2), 414–430.
Domeniconi, C., Rana, A., Patel, R., Jones, J., Kavak, H., Luke, S., Menkov, V., Roberts, F., Baveja, A.,
Chen, W., Egan, D., Goswami, A., Lei, R., March, P., Melamed, B., Narayan, V., Crooks, A. (2022).
Detecting Criminal Disruption of Supply Chains Study: Phase I: Pharmaceutical Supply Chains, DHS
Report, October 20, 2022. https://ccicada.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/CINA-CCICADA-GMU-Ru
tgers_Final-Analysis-of-SC1.pdf
Domeniconi, C., Rana, A., Patel, R., Jones, J., Kavak, H., Luke, S., Menkov, V., Roberts, F., Baveja, A.,
Chen, W., Egan, D., Goswami, A., Lei, R., March, P., Melamed, B., Narayan, V., Crooks, A. (2023a).
Detecting Criminal Disruption of Supply Chains Study: Phase II: Medical Devices and Critical-Care
Supply Chains, DHS Report, June 15, 2023. https://ccicada.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/CINA-CC
ICADA-GMU-Rutgers_Final-Analysis-of-SC2.pdf
Domeniconi, C., Rana, A., Patel, R., Jones, J., Kavak, H., Luke, S., Menkov, V., Roberts, F., Baveja, A.,
Chen, W., Egan, D., Goswami, A., Lei, R., March, P., Melamed, B., Narayan, V., Crooks, A. (2023b).
Detecting Criminal Disruption of Supply Chains Study: Phase III: Technology Supply Chains, DHS
Report, September 5, 2023. https://ccicada.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/CINA-CCICADA-GMU-
Rutgers_Final-Analysis-of-SC3.pdf
Domeniconi, C., Rana, A., Patel, R., Jones, J., Kavak, H., Luke, S., Menkov, V., Roberts, F., Baveja, A.,
Chen, W., Egan, D., Goswami, A., Lei, R., March, P., Melamed, B., Narayan, V., Crooks, A. (2023c).
Detecting Criminal Disruption of Supply Chains Study: Report: General Methodology and Tools, DHS
Report, August 21, 2023. https://ccicada.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/10/CINA-CCICADA-GMU-Ru
tgers_GeneralizedMethod_Final-1.pdf
Dong,J.,Zhang,D.,Yan,H.,&Nagurney,A.(2005).Multitieredsupplychainnetworks:Multicriteriadecision-
making under uncertainty. Annals of Operations Research, 135, 155–178.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Dong, L., & Tomlin, B. (2012). Managing disruption risk: The interplay between operations and insurance.
Management Science, 58(10), 1898–1915.
Dougherty, D. (1990). Understanding new markets for new products. Strategic Management Journal, 59–78.
DuHadway, S., Carnovale, S., & Hazen, B. (2019). Understanding risk management for intentional supply
chain disruptions: Risk detection, risk mitigation, and risk recovery. Annals of Operations Research, 283,
179–198.
Dunleavy, K. (2022). Third former GlaxoSmithKline scientist pleads guilty to stealing company secret.
Fierce Pharma January 4, 2022. https://www.ﬁercepharma.com/pharma/a-third-glaxosmithkline-scient
ist-pleads-guilty-to-stealing-secrets-from-company
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management Review, 14(4),
532–550.
Farrukh, M. J., Tariq, M. H., Malik, O., & Khan, T. M. (2019). Valsartan recall: Global regulatory overview
and future challenges. Therapeutic Advances in Drug Safety, 10, 2042098618823458.
FBI (2020). FBI and Secret Service Working Against COVID-19 Threats. FBI Press Release. https://www.
fbi.gov/news/press-releases/fbi-and-secret-service-working-against-covid-19-threats
FDA (2020). CGMP and Process Validation. FDA Ofﬁce of Compliance. https://www.fda.gov/media/16
4517/download#:~:text=Process%20Validation%20is%20the%20collection,product%20throughout%
20the%20product%20lifecycle.
FDA (2021). Recalls of Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers (ARBs) including Valsartan, Losartan and Irbesartan.
FDA Drug Safety and Availability. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/recalls-angi
otensin-ii-receptor-blockers-arbs-including-valsartan-losartan-and-irbesartan
FDA (2023). The Latest in Drug Shortages. FDA Drug Safety and Availability. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
drug-safety-and-availability/drug-shortages
Ganti, L. (2022). Healthcare Lessons From A Pandemic: A Place For Glass Alternatives. Forbes March 23,
2022. https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesbusinessdevelopmentcouncil/2022/03/21/healthcare-lessons-
from-a-pandemic-a-place-for-glass-alternatives/
Gardner, J. T., & Cooper, M. C. (2003). Strategic supply chain mapping approaches. Journal of Business
Logistics, 24(2), 37–64.
Gaur, V., Osadchiy, N., & Udenio, M. (2022). Research: Why It’s So Hard to Map Global Supply Chains.
Harvard Business Review October 31, 2022. https://hbr.org/2022/10/research-why-its-so-hard-to-map-
global-supply-chains
Graebner, M. E. (2004). Momentum and serendipity: How acquired leaders create value in the integration of
technology ﬁrms. Strategic Management Journal, 25(8–9), 751–777.
Grahl, J., Minner, S., & Dittmar, D. (2016). Meta-heuristics for placing strategic safety stock in multi-echelon
inventory with differentiated service times. Annals of Operations Research, 242, 489–504.
Graves, S. C., & Willems, S. P. (2000). Optimizing strategic safety stock placement in supply chains. Manu-
facturing & Service Operations Management, 2(1), 68–83.
Haq, I., & Esuka, O. M. (2018). Blockchain technology in pharmaceutical industry to prevent counterfeit
drugs. International Journal of Computer Applications, 180(25), 8–12.
Health-ISAC (2022). Securing the Modern Pharmaceutical Supply Chain: A Guide for CISOs in an Age of
Disruption. White Paper. https://h-isac.org/securing-the-modern-pharmaceutical-supply-chain/
Hedlund, K. D., Coyne, D. P., Sanford, D. M., & Huddelson, J. (2013). The heparin recall of 2008. Perfusion,
28(1), 61–65.
Hendricks, K. B., & Singhal, V. R. (2005). An empirical analysis of the effect of supply chain disruptions on
long-run stock price performance and equity risk of the ﬁrm. Production and Operations Management,
14(1), 35–52.
Hendricks, K. B., Singhal, V. R., & Zhang, R. (2009). The effect of operational slack, diversiﬁcation, and
vertical relatedness on the stock market reaction to supply chain disruptions. Journal of Operations
Management, 27(3), 233–246.
Hosseini, S., & Ivanov, D. (2022). A new resilience measure for supply networks with the ripple effect
considerations: A Bayesian network approach. Annals of Operations Research, 319(1), 581–607.
IQVIA (2023). Drug Shortages in the U.S. 2023: A Closer Look at Volume and Price Dynamics. Technical
Report November 15, 2023. https://www.iqvia.com/insights/the-iqvia-institute/reports-and-publications/
reports/drug-shortages-in-the-us-2023
Ivanov, D. (2022). Viable supply chain model: Integrating agility, resilience and sustainability perspectives-
lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Annals of Operations Research, 319(1),
1411–1431.
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2020). Viability of intertwined supply networks: extending the supply chain resilience
angles towards survivability A position paper motivated by COVID-19 outbreak. International Journal
of Production Research., 58(10), 2904–2915.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Ivanov, D., & Rozhkov, M. (2020). Coordination of production and ordering policies under capacity disruption
and product write-off risk: An analytical study with real-data based simulations of a fast moving consumer
goods company. Annals of Operations Research, 291(1–2), 387–407.
Jüttner, U., & Maklan, S. (2011). Supply chain resilience in the global ﬁnancial crisis: An empirical study.
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 16(4), 246–259.
Kamalahmadi, M., & Parast, M. M. (2016). A review of the literature on the principles of enterprise and supply
chain resilience: Major ﬁndings and directions for future research. International Journal of Production
Economics, 171, 116–133.
Katehakis, M. N., Melamed, B., & Shi, J. J. (2022). Optimal replenishment rate for inventory systems with
compound Poisson demands and lost sales: A direct treatment of time-average cost. Annals of Operations
Research, 1–27.
Katsaliaki, K., Galetsi, P., & Kumar, S. (2021). Supply chain disruptions and resilience: A major review and
future research agenda. Annals of Operations Research, 1–38.
Kemsley, J. (2014). Eyes On Excipients. Chemical and Engineering News February 3, 2014. https://cen.acs.
org/articles/92/i5/Eyes-Excipients.html
Kleindorfer, P. R., & Saad, G. H. (2005). Managing disruption risks in supply chains. Production and Opera-
tions Management, 14(1), 53–68.
Knemeyer, A. M., Zinn, W., & Eroglu, C. (2009). Proactive planning for catastrophic events in supply chains.
Journal of Operations Management, 27(2), 141–153.
Landi, H. (2020). UHS hit with massive cyberattack as hospitals reportedly divert surgeries, ambulances. Fierce
Pharma September 28, 2020. https://www.ﬁercehealthcare.com/tech/uhs-hit-massive-cyber-attack-as-ho
spitals-divert-surgeries-ambulances
Lawrence, J. M., Hossain, N. U. I., Jaradat, R., & Hamilton, M. (2020). Leveraging a Bayesian network
approach to model and analyze supplier vulnerability to severe weather risk: A case study of the US
pharmaceutical supply chain following Hurricane Maria. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion, 49, 101607.
Lechler, S., Canzaniello, A., Roßmann, B., von der Gracht, H. A., & Hartmann, E. (2019). Real-time data
processing in supply chain management: Revealing the uncertainty dilemma. International Journal of
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 49(10), 1003–1019.
MacCarthy, B. L., Ahmed, W. A., & Demirel, G. (2022). Mapping the supply chain: Why, what and how?
International Journal of Production Economics, 250, 108688.
Malhotra, G. (2015). Continuous Process in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing: Considerations, Nuances and
Challenges. Contract Pharma, June 2, 2015.
Marucheck, A., Greis, N., Mena, C., & Cai, L. (2011). Product safety and security in the global supply chain:
Issues, challenges and research opportunities. Journal of Operations Management, 29(7–8), 707–720.
Meier, O., Gruchmann, T., & Ivanov, D. (2023). Circular supply chain management with blockchain technol-
ogy: A dynamic capabilities view. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review,
176, 103177.
Moosavi, J., Fathollahi-Fard, A. M., & Dulebenets, M. A. (2022). Supply chain disruption during the COVID-
19 pandemic: Recognizing potential disruption management strategies. International Journal of Disaster
Risk Reduction, 75, 102983.
Mubarik, M. S., Kusi-Sarpong, S., Govindan, K., Khan, S. A., & Oyedijo, A. (2023). Supply chain mapping:
A proposed construct. International Journal of Production Research, 61(8), 2653–2669.
Mubarik, M. S., Naghavi, N., Mubarik, M., Kusi-Sarpong, S., Khan, S. A., Zaman, S. I., & Kazmi, S. H. A.
(2021). Resilience and cleaner production in industry 40 Role of supply chain mapping and visibility.
Journal of Cleaner Production., 292, 126058.
Müller, J., Hoberg, K., & Fransoo, J. C. (2023). Realizing supply chain agility under time pressure: Ad hoc
supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Operations Management, 69(3), 426–449.
Nelson, M., Vizurraga, M., & Chang, D. (2006). Counterfeit pharmaceuticals: A worldwide problem. Trade-
mark Rep., 96, 1068.
Papadakis, I. S. (2006). Financial performance of supply chains after disruptions: An event study. Supply
Chain Management: An International Journal, 11(1), 25–33.
Penna, P. H. V., Subramanian, A., Ochi, L. S., Vidal, T., & Prins, C. (2019). A hybrid heuristic for a broad
class of vehicle routing problems with heterogeneous ﬂeet. Annals of Operations Research, 273, 5–74.
Ponomarov, S. Y., & Holcomb, M. C. (2009). Understanding the concept of supply chain resilience. The
International Journal of Logistics Management, 20(1), 124–143.
Precedence Research (2024). Pharmaceutical excipients market size, share, and trends 2024 to 2034. Report
Code 1761. https://www.precedenceresearch.com/pharmaceutical-excipients-market
123

Annals of Operations Research
Queiroz, M. M., Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Fosso Wamba, S. (2022). Impacts of epidemic outbreaks on supply
chains: Mapping a research agenda amid the COVID-19 pandemic through a structured literature review.
Annals of Operations Research, 319(1), 1159–1196.
Ramacciotti, E., Clark, M., Sadeghi, N., Hoppensteadt, D., Thethi, I., Gomes, M., & Fareed, J. (2011). Con-
taminants in heparin: Review of the literature, molecular proﬁling, and clinical implications. Clinical
and Applied Thrombosis/hemostasis, 17(2), 126–135.
Rana, A., Patel, R., Goswami, A., Luke, S., Baveja, A., Domeniconi, C., Melamed, B., Roberts, F., Chen, W.,
Crooks, A., Menkov, V., Narayan, V., Jones, J., Kavak, H. (2024). A Hybrid Simulation Methodology
for Identifying and Mitigating Supply Chain Disruptions. Under Review at Journal of Simulation. Also,
accessible as CCICADA Report on Simulation Tools for Getting Early Warning of Disruptions to Critical
Supply Chains. CCICADA Report August 7, 2024. https://ccicada.org/2024/08/07/ccicada-report-on-si
mulation-tools-for-getting-early-warning-of-disruptions-to-critical-supply-chains/
Rastogi, R., Sharma, B. P., Gupta, N., Gaur, V., Gupta, M., Kohli, V., ... & Rai, A. (2022). NFC-enabled pack-
aging to detect tampering and prevent counterfeiting: Enabling a complete supply chain using blockchain
and CPS. In Blockchain Applications for Healthcare Informatics (pp. 27–55). Academic Press.
Rice, J. B., & Caniato, F. (2003). Building a secure and resilient supply network. Supply Chain Management
Review, V. 7, No. 5 Sept./oct. 2003), p. 22–30: IL.
Roberts, S. J. (2014). The necessity of information security in the vulnerable pharmaceutical industry. Journal
of Information Security, 5(04), 147.
Robins-Early, N. (2021). Vermectin frenzy: the advocates, anti-vaxxers and telehealth companies driving
demand. The Guardian September 13, 2021. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/sep/13/iverme
ctin-treatment-covid-19-anti-vaxxers-advocates
Rogers, D. S., Lembke, R., & Benardino, J. (2013). Reverse logistics: A new core competency. Supply chain
Management Review, 17(3).
Sabouhi, F., Pishvaee, M. S., & Jabalameli, M. S. (2018). Resilient supply chain design under operational and
disruption risks considering quantity discount: A case study of pharmaceutical supply chain. Computers
& Industrial Engineering, 126, 657–672.
Sagonowsky,E.(2019).McKessonexecutivesreapedpersonalgainsfromgenericsprice-ﬁxingscheme,lawsuit
claims. Fierce Pharma May 29, 2019. https://www.ﬁercepharma.com/pharma/mckesson-implicated-ge
neric-drug-price-ﬁxing-scheme-lawsuit-says
Sagonowsky, E. (2021). Pﬁzer says former employee stole trade secrets on megablockbuster COVID-19
vaccine. Fierce Pharma November 24, 2021. https://www.ﬁercepharma.com/pharma/pfizer-says-former-
employee-stole-trade-secrets-megablockbuster-covid-19-vaccine
Schier, J. G., Barr, D. B., Li, Z., Wolkin, A. F., Baker, S. E., Lewis, L. S., & McGeehin, M. A. (2011).
Diethylene glycol in health products sold over-the-counter and imported from Asian countries. Journal
of Medical Toxicology, 7, 33–38.
Schmidt, W., & Raman, A. (2012). When supply-chain disruptions matter. Harvard Business School Working
Paper, No. 13–006, July 2012.
Shah, N. (2004). Pharmaceutical supply chains: Key issues and strategies for optimisation. Computers &
Chemical Engineering, 28(6–7), 929–941.
Shefﬁ, Y., & Rice Jr, J. B. (2005). A supply chain view of the resilient enterprise. MIT Sloan Management
Review.
Sherman, E. (2020). 94% of the Fortune 1000 are seeing coronavirus supply chain disruptions: Report. For-
tune February 21, 2020. https://fortune.com/2020/02/21/fortune-1000-coronavirus-china-supply-chain-
impact/
Shi, J. (2022). Optimal continuous production-inventory systems subject to stockout risk. Annals of Operations
Research, 317(2), 777–804.
Shi, J., Katehakis, M. N., Melamed, B., & Xia, Y. (2014). Optimal continuous replenishment for a production-
inventorysystemwithcompoundpoissondemandsandlost-sales.OperationsResearch,6(5),1048–1063.
Shih, W. C. (2020). Global supply chains in a post-pandemic world. Harvard Business Review, 98(5), 82–89.
Snyder, L. V., Atan, Z., Peng, P., Rong, Y., Schmitt, A. J., & Sinsoysal, B. (2016). OR/MS models for supply
chain disruptions: A review. IIE Transactions, 48(2), 89–109.
Speier, C., Whipple, J. M., Closs, D. J., & Voss, M. D. (2011). Global supply chain design considerations:
Mitigating product safety and security risks. Journal of Operations Management, 29(7–8), 721–736.
Srivastava, H. K., Wolfgang, S., & Rodriguez, J. D. (2016). Rapid screening of guar gum using portable Raman
spectral identiﬁcation methods. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, 118, 387–392.
Stecke, K. E., & Kumar, S. (2009). Sources of supply chain disruptions, factors that breed vulnerability, and
mitigating strategies. Journal of Marketing Channels, 16(3), 193–226.
Talluri, S., Cetin, K., & Gardner, A. J. (2004). Integrating demand and supply variability into safety stock
evaluations. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 34(1), 62–69.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Tang,C.S.(2006).Robust strategiesfor mitigating supply chain disruptions. International Journal of Logistics:
Research and Applications, 9(1), 33–45.
The White House (2021). FACT SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Announces Supply Chain Disruptions
Task Force to Address Short-Term Supply Chain Discontinuities. Final Report. https://www.whiteh
ouse.gov/brieﬁng-room/statements-releases/2021/06/08/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announ
ces-supply-chain-disruptions-task-force-to-address-short-term-supply-chain-discontinuities/
The Commonwealth Fund (2022). The Impact of Pharmaceutical Wholesalers on U.S. Drug Spending. Issue
Briefs July 20, 2022. https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/issue-briefs/2022/jul/impact-ph
armaceutical-wholesalers-drug-spending
Tierney, K., & Bruneau, M. (2007). Conceptualizing and measuring resilience: A key to disaster loss reduction.
TR news, 250.
Tomlin, B. (2006). On the value of mitigation and contingency strategies for managing supply chain disruption
risks. Management Science, 52(5), 639–657.
Tukamuhabwa, B. R., Stevenson, M., Busby, J., & Zorzini, M. (2015). Supply chain resilience: Deﬁnition,
review and theoretical foundations for further study. International Journal of Production Research,
53(18), 5592–5623.
Vakil, B. (2021). How Supply Chain Mapping Mitigates Disruption. Newsletter December 16, 2021. https://
epsnews.com/2021/12/16/how-supply-chain-mapping-mitigates-disruption/
Velásquez, G. (2022). Rethinking R&D for pharmaceutical products after the novel coronavirus COVID-19
shock. Vaccines, Medicines and COVID-19: How Can WHO Be Given a Stronger Voice?, 59–72.
Wamba, S. F., Akter, S., Edwards, A., Chopin, G., & Gnanzou, D. (2015). How ‘big data’ can make big impact:
Findings from a systematic review and a longitudinal case study. International Journal of Production
Economics, 165, 234–246.
World Health Organization (2018). Substandard and falsiﬁed medical products. Fact Sheet January 31, 2018.
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/substandard-and-falsified-medical-products
WorldHealthOrganization(2019).InformationNoteNitrosamineimpurities.MedicalProductAlertNovember
20, 2019. https://www.who.int/news/item/20-11-2019-information-note-nitrosamine-impurities
Yankus, W. (2006). Counterfeit Drugs: Coming to a Pharmacy Near You. The American Council on Science
and Health. https://www.acsh.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/20090202_counterfeitdrug09.pdf
Ziavrou, K. S., Noguera, S., & Boumba, V. A. (2022). Trends in counterfeit drugs and pharmaceuticals before
and during COVID-19 pandemic. Forensic Science International, 338, 111382.
Zobel, C. W., & Khansa, L. (2014). Characterizing multi-event disaster resilience. Computers & Operations
Research, 42, 83–94.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123