TITLE: The evaluation of football players: an in-depth look at the Expected Goal metric
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06606-8
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06606-8
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The evaluation of football players: an in-depth look at the
Expected Goal metric
Stefania Corsaro2
· Giuseppina Dello Ioio1
· Zelda Marino2
Received: 2 January 2025 / Accepted: 3 April 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
The global sports industry is valued at $480 billion in 2023, projected to rise to $629.81
billion by 2028, with the betting sector alone generating e1.41 trillion in turnover in 2022,
e730 billion of which was from football. Football attracts millions of fans worldwide, cre-
ating lucrative opportunities for advertising and marketing. In Europe, the Big Five leagues
represent most of the European professional sports market. In this context, it is important to
be able to evaluate football clubs and players. The value of a football player depends mainly
on his performance, which depends on different factors, such as personal characteristics,
attacking and defending ability on the pitch, mentality, and much more. This study focuses
on attacking performance, speciﬁcally Expected Goals (xG), a critical metric for ﬁnancial
and strategic decisions in football, since it helps clubs, investors, and bookmakers to evaluate
more accurately team performance and identify value bets. In addition, the xG metric can
also signiﬁcantly inﬂuence a player’s market value and transfer decisions. This study has two
main objectives: ﬁrst, we want to identify the current xG model through data from Under-
stat, one of the primary data providers for shot characteristics; then, we want to propose an
improved approach for more accurate xG predictions.
Keywords Machine learning · Neural networks · Expected Goal · Player performance
evaluation
Stefania Corsaro, Giuseppina Dello Ioio and Zelda Marino contributed equally to this work.
B Giuseppina Dello Ioio
giuseppina.delloioio@studenti.uniparthenope.it
Stefania Corsaro
stefania.corsaro@uniparthenope.it
Zelda Marino
zelda.marino@uniparthenope.it
1
Department of Economic and Legal Studies, University of Naples “Parthenope”, via Generale
Parisi, 13, 80132 Naples, Italy
2
Department of Business and Quantitative Studies, University of Naples “Parthenope”, Via Generale
Parisi, 13, 80132 Naples, Italy
123

Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
Interest in sports has grown around the world over time, leading to increased participation
and demand for sports facilities such as stadiums, arenas, and other specialized venues. This
growing interest has contributed and continues to contribute to the growth of the sports
market, which has a signiﬁcant global reach, with a value of $480.12 billion in 2023, which
is expected to grow to $506.93 billion in 2024 and as much as $629.81 billion in 2028 at a
Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 5.6% (The Business Research Company, 2024).
Professional sports attract the attention of millions of people around the world, who constitute
a vast base of spectators. This represents a valuable opportunity for advertising campaigns,
marketing strategies, or for the sports betting sector, which is constantly growing and involves
more and more enthusiasts who bet on sporting events. Among the different sports, football
is the most popular worldwide, with an estimated 3.5 billion fans and approximately 250
million players in more than 200 countries, according to a study conducted by Tifosy.1
A football company produces a peculiar type of entertainment service that is sold on
the relevant market (Follert and Gleisner, 2024). In order to provide this entertainment, the
football club must build a team with which to compete with other clubs in a league (Neals,
1964); therefore, football players, from an economic point of view, constitute the key asset of
football clubs (Campa, 2021) and, since the football industry moves billions of money all over
the world, the economic and ﬁnancial evaluation of the value of a football player becomes
a crucial element for the strategic decisions of football clubs, inﬂuencing market operations
and the entire management of the sports assets. Furthermore, their evaluation becomes an
important determining factor of the ﬁnancial value of the clubs (Forker, 2005; Scelles et al.,
2016).
The inﬂuence of football extends beyond the ﬁeld of play, with a signiﬁcant economic
impact.ItcontributessigniﬁcantlytoglobalGDPandemployment(GásquezMendoza,2017),
inﬂuences the international business landscape, and acts as a powerful tool for ﬁnancial
and economic development. In this context, in recent years, the ﬁeld of sports ﬁnance has
witnessed the development of innovative tools that connect investors’ ﬁnancial returns with
the performance of football teams and players, like KickBonds, a corporate bond indexed
to sporting performance (Gigante & Sottoriva, 2021), or Fan Tokens, a cryptocurrency that
allows fans to actively participate in the life of the club (Mazur & Vega, 2022). In this
framework, it is important to be able to give value to football teams or players. For a team,
the most common measures are the result of a match (won, lost, or drawn by the team), the
number of points obtained, the number of goals scored, and once a goal threshold has been
set, it is possible to identify whether the team is above or below this threshold (Corsaro et al.,
2025). Regarding the individual player, traditional metrics have long been used to evaluate
performance, such as goals scored (Bryson et al., 2013) or assists made (Franck & Nüesch,
2012). However, an athlete’s performance depends on personal characteristics, attacking and
defending ability on the pitch, mentality, and much more. Furthermore, in recent years, the
evaluation of football players’ performances has experienced a signiﬁcant transformation due
to the growing availability of data; the use of advanced technologies allows for the collection
of a wide range of variables during matches, including the position of players, speed, and
more. This availability of data has enabled the application of machine learning techniques to
the analysis and prediction of individual and collective performances with greater precision
and dynamism (Horvat & Job, 2020).
1 https://www.tifosy.com/it.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In this work, we focus on attacking performance, in particular Expected Goals (xG), which
offers an evaluation of the quality of the scoring chances created and conceded during a match,
speciﬁcally analyzing the shooting information. Looking at xG, it is possible to identify
players who create high-quality opportunities. In addition, this measure may highlight young
talent or players from less prominent leagues who generate quality opportunities but are
yet to convert them effectively. Investing in these players can bring signiﬁcant returns in
the future as their conversion rates improve. Finally, by examining the xG measure over
multiple seasons, the club can determine whether a player’s performance is increasing or
decreasing over time based on a more robust measure than the number of goals, which could
be inﬂuenced by short-term factors. In this way, the club can avoid overpaying some players
and understand who to invest in based on solid and data-driven measures, mitigating ﬁnancial
risks.
It is a fundamental aspect of football that few goals are scored. Furthermore, it is not
uncommon to observe matches in which a team dominates the game and has numerous scoring
opportunities but does not score. In contrast, the opposing team, despite having few scoring
opportunities, is able to score and win the match. To have a data-driven representation of this
concept, Green (2012) in his work proposed the xG measure to quantify the probability of a
shot being a goal. It is deﬁned mathematically as the weighted average of many independent
observations of a random variable that leads the player to take a shot on goal. Lucey et al.
(2015) propose the Expected Goal Value (EGV) estimate, using an approach similar to that
used in basketball (Yue et al., 2014; Miller et al., 2014; Cervone et al., 2014), to predict
the likelihood of a shot based on features, relating to the context, the position, the attack,
and defense. The authors use a logistic regression to deﬁne the characteristics of the model.
A similar approach was used by Eggels et al. (2016), who use not only logistic regression
to deﬁne model characteristics but also other tree-based and logistic regression classiﬁers.
Kharrat et al. (2020) present a methodology to calculate an expected goal plus-minus rating,
using the Brier score as the target for model training, hyperparameter tuning, and cross-
validation. Furthermore, the authors do not build a generic model for predicting the result of
each type of shot, but build four different models for four different types of shots: penalty, free
kick, header and open action. To do this, different classiﬁers are used and tested for each type
of model, and the one that provides the best results is then selected. Nowadays, this metric
is widely used and is provided by data providers or bookmakers; however, each provides a
different value of this metric, and none of them publish their models, which creates ambiguity
and reduces the effectiveness of using xG for investment strategies, decision-making, and
other applications.
In light of the previous considerations, the aim of this study is twofold. Firstly, we intend
to identify the model currently employed for the calculation of xG. Having established the
model in use, we will then propose an approach that can improve the predictions of this metric.
The evaluation will be conducted using real data regarding the characteristics of shots taken
by football players from the 2014/15 season of the Italian Serie A, given the relevance of
football in Italy. Among the numerous providers of football data, the decision was made
in favor of one of the principal providers, Understat, which offers a comprehensive set of
characteristics related to the shots taken by football players. The work is structured as follows.
In Sect.2, we describe the Expected Goal metric, followed by Sect.3, in which we provide a
brief overview of the algorithms under consideration, including white-box algorithms, such
as linear regression models and decision trees, and black-box algorithms, such as random
forests, boosting models and artiﬁcial neural networks. In Sect.4, we present the dataset used
and the data exploration operations before presenting the numerical experiments in Sect.5,
123

Annals of Operations Research
in which we explore the models used by Understat and propose our approach. Finally, Sect.6
presents conclusions and future works.
2 The Expected Goal
The Expected Goal is a metric that aims to measure the probability of a shot resulting in a goal.
It offers an evaluation of the quality of scoring opportunities created and conceded during a
match. This approach offers a more effective means of addressing the inherent randomness
in football than a traditional goal-based metric, as the shot is a much more widespread event
than a goal (Noordman, 2019; Brechot & Flepp, 2020). This allows for the assessment of
the quality of a goal-scoring opportunity, which is particularly useful when considering a
player’s expected goal-scoring potential from a speciﬁc opportunity. The xG model employs
historical data on similar shots or chances to create a probability model for goal scoring. The
probability of a shot resulting in a goal can be inﬂuenced by a number of factors, including
the characteristics of the shot, the type of action that preceded it, the player taking the shot,
and the position of the player on the ﬁeld. However, it is important to note that other factors
may also play a role in this probability, such as the psychological state of the players, referee
errors, and other factors that may introduce bias into the results. These factors are often
unpredictable, and as a result, there will always be an element of error in the predictions of
models that aim to predict sporting events.
In our framework, we assume a set of game variables Z = (Z1, Z2, . . . , Zm) concerning
the characteristics of the shots, such as the type of shot, the distance from the goal, the angle
of the shot and so on. Let (, F, P) be a probability space, where  is the set of all shots
taken during a game, and P is the probability that a shot becomes a goal. We deﬁne the
random variable G :  →{0, 1}, deﬁned as follows:
G(ω) =

1 if the shot ωbecomes a goal,
0 otherwise.
We deﬁne the Expected Goal as the probability that a shot is a goal, given the value of the
game variables:
xG = P(G = 1 | Z = z)
To obtain this probability, similar past shots are analyzed. To be more precise, if 100 past
shots are analyzed and an expected goal value of 0.3 is obtained, this means that 30 out of
100 shots of this type are expected to turn into goals.
Since the Expected Goal metric is designed to represent the offensive potential of a team
in a match or the scoring opportunities that a player may have, it is often used in its aggregate
form. Let xGi be the expected goal of the shot i, and x a player or a team. The xG in its
aggregate form is calculated as follows:
xGx =
nx

i=1
xGi
where nx is the number of shots taken by player/team x.
It is important to note that there are multiple providers that offer xG metrics, all of which
are based on a set of fundamental variables that can potentially inﬂuence the probability of a
shot resulting in a goal. However, the models used to calculate these values are not publicly
disclosed, leading to discrepancies in the xG values reported by different providers. This
123

Annals of Operations Research
contributes to a lack of transparency and efﬁcacy in the metric; thus, the ﬁrst aim of this
study is to obtain the data and identify the model currently in use. Among the numerous
providers, the decision was made in favor of one of the principal providers, Understat, which
offers a comprehensive set of characteristics related to the shots taken by football players
since the 2014/15 season. The details of the dataset utilized are provided in the Sect.4.
Since the Expected Goal value is a function of a set of variables Z:
xG = f (Z)
with f : Rm →[0, 1], in the ﬁrst part of this work, we want to identify the model currently
employed by Understat for the calculation of xG, i.e. we want to ﬁnd ˆf that is the solution
of this optimization problem:
ˆf = arg min
f ∈F L( f (Z), xG)
where F is a functional space and L is a loss function.
3 Numerical methods
Since the model underlying the Expected Goal calculation is not known, we want to propose
a tool to help understand how this metric is calculated. To this end, we analyze different
models in order to understand and clarify the model used by one of the main football data
providers, Understat, to estimate xG values. We have applied both white-box algorithms, such
as linear regression models and decision trees, and black-box algorithms, such as random
forests, boosting models, and artiﬁcial neural networks. In this section, we provide a brief
overview of the algorithms under consideration; for further details, refer to Hull (2021) and
Hastie et al. (2017).
White box algorithms are methods that offer a high level of transparency and interpretabil-
ity, as the internal rules and processes that drive the model are visible and accessible; however,
they typically provide less predictive power and are not always able to model the intrinsic
complexity of the data set. First, we applied the simplest model, linear regression. The limita-
tion of this model is that it does not capture non-linear relationships or complex interactions
typical of game data. Another model that we have applied is represented by decision trees,
which are a non-parametric supervised learning method used for classiﬁcation and regres-
sion. The goal is to create a model that predicts the value of a target variable by learning,
iteratively, simple decision rules inferred from the data features. Decision trees are easy to
interpret and do not require extensive data pre-processing, as they handle both numeric and
categorical variables and do not require variable standardization. However, they are prone to
overﬁtting problems.
Black-box algorithms can capture complex patterns and relationships in data and, there-
fore, offer high predictive power but, at the same time, have low interpretability and
transparency, as their internal workings are not easily understood or accessible. Among
these, we start exploring the random forest and SVMs models.
Random Forest is an ensemble learning method used to solve regression and classiﬁcation
problems; we use the Random Forest technique for a regression problem, which generates
different trees (all grown independently from each other) to reduce variance compared to a
single decision tree. For this purpose, two different randomization phases are applied; the
trees are not applied to the original sample of data but to random subsamples, and at each
node, a random subset of explanatory variables is used to ﬁnd the best split. This approach
123

Annals of Operations Research
reduces overﬁtting compared to a single decision tree; by using bootstrap sampling and
randomly selecting variables at each node, the algorithm introduces diversity between trees,
thus increasing the generalization ability of the model.
Support vector machines (SVMs) are a set of supervised learning methods used for clas-
siﬁcation, regression and outliers detection. We have a regression problem, so we used a
Support Vector Regression model. In this case, the algorithm is designed to identify a func-
tion that approximates the training data to minimize the difference between the predicted and
actual values, but within a deﬁned “tolerance band”; this loss function penalizes points that
are distant from the margin. The model is adjusted to ﬁnd an optimal balance between the
complexity of the model and the error in the training data.
In addition, we applied Boosting, a supervised machine learning strategy that combines
multiple weak learners (base learners) to create a strong learner, progressively improving
performance as each successive model learns from and attempting to correct the residual
errors made by previous models (Schapire, 2003). This iterative approach allows Boosting to
adapt ﬂexibly to various tasks, such as regression or classiﬁcation, by minimizing a suitable
loss function. In the context of regression analysis, boosting aims to progressively reduce the
overall error of the model by correcting the residuals by reducing the discrepancies between
the observed and predicted values. This approach makes boosting particularly efﬁcient in
capturing complex patterns in the data and improving the accuracy of predictions.
Therearevariousboostingalgorithmsthatcanbeused;sincewehavearegressionproblem,
we chose to use Gradient Boosting, a method directly designed to optimize the chosen loss
function, making it more suitable for the accurate estimation of continuous variables. In
addition to this method, we also applied two extensions, XGBoost and LightGBM, which
introduce advanced optimization techniques, making them better for medium-large datasets
like ours.
Finally, we applied neural networks, for which we believe more details are needed.
3.1 Neural networks
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs), as the name suggests, are non-linear computational
models inspired by the human brain’s functionality. They operate as two-stage regression
or classiﬁcation models and are often represented by a neural diagram, as shown in Fig.1.
ANNs consist of a series of layers, each of which consists of a set of interconnected units
called neurons (or nodes) that receive inputs and, as they move through the layers, process
the information and learn from the data using learning algorithms to produce an output. The
main goal is to learn the relationships between inputs and outputs in order to generalize on
“unseen” data. Thus, the ﬁrst stage, referred to as feature extraction, aims to capture patterns
and relationships within the input data; the second stage, referred to as prediction, uses the
features extracted in the ﬁrst stage to provide a result aligned with the ﬁnal objective.
The network is organized with three different types of layers:
• Input layer, which receives the input data;
• Hidden layers, which perform intermediate processing through weights w and biases b,
which represent the parameters of the model;
• Output layer, which produces the ﬁnal output.
To gain a deeper understanding of the network’s functioning, examining the processes occur-
ring within a single neuron is necessary. Each neuron receives incoming inputs and multiplies
them by weights, which serve to “focus” the network’s attention on speciﬁc inputs or, poten-
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Network diagram
tially, to “ignore” others. The weighted inputs are summed, and a bias value is added to this
sum:
z =
n

i=1
wi xi + b,
where:
• n is the total number of inputs received by the neuron;
• xi are the inputs;
• wi are the associated weights;
• b is the bias.
The z value is then transformed through an activation function f (z), which introduces nonlin-
earity in the model. The output of each neuron in a layer serves as the input to the neurons in
the next layer, and this process repeats across layers until the ﬁnal layer is reached. The ﬁnal
layer aggregates the processed information to produce the overall prediction of the network.
One of the most common architectures is the feed-forward neural network (FNN), distin-
guished by a unidirectional ﬂow in which information only moves from one layer to another
in a forward direction, starting from the input nodes and proceeding through the possible
hidden nodes to the output nodes. Consequently, the connections do not form any cycles or
loops, in contrast to recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which have a bi-directional ﬂow.
The input layer receives the data x ∈Rd, where d is the size of the input (i.e., the number
of features in the input vector). The possible hidden layers process the information received
from the input layer and produce the ﬁnal result, which is provided through the output layer.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Let nl denote the number of neurons in layerl. At each hidden layer, a linear transformation
is applied to the inputs as follows:
z(l) = W(l)a(l−1) + b(l),
l = 1, . . . , Ltot
where:
• Ltot is the total number of layers, excluding the input layer;
• z(l) ∈Rnl is the vector of linear activations at layer l;
• W(l) ∈Rnl×nl−1 is the weight matrix;
• a(l−1) ∈Rnl−1 is the vector of outputs from the previous layer, where a(0) = x represents
the input data;
• b(l) ∈Rnl is the bias vector of layer l.
The result of the linear operation z(l) is transformed through a nonlinear activation function:
a(l) = f (z(l))
Some common examples of activation functions are:
• ReLU: f (z) = max(0, z);
• Sigmoid: f (z) =
1
1+e−z ;
• Hyperbolic tangent (Tahn): f (z) = tanh(z).
Parameters W and b are determined as the optimal solution to an optimization problem that
minimizes the loss function L(ˆy, y), which measures the distance between the predicted
output ˆy and the actual value y. The choice of loss function depends on the type of problem
and the nature of the data.
In the ﬁrst part of the work, as it involves a regression problem, we used as loss function
both Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE):
LMSE = 1
N
N

i=1
( ˆyi −yi)2,
LMAE = 1
N
N

i=1
| ˆyi −yi|.
where N is the number of samples.
For the second part of the work, since it involves a classiﬁcation problem, we chose the
Binary Cross-Entropy loss, deﬁned as:
LBCE = −1
N
N

i=1
K

k=1
yik log( ˆyik)
where K isthenumberofclasses,and yik and ˆyik representtheactualandpredictedprobability
for class k of sample i.
The calibration of the network weights is performed via the Back-Propagation (BP)
algorithm (Rojas, 1996), which is an iterative process in which the network weights are
progressively adjusted to minimize a speciﬁc loss function measured on a sample of data.
The backpropagation algorithm calculates the gradients of the loss function with respect to
the weights:
∂L
∂W(l) = ∂L
∂a(l) · ∂a(l)
∂z(l) · ∂z(l)
∂W(l) .
123

Annals of Operations Research
where ∂L
∂a(l) is the gradient of the loss with respect to the activations, and the remaining terms
correspond to the chain rule components for each layer.
The weights are updated with gradient descent:
W(l) ←W(l) −η ∂L
∂W(l)
where η is the learning rate, determining the step size in the gradient descent update.
4 Data description and exploration
We perform our analysis on data from Understat, a football data provider that offers statistics
for every season since 2014/15 for the top-ﬁve European football leagues (EPL, La Liga,
Ligue 1, Serie A, Bundesliga) and Russian Premier League. For more details, visit https://
understat.com/.
The dataset concerns the top professional division of the Italian men’s football champi-
onship, Serie A, which comprises 20 teams, each competing against all the others in two
groups, the ﬁrst round and the second round. Each team meets all the other teams twice,
once “at home”, i.e., on its own ﬁeld, and once “away,” i.e., on the opposing team’s ﬁeld.
In this format, called round robin, each team plays a total of 38 games, 19 in the ﬁrst round
and 19 in the second. At the end of each match, the teams are assigned a score: 0 points for
the losing team, 3 points for the winning team, or 1 point for both teams in the event of a
draw. The score is determined by the number of goals scored during the match. In order to
evaluate the expected value of the number of goals, we need to analyze the shots. The dataset
collects shots-related event data from matches in 10 seasons between 2014–15 and 2023–24
and contains 100,205 observations for 21 variables. Each observation represents a single shot
taken during a match and includes information about the player, the team, the context of the
match and the characteristics of the shot, such as the coordinates, the action that led to it, and
more. All variables are listed and described in Table1.
“Own goal” type shots were removed from the dataset since they are shots that do not
reﬂect the intention of the team taking the shot to score but are unintentional shots, often
the result of involuntary deviations and errors, which can, therefore, distort the predictive
capacity of the model.
In addition, the X and Y variables (shot coordinates) were employed to calculate two key
variables in the prediction of xG, namely the distance to the goal (distanceToGoal - di) and
the shot angle (angleToGoal - θi), shown in Fig.2. The X and Y coordinates indicate the
position on the ﬁeld from which the shot was taken with respect to a reference coordinate
system. However, they do not provide relevant information for predicting the Expected Goal.
In contrast, the distance to the goal and the shooting angle appear to be more signiﬁcant and
informative measures of the quality of the scoring opportunity.
Before calculating these variables, we remember that the football pitch must have the
following measurements:
L = 105 meters
W = 68 meters
where L and W represent the length and width of the standard ﬁeld, respectively.
In order to calculate the distance to the goal and the shooting angle, it is necessary to
establish a coordinate system in which the origin (0, 0) is located in the lower-left corner of
the ﬁeld. In this system, the X axis represents the length of the football ﬁeld (from 0 to 105),
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Understat dataset variables
Variable
Description
season
Season in which the match occurred
minute
Minute of shot between 1 and 90+ possible extra time
h_a
Status of the shooting team (home or away)
player
Player who took the shot
home_team
Team playing the match at home
away_team
Team playing the match away from home
X, Y
Shot coordinates (length and width)
situation
Situation at the time of the event (Direct freekick, From corner, Open play, etc.)
shotType
Type based on the limb used by the player to shoot (Head, Left foot, etc.)
lastAction
Last action before the shot (Pass, Cross, Rebound, etc.)
league
League in which the match is played
id
Unique identiﬁer of the shot
result
Result of the shot (Goal, Saved, Missed, etc.)
player_id
Unique identiﬁer of the player who took the shot
match_id
Unique identiﬁer of the match
home_goals
Number of goals scored by the home team
away_goals
Number of goals scored by the away team
date
Date on which the match occurred
player_assisted
Player who assisted the shot, if applicable
xG
Probability of the shot resulting in a goal (Expected Goals)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 distanceToGoal (a) and angleToGoal (b) variables
and the Y axis represents the width of the football ﬁeld (from 0 to 68). The ﬁeld goals are
positioned along the center of the shortest side at each end of the ﬁeld. The center of a goal
at one end of the ﬁeld is located at coordinates (105, 34). This point is used as a reference
for the calculation of distance and angle.
Equation1 deﬁnes the variable distanceToGoal for each shot i in function of variables X
and Y. Figure2a shows an illustration of the distance to the goal.
di =

[L −(Xi · L)]2 +
 W
2 −(Yi · W)
2
(1)
Equation2 deﬁnes the variable angleToGoal for each shot i in function of variables X and
Y. Figure2b shows an illustration of the shooting angle, calculated as the difference between
the angle αi and the angle βi.
θi =

180
π
× (αi −βi)

(2)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Spatial distribution of shots (xG values)—Inter 2023/24
where:
αi = arctan
−7.32
2
−
 
Yi × W −W
2


L(1 −Xi)

βi = arctan
 7.32
2
−
 
Yi × W −W
2


L(1 −Xi)

Before we begin the analysis, we will examine the distribution of shots and some aspects
that emerge from it. A fundamental aspect of analyzing shot effectiveness is determining
whether a shot results in a goal, as this information enhances our understanding of shot
distribution. The xG value for unsuccessful shots is, on average, 0.08, whereas for successful
shots it is 0.34. A further observation is that shots which result in a goal are more prevalent
in the latter half of a match, accounting for 57.14% of total goals, as opposed to 42.86% in
the ﬁrst half. A more detailed analysis reveals that goals are more frequently scored within
the initial 30min of each half. This observation suggests that players are more motivated and
energetic at the beginning of each half.
Furthermore, the spatial distribution of shots is observed, with the xG value highlighted;
this is useful in obtaining a visual representation of the quality of shots in different areas of
the pitch. To enhance the graphical representation, the analysis is restricted to a single season
and a single team. In particular, Fig.3 shows the spatial distribution of Inter’s shots in the
2023/24 season. It is evident that the majority of shots are concentrated around the penalty
area, with higher xG values for shots taken inside the penalty area and from favourable angles,
since the probability of scoring is generally higher in these conditions, and lower values for
123

Annals of Operations Research
shots taken further away from the goal or from less favourable angles, highlighting that these
shots represent less dangerous opportunities.
In order to analyze the data provided by Understat, all the available variables are used
in the analysis, with the exception of those that are not signiﬁcant for the purposes of the
analysis, namely: league, id, player_id (since the variable player was considered), match_id,
result, home_goal, away_goal, date and player_assisted.
Finally, the following variables were used for the analyses:
• season;
• minute;
• h_a;
• player;
• home_team;
• away_team;
• distanceToGoal;
• angleToGoal;
• situation;
• shotType;
• lastAction.
Since the dataset contains categorical variables (e.g. player or team), the dummy encoding
technique was adopted to transform these variables. In particular, this technique allows the
conversion of a categorical variable with k categories into k −1 binary variables, called
“dummy variables”. Each of these takes the value 1 if the observation belongs to the category
represented by the column and 0 otherwise. This process involves the elimination of a column
chosen as the reference category in order to avoid multicollinearity issues. Finally, it is
necessary to standardize the variables for the models for which it is needed, such as linear
regression or SVM.
The next step is to divide the dataset into training and testing sets and determine the
optimal size of the two sets. In the present study, we decided to use the most recent available
championship as test set: the 2023/2024 season. For the training set, since xG is based on large
amounts of information regarding previous shots, we decided to use all available information,
so the seasons from 2014/14 to 2022/23.
5 Numerical experiments
This section provides a comprehensive evaluation of the numerical analyses performed and
the results obtained. In particular, Sect.5.1 presents the models used to predict xG based on
shots from previous seasons in order to identify the model used by Understat, with a focus
on optimizing the calibration of some parameters in order to correctly apply these models
and have accurate predictions. Section5.2 presents the proposed approach in order to obtain
better predictions of xG values. Finally, Sect.5.3 provides a comparative evaluation of the
performance of the proposed approach against the Understat model. This evaluation is based
on error metrics and a statistical test, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, to determine whether
the observed differences in performance are statistically signiﬁcant.
5.1 Exploration of the understat model
To establish the model that underlies the xG predictions made by Understat, we decided to
analyze several models. The models used are listed below:
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Forecast results
Model
MSE
MAE
R2
Linear regression
0.0071
0.0542
0.7294
Decision tree
0.0086
0.0368
0.6747
Random forest
0.0054
0.0325
0.7962
SVM
0.0082
0.0723
0.6874
Gradient boosting
0.0049
0.0365
0.8093
XGBoost
0.0051
0.0361
0.8059
LightGBM
0.0043
0.0314
0.8235
Feed-forward neural network
0.0055
0.0358
0.7906
• Linear regression;
• Decision tree;
• Random forest;
• Support Vector Machine;
• Gradient boosting;
• XGBoost;
• LigthGBM;
• Feed-forward neural network.
All predictive models were implemented using the scikit-learn package (Pedregosa et
al., 2011), an open-source library in Python, which offers a wide range of tools for data
preprocessing, modelling, parameter selection and performance evaluation. The evaluation
of the models’ performance will be done through three main error metrics, Mean Squared
Error (MSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), and the coefﬁcient of determination R2, which
respectively evaluate the accuracy of the squared errors, absolute errors and the ability of the
model to explain the variability in the data. The analysis starts from the simplest model, linear
regression. We then move on to the application of other models, such as decision trees, random
forests, neural networks. For each model, a hyperparameter tuning process was conducted,
utilizing techniques such as Grid Search and Randomized Search. These techniques are
employed for the optimization of hyperparameters of machine learning models, with the
objective of enhancing their performance. Details are provided in Appendix A. Once the
optimal conﬁguration was identiﬁed, we trained the models on the input data to generate
predictions and evaluated their performance by comparing the models based on the previously
mentioned error metrics; results are summarized in the Table2.
The results highlight the performance of the different machine learning models applied,
with LightGBM emerging as the optimal, exhibiting the lowest MSE and MAE values,
as well as the highest R2, indicating superior accuracy and robust predictive capability.
Subsequently, we ﬁnd the models based on Gradient Boosting and XGBoost techniques,
which demonstrate competitive performance and consistent results in terms of accuracy. In
contrast, models such as Decision Tree and SVM exhibit overall lower performance than
the other models, indicating greater susceptibility to overﬁtting and less precise predictive
capacity. Finally, the feed-forward neural network achieved satisfactory results, but did not
outperform the ensemble-based models in terms of overall accuracy. In light of the above, it
seems reasonable to suggest that Understat employs a boosting model to generate forecasts
for expected goals.
123

Annals of Operations Research
5.2 Neural networks approach
At this point, it is appropriate to examine the feasibility of improving the forecasts of Expected
Goals based on the variables currently available. To this end, we proceed with an exploratory
analysis of the dataset and the application of a neural network model in order to improve the
forecasts. Then, we evaluate the validity and the discriminatory capacity of the developed
model, and we analyze the confusion matrix, serving as an essential tool to evaluate the
quality of the model’s predictions in detail.
In contrast to the initial aim, which was to identify the existing model employed for
calculating xG, now we want to propose our approach to improve the prediction of the
metric; therefore, we move from a regression problem to a classiﬁcation one. In detail, we
are addressing a binary classiﬁcation problem, wherein the response variable represents the
state of the shot, speciﬁcally whether the shot resulted in a goal or not. In other words, our
aim is to develop a model that can estimate whether a shot, based on the information collected
from previous shots, will result in a goal or not and then predict the value of xG. To this end,
a new variable, designated status, has been created from the existing variable results. The
variable status assumes value 1 if the shot is recorded as a goal, and 0 otherwise.
In order to address this problem, we chose to utilize a feedforward neural network (FNN),
which has been previously described in Sect.3.1. Since we do not have to deal with time
sequences or complex data such as images, the simplicity and computational efﬁciency of the
FNN are an advantage. Furthermore, FNNs are suitable for learning non-linear relationships
(asexpectedinthistypeofproblem)betweenthepredictorvariablesandtheresponsevariable.
First, we examine the impact of the variables on the dependent variable status through the
feature selection process. Feature selection has a twofold motivation. Firstly, it helps to
improve the efﬁciency of the model, as it reduces time and computational resources. Secondly,
it simpliﬁes the model, reducing its complexity, improving interpretability and decreasing
overﬁtting, as it helps to eliminate irrelevant features. We use the SelectKBest method,
a widely used for feature selection in machine learning tasks, as it helps identify the most
relevant features for predicting the target variable. The SelectKBest method calculates feature
scores based on the results of the ANOVA F-test, which tests the relationship between the
features and the classes of the dependent variable, assigning each variable a score based
on its ability to separate the classes, with higher values indicating greater relevance to the
prediction of status variable. Figure4 shows the feature scores of the variables. From the
results, we observe that the only variables that have an impact on the dependent variable
are angleToGoal, distanceToGoal, situation and lastAction; therefore, we decide to use only
these four variables in our analysis.
Remember that the ﬁrst two variables indicate the distance to the goal and the angle of
the shot, while situation and lastAction are, respectively, the situation at the time of the event
(Direct freekick, From corner, Open play, etc.) and the last action before the shot (Pass, Cross,
Rebound, Foul, Tackle, etc.). Closer distances and more favourable angles generally result
in a greater chance of scoring, so the variables angleToGoal, distanceToGoal are crucial in
predicting whether a shot will result in a goal. At the same time, different situations have
different probabilities of leading to a goal, so this feature is important for understanding the
circumstances of the shot. Finally, the type of action that led to the shot reﬂects the preparation
for it, providing an indication of how the shot was made. By selecting these four variables,
we focus on the key aspects of a shot, which have a strong predictive power for whether or
not a goal is scored.
In light of the fact that some variables, such as situation and lastAction, are categorical, it is
essential to employ an appropriate encoding technique to facilitate their effective integration
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Feature scores using ANOVA F-statistic
into the neural network. Dummy encoding is commonly used; however, it does not capture
any semantic relationship or order between categories, treating them as completely inde-
pendent entities, which can limit the ability of the model to generalize or learn meaningful
patterns. Furthermore, it generates highly sparse and high-dimensional vectors, particularly
when the categorical variable has multiple categories, which signiﬁcantly increases mem-
ory consumption and computational cost. The neural network approach allows the use of
sophisticated techniques to overcome these problems, such as the embedding layer (Guo &
Berkhahn, 2016). This approach is particularly advantageous as it maps each category to a
low-dimensional vector, thereby reducing the overall dimensionality of the input space and
enabling the model to capture more complex relationships between different categories. By
incorporating the embedding layer before the hidden layers, we ensure that the categorical
data is transformed into an optimal format, which enhances the network’s ability to learn com-
plex patterns. Once the embedding process is complete, the resulting transformed variables
are passed through the network for further processing, thereby facilitating a more accurate
and efﬁcient learning process.
With regard to the division between the test set and the training set, the same approach
previously adopted is applied; this consists of using the most recent season (2023/24) as the
test set and all preceding seasons (2014/15 to 2022/23) as the training set. Before proceeding
to train the network, it is ﬁrst necessary to select an appropriate activation function and a
suitable loss function. In regard to the loss function, given that this is a classiﬁcation problem,
we use the Binary Cross Entropy. The activation function must be selected for both the output
layer and any potential hidden layers. Given that the output layer produces a 0–1 output, the
sigmoid activation function is the optimal choice. For the hidden layers, the selection is made
through parameter tuning, whereby the following parameters are calibrated:
• Number of hidden layers: 1, 2, 3
• Number of units for each hidden layer: from 32 to 256 in increments of 32
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Best hyperparameters
combination
Hyperparameter
Value
Number of hidden layers
2
Number of units in the ﬁrst layer
64
Activation function of the ﬁrst layer
ReLU
Number of units in the second layer
32
Activation function of the second layer
ReLU
Learning rate
0.001
• Activation function for each hidden layer: sigmoid, tanh, ReLU
• Learning rate: 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001
Table3 shows the best hyperparameters combination used to train the neural network.
To evaluate the validity of the developed model, some fundamental metrics for binary clas-
siﬁcation models were analyzed, such as accuracy, which quantiﬁes the proportion of correct
predictions compared to the total observations and represents a general measure of model
performance; Log-Loss, which evaluates the divergence between predicted probabilities and
observed values, providing an indication of the overall quality of probabilistic forecasts, and
the Brier Score, which measures the mean squared error between predicted probabilities and
observed results, representing an indicator of model calibration. In particular, for a valid
model, we expect an accuracy value close to 1, indicating high precision in classiﬁcation,
a low Log-Loss value, as better performance corresponds to lower values (with interpreta-
tive thresholds deﬁned as excellent performance (< 0.2), good performance (0.2–0.5) and
performance requiring improvement (> 0.5)), and a Brier Score close to 0, indicating good
model calibration (with values between 0 and 1, where 0 represents a perfect model).
The results obtained by the model, presented below, are in line with the expected outcomes.
• Accuracy: 0.9109
• Log-Loss: 0.2607
• Brier Score: 0.073
Another important aspect analyzed is the discriminatory capacity of the model, evaluated
through the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC-ROC). We recall
that an AUC of 0.5 indicates that the model does not perform better than random guessing,
while an AUC of 1.0 indicates perfect classiﬁcation. Our model has an AUC-ROC value of
0.8, which shows a good discriminatory ability between the “Goal” and “No Goal” classes.
Finally, the confusion matrix was examined, serving as an essential tool to evaluate the
quality of the model’s predictions in detail, distinguishing between False Positives (FP) and
False Negatives (FN). A threshold of 0.5 was used to classify predicted probabilities; this
means that any observation with a predicted probability of 0.5 or greater was classiﬁed as
a “Goal” (positive class), while any observation with a predicted probability below 0.5 was
classiﬁed as “No Goal” (negative class). It is important to note that the choice of threshold can
signiﬁcantly affect the model’s performance. Lowering the threshold (for example, to 0.3)
would increase the number of True Positives by classifying more observations as “Goal”, but
this may also increase False Positives, reducing precision. However, increasing the thresh-
old (for example, to 0.7) would reduce False Positives but could also result in more False
Negatives, decreasing recall. Therefore, the threshold choice involves a trade-off between
precision and recall, depending on the desired model performance. The results of our analysis
are shown in Table4.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Confusion matrix
Predicted: 0
Predicted: 1
Actual: 0
8636
85
Actual: 1
778
188
Table 5 Comparison of models
Error
Understat
Neural networks
model
approach
MSE
1.6173
1.5737
MAE
0.8602
0.8593
R2
0.8334
0.8379
The matrix shows that the model is highly effective in identifying “No Goal” (8636 True
Negatives against only 85 False Positives). However, it presents some difﬁculties in detecting
“Goal” cases (188 True Positives against 778 False Negatives). This performance could be
attributed to the nature of the analyzed phenomenon, football, in which the probability of
scoring a goal is intrinsically low, making it more challenging to predict rare events.
5.3 Comparative performance evaluation
To further evaluate the performance of the model and to test whether our proposed approach
provides an improvement over the Understat model, we proceeded with a comparison of
Understat xG values and our model’s predicted xG values with the actual number of goals
scored. Speciﬁcally, we calculated the actual total number of goals scored by each player and
aggregated the predicted xG values from both our model and the Understat model for each
player. The comparison was then conducted by analyzing how well the xG predictions from
both models are aligned with the actual goals scored. Table5 shows the results obtained.
The results show that the proposed approach slightly outperforms the Understat model,
providing more accurate predictions. The proposed model has a lower mean squared error and
mean absolute error than the Understat model, indicating a smaller discrepancy between the
xG predicted by our model and the real number of goals scored compared to the Understat
xG. The coefﬁcient R2 of the proposed approach is barely higher than that of Understat,
indicating that our model explains a greater percentage of the data variability, suggesting a
better ability to adapt to the observed data. Although these differences are not noticeable,
they still highlight the superior capability of the proposed approach to detect patterns in the
observed data.
To further validate the results, it is important to verify whether the difference between the
two models is statistically signiﬁcant and not due to chance. For this purpose, the paired-
sample t-test or the Wilcoxon signed-rank test on the residuals can be used, depending on
the characteristics of the residuals distribution. The ﬁrst is a parametric test, used when
the residuals are normally distributed; the second is a non-parametric test, used when the
residuals are not normally distributed. The normality of the residuals was veriﬁed using the
Shapiro-Wilk and Jarque-Bera tests. Since both distributions were found to be non-normal,
the Wilcoxon signed-rank test was applied. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test is based on the
following hypotheses:
• Null hypothesis (H0): There is no difference between the groups.
123

Annals of Operations Research
• Alternative hypothesis (H1): There is a signiﬁcant difference between the groups.
If the p-value is less than 0.05, the null hypothesis is rejected. Given that the associated
p-value is equal to 0.001, it can be concluded that there is a signiﬁcant difference between
the two models, thus supporting the conclusion that the proposed model performs better than
Understat’s, as also observed by the other validation metrics (MAE, MSE and R2).
6 Conclusions
Professional sports attract the attention of millions of people worldwide, who constitute a
vast base of spectators who are increasingly interested in sports. Among the different sports,
football is the most popular worldwide; its inﬂuence extends beyond the ﬁeld of play, with
a signiﬁcant economic impact, generating substantial ﬁnancial ﬂows in several sectors. It
contributes signiﬁcantly to global GDP and employment, inﬂuences the international business
landscape, and acts as a powerful tool for ﬁnancial and economic development. Due to the
impact that football has on ﬁnance and the economy and the dynamic and ﬁnancially complex
nature of football, it is important to be able to give value to football clubs and, in particular,
to football players. This value depends on various factors, such as age, role, and, above
all, performance on the ﬁeld. Among the numerous measures and metrics used to evaluate
the performance of a football player or a team, the Expected Goal stands out. All football
stakeholderswidelyusethismetric,butitpresentstheproblemthatseveraldataprovidershave
developed their xG estimation model, resulting in disparate outcomes and evaluations of the
football player’s performance; this makes this metric unclear and decreases the effectiveness
of using xG for investment strategies, decisions, and more. Therefore, the work focused on
exploring different models to understand the underlying model of one of the primary data
providers, Understat. After estimating several models, including regression linear, decision
trees, SVM, boosting models, and neural networks, we concluded that the model used by
Understat appears to be a boosting model, in particular a LigthGBM, which is the model
that best predicted the Understat xG values. In addition, the work addressed the problem of
trying to improve the xG estimates through a Neural Networks approach; to this end, a Feed-
forward neural network model was developed. The results showed that the proposed approach
subtlyoutperformstheUnderstatmodel,providingmoreaccuratepredictions.Futureresearch
could not only further optimize the developed model to achieve higher predictive accuracy
but also investigate the integration of additional variables, which could signiﬁcantly impact
the expected goal. Also, if the focus is on player evaluation, other metrics could be explored,
such as xA or the new metrics xGChain and xGBuildUp.
Appendix A: Hyperparameter tuning
This section provides details about the different models tested, as described in Sect.5.1. The
tables present the sets of parameters tested for each model to explore the effect of different
combinations on the behavior and performance of each model to optimize the results obtained
in forecasting Expected Goals.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Decision tree
Hyperparameter
Values
max_depth
[3, 5, 10, None]
min_samples_split
[2, 5, 10]
min_samples_leaf
[1, 2, 5]
max_features
[sqrt, log2, None]
Random forest
Hyperparameter
Values
n_estimators
[50, 100, 200, 300]
max_depth
[3, 5, 10, None]
max_features
[sqrt, log2, None]
min_samples_split
[2, 5, 10]
min_samples_leaf
[1, 2, 4]
bootstrap
[True, False]
Support vector machine
Hyperparameter
Values
kernel
[linear, rbf, sigmoid]
C
[0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 100]
epsilon
[0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1]
gamma
[scale, auto, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10]
Gradient boosting
Hyperparameter
Values
n_estimators
[50, 100, 200, 500]
learning_rate
[0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2]
max_depth
[3, 5, 7, 10]
XGBoost
Hyperparameter
Values
n_estimators
[50, 100, 200, 500]
learning_rate
[0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2]
max_depth
[3, 5, 7, 10]
subsample
[0.8, 0.9, 1]
colsample_bytree
[0.8, 0.9, 1]
LightGBM
Hyperparameter
Values
n_estimators
[50, 100, 200, 500]
learning_rate
[0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2]
max_depth
[3, 5, 7, 10, -1]
num_leaves
[31, 50, 100]
123

Annals of Operations Research
Neural networks
Hyperparameter
Values
n_layers
[1, 2, 3]
n_neurons
[32, 64, 128, 256]
activation function
[sigmoid, tanh, ReLU]
learning_rate
[0.001, 0.01, 0.1]
Funding Open access funding provided by Università Parthenope di Napoli within the CRUI-CARE
Agreement.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that there are no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with animals performed by any of the authors.
Informed consent Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Brechot, M., & Flepp, R. (2020). Dealing with randomness in match outcomes: How to rethink performance
evaluation in European club football using expected goals. Journal of Sports Economics, 21(4), 335–362.
Bryson, A., Frick, B., & Simmons, R. (2013). The returns to scarce talent: Footedness and player remuneration
in European soccer. Journal of Sports Economics, 14(6), 606–628.
Campa, D. (2021). Do soccer player registrations meet the accounting concepts behind the recognition of
intangible assets? A discussion of the European context. International Journal of Sport Management and
Marketing, 21(5–6), 348–364.
Cervone, D., D’amour, A., Bornn, L., & Goldsberry, K. (2014). Pointwise: Predicting points and valuing
decisions in real time with nba optical tracking data. In Proceedings of the 8th MIT sloan sports analytics
conference, Boston, MA, USA, (vol. 28).
Corsaro, S., Ioio, G.D., Sauro, V. D., & Marino, Z.: In M. J. Blondin, I. Fister Jr., & P. M. Pardalos (Eds.) (2025).
A supervised learning approach for evaluating football performances (pp. 215–242). Cham: Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-76047-1_7
Eggels, H., Van Elk, R., & Pechenizkiy, M. (2016). Explaining soccer match outcomes with goal scoring
opportunities predictive analytics. In 3rd Workshop on machine learning and data mining for sports
analytics (MLSA 2016). CEUR-WS.org
Follert, F., & Gleißner, W. (2024). A decision model to value football player investments under uncertainty.
Management Decision, 62(13), 178–200.
Forker, J. (2005). Discussion of accounting, valuation and duration of football player contracts. Journal of
Business Finance & Accounting, 32, 587–598.
Franck, E., & Nüesch, S. (2012). Talent and/or popularity: What does it take to be a superstar? Economic
Inquiry, 50(1), 202–216.
Gásquez Mendoza, R. (2017). Football and economy relations at the international level
123

Annals of Operations Research
Gigante, G., & Sottoriva, C. (2021). Economia, Gestione e Finanza dei Football Club Professionistici. EGEA
spa.
Green, S. (2012). Assessing the performance of premier league goalscorers. OptaPro Blog
Guo, C., & Berkhahn, F. (2016). Entity embeddings of categorical variables. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.06737
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, J. (2017). The elements of statistical learning: Data mining, inference,
and prediction. Berlin: Springer.
Horvat, T., & Job, J. (2020). The use of machine learning in sport outcome prediction: A review. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 10(5), 1380.
Hull, J. C. (2021). Machine learning in business: An introduction to the world of data science. (No Title)
Kharrat, T., McHale, I. G., & Peña, J. L. (2020). Plus-minus player ratings for soccer. European Journal of
Operational Research, 283(2), 726–736.
Lucey, P., Bialkowski, A., Monfort, M., Carr, P., & Matthews, I. (2015). quality vs quantity: Improved shot
prediction in soccer using strategic features from spatiotemporal data.
Mazur, M., & Vega, M. (2022). Football and cryptocurrencies. SSRN J.
Miller, A., Bornn, L., Adams, R., & Goldsberry, K. (2014). Factorized point process intensities: A spatial
analysis of professional basketball. In International conference on machine learning (pp. 235–243).
PMLR.
Neals, W. C. (1964). The peculiar economics of professional sports. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 78(1),
1–14.
Noordman, R. (2019). Improving the estimation of outcome probabilities of football matches using in-game
information. Amsterdam: Faculty of Economics and Business, Amsterdam School of Economics.
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P.,
Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., et al. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 12, 2825–2830.
Rojas, R. (1996). The backpropagation algorithm. Neural networks: A systematic introduction (pp. 149–182).
Scelles, N., Helleu, B., Durand, C., & Bonnal, L. (2016). Professional sports ﬁrm values: Bringing new
determinants to the foreground? A study of European soccer, 2005–2013. Journal of Sports Economics,
17(7), 688–715.
Schapire, R. E. (2003). The boosting approach to machine learning: An overview. Nonlinear estimation and
classiﬁcation, 149–171
The Business Research Company. (2024). Sports global market report 2024. The Business Research Company.
Yue, Y., Lucey, P., Carr, P., Bialkowski, A., & Matthews, I. (2014). Learning ﬁne-grained spatial models for
dynamic sports play prediction. In 2014 IEEE international conference on data mining (pp. 670–679).
IEEE.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123