TITLE: Strategy analysis for a digital content platform considering perishability
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04967-y
---

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04967-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Strategy analysis for a digital content platform considering
perishability
Xiaojie Sun1
Accepted: 29 August 2022 / Published online: 13 September 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
With the vigorous development of e-commerce, digital content consumption has prospered
in the consumer market. Considering the perishability of digital content products and the
negative utility of advertisements on users, the paper develops a dynamic game model for
the supply chain with a digital content platform and an upstream advertiser, and obtains the
optimal (or equilibrium) resource investing, pricing, and advertising strategies under the cen-
tralized and decentralized decision-making cases. The main results show that the marketing
strategies of pricing and advertising are constant over the planning horizon, while the oper-
ation strategy of resource investing which depends on digital content products’ perishability
is decreasing over time. And, the platform may open resource for free to beneﬁt more from
advertising. Furthermore, for a certain region with relatively small price sensitivity, a coun-
terintuitive result is obtained that the resource investing level and the proﬁts of both members
increase with the price sensitivity under the decentralized case, which is in sharp contrast to
the centralized case. Finally, ignoring the product perishability in the decision-making pro-
cess will cut down the resource investment level and proﬁt, and the proﬁt loss is intensiﬁed
by a lower price or advertising sensitivity of consumers.
Keywords Digital content platform · Pricing · Advertising · Dynamic investing · Dynamic
game
1 Introduction
In recent years, with the rapid development of internet technology and the widespread appli-
cation of mobile payment, digital revenue has been increasing greatly in the consumer market,
driven by the huge growth of internet advertising and digital content consumption. According
to the report “Global Entertainment and Media Outlook 2019–2023” from Pricewaterhouse-
Coopers (PwC), the global entertainment and media market value will reach $2.6 trillion by
2023, with a compound annual growth rate of 4.3% (PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2019).
As compared with traditional physical products, digital content products have some special
features. First, digital content products are different from traditional physical products in cost
B Xiaojie Sun
xjsun@swjtu.edu.cn
1
School of Economics and Management, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, China
123

416
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
structure (Jones & Mendelson, 2011). The ﬁxed costs of digital content products (which can
be understood as independent research and development cost, and copyright purchase cost)
are high, but the variable costs (such as, production, storage, and transmission) are almost
zero. Second, there are no restrictions on the production of digital content products. After
investing in resource, digital content platforms can achieve unlimited production and cover
the entire market demand. Third, the value of digital content products is perishable, and
the consumer valuation of the newer digital content products is higher. For example, the
value of the dated version of Microsoft Ofﬁce software is usually much less than that of
the new version (Dou et al., 2017). Empirical evidence also shows that in the video game
market, consumer valuation depreciates over time is a common phenomenon (Shiller, 2013).
Therefore, it is crucial for digital content platforms to make dynamically resource investing
policy from a long-term perspective to maintain their competitiveness.
In addition to the characteristics of digital content products themselves, the proﬁt model
of the digital content market is also different from that of the traditional market. As known,
product charging revenue is the main income of the traditional market. However, besides
the charging revenue, digital content platforms gain a large portion of their income from
advertising. From photo sharing to video games, advertising has become an important source
of income for many large platforms, such as, Hotmail, Facebook, and MySpace. Some plat-
forms even adopt the strategy of providing free content to attract consumers and advertisers.
For example, the Google and Baidu search engines are provided for free to users; the income
of such platforms mainly depends on advertising revenue. Moreover, as compared with the
traditional advertising, the platform advertising comes in various types, including website
sponsorship,built-insearchresults,productplacement,andsocialnetworkinglinks.Although
platforms can proﬁt from charging advertising fees, they need to take consideration of the
user loss due to the negative utility caused by commercial advertisements. In other words, the
user size decreases with the volume of commercial advertisements, as consumers generally
hate commercial advertisements in experiencing digital content products (Reisinger, 2012).
Consequently, platforms should carefully develop advertising strategy and pricing strategy
to balance the advertising revenue from advertisers and the charging revenue from users.
As for the game relationship between advertisers and digital content platforms, it is com-
mon that advertisers are the dominant party with deciding the advertising expense paid to
platforms. Whereas there exist some large platforms who decide the advertising fee them-
selves, most platforms choose to actively contact advertisers and give up the advertising
pricing initiative, rather than waiting for advertising opportunities, so as to avoid advertising
revenue loss. The decision-making on advertising payment not only inﬂuences the advertising
revenue via the direct impacts on the advertising level, but also affects the charging revenue
indirectly since the user size is related to the advertising level. The fact that platforms expect
a high advertising payment but advertisers prefer to cut down the advertising payment, also
makes the game with marketing (advertising and pricing) and operations (resource investing)
become more complicated.
Based on the above background, the common theories and models used in the traditional
market are no longer fully applicable to the digital content market (Chang & Yuan, 2009). This
paper develops a dynamic Stackelberg game model over a ﬁnite planning horizon, involv-
ing an advertiser who is the leader and a digital content platform who is the follower. The
advertiser decides the unit advertising payment to the platform, and the platform dynamically
determines the resource price, advertising level, and resource investing level. Speciﬁcally,
comprehensively considering the features of the digital content market and the negative utility
of advertisements on the platform users, this paper studies the operation and marketing deci-
sions of both proﬁt-maximizing ﬁrms under a long-term dynamic environment. To examine
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
417
the efﬁciency of the digital supply chain, this paper also investigates the centralized case for
the sake of comparison. And then, this paper discusses the case without the consideration of
the perishability of digital content products in the making-decision process in order to explore
the inﬂuence of ignoring perishability on ﬁrms’ proﬁtability. This work aims at addressing
the following questions:
(1) What are the equilibrium advertising payment for the advertiser and the equilibrium
resource price, advertising level, and resource investing level for the platform in the game?
(2) How does the ignoring perishability of digital content products affect ﬁrms’ operation
decisions and proﬁts?
(3) What are the effects of price sensitivity, advertising sensitivity, and unit advertising
revenue on the equilibrium decisions and proﬁts?
By solving the dynamic game problem between the advertiser and the platform in basis of
the optimal control method, this paper ﬁgures out the above questions. The main ﬁndings are
summarizedasfollows:(1)Theplatformopensresourceforfreeiftheunitadvertisingrevenue
is sufﬁciently high, or consumers are not very sensitive to advertisements, or consumers are
very sensitive to the resource price. (2) Under both the centralized and decentralized cases,
taking consideration of the dynamics due to the perishability of digital content products will
lead to an optimal (or equilibrium) dynamic operation strategy in resource investing which
depends on perishability, but the optimal (or equilibrium) marketing strategies of pricing and
advertising are constant over the planning horizon. And in the centralized case, the pricing
and advertising policies are independent of the perishability. (3) For a region with relatively
small price sensitivity, a counterintuitive result is obtained that the equilibrium resource
investing level and proﬁts of both members increase with the price sensitivity, which is in
sharp contrast to the centralized case where the optimal resource investing level and proﬁt
of the whole supply chain decrease with the price sensitivity. This is because a larger price
sensitivity in a certain region can reduce the double marginalization of the supply chain.
(4) The equilibrium resource investing level is nonmonotonic with respect to the advertising
sensitivity and the unit advertising revenue, which is also different from the centralized
case. In addition, it is shown that ﬁrms’ neglect of the product perishability will decrease
the resource investment level, and lead to the loss of proﬁt which is intensiﬁed by lower
advertising sensitivity and price sensitivity.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. A literature review is provided in
Sect. 2. The Stackelberg game model between the advertiser and the digital content platform
is developed in Sect. 3. Both analytical and numerical studies are conducted in Sect. 4 to
obtain managerial insights. Section 5 summarizes the paper and discusses the future research
directions. All proofs are provided in Appendix.
2 Literature review
This paper mainly involves two literature streams: one is the pricing strategy of digital content
platforms; the other is the advertising strategy of digital content platforms.
Pricing strategy has a signiﬁcantly impact on market demand, and the pricing strategy of
digital content platforms has been discussed in many previous studies. For example, Caillaud
and Jullien (2003) ﬁrst put forward two speciﬁc charging models of digital content products,
i.e. registration fee and transaction fee. And, Rochet and Tirole (2006) deﬁne the former as
membership or ﬁxed charge and the later as usage or variable charge. As compared with
traditional physical products, consumers are more sensitive to digital content products (Goh
123

418
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
& Bockstedt, 2013). Analogously, some studies, such as, Boudreau (2012), Casey and Töyli
(2012), Keskin and Taskin (2015), and Nan et al. (2016) investigate the pricing strategy
of digital content platforms under asymmetric crossover network effects, and show that
the platforms can attract more consumers by taking a lower price. Moreover, (Boudreau &
Jeppesen, 2015) ﬁnd that in fact, under the strong asymmetric network effects, digital content
platforms can make more proﬁts by providing their resource for free to customers, that is,
taking free pricing strategy is more proﬁtable for digital content platforms. Na et al. (2017)
consider two pricing strategies of digital content platforms, free value-added strategy and
paid-content strategy, and divided digital content platforms into three groups based on the
pricing strategies; they ﬁnd that the platforms who use free value-added strategy obtain the
highest proﬁt, followed by the platforms who adopt paid-content strategy, and the worst are
the platforms who adopts mixed strategy. Nan et al. (2019) analyze the the optimal pricing
strategies for cloud service providers in a competitive setting. Wang and Guo (2021) discuss
the optimal subscription strategy for network video platforms: paid strategy, free strategy, and
trial strategy; and show how it is affected by social inﬂuence. They also suggest that positive
social inﬂuence expands consumers’ tolerance of advertising when compared to a video
with no social inﬂuence. Duan et al. (2022) examine the optimal pricing strategy of online
platforms by developing a two-sided model considering users’ privacy concerns. They ﬁnd
that the platform can strategically make pricing decisions based on the level of information
disclosure to inﬂuence user demand and further promote the participation of advertisers, and
discuss the conditions under which the online platform has an incentive to provide users
with free services. For the establishment of dynamic pricing model, the researchs of Liu et
al. (2015) and Sun et al. (2020) provide workable methods and guidance, considering the
dynamic pricing and investment strategy for perishable products. Different from these works,
this paper examines the dynamic pricing strategy of a digital content platform and identiﬁes
the conditions under the platform resource is free and paid in a dynamic game model.
Advertising strategy has received much attention driven by the fact that the advertising
revenue shares a large part of income for digital content platforms, and the existing studies
focus on the revenue models. For example, Casadesus-Masanell and Zhu (2010) develop
four revenue models, i.e., subscription-based model, ad-sponsored model, mixed model,
and dual model. They investigate how the revenue model of the potential entrant affects the
revenue model of the existing ﬁrms, and ﬁnd that the existing ﬁrms prefer to choose singleton
model of only subscription-based or ad-sponsored. Pauwels and Weiss (2008) adopt empirical
methods and show that for online content providers, it is more proﬁtable to switch from free
model to subscription model, even though they may lose the advertising revenue. On the
contrary, Chiou and Tucker (2013) adopt empirical methods and ﬁnd that introducting the
subsciption model would signiﬁcantly reduce the online website trafﬁc, especially the click
volume of young consumers. Kumar and Sethi (2009) believe that advertising alone could not
support the survival of digital content platform ﬁrms. They dynamically establish the revenue
model including advertising revenue and subscription fee and obtain the optimal dynamic
pricing and advertising level of the digital content platform. Kind et al. (2005) analyze the
impact of competition on the revenue of a media platform by establishing mathematical
models under different market structures. They demonstrate that under the monopolistic
market structure, the platform could choose the model of consumer payment; while under
the competitive structure, the platform could make proﬁts by selling advertising space, in
which the platform simultaneously charges consumers and advertisers. Godes et al. (2009)
establish mathematical models and point out that the greater the competition intensity, the
more revenues the media platforms would obtain from consumer payment, and the less
revenues they would obtain from advertisers. Chen et al. (2016) studies the effects of different
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
419
business models on the digital content platform’s revenue and social welfare, and ﬁnd that
when the advertising space is small, the brokerage model is better in proﬁtability for the
platform than the advertising model. Lambrecht and Misra (2016) empirically investigate
and quantiﬁed the tradeoff between resource subscription and advertisements, and show
that due to the heterogeneity and the time of consumers’ willingness to pay, adopting a
static model may be suboptimal and ﬂexibly adjusting the amount of resource can improve
the revenue of the digital content platform. Kaul et al. (2018) construct a integer linear
programming model to identify the optimal allocation of advertisements in media over a
planning horizon. Kim and Moon (2020) develop a non-linear model and two algorithms to
analyze the web advertisement scheduling of online advertisement publishers who maximize
advertising effectiveness. Chakraborty et al. (2021) investigate the revenue management
problem of Video Sharing Platforms in determining the optimal mix of skippable and non-
skippable advertisements, which helps Video Sharing Platforms in determining the incentive
they should provide to the advertisers to switch to their preferred advertisement type. This
paper focuses on the tradeoff between the advertising revenue and the charging revenue, with
the considerations of the perishability of digital content products and the game relationship
between a digital content platform and an advertiser.
There also some existing studies focused on the inﬂuences of different factors on digital
content platforms’ operation and marketing strategies. For example, Lin et al. (2012) con-
sider the online service level, Liu et al. (2012) consider information technology capacity
constraints, Chen and Stallaert (2014) consider behavioral factors, and Xiao et al. (2020)
consider platform digital empowerment-induced demand. In addition, some scholars inves-
tigate the game issues between advertisers and digital content platforms. For example, Sun
and Zhu (2013) adopt empirical studies and ﬁnd that the result consistent with theoretical
studies that the digital content platform who has advertising sponsorship would introduce
more popular resources. Hao et al. (2017) consider two distinct features of in-app advertising
market, and develop a two-sided market model and examine the effects of the two features on
the revenue of the media platforms. This work investigates the impacts of price sensitivity,
advertising sensitivity, and unit advertising revenue on the optimal decisions and proﬁts of
the ﬁrms.
To the best of my knowledge, throughout the research developed so far, a few papers
provide the dynamic analysis of the digital content market, while most papers usually con-
sider the operation and marketing strategies under a static environment. In addition, those
papers in which problems are solved dynamically just consider the pricing strategy or the
advertising strategy. This work is different with the existing researches as the consideration of
the perishability of digital content products, and accordingly this paper studies the dynamic
resource investing strategy of the platform. Moreover, most of the previous analysis of the
digital content market focus on the decisions of platform themselves, and few papers consider
the decisions of the upstream advertiser. This paper considers the scenario where the adver-
tiser as the leader decides the advertising payment, and the platform as the follower decides
the resource price, the advertising level, and the resource investing level in a Stackelberg
game framework.
3 Model description
Consider a game model in which an advertiser (she) advertises on a platform (he) who
operates digital content products. The platform’s resource level declines over time due to
123

420
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
the perishability of digital content products; for example, the newer movies tend to be more
valuable to consumers, and after a period of time they will be less attractive. For this reason,
the platform continuously invests in the introduction and renewal of resource to guarantee
a good proﬁtability. Therefore, the dynamic evolution of the resource level I(t) can be
characterized as follows:
˙I(t) = u(t) −δI(t), I(0) = I0,
(1)
where the decision u(t) made by the platform denotes the resource investing level or the
increased resource volume at time t; δ > 0 is the depreciation rate of the resource level, and
a larger δ implies that the resource level is more time-sensitive; and I0 denotes the initial
resource stock. The platform’s resource investing cost is assumed to be s
2u2(t), with s > 0
reﬂecting the resource investing efﬁciency. The quadratic cost form captures the diminishing
return of resource investing.
The advertiser advertises on the platform to attract the platform’s users to purchase her
products or services, with being allowed an advertising level or intensity l(t) by the platform.
The platform’s users need to pay a fee p(t) for using the platform’s resource. As a result, the
user size (the consumer demand) of the platform at time t is jointly affected by the resource
level I(t), resource price p(t), and advertising level l(t), which is formulated by
D(t) = kF(p(t),l(t))I(t),
(2)
where kF(p(t),l(t)) denotes the marginal contribution of the platform resource to the user
size, and a larger coefﬁcient k implies that per unit resource can attract more consumers. The
term F(p(t),l(t)) reﬂects the impacts of resource price p(t) and advertising level l(t) on the
marginal contribution to the user size. In particular, when there is nothing in the repository
(i.e., I(t) = 0), no consumers will use the platform (i.e., D(t) = 0).
Obviously, a higher price p will reduce the marginal contribution of the platform resource
to the user size, i.e., ∂F
∂p < 0. Note that advertisements would give rise to a negative utility
on the platform users, based on the fact that the users generally dislike the advertisements
displayed in using digital content products. For example, consumers would show a sense of
disgust if they are interrupted by advertisements when watching movie on an online video
platform. Hence, a higher advertising level l will also reduce the marginal contribution, i.e.,
∂F
∂l < 0. Furthermore, the marginal effect of the advertising level on the marginal contribution
increases with the advertising level, which indicates that the term F(p,l) is a concave and
decreasing function with respect to l, i.e., ∂2F
∂l2 < 0. This fact can be shown from the practical
observation that the more in-stream advertisements in experiencing digital content products,
the lower consumers’ tolerance for the platform. Based on the above considerations and for
the sake of analytical discussion, it is assumed that F(p,l) takes the form of F(p,l) =
a −bp −gl2. Therefore, the consumer demand at time t is given by
D(t) = k(a −bp(t) −gl2(t))I(t),
(3)
where a > 0 reﬂects the market potential, and b > 0 is the price sensitivity which describes
that the consumer demand decreases with price p. The assumption about the linear decreasing
demand function with respect to price p is widely used in existing literature (Asdemir et al.,
2008; Yuan et al., 2017). The coefﬁcient g > 0 denotes the advertising sensitivity, implying
that more consumers will stay out of the platform if the advertising level increases. The
square of l means that a higher advertising level will lead to a greater degree of consumers’
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
421
marginal aversion. The quadratic form widely applied in existing literature characterizes
the phenomenon of increasing margin, for which the platform would not make excessive
advertisements.
A Stackelberg game arises between the advertiser and the platform, wherein the advertiser
is the leader and the platform is the follower. The advertiser advertises her own products or
services which are independent with the digital content products on the platform, and obtains
revenue H per unit advertisement per platform user. Hence, the advertiser’s advertising
revenue per unit time is H D(t)l(t). On the other hand, the advertiser needs to pay advertising
expense h to the platform for per unit advertisement per platform user, which is her decision
term satisfying the constraint h ∈[0, H]. Then the advertiser’s advertising expense paid
to the platform per unit time is hD(t)l(t), which describes the transfer payment between
the advertiser and the platform. Therefore, the advertiser’s objective functional within a
ﬁnite planning horizon [0, T ], i.e., the total proﬁt πa with the subscript “a” representing the
advertiser, is modeled as
πa =
 T
0
(H −h)D(t)l(t)dt.
(4)
The platform’s revenue per unit time consists of two parts: one is charging revenue
p(t)D(t) which comes from the platform users; the other is the advertising revenue hD(t)l(t)
from the advertiser. Therefore, the platform’s objective functional over the planning horizon
[0, T ], i.e., the total proﬁt πp with the subscript “p” representing the platform, equals to the
revenues minus the resource investing cost, and is formulated as
πp =
 T
0

p(t)D(t) + hD(t)l(t) −s
2u2(t)

dt.
(5)
4 Strategy analysis
The paper ﬁrst considers the centralized case as a benchmark, wherein the advertiser and
the platform act as one ﬁrm to maximize the overall proﬁt. And then, this paper focuses on
the analysis under the decentralized case in which a Stackelberg game arises between the
advertiser and the platform.
4.1 The centralized case
In the centralized case, the advertiser and the platform are integrated to one decision-maker.
There does not exist the transfer payment between the advertiser and the platform, which is
also equivalent to the case where the advertising payment h is given exogenously. Hence, the
integrated system’s objective functional over the planning horizon [0, T ], i.e., the total proﬁt
πc with the subscript “c” representing the centralized case, is given by
πc =
 T
0

p(t)D(t) + H D(t)l(t) −s
2u2(t)

dt.
(6)
Therefore, the following dynamic optimization problem can be formulated:
max
p(·),l(·),u(·)
 T
0

p(t)D(t) + H D(t)l(t) −s
2u2(t)

dt
s.t.
˙I(t) = u(t) −δI(t), I(0) = I0,
(7)
123

422
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
which is an optimal control problem with one state variable I(·) and three control variables
p(·),l(·), and u(·).
By solving the optimal control problem (7) based on the maximum principle from (Sethi
& Thompson, 2006), the optimal pricing, advertising, and resource investing levels are char-
acterized in the following proposition.
Proposition 1 In the centralized case, the optimal price, advertising level, and resource
investing level are respectively given by
p∗
c(t) =

4ag−3b2H2
8bg
, H ≤ˆh,
0, H > ˆh,
(8)
l∗
c (t) =
 bH
2g , H ≤ˆh,

a
3g , H > ˆh,
(9)
u∗
c(t) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
k(b2H2+4ag)2(eδT −eδt)
64bg2δseδT
, H ≤ˆh,
2kaH
√
3a(eδT −eδt)
9δs√geδT
, H > ˆh,
(10)
where ˆh =

4ag
3b2 .
It is interesting to show from Proposition 1 that both the optimal price and advertising
level are constant. Speciﬁcally, even considering the dynamics of the platform’s resource
level due to the perishability of digital content products, the marketing strategies of pricing
and advertising are time-invariant, which illustrates that the ﬁrm would take static marketing
strategies, and only the operation strategy of resource investing is time-varying. These ﬁnd-
ings can be veriﬁed from the practice, for example, many online video platforms in China,
such as iQIYI and Youku, have always charged a stable and similar fee per unit time to their
users (about 30 yuan RMB per month), and kept inserting advertisements at a stable fre-
quency (including pop-up ads, interstitial ads, etc), while frequently and actively introduced
new video resources to attract more users. Furthermore, the pricing and advertising policies
are independent of the perishability, while the resource investing level is decreasing over
time. It is intuitive that the platform would invest more at the early stage of the planning
horizon to attract more consumers, and invest less at the later stage of the planning horizon
for saving cost.
In addition, the optimal decisions depend on the unit advertising revenue H. Speciﬁcally,
when the unit advertising revenue is relatively high (H > ˆh), the platform opens the digital
content products free of charge to users (p∗
c(t) = 0). And, the platform does not increase
the advertising level unlimitedly no matter how high the unit advertising revenue is. This
implies that the optimal advertising level

a
3g is independent of the unit advertising revenue,
and is determined jointly by the market size and the advertising sensitivity. When the unit
advertising revenue is relatively low (H ≤ˆh), all the time-invariant strategies (pricing and
advertising) and the time-varying strategy (resource investing) depend on the unit advertising
revenue.
Next, based on the results obtained in Proposition 1, the paper conducts analytical studies
fortheimpactsofthemainparametersontheoptimaldecisionstoobtainimportantmanagerial
implications.
Corollary 1 For the turning point H = ˆh =

4ag
3b2 , the results are as follows:
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
423
(i) As g increases, p∗
c(t) is set for free ﬁrst and then increases, l∗
c (t) decreases, and u∗
c(t)
decreases.
(ii) As b increases, p∗
c(t) decreases ﬁrst and then is set for free, l∗
c (t) increases ﬁrst and then
keeps constant, and u∗
c(t) decreases ﬁrst and then keeps constant.
(iii) As H increases, p∗
c(t) decreases ﬁrst and then is set for free, l∗
c (t) increases ﬁrst and
then keeps constant, and u∗
c(t) increases.
For Corollary 1(i), the increase of the advertising sensitivity g implies that advertisements
exert a larger negative effect on the platform users, causing more consumers to leave the
platform market and accordingly a lower proﬁt of the ﬁrm. To ensure enough demand for
proﬁt, the ﬁrm has to reduce the advertising level. Note that the centralized ﬁrm’s revenue
consists of two parts: advertising revenue H D(t)l(t) and charging revenue p(t)D(t). For
a relatively small advertising sensitivity (g < 3b2H2
4a
), the advertising revenue signiﬁcantly
dominates the charging revenue. Thus, the ﬁrm chooses to open the platform for free to
attract more consumers. For a relatively large advertising sensitivity (g ≥
3b2H2
4a
), both
the advertising revenue and the charging revenue are important for the ﬁrm. In this case,
with the advertising sensitivity increasing, the proﬁtability in advertising is reduced, and
thus the ﬁrm chooses a higher price to obtain a higher charging revenue to make up for the
advertising revenue loss. Finally, a larger advertising sensitivity implies that it’s not cost-
effective for the ﬁrm to spend same expenditures as before in resource investing, as a result
of the deterioration of investing environment. In other words, consumers’ incremental dislike
about advertisements will reduce the ﬁrm’s resource investing willingness.
For Corollary 1(ii), when the price sensitivity b is relatively small (b ≤

4ag
3H2 ), both
the advertising revenue and the charging revenue are important for the ﬁrm’s proﬁtability.
The increase of the price sensitivity implies that for the same pricing level, more consumers
will leave the platform market. Hence, the ﬁrm has to set a lower price to reduce customer
defection. However, when the price sensitivity is sufﬁciently large (b >

4ag
3H2 ), the prof-
itability in charging is greatly reduced, and the charging revenue is signiﬁcantly dominated
by the advertising revenue. Thus, the ﬁrm chooses to open the platform for free to attract
more consumers. As for the impacts of the price sensitivity on the advertising level and
resource investing level, the details are as follows. When the price sensitivity is relatively
small, the ﬁrm increases the advertising level to improve the advertising revenue for making
up for the charging revenue loss due to a lower price, with the price sensitivity increasing.
Since an increasing price sensitivity means the deterioration of investing environment, it’s not
cost-effective for the ﬁrm to spend as much as before in resource investing. When the price
sensitivity is sufﬁciently large, the platform is free to the consumers, and thus the advertising
and resource investing levels remain unchanged no matter how the price sensitivity changes.
For Corollary 1(iii), when the unit advertising revenue H is relatively low (H ≤ˆh),
both the advertising revenue and the charging revenue contribute to the ﬁrm’s proﬁtability.
Note that the advertising revenue is directly dependent on consumer demand. As the unit
advertising revenue increases, it is obvious that the ﬁrm will set a higher advertising level.
Furthermore, the ﬁrm is motivated to cut the price down and to improve the platform resource
investing level for attracting more consumers. However, when the unit advertising revenue
is sufﬁciently high (H > ˆh), the advertising revenue signiﬁcantly dominates the charging
revenue, and thus the ﬁrm sets the price to zero. That is, for a high enough advertising revenue,
the ﬁrm will offer the platform resource for free to users. This explains the phenomenon
in practice where some platforms choose to open to the public free of charge to attract
subscribers, because the ﬁrms earn more from advertising and only need to attract more
123

424
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
consumers; for example, YouTube and iQIYI provide a large amount of video resources to
consumers for free. Note that in this case, the ﬁrm has no space to reduce the price any more
for that the platform resource is free for consumers. Thus, in order to enhance consumer
demand, the ﬁrm no longer raises the advertising level. The rationality behind is that despite
increasing advertising level has a positive effect in improving marginal revenue, it also has
a negative effect on proﬁtability due to demand loss. These two opposite effects cancel each
other out no matter how the unit advertising revenue changes, hence the ﬁrm chooses to
maintain the constant advertising level independent on the unit advertising revenue. Finally,
it is intuitive that the ﬁrm is motivated to continuously improve the resource investing level
to attract more consumers when the unit advertising revenue becomes higher.
By substituting the optimal decisions p∗
c(t), l∗
c (t), u∗
c(t) presented in Proposition 1 into
Eq. (6), the optimal proﬁt of the centralized ﬁrm can be obtained as follows:
π∗
c =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
sΔ1eδT
2δ

Δ1(2δT −3)eδT −e−δT +4)+2I0δ(1−eδT )

−sΔ2
1
4δ

(2δT −3)e2δT +4eδT −1

,
H ≤ˆh,
sΔ2eδT
2δ

Δ2(2δT −3)eδT −e−δT +4)+2I0δ(1−eδT )

−sΔ2
2
4δ

(2δT −3)e2δT +4eδT −1

,
H > ˆh,
(11)
where Δ1 = k(b2H2+4ag)2
64bg2δseδT
, and Δ2 = 2kaH
√
3a
9δs√geδT . Some numerical results which show several
important parameters’ impacts on the optimal proﬁt under the centralized case, are summa-
rized in Table 1.
Intuitively, an increase in the advertising revenue H will bring more proﬁts for the cen-
tralized ﬁrm. An increase in the advertising sensitivity g reduces consumer demand, and in
turn reduces the proﬁt. An increase in the price sensitivity b reduces consumer demand when
the price sensitivity is small, while it has no effect on consumer demand because the plat-
form resource is free when the price sensitivity is large. Therefore, the ﬁrm’s proﬁt decreases
ﬁrst and then remains constant as the price sensitivity increases. An increase in the platform
resource attraction k implies that more users are drawn to the platform, and thus the proﬁt
increases. A higher depreciation rate δ implies that the platform resource has greater depre-
ciation, causing more consumers to run off and accordingly proﬁt reduction. An increasing
cost coefﬁcient s means a lower investing efﬁciency, thus reducing the proﬁt. Finally, since
a higher initial resource level I0 means a higher initial demand, the proﬁt is improved.
4.2 The decentralized case
In the decentralized case, a Stackelberg game arises between the advertiser (the leader) and the
platform (the follower), denoting the case by the subscript “d”. The dynamic game problem
between the upstream advertiser and the downstream platform is described as follows:
max
h∈[0,H] πa =
 T
0
(H −h)D(t)l(t)dt
max
p(·),l(·),u(·) πp =
 T
0

p(t)D(t) + hD(t)l(t) −s
2u2(t)

dt
s.t. ˙I(t) = u(t) −δI(t), I(0) = I0.
(12)
First, using backward induction method to solve the dynamic game problem (12). Specif-
ically, for a given advertiser’s advertising payment h, solve the platform’s optimal control
problem and obtain the corresponding optimal response functions of pricing, advertising,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
425
Table 1 Impacts of parameters
on the optimal proﬁt
parameter
H
g
b
k
δ
s
I0
π∗c
↑
↓
↓−
↑
↓
↓
↑
and resource investing levels as those shown in Eqs. (8)–(10) with the parameter H replaced
by h (according to Proposition 1), namely,
p∗
d(t, h) =

4ag−3b2h2
8bg
, h ≤ˆh,
0, h > ˆh,
(13)
l∗
d(t, h) =
 bh
2g , h ≤ˆh,

a
3g , h > ˆh,
(14)
u∗
d(t, h) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
k(b2h2+4ag)2(eδT −eδt)
64bg2δseδT
, h ≤ˆh,
2kah
√
3a(eδT −eδt)
9δs√geδT
, h > ˆh.
(15)
The optimal response functions depend on the upstream advertiser’s decision h, that is,
the upstream advertiser can control the platform’s response by choosing different advertising
payment h. Once the optimal advertising payment h∗is determined by the advertiser, the
optimal strategies for the platform can be obtained by virtue of the optimal response functions
in Eqs. (13)–(15). It is can be veriﬁed from Eqs. (13)–(15) that despite considering the
dynamics of the platform’s resource level due to the perishability of digital content products,
the optimal marketing strategies of pricing and advertising will be time-invariant, which
implies that the platform would take stable (static) marketing strategies and only take a
dynamic operation strategy in resource investing.
By comparing the optimal decisions of the decentralized case to that of the centralized
case, the following corollary can be obtained.
Corollary 2 p∗
c(t) ≤p∗
d(t, h),l∗
c (t) ≥l∗
d(t, h), and u∗
c(t) ≥u∗
d(t, h) hold for any t ≥0 and
h ∈[0, H].
Corollary 2 shows that when a game occurs between the upstream advertiser and the
downstream platform, the platform will raise the price and reduce the advertising and resource
investing levels, as compared to the centralized case. The double marginalization effect in the
supply chain drops a hint that the proﬁt-maximizing advertiser and platform have conﬂicts to
achieve their goals. Obviously, in the decentralized case, the advertiser will set a unit transfer
payment h lower than her unit advertising revenue H to gain positive advertising revenue,
causing the platform to set a lower advertising level due to advertising margin reduction (i.e.,
H −h < H). Meanwhile, the platform increases the price to make up for his advertising
revenue loss (i.e., hDl < H Dl). Moreover, owing to the unit revenue reduction, it is not
cost-effective for the platform to make resource investing as same as the centralized case to
attract more consumers, and thus the resource investing level is reduced in the decentralized
case.
Substituting the optimal response functions (13)–(15) into the state equation (1) and the
demand function (3), the demand rate can be obtained as
Dd(t, h) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
k A
2bg3δ2seδT

−1
4k A2 + B

e−δt + 1
4k A2 
eδT −1
2eδt
, h ≤ˆh,
2ka
27δ2seδT

9δ2sI0eδ(T−t)−kah

3a
g

2eδ(T−t)−2eδT −e−δt +eδt
,
h > ˆh,
(16)
123

426
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
where A = 1
4b2h2 + ag and B = bg2δ2sI0.
By virtue of the response functions (13)–(16), the optimization problem for the advertiser
with deciding the optimal unit advertising payment is given as
max
h∈[0,H] πa =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
k Ah(H−h)e−2δT
4g4δ3s
 1
4(δT −2
3

k A2+B)e2δT +
 1
2k A2−B

eδT −1
8k A2
,
h ≤ˆh,
2ka(H−h)e−2δT
9gδ3s

δ2sI0
√3ag

e2δT −eδT 
+ 4
3ka2h
 1
2δT −3
4

e2δT + eδT −1
4

, h > ˆh.
(17)
By solving the optimization problem (17), one can obtain the optimal unit advertis-
ing payment h which implicitly depends on the perishability coefﬁcient δ. Hence, for the
decentralized decision-making case, it is concluded that all of the operational and marketing
policies depend on the perishability, which is different from the centralized decision-making
case. As presented in Eq. (17), the expression of the advertiser’s proﬁt (a high power equa-
tion) is too complex to yield the analytical solutions, and thus the paper adopts numerical
studies to ﬁnd some managerial insights. The basic parameters are set as a benchmark:
a = 1, b = 0.5, g = 0.5, k = 0.5, s = 0.5, H = 3, T = 10, and δ = 0.02. When analyzing
the impacts of a parameter, one keeps the values of other parameters unchanged.
First, Fig. 1a, b depict the advertiser’s optimal (equilibrium) unit advertising payment
with respect to the price sensitivity b. Speciﬁcally, Fig. 1a presents the advertiser’s proﬁt
with the unit advertising payment h under different price sensitivities. As observed, for a
given price sensitivity, the advertiser’s proﬁt is a unimodal function with respect to the unit
advertising payment, which is driven by two effects. On one hand, the increase of the unit
advertising payment decreases the advertiser’s proﬁt directly. On the other hand, a larger unit
advertising payment improves the advertiser’s proﬁt indirectly by stimulating the platform
to introduce more advertisements. When the unit advertising payment is relatively low, the
indirect increasing effect outperforms the direct decreasing effect, where the advertiser’s
proﬁt increases with the unit advertising payment, and vice versa. Therefore, for any given
price sensitivity b, there exists a unique optimal advertising payment set by the advertiser.
Figure 1b shows that as the price sensitivity b increases, the optimal (equilibrium) unit
advertising payment increases ﬁrst, then decreases, and becomes constant afterwards. When
the price sensitivity is relatively small, both the platform’s advertising revenue and charging
revenue are important. In this case, the increase of the price sensitivity will decrease the
platform’s revenue from charging users due to a reduced demand and a lower price, and thus
the advertiser as the leader taking a comparative advantage in the game would provide a higher
advertising payment to induce the platform to introduce more advertisements for obtaining
a higher advertising revenue. While the price sensitivity is relatively large, the platform’s
proﬁtability mostly relies on the advertising revenue. In this case, the advertiser as the leader
inthegamehasincentivestoreducetheadvertisingpaymenttoextractmoreproﬁtsastheprice
sensitivity increases. Although the advertiser’s action discourages the platform to introduce
advertisements, the advertiser’s loss is dominated by the earning from the reduction in the
advertising payment, which consequently induces the advertiser to decrease the advertising
payment. When the price sensitivity is sufﬁciently large, the platform’s resource is provided
for free, which makes the advertising and resource investing decisions independent of the
price sensitivity, and thus the advertiser keeps the unit advertising payment unchanged as the
price sensitivity increases.
Figure 2 shows the platform’s optimal (equilibrium) decisions with respect to the price
sensitivity b. Speciﬁcally, Fig. 2a illustrates that when the price sensitivity is relatively small,
the price decreases with the price sensitivity. In this case, because both the charging revenue
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
427
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1 Advertiser’s optimal decision with respect to b
and the advertising revenue are important, the platform has incentives to cut down the resource
price to prevent the loss of users as the price sensitivity increases. Meanwhile, as shown in
Fig. 2b, the platform rises up the advertising level to make up for the charging revenue loss.
When the price sensitivity is large enough, the charging revenue is signiﬁcantly dominated by
the advertising revenue. In order to get a high demand for a considerable advertising revenue,
the platform reduce the price to zero, and thus advertising level remain unchanged. Figure 2c,
d show that with the price sensitivity increasing, the resource investing level decreases ﬁrst,
then increases slightly, continues to decrease later, and keeps unchanged ﬁnally. When the
price sensitivity is relatively small, the fact that the increase of the price sensitivity decreases
the resource investing efﬁciency causes the platform to reduce the resource investing level,
even though it makes the advertiser increase the unit advertising payment (as shown in Fig. 1b)
which promotes the resource investing. As the price sensitivity further increases, however, it
is interesting to ﬁnd that the platform increases the resource investing level, which is driven
by a higher advertising payment from the advertiser. This interesting result differs from the
centralized decision case where the resource investing level never increases with the price
sensitivity. When the price sensitivity increases to a region (i.e., 0.54 < b < 0.78), the
resource investing will not beneﬁt the charging revenue at all because the resource is opened
for free. In this case, as the price sensitivity increases, the platform decreases the resource
investing level due to the lower advertising payment from the advertiser. When the price
sensitivity is sufﬁciently large (i.e., b > 0.78), since the unit advertising payment remains
unchanged, the platform keeps the resource investing level constant. In addition, Fig. 2c
shows that for any given price sensitivity, the resource investing level is decreasing over
time, which coincides with that in the centralized case and shares the same reasons.
Figure 3 shows the optimal (equilibrium) proﬁts of the two ﬁrms with respect to the price
sensitivity b. Speciﬁcally, Fig. 3a shows that as the price sensitivity increases, the advertiser’s
proﬁt increases ﬁrst and then remains constant (for a relatively large b). Figure 3b shows that
the platform’s proﬁt decreases ﬁrst, then increases slightly, continues to decrease later, and
keeps unchanged ﬁnally. With the price sensitivity increasing, the platform’s proﬁtability
relies more on advertising revenue. Therefore, the advertiser as the leader in the Stackelberg
game can strictly beneﬁt from an increasing price sensitivity by inducing the platform to insert
more advertisements, until the optimal decisions remain unchanged for a relatively large price
123

428
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 2 Platform’s optimal decisions with respect to b
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3 Optimal proﬁts with respect to b
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
429
sensitivity where her proﬁt keeps unchanged. As for the platform, when the price sensitivity
is relatively small, both the charging revenue and advertising revenue are important, and thus
his proﬁt decreases ﬁrst with the price sensitivity. However, it is interesting to show that
the platform’s proﬁt correspondingly increases with the price sensitivity further increasing,
because the advertiser increases the advertising payment. Recall that in the centralized case,
except for the region with sufﬁciently large price sensitivity where the proﬁt of the centralized
system is independent of the price sensitivity, the system’s proﬁt always strictly decreases
with the price sensitivity. However, the proﬁts of both members in the decentralized case
increase with the price sensitivity in a certain region (for a relatively small b), which is in
sharpcontrasttothecentralizedcase.Inotherwords,alargerpricesensitivitymaybringawin-
win outcome for both supply chain members. The rationality behind of this counterintuitive
result is that a larger price sensitivity in a certain region can induce both members to focus on
the proﬁtability from advertising, and to make effective advertising and resource investing
decisions, thus reducing the double marginalization in the supply chain. When the price
sensitivity continues to increase to a sufﬁciently large level, the platform’s proﬁt starts to
decrease because the advertiser decreases the advertising payment. Finally, the platform’s
proﬁt keeps unchanged because the optimal decisions of both members are constant with
respect to the price sensitivity.
Next, Figure 4 demonstrates the impacts of the advertising sensitivity g on the adver-
tiser’s optimal (equilibrium) decision. Speciﬁcally, Fig. 4a shows that for a given advertising
sensitivity, the advertiser’s proﬁt is a unimodal function with respect to the unit advertising
payment, which implies that there exists a unique optimal unit advertising payment set by the
advertiser. The rationality behind is similar to that for Fig. 1a. Furthermore, Fig. 4b shows
that with the advertising sensitivity increasing from a small level to a large level, the optimal
unit advertising payment ﬁrst decreases slightly, then increases signiﬁcantly, and decreases
afterwards. When the advertising sensitivity is relatively small, the platform’s advertising
proﬁtability dominates the charging proﬁtability. In this case, the advertiser has no incen-
tive to increase the advertising payment to stimulate the platform’s advertising strategy,
since the relatively small advertising sensitivity has made the platform introduce consid-
erable advertisements. Actually, the advertiser as the leader would reduce the advertising
payment to extract more proﬁts as the advertising sensitivity increases. While as the adver-
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4 Advertiser’s optimal decision with respect to g
123

430
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 5 Platform’s optimal decisions with respect to g
tising sensitivity further increases, the larger negative effect leads to lower resource investing
and advertising levels, and thus the advertiser begins to increase the advertising payment
to stimulate the platform’s resource investing and advertising strategies. Finally, when the
advertising sensitivity is sufﬁciently large (i.e., g > 2.2 as shown in Fig. 4b), the platform’s
charging proﬁtability dominates the advertising proﬁtability, and the greater negative effect
causes the platform to signiﬁcantly reduce the resource investing and advertising levels.
In this case, the high incentive cost for stimulating the platform’s resource investing and
advertising strategies, makes the advertiser lower the advertising payment.
Figure 5 shows the platform’s optimal (equilibrium) decisions with respect to the adver-
tising sensitivity g. Speciﬁcally, as the advertising sensitivity increases, the price keeps zero
ﬁrst and then increases, and the advertising level sustainedly declines, while the resource
investing level decreases ﬁrst, then keeps unchanged, and decreases ﬁnally. When the adver-
tising sensitivity is relatively small, the advertising proﬁtability outperforms the charging
proﬁtability, and thus the platform provides the resource for free to attract more users. When
the advertising sensitivity is sufﬁciently large (i.e., g > 2.2 as shown in Fig. 5a), the adver-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
431
tising proﬁtability decreases signiﬁcantly, and thus the platform begins to increase the price
to make up for the advertising revenue loss. As for the advertising decision, the larger adver-
tising sensitivity implies the more the loss of users, and therefore the platform cuts down the
advertising level to reduce the user loss, as shown in Fig. 5b. As for the resource investing
level, when the advertising sensitivity is small, the resource investing efﬁciency decreases
and the platform reduces the investing level, with the advertising sensitivity increasing. When
the advertising sensitivity is intermediate, with it increasing, on the one hand, the advertiser
increases the advertising payment (recall the analysis presented for Fig. 4b) which increases
the platform’s unit advertising revenue and induces the platform to invest more in resource; on
the other hand, an increasing advertising sensitivity leads to a large demand loss which makes
the platform decrease the investment in resource. These two effects cancel out each other, and
thus the platform keeps the resource investing level unchanged within 1 < g < 2.2, as shown
in Fig. 5c, d. This interesting result that the optimal resource investing level is independent
of the advertising sensitivity in a certain region is different from the centralized decision case
where the optimal resource investing level always decreases with the advertising sensitivity.
When the advertising sensitivity is large (i.e., g > 2.2), the advertising revenue decreases
(as shown in Fig. 4b), and therefore the platform decreases the resource investing level. In
addition, for any given advertising sensitivity, Fig. 5c, d show that, the resource investing
level is decreasing over time, which is in line with that of the centralized case.
Figure 6 shows the two ﬁrms’ optimal proﬁts with respect to the advertising sensitivity.
Speciﬁcally, as the advertising sensitivity increases, the proﬁtability of the advertiser weakens
and thus her proﬁt decreases. The intuition is the same as that of the advertising level. With
the advertising sensitivity increasing, the platform’s proﬁt is decreasing in the region with
relatively small or large advertising sensitivity, and is independent of those intermediate
advertising sensitivities where a higher advertising revenue and a smaller demand cancel out
each other in proﬁtability and the resource investing level keeps unchanged.
Finally, Fig. 7 illustrates the impacts of the unit advertising revenue H on the advertiser’s
optimal (equilibrium) decision. Speciﬁcally, Fig. 7a shows that for a given advertising rev-
enue, the advertiser’s proﬁt is unimodal with respect to the advertising payment, and thus
there exists a unique optimal advertising payment set by the advertiser. Figure 7b shows
that with the advertising revenue increasing, the advertising payment increases ﬁrst, then
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6 Optimal proﬁts with respect to g
123

432
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7 Advertiser’s optimal decision with respect to H
keeps unchanged, and increases ﬁnally. When the advertising revenue is low, the advertiser
increases the advertising payment to induce the platform to increase investments, as the
advertising revenue increases. When the advertising revenue is intermediate, the advertiser
keeps the advertising payment unchanged. In this region, the price is set to zero by the plat-
form. Although a higher advertising payment induces the platform to made more resource
investments, it also incurs a higher cost for the advertiser. These two factors cancel out each
other and yield a constant advertising payment. When the advertising revenue is sufﬁciently
high, the revenue increase is signiﬁcantly exceeds the increase in the advertising payment,
and thus the advertiser increases the advertising payment.
Figure 8 shows the platform’s optimal (equilibrium) decisions with respect to the unit
advertising revenue H. When the unit advertising revenue is low, the advertiser increases the
advertising payment, and thus the platform increases the advertising level, as the unit advertis-
ing revenue increases. However, the user demand decreases as the advertising level increases,
and hence the platform decreases the price and increases the resource investing level. When
the unit advertising revenue is intermediate, the platform’s decisions are unchanged because
the advertiser keeps the advertising payment unchanged in a certain region of the unit advertis-
ing revenue. When the unit advertising revenue is high, the advertiser increases the advertising
payment; while the platform keeps the advertising level unchanged due to a zero price and
just increases the resource investing level. Additionally, Fig. 8c shows that for any given
unit advertising revenue, the resource investing level decreases over time. Figure 9 shows
the optimal (equilibrium) proﬁts of the two ﬁrms with the unit advertising revenue varying.
It is intuitive that a higher unit advertising revenue will bring the advertiser a higher proﬁt.
Since the impact of the unit advertising revenue on the platform’s proﬁt depends on the
advertiser’s advertising payment, the platform’s proﬁt increases ﬁrst, then keeps unchanged,
and increases ﬁnally.
4.3 Discussion on the value of consideration of perishability
Note that in the centralized case, the pricing and advertising policies are independent of the
perishability, and only the investment policy depends on the perishability. Notwithstanding,
for the decentralized case, all of the operational and marketing policies depend on the perisha-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
433
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 8 Platform’s optimal decisions with respect to H
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9 Optimal proﬁts with respect to H
123

434
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
bility, so it can be expected that the value of considering perishability would be intensiﬁed
compared to the centralized case. Therefore, for simpliﬁcation, the following takes the cen-
tralized case as an example to discuss the scenario where the ﬁrm ignores the perishability
of digital content products when making decisions. By comparing the ﬁrm’s proﬁts earned
in the two cases with and without consideration of the perishability, the paper can show the
inﬂuence of the ﬁrm’s neglect of perishability on its proﬁtability.
When the ﬁrm ignores the perishability of digital content products, the corresponding
optimal price and advertising level keep the same as (8) and (9) under the centralized case,
but the resource investing level changes to
u∗
n(t) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
k(b2H2+4ag)2(T −t)
64bg2s
, H ≤ˆh,
2kaH
√
3a(T −t)
9s√g
,
H > ˆh,
(18)
which is smaller than (10). That is, ignoring the perishability will cut down the resource
investing. By substituting the above optimal decisions into Eq. (6), the corresponding optimal
proﬁt of the centralized ﬁrm is obtained as
π∗
n =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
sΔ′
1
2δ3

Δ′
1(δ2T 2+2δT −2(δT +1)(1−e−δT ))+2δ2I0(1−e−δT )

−sΔ′2
1 T 3
6
,
H ≤ˆh,
sΔ′
2
2δ3

Δ′
2(δ2T 2+2δT −2(δT +1)(1−e−δT ))+2δ2I0(1−e−δT )

−sΔ′2
2 T 3
6
,
H > ˆh,
(19)
where Δ′
1 = k(b2H2+4ag)2
64bg2s
, and Δ′
2 = 2kaH
√
3a
9s√g
.
Owing to the complex expression of the ﬁrm’s proﬁts in Eqs. (11) and (19), numerical
study are conducted to identify the inﬂuence of ignoring perishability on the ﬁrm’s prof-
itability, with setting the basic parameters: a = 1, b = 0.5, g = 0.5, s = 0.5, T = 10,
H = 0.7, and δ = 0.1. It should be mentioned that the paper only focuses on the general
case H < ˆh with p > 0, and the results obtained are robust for the case H > ˆh where the
product is free (p = 0). As shown in Figs. 10 and 11, the ﬁrm obtains more proﬁts in the case
with considering the product perishability than that with ignoring the product perishability.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10 Proﬁt comparison with and without considering perishability via b
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
435
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11 Proﬁt comparison with and without considering perishability via g
Furthermore, it is observed that the difference between the proﬁts with and without consider-
ation of perishability is monotonically decreasing with the price sensitivity or the advertising
sensitivity. This illustrates that a lower price or advertising sensitivity of consumers will
intensify the proﬁt loss caused by ignoring the product perishability. In summary, the digital
content platform should attach importance to the consideration of the product perishability
when making operation decisions.
5 Conclusions
Digital content platforms have two salient features: one is the perishability of digital content
products; the other is the negative utility on the platform users caused by the advertisements
displayed on the platform. Based on the two features, this paper develops a dynamic game
model for the supply chain with a digital content platform and an upstream advertiser, and
investigates the operation and marketing strategies of the supply chain members. By using
optimal control method, the paper solves the corresponding Stackelberg game in a dynamic
environment over a ﬁnite planning horizon where the advertiser as the leader decides the
advertising payment, and the platform as the follower dynamically decides the resource
price, advertising level, and resource investing level. The main contribution of the paper is
the analysis for the operational issues of the related ﬁrms in the digital content market by
developing a dynamic model.
In order to fully analyze the model, the paper ﬁrst considers the centralized case where the
advertiser and the platform are integrated to one decision-maker, then solves the Stackelberg
game under the decentralized case, and compares the two cases. By conducting analytical
and numerical studies, the paper presents the optimal (or equilibrium) strategies and the
impacts of the price sensitivity, the advertising sensitivity, and the unit advertising revenue
on the optimal (or equilibrium) decisions and proﬁts of the supply chain members. The main
ﬁndings are presented as follows. First, under both the centralized and decentralized cases,
despite considering the dynamics of the platform resource level due to the perishability of
digital content products, the marketing strategies of pricing and advertising are static, and only
the operation strategy of resource investing is dynamic. Second, for a region with relatively
123

436
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
small price sensitivity, it is interesting to show that a increasing price sensitivity may make
the platform increase the resource investing level, which is in contrast to the centralized case
where the optimal resource investing level decreases with the price sensitivity. Furthermore,
in this case, a counterintuitive result is obtained that the equilibrium proﬁts of both members
in the decentralized case increase with the price sensitivity, which is also different from the
centralized case where the whole system’s proﬁt decreases with the price sensitivity. The
rationality behind is that a larger price sensitivity in a certain region can reduce the double
marginalization in the supply chain. Third, the equilibrium resource investing level also
exhibits nonmonotonicity with respect to the advertising sensitivity and the unit advertising
revenue, which is in contrast to the centralized case. Fourth, the platform may open resource
for free when the unit advertising revenue is sufﬁciently high, or the consumers are not very
sensitive to advertisements, or consumers are very sensitive to the resource price. Finally,
it is shown that ignoring the product perishability when making decision will lead to lower
resource investment and proﬁt, and the loss is intensiﬁed by a lower price or advertising
sensitivity of consumers.
There are a few limitations in this paper. For instance, it is assumed that the advertiser
is the leader in the Stackelberg game, however, in some cases of the real world, the digital
content platform is the leader. Hence, future study may consider different game sequences. In
addition, in this paper, the ﬁrms make decisions under symmetric information. However, the
platform may keep the market demand as private information. Under asymmetric information,
how will the ﬁrms’ strategies change needs further study in the future research. Besides, future
research may also consider the uncertainties of the perishability of digital content products
which is common in practice, and this extension would resort to the stochastic dynamic game
method.
Acknowledgements The author is grateful to the editor, anonymous reviewers, and Professor Guowei Zhu for
their efforts and valuable suggestions that improved this paper. This work was supported by the Humanities
and Social Sciences Youth Foundation of Ministry of Education of China (Grant number: 21XJC630011), and
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant number: 72201217).
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The author declares that there is no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1 By employing the optimal control theory (Sethi & Thompson, 2006),
the Hamiltonian function of the centralized case is given as follows:
Hc = pk(a −bp −gl2)I + Hk(a −bp −gl2)Il −s
2u2 + λc(u −δI),
(A.1)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
437
where λc is the adjoint variable for the state variable I.
According to the ﬁrst-order condition, one has
∂Hc
∂p = kI(a −2bp −bHl −gl2) = 0,
(A.2)
∂Hc
∂l
= kI(aH −bHp −2pgl −3gHl2) = 0,
(A.3)
∂Hc
∂u = −su + λc = 0.
(A.4)
It can be veriﬁed that Hamiltonian function (A.1) is concave with respect to p,l, and u.
Thus, the optimal control is unique. The adjoint variable requires to satisfy the following
adjoint equation:
˙λc = −∂Hc
∂I
= −pk(a −bp −gl2) −Hk(a −bp −gl2)l + δλc.
(A.5)
Note that the initial condition I(0) = I0 and the terminal condition λc(T ) = 0. In
consideration of the constraints that all of the control variables should be non-negative, one
solves the above Eqs. (A.2)–(A.5) simultaneously and obtain the results in Proposition 1. ⊓⊔
Proof of Corollary 1 First consider the optimal advertising level. When b ≤

4ag
3H2 , ∂l∗
c (t)
∂b
=
H
2g > 0. When b >

4ag
3H2 , ∂l∗
c (t)
∂b
= 0. Therefore, l∗
c (t) increases ﬁrst and then keeps
unchanged as b increases. When g ≥3H2b2
4a
, ∂l∗
c (t)
∂g
< 0. When g < 3H2b2
4a
, ∂l∗
c (t)
∂g
< 0.
And the expression of l∗
c (t) is continuous in g. Therefore, l∗
c (t) decreases with g. When
H ≤

4ag
3b2 := ˆh, ∂l∗
c (t)
∂H
> 0. When H >

4ag
3b2 , ∂l∗
c (t)
∂H
= 0. Therefore, l∗
c (t) increases ﬁrst
and then keeps unchanged as H increases.
Next consider the optimal price. Note that the expression of p∗
c(t) is continuous in system
parameters. When b ≤

4ag
3H2 , ∂p∗
c (t)
∂b
< 0. When b >

4ag
3H2 , ∂p∗
c (t)
∂b
= 0. Therefore, p∗
c(t)
decreases ﬁrst and then keeps unchanged as b increases. When g ≥3H2b2
4a
, ∂p∗
c (t)
∂g
> 0.
When g < 3H2b2
4a
, ∂p∗
c (t)
∂g
= 0. Therefore, u∗
c(t) keeps unchanged ﬁrst and then increases as
g increases. When H ≤

4ag
3b2 , ∂p∗
c (t)
∂H
< 0. When H >

4ag
3b2 , ∂p∗
c (t)
∂H
= 0. Therefore, p∗
c(t)
increases ﬁrst and then keeps unchanged as H increases.
Finally consider the optimal resource investing level. The expression of u∗
c(t) is continuous
in system parameters. When b ≤

4ag
3H2 , ∂u∗
c(t)
∂b
=
(H2b2+4ag)k(eδT −eδt)(3H2b2−4ag)
64g2eδT δsb2
< 0.
When b >

4ag
3H2 , ∂u∗
c(t)
∂b
= 0. Therefore, u∗
c(t) decreases ﬁrst and then keeps unchanged as
b increases. When g ≥3H2b2
4a
, ∂u∗
c(t)
∂g
< 0. When g < 3H2b2
4a
, ∂u∗
c(t)
∂g
< 0. Therefore, u∗
c(t)
decreases with g. When H ≤

4ag
3b2 , ∂u∗
c(t)
∂H
> 0. When H >

4ag
3b2 , ∂u∗
c(t)
∂H
> 0. Therefore,
u∗
c(t) increases with H.
⊓⊔
Proof of Corollary 2 First consider the price. As h∗≤H, one divides the parameters into three
cases. When ˆh ≤h∗≤H, p∗
c(t) = p∗
d(t) = 0. When h∗≤H ≤ˆh, p∗
c(t) = 4ag−3b2H2
8bg
,
p∗
d(t) = 4ag−3b2(h∗)2
8bg
, and thus p∗
c(t) ≤p∗
d(t). When h∗≤ˆh ≤H, p∗
c(t) = 0, p∗
d(t) =
4ag−3b2(h∗)2
8bg
, and thus p∗
c(t) ≤p∗
d(t). In conclusion, it can be obtained that p∗
c(t) ≤p∗
d(t).
123

438
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
Next consider the advertising level. Similarly, three cases are discussed. When ˆh ≤h∗≤
H, l∗
c (t) = l∗
d(t) =

a
3g . When h∗≤H ≤ˆh, l∗
c (t) = bH
2g , l∗
d(t) = bh∗
2g , and thus l∗
c (t) ≥
l∗
d(t). When h∗≤ˆh ≤H, l∗
c (t) =

a
3g , l∗
d(t) = bh∗
2g ≤b ˆh
2g = l∗
c (t). In conclusion, it can be
obtained that l∗
c (t) ≥l∗
d(t).
Finally consider the resource investing level. Similarly, three cases are discussed. When
ˆh ≤h∗≤H, u∗
c(t) = 2kaH
√
3a(eδT −eδt)
9δs√geδT
, u∗
d(t) = 2kah∗√
3a(eδT −eδt)
9δs√geδT
, and thus u∗
c(t) ≥u∗
d(t).
When h∗≤H ≤ˆh, u∗
c(t) = k(b2H2+4ag)2(eδT −eδt)
64bg2δseδT
, u∗
d(t) = k(b2(h∗)2+4ag)2(eδT −eδt)
64bg2δseδT
, and
thus u∗
c(t) ≥u∗
d(t). When h∗≤ˆh ≤H, u∗
c(t) = 2kaH
√
3a(eδT −eδt)
9δs√geδT
≥2ka ˆh
√
3a(eδT −eδt)
9δs√geδT
=
4ka2(eδT −eδt)
9bδseδT
, u∗
d(t) = k(b2(h∗)2+4ag)2(eδT −eδt)
64bg2δseδT
≤k(b2(ˆh)2+4ag)2(eδT −eδt)
64bg2δseδT
= 4ka2(eδT −eδt)
9bδseδT
, and
thus u∗
c(t) ≥u∗
d(t). In conclusion, it can be obtained that u∗
c(t) ≥u∗
d(t).
⊓⊔
References
Asdemir, K., Yurtseven, Ö., & Yahya, M. A. (2008). An economic model of click fraud in publisher networks.
International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 13(2), 61–90.
Boudreau, K. J. (2012). Let a thousand ﬂowers bloom? An early look at large numbers of software app
developers and patterns of innovation. Organization Science, 23(5), 1409–1427.
Boudreau, K. J., & Jeppesen, L. B. (2015). Unpaid crowd complementors: The platform network effect mirage.
Strategic Management Journal, 36(12), 1761–1777.
Caillaud, B., & Jullien, B. (2003). Chicken and egg: Competition among intermediation service providers.
The RAND Journal of Economics, 34(2), 309–328.
Casadesus-Masanell, R., & Zhu, F. (2010). Strategies to ﬁght ad-sponsored rivals. Management Science, 56(9),
1484–1499.
Casey, T. R., & Töyli, J. (2012). Dynamics of two-sided platform success and failure: An analysis of public
wireless local area access. Technovation, 32(12), 703–716.
Chakraborty, S., Basu, S., Ray, S., & Sharma, M. (2021). Advertisement revenue management: Determining
the optimal mix of skippable and non-skippable ads for online video sharing platforms. European Journal
of Operational Research, 292(1), 213–229.
Chang, W. L., & Yuan, S. T. (2009). A Markov-based collaborative pricing system for information goods
bundling. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(2), 1660–1674.
Chen, J., Fan, M., & Li, M. (2016). Advertising versus brokerage model for online trading platforms. Man-
agement Information Systems Quarterly, 40(3), 575–596.
Chen, J., & Stallaert, J. (2014). An economic analysis of online advertising using behavioral targeting. MIS
Quarterly, 38(2), 429–450.
Chiou, L., & Tucker, C. (2013). Paywalls and the demand for news. Information Economics and Policy, 25(2),
61–69.
Dou, Y., Hu, Y. J., & Wu, D. J. (2017). Selling or leasing? Pricing information goods with depreciation of
consumer valuation. Information Systems Research, 28(3), 585–602.
Duan, Y., Liu, P., & Feng, Y. (2022). Pricing strategies of two-sided platforms considering privacy concerns.
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 64, 102781.
Godes, D., Ofek, E., & Sarvary, M. (2009). Content vs. advertising: The impact of competition on media ﬁrm
strategy. Marketing Science, 28(1), 20–35.
Goh, K. H., & Bockstedt, J. C. (2013). The framing effects of multipart pricing on consumer purchasing
behavior of customized information good bundles. Information Systems Research, 24(2), 334–351.
Hao, L., Guo, H., & Easley, R. F. (2017). A mobile platform’s in-app advertising contract under agency pricing
for app sales. Production and Operations Management, 26(2), 189–202.
Jones, R., & Mendelson, H. (2011). Information goods vs. industrial goods: Cost structure and competition.
Management Science, 57(1), 164–176.
Kaul, A., Aggarwal, S., Krishnamoorthy, M., & Jha, P. C. (2018). Multi-period media planning for multi-
products incorporating segment speciﬁc and mass media. Annals of Operations Research, 269(1), 317–
359.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 320:415–439
439
Keskin, T., & Taskin, N. (2015). Strategic pricing of horizontally differentiated services with switching costs:
A pricing model for cloud computing. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 19(3), 34–53.
Kim, G., & Moon, I. (2020). Online banner advertisement scheduling for advertising effectiveness. Computers
and Industrial Engineering, 140, 106226.
Kind, H. J., Nilssen, T., & Sørgard, L. (2005). Financing of media ﬁrms: Does competition matter? Institute
for Research in Economics and Business Administration.
Kumar, S., & Sethi, S. P. (2009). Dynamic pricing and advertising for web content providers. European Journal
of Operational Research, 197(3), 924–944.
Lambrecht, A., & Misra, K. (2016). Fee or free: When should ﬁrms charge for online content? Management
Science, 63(4), 1150–1165.
Lin, M., Ke, X., & Whinston, A. B. (2012). Vertical differentiation and a comparison of online advertising
models. Journal of Management Information Systems, 29(1), 195–236.
Liu, D., Kumar, S., & Mookerjee, V. S. (2012). Advertising strategies in electronic retailing: A differential
games approach. Information Systems Research, 23, 903–917.
Liu, G., Zhang, J., & Tang, W. (2015). Joint dynamic pricing and investment strategy for perishable foods with
price-quality dependent demand. Annals of Operations Research, 226(1), 397–416.
Na, H. S., Hwang, J., Hong, J. Y., & Lee, D. (2017). Efﬁciency comparison of digital content providers with
different pricing strategies. Telematics and Informatics, 34(2), 657–663.
Nan, G., Shi, F., Dou, R., & Li, M. (2016). Duopoly pricing of software products under free strategy: Limited-
feature vs. seeding. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 100, 13–23.
Nan, G., Zhang, Z., & Li, M. (2019). Optimal pricing for cloud service providers in a competitive setting.
International Journal of Production Research, 57(20), 6278–6291.
Pauwels, K., & Weiss, A. (2008). Moving from free to fee: How marketing can stimulate gains and stem losses
for an online content provider. Journal of Marketing, 72(3), 14–31.
PricewaterhouseCoopers. (2019). Global Entertainment and Media Outlook 2019–2023. PricewaterhouseC-
oopers.
Reisinger, M. (2012). Platform competition for advertisers and users in media markets. International Journal
of Industrial Organization, 30(2), 243–252.
Rochet, J. C., & Tirole, J. (2006). Two-sided markets: A progress report. The RAND Journal of Economics,
37(3), 645–667.
Sethi, S. P., & Thompson, G. L. (2006). Optimal control theory: Applications to management science and
economics. Berlin: Springer.
Shiller, B. R. (2013). Digital distribution and the prohibition of resale markets for information goods. Quan-
titative Marketing and Economics, 11(4), 403–435.
Sun, M., & Zhu, F. (2013). Ad revenue and content commercialization: Evidence from blogs. Management
Science, 59(10), 2314–2331.
Sun, X., Tang, W., Chen, J., & Zhang, J. (2020). Optimal investment strategy of a free-ﬂoating sharing platform.
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 138, 101958.
Wang, W., & Guo, Q. (2021). Subscription strategy choices of network video platforms in the presence of
social inﬂuence. Electronic Commerce Research, 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10660-021-09504-w
Xiao, D., Kuang, X., & Chen, K. (2020). E-commerce supply chain decisions under platform digital
empowerment-induced demand. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 150, 106876.
Yuan, Z., Xu, H., Gong, Y., Chu, C., & Zhang, J. (2017). Designing public storage warehouses with high
demand for revenue maximisation. International Journal of Production Research, 55(13), 3686–3700.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123