TITLE: Gompertzian survivorship ages: modeling and numerical evidence
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06853-9
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 31 December 2024 / Accepted: 15 September 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
 
 Marino Mario
mario.marino@deams.units.it
1 
Department of Economics, Business, Mathematics and Statistics “Bruno de Finetti”, 
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
Gompertzian survivorship ages: modeling and numerical 
evidence
Marino Mario1
 · Sbaiz Gabriele1
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06853-9
Abstract
Age has long been recognized as one of the primary determinants of mortality and the 
implicit assumption shared by the mortality models is that age flows chronologically. 
However, due to their own biological features, individuals’ age does not necessarily move 
in lockstep with calendar time, and different individuals may age at different rates. Then, a 
so-called non-chronological age can reasonably be acknowledged as a new element in ana­
lyzing lifespan randomness. If biological factors are not observed or cannot be observed, 
the issue of how to determine a non-chronological age consistent with the chronological 
age-based mortality experience comes up. The present work is set in this context, namely, 
it aims to discuss how to determine a non-chronological age in the absence of observable 
biological factors. To this end, we consider the concept of survivorship age introduced in 
Alvarez and Vaupel (Demography 60(1):327–342), which allows us to analyze mortality 
in terms of survival. We derive closed-form expressions for survivorship ages and related 
quantities under both the Gamma-Gompertz and the Gompertz mortality law. Finally, we 
present a numerical application to test our proposal by exploiting the mortality experience 
of four countries worldwide, and for both genders, namely Australia, Italy, Japan, and 
Sweden, discussing strengths and weaknesses of the use of Gompertz-based models in 
describing mortality as a function of survival.
Keywords  Risk of dying · Gompertz law · Frailty model · Survivorship ages
1  Introduction
Throughout the last century, human lifetime has grown continuously and human mortality 
has shifted to later ages. Mortality deferment to older ages was empirically observed by 
investigating changes in the main lifetime indicators expressed in terms of chronological 
age, such as the mortality hazard, life expectancy, and lifespan disparities (see, e.g., Vaupel 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
et al., 2021). While living longer is a positive achievement at the individual level, it implies 
significant unexpected financial exposures for governments, annuity providers, and pension 
schemes. These entities deal with the risk of paying out benefits for a much longer period than 
expected, namely longevity risk, as well as the risk of enduring unexpected health-related 
costs. In fact, due to the diffusion of chronic diseases, afflicting a growing older population, 
longevity increments have not been followed by parallel health span expansions (see, e.g., 
Garmany et al., 2021). In other words, the insurance market worldwide has experienced, and 
is still experiencing, financial sustainability troubles to assist the needs of an increasingly 
elderly population. Consequently, the course of longevity is a compelling matter of inter­
est for policymakers, demographers, and actuaries, and the scientific literature has seen an 
enriched focus on mortality modelling and forecasting. Demographers and actuaries have 
usually concentrated their efforts on the model’s functional form and its parameterization. 
Interestingly, models introduced in the literature share an implicit assumption: the age flows 
chronologically. Age has long been recognized as one of the primary determinants of mor­
tality, but new perspectives on the nature of this variable have emerged. For instance, the 
concept of biological age has been introduced, that is, the age indicating how old the human 
mechanism is at both the cellular and molecular levels (see, e.g., Jackson et al., 2003). The 
biological age may be misaligned with respect to the corresponding chronological age, and 
it can reasonably be acknowledged as a new element in analyzing lifespan randomness. 
The biological age is usually estimated with a microscopic approach, i.e., by collecting data 
concerning physiological and molecular variables for a large sample of people, and, through 
regression techniques, an increment or a reduction of the corresponding chronological age 
is inferred. Then, due to detectable biological factors, a person’s age does not necessarily 
move in lockstep with calendar time, and different individuals may age at different rates. 
The use of such a microscopic approach requires high data granularity and is subject to both 
data collection and processing times. However, life insurers and pension schemes usually 
have access to mortality data at an aggregate level, and biological factors are not observed 
or cannot be observed. Thus, the issue of how to determine a non-chronological age (not 
necessarily a biological age) consistent with the chronological age-based mortality experi­
ence comes up. The present work is set in this context, namely, it aims to discuss how to 
determine a non-chronological age in the absence of observable biological factors. Such 
a study could interest actuaries and policymakers in understanding to what extent a non-
chronological age-based assessment of mortality furnishes new perspectives or insights for 
the mortality/longevity risk measurement purposes.
To the best of our knowledge, there are two main research works facing the goal of 
determining non-chronological ages stemming from the chronological age-based mortality 
experience. Milevsky (2020) discussed the meaning and the use of the biological age for 
the first time in the actuarial literature, emphasizing two different approaches in defining a 
non-chronological age: the living approach and the dying approach. The former refers to 
the medical and microscopic way of determining the biological age of individuals, e.g., by 
the use of biomarkers, and its main focus is the prediction of the risk of chronic diseases or 
functional impairments. On the other hand, the time until death is the focal point of the dying 
approach, which aims to describe the link between the lifespan of a given population and a 
global average. Through the latter approach, Milevsky (2020) paved the way to construct a 
non-chronological age, namely longevity-risk-adjusted global age (L-GaR), different from 
the biological one and in contrast to the chronological age. The computational procedure to 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
estimate the L-GaR requires chronological age-based mortality rates and a mortality law to 
be reversed, such that the age can be expressed as a function of the mortality experience. To 
this end, the author refers to the well-known Gompertz-Makeham law.
Another type of non-chronological age is defined in Alvarez and Vaupel (2023), namely 
survivorship age (s-age), representing the age at which a proportion of a population is still 
alive. The underlying idea is to analyze mortality in terms of survival quantiles by invert­
ing the relation between the survival function and the chronological age, so that the latter 
becomes a function of the survival levels. The authors applied this approach to the mortality 
experience of 23 populations worldwide over more than 100 years. They revealed that while 
trajectories of mortality over chronological ages differ, mortality trajectories over s-ages are 
similar, meaning that populations experience similar mortality dynamics at specific levels 
of survivorship. In the demographic literature, the quantile-based analysis of mortality was 
already used to discover new insights on the relationship between survival and the risk 
of dying. For instance, Cohen (2010) considered the chronological age as the inverse of 
the life table function. As a result, it showed that life expectancy can be expressed as the 
death-weighted average of the reciprocal of the survival-specific force of mortality. Zuo 
et al. (2018) investigated percentiles in the distribution of deaths after age 65, concluding 
that the relevance of compression (or dispersion) of deaths is heavily driven by reliance on 
chronological age.
Summarizing, the L-GaR and the s-age offer two alternative ways to define a non-chron­
ological age in the absence of observable biological factors. While in Milevsky (2020) the 
L-GaR is determined according to a mortality law, the s-ages in Alvarez and Vaupel (2023) 
are investigated from an empirical perspective. In the present work, we will pursue the s-
age approach, aiming to examine the extent to which a mortality law is suitable to describe 
mortality as a function of survival. In particular, we derive the s-age expression and related 
quantities in the context of heterogeneous mortality through a multiplicative frailty model, 
where the Gompertz law acts as the standard force of mortality and the frailty factor is 
Gamma distributed (see, e.g., Vaupel et al. 1979, Olivieri 2006, Pitacco 2019). We also 
consider s-ages for a homogeneous population by employing the Gompertz mortality law. 
Since the s-age is determined as the inverse of the survival function, we briefly argue that 
not all mortality laws are suitable to robustly measure the s-age, as, for instance, in the case 
of the Gompertz-Makeham model. Afterward, both the Gompertz-based and frailty-based 
frameworks are tested in a numerical application by exploiting the mortality experience of 
four countries worldwide, and for both genders, namely Australia, Italy, Japan, and Sweden, 
over calendar years 1950–2019. Our results show that the accuracy of estimating s-ages 
varies significantly depending on the survival level. The Gompertz-based mortality laws fail 
to describe mortality at young, early adult, and very old chronological ages. Consequently, 
for survival levels related to these chronological ages, we note an overestimation of s-ages. 
Conversely, the s-age estimation becomes more accurate in correspondence with the median 
chronological age at death.
The manuscript is organized as follows. Along the lines of Alvarez and Vaupel 
(2023), Sect. 2 recalls the definition of s-ages and related quantities necessary to investigate 
mortality as a function of survival. In Sect. 3, we derive the closed-form expression of the 
s-age and associated quantities for both the Gamma-Gompertz and the Gompertz mortality 
law. In Sect. 4, we provide the numerical application and discuss the results. Finally, Sect. 
5 poses concluding remarks.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
2  Survivorship ages
Let T0 be a continuous nonnegative random variable that represents the lifetime of a new­
born with a continuous, strictly increasing distribution function F0(x), x ≥0. The survival 
function S0(x) = 1 −F0(x) is continuous, strictly decreasing, and there exists its inverse 
S−1
0 such that for every chronological age x we can associate a unique survival level s. In 
other words, the s-age is the quantile function associated with the distribution of T0 and the 
s-age is defined as
 
x(s) = S−1
0 (s),
s ∈[0, 1].
(1)
 Interpreting the relation between the survival function and the s-age is quite intuitive. While 
the survival function indicates the proportion of a population still alive at a given chrono­
logical age x, the s-age defines the age at which a given proportion s of a population is still 
alive. Note that x(1) is the s-age at which everyone is alive, while x(0) indicates the s-age at 
which there are no survivors left in the population. Let f0(x) = −d
dxS0(x) be the density 
function of T0. By applying the inverse function theorem, we can introduce the following 
expressions
 
ψ0(s) = −d
ds x(s),
f0 (x(s)) =
1
ψ0(s).
(2)
The function ψ0(s), namely the quantile-density function (see, e.g., Parzen, 1979), is the 
density function of s, and measures the s-age changes as the survival level s drops from 1 
to 0. f0(x(s)) is the so-called density-quantile function and it is very useful for determining 
the force of mortality as a function of survival levels. Denoting by µ(·) the force of mortality 
function, the s-age-based force of mortality is
 
µ(s) := µ(x(s)) = f0(x(s))
S0(x(s)) =
1
sψ0(s).
(3)
 The relevance of µ(s) lies in its ability to measure the risk of dying for the proportion 
s of the population still alive without accounting for chronological age x. Moreover, as 
empirically outlined in Alvarez and Vaupel (2023), µ(s) trajectories are very close over 
different calendar years and populations, whereas mortality curves over chronological ages 
differ. For example, Figs. 1 and 2 below show differences and similarities between mortality 
trajectories by exploiting crude mortality data by gender and calendar year for Japan and 
Sweden. Country-specific mortality data were downloaded from the Human Mortality Data­
base (Human Mortality Database, 2021), and they concern the age range 0–105 and calen­
dar years over the period 1950–2019. The Japanese and Swedish populations are among 
the longest-lived in the world, although they exhibit different rates of aging. In particular, 
mortality improvements for Sweden are less significant than those observed for Japan, as 
the Swedish population’s mortality in old age improves more slowly (see, e.g., Drefahl et 
al., 2014). Hence, by expressing mortality as a function of chronological age, we expect to 
observe mortality improvements for both populations, and they are more pronounced for the 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2  Mortality trajectories (log-scale) for Swedish females and males concerning the calendar years 
1960, 1980, 2000, and 2019
 
Fig. 1  Mortality trajectories (log-scale) for Japanese females and males concerning the calendar years 
1960, 1980, 2000, and 2019
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Japanese than for the Swedish population. However, this is not necessarily the case when 
expressing mortality as a function of survival.
Figure 1 and 2 are composed of two panels: the left panel depicts the chronological 
age-based force of mortality, µ(x), while the right panel represents the s-age-based force of 
mortality, µ(s). For both countries and genders, we recognize the main finding in Alvarez 
and Vaupel (2023): if we express mortality hazards as a function of chronological age, then 
a separation between the curves emerges; vice versa, when mortality hazards are determined 
as a function of survival levels, it is possible to observe closer patterns. More in detail, the 
main differences in the trajectories of µ(s) for the different calendar years occur due to 
higher survival levels and refer mainly to improvements in infant, child, and youth mor­
tality. For lower survival quantiles, which are relative to the chronological ages of adults 
and the elderly, regularities are observed throughout different calendar years. Beyond these 
interesting empirical findings, it is worth understanding the extent to which a mortality 
model is able to represent them. Section 3 will be devoted to this goal by focusing on 
Gompertz-based mortality modeling.
Remark 2.1  The present study exploits a period perspective for mortality analysis, taking 
into account the overall range of chronological ages, that is, from birth to an ultimate age, 
ω. Often, due to both economic and actuarial motivations concerning retirement and life 
insurance issues, the age range of interest in studying mortality is narrower and focused on 
adult and elderly ages. However, the experienced improvements in mortality at adult and 
elderly chronological ages are the result of a mortality improvement process which begins at 
the youngest chronological ages (see, e.g, Beltrán-Sánchez & Subramanian, 2019). In order 
to avoid distortions in investigating the aging process of a population due to age interval 
truncation, the entire human age range is considered for the purposes of the present work.
3  Survivorship ages under the Gompertz-based frailty model
In the discussion that follows, we resort to the frailty model suggested by Vaupel et al. 
(1979), aiming to derive a closed-form expression for the s-age and related quantities by 
taking into account mortality heterogeneity. We assume that the mortality heterogeneity is 
described through a multiplicative frailty model, meaning that the frailty in a heterogeneous 
population across any given chronological age x is represented by a random variable, Zx, 
and the force of mortality at the individual level is defined as
 
µ(x|Zx) = Zx µ (x|Zx = 1) ,
x ∈[0, ω].
(4)
The quantity µ (x|Zx = 1) is referred to as the standard force of mortality at the age x. 
The frailty factor Zx incorporates all the unobserved elements affecting human mortality in 
order to determine the heterogeneity in a human population composed of individuals with 
different features.
Relation (4) requires that both the standard force of mortality and the distribution of 
the frailty factor have to be chosen. In the present study, we adopt the Gamma-Gompertz 
mortality model framework. We consider the Gompertz mortality law as standard force 
of mortality, i.e. µ (x|Zx = 1) = α exp (βx), where α > 0 represents the initial mortality 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
level and β > 0 is the rate of aging; on the other hand, the frailty factor is assumed to be 
Gamma distributed. In particular, the frailty at birth is Z0 ∼Gamma (δ, θ), with δ > 0 the 
shape parameter and θ > 0 the rate parameter. The density function of Z0 is
 
g0 (z) =
θδ
Γ(δ)zδ−1 exp (−θz) ,
z > 0,
(5)
being Γ(δ) the Gamma function. The mean frailty at birth is z0 := E(Z0) = δ
θ, while the 
variance and the coefficient of variation are, respectively, Var(Z0) =
δ
θ2 and CV(Z0) =
1
√
δ , 
and can be used to measure the heterogeneity of the population. For x > 0, the distribution 
of the frailty factor also follows a Gamma distribution with the same shape parameter (see 
Vaupel et al., 1979). More in detail, we have Zx = Z0|T0 > x ∼Gamma (δ, θ(x)), where
 
θ(x) = θ + H (x) = θ +
ˆ x
0
µ (t|Zt = 1) dt.
(6)
The mean frailty among the survivors to age x is zx := E(Zx) =
δ
θ(x), and decreases as age 
increases, as well as the variance Var(Zx) =
δ
θ(x)2 . The coefficient of variation does not 
change with age, i.e. CV(Zx) = CV(Z0) =
1
√
δ . Referring to the whole population, we can 
define the average survival function under the Gamma-Gompertz model as
 
S0(x) =
ˆ ∞
0
S0 (x|z) g0(z) dz =
(
θ
θ(x)
)δ
=
(
θ
θ + α
β (exp (βx) −1)
)δ
,
(7)
where S0(x|z) = exp (−zH(x)) is the survival function for a person with frailty Zx = z. 
By inverting relation (7), it holds the following expression for the frailty-based s-age
 
x(s) = 1
β ln
(
1 −βθ
α
(
1 −s −1
δ
))
,
s ∈(0, 1] .
(8)
It is worth noting that the frailty-based s-age cannot be determined for the survival level 
s = 0, and it holds that x(s) →+∞ for s →0. Therefore, the Gamma-Gompertz model 
does not allow for obtaining the s-age exactly corresponding to the extreme chronological 
age, ω.
Finally, for s = 1 it holds that x(1) = 0, i.e., the entire population is alive at birth. By 
means of (2) and (3), the frailty-based quantile-density function and the s-age-based force 
of mortality are, respectively,
 
ψ0(s) =
θ s −1
δ −1
αδ
(
1 −βθ
α
(
1 −s −1
δ
)),

(9)
 
µ(s) = αδ
θ s
1
δ + δβ
(
1 −s
1
δ
)
,

(10)
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
where (9) makes sense for s ̸=
(
βθ
βθ−α
)δ
, and µ(s) > 0 for every s ∈(0, 1].
At this point, it is interesting to highlight the link between the population frailty and the 
survival levels. Rewriting (7) as
 
S0(x) =
(θ
δ
δ
θ(x)
)δ
=
(zx
z0
)δ
,
(11)
it follows that
 
zx = s
1
δ z0.
(12)
Then, we can express the mean frailty of the population alive at age x as proportional to the 
mean frailty at birth through the survival level s. In particular, two critical observations must 
be considered. First, s is the survival level corresponding to chronological age x, meaning 
that, for a fixed δ, (12) allows for the computation of the mean frailty at age x by consid­
ering the corresponding survival level s. By changing the chronological age, we have to 
switch to the corresponding survival level. Furthermore, as δ increases, the mean frailty of 
the population alive at age x is close to the mean frailty at birth, that is, the population alive 
at age x is approximately as frail as that at birth. Conversely, as δ decreases, there will be a 
more marked differentiation between the frailty level of the population at birth and that of 
the population still alive at age x.
3.1  Survivorship ages under the Gompertz model
Staring from the Gamma-Gompertz framework, we can attain the Gompertz model as a 
special case. By assuming that the population is homogeneous, i.e., the case of a unit frailty 
in (4), the force of mortality at the individual level corresponds to the standard force of mor­
tality represented by the Gompertz mortality law. As a result, the survival function becomes
 
S0(x) = exp
(
−
ˆ x
0
µ (t|Zt = 1) dt
)
= exp
(
−α
β exp (βx −1)
)
,
(13)
and through its inversion, the s-age expression under the Gompertz model is
 
x(s) = 1
β ln
(
1 −α
β ln(s)
)
,
s ∈(0, 1].
(14)
As for the Gamma-Gompertz case, the Gompertz model does not favor the calculation of an 
s-age related to the extreme chronological age, while it holds that x(1) = 0. By means of 
(2) and (3), both the quantile-density function and the s-based force of mortality under the 
Gompertz model follow
 
ψ0(s) =
1
αs −βs ln(s),

(15)
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
µ(s) = α −β ln(s),

(16)
where (15) is defined for s ̸= exp
(
α
β
)
, and µ(s) > 0 for every s ∈(0, 1].
Remark 3.1  We stress that the procedure for defining the s-age is based on the inversion of 
the survival function. Although intuitive and interpretable from a demographic perspective, 
the inversion procedure may be tedious depending on the functional form of the survival 
function. In addition, verifying that the achieved s-age expression yields biologically rea­
sonable results is essential (e.g., trivially, the s-age must be nonnegative). Many mortality 
and survival laws exist in the demographic and actuarial literature, but not all are necessarily 
suitable for determining the s-age. As an example, let us consider the Gompertz-Makeham 
mortality law, i.e. µ(x) = γ + α exp (βx), where γ > 0 is the parameter allowing for the 
quantification of age-independent mortality, such as accidental deaths. The Gompertz-
Makeham law is a quite simple extension of the Gompertz mortality function, and the asso­
ciated survival function is
 
S0(x) = exp
(
−γx −α
β (exp (βx) −1)
)
.
(17)
Note that the inverse function of (17) does not have an explicit form, and numerical methods 
have to be used in computing s-ages. More in detail, the Gompertz-Makeham-based s-age 
can be written as
 
x(s) = −1
βγ (−α + β ln(s) + γW(y)) ,
(18)
where W(y) is a special function, namely the Lambert function, and y = α
γ exp
(
α−β ln(s)
γ
)
.
Depending on the values of parameters, their interactions, and the numerical computa­
tion of W(y), there may be several survival levels for which it is not possible to determine 
an s-age. Consequently, the Gompertz model and the Gamma-Gompertz model seem more 
robust to obtain both s-ages and a reliable characterization of mortality as a function of 
survival.
4  Numerical application
The following numerical application is based on gender-specific mortality rates for four 
countries, namely Australia, Italy, Japan, and Sweden, available in the Human Mortality 
Database (Human Mortality Database, 2021). We consider the age set X = {0, 1, . . . , 105} 
and the calendar years set T = {1950, 1951, . . . , 2019}. For the sake of numerical evidence 
readability, in this section only the graphs relating to Japan and Sweden will be exposed, 
while the graphical visualization of the results for Australia and Italy is reported, respec­
tively, in the Appendixs 1.1 and 1.2. Let C = {AUS, ITA, JPN, SWE} be the set of coun­
tries and let G = {Male, Female} the set of genders. Then, the set I = C × G × T contains 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
all the mortality experiences we deal with, each of which is characterized by the triplet 
country, sex, and calendar year.
As the first step of our analysis, we estimate the parameters of both the Gamma-Gom­
pertz and the Gompertz law via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) under the assump­
tion of Poisson-distributed death counts, that is
 
Di(x) ∼Poi(Ec
i (x)µi(x; λi)),
∀i ∈I,
(19)
where Ec
i (x) is the central exposure to the risk of dying at age x and λi is the vector of 
mortality law’s parameters. For the Gamma-Gompertz case, we have λi = (αi, βi, δi, θi), 
and µi(x; λi) is the average force of mortality of the population, i.e.
 
µi(x; λi) =
δiαi exp (βix)
(
θi −αi
βi
)
+ αi
βi exp (βix)
,
∀i ∈I.
By considering the Gompertz model, it holds that λi = (αi, βi) and µi(x; λi) = αi exp (βix).
The log-likelihood to maximize is
 
ℓ(di(x); λi) =
∑
x∈X
di(x) ln µi(x; λi) −Ec
i (x)µi(x; ; λi) + κi,
∀i ∈I,
(20)
where κi = di(x) ln Ec
i (x) −ln di(x)! is a constant. In addition, we assume that the ini­
tial values of the parameters of the Gamma distribution are chosen so that z0 = 1, i.e., 
δ = θ. The parameter estimates are obtained by solving the optimization problem numeri­
cally through the R software (R Core Team (2022), version 4.2.2).
Concerning the Gompertz law, the estimates achieved are in line with the usual evidence 
emerging from the literature (see, e.g., Missov et al. (2015)). In particular, for each i ∈I, 
αi and βi are negatively correlated and, moreover, βi >> αi. Over calendar years, the αi is 
characterized by a decreasing behavior, in contrast to the increasing trend of βi. Such find­
ings also appear for the αi and βi parameters of the Gamma-Gompertz law. For each i ∈I, 
the latter is characterized by high values of δi, meaning that populations under investigation 
are not very heterogeneous.
As the second step, we aim to determine the s-age, as well as the quantile-density func­
tion and the s-age-based force of mortality for each i ∈I. We recall that the survival level s 
belongs to the continuous interval (0, 1], and we need to make also raw mortality quantities 
continuous. To this end, we proceed to smooth the survival function by age using P-splines 
(see, e.g. Eilers & Marx, 2021). Once the survival function is smoothed, we can obtain other 
quantities within an age interval of size h sufficiently small. We pose h = 10−3 so that we 
can determine the survival function for x ∈X ′ = {10−3, 2 · 10−3, . . . , 105}, as well as the 
x(s) values can be obtained for s ∈S = {0, 10−3, 2 · 10−3, . . . , 1}.
In Figs.  3 and 4 we show the estimated s-ages for the survival levels 
s = 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 0.95, for the Japanese and Swedish cases, respectively.
As general observation, we note that s-ages are increasing over time for all the popula­
tions under investigation. Such a result is a symptom of the mortality postponement to 
older chronological ages, and this is in line with the empirical findings stemming from the 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
literature (see, e.g., Zuo et al., 2018). Both the Gompertz and the Gamma-Gompertz law are 
able to reproduce such a mortality pattern, despite some questions that emerge when look­
ing at specific s levels. For instance, considering the survival levels 0.9 and 0.95, s-ages for 
both the mortality models are systematically greater than the corresponding smoothed s-age. 
This is particularly the case concerning the calendar years 1950–1975, for all the countries 
Fig. 4  s-age trajectories over calendar years for the Swedish population, both genders. Red dots repre­
sent the Gamma-Gompertz-based s-ages, green diamonds represent the Gamma-Gompertz-based s-ages, 
while azure squares indicate s-ages obtained through the P-spline smoothing of the raw mortality data
 
Fig. 3  s-age trajectories over calendar years for the Japanese population, both genders. Red dots repre­
sent the Gamma-Gompertz-based s-ages, green diamonds represent the Gamma-Gompertz-based s-ages, 
while azure squares indicate s-ages obtained through the P-spline smoothing of the raw mortality data
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
and both genders. The survival levels 0.9 and 0.95 refer to chronological ages character­
ized by youth and early adult mortality, which experienced significant improvements after 
the Second World War. However, the Gompertz mortality law is not suitable for describing 
mortality patterns at young chronological ages and does not capture the age hump (see, e.g, 
Remund et al., 2018), and an overestimation of s-ages follows. Such a drawback also char­
acterizes the Gamma-Gompertz model because (a) it embeds the Gompertz model as the 
standard force of mortality, and (b) the frailty does not seem impactful due to the modest (on 
average) heterogeneity of the populations. Moving toward lower survival levels, the s-ages 
produced by the two mortality laws are closer to the empirical ones. For s = 0.05 and s=0.1, 
we note that the s-age curves related to the Gompertzian models approach the empirical s-
age curve, although an overestimation persists. It seems that both the Gamma-Gompertz and 
Gompertz models tend to provide an excessive postponement of mortality, i.e., they do not 
take into account the mortality deceleration at older ages. Let us recall that s-age is the age at 
which a given proportion s of a population is still alive. If the model furnishes higher s-ages 
with respect to the empirical ones, then it tells us that the proportion s of the population will 
be alive at a greater chronological age: to some extent, the mortality model exacerbates the 
rectangularization phenomenon of the survival function. In addition, we highlight that the 
Gamma-Gompertz-based s-ages are slightly lower than the Gompertz-based ones, indicat­
ing the presence of a weak heterogeneity of the population in adult and elderly mortality. 
Finally, for the survival level s=0.5, which corresponds to the median chronological age at 
death, the Gamma-Gompertz and the Gompertz model offer the best estimate of the s-ages.
In Figs. 5 and 6, the quantile-density function for both the Gamma-Gompertz and the 
Gompertz model is depicted, for the Japanese and Swedish cases, respectively.
Let us recall that the quantile-density function measures the s-age changes as the survival 
level s drops from 1 to 0: higher values of ψ0(s) suggest a greater s-age variation as s goes 
from 1 to 0; the opposite holds if the values of ψ0(s) decrease. Interestingly, a bathtub shape 
for the quantile-density function appears for all the populations under investigation. By 
moving from higher to lower survival levels, changes in s-ages are initially wide and then 
decrease steeply, reaching a minimum level around s values in the interval (0.3, 0.4). After­
ward, they increase up to the lower s level is attained. Therefore, we can observe how the 
Fig. 5  Gompertz-based quantile-density function for the Japanese population
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
distance between s-ages rapidly reduces when we move from higher survival quantiles, con­
cerning young and early adult chronological ages, towards lower quantiles, regarding adult 
and old chronological ages. This evidence sheds light on the mortality improvements for 
both youth and early adult mortality. Moving from adult to elderly ages, variations in s-ages 
augment, indicating the postponement of mortality to older ages. Summarizing, populations 
experienced the greatest variations in survivorship at young and early adult chronological 
ages, while survival gains at old ages are less significant. Furthermore, in both Figs. 5 and 
6, a comparison among the calendar years 1960, 1980, 2000, and 2019 is provided. As 
expected, advancing through the calendar years leads to a reduction in ψ0 values associated 
with higher quantiles. Improvements in mortality for young and early adult chronological 
ages tend to stabilize over time at lower values, leading to reductions in corresponding 
s-ages. Furthermore, ψ0 curves shift toward lower survival levels, indicating an increasing 
size of the population still alive at older ages. Both the Gamma-Gompertz and the Gompertz 
law fail in catching s-ages variations related to higher survival levels. As calendar years 
advance, the Gompertz quantile-density curve tends to overlap with that of the Gamma-
Gompertz, suggesting that population survival becomes homogenized over time.
Finally, Figs. 7 and 8 allow to visualize the s-age based force of mortality regarding the 
calendar years 1960, 1980, 2000, and 2019. In particular, Figs. 7 and 8 show the s-age-
based force of mortality curves as a smoothed version of what is exposed in Figs. 1 and 2, 
respectively. Given the little heterogeneity, the s-aged force of mortality curves under both 
the Gamma-Gompertz and the Gompertz model are very similar, for all the countries and 
for both genders. Furthermore, as the calendar years progress, we note a slight reduction in 
mortality force at the extreme survival quantiles.
Fig. 6  Gompertz-based quantile-density function for the Swedish population
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
5  Conclusions
In the present work, we have investigated the extent to which both the Gamma-Gompertz and 
the Gompertz mortality laws are suitable (a) for determining s-ages consistent with the expe­
rienced mortality, and (b) for describing the relationship between the mortality of a population 
and its survival. In particular, building on the s-age framework introduced in Alvarez and 
Vaupel (2023), we derived closed-form expressions for the s-age, the quantile-density func­
tion, and the force of mortality under both the Gamma-Gompertz and the Gompertz model. 
In addition, we argue that not all mortality laws are suitable to robustly measure the s-age, 
as, for instance, in the case of the Gompertz-Makeham model (see Remark 3.1). Supported 
by a numerical analysis concerning four countries and both genders, we highlighted that the 
Gompertz-based mortality laws fail in describing mortality as a function of survival for young 
Fig. 8  s-based force of mortality (log-scale) for the Swedish population
 
Fig. 7  s-based force of mortality (log-scale) for the Japanese population
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
and early adutl chronological ages. This finding is unsurprising, as it represents a drawback 
of the Gompertz model, which is well-known in the literature. However, within the s-ages 
framework, a balance must be struck between the functional form of the survival function and 
the ability of a mortality law to describe the risk of death as chronological age varies. Mortal­
ity laws that adequately describe mortality across the entire age range have more convoluted 
expressions than the Gompertz law; however, this can lead to problems in inverting the sur­
vival function and, therefore, in calculating the s-ages and associated quantities.
We believe that the present work can be helpful in pointing out the merits and limitations 
of the Gompertz-based mortality laws in a novel framework, opening the way for a wide 
research area in modeling mortality in terms of survival. This would be useful for demo­
graphic forecasting purposes and actuarial valuations in life insurance and pension systems.
Appendix: Graphical visualization of numerical results for Australia 
and Italy
In this appendix, we present the graphical visualization of the numerical results concerning 
the Australian case (see Appendix 1.1) and the Italian one (see Appendix 1.2). Analogous 
considerations could also be inferred in those cases (we refer in particular to Section 4 in 
this respect).
1.1 The Australian case
See Appendix Fig. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Fig. 9  Mortality trajectories (log-scale) for Australian females and males concerning the calendar years 
1960, 1980, 2000, and 2019
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 10  s-age trajectories over calendar years for the Australian population, both genders. Red dots repre­
sent the Gamma-Gompertz-based s-ages, green diamonds represent the Gamma-Gompertzbased s-ages, 
while azure squares indicate s-ages obtained through the P-spline smoothing of the raw mortality data
 
Fig. 11  Gompertz-based quantile-density function for the Australian population
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
1.2 The Italian case
See Appendix Fig. 13, 14, 15 and 16.
Fig. 12  s-based force of mortality (log-scale) for the Australian population
 
Fig. 13  Mortality trajectories (log scale) for Italian females and males concerning the calendar years 
1960, 1980, 2000, and 2019
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 14  s-age trajectories over calendar years for the Italian population, both genders. Red dots represent 
the Gamma-Gompertz-based s-ages, green diamonds represent the Gamma-Gompertzbased s-ages, while 
azure squares indicate s-ages obtained through the P-spline smoothing of the raw mortality data
 
Fig. 15  Gompertz-based quantile-density function for the Italian population
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Funding  Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Trieste within the CRUI-CARE 
Agreement.
Conflict of interest
Conflict of interest  The authors report there are no Conflict of interest to declare.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Alvarez, J.-A., & Vaupel, J. W. (2023). Mortality as a function of survival. Demography, 60(1), 327–342.
Beltrán-Sánchez, H., & Subramanian, S. V. (2019). Period and cohort-specific trends in life expectancy at 
different ages: Analysis of survival in high-income countries. SSM-Population Health, 8, 100422.
Cohen, J. E. (2010). Life expectancy is the death-weighted average of the reciprocal of the survival-specific 
force of mortality. Demographic Research, 22(5), 115–128.
Drefahl, S., Ahlbom, A., & Modig, K. (2014). Losing ground-Swedish life expectancy in a comparative 
perspective. PLoS One, 9(2), Article e88357.
Eilers, P. H. C., & Marx, B. D. (2021). Practical smoothing: The joys of p-splines. Cambridge University 
Press.
Garmany, A., Yamada, S., & Terzic, A. (2021). Longevity leap: mind the healthspan gap. NPJ Regenerative 
Medicine, 6(1), 57.
Human Mortality Database (2021). University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck Institute 
for Demographic Research, Rostock (Germany). www.mortality.org (data downloaded on September 
2024).
Jackson, S. H. D., Weale, M. R., & Weale, R. A. (2003). Biological age-what is it and can it be measured? 
Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 36(2), 103–115.
Fig. 16  s-based force of mortality (log-scale) for the Italian population
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Milevsky, M. A. (2020). Calibrating Gompertz in reverse: What is your longevity-risk-adjusted global age? 
Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 92, 147–161.
Missov, T., Lenart, A., Nemeth, L., Canudas-Romo, V., & Vaupel, J. W. (2015). The Gompertz force of mor­
tality in terms of the modal age at death. Demographic Research, 32(36), 1031–1048.
Olivieri, A. (2006). Heterogeneity in survival models-applications to pension and life annuities. Belgian 
Actuarial Bulletin, 6, 23–39.
Pitacco, E. (2019). Heterogeneity in mortality: A survey with an actuarial focus. European Actuarial Journal, 
9(1), 3–30.
Parzen, E. (1979). Non parametric statistical data modeling. Journal of American Statistical Association, 74, 
105–122.
R Core Team. (2022). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/.
Remund, A., Camarda, C. G., & Riffe, T. (2018). A cause-of-death decomposition of young adult excess 
mortality. Demography, 55, 957–978.
Vaupel, J. W., Manton, K. G., & Stallard, E. (1979). The impact of heterogeneity in individual frailty on the 
dynamics of mortality. Demography, 16(3), 439–54.
Vaupel, J. W., Villavicencio, F., & Bergeron-Boucher, M.-P. (2021). Demographic perspectives on the rise of 
longevity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118, e2019536118.
Zuo, W., Jiang, S., Guo, Z., Feldman, M. W., & Tuljapurkar, S. (2018). Advancing front of old-age human 
survival. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115, 11209–11214.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3