TITLE: Exploring the development trajectory of single-machine production scheduling
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06395-6
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06395-6
ORIGINAL - SURVEY OR EXPOSITION
Exploring the development trajectory of single-machine
production scheduling
Kuo-Ching Ying1 · Pourya Pourhejazy2
· Tz-chi Huang3
Received: 25 September 2023 / Accepted: 11 November 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
The Single-Machine Scheduling Problem (SMSP) serves as the cornerstone of scheduling
theory. Almost all developments in production planning and control were initially introduced
and tested within single-machine production settings. Exploring the literature on SMSPs illu-
minates the entire development trajectory of scheduling theory. This study employs the Main
Path Analysis (MPA) for a systematic review that is the ﬁrst of its kind in the literature
on SMSPs. By analyzing 2904 articles, the main path and key branches that highlight the
most signiﬁcant documents in the development trajectory as well as the speciﬁcs in different
development stages of the ﬁeld are identiﬁed. The literature is analyzed in four stages of
development, following a chronological order. Within this framework, the focus of the stud-
ies, key technologies, and characteristics of each period are discussed. Cluster and keyword
analysis are employed alongside MPA to identify and explore the predominant themes in
the ﬁeld, including SMSPs with deterioration and/or learning effects, solution methods for
SMSPs with various constraints, solving SMSPs integrated with maintenance-related vari-
ables and constraints, advanced solution methods and constructive heuristics for minimizing
delays, as well as agent-based methods for single-machine scheduling. The review outcomes
consist of directions for future research based on the development trajectories of SMSPs.
Keywords Production planning and control · Optimization · Systematic review · Main path
analysis (MPA) · Cluster analysis (CA)
B Pourya Pourhejazy
pourya.pourhejazy@uit.no
Kuo-Ching Ying
kcying@ntut.edu.tw
Tz-chi Huang
huangchiqi@gmail.com
1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, National Taipei University of Technology,
Taipei 10608, Taiwan
2
Department of Industrial Engineering, UiT- The Arctic University of Norway, Lodve Langesgate 2,
8514 Narvik, Norway
3
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC) Limited, Kaohsiung City 811019, Taiwan
123

Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
Schedulingis“theprocessofallocatinglimitedresourcestoperformcertaintasksoractivities
within a given timeframe, including all the constraints imposed” (Baker, 1974). Production
scheduling helps to plan and control the operating parameters of a shop ﬂoor to improve
margins and reduce costs while maximizing efﬁciency without necessarily upgrading the
system. The Single-Machine Scheduling Problem (SMSP) has been employed for planning
tasks in various operating systems to optimize their performance. In this context, an operator, a
production line, a process, a factory, or an entire manufacturing shop ﬂoor with a bottleneck
can all be modeled as a ‘single-machine’ system. As a classic engineering optimization
problem, SMSP constitutes the backbone of scheduling theory with nearly all developments
in the ﬁeld having been introduced and/or tested in a single-machine environment.
Scheduling problems have been extensively investigated in industrial engineering, pro-
duction engineering, operations management, operations research, management science, and
data science, with a primary emphasis on mathematical formulations and solution method-
ologies. Given the nearly 17,000 published articles, researchers may ﬁnd it challenging to
ﬁnd signiﬁcant research gaps and contribute to the further development of various scheduling
domains. A big data analysis-based overview of the literature on SMSP can aid in identifying
unexplored research directions, expanding the existing body of knowledge, or introducing
new research ideas across various scheduling domains.
FewcomprehensivereviewsexistregardingtheliteratureonSMSPs.Koulamas(2010)sur-
veyed single-machine total tardiness scheduling problems. Martinelli et al. (2022) conducted
a literature review on single-machine scheduling in make-to-order production. Most recently,
Koulamas and Kyparisis (2023) presented a review that examined dynamic programming
algorithms for ofﬂine deterministic SMSPs, addressing their classiﬁcations, enhancements,
and applications in broader scheduling contexts over the past 50 years. These reviews have
limited scope and cannot provide a comprehensive overview. Besides, they have used tra-
ditional review approaches. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the only comprehensive
reviews of the literature on SMSPs were conducted by Gupta and Kyparisis (1987) and
Maxwell (1964), and the most recent review dates back more than 37 years. Providing a
fresh and insightful perspective on the development of SMSPs is timely and bridges a gap.
The present study conducts a systematic review of the literature on SMSPs to address the
following question. What are the knowledge diffusion patterns in the literature on SMSPs
and how could this impact the future development trajectory of the ﬁeld? To answer this, the
Main Path Analysis (MPA; Hummon & Dereian, 1989) method is employed to identify the
important research themes, problem features, and solution algorithms in SMSPs. The rele-
vant literature is analyzed at various development stages to synthesize the research results
in each period and identify the main topics of interest and key technologies. MPA operates
within citation networks, commonly referred to as a network ‘directed acyclic graph’ within
graph theory. The network can be constructed from datasets comprising diverse document
types, including patents, papers, and court decisions, where objects demonstrate referencing
or inheritance relationships. Patent citation networks predominantly serve to investigate tech-
nological development trajectories, while paper citation networks form the foundation for
literature reviews and the examination of knowledge dissemination pathways. Hummon and
Doreian (1989) propose a two-step methodology to analyze the development of DNA theory.
First, citation links, initially considered to be of equal importance, are assigned traversal
weights. Subsequently, the links with the highest traversal weights are traversed to identify
123

Annals of Operations Research
the most signiﬁcant citation chain, termed the "main path," which represents a pivotal path-
way within the citation network. Additionally, in this study, Cluster Analysis (CA; Girvan
& Newman, 2002) is employed to categorize the published literature into groups. Based on
this categorization, in-depth discussions on the development of each subﬁeld are provided
as references for future research. MPA and CA are conducted using the MainPath 465 soft-
ware. Pajek (http://mrvar.fdv.uni-lj.si/pajek/) is utilized to visualize the main trajectories of
the citation network. Finally, the citation maps are generated using VOSviewer (https://www.
vosviewer.com/) to depict the primary keywords and their correlations within each cluster.
The rest of this review article is organized into three sections. Research methods and
materials are brieﬂy explained in Sect. 2. The results and discussions are presented in Sect. 3.
Lastly, the review is concluded in Sect. 4 followed by the suggestion of some directions for
future research.
2 Research methodology
The methodology comprises three phases: ‘data collection’, ‘data processing’, and ‘data anal-
ysis’. The ‘data collection’ phase begins by conﬁrming the keywords and search protocols.
For the systematic review and citation network analysis, the necessary data is collected from
the Web of Science (WoS) database. The database includes documents indexed in the Science
Citation Index Expanded (SCIE), Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI), Arts & Humanities
Citation Index (AHCI), and Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI). The search ﬁeld was
ﬁlled by ((TS = ("single machine") OR TS = ("single-machine") OR TS = ("one machine")
OR TS = ("one-machine")) AND TS = ("scheduling")). Taking into account the studies
published from and after 1987, a total of 4,527 related research papers were retrieved.
The ‘data processing’ phase involves cleaning up the original database and screening arti-
cles. The articles are screened by considering their titles and abstracts, following the PRISMA
method (Liberati, 2009). Data processing revealed that 210 articles were disconnected from
the citation network, 51 articles were perceived as irrelevant to scheduling, and 1308 articles
did not directly study SMSPs, but only mentioned this scheduling variant in their content. A
total of 2,904 articles passed the screening and cleaning processes and were organized in a
uniﬁed ﬁle format. The compiled documents were subsequently imported into the software
to conﬁrm whether the quality measures were reasonable.
In the ‘data analysis’ phase, a citation network is ﬁrst established. Using this network,
MPA discovers all possible paths from the origin to the end of dissemination to identify the
main path based on the most frequent occurrences. In the citation network, nodes represent
documents; these are characterized as source nodes (origin of dissemination), intermediate
nodes, and sink nodes (end of dissemination). A connection arrow represents the citations,
with the tail indicating the cited article.
The MPA literature uses the following methods to identify the main path (Liu et al., 2019):
[1] ‘Search Path Count’ (SPC), which counts all traversals between all sources and sinks; [2]
‘Search Path Link Count’ (SPLC), which counts the number of traversals when considering
paths from all ancestors of a speciﬁc tail node to all sink nodes in the knowledge dissemination
network; and [3] ‘Search Path Node Pair’ (SPNP), which counts how many times a citation
link is traversed when running through all paths from its ancestors to descendants. SPLC is
considered the most suitable method for identifying the path of knowledge dissemination in
the literature (Liu et al., 2019). This is because SPLC reﬂects the intermediate nodes as both
123

Annals of Operations Research
carriers of the previous knowledge and developers of new knowledge, as opposed to SPC,
which recognizes the intermediate nodes as mere knowledge carriers.
When dealing with a weighted network representing the number of SPLC-based traversals,
various methods can be employed to identify the main path. The ‘Global Main Path’ (GMP)
is utilized to ﬁnd the path(s) with the highest cumulative weight, offering insights into the
development trajectory of the literature on SMSPs. Additionally, the ‘Key-route Main Path’
(KMP) method is employed to incorporate the top ten most cited references from the network.
The path analysis commences separately from the tail and tip nodes of the highly weighted
arrows and proceeds toward the origin and sink nodes of the network, respectively.
As a complementary step, CA is employed for the hierarchical clustering of articles. CA
uses the article citation network as input and generates a tree-like diagram based on the
similarities among the articles. The computational procedure consists of three steps: (A)
ﬁnding the shortest paths from each node to every other node in the network; (B) calculating
the number of steps taken from the network’s source node to a given node using Eq. (1) for
all nodes, starting at the bottom of the tree; (C) removing the edge(s) with the highest score.
Completing this three-step procedure transforms the network into distinct groups of nodes.
Edge Credit = (1 +

Incoming Edge Credit) × Score of Destination
Score of Start
(1)
In the data analysis phase, calibrating the MPA algorithm includes setting parameters such
as the number of key routes and the search method. Overall, the statistical analysis provides
an overview. MPA, when performed using the MainPath software, uncovers the knowledge
development trajectory of SMSPs. The outputs of the MainPath software are then imported
into the Pajek software for visualization. CA categorizes the documents into primary clusters
to identify the subﬁelds of SMSPs. VOSviewer compiles the results of the CA and keyword
analysis while considering the author’s keywords to analyze the inherent correlations. The
outcomes of these phases are utilized to explore the development trajectories of SMSPs and
to propose future research directions in the ﬁeld.
3 Results analysis
3.1 Preliminaries
Before analyzing the literature, the database must be checked to ensure that the collected
data represents the entire literature. For this purpose, the precision rate (Eq. 2) and the
percentage of digital object identiﬁcation (DOI, Eq. 3) are calculated. The precision rate and
DOI percentage exceeding 70% conﬁrm the adequacy of the database (Liu et al., 2019).
Precision Rate =
Network Size
Number of papers in the original database × 100%
(2)
DOI Percentage = DOI Total
CR Total × 100%
(3)
In terms of the precision rate, 2904 out of the 2958 articles in the original database
are included for further analysis after excluding isolated points, resulting in a precision of
98%. For evaluating the database’s DOI percentage, 2904 documents were imported into
the analysis software to examine their citation relationships. From 73,855 citations, 58,368
records are present in the database, which represents approximately 79.03% of the existing
records.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Notations representing the SMSPs studied in the literature
Field
Notation
Deﬁnition
Field
Notation
Deﬁnition
β
pt
Processing time
γ
Cmax
Maximum completion
time
rt
Release time
Emax
Maximum lead time
dt
Due date
Lmax
Maximum lateness
Ct
Completion time
Tmax
Maximum tardiness
Ft
Flow time
 Tj
Total latency
Wt
Waiting time
 Fj
Total ﬂow time
Lt
Lateness
 C j
Total completion time
Et
Earliness
 E j
Total lead time
Tt
Tardiness
 U j
Total number of tardy
jobs
Ut
Number of tardy
completions
 U j
Weighted number of
tardy jobs
STsi
Sequence-independent
setups
T SC
Total cost
STsd
Sequence-dependent setup
time
T ST , T N S
Total number of
setups/changeovers,
Total number of spare
parts
Finally, key-route values of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 are tested to determine the best
setting for KMP. This setting determines how many top-SPLC links should be included to
identify a critical extended main path that is neither divergent nor limited. When the key-route
value is set at ten, there are 37 resulting articles, only one more than that in the main path.
Setting the key route at 30 or more causes the number of articles to begin to converge to 60,
representing the overall developments in the SMSP’s literature.
The notations characterizing the SMSPs in the literature are listed in Table 1. In this
table, ’ﬁeld’ refers to the three-ﬁeld ⟨α|β|γ ⟩symbolization method introduced by Graham
et al. (1979). The ﬁrst, second, and third ﬁelds of the notation system refer to the operating
environment (single-machine: α = 1), technical constraints (β), and optimization objective
(γ ), respectively.
3.2 Descriptive statistics
The statistics regarding the number of published articles from 1987 to date show a consistent
upward trend. We used the Logistic growth model from the Loglet Lab4 software to project
the future trend of SMSPs in Fig. 1. The dotted section of the curve represents the actual
cumulative number of SMSP articles over the years, whereas the dashed line represents the
projected trend. The literature on SMSPs entered the growth stage in 2004 and is expected
to reach saturation and enter the maturity phase in the early 2030s.
Figure 2 displays the top 20 journals considering the number of published articles; the
European Journal of Operational Research is leading by a signiﬁcant margin, followed by
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Growth trend of the literature on SMSPs
Fig. 2 Top journals in the literature on SMSPs
Computers & Operations Research, Computers & Industrial Engineering, Journal of Schedul-
ing, and the International Journal of Production Research. In general, the top contributing
journals mainly belong to the ﬁelds of manufacturing, operations research, and industrial
engineering, and secondary contributions come from computer science, mathematics, and
applied science. Figure 3 illustrates the top ten contributing countries based on the number
of publications and citation counts with China, the United States, and Taiwan leading the
competition.
To assess the quality of published works, the average traversal weight SPLC is used to
highlight the relative signiﬁcance of publications. Considering a network of 2904 publication
nodes and 23,774 citation links, the top 10 countries according to the average SPLC value are
listed in Table 2. It is observed that Japan has a lower-than-average SPLC value compared
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Top contributing countries in the literature on SMSPs
to the overall average, while the other regions/countries exhibit above-average performance.
Publications from Hong Kong universities are considered highly inﬂuential, comprising 18
seminal articles.
3.3 Main path analysis
This section reviews the 36 articles that shape the main path, categorizing them into three
development stages with the main path links shown in Fig. 4.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Ranking of inﬂuential regions/countries
Country
Documents
Percentage
(%)
Average
SPLC
Country
Documents
Percentage
(%)
Average
SPLC
Hong
kong
18
0.62
53.80
Tunisia
3
0.10
22.19
Israel
112
3.86
40.33
Germany
80
2.75
18.08
Poland
78
2.69
37.45
USA
382
13.15
10.83
China
787
27.10
36.53
Türkiye
89
3.06
9.92
Taiwan
290
9.99
32.17
Japan
35
1.21
8.69
Fig. 4 The main path on the
development trajectory of SMSPs
123

Annals of Operations Research
• Stage I (1987–1999): SMSPs focusing on resource allocation;
• Stage II (1999–2010): SMSPs focusing on the learning effect and group technology; and
• Stage III (2010 to date): SMSPs considering both learning and degradation effects.
3.3.1 Development stage I
The initial development stage of SMSPs was centered on resource allocation, taking into
account various constraints. The source of the main path can be traced to Janiak, (1987),
who proposed the unconstrained SMSP, where a single machine was considered the sole
production resource, and the processing time depended on the number of allocated resources.
Several linear resource consumption models were proposed, taking into account various
optimization criteria, including maximum completion time, maximum tardiness, maximum
cost, and the weighted sum of completion time. Several algorithms were developed to solve
the SMSPs in polynomial time.
Janiak, (1991) explored SMSPs with common due dates and resource-dependent release
times in the context of steelmaking. The release time was deﬁned by considering a linearly
decreasing function to minimize the total resource consumption while meeting a speciﬁc due
date. He provided several approximation algorithms to solve this problem. Furthermore, he
proved that the problem is ‘NP-hard’ in a strong sense but becomes NP-complete when the
release time reduction rate is assumed to be equal.
Li, (1994) extended Janiak’s research by comparing job orders while considering two dif-
ferent resource consumption functions under various constraints. Using the linear function
proposed by Janiak, (1991), Li, (1994) compared two resource consumption functions for
SMSPs, considering release time and due date constraints across four scenarios: (i) minimize
the total resource consumption within the common due date of all work orders, (ii) minimize
the total resource consumption while constraining the total work order completion time, (iii)
minimize the weighted total resource consumption and maximum work order completion
time, and (iv) minimize the weighted total resource consumption and total job completion
time. He compared the resource consumption function with the same and different effects on
the processing time of all job sequences, concluding that different functions result in different
computational complexities. Finally, he discussed optimal solutions for SMSPs with maxi-
mum completion time, total completion time constraints, and the bi-objective minimization
of resource consumption and completion time.
JaniakL (1994) further discussed the problem of minimizing the total weighted completion
time under resource consumption constraints. They proved that SMSP with release date and
resource consumption constraints is generally NP-hard and attempted to exactly solve the
problem under a special case where a job’s weight equals its resource consumption rate,
with the resource consumption function being linear. (Li et al., 1995) attempted to exactly
solve the SMSP to minimize total resource consumption and total delays, considering a non-
increasing convex function of resource consumption, and job orders with a common due
date. The authors investigated two special cases and identiﬁed properties to develop efﬁcient
pseudo-polynomial-time algorithms for solving them.
In general, the research at this stage analyzes the relationship between resource con-
sumption and single-machine scheduling and ﬁnds feasible solutions according to various
optimization criteria.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.3.2 Development stage II
Biskup, (1999) introduced the concept of a learning effect to SMSPs. Before this seminal
work, several studies had explored workers’ capacity to learn and their potential impact on
enhancing production efﬁciency. In essence, it is not recommended to assume that workers
maintain a constant level of efﬁciency over time. In addition to the learning effect, this study
was the ﬁrst to investigate the relationship between job processing time and job sequence
position.
Mosheiov (2001) continued Biskup’s research and found that under the learning effect
model, some classical scheduling rules are ineffective. However, under speciﬁc conditions,
they can be solved in polynomial time. Mosheiov developed the Earliest Due Date (EDD)
rule to minimize maximum tardiness, and the Weighted Shortest Processing Time (WSPT)
rule to minimize the sum of weighted makespans, thereby minimizing the number of tardy
jobs. He argued that the problem can be solved in O(n3) time complexity when adding a
job does not affect the learning effect. He also showed that the SMSP with makespan can
be ‘exactly’ solved through pairwise exchanges if the job sequence lacks a learning effect
index, and the best sequence is determined using the Smallest Processing Time (SPT) rule.
Finally, the article extended the study of SMSPs to homogeneous dual machines.
Mosheiov (2003) extended the learning curve setting to allow differential learning rates
among jobs. They proposed a general polynomial-time algorithm capable of solving a wide
variety of problems, including those related to maximum completion time and total ﬂow
time minimization, due date assignment, and minimization of total ﬂow time on unrelated
parallel machines. Building on these ﬁndings, LeeWS (2004) explored the dual-criteria SMSP
with learning effects and proposed a branch-and-bound algorithm along with a heuristic for
approximating the optimal solution.
The variable speed learning model was introduced by (Kuo & Yang, 2006). They devel-
oped a polynomial-time algorithm and extended the group scheduling problem to include
time-varying learning effects. The study also provided two polynomial-time algorithms to
solve the problem, considering the minimization of the makespan and total completion time,
respectively. Finally, they showed that a single-machine group scheduling problem with a
time-dependent learning effect is ‘polynomial time solvable’.
Wu (2008) discussed degeneracy in the single-machine group scheduling problem. The
study assumes that both the actual processing time and the group setup time are simple linear
functions of the starting time. The objective is to determine a sequence that minimizes the
completion time of all jobs and the maximum completion time. The paper provides theorems
regarding optimal assignments and group sequences. The theorems assert that in the single-
machine group scheduling problem aiming to minimize the makespan, the optimal schedule
satisﬁes the property that the group sequence and the work order sequence in each group can
be arranged in any order. Additionally, in the single-machine group scheduling problem that
aims to minimize the total completion time of all jobs, the optimal approach involves sorting
the work orders within each group according to the Smallest Deteriorating Rate (SDR) rule
and sorting the work orders by rank groups in non-decreasing order.
Wang (2008) extended the research of Wu (2008) to discuss SMSPs with degenerate jobs
and Group Technology (GT). They assumed that both group setup times and job processing
times are increasing functions of their starting time; that is, an SMSP variant with a time-
changing learning effect. They showed that the problem can still be solved in polynomial
time when aiming to minimize the makespan and total weighted completion time.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Wang (2009b) introduced the SMSP with past-sequence-dependent setup times. They
investigated the impact of degradation and learning effects on the setup time associated
with past sequencing, where the processing time of a job is a function of its start time and
position in the sequence, and the setup time is proportional to the length of the processed
job. They showed that the problem of minimizing the completion time, the total completion
time, and the sum of δ powers of the completion time can be solved in polynomial time. They
also showed that under certain conditions, the problems of minimizing the total weighted
completion time, minimizing the maximum delay problem, and minimizing the number of
tardy jobs can be solved in polynomial time.
Wang(2009a)studiedthedeteriorationeffect,consideringthattheSMSPhasadegradation
effect that increases with time, within the GT assumption. A new learning effect model
was developed, and it was shown that the problem can be solved in polynomial time when
general linear degradation and GT are considered simultaneously. Wang (2009c) studied
time-dependent deterioration in the SMSP. They showed that the single-machine makespan
minimization problem is polynomially solvable even when time-dependent deterioration is
introduced into the job processing times. They also showed that the optimal schedule for
the total completion time minimization problem is V-shaped according to the normal work
processing times.
Gao et al., (2010) extended the research of WANGWWW2009 for a special case where
the processing time is dependent on the start time and decreases, subject to precedence
constraints. The authors conclusively proved that the SMSP can be solved in polynomial
time to minimize the total weighted makespan. (Huang et al., 2010) explored the SMSP with
deteriorating jobs by extending it to the early penalty cost, where the deterioration of work
is modeled as a linear function of time. The authors showed that two special cases of this
problem can be solved in polynomial time: the problem with an equal-weighted monotonic
penalty objective function and the problem with a weighted linear penalty objective function.
Wang (2010) addressed a variant of the SMSP with the group setup times and processing
times depending on the start time and following a decreasing function. They proved that
the problem of minimizing the makespan is polynomially solvable under the assumption
of decreasing linear deterioration and that the problem of minimizing the total weighted
completion time becomes polynomial-time solvable under the scaling assumption that the
decrement in working time is a linear function of time. Finally, (Yang & Yang, 2010) con-
sidered both deterioration and learning effects and proved that the optimal job sequence
and group sequence can be found in polynomial time; this article initiated the third stage of
development of the SMSP’s literature.
Overall, the research during the second stage of development was mainly concerned with
incorporating the learning effect, exploring its impact, and developing solution strategies.
3.3.3 Development stage III
The main path during the third development stage shows that scholars proposed different
models and solutions for SMSPs with both deterioration and learning effects. The most
dominant considerations were resource allocation, starting time, location-related effects, and
resource consumption.
Yang and colleagues suggested that deterioration and learning effects can exist simulta-
neously and should be considered together in SMSPs. (Yang & Yang, 2010) proved that the
optimal job sequence and group sequence under this extension of SMSPs can be found in
polynomial time. YangY2010c focused on minimizing the makespan and total completion
time and showed that the former is polynomially solvable while the latter is solvable under
123

Annals of Operations Research
special conditions. Yang (2010) introduced a new SMSP extension that takes into account the
onset time-related learning effect and the position-related deteriorating effect to minimize the
makespan, total completion time, and total absolute deviation of completion times (TADC)
and solved them in polynomial time.
Huang (2011) proposed a polynomial time solution algorithm under resource constraints.
They explored two single-machine group scheduling problems with deterioration and learn-
ing effects, considering two scenarios: minimizing the makespan and minimizing the total
resource consumption problem under the maximum completion time below a given limit.
Shen (2012) extended the study of (Yin et al., 2010), ensuring that the work order processing
time changes due to deterioration and learning effects. They provided a counterexample to
support the importance of this inclusion.
Wang & Wang, 2013a, b; Wang et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2014 all introduced new dete-
rioration functions and proved that the problem of makespan minimization can be solved
in polynomial time under certain conditions. WangHWJ2012 proposed a new SMSP where
jobs deteriorate over time and have independent setup times; they also incorporated group
technology to include a simple linear degradation function. WangHWJ2012 ﬁnally proved
that the problem of minimizing the makespan problem in a special case can be solved in
polynomial time when deterioration and GT are considered simultaneously. WangW2013c
explored SMSPs with a convex resource-dependent allocation of processing times and dete-
riorating jobs and proposed a mathematical model where job processing time is related to the
starting time and resource allocation. A polynomial-time algorithm was proposed to solve
this problem, considering the makespan, total completion time, and absolute standard devi-
ation of total completion time and total resource consumption cost. It is worth mentioning
that WangW2013c’s study opened a relatively popular branch line for the development of
SMSPs. XuZH2014 considered the SMSP with GT and release time as a linearly proportional
deterioration function, where the actual processing time of jobs is an increasing function of
their start time. They developed a highly competitive heuristic algorithm and also proved that
the problem is solvable in polynomial time to minimize the makespan.
Wang & Liu (2014), Yin et al., (2014) combined resource allocation and learning effects
and proposed polynomial-time algorithms to solve the problem. Yin studied the single-
machine group scheduling problem, combining resource allocation, learning effects, and
deteriorating jobs, where the processing time depends on location, start time, and allocated
resources. They proposed two resource allocation functions to minimize the weighted sum
of completion time and total resource cost and demonstrated that these problems have poly-
nomial solutions under the condition that the number of jobs in each group is the same.
WangL2014 explored a dual-objective extension (minimizing the total weighted completion
time and the maximum cost) of group scheduling with a single machine, in which setup
and processing times are increasing functions of their starting times. They also proposed a
polynomial-time algorithm to solve the problem and demonstrated that the bi-objective group
scheduling problem can be solved in polynomial time.
Huang (2015) introduced the position-dependent deterioration model and proved that a
polynomial-time algorithm can be developed to solve several special cases. In their model,
the processing time of a job is deﬁned by an increasing function of the total weighted normal
processing time of the previous jobs, where the weight is determined based on the position of
the job. (Rudek, 2017)’s article aims to minimize the total weighted completion time while
taking into account learning and deterioration effects based on the sum of processing times.
The authors showed that this SMPS variant is NP-hard in the strongest sense. LuL2018
(Lu & Liu, 2018) studied four dual-criteria SMSPs with resource allocation and location-
dependent workloads. The ﬁrst criterion is minimizing scheduling time (i.e., manufacturing
123

Annals of Operations Research
time,themakespan,thetotalabsolutedifferenceinmakespan,andthetotalabsolutedifference
in waiting time), and the second criterion is minimizing the total resource consumption
cost. Wang & Liang (2019) considers a single-machine group scheduling problem with
deterioration effects and resource allocation with controllable processing times. The goal is
to limit resource availability to a given range and minimize the makespan. They showed that
the problem can be solved under two special cases, and heuristic algorithms were developed
to solve the general problem.
Bai & Zhao (2020); Mor (2021); Mor & Mosheiov (2021); Zhao & Hsu, 2019) all con-
sidered the dependence of the jobs’ processing times on the starting times, along with other
factors, and proposed polynomial-time and pseudo-polynomial-time algorithms to solve the
problems. ZhaoH2019 studied the scenario where both processing times and start times dete-
riorate, and the processing time of a job is a linear increasing function of its start time. The
goal was to minimize the weighted number of late jobs. Ultimately, they developed a pseudo-
polynomial solution algorithm and a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme (FPTAS)
to solve this problem. BaiZ2020 studied SMSPs with DeJong’s learning effect and machine
availability constraints. Initially, a polynomial-time approximation scheme (FPTAS) was
developed to solve the problem. Subsequently, the FPTAS was extended to solve SMSPs
involving deteriorating jobs, DeJong’s learning effect, and machine availability constraints.
Mor (2021) explored a single-machine batch scheduling problem. The article examined
three performance measures: maximum completion time, total completion time, and total
weighted completion time. They assumed that batches have the same capacity, each batch
may contain multiple orders of different sizes, each order size being less than or equal to
the same capacity, and orders must be processed in a maximum of two consecutive batches.
The problem is subject to an upper bound on the total rejection cost. They showed that all
three problems can be solved in polynomial time. Later, (Mor & Mosheiov, 2021) extended
the problem to account for common due dates and common due windows problems in batch
scheduling.Theydevelopedpolynomial-timedynamicalgorithmstosolvethetwoextensions.
Numerical experiments showed that both algorithms can easily solve instances of medium
size.
Finally, (Mor et al., 2021) studied a single-machine batch scheduling problem with
rejectable jobs. They considered three objective functions: minimizing the makespan, mini-
mizing the total makespan, and minimizing the total weighted makespan while ensuring that
the jobs exceeding the cost upper limit can be rejected. It was conﬁrmed that the three prob-
lems are NP-hard, and the author developed a pseudo-polynomial dynamic programming
algorithm to ﬁnd near-optimum solutions.
In general, the research during this period was focused on ﬁnding efﬁcient solutions for
SMSPs.Differentmethodsincludingnewmathematicalmodels,polynomial-timealgorithms,
and heuristic algorithms were developed to address problems, such as scheduling problems
that consider complex factors such as deterioration effects, learning effects, resource alloca-
tion, starting time, position-related effects, and resource consumption. The main contribution
of these studies is that they not only solve theoretical problems but also provide solutions to
challenges that may be encountered in practical operations.
3.4 Key-extensions path analysis
This section elaborates on the development branches that have emerged from the main path.
As depicted in Fig. 5, the key branches are developed in three major streams.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Important development branches from the main path
In Fig. 5, the nodes on the overall main path are marked in red, while the branches are
differentiated in various colors according to their research themes. The detailed discussion
of the three development branches is as follows:
Stream 1 (light blue) The nodes in the ﬁrst stream are represented by light blue, where
resource allocation subject to various constraints is the main focus. This branch began with
the studies of Hall et al., (1991), both focusing on earliness and tardiness penalty costs. The
ﬁrst study showed that when jobs have different weights while considering a soft due date,
the problem becomes NP-complete. The second study aimed to minimize the Total Weighted
Earliness and Tardiness (TWET) subject to a restrictive common due date, proving that the
problem is NP-hard.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Mosheiov (1991) focused on deteriorating jobs and proved that the best scheduling method
for minimizing the makespan is to use a V-shape policy. In this method, the ﬁrst job is sorted
in descending order of the rate of deterioration, while the subsequent jobs are sorted in
ascending order of the rate of deterioration. Mosheiov (1994) proposed a simpliﬁed linear
deterioration model and explored different optimal scheduling strategies. He suggested that
as the number of jobs increases, the start times of the jobs can be delayed, rendering the
basic processing time irrelevant. Mosheiov (1995) explored various industry scenarios in
which step-deterioration occurs; he proposed several heuristic algorithms to solve the prob-
lem considering the makespan. Mosheiov (1996) extended his earlier study the research to
encompass nonlinear job deterioration, in which the processing time of the job increases with
the start time; this study addressed the problem of minimizing the total weighted makespan
and proved that the optimal scheduling method is of Lambda type and can be solved in
polynomial time.
Alidaee & Womer (1999) conducted a literature survey to examine methods for handling
time-dependent processing times. They discussed the issues related to linear, step-linear, and
nonlinear processing time functions. Wu (2003) extended the study on linear deteriorating
jobs to include availability constraints and proposed a simpliﬁed model. They showed that
the problem of minimizing makespan can be solved by transforming it into a 0–1 integer
programming problem and simplifying it under certain conditions.
During the same period, another branch emerged from the main path. Vasilev (1997)
extended the studies of Li and Janiak (1994), where resource consumption is related to
the release time of the jobs, aiming to minimize the total consumption with constrained
makespan and total completion time, and extended the consumption function to the case of
convex decreasing. However, despite its promise, the new development branch was quickly
overshadowed by Biskup (1999).
The next two studies belong to a more recent phase of development. Continuing the study
of (Eren & Güner, 2007) explored the bicriteria SMSP with a learning effect and proposed an
integer programming model to minimize the weighted sum of total completion time and total
tardiness time. Cheng (2008) proposed a new learning model in which, the actual processing
time of a job depends on its scheduled position and the processing time of the processed jobs.
They showed that, under certain assumptions, the problems of maximum and total completion
times, as well as the total weighted completion time and maximum tardiness, can be solved
in polynomial time.
Overall, the studies in this branch have laid the essential theoretical foundations and
optimization tools for subsequent research on exploring the real-world use cases of SMSPs.
More recent developments in the ﬁeld have diverged into two distinct development branches;
one in 2011 and the other in 2013. While the main path (represented by red nodes) considered
both deterioration and learning effects, the yellow nodes (i.e., the left branch) lie at the
intersection of learning effects and resource allocation, and the dark blue nodes (i.e., the
right branch) are commonly used for solving SMSPs considering the makespan. The two
streams are discussed in the following sections.
Stream 2 (yellow) (Wang & Wang, 2013a, 2013b) extended the main path research of
WangW2013c to establish the new branch. They investigated the SMSP with due date
allocation, aiming to minimize earliness, lateness, and total resource consumption costs
simultaneously. Two different processing time functions and three different deadline allo-
cation methods were analyzed. They found polynomial-time solutions to each combination.
Wang (2015a) focused on job-dependent learning effects and the SMSP with convex resource-
dependent processing times. They found a polynomial-time algorithm for all the studied
objective functions. He et al.(2017) examined resource-constrained SMSPs with general
123

Annals of Operations Research
truncated job-dependent learning effects. They assumed that the processing time of a job is a
function of the number of resources allocated to the job, general job-related learning effects,
and job-related control parameters. They developed polynomial-time algorithms to mini-
mize various objective functions and processing time functions under both linear and convex
resource allocation. Lu et al., (2017) studied the SMSP with setup times and convex resource
allocation, where the learning effect is inﬂuenced by the position between groups and within
the group. The objective was to minimize the makespan under limited available resources.
They showed that the best result was obtained by sorting each group’s work according to the
SPT rule.
Liu (2020) explored an SMSP that simultaneously considers due dates, learning effects,
and convex resource allocation while minimizing the total weighted resource consumption
cost. In their model, the learning effect is location-based and job-related. The objective was
to simultaneously determine the optimal job sequence and resource allocation such that the
total weighted resource consumption cost is minimized, subject to a bounded total weighted
resource consumption. Wang et al., (2021) studied an SMSP with learning effects and convex
resource allocation. Under relaxed deadline assignment, the goal was to determine the optimal
order of jobs and groups, the optimal deadline assignment, and the optimal resource allocation
to minimize the weighted sum of early and late penalties, general trafﬁc allowance, and
resource consumption costs. They showed that the problem can be solved in polynomial time
in three special cases and developed heuristics and Tabu search algorithms to solve the general
problem. Finally, (Liu et al., 2021) studied the single-machine group scheduling problem
with due window assignment and position-dependent weights. The goal was to minimize the
weighted sum of the delay and due window allocation costs. The authors showed that the
problem can be solved in polynomial time using different methods of assigning due windows.
Overall, in the early development period of this stream, resource allocation SMSPs were
examined from different perspectives, such as due date allocation and learning effects. During
the second development period, the studies focused on solving SMSPs by incorporating
learning effects and resource allocation. Both groups developed new methods to solve the
problems studied in polynomial time.
Stream 3 (dark blue) Inspired by the work of (Bai et al., 2012) studied the single-machine
group scheduling problem with deterioration and learning effects. They assumed that assign-
ments in the same group have general position-dependent and time-dependent learning
effects. The authors considered the problem of minimizing the total completion time in
two special cases and showed that it can still be solved in polynomial time. Lu (2012) studied
single-machine scheduling with learning effect and proposed two new learning models that
combine existing models through addition and multiplication. They proposed polynomial-
time algorithms for different objective functions, including minimizing the total completion
time, the makespan, and the hth power of completion times.
Yin (2012). studied a dual agent SMSP with assignable due dates. In their model, each
agent tries to minimize the completion time of its assigned job. The objective was to assign
each job a due date and a position in the sequence such that the weighted sum of the conﬂicting
goalsoftheagentsisminimized.Theyconductedcomplexityanalysisandsolvedtheproposed
problems for different combinations of maximum lateness time, total (weighted) lateness
time, and total (weighted) tardy jobs (Wu et al., 2013) also studied a two-agent SMSP with
job deterioration. The objective of this model was to minimize the weighted makespan of the
ﬁrst agent’s jobs while ensuring that the maximum lateness rate of the second agent adhered
to within an upper limit. The authors proved the model to be NP-hard and proposed several
sorting rules and a lower bound to develop a branch-and-bound algorithm. Furthermore, they
devised a Tabu algorithm to approximate the optimal solution.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Keyword clouds for the clusters
Yin (2015) introduced a new deterioration model considering time and position depen-
dence. They conﬁrmed that the problem of minimizing makespan can be solved in polynomial
time. The study further showed that an optimal schedule can be found with minimum, max-
imum, or V-shaped processing times, depending on the problem parameters. Finally, (Wang
& Wang, 2015b) explored SMSPs with precedence constraints while considering simple lin-
ear deterioration. The goal was to minimize the weighted sum of waiting times, where the
processing time of a job follows a simple linear function of its execution start time. They
proved that the general variant of the problem, as well as extensions for jobs with weak
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Keywords correlation diagram of Cluster I
(strong) parallel chains and series–parallel digraph precedence constraints, can all be solved
in polynomial time.
Overall, the aforementioned research covers problems such as deterioration and learning
effects, as well as dual agent SMSPs, and developed polynomial-time solution methods to
facilitate their industry applications. Given the advances in computational hardware, the
SMSP literature’s development in exact optimization may soon be used as a basis for exactly
solving more complex scheduling problems. In addition to the above streams, Lu (2015)
branched off from the main path by studying SMSPs with variable job processing times. To
minimize the makespan and the total completion time, they showed that the optimal schedule
exhibits a V-shaped property in terms of processing time for special cases. The study attracted
considerable attention, although most criticized its ﬁndings.
3.5 Prevailing themes
The CA approach identiﬁed a total of 23 major themes. The word clouds in Fig. 6 highlight
the keywords that appeared ﬁve times or more in each cluster, with yellow color (larger circle
sizes) indicating a higher frequency. The cluster (theme) name is determined by considering
the edge-betweenness measure for clustering the articles, the most frequently used keywords,
and the respective correlations within each cluster. The number of articles in the following
top clusters is 674, 300, 211, 168, and 140, respectively.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 Keywords correlation diagram of Cluster II
(I)
SMSPs with deterioration and/or learning effects.
(II)
Solution methods for SMSPs with various constraints.
(III)
Solving SMSPs involving maintenance variables and related constraints.
(IV) Advanced solution methods and constructive heuristics for minimizing tardiness.
(V)
Agent-based methods for single-machine scheduling.
The correlation among the keywords within each cluster is analyzed to identify the most
practical relationships and meaningful academic contributions. Figure 7 shows the keyword
correlations within the ﬁrst cluster that have two cores, deterioration, and the learning effect.
In this ﬁgure, the thickness of the paths indicates the strength of the link between the two
keywords. Important links in the ﬁrst cluster are observed from three points of view: the
problem of interest, the solution method, and the optimization objectives. Resource allocation
and due-date allocation exhibit the strongest link in case of the desired problem. Among the
methods, batching techniques and heuristic algorithms represent the strongest linkage. When
considering the objective function, the makespan and the total completion time stand out more
than others. The primary observation is that the ﬁrst cluster contains the main path, and the
keywords within this cluster are consistent with those from the MPA results.
The keyword correlation diagram of the second cluster in Fig. 8 shows that it possesses
several cores; no group of keywords exceeded 15 percent of the overall repetitions, implying
that the cluster cannot be adequately represented using a few keyword groups. The main
themes encompass branch and bound solution methods for solving SMSPs with different
constraints, like release date constraints, and optimization objectives such as earliness and
tardiness penalty cost, as well as delay penalty cost optimization. The second cluster contains
some of the articles located on the key-extension paths.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 9 Keywords correlation diagram of Cluster III
Fig. 10 Keywords correlation diagram of Cluster IV
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 11 Keywords correlation diagram of Cluster V
Figure 9 shows the keyword correlations within the third cluster. This cluster differs
from the ﬁrst two clusters by demonstrating a distinct focus on one keyword: "maintenance
activity" is identiﬁed as the main core of the third cluster, accounting for more than 40%
of the total relationships. The main keywords correlated with "maintenance activity" are
method-related, including heuristic algorithms, dynamic programming methods, branch and
bound methods, and genetic algorithms; these showed the most signiﬁcant interactions with
SMSPs that include maintenance variables.
The correlation diagrams of the last two clusters are presented in Figs. 10 and 11, respec-
tively. Cluster IV is formed around correlations between time-related factors, like tardiness,
and solution methods for solving the problem of interest. In contrast, the last cluster exhibits
correlations between agent-based methods and a wider range of scheduling features both in
terms of optimization objectives and operational constraints. Overall, the last cluster reﬂects a
more diverse literature compared to the other four clusters. An analysis of the growth trends
in these clusters shows that the third cluster is expected to continue its growth, while the
development of the other clusters is expected to reach the saturation stage in the coming
years.
4 Concluding remarks
This systematic review analyzed the main path of knowledge dissemination and seminal
development branches within the literature on SMSPs. By analyzing articles published after
123

Annals of Operations Research
1987, the study categorized the literature into different stages and themes of development.
Based on these categorizations, the review article discussed trajectories, growth trends, key
technologies, and practical features incorporated into SMSPs. The ﬁndings provided insight
and directions for future research.
When considering current research trends, it becomes clear that the aspects of learning and
deterioration effects, particularly in their relationships to group technology, have received
limited attention in the existing SMSP studies. These features should be thoroughly explored
in the context of SMSPs, taking into account various setup times, resource allocation, due
data assignments, and maintenance requirements. Total weighted tardiness (Bo˙zejko et al.,
2006; Wodecki, 2008) and the number of tardy jobs (Bo˙zejko et al., 2024) have been well
studied in the SMSPs literature. Developing parallel and quantum algorithms for SMSPs
considering novel optimization objectives, like energy consumption and workload balance is
another suggestion for future research. Additionally, there is room for further development
in the integration of uncertainty into SMSPs as well as multi-objective optimization. Fur-
thermore, it is essential to recognize the ongoing industrial transformation and the impact
of disruptive technologies in shaping new research directions within the SMSP literature.
To name a few, future studies may investigate the Internet of Things (IoT), digital twins,
5G, cyber security, blockchain, as well as Generative AI and their possible implications for
scheduling, particularly in the context of SMSPs. Although additive manufacturing-based
scheduling problems have received recent recognition among production research scholars
(Ying et al., 2022), this new scheduling domain remains underdeveloped, both in terms of
problem complexity and solution methodologies.
Our literature review is dedicated to SMSPs; future research may consider expanding the
scope of the review to draw a broader picture of scheduling theory and its milestones. In
addition, exploring the cross-research between scheduling theory and related ﬁelds, such as
supply chain and operations management, may shed light on new research ideas. Reviewing
real-world use cases and patents based on scheduling theory and its variants is another review
topic that will help bridge the gap between scheduling theories and practice. Finally, using
alternative big data analysis and learning methods may complement MPA in uncovering less
tangible aspects within the scheduling literature.
Author contributions Kuo-Ching Ying conceptualized the study and supervised it. Material preparation and
numerical analysis were performed by Tz-chi Huang. Investigations and writing the submitted manuscript
were done by Pourya Pourhejazy. All authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Funding Open access funding provided by UiT The Arctic University of Norway (incl University Hospital of
North Norway). The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received for the preparation
of this review article.
Data availability The raw/processed data required to reproduce these ﬁndings can be provided upon reasonable
request.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent to publish Not applicable.
Ethical approval. Not applicable.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Alidaee, B., & Womer, N. K. (1999). Scheduling with time dependent processing times: Review and extensions.
The Journal of the Operational Research Society, 50(7), 711. https://doi.org/10.2307/3010325
Bai, J., Li, Z.-R., & Huang, X. (2012). Single-machine group scheduling with general deterioration and learning
effects. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 36(3), 1267–1274. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2011.07.068
Bai, M., & Zhao, Y. (2020). A fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for total completion time mini-
mization on a single machine with DeJong’s learning effect and an availability constraint. Engineering
Optimization, 52(8), 1313–1322. https://doi.org/10.1080/0305215X.2019.1650922
Baker, K. R. (1974). Introduction to Sequencing and Scheduling. Wiley.
Biskup, D. (1999). Single-machine scheduling with learning considerations. European Journal of Operational
Research, 115(1), 173–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(98)00246-X
Bo˙zejko,W.,Grabowski,J.,&Wodecki,M.(2006).Blockapproach—Tabusearchalgorithmforsinglemachine
total weighted tardiness problem. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 50(1–2), 1–14. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cie.2005.12.001
Bo˙zejko, W., Pempera, J., Uchro´nski, M., & Wodecki, M. (2024). Quantum annealing-driven branch and
bound for the single machine total weighted number of tardy jobs scheduling problem. Future Generation
Computer Systems, 155, 245–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2024.02.016
Cheng, T., Wu, C., & Lee, W. (2008). Some scheduling problems with sum-of-processing-times-based and
job-position-based learning effects. Information Sciences, 178(11), 2476–2487. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ins.2008.02.002
Eren, T., & Güner, E. (2007). A bicriteria scheduling problem with a learning effect: Total completion time
and total tardiness. INFOR: Information Systems and Operational Research, 45(2), 75–81. https://doi.
org/10.3138/infor.45.2.75
Gao, W.-J., Huang, X., & Wang, J.-B. (2010). Single-machine scheduling with precedence constraints and
decreasing start-time dependent processing times. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, 46(1–4), 291–299. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-009-2089-5
Girvan, M., & Newman, M. E. J. (2002). Community structure in social and biological networks. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(12), 7821–7826. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.122653799
Graham, R. L., Lawler, E. L., Lenstra, J. K., & Kan, A. H. G. R. (1979). Optimization and approxima-
tion in deterministic sequencing and scheduling: a survey. In Annals of discrete mathematics (Vol. 5,
pp. 287–326). Elsevier.
Gupta, S. K., & Kyparisis, J. (1987). Single machine scheduling research. Omega, 15(3), 207–227. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0305-0483(87)90071-5
Hall, N. G., Kubiak, W., & Sethi, S. P. (1991). Earliness-tardiness scheduling problems, II: deviation of
completion times about a restrictive common due date. Operations Research, 39(5), 847–856. https://
doi.org/10.1287/opre.39.5.847
Hall, N. G., & Posner, M. E. (1991). Earliness-tardiness scheduling problems, I: weighted deviation of com-
pletion times about a common due date. Operations Research, 39(5), 836–846. https://doi.org/10.1287/
opre.39.5.836
He, H., Liu, M., & Wang, J.-B. (2017). Resource constrained scheduling with general truncated job-dependent
learning effect. Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 33(2), 626–644. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10878-
015-9984-5
Huang, X., & Wang, J.-J. (2015). Machine scheduling problems with a position-dependent deterioration.
Applied Mathematical Modelling, 39(10–11), 2897–2908. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2014.11.002
Huang, X., Wang, J.-B., & Wang, X.-R. (2010). A generalization for single-machine scheduling with dete-
riorating jobs to minimize earliness penalties. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, 47(9–12), 1225–1230. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-009-2242-1
123

Annals of Operations Research
Huang, X., Wang, M.-Z., & Wang, J.-B. (2011). Single-machine group scheduling with both learning effects
and deteriorating jobs. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 60(4), 750–754. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cie.2011.01.009
Hummon, N. P., & Dereian, P. (1989). Connectivity in a citation network: The development of DNA theory.
Social Networks, 11(1), 39–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-8733(89)90017-8
Janiak, A. (1987). One-machine scheduling with allocation of continuously divisible resource and with no
precedence constraints. Kybernetika, 23(4), 289–293.
Janiak, A. (1991). Single machine scheduling problem with a common deadline and resource dependent
release dates. European Journal of Operational Research, 53(3), 317–325. https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-
2217(91)90065-4
Janiak, A., & Li, C.-L. (1994). Scheduling to minimize the total weighted completion time with a constraint
on the release time resource consumption. Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 20(2), 53–58. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0895-7177(94)90206-2
Koulamas, C. (2010). The single-machine total tardiness scheduling problem: Review and extensions. Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research, 202(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2009.04.007
Koulamas, C., & Kyparisis, G. J. (2023). A classiﬁcation of dynamic programming formulations for ofﬂine
deterministic single-machine scheduling problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 305(3),
999–1017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2022.03.043
Kuo, W.-H., & Yang, D.-L. (2006). Single-machine group scheduling with a time-dependent learning effect.
Computers & Operations Research, 33(8), 2099–2112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2004.11.024
Lee, W.-C., Wu, C.-C., & Sung, H.-J. (2004). A bi-criterion single-machine scheduling problem with learning
considerations. Acta Informatica, 40(4), 303–315. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00236-003-0132-9
Li, C.-L. (1994). Scheduling with resource-dependent release dates—A comparison of two different
resource consumption functions. Naval Research Logistics, 41(6), 807–819. https://doi.org/10.1002/
1520-6750(199410)41:6%3c807::AID-NAV3220410609%3e3.0.CO;2-8
Li, C.-L., Sewell, E. C., & Cheng, T. C. E. (1995). Scheduling to minimize release-time resource consump-
tion and tardiness penalties. Naval Research Logistics, 42(6), 949–966. https://doi.org/10.1002/1520-
6750(199509)42:6%3c949::AID-NAV3220420607%3e3.0.CO;2-3
Liberati, A. (2009). The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies
that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration. Annals of Internal Medicine, 151(4),
W. https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00136
Liu, J. S., Lu, L. Y. Y., & Ho, M.H.-C. (2019). A few notes on main path analysis. Scientometrics, 119(1),
379–391. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-019-03034-x
Liu, W., & Jiang, C. (2020). Due-date assignment scheduling involving job-dependent learning effects and
convex resource allocation. Engineering Optimization, 52(1), 74–89. https://doi.org/10.1080/0305215X.
2019.1580705
Liu, W., Wang, X., Wang, X., & Zhao, P. (2021). Study on single-machine group scheduling with due-window
assignment and position-dependent weights. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, 2021, 1–8. https://
doi.org/10.1155/2021/2232696
Lu, Y.-Y., & Liu, J.-Y. (2018). A note on resource allocation scheduling with position-dependent workloads.
Engineering Optimization, 50(10), 1810–1827. https://doi.org/10.1080/0305215X.2017.1414207
Lu, Y.-Y., Wang, J.-J., & Huang, X. (2015). Scheduling jobs with position and sum-of-processing-time based
processing times. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 39(14), 4013–4021. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.
2014.12.021
Lu, Y.-Y., Wang, J.-B., Ji, P., & He, H. (2017). A note on resource allocation scheduling with group technology
and learning effects on a single machine. Engineering Optimization, 49(9), 1621–1632. https://doi.org/
10.1080/0305215X.2016.1265305
Lu, Y.-Y., Wei, C.-M., & Wang, J.-B. (2012). Several single-machine scheduling problems with general
learning effects. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 36(11), 5650–5656. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.
2012.01.022
Martinelli, R., Mariano, F. C. M. Q., & Martins, C. M. (2022). Single machine scheduling in make to order
environments: A systematic review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 169, 108190. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cie.2022.108190
Maxwell, W. L. (1964). The scheduling of single machine systems: A review∗. International Journal of
Production Research, 3(3), 177–199. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207546408943057
Mor, B. (2021). Single-machine lot scheduling with variable lot processing times. Engineering Optimization,
53(2), 321–334. https://doi.org/10.1080/0305215X.2020.1722119
Mor, B., & Mosheiov, G. (2021). A note on the single machine CON and CONW problems with lot scheduling.
Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 42(2), 327–338. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10878-021-00709-1
123

Annals of Operations Research
Mor, B., Mosheiov, G., & Shapira, D. (2021). Single machine lot scheduling with optional job-rejection.
Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 41(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10878-020-00651-8
Mosheiov, G. (1991). V-Shaped Policies for Scheduling Deteriorating Jobs. Operations Research, 39(6),
979–991. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.39.6.979
Mosheiov, G. (1994). Scheduling jobs under simple linear deterioration. Computers & Operations Research,
21(6), 653–659. https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-0548(94)90080-9
Mosheiov, G. (1995). Scheduling jobs with step-deterioration; Minimizing makespan on a single- and
multi-machine. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 28(4), 869–879. https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-
8352(95)00006-M
Mosheiov, G. (1996). -shaped policies to schedule deteriorating jobs. Journal of the Operational Research
Society, 47(9), 1184–1191. https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.1996.146
Mosheiov, G. (2001). Scheduling problems with a learning effect. European Journal of Operational Research,
132(3), 687–693. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(00)00175-2
Mosheiov, G., & Sidney, J. B. (2003). Scheduling with general job-dependent learning curves. European
Journal of Operational Research, 147(3), 665–670. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(02)00358-2
Rudek, R. (2017). The single machine total weighted completion time scheduling problem with the sum-of-
processing time based models: Strongly NP-hard. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 50, 314–332. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2017.05.034
Shen, P., Wei, C.-M., & Wu, Y.-B. (2012). A note on deteriorating jobs and learning effects on a single-
machine scheduling with past-sequence-dependent setup times. The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, 58(5–8), 723–725. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-011-3400-9
Vasilev, S. H., & Foote, B. L. (1997). On minimizing resource consumption with constraints on the makespan
and the total completion time. European Journal of Operational Research, 96(3), 612–621. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0377-2217(96)00095-1
Wang, J.-B., Gao, W.-J., Wang, L.-Y., & Wang, D. (2009a). Single machine group scheduling with general
linear deterioration to minimize the makespan. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, 43(1–2), 146–150. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-008-1667-2
Wang, J.-B., Huang, X., Wu, Y.-B., & Ji, P. (2012). Group scheduling with independent setup times, ready
times, and deteriorating job processing times. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, 60(5–8), 643–649. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-011-3639-1
Wang, J.-B., Jiang, Y., & Wang, G. (2009b). Single-machine scheduling with past-sequence-dependent setup
times and effects of deterioration and learning. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, 41(11–12), 1221–1226. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-008-1512-7
Wang, J.-B., & Liang, X.-X. (2019). Group scheduling with deteriorating jobs and allotted resource under
limited resource availability constraint. Engineering Optimization, 51(2), 231–246. https://doi.org/10.
1080/0305215X.2018.1454442
Wang, J.-B., Lin, L., & Shan, F. (2008). Single-machine group scheduling problems with deteriorating jobs.
The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 39(7–8), 808–812. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00170-007-1255-x
Wang, J.-J., & Liu, Y.-J. (2014). Single-machine bicriterion group scheduling with deteriorating setup times
and job processing times. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 242, 309–314. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.amc.2014.05.048
Wang, J.-B., & Sun, L. (2010). Single-machine group scheduling with linearly decreasing time-dependent
setup times and job processing times. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology,
49(5–8), 765–772. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-009-2444-6
Wang, J.-B., & Wang, J.-J. (2015a). Research on scheduling with job-dependent learning effect and convex
resource-dependent processing times. International Journal of Production Research, 53(19), 5826–5836.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2015.1010746
Wang, J.-B., & Wang, J.-J. (2015b). Single-machine scheduling problems with precedence constraints and
simple linear deterioration. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 39(3–4), 1172–1182. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.apm.2014.07.028
Wang, J.-B., Wang, L.-Y., Wang, D., & Wang, X.-Y. (2009c). Single-machine scheduling with a time-dependent
deterioration. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 43(7–8), 805–809.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-008-1760-6
Wang, W., Wang, J.-J., & Wang, J.-B. (2021). Solution algorithms for single-machine group scheduling with
learning effect and convex resource allocation. Complexity, 2021, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/
6615824
Wang, X.-R., & Wang, J.-J. (2013a). Single-machine scheduling with convex resource dependent processing
times and deteriorating jobs. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 37(4), 2388–2393. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.apm.2012.05.025
123

Annals of Operations Research
Wang, X.-Y., & Wang, J.-J. (2013b). Single-machine due date assignment problem with deteriorating jobs and
resource-dependent processing times. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology,
67(1–4), 255–260. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-013-4771-x
Wodecki, M. (2008). A branch-and-bound parallel algorithm for single-machine total weighted tardiness prob-
lem. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 37(9–10), 996–1004. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00170-007-1023-y
Wu, C.-C., & Lee, W.-C. (2003). Scheduling linear deteriorating jobs to minimize makespan with an availability
constraint on a single machine. Information Processing Letters, 87(2), 89–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0020-0190(03)00262-X
Wu, C.-C., Shiau, Y.-R., & Lee, W.-C. (2008). Single-machine group scheduling problems with deterioration
consideration. Computers & Operations Research, 35(5), 1652–1659. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2006.
09.008
Wu, W.-H., Xu, J., Wu, W.-H., Yin, Y., Cheng, I.-F., & Wu, C.-C. (2013). A tabu method for a two-agent single-
machine scheduling with deterioration jobs. Computers & Operations Research, 40(8), 2116–2127.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2013.02.025
Xu, Y.-T., Zhang, Y., & Huang, X. (2014). Single-machine ready times scheduling with group technology and
proportional linear deterioration. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 38(1), 384–391. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.apm.2013.05.064
Yang, S.-J. (2010). Single-machine scheduling problems with both start-time dependent learning and posi-
tion dependent aging effects under deteriorating maintenance consideration. Applied Mathematics and
Computation, 217(7), 3321–3329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2010.08.064
Yang, S.-J., & Yang, D.-L. (2010). Single-machine group scheduling problems under the effects of deterioration
and learning. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 58(4), 754–758. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2010.
02.006
Yin, N., Kang, L., & Wang, X.-Y. (2014). Single-machine group scheduling with processing times dependent
on position, starting time and allotted resource. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 38(19–20), 4602–4613.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2014.03.014
Yin, N., Wang, J.-B., Wang, D., Wang, L.-Y., & Wang, X.-Y. (2010). Deteriorating jobs and learning effects
on a single-machine scheduling with past-sequence-dependent setup times. The International Journal of
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 46(5–8), 707–714. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-009-2116-6
Yin, Y., Cheng, S.-R., Cheng, T. C. E., Wu, C.-C., & Wu, W.-H. (2012). Two-agent single-machine scheduling
with assignable due dates. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 219(4), 1674–1685. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.amc.2012.08.008
Yin, Y., Wu, W.-H., Cheng, T. C. E., & Wu, C.-C. (2015). Single-machine scheduling with time-dependent
and position-dependent deteriorating jobs. International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing,
28(7), 781–790. https://doi.org/10.1080/0951192X.2014.900872
Ying, K.-C., Fruggiero, F., Pourhejazy, P., & Lee, B.-Y. (2022). Adjusted Iterated Greedy for the optimization
of additive manufacturing scheduling problems. Expert Systems with Applications, 198, 116908. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.116908
Zhao, C., & Hsu, C.-J. (2019). Fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for single machine scheduling
with proportional-linear deteriorating jobs. Engineering Optimization, 51(11), 1938–1943. https://doi.
org/10.1080/0305215X.2018.1558446
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123