TITLE: Modelling and optimising switching on a physical binary sorter
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06903-2
---

ORIGINAL - OR MODELING/CASE STUDY
Received: 11 December 2024 / Accepted: 15 October 2025 / Published online: 3 February 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
 
 Josep Maria Salvia Hornos
josepmaria.salvia@udl.cat
Cèsar Fernández Camón
cesar.fernandez@udl.cat
Carles Mateu Piñol
carles.mateu@udl.cat
Joao Marques-Silva
joaopaulo.marques@udl.cat
Ivet Rafegas Fonoll
ivet.rafegas@bonarea.com
Josep Cirera Balcells
josep.cirera@bonarea.com
1 
Department of Computer Engineering and Digital Design, University of Lleida, Lleida, Spain
2 
Department of IT and Systems, Artificial Intelligence Division, Corporación Alimentaria 
Guissona S.A., Guissona, Spain
Modelling and optimising switching on a physical binary 
sorter
Josep Maria Salvia Hornos1,2
 · Cèsar Fernández Camón1
 · Carles Mateu Piñol1
 · 
Joao Marques-Silva1
 · Ivet Rafegas Fonoll2 · Josep Cirera Balcells2
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06903-2
Abstract
In this paper, we apply MaxSAT to a system built around a physical binary sorter that 
functions as a load balancer between warehouses. We study a sorter operating in real 
time on 4.5 million elements per year. The optimization task is to minimize the switching 
needed to route a sequence of elements, under an arbitrary binary function that constrains 
the achievable load balance. The case study is drawn from a company operating hundreds 
of such sorters, which are essential to its internal logistics. We examine the problem 
from both theoretical and practical perspectives: we present an online model, analyze its 
properties, and evaluate several implementations across different scenarios. Experiments 
show switching reductions of 63 and 48% for two problem variants in a partial informa­
tion setting.
Keywords  Combinatorial optimisation · MaxSAT · Operations research · Physical binary 
sorter
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
1  Introduction
In this work we present a novel problem in the field of operations research, specifically com­
binatorial optimisation (Cook et al., 1994) that we tackle with constraint programming. We 
name this problem the binary sorter minimization problem. This problem (and its variants) 
are based on a real-world optimisation use-case in a complex internal logistics network at a 
large, and vertically integrated, company in the food sector.
The physical layout of the problem can be visualized in Fig. 1. In it we see a binary 
sorter (represented by B, which should not be confused with a similar term in SAT/circuit 
contexts1). This binary sorter has to make a series of decisions (L or R) based on a sequence 
of items coming from its input on the right (represented with W).
Currently, these decisions are based on proportional rule mapping article types to targets 
(L or R). In order to fill the quotas of articles that must go to each destination, a binary sorter 
must switch the target. Switching is the binary sorter process of changing the target it is 
pointing at (L to R or vice-versa). The process of switching the target destination takes time, 
energy and an associated mechanical wear that we want to minimize.
The crux of the problem relies on the fact that we are not free to change the targets as 
desired, as we want to ensure the same articles reach both destinations (L and R) in exactly 
the same proportions as the original system, emulating the business rules more efficiently. 
That means that if the original routing system derived three articles of type A to direction L 
and two of type B to direction R, our new system has to uphold that property.
This problem is an online problem (Ascheuer et al., 1999) since we have to take deci­
sions that cannot be reconsidered at a later point in time. Moreover, in the deployment sce­
nario this is a real-time problem (Grötschel et al., 2001), since the decisions are to be taken 
with very low latency under the assumption that high computation times will also lead to a 
delay in the overall system.
This problem is particularly interesting due to its online properties. These systems work 
uninterrupted all the time, and the sequence of items that we know is coming to the binary 
sorter (also called window W) only provides the items of the next few minutes, forcing us to 
optimize the sequence without having the entire information upfront.
The combination of all of these properties (partial information, online problem, real-time 
problem, etc.) are usually under-reported in the literature, especially when considering opti­
mal (or almost optimal) solutions.
Although we will focus our case study on a particular physical binary sorter, the com­
pany in question has deployed hundreds of sorters in its factory logistics, so this problem is 
key in optimising operational efficiency of the routing network for the delivery of the boxes.
We motivate this research from the necessity of increasing the operational efficiency of 
the logistic system, whose performance has decreased over the past few years. This is, in 
part, due to the explosion in consumer demand for various niche products that has signifi­
cantly increased the number of stock-keeping units (SKUs) (Huggs, 2016) as a consequence 
1 In SAT and circuit contexts, a binary sorter is a construct or component used to sort binary variables or 
numbers, often implemented using sorting networks.
Fig. 1  Binary sorter representation, with a given width W 
placed before the sorter B that chooses between L and R
 
1 3
448

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
of an increase in online retailing (Tyrväinen and Karjaluoto, 2022; Singh and Rosengren, 
2020). Moreover, the logistics have received higher stress due to the desire to follow Just-
In-Time (JIT) manufacturing (Iijima et al., 1996). With this problem formulation we attempt 
to mitigate the impact from this and other inefficiencies.
In this work we investigate how to optimize an already existing system based on some 
weighted distribution Q, with the objective being to minimize the switching without chang­
ing the overall behaviour of the system.
This paper is a case study. All improvements are measured against the as-is policy Q run­
ning in production. We study both switching reduction and computational latency.
1.1  Relation to established optimisation problems
Our formulation relates to several classical models, but differs in decisive constraints or 
objective aspects:
Load balancing Standard load balancing minimizes deviation across machines (Ghomi 
et al., 2017; Azar, 2005). Switching between targets is assumed cost-free or a secondary 
objective. Here, switching is the primary objective, and feasibility requires exact per-type 
quotas.
Changeover minimization/paint-shop scheduling Changeover (Zhu and Wilhelm, 2006) 
or paint-shop problems (Spieckermann et al., 2004; Solnon et al., 2008) penalize color 
changes while meeting demand constraints. Those models permit job reordering, whereas 
the sequence is fixed in our case.
Binary segmentation/Potts labeling The Potts model (Wu, 1982) and related segmenta­
tion problems minimize label transitions along a chain. Our setting introduces hard per type 
quotas across scattered positions, which are absent in these models.
Packet switch scheduling with reconfiguration delay Scheduling in input-queued switches 
(Marsan et al., 2003) with setup costs penalizes reconfiguration. While the switch penalty is 
analogous, these problems address dynamic queueing systems with multiple input ports; our 
formulation is a single-stream two-output assignment with quota constraints.
1.2  Contributions and paper structure
In this paper we make a set of important contributions to the problem we study, both in 
understanding and in developing methods to exploit it. In Sect. 2 we formally define the 
problem in complete and incomplete information settings as well as present a complete set 
of formal definitions for our problem and optimisations techniques. In Sect. 3 we present an 
optimal solution for the case where all the information is known ahead of time (Sect. 3.1) 
and two different strategies in the online variant (Sect. 3.2). Then in Sect. 4 we explore the 
effect different objective functions have on the problem solution, exploring giving bigger 
weights to the head of the window (weight balancing) or a more subtle biasing technique 
(weight tipping). In Sect. 5 we benchmark our strategies against a recorded sequence of 
boxes and show an improvement in routing of up to 63% with minimal latency using Max­
SAT. And finally we conclude in Sect. 6.
1 3
449

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
2  Problem statement
The following definitions are used to formulate our target problem. Examples are provided 
after the initial definitions.
Definition 1  (Binary sorter instance) A binary sorter instance P is described with a tuple 
⟨A, S, Q, q0⟩, where:
 
●
A is a finite set of articles,
 
●
S = [s1, s2, . . . , sn] is a vector of elements from A, so si ∈A,
 
●
Q is an arbitrary function of the form Q : N −→M, where the domain corresponds to 
the indices of S and the codomain to the binary decisions of the sorter. Q represents the 
decisions currently taken in production,
 
●
q0 ∈M is the initial state of the sorter.
We refer to the binary domain as M = {L, R}. We use Q to denote the current policy in pro­
duction. Our goal is to produce an alternative D with lower switching, subject to the same 
per-article tallies. That is, D will need to respect the number of articles sent to each side.
For clarity, we will often view the function Q as a vector Q = [q1, q2, . . . , qn] of the same 
size as S, where each element corresponds to the application of Q to its index.
Definition 2  (Article positions) For a ∈A, let Ia = { i ∈{1, . . . , |S|} | si = a }.
Definition 3  (Decision vector) A decision vector D for an instance P is a vector 
D = [d1, d2, ..., dn] where di ∈M and has the same size as S, that is |D| = |S|.
Naturally, Q is also a decision vector.
Not all decision vectors are valid alternatives to Q, and this is considered in Definition 7.
Definition 4  (Decision count) The decision count V m
a , where m ∈M and a ∈A is an indi­
cator function that takes as an input a decision vector D for an instance P and describes the 
number of times the decision m has been chosen on article a. This can be formulated with 
partial function notation or indicator notation:
 
V m
a (D) =
∑
i∈Ia
{ 1
di = m
0
otherwise
=
∑
i∈Ia
1(di = m)
(1)
While the previous definitions established the structure of our decision vectors, we now 
need to quantify the cost associated with these decisions. This leads us to define how we 
measure the cost of switching between states:
Definition 5  (Switching cost) Given q0 ∈M and a decision vector D = (d1, . . . , d|S|), the 
switching cost is
1 3
450

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
 
cD = 1(q0 ̸= d1) +
|S|
∑
i=2
1(di−1 ̸= di).
If the context allows it, we will simply reference this cost as c without reference to D.
Example 1  An example for the definitions presented up to this point is presented in Fig. 2 
with a cost of 5. This sequence is of 9 elements, ordered left to right. The direction L and R 
of Q is the associated target of that element, and C is the cost of a decision for each element.
Definition 6  (Balanced decision vector) A decision vector D is balanced on article a ∈A 
for an instance P iff it sends the same number of articles to the same target as the original 
function Q. Formally, this is described as ∧
m∈M V m
a (D) = V m
a (Q).
Example 2  Taking Fig.  2 as reference, we can see that V L
A (Q) = 2; V R
A (Q) = 3; 
V L
B (Q) = 1; V R
B (Q) = 2; V L
C (Q) = 1; V R
C (Q) = 0.
Definition 7  (Valid decision vector) A decision vector D is valid for an instance P iff it is 
balanced for all articles present in S. It also follows that Q is a valid decision vector for P.
Example 3  Let’s take Fig. 2 as reference to explain the balance decision vector definition. 
We will take as an example the article B. This article has 2 boxes sent to R and 1 box sent 
to L. Following the definition a balanced decision vector must also follow this property. 
An alternative decision vector D for the problem presented in Fig. 2 is presented in Fig. 3. 
Notice the difference between the decision vector Q and D in the 3rd and 7th item of the 
sequences, as they swapped their directions, for a total cost of 3. This new solution is natu­
rally still valid, since the same number of articles B are sent to each side.
Definition 8  (Optimal decision vector) A decision vector D is optimal for an instance P iff 
it is valid and ̸ ∃D′ such that D′ is also valid with respect to P and cD′ < cD. In the right 
context we will refer to the cost by c and infer the decision vector.
Fig. 3  Optimal sequence D for 
the instance in Fig. 2
 
Fig. 2  Example instance with 
A = {A, B, C}, a sequence S 
with |S| = 9 and q0 = L. The 
values of the vectors are aligned 
in a grid
 
1 3
451

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
Example 4  The solution in Fig. 3 presents an optimal decision vector for the given problem. 
This can be formally verified with the methods we will present in the following sections.
Definition 9  (Binary sorter minimization problem) Given an instance P = ⟨A, S, Q, q0⟩, the 
binary sorter minimization problem asks us to find a decision vector D = [d1, d2, . . . , dn] 
such that:
 
●
D is valid, i.e., it preserves the same per-article counts on L and R as the production 
policy Q, and
 
●
the switching cost cD is minimized.
This is the full-information version, where S and Q are known in advance.
Terminology. We use instance for the data tuple and problem for the optimisation task; in 
captions and informal prose we may use problem or view loosely when the optimisation 
context is clear.
Definition 10  (Slice notation) For any vector X = [x1, . . . , xn] and indices u < v, we write 
X[u : v) for the half-open slice [xu, xu+1, . . . , xv−1].
Definition 11  (Sliding window instance) The binary sorter minimization instance P with 
a fixed optimisation window is described by the extended tuple ⟨A, S, Q, q0, W⟩, where 
W ∈N. Decisions are taken incrementally, constructing D one element at a time.
For each index i, we define the window subinstance Pi with sequence S[i:i + W) and 
the restriction of Q to those indices. Intuitively, this is a sliding window of size W over P; at 
each step we fix di having access to all previous elements.
In a fixed window context, given a sequence of |S| elements there are |S| −W + 1 binary 
sorter minimization subinstances Pi. We reduce the window near the end to flush the tail.
Example 5  (Sliding window) In Fig. 4 we see an example of a sliding window view with a 
highlighted part of the current view of the current subinstance Pi, and the elements already 
decided upon marked with grey.
Definition 12  (Sliding window minimization) Given P = ⟨A, S, Q, q0, W⟩, produce 
D = [d1, . . . , dn] sequentially. At step i you fix di using only the prefix S[1 : i) and the win­
dow S[i:i + W) (with the corresponding entries of Q). Minimize the final switching cost cD 
subject to the global validity constraints. No optimality is required at the per-window level 
since not all the information is known upfront.
Fig. 4  Example of a sliding win­
dow view. i is the current ele­
ment, with a view of [i, i + W). 
Grey shows elements already 
decided whose index is smaller 
than i. In purple we see elements 
not yet in view of the current 
view
 
1 3
452

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
Definition 13  (Timed Window instance) The binary sorter minimization instance P in a 
timed setting is described with the tuple ⟨A, S, Q, q0, E, O⟩. Here, each ei ∈E is the time­
stamp when element si enters the sequence, and each oi ∈O is the timestamp when its 
decision di is made. At time oi, the eligible indices are { j | ej ≤oi } and the active window 
is { j | ej ≤oi ∧oj ≥oi }.
The timestamps E and O follow two natural rules:
Temporal consistency An item cannot be decided before it arrives, so oi ≥ei.
Sequential consistency Items come in order and are processed in order, meaning 
ei−1 ≤ei and oi−1 ≤oi.
A sliding window instance can be expressed as a special case of this timed window 
formulation, but not the other way around. For that reason, we will sometimes refer to the 
timed window problem as the variable window size or real-time version.
Example 6  (Timed window) Consider Fig. 5. Each element j arrives at time ej and has an 
assigned decision time oj. We are at the current item i with ei = 3 and oi = 7 (marked). 
The long bracket highlights the eligible prefix { j | ej ≤oi }. Within that prefix, the short 
bracket highlights the active window { j | ej ≤oi ∧oj ≥oi }, i.e., items that have arrived 
but whose own decisions have not yet been fixed relative to oi. Items with oj ≤oi are 
already fixed (left shaded block), and items with ej ≥oi have not yet entered the window 
(right shaded block).
Definition 14  (Timed window minimization) Given P = ⟨A, S, Q, q0, E, O⟩, at each deci­
sion time oi fix di using only indices j with ej ≤oi (and their Q values). Minimize the 
final switching cost cD subject to global validity. Problem 12 is the special case with fixed 
lookahead W and synchronous arrivals.
2.1  Optimisation preliminaries
The following definitions are provided as a reference of various paradigm solving solvers 
and strategies. They are only intended to contextualize the reader. For a more detailed treat­
ment of these subjects the reader is referred for example to Rossi et al. (2006).
Fig. 5  Timed window with 
arrivals E and decision times 
O. At the current item with 
ei = 3 and oi = 7, the long 
bracket marks the eligible prefix 
{j | ej ≤oi} and the short 
bracket marks the active window 
{j | ej ≤oi ∧oj ≥oi}. Left 
shading indicates elements 
already fixed (oj ≤oi); right 
shading indicates elements not 
yet in the window (ej ≥oi)
 
1 3
453

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
Definition 15  (Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF)) Conjunctive Normal Form (CNF) Sobo­
lev (2002) is a way of structuring logical formulas in Boolean algebra. A formula is in CNF 
if it is a conjunction of one or more clauses, where each clause is a disjunction of literals, 
and a literal is either a variable or the negation of a variable. Formally, a CNF formula can 
be represented as:
 
(l11 ∨l12 ∨· · · ) ∧(l21 ∨l22 ∨· · · ) ∧· · · ,
(2)
where lij represents the j-th literal in the i-th clause.
Definition 16  (Satisfiability (SAT)) The Satisfiability (SAT) problem Li and Manya (2021) 
asks whether there exists an assignment to the Boolean variables of a Boolean formula such 
that all its clauses are satisfied. In practice, SAT is usually defined over CNF formulas.
Definition 17  (Hard and soft clauses) In the context of optimization variants of SAT, clauses 
are divided into two groups. Hard clauses must always be satisfied, while soft clauses may 
be violated at a certain cost. Hard clauses can be regarded as soft clauses with infinite 
weight.
Definition 18  (Weighted partial MaxSAT) Let V be a finite set of Boolean variables and 
consider a CNF formula with hard clauses H and soft clauses S; each soft clause Ci ∈S has 
a positive weight wi (Battiti and Protasi, 1998).
Given an assignment x : V →{0, 1}, let 1(C(x) = 1) denote the indicator that clause C 
is satisfied under x. The problem is
 
min
x
:
∑
i∈S
wi 1(Ci(x) = 0)
s.t.
Cj(x) = 1
∀j ∈H
Definition 19  (Pseudo-Boolean and cardinality constraints) Let U = {l1, . . . , ln} be liter­
als over Boolean variables, each identified with its 0/1 truth value. A pseudo-Boolean (PB) 
constraint is of the form
 
∑
li∈U
ai li ▷◁b,
ai ∈N, b ∈Z≥0, ▷◁∈{≤, =, ≥},
where a cardinality constraint is the special case ai = 1 for all i. We can encode these con­
straints into CNF using standard methods (Sinz, 2005; Bailleux and Boufkhad, 2003; Eén 
and Sörensson, 2006; Marques-Silva and Lynce, 2007).
1 3
454

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
3  Modelling the problem
3.1  Binary sorter minimization problem
At a high level, the optimal decision sequence D for a binary sorter minimization problem 
P can be found by solving the following optimisation problem with the set of variables 
⟨C, D⟩, whose indices are relative to the elements of sequence S of the problem P:
 
min :
|S|
∑
j=1
cj 
(3)
 
∧
1≤j≤|S|
cj = (dj ̸= dj−1)

(4)
 
∧
a∈A
∧
m∈M
V m
a (Q) =
∑
i∈Ia
1 (di = m)

(5)
Where we assume d0 = q0, variables C,  D refer to cost vector and the decision vector 
associated with the solution respectively. Since Q is known a priori, V m
a (Q) is statically 
evaluated to a constant. Equation 4 describes the cost of a decision, while Eq. 5 imposes the 
constraints to ensure a valid solution. This formulation is designed while ignoring the binary 
nature of the function Q and assumes that an equality comparison naturally maps over to 
binary and can be summed over in Eq. 5.
It should be natural to the reader a decision vector D as a result of the optimisation prob­
lem is a valid decision vector; since that is taken care of by Eq. 5. Moreover, an optimal 
decision vector D for this problem is also an optimal decision vector for the problem P.
3.1.1  MaxSAT reduction
This problem can be reduced to MaxSAT with the help of cardinality constraints. For 
this reduction we will assume L = False; R = True. Equation 4 can be reduced to 
∧
1≤j≤|S|
cj = dj ⊕dj−1, where ⊕ is the XOR operator. We encode cj = dj ⊕dj−1 with the 
standard Tseitin gadget encoding (4 clauses).
We reduce Eq. 5 to ∧
a∈A
∑
i∈Ia ¬di = V L
a (Q). This encoding is valid because the func­
tion Q is of a binary codomain; since we are dealing with strict equalities, this leaves the 
underlying equations with |M| −1 degrees of freedom, so we only need to solve consider­
ing one of the sides of the equations, which halves the number of constraints necessary. 
The objective function can be naturally mapped to Partial MaxSAT with unitary clauses or 
transformed to Weighted Partial MaxSAT by setting the weight of those clauses to 1.
1 3
455

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
3.2  Sliding window problem
The sliding window problem is quite different than the non-sliding version, since in this case 
we are forced to make decisions without having all the information upfront.
In order to optimize over a sliding window problem we propose two different strategies. 
Assuming we have a fixed window problem P, this problem can be optimised by either: 
1. Optimisation by blocks In this strategy we solve 
⌊|S|
W
⌋
 subproblems, each of those 
problems Pi is composed of a sequence of articles of slice W, disregarding sj | j < i. 
Those problems are then solved as described in Sect. 3.1. This is done by only solving 
the problem at (i = 0 mod W), and concatenating the resulting decision vectors as the 
result of the optimisation of these subproblems.
Example 7  If we were to apply this optimisation strategy to the example in Fig. 4, we would 
set the elements on range [i, i + W) as final, and choose the decision vector D as an alter­
native to the decision vector Q. An example of the ranges of the subproblems is shown in 
Fig. 6.
2. Fluid optimisation This strategy encodes each problem individually, taking only the 
decision di at each step as final and appending to an iteratively created decision vector 
D. In order for the final decision vector D to be valid, we cannot simply re-encode each 
one of these problems as described in Sect. 3.1, since the case di ̸= qi forces a negative 
carry of the side qi (and a positive carry on side di). In order to fix this difference, we 
accumulate this carry manually on ∆m
a , redefining Eq. 5 as: 
 
∧
a∈A
∧
m∈M
V m
a (Q[i:i + W)) + ∆m
a =
∑
j ∈Ia
i ≤j < i + W
1 (dj = m)

(6)
At the end of each optimisation problem, we will update ∆m
a . We will update ∆di
a by -1 and 
∆qi
a by 1. Notice that if di = qi no change will take effect.
As previously discussed, when reducing to MaxSAT we do not need to track both sides, 
as there is only one degree of freedom; so we collapse the tracking to δL
a .
We track a single accumulator per article,
 
δL
a := V L
a (Q[1:i)) −V L
a (D[1:i)),
(7)
Fig. 6  Example of the problem distribution for the optimisation by blocks strategy on a fixed window 
problem with W = 4
 
1 3
456

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
so δL
a > 0 means a debt to the left and δL
a < 0 means a debt to the right. We update it as 
follows:
 
δL
a := δL
a +
{ 0
if qi = di
1
if qi ̸= di ∧di = R
−1
if qi ̸= di ∧di = L

(8)
And we update the left hand side in Eq. 6 to V L
a (Q[i:i + W)) + δL
a .
Lemma 1  (Correctness of the fluid update rule) Let P be a sliding window binary sorter 
minimization problem and let δL
a be updated at step i by the update rule in Eq. 8.
At every step i this debt is repayable: there exist at least |δL
a | future occurrences of article 
a in the undecided part of S whose decision in Q is opposite to the side of the debt, so that a 
valid completion of D is always possible.
Proof  We proceed by induction on i.
Base case. For i = 1, δL
a = 0 by initialization, and both Q[1 : 1) and D[1 : 1) are empty, 
hence (7) holds.
Inductive step. Assume (7) holds for index i. When setting di:
 
●
If di = qi, then both counts V L
a (Q[1:i + 1)) and V L
a (D[1:i + 1)) change equally (either 
both increment by 1 if di = L and a = si, or both stay unchanged otherwise). The dif­
ference is preserved and (8) leaves δL
a unchanged.
 
●
If qi = L, di = R and a = si, then V L
a (Q[1:i + 1)) increases by 1 while V L
a (D[1:i + 1)) 
does not. The difference increases by 1, and the rule increments δL
a accordingly.
 
●
If qi = R, di = L and a = si, then V L
a (D[1:i + 1)) increases by 1 while V L
a (Q[1:i + 1)) 
does not. The difference decreases by 1, and the rule decrements δL
a accordingly.
In all cases, the equality (7) is preserved for i + 1.
Repayability. From (7), if δL
a > 0 then D has sent δL
a fewer copies of a to L than Q did so 
far. Since the solution D obeys the updated Eq. 6 there are at least |δL
a | remaining a in the 
undecided suffix of S so we can repay the debt. The case δL
a < 0 is symmetric. 
□
Example 8  (Fluid optimisation) Figure 7 illustrates three consecutive problems Pi−1, Pi, Pi+1 
for W = 4. All δ counters are initially 0. Only the elements that leave or enter the window 
contribute to the update, while the overlap cancels. The figure annotates how the counters 
change at each step: a decrement when an si−1 leaves (that is, when when di−1 becomes 
fixed), no change when the si is finalised, and a restoration when the next A in si+1 leaves. 
The example update rules assume that further optimisations do not update the element i + 1 
on vector D on Pi+1.
These presented definitions assume a fixed window problem P. It is perfectly possible to 
extend the strategies to the variable window size problem. For the optimisation by blocks 
strategy, at each oi we would ask if the element i is present in the last solved optimisation, if 
1 3
457

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
not, re-optimize with a window of available elements that have not left already. The sliding 
window version is easier to visualize, since we are forced to optimize each subproblem at 
oi anyways.
The two presented strategies have tradeoffs, since the optimisation by blocks strategy 
requires less computation and is therefore faster. Additionally, it has the added benefit of 
allowing instantaneous responses every W −1 elements of the sequence, since they are 
precomputed.
It should be natural to the reader that the fluid optimisation strategy leads to less switch­
ing than the optimisation by blocks. In fact, we can prove that this is always the case:
Lemma 2  Fluid optimisation over a sequence of items has less or equal switching cost 
compared with block optimisation.
We are going to present an intuitive argument that prove this and a proof of this fact:
Intuitive argument One way to see this fact is to visualize it iteratively. Imagine a sequence 
S in a variable sized problem. If no other elements are added to the sequence, no improve­
ment will be possible to the decision vector, since we already have found the optimum; so 
the switching cost will simply be the associated cost cD. Therefore, adding new elements is 
a requisite to improve the switching cost.
Furthermore, if this sequence S gets broken down into subsequences, each optimised 
optimally, this is going to be at best as good as optimising the global problem. This should 
be intuitively true to the reader, since optimising a global problem can always yield better 
results than optimising sub-problems and combining their results (although this may be 
computationally harder).
Proof Sketch When we optimize in blocks of size W, at each iteration of the optimisation 
procedure we decide the direction of the next W elements. Meanwhile, the fluid optimisa­
tion strategy we only decide on the direction of 1 element. Therefore, the fluid optimisation 
strategy has the ability to reconsider on the next W −1 directions as the next optimisations 
iterations are performed. In the worst case, no improvement will be found while reconsider­
ing, yielding a solution with the same switching cost as block optimisation. In the best case, 
the cost can be further reduced, improving the switching beyond block optimisation. 
□
Example 9  (Fluid vs. block) Figure 8 contrasts disjoint blocks with a sliding window at 
width W = 4 on eight items. Rows show items S, the block solution D with per–item costs 
Fig. 7  Example of the prob­
lem distribution for the fluid 
optimisation strategy on a fixed 
window problem with W = 4 
with three subproblems and their 
effect on δ
 
1 3
458

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
cD, and the fluid update D′ with costs cD′. Block optimises P1 = [1, 4] and P2 = [5, 8] 
independently, so it cannot couple the boundary (4|5); hence the costs shown in cD persist 
across the cut. A single fluid window P4 = [4, 7] straddles the cut and re-optimises over the 
overlap, yielding the updated decisions D′ and the costs cD′. When the fluid strategy solves 
P5, a new switch will be required for the new item C, for a total cost cD′ = 4, which is an 
improvement from the block strategy of cD = 6.
4  Heuristic objective alternatives
The fluid optimisation scheme provides good performance across the sequence, but it 
remains limited by its local scope. At each step only the immediate element is optimised, 
with no possibility of revisiting past assignments. If the sequence were known in advance, 
the problem could be solved globally as a binary sorter minimisation problem. Since this is 
not the case, we explore heuristic modifications of the optimisation objective that bias the 
solver toward more desirable local behaviours while preserving the same overall target. All 
objectives in this section are interpreted at step i and S refers to the current visible window.
4.1  Weight balancing
A first class of heuristics introduces position-dependent weights on the first k elements of 
the window:
 
min :
|S|
∑
j=i
cj +
min(k+i−1,|S|)
∑
j=i
wjcj.
(9)
The choice of wj changes the optimisation trajectory by favouring stability at the start of the 
window. Choices of wj bias the optimisation differently:
Quadratic
Fig. 8  Block (P1, P2) versus 
fluid (P4) at W = 4. Rows: S, 
block decision D with costs cD, 
and fluid decision D′ with costs 
cD′. The fluid window crosses 
the block boundary (4|5) and re­
duces the total cost, while blocks 
cannot modify that overlap
 
1 3
459

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
 
min :
|S|
∑
j=i
cj +
min(k+i−1,|S|)
∑
j=i
(k −(j −i))2cj,
(10)
which strongly penalises early switches, promoting long runs near the head but risking over-
constraint in highly alternating inputs.
Linear
 
min :
|S|
∑
j=i
cj +
min(k+i−1,|S|)
∑
j=i
(k −(j −i))cj,
(11)
a moderate bias that balances initial stability with solver flexibility.
Constant.
 
min :
|S|
∑
j=i
cj +
min(k+i−1,|S|)
∑
j=i
cj,
(12)
a uniform penalty over the prefix. This objective formulation is also desirable since it leads 
to an unweighted problem.
4.2  Weight tipping
A second class of heuristics does not only bias the prefix, but also amplifies the weight of 
the entire sequence. The objective becomes
 
min :
min(k+i−1,|S|)
∑
j=i
cj + α ·
|S|
∑
j=i
cj
(13)
where α ≥2 controls the degree of global emphasis. This tipping scheme pushes the solver 
to simultaneously reduce the overall number of switches while preferring stability at the 
start of the window. Larger values of α strengthen the pressure on global optimisation, while 
smaller values increase the relative influence of the prefix term.
Tie-breaker as special case. When k = 1 the scheme reduces to the following tie-
breaker objective:
 
min : ci + 2 ·
|S|
∑
j=i
cj
(14)
Notice that the value of α can be ignored, since the objective formula is hierarchical in 
nature, so we can assume α = 2. This variant is particularly suited to the fluid scheme, since 
the first element of the window cannot be revisited. It ensures that whenever possible, the 
solver extends the current run without sacrificing the global minimisation target.
1 3
460

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
Lemma 3  The fluid strategy with the tie-breaker improvement must result in a cost that is 
lower or equal to applying the fluid strategy without the tie-breaker optimisation.
This should be natural to the reader, since the cost with the tie-breaker is not bigger than 
without the strategy, since every solution with the tie-breaker optimisation function is a 
valid solution for the fluid strategy.
Example 10  (Weight–tipping tie–breaker) Figure 9 contrasts standard fluid (D) with fluid 
plus tie–breaker (D′) at W = 4. On the left (P1) both attain the same window cost, but the 
tie–breaker flips the first item (D chooses R, D′ chooses L) to reduce the heavier side at 
the right boundary; the per–item costs in cD and cD′ are equal. After the slide to P3 (right 
panel), that conservative choice pays off: D′ yields a cheaper boundary and a strictly smaller 
cumulative cost. The intermediate window P2 is not represented, as its decision concerns a 
B and there is no other B inside the window, so its effect is negligible.
5  Experimentation
We implemented the MaxSAT versions following the strategy by blocks and fluid versions.
To test our implementations we were able to extract a benchmark from a food manufac­
turing company that is vertically integrated and owns all of its internal logistics equipment 
and processes. This company has hundreds of binary sorters in their logistics chains. For this 
case study we will focus on a particular binary sorter that has an approximate annual influx 
of over 4.5 million elements continuously through 24 h.
Fig. 9  Fluid with and without a weight–tipping tie–breaker at W = 4. Left: P1, equal window cost but 
different decision at i = 1 (tie–breaker points left). Right: P3, the earlier tie resolution leaves a lighter 
boundary and lowers the cumulative cost for D′; cD′ clears prior ones while cD does not
 
1 3
461

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
5.1  Setup
We recorded data from the sequence for a week. Due to most of the items going through 5 
AM and 4 PM from Monday to Friday, we decided to split our dataset into 5 different simu­
lations, one for each day of the week resetting at midnight.
To help with applicability and transparency in our research, we have published the data­
set through IEEE Dataport (Salvia Hornos et al. 2024), making replication and future exper­
imentation possible.
We executed the simulations on an Intel i7-1165G7. The memory requirements were 
negligible. To compute the efficiency improvements, we compared the percentage dif­
ference between the optimisation provided by the respective strategies to the number of 
switches (cQ) required by the original function Q. All subproblems were solved to optimal­
ity without time limit.
5.2  Solvers
Choosing solvers for this kind of problem is difficult, since the problem has very low latency 
requirements in order to not stop the conveyor belt. For this reason, we had to choose solv­
ers with native Python bindings, since from our experiments other forms of communication 
(pipes, I/O, etc) are too slow and require encoding and parsing the problems or could require 
process spawning.
For MaxSAT we chose RC2 (Ignatiev et al. 2019) available through PySAT2 (Ignatiev 
et al. 2018), a Linear Search SAT-UNSAT (Morgado et al. 2013) version with ITotalizer 
(Martins et al. 2014) also through PySAT.
We additionally tested with EvalMaxSAT3 (Avellaneda 2023), UWrMaxSat4 (Piotrów 
2020), Open-WBO5 (OLL algorithm) and Open-WBO (PartMSU3 algorithm) Martins et 
al. (2014). Testing these solvers required the development of custom python MaxSAT bind­
ings, since most MaxSAT solvers are not developed from the ground up with a reusable API 
in mind (with the exception of EvalMaxSAT and partially Open-WBO OLL). This solver 
selection ensures we cover LSU, OLL (Morgado et al. 2014) and MSU (Marques-Silva and 
Planes 2008) families of complete algorithms.
All solvers were run with default configuration out of the box. We want to point out that 
Open-WBO PartMSU3 may fall back to MSU3 when partitioning fails to produce meaning­
ful groups or would be invalid, as per the original Open-WBO source code. Due to really 
bad performance on EvalMaxSAT, we considered multiple parameters and ended up with a 
slightly more favorable configuration than default with multi-core strategy disabled.
2 PyPi version: version 1.8.dev19.
3 Commit identifier: aabaefd.
4 Commit identifier: 230faa1.
5 Commit identifier: 80f3073.
1 3
462

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
5.3  Dataset
The dataset is mostly raw data (with anonymized item identifiers and timestamps). With the 
only meaningful preprocessing of removing duplicated item signals and boundary condi­
tions (items in boundary days).
The average input–output time varies per binary sorter (defined as the average oi −ei) of 
the company, and the window size available is also a variable of each sorter and the overall 
logistics infrastructure. For this reason, we consider the problem from the data of a single 
binary sorter. We analyze the experiments from a fixed window and variable window points 
of view. This can give us an idea of how the algorithm scales with the available information 
in the system.
A summary table with the size of the sequences, the cost of the original function Q, the 
average cost per item in the sequence and the total number of different articles can be found 
in Table 1.
5.4  Results
We executed our simulator with our implementations and averaged the results per day. 
Because the fluid optimisation strategy depends on compensating the decisions made on 
some items with others seen later in the sequence, we need to consider the entire deci­
sion vector for the sequence, including the tail. For this reason, on the fixed window size 
problem we exceptionally reduce the window size at the end of the simulation to allow 
for the remaining items in the sequence to exit the binary sorter. Each day is optimised 
independently.
Before we test at different window sizes and in a timed window context, we experi­
mented to identify the optimal heuristic strategy to solve the problem. The comparison of 
the different weight balancing strategies can be found on Fig. 10. We can see that both 
constant and linear strategies improve over the standard objective. We strategically ran the 
experiments at W = 50.
Following those results, we compared the constant objective with the weight tipping 
objectives at various α values. Figure 11 presents the results. As previously discussed, at 
k = 1 (tie-breaker) it is particularly effective. However, the graph shows empirically that 
setting k > 1 seems reasonably more effective, with the constant objective being the one 
that presents the most improvement.
Following the previous results, we ran all of the following studies strictly either on the 
block strategy, the fluid standard strategy or the fluid constant strategy (both fluid variants 
with real-time variants). All of these variants are unweighted MaxSAT problems.
In Fig. 12 we can see the improvement in switching of the various strategies. There are 
three main curves: one for the block optimisation, one for the fluid optimisation (fixed win­
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
|S|
19122
18688
18584
18655
20320
cQ
6788
6831
6363
6270
6258
cQ/|S|
0.35
0.37
0.34
0.34
0.31
|A|
170
150
153
168
187
Max window
72
70
77
76
75
Mean window
35.43
36.45
35.75
37.58
40.12
Table 1  Summary of the bench­
mark used
 
1 3
463

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
dow size) and another one of the the fluid real-time optimisation (variable window size). 
The constant weight balancing objective with k = 5 has been implemented for both fluid 
versions since implementing it on the block strategy would not lead to an improvement. The 
variable window size version cannot be directly studied at multiple window sizes, so what 
we do is cap the window size at a certain maximum, optimising over a variable window size 
of a maximum length.
The fluid implementation significantly outperforms the block implementation in terms 
of efficiency, with a gap that grows from a few to 10 percentage points as the window size 
increases. This intuitively makes sense, as an increase in the size of the window gives more 
Fig. 11  Improvement of the weight tipping strategy compared with standard and constant objectives
 
Fig. 10  Improvement of the different weight balancing strategies compared with standard objective
 
1 3
464

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
room for the optimisation to work. It is trivial to prove that a bigger window size in the fluid 
strategy will always lead to the same or higher efficiencies.
We can also observe a non trivial improvement in efficiency due to the constant weight 
balancing objective of a few percentages points for both the fixed window size and variable 
window size versions.
In Fig. 13 we see a performance comparison of the previously discussed complete Max­
SAT solvers when running under different window size the constant weight balancing objec­
tive with k = 5. Time is reported in average time per MaxSAT solver call in wall-time 
seconds. Surprisingly, the solvers do show a significant difference in their performance 
profile. Among the surprising results, OpenWBO OLL performs better than OpenWBO 
PartMSU3 implementation on this specific problem, even though PartMSU3 is the default 
OpenWBO strategy for unweighted problems. On top of that, it is also interesting to see that 
older, simpler strategies (like RC2 or LSU) outperform more recent MaxSAT solvers like 
UWrMaxSAT or EvalMaxSAT.
We attribute the discrepancy of these results to the optimisation of complete MaxSAT 
solvers to bigger and more complex instances, which require different techniques, heuristics 
and preprocessing than those in a low-latency scenario.
From a theoretical perspective, it would also be interesting to study the efficiency of 
these solutions against the optimal, assuming we know the entire sequence ahead of time, 
even though that would not have practical applications. However, the exponential nature of 
the problem makes the optimisation totally intractable after a few hundred boxes in window 
size. For reference, we were able to compute an average improvement of around 67.2% 
for the block implementation at a window size of 200, however, this was beyond the time 
budget for a real-world implementation, and the improvement seems to plateau after that.
Fig. 12  Switching improvement of the various strategies
 
1 3
465

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
6  Conclusions and future work
In this work we presented a novel problem we refer to as the binary sorter minimization 
problem, and presented three variants on it, one with all the information upfront, and two 
with incoming information in an online setting, with either a static window size W and or 
a variable one.
Beyond the specific improvement in switching costs studied in this paper, the improve­
ments of this paper had effects in resolving a specific logistic bottleneck in this manu­
facturing company. Internally, this allowed them to see the impact this bottleneck had on 
production holding (also called palletization). Moreover, resolving this bottleneck in the 
production pipeline highlighted other throughput issues on the warehouses that are down­
stream of the studied problem.
We presented an optimal solution for the variant with all the information upfront and two 
different strategies to solve the online variants. We test our algorithms with implementations 
in MaxSAT with state of the art solvers and benchmark them on an industrial dataset of real-
world data. With our experiments we show a significant reduction in switching by about 
63% for the static window size problem and 48% for the variable window size problem.
As future work we want to consider new strategies for solving the online variants and 
pose new ways to improve the efficiency of our encodings. On top of that, we think that fur­
ther research is possible in MaxSAT algorithms and implementations that are more suitable 
for real-time online applications.
We also leave as future work studying an approach leveraging Machine Learning to the 
current problems. Being able to predict future elements of the sequence S from past ele­
ments may allow us to formulate more efficient decision vectors. This could be naturally 
leveraged by a Reinforcement Learning approach.
Fig. 13  Performance of the MaxSAT solvers on a logarithm scale
 
1 3
466

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
Moreover, some of the other binary sorters of the company may have access to an 
unsorted vector of future elements that will later appear in the ordered window. We leave as 
future work exploring the properties of this problem.
Acknowledgements  We want to thank Alexey Ignatiev for answering questions regarding the RC2 MaxSAT 
solver.
Author contributions  Josep Maria Salvia Hornos—Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Fund­
ing acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software, Validation, Visualization, 
Writing—original draft, Writing—review and editing. Cèsar Fernández Camón & Carles Mateu Piñol—
Methodology, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing – review and editing. Joao Marques-Silva—Meth­
odology, Writing—review and editing. Ivet Rafegas Fonoll and Josep Cirera Balcells—Conceptualization, 
Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Writing—review and editing.
Funding  Open Access funding provided thanks to the CRUE-CSIC agreement with Springer Nature. 
Josep Maria Salvia Hornos reports funding from Generalitat de Catalunya AGAUR DI-2024-00020. 
Cèsar Fernández reports funding by the Spanish MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/, FEDER, UE in 
project IDs PID2022-138564OA-I00 and PID2022-137971OB-I00. Carles Mateu reports that this work 
was partially funded by the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación - Agencia Estatal de Investigación (AEI) 
(PID2021-123511OB-C31- MCIN/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033/FEDER, UE and RED2022-134219-T).
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors have no conflict of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this 
article.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ascheuer, N., Grötschel, M., Krumke, S.O., Rambau, J. (1999). Combinatorial online optimization. In Oper­
ations Research Proceedings 1998: Selected Papers of the International Conference on Operations 
Research Zurich, August 31–September 3, 1998, Springer. pp. 21–37. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​6​
4​2​-​5​8​4​0​9​-​1​_​2​
Avellaneda, F. (2023). Evalmaxsat 2023. MaxSAT Evaluation 2022: Solver and Benchmark Descriptions, 
12–13. http://hdl.handle.net/10138/347396
Azar, Y. (2005). On-line load balancing. Online algorithms: the state of the art, 178–195. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​0​0​7​/​B​F​b​0​0​2​9​5​6​9​
Bailleux, O., & Boufkhad, Y. (2003). Efficient CNF encoding of Boolean cardinality constraints. In Interna­
tional conference on principles and practice of constraint programming, pp. 108–122. Springer
Battiti, R., & Protasi, M. (1998). Approximate algorithms and heuristics for max-sat. Handbook of Combina­
torial Optimization, 1–3, 77–148.
Cook, W.J., Cunningham, W.H., Pulleyblank, W.R., & Schrijver, A. (1994). Combinatorial optimization. 10, 
75–93.
Eén, N., & Sörensson, N. (2006). Translating pseudo-Boolean constraints into sat. Journal on Satisfiability, 
Boolean Modeling and Computation, 2(1–4), 1–26.
1 3
467

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 358:447–468
Ghomi, E. J., Rahmani, A. M., & Qader, N. N. (2017). Load-balancing algorithms in cloud computing: A 
survey. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 88, 50–71.
Grötschel, M., Krumke, S.O., Rambau, J., Winter, T., & Zimmermann, U.T. (2001). C ombinatorial online 
optimization in real time. Online optimization of large scale systems. pp 679–704. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
0​0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​6​6​2​-​0​4​3​3​1​-​8​_​3​3​
Huggs, A.E. (2016). How competition, customization, and niche markets have affected sku proliferation and 
management. Scholar Commons ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​s​c​h​o​l​a​r​c​o​m​m​o​n​s​.​s​c​.​e​d​u​/​s​e​n​i​o​r​_​t​h​e​s​e​s​/​9​4
Ignatiev, A., Morgado, A., & Marques-Silva, J. (2019). Rc2: An efficient maxsat solver. Journal on Satisfi­
ability, Boolean Modeling and Computation, 11(1), 53–64.
Ignatiev, A., Morgado, A., & Marques-Silva, J. (2018). PySAT: A Python toolkit for prototyping with SAT 
oracles. In SAT, pp. 428–437. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94144-8_26
Iijima, M., Komatsu, S., & Katoh, S. (1996). Hybrid just-in-time logistics systems and information networks 
for effective management in perishable food industries. International Journal of Production Economics, 
44(1–2), 97–103.
Li, C. M., & Manya, F. (2021). Ma xsat, hard and soft constraints. In Handbook of satisfiability, pp. 903–927. 
IOS Press. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​2​3​3​/​9​7​8​-​1​-​5​8​6​0​3​-​9​2​9​-​5​-​6​1​3
Marques-Silva, J., & Lynce, I. (2007). Towards robust cnf encodings of cardinality constraints. In Principles 
and practice of constraint programming–CP 2007: 13th International conference, CP 2007, Provi­
dence, RI, USA, September 23-27, 2007. Proceedings 13, pp. 483–497. Springer
Marques-Silva, J., & Planes, J. (2008). Algorithms for maximum satisfiability using unsatisfiable cores. In 
Proceedings of the conference on design, automation and test in Europe, pp. 408–413.
Marsan, M. A., Bianco, A., Giaccone, P., Leonardi, E., & Neri, F. (2003). Multicast traffic in input-queued 
switches: Optimal scheduling and maximum throughput. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 
11(3), 465–477.
Martins, R., Joshi, S., Manquinho, V., & Lynce, I. (2014). Incremental cardinality constraints for maxsat. In 
International conference on principles and practice of constraint programming, pp. 531–548. Springer 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10428-7_39
Martins, R., Manquinho, V., & Lynce, I. (2014). Open-wbo: A modular maxsat solver. In International con­
ference on theory and applications of satisfiability testing, pp. 438–445. Springer ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
0​7​/​9​7​8​-​3​-​3​1​9​-​0​9​2​8​4​-​3​_​3​3​
Morgado, A., Heras, F., Liffiton, M., Planes, J., & Marques-Silva, J. (2013). Iterative and core-guided maxsat 
solving: A survey and assessment. Constraints, 18(4), 478–534.
Morgado, A., Dodaro, C., & Marques-Silva, J. (2014). Core-guided maxsat with soft cardinality constraints. 
In International conference on principles and practice of constraint programming, pp. 564–573. 
Springer
Piotrów, M. (2020). Uwrmaxsat: Efficient solver for maxsat and pseudo-boolean problems. In 2020 IEEE 
32nd international conference on tools with artificial intelligence (ICTAI), pp. 132–136. IEEE
Rossi, F., Beek, P., & Walsh, T. (Eds.). (2006). Handbook of constraint programming. Foundations of artifi­
cial intelligence (Vol. 2). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Salvia Hornos, J.M., Petit Riera, J., Palou Figueras, R., & Torres Amigo, R. (2024) Logistics Routing of a 
Box Sequence on a Physical Binary Sorter. IEEE Dataport. https://doi.org/10.21227/63x4-ta24
Singh, R., & Rosengren, S. (2020). Why do online grocery shoppers switch? An empirical investigation of 
drivers of switching in online grocery. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 53, 101962.
Sinz, C. (2005). Towards an optimal CNF encoding of Boolean cardinality constraints. In International con­
ference on principles and practice of constraint programming, pp. 827–831. Springer.
Sobolev, S. (2002). Propositional formula. Encyclopedia of Mathematics. ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​e​n​c​y​c​l​o​p​e​d​i​a​o​f​m​a​t​h​.​
o​r​g​/​i​n​d​e​x​.​p​h​p​
Solnon, C., Nguyen, A., Artigues, C. (2008). The car sequencing problem: Overview of state-of-the-art meth­
ods and industrial case-study of the roadef’2005 challenge problem. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 191(3), 912–927.
Spieckermann, S., Gutenschwager, K., & Voß, S. (2004). A sequential ordering problem in automotive paint 
shops. International Journal of Production Research, 42(9), 1865–1878.
Tyrväinen, O., & Karjaluoto, H. (2022). Online grocery shopping before and during the covid-19 pandemic: 
A meta-analytical review. Telematics and Informatics, 71, 101839.
Wu, F.-Y. (1982). The potts model. Reviews of Modern Physics, 54(1), 235.
Zhu, X., & Wilhelm, W. E. (2006). Scheduling and lot sizing with sequence-dependent setup: A literature 
review. IIE Transactions, 38(11), 987–1007.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
468