TITLE: Climate change adaptation projects of transport facilities: is a demonstrator necessary?
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06010-8
---

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06010-8
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Climate change adaptation projects of transport facilities: is
a demonstrator necessary?
Shiyuan Zheng1 · Changmin Jiang2
· Kun Wang3
Received: 17 November 2022 / Accepted: 16 April 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Transport facilities are increasingly threatened by the climate-change related natural disasters
in recent years. In order to incentivize the transport facility operators to engage in climate
change adaptation, governments may provide subsidies to the adaptation investment. Due to
the substantial uncertainties in the outcomes of the adaptation projects, the government can
set up an “experiment” project, which can be used as a demonstrator. In this paper, we develop
real-option game models to investigate the transport facility operators’ adaptation investment
under static stochastic demand and time-varying stochastic demand. Meanwhile, the govern-
ment’s optimal decisions on whether to set up a demonstrator and the related subsidy policies
are also examined. We ﬁnd that under static stochastic demand, the government prefers to set
up a demonstrator if the marginal beneﬁt of the adaptation capacity is larger than its marginal
cost, or the demonstration effect is high enough. Under time-varying stochastic demand, the
government prefers to set up a demonstrator when the demand volatility is low. Moreover,
increasing demand volatility requires less (or more) subsidy, when the demonstrator is (or is
not) set up. Increasing demand volatility leads to postponement of the adaptation timing and
more adaptation investment, irrespective of whether there is a demonstrator.
Keywords Transport facility · Adaptation · Climate change · Demonstrator project ·
Subsidy · Stochastic demand · Real option game
1 Introduction
Climate change is considered one of the biggest challenges of our time. We can already
observe the impacts of climate change in many areas, such as the melting sea ice, the rising
sea levels, and the more extreme weather patterns. Transport facilities, including seaports,
B Changmin Jiang
changmin.jiang@polyu.edu.hk
1
School of Transport, Shanghai Maritime University, Shanghai, China
2
Department of Logistics and Maritime Studies, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong
Kong, China
3
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom,
Hong Kong, China
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
/ Published online: 29 May 2024

airports and roads, are among the most signiﬁcantly affected by climate change (e.g., Jiang
et al., 2020; Koetse & Rietveld, 2009). Given this context, many transport facilities have
already invested or are planning to invest in reducing the risk of natural disasters due to
climate change. This is commonly known as climate change adaptation. There are abundant
examples for such adaptation projects. For instance, in response to sea level rise, the Port of
Hamburg has a storm surge protection plan in place (Christodoulou et al., 2019).1 However,
there is no doubt that the transport facility operators face great pressure when deciding to
engage in such projects, as the level of uncertainty is very high, and there exist all sorts of
barriers in the process (Ng et al., 2018).
From the perspective of the government, it is also increasingly desirable to promote the
transport facility’s climate change adaptation projects, as these projects prevent transportation
disruptions and protect passengers and shippers. This is essential to maintain normal social-
economic activities and international trade. Furthermore, the implementation of adaptation
measures within the transport infrastructure can also provide protection to nearby commu-
nities (Zheng et al., 2023). The government faces the same uncertainties as the transport
facility operators (hereafter referred to as “operators”). But the government can use policy
tools to deal with them. One such tool is to incentivize some operators to start the project
before others. This way, the project can be a trial-and-error to learn and evaluate the adapta-
tion technologies and processes. If the project works, it becomes a model for other similar
projects. If not, it can be abandoned, and the related sunk cost or loss can be controlled in
a small scale. Such demonstrator projects are quite common across the world. For example,
in the United States (US), the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) launched its Climate
Change Adaptation Initiative in 2011 and funded $1 million for research on pilots in seven
different places, with nine transit agencies involved.2 The US Federal Highway Administra-
tion (FHWA) has partnered with State Departments of Transportation (DOTs), Metropolitan
Planning Organizations (MPOs) and others to create and implement resilience pilots that
cope with present and future weather extremes, saving maintenance expenses throughout the
transportation assets’ life-cycle.3 In 2010, the National Disaster Reduction Center of China
(NDRC) initiated nationwide disaster reduction demonstrator projects, involving transport
facilities like airports, seaports, and highways, to enhance emergency management for natural
disasters in China.4
The government’s endorsement of establishing a demonstrator can yield positive out-
comes, including enhanced disaster prevention and mitigation expertise, and stimulating
competition among transport facilities for adaptation investments. However, there are poten-
tial drawbacks. The demonstrator could exploit its monopoly power and preferential policies,
such as extended subsidy periods, to undermine subsequent operators, negatively impacting
social welfare. Given these contrasting effects and the uncertainties associated with climate
1 Different types of transport infrastructure require different adaptation measures to cope with various envi-
ronmental challenges. For example, seaports facing hurricanes, storms, and sea-level rise need to construct
dams and water breaks, as well as elevate terminals to prevent ﬂooding. Airports need to upgrade their
drainage systems to handle heavy rains and storms, ensuring operational continuity and safety. Railways need
to improve their drainage systems and reinforce their tracks and surrounding areas to prevent landslides caused
by increasingly frequent and intense heavy rains.
2 Please refer to the following link for more information: https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/29288
3 Please refer to the following link for more information: https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/environment/
sustainability/resilience/pilots/
4 Please refer to the following link for more information: http://www.ndrcc.org.cn/search.jspx?q=%E7%A4%
BA%E8%8C%83%E5%8C%BA&token=05012408-e26c-434c-9823-7228f60e68f4
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1604

change-related disasters and ﬂuctuating demand, the government must meticulously evaluate
the implications of supporting a demonstrator project.
The ﬁnancial burden of adapting transport facilities to modern standards is signiﬁcant
and often irreversible. Recognizing this, various governments and international entities have
stepped in to alleviate such expenses, promoting the necessary upgrades. A notable initia-
tive is the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP) in the United States, which provides
substantial ﬁnancial assistance exceeding 1 million US dollars per application.5 This pro-
gram primarily targets transport infrastructures like seaports and airports. In a parallel effort,
Canada has instituted a similar program that earmarks 2 billion Canadian dollars annually
from 2007 to 2027 for infrastructure adaptation investments.6 These subsidies play a crucial
role but are not exhaustive; operators must supplement them with revenues generated from
transport services to fully cover adaptation costs.
Despite the potential government ﬁnancial assistance, the operators may still harbor
reservations about investing in transport adaptation projects. This hesitancy stems from the
unpredictable demand, which directly inﬂuences the project’s revenue. Uncertain demand not
only affects revenue but is also correlated with the extent of damage incurred during disas-
ters. The damage is proportional to the transport facility’s output volume; hence, ﬂuctuating
demand leads to variable disaster impacts, all other factors being constant. This variability
complicates the operator’s decision-making process regarding investment in adaptation mea-
sures. Consequently, a comprehensive analysis that integrates both demand uncertainty and
investment decisions is crucial to address these concerns effectively.
The demand uncertainty in different transport sectors varies substantially. Figure 1 exem-
pliﬁes these variations, showcasing the evolution of road transport demand in China from
2005 to 2022. Prior to 2014, the sector experienced steady growth characterized by mini-
mal volatility. In contrast, the post-2014 period was marked by signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations in
demand, even though the average level remained relatively stable. Analytically, these two
distinct periods can be understood through different stochastic processes. The pre-2014 era
is best represented by a dynamic or time-varying stochastic process due to its evolving
nature over time. In the post-2014 period, however, the expectation of demand stabilized and
was more aptly described by a static stochastic parameter. Understanding these contrasting
stochastic characteristics is pivotal for operators as they navigate and adapt to the evolving
demands of the road transport market. The timing of adaptation is a crucial decision for an
operator dealing with a time-varying demand, as it necessitates waiting until revenue—tied to
dynamic stochastic demand—reaches a level sufﬁcient to offset adaptation investment costs.
In contrast, operators facing static stochastic demand can bypass this timing issue, basing their
investment decisions directly on anticipated proﬁts. The government and operators often have
divergent objectives and, consequently, different preferences regarding timing. To reconcile
these differences and align the operators’ decisions with societal optimums, the government
can implement well-crafted subsidy policies. However, the presence of competition among
operators complicates this process; the leading operator’s actions set a precedent that must
be considered in the design of governmental subsidy policies.
In our discussions on the climate change adaptation of transport facilities, we distinguish
between two kinds of stakeholders: the government and the transport facility operators. The
government cares about the social welfare, which we deﬁne in Sect. 3 as the sum of the
5 Please refer to the following link for more information: link:https://www.water-technology.net/projects/
delta-works-ﬂood-netherlands/#:~:text=The%20project%20comprised%20of%20laying,a%20cost%20of%
20%245bn
6 Please refer to the following link for more information: https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/dmaf-faac/index-
eng.html
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1605

Fig. 1 Road transport volume in China from 2005 to 2022. Source https://data.eastmoney.com/cjsj/hyzs_
EMI00107137.html
facility users’ utility, the operators’ proﬁts, and the possible demonstration effect (in the case
of demonstrator). The government inﬂuences the operators’ adaptation investment decisions
by providing adaptation subsidies. The operators are ﬁrms that operate the transport facilities
and seek to maximize their proﬁts from the transport businesses. The operators decide on
their adaptation investment or capacities, as well as their position in the adaptation investment
sequence (leader/demonstrator or follower).
In summary, a few research questions remained to be answered. First, what is the opti-
mal subsidy policy for the government to promote the adaptation? Should the government
subsidize one operator to be a leader and a demonstrator, or subsidize multiple operators to
invest in adaptation simultaneously? Second, how can the government maximize the social
welfare by balancing the trade-off between the subsidy cost and the adaptation beneﬁt? Third,
how do the dynamic uncertainty of the disaster loss, trafﬁc demand and the demonstration
effect affect the stakeholders’ decisions and the market equilibrium? Speciﬁcally, how do
they inﬂuence the operators’ adaptation timing and capacity choices, and the government’s
subsidy levels? Moreover, under what conditions is it preferable to have one demonstrator
or multiple simultaneous investors?
In this paper, we use game theory to model the interactions between operators’ adaptation
investments and the government’s adaptation policies. Speciﬁcally, we compare two demand
scenarios: static stochastic demand and time-varying stochastic demand. Our study adds to
the existing literature in two ways. First, we adopt a novel modeling approach that captures
the uncertainty and dynamics of the demand in analysis of transport adaptation. Second, we
derive policy implications for the government’s role in promoting adaptation and innovation.
Speciﬁcally, our study contributes to the related literature from two perspectives: the mod-
eling approach and the policy implications. In terms of modeling approach, we model the
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1606

government’s decision on whether to allow the demonstrator project set-up, the correspond-
ing optimal subsidy policy design, and the operators’ reactions; we also model the transport
operators’ interactions and competition in adaptation investment, when facing the stochastic
demand: the static and the time-varying. Speciﬁcally,
(i)
The operators’ adaptation investment decision and whether they are willing to become
the adaptation demonstrator are incorporated by our models. In the case of time-varying
stochastic demand, the operators’ decisions of the adaptation timing and capacity are
investigated. This is one of the ﬁrst studies to formally analyze the adaptation investment
of a transport facility together with demand uncertainty.
(ii) Whether the government should encourage an adaptation demonstrator project to maxi-
mize social welfare is discussed. The corresponding optimal subsidy policy, the support,
and the demonstrator project are also examined. All these innovations contribute to stud-
ies on the government’s policy instruments for the adaptation investment of transport
facilities.
In terms of policy implications, this study identiﬁed the conditions to favor or oppose the
set-up of the demonstrator project for the transport adaptation, and the corresponding subsidy
policies are also suggested, in terms of the government’s policy implications. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁnd:
(i)
The net marginal beneﬁt and the demonstration effect of the demonstrator projects have
crucial impacts on the government’s decision to support them.
(ii) In the context of time-varying demand, the demand volatility plays a pivotal role in
inﬂuencing the government’s decision to back the demonstrator project with subsidies.
Additionally, we examine the link between the static and time-varying demand criteria to
enhance our understanding of the policy design. These ﬁndings provide useful implications
for the government’s policy design to intervene in the adaptation investments of the transport
facilities.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related litera-
ture. Section 3 investigates the scenario where the operators face static stochastic demand.
Section 4 extends the analysis to the scenario of time-varying stochastic demand. Conclusions
and future research orientations are summarized in Sect. 5.
2 Literature review
This section reviews the related literature for us to identify the research gaps and highlight our
research contributions. There are two main streams of literature that are related to our study:
(1) the economic analysis on the adaptation investment of transport facilities in response
to the climate change-related disasters; (2) modeling the transport facility investment under
stochastic demand using the real option game (ROG) approach.
2.1 Climate change adaptation of transport facilities
Recent studies address the adaptation investment of transport facilities under climate change
threats. Some studies focus on improving the disaster relief management to speed up the
recovery of infrastructure by using operations research methods (e.g., Coles et al., 2022;
Dubey et al., 2019; Mishra et al., 2019). On the other hand, some studies conduct economic
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1607

analysis on the adaptation investment decisions of transport infrastructure, using either empir-
ical or modeling approaches (e.g., Ng et al., 2013; Panahi et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2018). Our
study is directly related to the modeling work as summarized in Table 1 below. In the last
row of the table, we highlight the distinct elements of this study compared to previous ones.
When conducting the economic analysis, it is essential to answer this question: how to
model the uncertainty of the climate change-related disasters? According to the information
availability among different stakeholders, the adaptation investment decisions can be made
by assuming that the disaster information (i.e., the degree of uncertainty or the random
distribution of the disaster information) is the common knowledge for all the entities, namely
the perfect information or the absence of incomplete information. The disaster uncertainty
can be regarded as a random variable with a known distribution (e.g., Xiao et al., 2015;
Randrianarisoa & Zhang, 2019; Gong et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020; Xia & Lindsey, 2021;
Zheng et al., 2021b). These studies mainly answer how the vertical structure of the transport
facility and the inter-facility effects affect the adaptation investment, the market outcomes,
and the timing of the adaptation investment, namely investing now or waiting (e.g., Xiao et al.,
2015; Xia & Lindsey, 2021). Other papers under the complete disaster information (perfect
information), however, assume that the random distribution of the disaster occurrence is not
known at the stage of the adaptation investment, namely the Knightian uncertainty or the
ambiguity (e.g., Wang & Zhang, 2018; Wang et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2021a, 2022a). These
studies mainly attempt to examine how such ambiguity could affect the adaptation decisions.
In reality, the disaster information may not be perfectly known by particular entities (either
the government or the operators). The impact of such incomplete information has recently
been acknowledged and studied. For example, Zheng et al. (2022a) considered the case
where the operators possessed more accurate disaster information than the government. This
is because the operator has private information on the facility’s resilience condition and the
ability/speed to recover. Another study by Zheng et al. (2022b) further extended the research
context to two competing transport facilities with asymmetric information on the disaster
damage (i.e., a better informed transport facility operator vs. a less-informed transport facil-
ity operator). On the other hand, a recent paper by Zheng et al. (2023) assumed that the
government owned certain information advantage over the transport facility operators due to
government’s research capability and more abundant resources. Such disaster-related infor-
mation is more about the scientiﬁc research knowledge that is costly and beyond the ability of
speciﬁc transport facility operators to acquire. Yang et al. (2022) explored the seaport adap-
tation investment decision by assuming information asymmetry within one transport facility
(i.e., a seaport), between the upstream port authority and downstream terminal operators.
Governments can employ a variety of policy tools to inﬂuence adaptation investments by
transport facilities, particularly when faced with incomplete information. Zheng et al. (2021a)
pioneered the analytical economic examination of such policies, evaluating the impact of
minimum requirement rules and subsidies on seaport adaptation investments and market
outcomes. The study was expanded by Zheng et al. (2021b), introducing a scenario where
two transport facilities with asymmetric disaster damages could trade adaptive capacities,
eliminating direct government intervention. Zheng et al. (2022b) explored a policy instrument
involving information sharing or publication, where the government audits a facility with
superior information and decides whether to disseminate this knowledge to others for updated
disaster damage assessments. In another development, Zheng et al. (2023) considered a
government equipped with precise disaster data choosing between persuasion strategies or
subsidies to inﬂuence adaptation investments. Despite these recent attempts on modeling
the government’s adaptation-related polices under the incomplete disaster information, no
studies have addressed the government’s role in supporting demonstrator adaptation projects
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1608

Table 1 Summary of existing economic modeling on transport facility adaptation
Research
Disaster uncertainty
Investment period
Information
Regulation instruments
Demand uncertainty
Xiao et al. (2015)
Uniform distribution
two-period
Perfect
NA
Certain
Wang and Zhang (2018)
Knightian uncertainty,
Symmetric
single period
Perfect
NA
Certain
Randrianarisoa and Zhang
(2019)
Knightian uncertainty
two periods
Perfect
NA
Certain
Wang et al. (2020)
Knightian uncertainty,
Symmetric/Asymmetric
single period
Perfect
NA
Certain
Gong et al. (2020)
Bernoulli distribution
Single period
Perfect
NA
Stochastic
Jiang et al. (2020)
Random distribution
Single period
Perfect
NA
Certain
Xia and Lindsey (2021)
Random distribution
two periods
Perfect
NA
Certain
Zheng et al. (2021a)
Knightian uncertainty,
Symmetric
Single period
Perfect
Subsidy vs. Minimum
requirement
Certain
Zheng et al. (2021b)
Bernoulli distribution,
Asymmetric between
infrastructures
Single period
Perfect
Adaptive capacity sharing
vs. subsidy
Certain
Zheng et al. (2022a)
Knightian uncertainty
Single period
Incomplete (government vs.
transport facility operator)
Subsidy
Certain
Zheng et al. (2022b)
Bernoulli distribution
Single period
Incomplete (between two
transport facility operators)
Information sharing vs.
subsidy
Certain
Zheng et al. (2023)
Bernoulli distribution
Single period
Incomplete (government vs.
transport facility operator)
Bayesian persuasion
Certain
The current study
Random distribution
Multi-period
Perfect
Subsidy to set up
demonstrator project
Stochastic (static vs.
time-varying)
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1609

until now. This research introduces an innovative policy tool where the government aids a
transport facility in acquiring detailed disaster data through its designation as a “demonstrator
project.” This facility then indirectly shares this information via signaling its investment and
output decisions. As explained in our introduction, this policy tool has already been tried in
practice, but its effectiveness compared to other instruments under conditions of incomplete
information remains unclear. Our study aims to bridge this knowledge gap through rigorous
economic modeling.
2.2 Transport infrastructure investment using ROG
Studies on transport infrastructure investment can be classiﬁed into two groups, depending
on whether they account for uncertainty or not. There is a rich literature on the transport
investment under certainty, which includes the investment of airports (e.g., Lin & Zhang,
2017; Zhang & Zhang, 2003, 2006) and seaports (e.g., Luo et al., 2012; Zhu et al., 2019).
These studies mainly address the capacity investment in the presence of congestion problems.
More recent studies focus on the transport investment under uncertainty (mainly the demand
uncertainty), such as airports (Xiao et al., 2013, 2017; Zheng et al., 2020), seaports (Balliauw
et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2021c), and rail transit (Gao & Driouchi, 2013). Although the
impacts of demand uncertainty on the transport facility’s capacity investment have been
well investigated, its combination with the adaptation investment to climate change-related
disasters is quite scarce. That is, the studies reviewed in Sect. 2.2 all assume the deterministic
demand while only considering the uncertainty from the climate change-related disasters
(see Table 1 as well).
The current transport adaptation work focuses on the disaster uncertainty, while the
stochastic transport demand and its volatility have not been well integrated with the adapta-
tion investment decisions of the transport facilities. In reality, the disaster damage is directly
proportional to the trafﬁc volume, so the demand stochastic nature would also affect the
effectiveness of the adaptation and thus its investment level. When modeling the uncertain
demand, existing transport studies mainly adopt the static models assuming the uncertainty
only exists in one period, or adopt the “two-period model” that can examine the investment
timing and updated information on the disaster uncertainty.
When considering more complex forms of the demand uncertainty, the ROG is a better
method that has been widely applied in the literature of operations research and management
to model the timing and the investment levels in the presence of the stochastic demand,
including between competing entities (Huisman & Kort, 2013). There are some excellent
review papers on ROG and its applications in different ﬁelds (e.g., Azevedo & Paxson, 2014;
Trigeorgis & Tsekrekosd, 2018; Zheng & Jiang, 2023; Zormpas & Oggioni, 2023). When it
comes to the transport facility’s adaptation, the length of the investment completion and its
effective periods are quite long, so the demand uncertainty could exhibit changing patterns
or evolution. It could be more appropriate to use ROG to acknowledge such complexity. As
can be seen in Table 1, Gong et al. (2020) also assumed stochastic demand when analyzing
the transport facility decisions between capacity and adaptation investments. However, their
model only assumed simple Bernoulli distributed demand and disaster damage, and did not
consider incomplete information or government policy. This study therefore complements the
existing ones by applying ROG to model the adaptation investment decisions of the transport
facility in the presence of the stochastic demand. It should be noted that Chesney et al. (2017)
have applied ROG to examine the climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies at the
country-level in the presence of the stochastic demand. They used a real options model to
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1610

explore the ideal proportion of GDP and the optimal timing at which a global decision-maker
should allocate resources to climate change mitigation endeavors. Their analysis takes into
account the context of necessary adaptation expenditures when evaluating investments in
mitigation. The work by Chesney et al. (2017) provides a good example of the ROG research
framework to be applied to the transport infrastructure adaptation investment by considering
the stochastic demand.
To summarize, this study extends the previous literature on transport adaptation investment
by applying the ROG model to the case of competing transport facility operators. Unlike the
previous studies, we consider both the timing and capacity decisions of the operators, as well
as the government’s policies on setting up a demonstrator and providing subsidies. We also
incorporate the “demonstrator effect” into our model, which captures the positive impact
of the demonstrator on the demand for the new technology. We analyze the government’s
optimal subsidy policy design under both static and time-varying stochastic demand, and
explore the trade-off between the demonstrator’s positive effect and its drawbacks. Our study
contributes to the literature by introducing new modeling elements and policy implications
for transport adaptation investment.
3 Static stochastic demand
In order to obtain the basic economic intuitions, we simplify the problem in this section
to consider the static stochastic demand. In particular, the operators only need to consider
the adaptation investment or capacity decisions, rather than the timing. In the case of static
stochastic demand, each operator only needs to determine its adaptation capacity. We ﬁrst
establish our model setting, which includes the demand function, the operators’ proﬁt func-
tion, the game structure (between the two operators and the government), and the related
social welfare function under different scenarios (depending on whether a demonstrator is
set up). Then we analyze the optimal decisions of the operators and the government. After
comparing the model outcomes under different scenarios, we can identify the conditions
where the government should subsidize an operator to encourage it to be a demonstrator
of adaptation investment, or subsidize all operators in the same area equally and encourage
them to make their adaptation investment simultaneously.
3.1 Model basics
In our context, two competing facilities share the same market and provide homogeneous
transport services. Their demands are stochastic, and each faces a risk of potential disaster
loss. They can install the adaptation investment to remedy their losses partially. Because the
adaptation projects of the facilities can beneﬁt the social welfare by reducing disaster loss, the
government would like to use subsidies to promote the operators’ adaptation investment. It
provides the subsidy on adaptation investment, and also determines the optimal subsidies to
each operator. Two operators can choose to make the adaptation investment simultaneously
or sequentially. Then each operator determines its adaptation investment to maximize its
expected proﬁts facing the rival’s competition and the government’s subsidies.
To set up our models, a linear demand function is speciﬁed as (1) after two competing
facilities install their adapted capacity.
P  X(1 −Q1 −Q2)
(1)
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1611

where P is the facility service charge and Q1, Q2 are the outputs of the two facilities. X
is a stochastic parameter to reﬂect the potential market size. The linear demand function is
used to simplify the analysis.7 The normalization of the market scalar to 1 is commonly used
in the literature of the operation management and industrial economics (see Tirole, 1988).
In such a case, the outputs of the operators, i.e., Q1 and Q2 in demand function Eq. (1)
can be treated as their market shares. Moreover, if the market scale is normalized to 1, all
the outputs and prices in the equilibrium are in the scope of [0,1], which can facilitate our
numerical simulations in Sect. 4. Meanwhile, we assume that the two facilities provide the
homogeneous services, which is to help us focus on the impacts of stochastic demand, the
demonstration effect of the transport adaptation projects, and the game structures between
the operators.8 In the demand function Eq. (1), it is assumed that the stochastic parameter
has the multiplying impacts on the market demand. Transport demand could be determined
by two kinds of factors: the basic factors (e.g., the transport prices and the competition
between the transport service providers), and the “external” factors (e.g., regional economy,
international trade). The former is represented by the term 1 −Q1 −bQ2. The latter is
more stochastic and may amplify the effects of the basic factors. For example, the regional
economy is positively related the transport with rapid economy development leads to higher
transport demand. Therefore, the multiplying form containing effects of the basic factors and
the external factors could be appropriate to model the demand of the transport facilities.
Let D and η be the expected disaster loss and remedy by the adaptation investment for each
unit of output, respectively. δ is the marginal adaptation investment cost. In order to promote
the facilities to make the adaptation investment, the government provides the subsidy τ to
the operators, after they do so. Each operator’s expected proﬁt is:
πi  EX[P Qi −(D −η)Qi −(δ −τ)Qi]
(2)
Equation (2) indicates that each operator’s expected proﬁt consists of three parts: its
revenue from the transportation services (term P Qi), its disaster loss with the adaptation
(term (D −η)Qi) and its adaptation costs after receiving the government’s subsidy (term
(δ −τ)Qi). In our model, the remedy by the adaptation for each unit of output cannot
exceed the disaster loss, which leads to η ≤D. The subsidy is used to cover the operator’s
partial investment cost and thereby cannot exceed the marginal adaptation investment cost,
i.e., τ ≤δ. n the demand function, i.e., Eq. (1), the market potential of the deterministic
part is normalized to 1. To guarantee non-negative prices and facility outputs in all possible
scenarios, we need to insure that η, D, τ and δ are less than 1. In summary, to avoid the trivial
cases, we assume that η ≤D < 1, τ ≤δ < 1.
The adaptation projects offer numerous beneﬁts to both the region and society as a whole.
They effectively mitigate disruptions in transport facilities, minimizing economic losses
for passengers and shippers caused by property damage or delays. Moreover, investing in
7 Equation (1) is the inverse demand function, which describes the relationship between the charge of the
transport facilities (P) and their outputs (Qi). In market equilibrium, the transport demand and the output or
capacity of the transport facilities are equal. Therefore, the output or capacity of the transport facilities can be
used to indicate their demand.This inverse demand function, which uses the outputs or capacities to reﬂect the
demand in the equilibrium, is commonly used in the literature of the Industrial Organization (e.g., see Tirole,
1988).
8 Of course, the operators may provide “heterogeneous” services. In order to accommodate this situation,
we extend our models (for both the static and the following dynamic stochastic cases) by setting the demand
function as P  X(1 −Q1 −bQ2), where b ∈[0, 1] indicates the substitute degree of the services between
two operators. After repeating the analyses, it is found that our main conclusions keep unchanged qualitatively
(the details are available upon request).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1612

adaptation measures to protect transport facilities supports the normal function of the social-
economic activities and the smooth operation of global supply chains. Additionally, the
adaptation investments made by seaports or airports along coastal lines provide protection
to nearby communities against extreme weather conditions such as hurricanes or storms.
Therefore, the adaptation projects are also desirable to the local region/communities and
even the whole society. According to the facility operators’ adaptation timing sequence,
two scenarios may happen: two operators investing sequentially or simultaneously. Under
the government’s speciﬁc policy, if they make the investment sequentially, the ﬁrst investor
(called as the “leader” hereinafter) can be regarded as a “demonstrator” whose experiences
can be used to guide the later investor (called as the “follower” hereinafter) and promote the
total social welfare. The expected social welfare function is expressed as follows:
SWA  EX

X

(Q1 + Q2) −(Q1 + Q2)2/2

−(D −η)(Q1 + Q2) −δ(Q1 + Q2)

(3)
In Eq. (3), the term X

(Q1 + Q2) −(Q1 + Q2)2/2

indicates the facility users’ utilities.9
The term (D −η)(Q1 + Q2) is the expected disaster loss after the adaptation, and the term
δ(Q1 + Q2) is the adaptation investment cost. If there is a leader who invests in a demonstrator
project ahead of the follower, then the expected social welfare can be increased when the
follower makes the adaptation project because some beneﬁts can be learned through the
leader’s experience, i.e.,
SWD  EX

X

(Q1 + Q2) −(Q1 + Q2)2/2

−(D −η)(Q1 + Q2)
−δ(Q1 + Q2) + T (Q1 + Q2)}
(4)
where the term T (Q1 + Q2) is the social welfare improvement from the learning of the
demonstrator, with T > 0. After a demonstrator is set up, it can pass the relevant experiences
to the follower that can learn from it and improve its operation. Meanwhile, the government
can also obtain the knowledge to manage these adaptation facilities and better understand
the effectiveness of the adaptation measures. All these beneﬁts are related to the scale of
the adaptation facilitie (including the leader and the follower), with larger scale or capacity
leading to more social welfare improvement.10 That is to say, if there is a leader who invests
in a demonstrator project ahead of the follower, then the expected TOTAL social welfare
(relatedo the adaptation projects from both the leader and the follower) can be increased
because some beneﬁts can be learned through the leader’s experience. To simplify the model
and keep it tractable, we assume the social welfare improvement caused by the demonstrator
9 According to the microeconomics theories (e.g., Geoffrey and Philip, 2013), the social welfare consists of
two parts: the consumers’ net utilities (their utilities minus their payments to the ﬁrms) and the ﬁrms’ proﬁts
(their revenues or the consumers’ payments minus their costs). Summing these two parts, we know that the
social welfare equals to the consumers’ utilities minus the ﬁrms’ costs. In our setting, the consumers’ utilities
are U  X[(Q1 + Q2)−(Q1 + Q2)2/2], which indicates the facility users’ utilities from the transport services.
For example, transport services promote the regional trade and provide the consumption goods for citizens and
the raw materials and intermediate components for manufacturers. All these are the utilities of the transport
service users (the citizens and the manufacturers). According to the microeconomics theories (e.g., Geoffrey
and Philip, 2013), we can use an increasing and concave function (with respect to the consumers’ assumptions)
to represent their utilities. Meanwhile, the inverse demand function should be derived from the consumers’
utility function as ∂U/∂Qi  P. In our setting, ∂U/∂Qi  X(1 −Q1 −Q2), which is exactly the inverse
demand function Eq. (1). Moreover, the ﬁrms’ proﬁts (or the transport operators’ proﬁts from their adaptation
projects) are expressed by Eq. (2). Summing them we obtain Eq. (3).
10 If the follower or the government ﬁnd the demonstraon adaptation project is not useful or failure, the
outcomes of the demonstrator project can avoid the possible failure of the following adaptation project, or the
resource waste (to be input in the followinadaptation project). These resource saving or the failure avoidance
are good to the social welfare and treby the demonstration effect is always positive.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1613

Table 2 Notations
Notations
Deﬁnitions
P
Facility service charge
Qi, QF,QL
The output or the capacity of facility i, the leader and the follower, respectively
X, X0
Market potential parameter (i.e., market scalar), and its value at time 0
μ, σ
The mean-drift and volatility of the market potential, when it follows GMB
r
Risk-free interest rate
D
The expected disaster loss for each unit of output
η
The remedy by the adaptation facility for each unit of output
δ
Marginal adaptation investment cost
τ
Government’s subsidy
πi
The instantaneous proﬁt of facility i
SWD, SWA
The expected social welfare with and without the demonstrator, respectively
T
Social welfare improvement for each unit of output from the learning of the
demonstrator
ti, tL, tA
Adaptation timing of facility i, the leader, and the facility operator in the
accommodation equilibrium, respectively
X D, X F, X A
Adaptation timing of the leader, the follower (in the deterrence equilibrium), and two
facilities (in the accommodation equilibrium), respectively
X ML, QML
Adaptation timing and the facility capacity when it is a monopoly
β
The positive root of the characteristic equation
Vi, VL, VF,VL A
The option values from the adaptation investment of Facility i, the leader, the follower
and the facility operator in the accommodation equilibrium, respectively
is a linear function of the operators’ total outputs. Meanwhile, we assume a linear relationship
between the adaptation cost and adaptation capacity. Although the marginal adaptation cost
should be increasing and they have a nonlinear relationship, the linear approximation of their
relationship can be used to simplify the model and the conclusions do not change qualitatively
(Zheng et al., 2021b).
All notations and parameters together with their deﬁnitions (including those used in the
next section) are summarized in Table 2.
3.2 Analysis results
Using the backward induction, we ﬁrst analyze the operators’ output decisions when they
engage in Cournot game.11 Substituting Eq. (1) into Eq. (2), and maximizing.
11 If the two operators provide the same services, and they engage in a homogeneous Bertrand competition,
their prices are the same as their marginal costs and their proﬁts are 0. This case is trivial and thereby omitted.
Moreover, there has been empirical evidence to support the Cournot competition in transport industry (Brander
and Zhang, 1990). This is because the Cournot competition can be equivalent to a two-stage game, with the
ﬁrst stage of capacity setting and second stage of price competition under the capacity constraint (Kreps and
Scheinkman, 1983). The capacity of the transport facility is a relatively long-term decision while the prices are
more ﬂexible to adjust, corresponding to the two-stage game assumption proposed by Kreps and Scheinkman
(1983), namely a Cournot competition.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1614

πi with respect to Qi simultaneously,12 we can obtain their equilibrium outputs or capacities
as:
Q1  Q2  Q A  E(X) + τ + η −D −δ
3X
(5)
Substituting Eq. (5) into Eq. (3), and maximiz SWA with respect to τ, we obtain the
government’s optimal subsidy under the Cournot game between the two operators, i.e., τ ∗
A.
When the operators engage in the Stackelberg game, we obtain the equilibrium capacities of
the leader and the follower as follows13:
QL  E(X) + τ + η −D −δ
2X
(6)
QF  E(X) + τ + η −D −δ
4X
(7)
Substituting Eqs. (6) and (7) into Eq. (4), and maximizing SWD with respect to τ, we obtain
the government’s optimal subsidy under the Stackelberg game between the two operators, i.e.,
τ ∗
D. Comparing the optimal expected social welfare with τ ∗
A and τ ∗
D, we ﬁnd the government’s
optimal policy on whether to set up a demonstrator as follows.
Proposition 1 With the static demand, the government’s optimal decisions are described as
follows:
(i)
If the two operators engage in a Cournot game, τ ∗
A  max[(E(X) + η −D −δ)/2, 0];
(ii)
If
the
two
operators
engage
in
a
Stackelberg
game,τ ∗
D

max[(E(X) + η −D −δ + 4T )/3, 0];
(iii) When T > max
√
33 −5

(E(X) + η −D −δ)/8, 0
 
, the government needs higher
subsidy budget in the case where the two ports engage in a Stackelberg game;
(iv)
When E(X) + η −D −δ > 0, the government prefers to set up a demonstrator.
When E(X) + η −D −δ < 0, the government pfers to set up a demonstrator only if
T > −2(E(X) + η −D −δ).
From Proposition 1, we can see that whether the government should set up an adaptation
demonstrator depends on two factors: the output effect and the demonstration effect. More
outputs leads to a higher level of consumer surplus, and thus higher levels of the possible
disaster loss costs and the adaptation capacity investment. It is obvious that the total output
is higher under the Stackelberg game than under the Cournot game. Therefore, the consumer
surplus is always higher under the Stackelberg game. If the marginal beneﬁt of the adaptation
capacity is larger than its marginal cost, i.e., η > δ, the social welfare is always higher under
the Stackelberg game due to the output effect and thereby the government prefers to set up
a demonstrator no matter whether there is the demonstration effect or not. If the marginal
adaptation cost is much higher than its marginal beneﬁt, i.e., η −δ < D −X < 0, the
government prefers to set up a demonstrator only if the demonstration effect is high enough,
i.e., T > −2(X + η −D −δ).14
12 In order to simplify the problem, we do not consider the operators’ output decisions. In our model, Qi
can also be considered as the “adaptation induced output”. Because of the adaptation investment, the reduced
facility loss promotes the transportation demand. The two operators are completely symmetric and thereby
have the same outputs before the disaster occurs. They compete on the adaptation investment induced outputs.
13 We call the operator who makes the earlier adaptation investment as the leader, and the later as the follower
hereinafter. Moreover, the leader is also referred to as the demonstrator sometimes in the following discussions.
14 It is useful to consider the compatibility incentive of the transport facility operators. For example, if the
government ﬁnds the demonstrator project is more welfare-improving, would it force the transport facility
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1615

Besides, in order to promote the operators to invest more on its adaptation (to maximize the
social welfare), the government needs to provide subsidies whatever the operators engage
in the Cournot game or the Stackelberg game, except when the marginal adaptation cost
is much higher than its marginal beneﬁt, i.e., η −δ < D −X in the Cournot game and
η −δ < D −X −4T in the Stackelberg game, where the very high adaptation cost makes
it improper to promote the adaptation investment. Last but not least, we also ﬁnd that larger
demonstration effect needs more government’s subsidy because of larger outputs under the
Stackelberg game between the operators.15
4 Dynamically evolved demand
In this section, we consider the case where the operators face the fast-developing and volatile
market conditions, where their expected demand cannot be considered as constant. Here we
use the Geometric Brownian Motion (GBM) to describe its demand evolution. The GBM is
commonly used to characterize the demands in the markets of maritime, electricity vehicle
(Zheng et al., 2022b), highway trafﬁc (Galera & Solino, 2010) and more. In the case of
dynamic stochastic demand, each operator needs to determine not only its adaptation capacity
but also its adaptation timing. We ﬁrst introduce the dynamic evolution process to describe the
dynamic stochastic demand. Then, we describe the dynamic optimal problems faced by the
operators in this scenario. To describe the possible equilibrium in the competition between
operators, two types of equilibrium are deﬁned. After analyzing the optimal decisions of
both operators and government and comparing model outcomes under different scenarios,
conditions where the government sets up an adaptation demonstrator or encourages both
operators to make their adaptation investment simultaneously can be identiﬁed. Additionally,
we investigate impacts of demand characteristics (e.g., growth and uncertainty), disaster
magnitude, and demonstration effect on decisions made by operators and government.
4.1 Model setting
Now we suppose the transport demands for both the leader and the follower are time-varying
and stochastic, while the parameter X. (market scalar) follows a GBM:
d X  μXdt + σ Xdz
(8)
where μ is the mean-drift of X, σ is the volatility of X, dz is an increment of a standard
Wiener Process. The risk-free interest rate is r, with r > μ. The GBM is used to describe
the dynamic evolution of demand in many cases, including the transport demand. There have
been some empirical studies to verify and conﬁrm this assumption. For example, Galera and
Solino (2010) used the unit root test to show the highway trafﬁc follows the GBM. Zheng
et al. (2022a), (2022b) used the same approach to show that the annual international shipping
demand (1999–2007) and the annual hybrid and plug-in vehicle sales in US (1999–2017)
follow the GBM. Moreover, the GBM is widely used to describe the demand evolution in
Footnote 14 continued
to do it? Or it needs to make sure the transport facility to have higher proﬁt to do it voluntarily? To answer
these questions, one can ﬁnd that the operators’ proﬁts are the increasing functions of the government’s
optimal subsidy. Under the optimal subsidy, the operators’ proﬁts are proved to be non-negative. Therefore,
the operators’ compatibility incentive can be guaranteed.
15 The detailed derivation processes to obtain the threshold in Part (iii) of Proposition 1 and its meaning can
be found in the proof of Proposition 1 in the appendix.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1616

many speciﬁc sectors, e.g., maritime (Rau & Spinler, 2016), road trafﬁc (Galera & Solino,
2010), electricity market (Thompson et al., 2004).16
The two operators engage in a ROG based on their capacities and adaptation timing. The
two operators face the following dynamic optimization problem:
Vi(X0)  max
ti, Qi
E

∞
∫
ti
πie−rtdt|X(0)  X0

(9)
where each operator determines its adaptation capacity Qi and adaptation timing ti. Vi is
operator i’s option value from the adaptation investment. In the case of dynamic stochastic
demand, when to make the adaptation investment or timing is crucial. Therefore, each oper-
ator’s objective is to maximize its option value of the adaptation project by determining its
adaptation timing (ti) and adaptation capacity (Qi). In the dynamic and stochastic demand,
the operators can treat their adaptation projects as the real options (Dixit & Pindyck, 1994)
and thereby maximize their option values, respectively.
4.2 Equilibrium in the sub-game between the leader and the follower
Facing the time varying stochastic demand, two operators decide their adaptation timing
and facility capacities respectively. According to Huisman and Kort (2013), there are two
types of equilibrium in a ROG with two symmetric players: the deterrence equilibrium and
the accommodation equilibrium, depending on the beginning time X(0). In the deterrence
equilibrium, the leader has a preemption timing strategy at X D and the follower waits to invest
until X F. Using the preemption timing strategy, the leader makes the adaptation timing
decision not only earlier than the follower’s, but also earlier than its monopoly optimal
timing (the timing when there is only one operator in the transport market). The purpose of
this preemption strategy is to enter the adaptation market as earlier as possible to deter the
follower’s adaptation strategy. Otherwise the follower has the inventive to make the adaptation
investment so that the leader’s position is in jeopardy. In the accommodation equilibrium,
two operators make the simultaneous investment at X A, but their adaptation capacities are
different. It is worthy pointing out that the time t and the dynamically evolved market scalar X
have a one-to-one relationship.17 Determining adaptation timing t is equal to ﬁnd the proper
market scalar (at time t) Xt when the adaptation investment can be implemented. Therefore,
the timing t and Xt will be used interchangeably hereinafter. The equilibrium scenarios are
described in Fig. 2.
Using the technique proposed by Huisman and Kort (2013), we can obtain the ROG
equilibrium between the two operators as the following two propositions (the detailed process
is illustrated in the appendix). In particular, Proposition 2 describes the deterrence equilibrium
while Proposition 3 describes the accommodation equilibrium. Let β be the positive root of
16 One of the advantages of the GBM is its mathematical tractability (Dixit and Pindyck, 1994). Other
continuous stochastic processes, e.g., the mean-reverting process, are difﬁcult to deal with and thereby cannot
obtain the analytical results (an example can be found in Chapter 5.5 in Dixit and Pindyck, 1994). Moreover,
the mean-reverting process is commonly used to describe the stochastic process which can return to its
long-term average level after some periods (e.g., the price processes of oil and stock). It is obvious that the
mean-reverting process does not ﬁt the transport demand as the transport volume is positively related to the
economic development, demonstrating a long-run increasing trend.
17 From Eq. (8) we know that every time t corresponds to a speciﬁc market scalar Xt. In other words, if
we know a speciﬁc Xt, we can immediately ﬁnd its corresponding time t. That is why we can transfer an
operators’ timing decision (from determining the optimal t) to its determining the investment threshold X∗.
Once the market scalar reaches the threshold, i.e., Xt  X∗, the operator’s optimal adaptation timing arrives
and its adaptation investment decision is implemented”.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1617

Fig. 2 Equilibrium scenarios
the following quadratic equation.18
1/2σ 2β(β −1) + μβ −r  0
(10)
Moreover, let φ  D −η + δ −τ, QF(QL) 
X F(QL)·(1−QL)−(r−μ)φ
2X F(QL)
, X F(QL) 
(β+1)(r−μ)φ
(β−1)(1−QL), VL(X, QL)

X QL(1−QL)
r−μ
−φQL −

X
X F(QL)
β
X F(QL)·QL·QF(QL)
r−μ
 
,
VF(X, QL)

X QF(QL)[1−QL−QF(QL)]
r−μ
−
φQF(QL),
VL A(X, QL A)

X QL A[1−QL A−QF(QL A)]
r−μ
−φQL A, X ML  β+1
β−1(r −μ)φ, QML  X ML−(r−μ)φ
2X ML
.
Proposition 2 In the deterrence equilibrium, the leader’s adaptation timing is X D 
min(X ML, X P), where X ML 
β+1
β−1(r −μ)φ and X P are the minimum positive root of
Eqs. (11) and (12). If its timing is X ML, its adaptation capacity is QML. If its timing is
X P, its adaptation capacity is QL, which is another positive root of Eq. (11)and Eq. (12).
The follower’s adaptation timing is X F(QL) or X F(QML), and its adaptation capacity is
QF(QL) or QF(QML), which depend on the leader’s capacity.
VL(X, QL)  VF(X, QL)
(11)
∂VL(X, QL)/∂QL  0
(12)
Proposition 3 In the accommodation equilibrium, the adaptation timing of the leader and
the follower are X A, which is the minimum positive root of Eqs. (12) to (14). Moreover,
the leader’s adaptation capacity QL A is another positive root of Eqs. (12) to (14), and the
follower’s adaptation capacity is QF(QL A).
VL(X, QL)  VL A(X, QL A)
(13)
∂VL A(X, QL A)/∂QL A  0
(14)
Propositions 2 and 3 can be understood through the following points. X ML is the operator’s
optimal timing if it is a monopoly. VL(X, QL) or VF(X, QL) are an operator’s option values
if it behaves as a leader or a follower, respectively. Equalizing VL(X, QL) and VF(X, QL)
leads to X P, which is the timing that makes the operator indifferent between being a leader and
18 In the case of dynamically stochastic demand, each operator faces a ROG problem and needs to solve an
ordinary differentiation equation (ODE). Equation (10) is the characteristic equation related to the ODE and
can be used to ﬁnd β, which is crucial to the solutions of the ODE. The positive root β in Eq. (10) is used
to calculate the operators’ optimal investment thresholds. In Proposition 2, X ML  β+1
β−1(r −μ)φ, where its
calculation depends on β. The detailed derivation processes refer to Dixit and Pindyck (1994).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1618

beingafollower.Inthedeterrenceequilibrium,theleaderusesthepreemptivestrategytomake
the adaptation investment and becomes the monopoly until the follower makes its investment
at X F.19 Therefore, the leader’s preemptive timing X D is the earlier one between X P and
X ML. After the leader makes the timing decision at X D, it determines its adaptation capacity,
i.e., QML or QL, based on the realized demand at the time of investment. QML is obtained
from maximizing the leader’s monopoly option value, and QL is obtained from VL(X, QL),
which leads to the ﬁrst order condition, i.e., Eq. (12). Then the follower waits until X F
to make the adaptation investment. Because the follower’s instantaneous proﬁt depends on
the leader’s capacity (see Eq. (2)), its timing can be X F(QL) or X F(QML), depending on
whether the leader’s capacity is QML or QL. Meanwhile, the follower’s capacity may be
QF(QL) or QF(QML).
If an operator is indifferent between being a monopoly (leader) and being one of duopoly, it
may consider using the accommodation strategy. In Eq. (13), VL A(X, QL A) is the operator’s
option value if it behaves as one of a duopoly. Equalizing VL(X, QL) and VL A(X, QL A)
leads to X A, which is the timing for the operators (both the leader and the follower) to
choose the accommodation strategies. Based on the realized demand at X A, both operators
determine their capacities. It is worth emphasizing that their capacity decisions still follow a
Stackelberg style where an operator invests in a larger capacity QL A (and is referred as the
leader) and the other operator invests based on the leader’s capacity, i.e., QF(QL A) (and is
referred as the follower while its capacity is smaller than the leader’s). In other words, in the
accommodation equilibrium, the leader uses its capacity (rather than timing) to dominate the
follower and win the competitive advantage.
4.3 Government’s policy on subsidy and whether to set a demonstrator
under dynamically stochastic demand
Under the setting of time varying and stochastic demand, the related expected social welfare
is:
SWA(X0)  E

∞
∫
tA
SWA · e−rtdt|X(0)  X0

(15)
and
SWD(X0)  E

∞
∫
tL
SWD · e−rtdt|X(0)  X0

(16)
where tA is the simultaneous adaptation timing in the accommodation equilibrium and tL is
the leader’s adaptation timing in the deterrence equilibrium.
Due to the complexity of the equilibrium expressions, it is difﬁcult to analyze the gov-
ernment’s optimal subsidy and compare the two equilibria in terms of social welfare. Here
we use numerical experiments to illustrate the main ﬁndings and insights under dynamically
stochastic demand. In the demand function, the market potential of the deterministic part is
normalized to 1. To guarantee the positive prices and facility outputs in all possible scenarios,
we need to make sure that η, D, τ and δ are less than 1. Moreover, D and η are the expected
disaster loss and remedy by the adaptation for each unit of output, respectively. The unit rem-
edy of adaptation cannot exceed the expected unit disaster loss, i.e., η ≤D. δ is the marginal
19 Because of the symmetry between the operators, each one has 50% to be the leader. This can be treated as
an operator’s mixed strategies in the equilibrium, i.e., 50% of acting as the leader and 50% of acting as the
follower (Dixit and Pindyck, 1994).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1619

adaptation investment cost, and τ is the government’s subsidy for every unit of adaptation
investment. The subsidy is used to cover the operator’s partial investment cost and thereby
cannot exceed the marginal adaptation investment cost, i.e., τ ≤δ. Therefore, to show the
robustness of our numerical simulation results and provide richer insights, we conducted the
extensive sensitivity analyses based on the following parameter ranges: 0 < η ≤D < 1,
0 < τ ≤δ < 1. Moreover, we have the prerequisite 1 > r > μ (Dixit & Pindyck, 1994),
which can help us ﬁnd the scope of r. For the volatility σ, we need σ > 0 and use the exten-
sive sensitivity analyses to illustrate the impacts of the volatility on the model outcomes. For
the social welfare increment parameter from the learning of the demonstrator, i.e., T , we
only need T > 0 in the model. We use the sensitivity analyses to obtain more insights on
the impacts of this parameter. Therefore, we set μ ∈[0.03, 0.08], r  0.1, η ∈[0.06, 0.26],
D  0.2, δ  0.2, T ∈[0.01, 0.1], σ ∈[0.1, 2]. We could make the vast experiments on
these parameter values. To save the space, we focus on the sensitivity analysis on μ, σ, η
and T .
4.3.1 Sensitivity analysis on 
First, we can illustrate the optimal subsidies under the accommodation equilibrium and the
deterrence equilibrium in Fig. 3. From Fig. 3, we have the following observation:
Observation 1 In the accommodation equilibrium, increasing demand volatility requires
more subsidy; while in the deterrence equilibrium, increasing demand volatility requires less
subsidy.
After comparing social welfare under different equilibrium (see Fig. 4), we have the
following observation:
Observation 2 When the demand volatility is low, it is better to set an adaptation demonstra-
tor. When the demand volatility is high, it is better to encourage the two operators to engage
in a Cournot fashion game.
Next, we investigate the two operators’ decisions (in terms of their adaptation timing and
capacities) under the government’s optimal policy (including whether to set a demonstrator or
not and the related subsidies) when the demand volatility changes. The results are illustrated
in Figs. 5 and 6. From these ﬁgures, we have the following observations.
Observation 3 Increasing volatility delays the operators’ timing (for both the leader and the
follower in the deterrence equilibrium and their simultaneous timing in the accommodation
Fig. 3 The optimal subsidies under the equilibrium of accommodation and deterrence. AE indicates the accom-
modation equilibrium. DE indicates the deterrence equilibrium
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1620

Fig. 4 The expected social welfare under the equilibrium of accommodation and deterrence. AE indicates the
accommodation equilibrium. DE indicates the deterrence equilibrium
Fig. 5 The timing of the leader and the follower under the optimal subsidies
Fig. 6 The capacities of the leader and the follower under the optimal subsidies
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1621

equilibrium). Moreover, the timing distance between the leader the follower in the deterrence
equilibrium is enlarged as the volatility increases.
Observation 4 The operators’ adaptation capacities under both equilibria increase as the
volatility increases.
Based on these observations, the following insights can be obtained. First of all, the
demand volatility, i.e., σ., has signiﬁcant impacts on the results. Increasing volatility delays
the timing of both operators to invest in the adaptation project, irrespective of whether they
are in the preemption equilibrium or in the simultaneous equilibrium. This observation is
consistent with the standard real option theory, which suggests that a higher level of risk or
demand volatility makes the delayed investment more valuable. In our model, the operator’s
adaptation capacity is positively related to the realized market scalar at its timing. Therefore,
delayed timing means larger expected market scalar and larger adaptation capacity. Moreover,
the timing distance between the leader the follower in the preemption equilibrium isnlarged
as the volatility increases. Meanwhile, the capacities (for both ports under any scenarios)
increase as the volatility increases. An increase of the government’s subsidy (under both
equilibria) makes the adaptation timing earlier and decreases the capacities of both transport
facilities under all scenarios. The subsidy also increases the timing gap between the leader
and the follower in the preemption equilibrium.
In the preemption equilibrium, the subsidy has two effects. First, it can make the adap-
tation timing earlier (called the timing effect), which beneﬁts the social welfare because the
adaptation project is established earlier. Second, the subsidy can also reduce the capacities
of the adaptation projects (for both the leader and the follower) which decreases the demon-
stration beneﬁt and harms the social welfare. When the demand volatility is low, the timing
effect dominates the capacity effect and therefore the earlier timing should be encouraged.
When the demand volatility is high, the timing effect is dominated by the capacity effect and
therefore the earlier timing is not the best choice. In other words, the subsidy is needed when
the volatility is low, and the optimal subsidy is decreasing as the volatility increases. In the
simultaneous equilibrium, on the other hand, the demonstration beneﬁt disappears and the
capacity effect is reduced. Therefore, the timing effect always dominates the capacity effect
and the subsidy should be used to encourage the earlier timing.
4.3.2 Sensitivity analysis on 
The drift of the demand μ has the signiﬁcant meaning in our model, because it indicates the
expected growth of the transport demand. The results of its sensitivity analyses are shown in
Figs. 7, 8, 9, 10. From these outcomes, we reached the following conclusions.
(i)
Higher expected demand growth needs more subsidies in the accommodation equilib-
rium, while less subsidies in the deterrence equilibrium.
(ii)
Higher expected demand growth does not beneﬁt the social welfare.
(iii) Higher expected demand growth makes the adaptation investments earlier in the accom-
modation equilibrium, while delaying their adaptation investments in the deterrence
equilibrium.
(iv)
Higher expected demand growth increases the operators’ adaptation investments in
both the accommodation equilibrium and the deterrence equilibrium.
We have the following insights and explanations on these results.
The impacts of the expected growth (or the drift) are similar to the volatility. The subsi-
dies have two effects: the timing effect and the demonstration effects. In the accommodation
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1622

Fig. 7 The optimal subsidies under the equilibrium of accommodation and deterrence when μ changes
Fig. 8 The expected social welfare under the equilibrium of accommodation and deterrence when μ changes
Fig. 9 The timing of the leader and the follower under the optimal subsidies when μ changes
equilibrium, there is no demonstration effect and higher expected demand growth delays the
adaptation investment. Therefore, the government needs to use more subsidies to encourage
the operators to prompt their investments. In the deterrence equilibrium, as the expect growth
becomes higher, the demonstration effect increases and dominates the timing effect. There-
fore, the operators have more incentives to invest and the government needs less subsidies.
Higher expected demand growth requires the operators to put more capacities in both
the accommodation equilibrium and the deterrence equilibrium. However, higher expected
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1623

Fig. 10 The capacities of the leader and the follower under the optimal subsidies when μ changes
demand growth encourages the operators to wait and delay the adaptation investment, thereby
harming the social welfare.
4.3.3 Sensitivity analysis on 
We conduct the sensitivity analysis on η ∈[0.06, 0.26] and keep δ  0.2 unchanged.
Moreover, in the cases of η ∈[0.2, 0.26], we let D  0.3 to satisfy the prerequisite of
our model, i.e., η ≤D. We ﬁnd that the model outcomes are the same among the cases
when η ∈[0.06, 0.2](η < δ). Same outcomes also exist among the cases where η ∈[0.21,
0.26](η > δ). Therefore, we only list two outcomes in these cases in Table 3. From Table 3,
we have the following observations. The adaptation effectiveness, i.e., η −δ only has the
stepwise impacts on the model outcomes. Moreover, it only affects the government’s optimal
subsidies (and the related social welfare) and the operators’ timing decisions, but has no
impacts on the operators’ capacity decisions. The reasons and insights are as follows.
In our setting, the social welfare in the linear function of the disaster loss remedy and
the adaptation investment cost. Therefore, the social optimal decision is “binary”. When
η < δ (or η > δ, respectively), the direct beneﬁt from the adaptation is less than (or more
than, respectively) the adaptation cost. The government needs to provide more subsidies in
the case of η < δ than the case of η > δ, in order to promote the operators to make the
adaptation investment. However, in the cases of η < δ, the subsidies are the same, whatever
the difference between the η and δ.
More subsidies in the case of η < δ (compared to the case of η > δ) encourage the oper-
ators to make earlier investments. However, the subsidies have no impacts on the operators’
capacity decisions, because the capacities (or the operators’ outputs) are mainly determined
by the market demand and the operators’ competition. The subsidy only affects the operators’
timing and has no impacts on the operators’ outputs.
4.3.4 Sensitivity analysis on T
The results of the sensitivity analysis on T are shown in Table 4. It is found that the change
of T has no impacts on the results in the accommodation equilibrium. In the deterrence equi-
librium, larger demonstration effects encourage the government to provide more subsidies
and the operators to make earlier adaptation investments. However, the larger demonstration
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1624

Table 3 Impacts of different η on the model results
Parameter
Subsidy
Social welfare
Timing in the DE
Capacities in the DE
Timing in the AE
AE-capacity
AE
DE
AE
DE
Leader
Follower
Leader
Follower
Leader
Follower
η  0.06 < δ  0.2, D  0.2
0.160
0.160
55.129
94.148
0.018
0.036
0.247
0.265
0.052
0.480
0.179
η  0.22 > δ  0.2, D  0.3
0.120
0.140
64.700
113.056
0.016
0.031
0.247
0.265
0.049
0.480
0.179
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1625

Table 4 Impacts of different T on the model results in the deterrence equilibrium
T
Subsidy in the DE
SW in the DE
DE-timing
DE-capacity
Leader
Follower
Leader
Follower
0.01
0.16
105.62
0.016
0.031
0.247
0.265
0.03
0.18
130.36
0.014
0.027
0.247
0.265
0.06
0.20
188.877
0.011
0.022
0.247
0.265
effects do not change the operators’ capacity decisions. These results are straightforward to
understand.
4.4 Rules of setting demonstrator under the static and the time-varying stochastic
demands
Proposition 1 tells us that under static stochastic demand, whether the government should set
a demonstrator depends on E(X) + η −D −δ and T . E(X) is the expected market scalar,
which can be treated as the marginal social welfare potential. The term E(X) + η −D −δ
is the net marginal beneﬁt potential from the adaptation projects. Proposition 1 indicates
that the setting of the demonstrator needs to be encouraged if the net marginal beneﬁt is
positive. If it is negative, the demonstrator can still be encouraged if the demonstration
effect is sufﬁciently large. From Observation 2 we know that the demand volatility plays
a crucial role in determining whether the demonstrator should be set. From Eq. (8) we
know that the expected market scalar at the operator’s adaptation timing under the dynamic
circumstance is E(Xt)  exp

μ −1
2σ 2
t, where t is the operator’s adaptation timing. Table
5 shows the comparisons of the rules of setting demonstrator under the static and time-
varying stochastic demand. We can see the equivalence between the two rules. Table 5
provides us an approximate rule to assess whether to set up a demonstrator in the time varying
stochastic demand case, that is: (1) if the expected instantaneous net marginal beneﬁt potential
(EINMBP) from the demonstrator’s adaptation project (at its investment time) is positive,
the government can set up the demonstrator; (2) if the EINMBP is negative, and the marginal
demonstration effect is larger enough (larger than the doubled EINMBP), the demonstrator
can still be set up; (3) otherwise, it is better not to set a demonstrator.
Table 5 Rules of setting demonstrator under the static and the time-varying stochastic demands
σ
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.5
1
1.5
2
X D
0.022
0.026
0.031
0.060
0.092
0.992
1.693
X A
0.045
0.056
0.071
0.207
0.591
0.992
1.693
SWD
100.480
64.022
43.089
13.958
9.626
8.962
8.783
SWA
59.430
41.203
29.924
12.181
9.421
9.127
9.113
Set a demonstrator?
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
E(X D) + η −D −δ
0.701
0.701
0.701
0.696
0.659
0.044
−0.263
−2(E(X D) + η −D −δ)
−1.402
−1.402
−1.402
−1.391
−1.319
−0.088
0.526
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1626

4.5 Policy implications
From our models under both the static and dynamic stochastic demand scenario, we can obtain
some policy implications which may be of potential use for the government in encouraging
the adaptation investment of the transport facilities. Corresponding to our research questions,
the policy implications mainly refer to the following two perspectives:
(i)
Should a demonstrator be set up? It can be judged from the demand side and the supply
side. In the demand side, the government should differentiate transport facilities that
have very stable demand from those that have volatile demand. In a stable market, its
market scalar or potential plays the most crucial role in the demonstrator policy. In a
volatile or time varying market, it is more necessary for the government to encourage a
demonstrator when the volatility is low. In the supply side, the demonstration effect from
the demonstrator facility should be considered to assess the policy design. Moreover,
whether the government encourages the setting up of a demonstrator could completely
change the behavior of the operators in terms of adaptation investment. Therefore, the
government should adopt a serious and careful attitude when designing the relevant
policy.
(ii) How to provide the operators subsidies? In a static demand market, the government
needs to provide subsidies to the transport facilities whatever the demonstrator is set or
not, except when the marginal adaptation cost is much higher than its marginal beneﬁt.
When the demonstrator is set, larger demonstration effect needs more government’s
subsidy budget.
In a volatile or time varying market, we obtain the following implications. When the
demand volatility is high, more (or less, respectively) subsidies are required and the demon-
strator is less (or more, respectively) likely to set. Higher demand volatility always encourages
the operators to invest more adaptations, no matter a demonstrator is set or not. Higher demand
volatility always delays the operators to invest in adaptation, no matter a demonstrator is set
or not. When the expected demand growth is high, more (or less, respectively) subsidies are
required and the demonstrator is less (or more, respectively) likely to set. When the expected
demand growth is high, the operators are inclined to invest earlier (or later, respectively), if a
demonstrator is not (or is, respectively) set. Higher expected demand growth always encour-
ages the operators to invest more adaptations, no matter a demonstrator is set or not. The
adaptation effectiveness, namely the difference between the adaptation marginal cost and its
remedy, has a stepwise effect on the subsidy. That said, when the adaptation marginal cost
is higher than its remedy, regardless their difference in magnitude, the government’s optimal
subsidies are the same. The adaptation marginal cost, its remedy and the demonstration effect
only affect the operators’ investment timing but have no impacts on outputs.
5 Conclusions
This paper presents a set of game-theoretic models to investigate the interaction of adaptation
investments among transport facility operators in the context of both static stochastic demand
and time-varying stochastic demand. Additionally, we examine the optimal decisions of the
government regarding the establishment of a demonstrator and the corresponding subsidy
policies. Our ﬁndings reveal several key insights. Firstly, under static stochastic demand,
the government is inclined to establish a demonstrator if the marginal beneﬁt of the adapta-
tion capacity surpasses its marginal cost or if the demonstration effect is sufﬁciently high.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1627

Secondly, with regard to time-varying stochastic demand, the government prefers to estab-
lish a demonstrator when the demand volatility is low. Furthermore, as demand volatility
increases, the required subsidy decreases (or increases, respectively) when a demonstrator
is (or is not, respectively) in place. Lastly, regardless of the presence of a demonstrator,
increasing demand volatility leads to delayed adaptation timing for operators and necessi-
tates higher levels of adaptation investment. These ﬁndings shed light on the government’s
decision-making process and the factors inﬂuencing operators’ adaptation strategies under
different demand scenarios. By considering both static and time-varying stochastic demand,
this research contributes to a comprehensive understanding of the transport adaptation deci-
sions and government policy design.
The paper acknowledges certain limitations that can serve as potential directions for future
research. Firstly, in our study, the leader’s demonstration effect is treated as exogenous and
does not inﬂuence the follower’s decisions and proﬁtability. However, it is worth considering
that followers can learn from the leader’s experiences, leading to improvements in their own
operations and marketing strategies. Incorporating this dynamic into the model would provide
a more comprehensive analysis. Secondly, to simplify the problem, we assume that the two
operators are symmetric. However, if there is asymmetry between the operators, it could result
in a more complex equilibrium (Pawlina & Kort, 2006), particularly in a time-varying market
where government policies play a crucial role. Future research could delve into exploring
the implications of operator asymmetry and its impact on market dynamics. Furthermore,
our study only considers the operators’ adaptation investments, neglecting their investments
in other projects such as general production and research and development (R&D). Since
these projects compete for investment resources, how operators allocate their limited budgets
among different projects becomes vital for their adaptation performance and overall social
welfare. Therefore, it is essential for future research to investigate the optimal allocation of
investment resources among diverse projects for operators.
Acknowledgements Financial supports from the National Science Foundation of China (No. 72371074;
72072113,72031005)andtheNaturalScienceFoundationofBeijingMunicipality(No.IS23129)aregratefully
acknowledged.
Funding Open access funding provided by The Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix
Proofs of Proposition 1
First, we prove the optimal subsidy in the case of no demonstrator. According to the
backward induction, we ﬁrst analyze the operators’ adaptation investment decisions, and
then the government’s optimal subsidy. In the case of no demonstrator, the two operators
engage in a Cournot game and their equilibrium capacities can be expressed as Eq. (5).
Substituting Eq. (5) into Eq. (3), which is the social welfare function when there is no
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1628

demonstrator, and maximizing it with respect to τ, we obtain the optimal subsidy as
τ ∗
A  max[(E(X) + η −D −δ)/2, 0] in the case of no demonstrator, which proves part
(i) of Proposition 1.
Then we prove the optimal subsidy in the case of demonstrator. We still follow the back-
ward induction. In the case of demonstrator, the two operators engage in a Stackelberg
game and their equilibrium capacities can be expressed as Eqs. (6) and (7). Substitut-
ing Eqs. (6) and (7) into Eq. (4), which is the social welfare function when there is
a demonstrator, and maximizing it with respect to τ, we obtain the optimal subsidy as
τ ∗
D  max[(E(X) + η −D −δ + 4T )/3, 0] in the case of demonstrator, which proves part
(ii) of Proposition 1.
Substituting τ ∗
A (obtained in Part (i) of Proposition 1) into Eq. (5), we can obtain the opera-
tors’ adaptation capacities Q∗
i, A in the case of no demonstrator. Then we have the total subsidy
in the case of no demonstrator as S∗
A  2τ ∗
AQ∗
i, A. Meanwhile, substituting τ ∗
D (obtained in
Part (ii) of Proposition 1) into Eqs. (6) and (7), we can obtain the optimal capacities of the
leader and the follower, i.e., Q∗
L, D and Q∗
F, D in the case of demonstrator. Then we have the
total subsidy in the case of demonstrator as S∗
D  τ ∗
D(Q∗
L, A + Q∗
F, D). Comparing S∗
A and
S∗
D, we ﬁnd that S∗
A < S∗
D when T >
√
33 −5

(E(X) + η −D −δ)/8. Because T should
be non-negative, we need to force T > max
√
33 −5

(E(X) + η −D −δ)/8, 0
 
. These
prove part (iii) of Proposition 1.
Substituting τ ∗
A (obtained in Part (i) of Proposition 1) into Eqs. (5) and (3), we can obtain
the optimal social welfare SW ∗
A in the case of no demonstrator. Meanwhile, substituting τ ∗
D
(obtained in Part (ii) of Proposition 1) into Eqs. (6), (7) and (4), we can obtain the optimal
social welfare SW ∗
D in the case of demonstrator. Comparing SW ∗
A and SW ∗
D, we ﬁnd that
SW ∗
A < SW ∗
D when E(X)+η−D −δ > 0. If E(X)+η−D −δ < 0, we have SW ∗
A < SW ∗
D
when T > −2(E(X) + η −D −δ). These prove part (iv) of Proposition 1.
Proofs of Proposition 2
The proofs of Proposition 2 and 3 follow Huisman and Kort (2013), and here we present the
main steps. The details can be referred from Huisman and Kort (2013).
First, the option value function of the follower can be expressed as follows:
VF 

AF Xβ
i f X < X∗
F
πF
r−μ −φQF i f X ≥X∗
F
(17)
where X∗
F is the follower’s adaptation timing, AF is the parameter and πF is the follower’s
instantaneous revenue after its adaptation.
πF  X(1 −QL −QF)QF
(18)
Meanwhile, the option value function of the leader can be expressed as follows:
VL 

AL Xβ
i f X < X∗
L
πML
r−μ −φQL −( X
X∗
F )β (πML−πF)
r−μ
i f X ≥X∗
L
(19)
where X∗
L is the leader’s adaptation timing, AL is the parameter and πML is the leader’s
instantaneous revenue after its adaptation and before the follower’s adaptation investment.
Or it is the leader’s instantaneous revenue as a monopoly investor.
πML  X(1 −QL)QL
(20)
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1629

Then, according to backward induction, we analyze the follower’s decisions. Its capacity
decision is made after its timing, which means the capacity decision is based on the realized
market scalar at the follower’s timing, i.e., X∗
F. Maximizing πF
r−μ −φQF with respect to QF,
we obtain
QF  X∗
F(1 −QL) −φ(r −μ)
2X∗
F
(21)
Note that X∗
F depends on QL, and thereby QF is a function of QL. Substituting Eq. (21)
into Eq. (17), and using the standard approach proposed by Dixit and Pindyck (1994), we
obtain the follower’s adaptation timing X∗
F and the parameter AF. Substituting X∗
F into
Eq. (21), we can obtain Q∗
F. Substituting X∗
F and Q∗
F into Eq. (19), and maximizing πML
r−μ −
φQL −( X
X∗
F )β (πML−πF)
r−μ
with respect to QL, we obtain Eq. (12). Meanwhile, using the rent
equalization principle (Fudenberg & Tirole, 1991), we have Eq. (11), which indicates the
latest deterrence timing making no difference between being the leader and the follower.
Solving the simultaneous equations Eqs. (11) and (12) with respect to QL and X L, we obtain
X P and its related Q∗
L. Moreover, the option value function of the monopoly operator can
be expressed as follows:
VML 

AML Xβ
i f X < X∗
ML
πML
r−μ −φQML i f X ≥X∗
ML
(22)
Maximizing πML
r−μ −φQML with respect to QML, we obtain the optimal Q∗
ML, which is
the function of X∗
ML. Substituting Q∗
ML into Eq. (17) and using the standard approach, we
obtain X∗
ML and Q∗
ML. Finally, the leader’s timing is the earlier time of X∗
ML and X P, i.e.,
X D  min(X ML, X P). After determining X D, we can obtain Q∗
L, X∗
F and Q∗
F.
Proofs of Proposition 3
First, the option value function of the leaser can be expressed as follows if it accommodates
the follower:
VL A 

AL AXβ
i f X < X∗
A
πAL
r−μ −φQ AL i f X ≥X∗
A
(23)
where πAL  X(1 −Q AL −QF)Q AL.
Substituting Eq. (21) into πAL and maximizing it with respect to Q AL, we obtain Eq. (14).
Meanwhile, equalizing the leader’s option value when it uses the preemptive strategy, i.e.,
Eq. (19), and the accommodation strategy, i.e., Eq. (23), we can obtain the leader’s timing
when it has no difference between these two strategies, which is its earliest timing to use the
accommodation strategy. That is, Solving the simultaneous equations Eqs. (12) to Eq. (14),
we obtain X∗
A and Q∗
AL. Substituting X∗
A and Q∗
AL into Eq. (21), we obtain QF(QL A), which
is the follower’s capacity in the accommodation equilibrium.
References
Azevedo, A., & Paxson, D. (2014). Developing real option game models. European Journal of Operational
Research, 237, 909–920.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1630

Balliauw, M., Kort, P. M., & Zhang, A. (2019). Capacity investment decisions of two competing ports under
uncertainty: A strategic real options approach. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 122,
249–264.
Brander, J. A., & Zhang, A. (1990). Market conduct in the airline industry: An empirical investigation. The
RAND Journal of Economics, 21, 567–583.
Chesney, M., Lasserre, P., & Troja, B. (2017). Mitigating global warming: A real options approach. Annals of
Operations Research, 255, 405–506.
Christodoulou, A., Christidis, P., & Demirel, H. (2019). Sea-level rise in ports: A wider focus on impacts.
Maritime Economics & Logistics, 21(4), 482–496.
Coles, J. B., Zhang, J., & Zhuang, J. (2022). Bridging the research-practice gap in disaster relief: Using the
IFRC Code of Conduct to develop an aid model. Annals of Operations Research, 312, 1337–1357.
Dixit, A. K., & Pindyck, R. S. (1994). Investment under uncertainty. Princeton University Press.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., & Papadopoulos, T. (2019). Disaster relief operations: Past, present and future.
Annals of Operations Research, 283, 1–8.
Fudenberg, D., & Tirole, J. (1991). Game theory. MIT Press.
Galera, A. L. L., & Solino, A. S. (2010). A real options approach for the valuation of highway concessions.
Transportation Science, 44(3), 416–427.
Gao, Y., & Driouchi, T. (2013). Incorporating Knightian uncertainty into real options analysis: Using multiple-
priors in the case of rail transit investment. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 55, 23–40.
Geoffrey, A. J., & Philip, J. R. (2013). Advanced microeconomic theory. Prentice Hall Press.
Gong, L., Xiao, Y. B., Jiang, C., Zheng, S., & Fu, X. (2020). Seaport investments in capacity and natural
disaster prevention. Transportation Research Part d: Transport and Environment, 85, 102367.
Huisman, K. J. M., Kort, P. M. (2013). Strategic capacity investment under uncertainty. Working paper, Tilburg
University.
Jiang, C., Zheng, S., Ng, A. K., Ge, Y. E., & Fu, X. (2020). The climate change strategies of seaports: Mitigation
vs. adaptation. Transportation Research Part d: Transport and Environment, 89, 102603.
Koetse, M. J., & Rietveld, P. (2009). The impact of climate change and weather on transport: An overview of
empirical ﬁndings. Transportation Research Part d: Transport and Environment, 14(3), 205–221.
Kreps, D. M., & Scheinkman, J. A. (1983). Quantity precommitment and Bertrand competition yield Cournot
outcomes. The Bell Journal of Economics, 14, 326–337.
Lin, M. H., & Zhang, Y. (2017). Hub-airport congestion pricing and capacity investment. Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological, 101, 89–106.
Luo, M., Liu, L., & Gao, F. (2012). Post-entry container port capacity expansion. Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological, 46(1), 120–138.
Mishra, D., Kumar, S., & Hassini, E. (2019). Current trends in disaster management simulation modeling
research. Annals of Operations Research, 283, 1387–1411.
Ng, A. K. Y., Chen, S. L., & Cahoon, S. (2013). Climate change and the adaptation strategies of ports: The
Australian experiences. Research in Transportation Business & Management, 8, 186–194.
Ng, A. K., Wang, T., Yang, Z., Li, K. X., & Jiang, C. (2018). How is business adapting to climate change
impacts appropriately? Insight from the commercial port sector. Journal of Business Ethics, 150(4),
1029–1047.
Panahi, R., Ng, A. K. Y., & Pang, J. (2020). Climate change adaptation in the port industry: A complex of
lingering research gaps and uncertainties. Transport Policy, 95, 10–29.
Pawlina, G., & Kort, P. M. (2006). Real options in an asymmetric duopoly: Who beneﬁts from your competitive
disadvantage? Journal of Economic and Management Strategy, 15(1), 1–35.
Randrianarisoa, L. M., & Zhang, A. (2019). Adaptation to climate change effects and competition between
ports: Invest now or later? Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 123, 279–322.
Rau, P., & Spinler, S. (2016). Investment into container shipping industry capacity: A real options approach
in oligopolistic competition. Transportation Research Part E, 93, 130–147.
Thompson, M., Davison, M., & Rasmussen, H. (2004). Valuation and optimal operation of electric power
plants in competitive markets. Operations Research, 52(4), 546–562.
Tirole, J. (1988). The theory of industrial organization. MIT Press.
Trigeorgis, L., & Tsekrekosd, A. (2018). Real options in operations research: A review. European Journal of
Operational Research, 270(1), 1–24.
Wang, K., Yang, H., & Zhang, A. (2020). Seaport adaptation to climate change-related disasters: Terminal
operator market structure and inter-and intra-port coopetition. Spatial Economic Analysis, 3, 1–15.
Wang, K., & Zhang, A. (2018). Climate change, natural disasters and adaptation investments: Inter-and intra-
port competition and cooperation. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 117, 158–189.
Xia, W., & Lindsey, R. (2021). Port adaptation to climate change and capacity investments under uncertainty.
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 152, 180–204.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1631

Xiao, Y., Fu, X., Ng, A. K. Y., & Zhang, A. (2015). Port investments on coastal and marine disasters prevention.
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 78, 202–221.
Xiao, Y., Fu, X., Oum, T. H., & Yan, J. (2017). Modeling airport capacity choice with real options. Trans-
portation Research Part B: Methodological, 100, 93–114.
Xiao, Y., Fu, X., & Zhang, A. (2013). Demand uncertainty and airport capacity choice. Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological, 57, 91–104.
Yang, R. F., Hu, R., Xiao, Y. B., Deng, X., & Wang, K. (2022). Seaport’s investment under disaster information
asymmetry between public and private operators. Transport Policy, 119, 89–112.
Yang, Z., Ng, A. K. Y., & Lee, P. T. W. (2018). Risk and cost evaluation of port adaptation measures to climate
change impacts. Transportation Research Part d: Transport and Environment, 61, 444–458.
Zhang, A., & Zhang, Y. (2003). Airport charges and capacity expansion: Effects of concessions and privati-
zation. Journal of Urban Economics, 53(1), 54–75.
Zhang, A., & Zhang, Y. (2006). Airport capacity and congestion when carriers have market power. Journal of
Urban Economics, 60(2), 229–247.
Zheng, S., Fu, X., Wang, K., & Li, H. (2021a). Seaport adaptation to climate change disasters: Subsidy
policy vs. adaptation sharing under minimum requirement. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review, 155, 102488.
Zheng, S., Jia, R., Shang, W. L., Fu, X., & Wang, K. (2023). Promote transport facility resilience: Persuasion
or subsidy? Transportation Research Part a: Policy and Practice, 176, 103822.
Zheng, S., & Jiang, C. (2023). Real options in transportation research: A review. Transport Economics and
Management, 1, 22–31.
Zheng,S.,Jiang,C.,&Fu,X.(2021c).Investmentcompetitionondedicatedterminalsunderdemandambiguity.
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 150, 102306.
Zheng, S., Jiang, C., Fu, X., & Ge, Y. (2020). Airline investments in exclusive airport facilities: Timing
decisions under demand ambiguity. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 139, 343–363.
Zheng, S., Jiang, C., Fu, X., Ge, Y., & Shu, J. (2022b). Subsidies for green technology adoption under uncertain
demand and incomplete information. Omega, 112, 102675.
Zheng, S., Wang, K., Chan, F., Fu, X., & Li, Z. (2022a). Subsidy on transport adaptation investment: Modeling
decisions under incomplete information and ambiguity. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological,
162, 103–129.
Zheng, S., Wang, K., Li, Z. C., Fu, X., & Chan, F. (2021b). Subsidy or minimum requirement? Regulation of
port adaptation investment under disaster ambiguity. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological,
150, 457–481.
Zhu, S., Zheng, S., Ge, Y., & Fu, X. (2019). Vertical integration and its implications to port expansion. Maritime
Policy and Management, 45(8), 920–938.
Zormpas, D., & Oggioni, G. (2023). Evaluating the optimal timing and capacity of investments in ﬂexible
combined heat and power generation for energy-intensive industries. Annals of Operations Research,
1–28.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1603–1632
1632