TITLE: Explainable text-based features in predictive models of crowdfunding campaigns
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05800-w
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05800-w
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Explainable text-based features in predictive models of
crowdfunding campaigns
Viktor Pekar1
· Marina Candi2 · Ahmad Beltagui1 · Nikolaos Stylos3 · Wei Liu4
Received: 1 April 2023 / Accepted: 15 December 2023 / Published online: 12 January 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Reward-Based Crowdfunding offers an opportunity for innovative ventures that would not
be supported through traditional ﬁnancing. A key problem for those seeking funding is
understanding which features of a crowdfunding campaign will sway the decisions of a suf-
ﬁcient number of funders. Predictive models of fund-raising campaigns used in combination
with Explainable AI methods promise to provide such insights. However, previous work on
Explainable AI has largely focused on quantitative structured data. In this study, our aim is
to construct explainable models of human decisions based on analysis of natural language
text, thus contributing to a fast-growing body of research on the use of Explainable AI for
text analytics. We propose a novel method to construct predictions based on text via semantic
clustering of sentences, which, compared with traditional methods using individual words
and phrases, allows complex meaning contained in the text to be operationalised. Using
experimental evaluation, we compare our proposed method to keyword extraction and topic
modelling, which have traditionally been used in similar applications. Our results demon-
strate that the sentence clustering method produces features with signiﬁcant predictive power,
Marina Candi, Ahmad Beltagui, Nikolaos Stylos and Wei Liu contributed equally to this work.
B Viktor Pekar
v.pekar@aston.ac.uk
Marina Candi
Marina@ru.is
Ahmad Beltagui
a.beltagui@aston.ac.uk
Nikolaos Stylos
n.stylos@bristol.ac.uk
Wei Liu
wei.liu@kcl.ac.uk
1
OIM Department, Aston University, Aston Street, Birmingham B4 7ET, UK
2
Center for Research on Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Reykjavik University, Menntavegur 1,
Reykjavik 101, Iceland
3
Innovation and Digitalisation Research Group, University of Bristol Business School, Queens Ave.,
Bristol BS8 1SD, UK
4
King’s College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK
123

368
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
compared to keyword-based methods and topic models, but which are much easier to inter-
pret for human raters. We furthermore conduct a SHAP analysis of the models incorporating
sentence clusters, demonstrating concrete insights into the types of natural language content
that inﬂuence the outcome of crowdfunding campaigns.
Keywords Predictive modelling · Crowdfunding · Natural Language Processing · Sentence
embeddings · SHAP · 3D printing
1 Introduction
Reward-based crowdfunding has emerged as a model for resourcing innovation activities that
would otherwise be unlikely to receive support (Belleﬂamme et al., 2015; Nucciarelli et al.,
2017). Due to its novelty, there is limited understanding of success factors, particularly how
to craft a crowdfunding campaign that successfully attracts sufﬁcient funding. Crowdfunding
is an open call for relatively small contributions from a large number of funders, who con-
tribute ﬁnancial resources without need for ﬁnancial intermediaries (Mollick, 2014; Behl et
al., 2022). Funders invest on the basis of earning a reward, such as the product or associated
beneﬁts (reward-based) or proﬁt-sharing with the founders (equity-based). Individuals seek-
ing resources to produce a product, who we refer to as founders, provide information on the
proposed product through a campaign hosted on a crowdfunding platform, such as Kickstarter
or Indiegogo. The campaign explains and demonstrates the product, outlines what funding is
needed to produce it and details the rewards on offer, including the product itself as well as
other beneﬁts such as discounts or additional features (Chakraborty and Swinney, 2021). The
immediacy of the interaction can reveal customers’ willingness to pay, allows founders to
experiment or “fail fast” and can build a business case for further funding through traditional
sources (Belleﬂamme et al., 2015). In the context of reward-based crowdfunding, funders
act as customers who decide whether to purchase a product. However, unlike products that
are already on the market and can be easily tested, funders must evaluate the promise of a
product prior to its production. With no customer feedback to rely on, they must evaluate the
information present in the crowdfunding campaign, which is made up of text and images.
The content of the text can have an important bearing on the success of campaigns. A crucial
challenge, therefore, is ensuring that campaign text communicates the correct messages to
ensure funders are convinced to invest in the campaign.
Previous research has identiﬁed stylistic characteristics such as the richness and persua-
siveness of text (Yeh et al., 2019) and its conciseness (Greenberg et al., 2013) to improve
success, while spelling errors or informal language can have the opposite effect (Mollick,
2014). An important but under-researched topic is content analysis that would reveal how
founders can signal quality, preparedness and legitimacy, to ensure funders value the prod-
uct, accept the risk of investing before production and trust the founder to deliver on their
promise.
In recent years, the use of Machine Learning (ML) to automate prediction and decision-
making in many business applications has increased rapidly. ML algorithms can process a
vast number of salient factors that human analysts may struggle to comprehend when making
business decisions, and as such, have been widely applied to problems that were previously
impossible to predict accurately, such as the assessment of investment risks (Mahbub et
al., 2022; Behl et al., 2022), customer segmentation (Mehta et al., 2021), prediction of
customer churn (Ahn et al., 2020), dynamic pricing (Ban and Keskin, 2021), personalized
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
369
advertising (Choi and Lim, 2020), and assessment of the quality of sales leads (Yan et al.,
2015). Despite ML’s advantages and potential, a growing concern relates to the lack of
transparency of automated, data-driven solutions, which may compromise accountability,
fairness and legality (Langer et al., 2021). End users urgently need automated solutions that
can explain, in terms that are intuitive for humans, how decisions were reached. Such systems
would gain increased trust and increase the value of insight they offer for business problems.
To address this need, considerable progress has been made in developing Explainable AI
methods, however previous work in this area has largely focused on structured data (Lundberg
and Lee, 2017). In this study we focus on explaining human decisions based on interpretation
of natural language, thus contributing to a fast-growing body of recent research on the use
of Explainable AI in text analytics (see Danilevsky et al. (2020) for an overview).
Predictive features extracted from natural language text are of particular interest in many
applications as they can shed light on ideas, beliefs and emotions that inﬂuence business
decisions. NLP techniques have long been employed to address different practical problems,
where they are used to create numerical representations of textual documents, by analysing
them in terms of pre-deﬁned lexical categories (Mitra and Gilbert, 2014), sentiment classiﬁca-
tions (Desai et al., 2015; Khan et al., 2020), distributed word and paragraph representations
(Kaminski and Hopp, 2019), and topic models (Hansen and McMahon, 2016; Thorsrud,
2020; Park et al., 2021), which are subsequently used as input into ML models of various
economic phenomena.
Toprovideameanstostudytheeffectofcampaignpresentationsontheireventualoutcome,
the present paper proposes a new method, which extracts predictor variables from natural
language text based on clustering of sentences by their semantic similarity. Unlike traditional
topic models that are constructed over words, our proposed method analyses entire sentences
to provide interpretable insights into the contents of documents. In so doing, we offer progress
toward interpretable predictive models incorporating evidence from natural language text.
In the experimental evaluation we apply the proposed method to text communications
between founders and investors in order to discover textual signals predictive of funding
success, and compare it to two methods that have been popular in prior research on crowd-
funding success predictions, namely keyword extraction and topic models. Our results show
that semantic sentence clusters provide a more transparent and interpretable way to analyse
these texts, compared to keywords and topics models. These results suggest that seman-
tic sentence clusters can also be useful for a variety of applications besides predicting the
success of crowdfunding campaigns, including market research, customer feedback, and sen-
timent analysis. Our method has the potential to signiﬁcantly improve the interpretability of
text-based predictive models in many other business applications, such as corporate com-
munications and customer relationship management, and help address some of the concerns
regarding their use in decision-making.
Our work makes three important contributions. First, we develop and test a new method
to construct predictor models from text based on clustering individual sentences by their
meaning. We demonstrate the beneﬁt to interpretability of using text-based analysis on sen-
tences, as opposed to keywords or topics. Second, our method offers automatic labelling of
clusters, which represents a substantial improvement over popular topic modelling methods.
Finally, we demonstrate the interpretability of predictor features created using our method
compared to topic modelling and keyword methods. Theoretically, this paper contributes to
improving the explainability and predictive power of text-based open databases emerging
from fundraising platforms. From a managerial viewpoint, the current work provides new
insights into how analysis of text databases can be improved.
123

370
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
2 Theoretical background
One key tenet of machine learning theory is that it is possible to design a computer program
that can learn to predict outcomes of different situations from data and improve its prediction
accuracy with experience (Mitchell, 1997). In developing ML models of economic phenom-
ena, researchers have sought to demonstrate that past observations can be used to accurately
predict the future development of these phenomena and, more importantly, to explain factors
that affect them, as such insights open possibilities to develop policies that can help to achieve
desired economic objectives. When it comes to models operating over textual data, machine
learning methods are similarly expected to reveal which concepts or ideas expressed within
textual documents act as drivers of different economic outcomes.
In this section, we ﬁrst provide a broad overview of existing research on modelling macro-
and micro-economic phenomena with different types of predictive features derived from
textual data (Sect.2.1). We then discuss prior research on using text-based features in models
of crowdfunding campaigns, in particular (Sect.2.1). Finally, we review studies concerned
with explainability of models that operate over text-based features (Sect.2.3).
2.1 Predictive modelling via text for macro and microeconomic phenomena
Scholars have been working on improving predictions for decades. They do so by design-
ing schemes, implementing hypotheses and even attempting to forecast natural events and
disasters. Concerning ﬁnancial markets, the main aspect of making successful predictions
relies on recognising, selecting, and measuring the most relevant and critical predictors. Still,
some of these predictors may be difﬁcult to identify or measure, as in certain cases they may
constantly vary with respect to temporal or spatial parameters.
Nowadays, social media and crowdfunding platforms play a key role in promoting activ-
ities, fundraising efforts, and gathering respective data, thus capitalizing on special interests
as expressed through online communities (Candi et al., 2018). Thus, the dynamics in utilizing
various online platforms represent one of the most striking challenges to the forecasting abil-
ities of private and public institutions worldwide (Elshendy et al., 2018). Already since 2010,
text analysis had been reported as a new phenomenon in ﬁnancial literature, as the availability
of electronic ﬁnancial text had already been on the rise (Cecchini et al., 2010). Text mining
is the process of extracting useful information from textual data sources. Apart from simple
processing procedures such as eliminating punctuation and capitalization, it describes the
process of ultimately converting the text into algorithmically interpretable data, or numerical
values (Naderi Semiromi et al., 2020).
Textual data can provide valuable qualitative information. With the recent advances in
statistics and computational techniques, researchers are much better equipped to analyse data
to serve forecasting efforts (Aprigliano et al., 2023), but more needs to be done to improve
prediction accuracy. NLP can be successfully utilized for learning and understanding human
language content, thus making it a crucial capability for capturing sentiments. Leveraging
NLP techniques to predict ﬁnancial markets has gradually established the research ﬁeld
of natural language-based ﬁnancial forecasting and stock market prediction (Xie and Xing,
2013), which can serve as a springboard for applying NLP algorithms in other ﬁelds, including
crowdsourcing and marketing of novel digital services.
Furthermore, topic modelling (Blei et al., 2003), a widely used NLP method, can ﬁnd
latent topics in text data and then classify the text according to the topics found. For text
analysis, there are different proposed approaches and algorithms for topic modelling, such
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
371
as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) and Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). In addition to
improving predictive performance, topic models have been seen as a way to generate readily
interpretable units of text analysis; previous research has developed quantitative metrics for
evaluating the interpretability of topics such as semantic coherence and topic exclusivity
(Park et al., 2021), which could also ﬁnd application in online funding initiatives.
Moreover, with the advent of machine learning, prediction systems started to draw
more attention and different solutions were proposed. New technologies have become
game-changers in advancing content-based customer recommendation systems, risk anal-
ysis systems for banks, as well as applications for stock markets (Sert et al., 2020). Social
media platforms have served as ideal sources for big data, feeding prediction systems (Candi
et al., 2018; Stylos and Zwiegelaar, 2019; Pekar, 2020; Stylos et al., 2021). For example,
information about cryptocurrencies is spread through various social media outlets and given
the beneﬁts of big data, a growing body of the literature is examining the use of text- and
news-basedmeasuresassourcesofinformationforforecastingandassessingeconomicevents
(Park et al., 2021).
From a slightly different perspective, news texts were converted into feature vectors with
word representations (Gunduz, 2021). Stock market forecasting models to improve prediction
performance by employing unsupervised learning models to analyse investor sentiments with
respect to stock prices can take place where explicit labels are not speciﬁed when training the
network(Baldi,2012).Incontrasttopreviousstudies,Loginovaetal.(2021)usedwell-reﬁned
topic-sentiment features, and the added value of the textual features appears to depend on the
nature of the text. Moreover, regarding textual data usage for forecasting foreign exchange
market developments, Naderi Semiromi et al. (2020) introduce a rich set of text analytics
methods to extract information from daily events and propose a novel sentiment dictionary
for the foreign exchange market. Using textual data together with technical indicators as
inputs to different machine learning models reveals that the accuracy of market pre-dictions
depends on the time of release of news/data as well as on text, with features based on term
frequency weighting offering the most accurate forecasts (Aprigliano et al., 2023).
Consequently, combining different data sources can lead to more informed price predic-
tions and improve chances of succeeding in funding projects or ventures via digital platforms.
Interestingly, until now, the literature has yet to elucidate how features from different data
sourcesaffectpredictiveperformanceforcryptocurrencyprices.Additionally,theareaofmar-
ket prediction, and even more so cryptocurrency, suffers from a lack of high-quality datasets
(Loginova et al., 2021). State-of-the-art decision support systems for stock price prediction
incorporate pattern-based event detection in text into their projections. Nonetheless, these
systems typically fail to account for word meaning, even though word sense disambiguation
is crucial for text understanding. In this case, an advanced NLP pipeline for event-based stock
price prediction would allow for word sense disambiguation to be incorporated into the event
detection process (Hogenboom et al., 2021).
2.2 Approaches and techniques for predicting success of crowdfunding campaigns
Research on crowdfunding was concerned with predicting success vs. failure of a fund-raising
campaign, where “success” means whether or not the funding goal was reached by the end
of the campaign. These studies explored a variety of indicators of successful campaigns.
Company characteristics, such as the number of previous funding applications, funding goal,
campaign duration, the social network activity of entrepreneurs, as well as characteristics
of campaign presentations, such as the length of the campaign description and the number
123

372
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
of included videos and images, have been shown to have a signiﬁcant predictive power;
classiﬁers trained over these features achieve accuracies of between 60% and 80% on the
success vs failure classiﬁcation, as reported in various projects (Etter et al., 2013; Mitra and
Gilbert, 2014; Du et al., 2015; Lukkarinen et al., 2016; Davies and Giovannetti, 2018; Wolfe
et al., 2021). Despite their inﬂuence on success, features such as videos are costly to produce,
whereas crafting the text of a campaign is more affordable for founders. Evidence suggests
words and phrases can inadvertently create unconscious bias against founders (Younkin and
Kuppuswamy, 2018) or conﬁdence in their credibility (Peng et al., 2022). Founders must
select whether to highlight their own credibility or that of their business idea (Wang et
al., 2020) and which characteristics to draw attention to, yet research to date gives limited
guidance on how to craft a successful crowdfunding campaign (Lipusch et al., 2020).
More recently, a number of studies have attempted to extract predictive signals from
natural language text, i.e. campaign presentations and conversations of entrepreneurs with
potential backers, in order to improve the model quality and gain further insights into the
factors that increase chances of successful fund-raising (Kang et al., 2020). This work has
employed NLP methods similar to those used in previous research on predictive models of
other economic phenomena, discussed in the previous section.
A commonly used technique has been the automatic keyword extraction using n-grams,
i.e. all possible sequences of words of a predeﬁned length. Mitra and Gilbert (2014) extracted
uni-, bi- and trigrams from campaign descriptions, and used them as features in a logistic
regression model of success vs failure, alongside “metadata” features such as project duration
and project goal. To determine broad semantic groupings of signiﬁcant predictors, the study
used the hand-built Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) dictionary (Pennebaker et
al., 2007), where words are organised into semantic categories, and found that successful
campaigns are characterized by prominence of words relating to cognitive processes, social
processes, emotions and senses. Drawing on the psychological theory of persuasion (Cialdini,
2001), it has also been rendered that many signiﬁcant predictors belong to the semantic ﬁelds
of reciprocity, scarcity, social proof, social identity, liking, and authority, which correspond
to persuasion techniques commonly used in advertising and marketing.
Desai et al. (2015) followed a similar approach, where LIWC and ad-hoc semantic cate-
gorieswereusedtoextractkeywordsthatdescribepsycholinguisticpropertiesoftexts.Similar
to Mitra and Gilbert (2014), the study found that words relating to persuasion techniques are
signiﬁcant predictors of fund-raising success. Training a separate model on the “Rewards”
section of campaign descriptions, and analysing its informative features, the researchers
obtain a number of interesting insights about the types of rewards that are associated with
successful campaigns. Parhankangas and Renko (2017) investigate the hypothesis that certain
linguistic styles of communication determine the funding success for social entrepreneurs,
but not for commercial start-ups. The authors represented the linguistic style of a text by
assigning it scores along several dimensions, such as concrete language, precise language
and interactive style; the scores are based on counting occurrences of words from predeﬁned
word lists, e.g., the concreteness of the text was measured in terms of the counts of articles,
prepositions and quantiﬁers. Based on this work, the authors make recommendations to social
entrepreneurs on the linguistic style to be used in communications with investors. Predictive
features in Chaichi (2021) are also keywords extracted using manually compiled word lists,
referring to technical characteristics of products. The approach uses a syntactic dependency
parser to identify opinion words grammatically linked to product characteristics, which are
then used in a model of a campaign to identify characteristics most appealing to backers.
The model developed in Babayoff and Shehory (2022) includes semantic features, such
as LIWC keywords, custom crowdfunding-related “buzzword” lists, as well as topic models.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
373
The study ﬁnds that a model trained on semantic features alone performs on par with a model
containing only metadata features, but the best results are obtained by combining both types
of features. The study examines features with a strong correlation with funding success; it
includes only LIWC and custom keywords, but not topic models.
To predict project success, Cheng et al. (2019) train a deep neural network model operating
on multimodal input: it incorporates features created from text, images and metadata of
the project descriptions. Two types of textual features extracted from the full-text of each
descriptions are studied: a bag-of-word representation and word embeddings constructed
using GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014). In an ablation analysis of the modalities, it was found
that textual features are the most useful in the predictive model.
Kaminski and Hopp (2019) experimented with several learning methods, applied to multi-
modal input. Textual features have been constructed using a Doc2Vec model (Le and Mikolov,
2014), which mapped the text of a document to a ﬁxed-length vector, similar to GloVe word
embeddings. Nonetheless, the distributed document representations, while being able to cap-
ture complex semantics contained in a document, cannot be used directly to explain which
particular semantic properties of the documents have the greatest predictive power. To answer
this question, the authors trained a logistic regression model over bag-of-words representa-
tions, and examined estimated coefﬁcients on the words. This step reveals, for example,
that words relating to the monetary depictions of the fundraisers, such as “money” and
“funding”, reduce the chances of reaching the funding goal. On the other hand, similar to
Mitra and Gilbert (2014), Kaminski and Hopp (2019) ﬁnd that words relating to excitement
(“amazing”), social interaction (“backer”, “community”, “thank”), and technical inclusive-
ness (“open source”) tend to characterise successful campaigns.
A summary of reviewed papers in presented in Table 1. In a nutshell, previous work has
demonstrated that the text of online campaign descriptions contains useful signals about the
chances of crowdfunding success; the methods to operationalize these signals have often
relied on keyword extraction, custom word lists, and word categories from LIWC. Some
studies employed more advanced NLP techniques such as topic modelling and distributed
word and document representations, though only a few of them attempted to explain which
semantic aspects of a campaign description inﬂuence its eventual outcome. These studies
used keywords as features within highly explainable logistic regression models. However,
interpretation of such models assumes that the meanings of keywords are independent of
context, which is clearly an oversimpliﬁcation, especially in the case of abstract keywords.
Theaccuracyoftheinterpretationofthekeywordsbasedongeneral-languagedictionarieslike
LIWC depends a lot on their coverage and adaptation to the application domain in question,
such as crowdfunding. Another unexplored issue relates to understanding predictive semantic
characteristics of campaigns using a broader range of learning methods.
2.3 Explainable AI in text-based predictive models
Machine learning is a subset of AI. In contrast to rule-based AI, where the solution developer
designs rules that generate a decision in response to a certain input, machine learning methods
derive such rules automatically from a collection of previously observed pairs of inputs and
outcomes. For this reason, most machine learning models are seen as “black boxes”, which,
while capable of a high prediction accuracy, are very difﬁcult for humans to interpret. As our
ultimate goal is to reveal factors driving a certain outcome for a crowdfunding campaign,
we are primarily interested in applying Explainable AI methods to machine learning models
and, speciﬁcally, in interpretability of the models’ predictions, i.e. processes that can reveal
123

374
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
Table 1 Review of published research on crowdfunding success predictability (source: authors)
References
Prediction problem
Modelling method
Textual features
Quality of best-performing model
Mitra and Gilbert (2014)
success or failure
Penalised logistic
regression
Uni-, bi- and
trigrams; LIWC
categories;
custom word
lists
2.24% (error rate)
Desai et al. (2015)
success or failure
SVM, Lasso
logistic
regression,
decision trees,
Naïve Bayes
LIWC categories,
custom word
lists, sentiment
scores
0.79 (F-score)
Kim et al. (2016)
fundraising ratio (amount raised divided by funding goal)
Ordinary Least
Squares
LIWC
0.22 (R2 score)
Parhankangas and Renko (2017)
success or failure
Logistic
regression
LIWC; custom
word lists
0.37 (R2 score)
Cheng et al. (2019)
success or failure
Multimodel deep
learning
network
GloVe word
embeddings
0.75 (F-score)
Kaminski and Hopp (2019)
success or failure
Deep neural
network, logistic
regression,
SVM, Gradient
Boosting,
Multi-Layer
Perceptron
Doc2Vec,
bag-of-words
0.71 (F-score)
Wolfe et al. (2021)
success or failure; pledged amount
Logistic
regression,
Ordinary Least
Squares
Sentiment score,
custom word
lists
0.54 (R2 score)
Chaichi (2021)
success or failure
Lasso logistic
regression
Custom word lists
0.69 (accuracy)
Babayoff and Shehory (2022)
success or failure
SVM, J48,
Random Forest,
LightGBM,
SDG, DNN
LIWC; topic
models; custom
word lists
0.96 (F-score)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
375
to a human user how speciﬁc features and their values have been used by a model to generate
a prediction.
Model-agnostic methods to explain feature importances, i.e., to quantify the contribution
of a feature to a particular prediction, which are not speciﬁc to any learning method, have
been seen as an attractive possibility to reveal causal relationships between features of an
observation and its predicted outcome. Of these, the SHAP algorithm (Lundberg and Lee,
2017) has a number of useful properties, such as intuitiveness and stability of generated
explanations (Schlegel et al., 2019; Velmurugan et al., 2021). SHAP is now considered a
state-of-the-art post-hoc explainable AI method in predictive modelling, though it is based
on an idea originally proposed by Lloyd Shapley in the 1950s. SHAP is effectively different
from the classic approach of utilizing Shapley values as it explains every instance of a factor
in the data by computing a single marginal contribution for that occurrence. In essence,
the SHAP method integrates multiple additive feature importance elements to achieve local
accuracy, consistency and value missingness for extracted explanation coefﬁcients.
Previous applications of SHAP to economic problems have normally involved observa-
tions represented with a relatively small number of features (e.g., Chew and Zhang 2022;
Haag et al., 2022). A number of studies have employed SHAP to study feature behaviour and
biases in models with very large numbers of features extracted from textual data. Velampalli
et al. (2022) develop several models for sentiment classiﬁcation of tweets in the context of a
targeting marketing campaign. Representing the text of the tweets as well as emojis in terms
of embeddings using pre-trained embedding models such as USE and SBERT, the authors
examine the SHAP values for these features to provide an insight of their relative contribution
to the eventual sentiment polarity identiﬁed in a tweet.
Ayoub et al. (2021) address the problem of detecting misinformation regarding the
COVID-19 pandemic. Their classiﬁcation model is trained on a corpus of textual claims
related to COVID-19, represented in terms of DistilBERT embeddings (Sanh et al., 2019).
SHAP is then utilised to improve explainability of the proposed model, driving an effort to
increase the end user’s trust in the model’s classiﬁcations. They evaluated trust in the predic-
tions using between-subjects experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk. The outcome was
very encouraging in terms of detecting misinformation on COVID-19. However, Ayoub et
al. (2021) reported that some experiment participants were confused in making predictions
based on single words; this has been seriously considered in the current study as a trigger to
improve explainable text-based modelling.
In a platform economy context, Davazdahemami et al. (2023) develop a recommender sys-
tem that uses a machine learning model trained on features capturing similarities of different
products; one type of similarity is created by measuring the distance between distributed
Doc2Vec embeddings of textual descriptions of the products. A SHAP analysis is then per-
formed to identify important determinants of link formations. SHAP was thus used to provide
insights for product developers about the design principles they can incorporate into their
development process to help better match products and their prospective users. In other
words, SHAP offers an explanatory perspective as this analysis offers a validation tool for
corroborating outputs from analytics and/or marketing studies.
To support tourism marketing campaigns, Gregoriades et al. (2021) train a machine learn-
ing model that matches marketing content to consumers. Using product reviews of hotels
as input, their approach constructs topic models which are then fed as features into a deci-
sion tree classiﬁer, alongside features encoding other cultural and economic information on
tourists. The proposed solution thus seeks to improve optimization abilities of campaign
contents, by targeting tourists based on SHAP values of features extracted from their own
word-of-mouth communications.
123

376
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
3 Text-based predictors of crowdfunding success
As previous research has shown, natural language texts contain signals predictive of various
economicandsocialphenomena,whichcanbeoperationalisedinstatisticalmodels.However,
in many applied contexts, it is often impossible to know in advance what these textual signals
are −they need to be discovered before they can be incorporated into a predictive model.
Therefore, in this paper, our focus is on methods that derive semantic representations from text
in an unsupervised manner, i.e., without a reliance on precompiled dictionaries or labelled
training data. We ﬁrst present two approaches that have been popular in previous work,
automatic keyword extraction (Sect.3.1) and Contextual Topic Models (Sect.3.2). After
that, we present a novel unsupervised method to construct highly explainable text-based
predictors based on semantic clustering of sentences (Sect.3.3). Subsequently, these three
kinds of predictors will be evaluated within a model of raised crowdfunding investment.
3.1 Keyword extraction
Keywords, which can be individual words or sequences of multiple words, have traditionally
been used to represent the essential content of a document. Automatic keyword extraction
has been employed in many information management problems, where keywords are used
to rank documents by relevance to the user query or to classify documents into thematic
categories. Most successful keyword extraction methods are based on a combination of
linguistic and statistical evidence: linguistic criteria, such as part-of-speech patterns, select
candidate keywords, while statistical measures, such as C-Value, TextRank or TFIDF, identify
keywords that have the strongest association to particular documents and thus best describe
their contents (for a survey, see Astrakhantsev et al. (2015)).
For the purposes of testing keyword extraction as a method to predict crowdfunding cam-
paign success, we extract candidate keywords with the help of the Rapid Keyword Extractor
(RAKE) method (Rose et al., 2010), which has been used in studies of various downstream
NLP tasks such as topic modelling (Jeong et al., 2019), text generation (Peng et al., 2018),
document classiﬁcation (Haynes et al., 2022) and construction of large-scale knowledge
bases (Sarica et al., 2020). RAKE is based on the observation that useful keywords are often
sequences of content words such as nouns and adjectives, and rarely contain any punctua-
tion or function words such as articles and prepositions. RAKE uses a list of “delimiters”,
consisting of punctuation symbols and function words, to split the text of a document into
keywords. An experimental evaluation by Rose et al. (2010) has shown that this procedure
produces better-quality candidates than ngrams of different sizes.
RAKE was originally designed to be applied to individual documents, and therefore does
not use any background corpus based on which measures of importance of a keyword in a
document could be calculated. In our application we do have such a collection of documents.
To determine how well a keyword represents the meaning of a document it occurs in, we use
a TFIDF weighting scheme, which is one of the most popular measures of keyword relevance
in information retrieval (Astrakhantsev et al., 2015); the scheme has also been used to select
keywords to represent crowdfunding campaign descriptions (e.g., Desai et al., 2015). The
document collection is used to calculate the TFIDF score of each candidate keyword t in
document d as follows:
T F I DFt,d = log(1 + T Ft,d) ·
N
log(1 + DFt)
(1)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
377
where T Ft,d is the frequency of t in d, DFt is the number of all documents in the collection,
in which t occurred, and N is the size of the document collection; T F and DF are log-
transformed to reduce the effect of outliers.
After extracting candidate keywords, we represent the document collection as a document-
by-keyword matrix, to be later fed into the model of crowdfunding investment. To that end,
we calculate a mean TFIDF score of each keyword across all documents and select k highest-
scoring ones to be used in the matrix, determining k using cross-validation.
3.2 Contextual topic models
Topic models (Blei et al., 2003) is an unsupervised method to discover latent topical groups
of words in a document collection. Topic models are conventionally constructed using Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), which represents each document as a probability distribution
over topics and each topic as a probability distribution over words. Once topic models have
been estimated from training data, they can be applied to test-set documents, producing their
representations in terms of topics discovered during training. As topics tend to be composed
of semantically related words, prominent topics in a document reﬂect its semantics. Topic
models have been widely used in many NLP applications, such as document classiﬁcation
(Rubin et al., 2012), document clustering (Xie and Xing, 2013), exploration of large document
collections (Blei and Lafferty, 2007), aspect-based sentiment analysis (Amplayo et al., 2018),
and opinion analysis in social media (Thonet et al., 2017). They have also been used in
applications beyond text analysis, where topics constructed from textual documents are used
as input into predictive models of problems in diverse areas including healthcare (Lehman
et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2016; Chiu et al., 2022), ﬁnance (Hansen and McMahon, 2016;
Thorsrud, 2020), marketing (Jacobs et al., 2016; Li and Ma, 2020), and management (Bao
and Datta, 2014).
In our experiments we include Contextual Topics Models (CTMs), an extension of the
original LDA algorithm. Bianchi et al. (2021) proposed CTMs in an attempt to improve
on LDA in terms of topic coherence. Coherent topics are composed of words with a clear
commonality of meaning, such as “apple, pear, lemon, banana, kiwi,” and thus can be more
intuitively understood by humans. The original LDA uses bag-of-words (BoW) document
representations, i.e., treating every document as an unordered set of words, ignoring gram-
matical and semantic relationships within sentences. To account for contextual meanings of
words, CTMs map documents to contextualised document embeddings, their ﬁxed-length
vector representations. The document embeddings are produced using RoBERTa, a language
model pre-trained on large amount of text using context-independent word embeddings such
as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) or GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014). The document
embeddings are used as input for ProdDLA (Srivastava and Sutton, 2017), a method to learn
a neural inference network that maps a BoW document to an approximate distribution over
topics. ProdLDA proves not only computationally more efﬁcient in estimating probability
distributions than LDA, but also produces more coherent topics. CTMs require the number of
topics to be set before training; we determine the best value of this hyperparameter through
cross-validation.
3.3 Sentence clusters
We next describe a new method to derive explainable predictor features from the text of a doc-
ument. Similar to topic models, we start with the assumption that every document addresses
123

378
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
several different topics, each to a different degree. Our method aims to discover topics that
are common to multiple documents in a collection and then represent each document as a
weighted mixture of these topics. However, unlike topic models, we represent topics in terms
of complete sentences, rather than individual words. In doing so, we hope to capture more
complex ideas contained in text than can be described with unordered lists of words. The
method consists of three main stages. First, each document in the training data is cleaned and
tokenised into individual sentences; each sentence is then represented in terms of a sentence
embedding, i.e., a numerical feature vector. In the second stage, all sentences in the training
data are fed into a clustering algorithm operating on sentence embeddings to create topical
clusters of sentences. In the third step, in order to make the meaning of sentence clusters
easier for a human user to interpret, each cluster is assigned a descriptive label.
Sentence embeddings The ﬁrst step constructs sentence embeddings using Universal
Sentence Encoder (USE) (Cer et al., 2018). The motivation behind USE is to facilitate trans-
fer learning in a wide range of NLP applications of deep neural networks, removing their
dependence on large amounts of training data and computational power. USE achieves a
high level of generalisation using multi-task learning: it trains a single neural network on
multiple, albeit related NLP problems, such as assessing semantic similarity between sen-
tences, sentence-level sentiment analysis, subjectivity classiﬁcation of sentences. The neural
network is trained over word embeddings, and by learning multiple NLP tasks, it also learns
how to represent the semantics of a sentence by contextualising the meaning representations
of words in a task-independent manner. After the neural network has been trained, the coding
sub-graph of the network can be used to encode any new given sentence into a contextualised
embedding vector. The trained encoder can thus be used in a new NLP task to produce an
accurate representation of sentences without a large training corpus. Subsequent research
has indeed shown that sentence embeddings produced with USE can be used to effectively
address diverse NLP applications, such as fake news detection Saikh et al. (2019), aspect-
based sentiment analysis (AL-Smadi et al., 2023), stance detection in social media (Rashed
et al., 2021), semantic search (Sheth et al., 2021), and document clustering (Pramanik et al.,
2023).
Sentence clustering In the next step, all sentences found in the document collection are
clustered by their meaning using their USE representations. We use K-Means (Macqueen,
1967), one of the most popular clustering algorithms, well-known for its efﬁciency. Given
a set of objects N represented as attribute vectors and an integer k, the desired number of
clusters, K-Means searches for a partition of N into k non-hierarchical clusters that minimises
the squared Euclidean distance between cluster members and the centroid of the cluster.
Cluster labelling Automatic labelling of document clusters is a well-known problem in
the ﬁeld of information retrieval, with most popular approaches based on determining words
that either have a strong association with a cluster, or that are frequent in the document closest
to the cluster centroid (Manning et al., 2008). Recent research has proposed to additionally
incorporate a hierarchical lexical resource such as WordNet and word embeddings into the
process of selecting words to be used as cluster labels (Poostchi and Piccardi, 2018). In our
approach, a label for a cluster is created by (1) calculating the centroid of the cluster by
averaging sentence embeddings, (2) extracting all keywords from the sentences of the cluster
using RAKE, (3) mapping each keyword to a USE representation, (4) retrieving the three
keywords that have the greatest cosine similarity to the centroid of the cluster and using them
as the cluster label.
After the clusters have been constructed and labelled, the document collection is repre-
sented as a document-by-cluster matrix, where cells encode the number of times sentences
belonging to the cluster occurred in the document.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
379
4 Experimental evaluation
We evaluate the three types of analysis described above on the task for predicting the success
of Kickstarter crowdfunding campaigns in terms of the amount of money raised. We focus
on crowdfunding campaigns that are concerned with 3D printing. On the one hand, this
technology is currently in the state of fast growth, with its broad adoption seen across many
industry sectors. On the other hand, this narrow technical domain presents itself as a suitable
case study, where model interpretation can uncover speciﬁc, previously unknown insights.
4.1 Data collection
Experimental data for the study was collected from Kickstarter, one of the oldest and most
popular reward-based crowd-funding platforms (Frydrych et al., 2014). The data processing
workﬂow is depicted in Fig.1. The data was downloaded from the Kickstarter website using
a custom crawler based on Selenium, a software package for web browser automation. The
crawler was restricted to pages in the 3D Printers category of the website, and to only those
campaigns, which had completed, had not been cancelled, and where the identity of the
author was veriﬁed. Each retrieved page was parsed with an HTML parser and the project
title, the pledged amount, as well as the text of the campaign description were extracted and
recorded into a database. These steps produced data on 267 campaigns, which ran between
September 2014 and June 2021.
4.2 Data preprocessing
The texts extracted from Kickstarter pages were found to contain a lot of noise, i.e., extraneous
material unrelated to the description of the campaigns, such as boilerplate text (e.g., elements
of website navigation, standard copyright notices, etc.), HTML and Javascript code. The
texts were cleaned using the following preprocessing steps that are commonly applied to
web pages:
• The texts were tokenized into individual words and sentences using the NLTK package
(Bird, 2006).
• Sentences written in a language other than English were automatically detected and
removed.
• Sentences shorter than 10 and longer than 40 words were removed, as upon initial data
exploration such content often turned out to be boilerplate material.
The size of the preprocessed corpus of documents was 251,376 tokens, its vocabulary
containing 15,614 unique words. The mean length of a document was 920.8 words (σ=635.7).
The mean number of sentences in a document was 45.5 (σ=31.6). The target variable, pledged
amount, was log-transformed to diminish the effect of extreme values. Its distribution in the
training data is shown in Fig.2.
The data was split into the training and test parts: 80% (N=213) was used for training
and 20% (N=54) was used to testing. The split was performed using stratiﬁed sampling
on the discretized “pledged amount” variable, to ensure that the target variable has similar
distributions in the training and in the test data.
123

380
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
Fig. 1 Data processing workﬂow
4.3 Feature extraction from text
Keyword extraction Keywords were extracted using the RAKE Python package (Rose et al.,
2010). RAKE’s delimiter list was extended with additional parts-of-speech—verbs, adverbs,
numerals, comparative and superlative adjectives, to give prominence to topical terms that
commonly consists of nouns and adjectives. Furthermore, we found that because of part-of-
speech tagging errors, RAKE tends to extract word sequences that are too long, but which
include useful candidate keywords as substrings. To correct this, we split each candidate
proposed by RAKE into bi- and trigrams and recorded them as additional candidates. For
example, “strong magnetic coupling mechanism” would be split into “strong magnetic cou-
pling”, “magnetic coupling mechanism”, “strong magnetic”, “magnetic coupling”, “coupling
mechanism”.
Keywords appearing in the title of a document are more likely to attract the reader’s
attention than those in its main body. To account for this, separate features were created
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
381
Fig. 2 The distribution of the target variable, “pledged”, in the training data
Table 2 Twenty keywords with
the largest mean TFIDF weights
in the training data
Professional 3d printer_title
make_desc
Professional 3d_title
learn_desc
Laser engraving_title
suggestions_desc
Fdm 3d printer_title
safety_desc
High performance_title
items_desc
High resolution_title
usb cable_desc
Kickstarter fast_title
developed_desc
Zimple_title
connections_desc
Work_title
open source 3d_desc
3d resin_title
laser_desc
The tags “desc” and “title” indicate if the keyword appeared in the title
or body of the document
to indicate if a keyword appeared in the title or in the body of the text by appending a
corresponding tag. To purge uninformative keywords, we followed the usual practice and
deleted all those that appeared in more than 90% of all documents; additionally, we removed
those title keywords with a document frequency of less than three and main-body keywords
with a document frequency of less than seven.
Table 2 shows twenty keywords in the training data with the greatest mean TFIDF weights
over calculated over training documents.
CTMs To construct CTMs, we use the Python package provided by Bianchi et al. (2021).
Because single tokens are used as input into the CTM training process, we performed addi-
tional ﬁltering of tokens: the top 100 most common nouns, verbs, and adjectives in English
as well as all numerals have been deleted, as their meanings tend to be unrelated to narrow-
domain topics such as crowdfunding.
As the pre-trained language model to produce document embeddings, we use Distil-
RoBERTa (Sanh et al., 2019), since the original study by Bianchi et al. (2021) recommends
the RoBERTa model based on a experimental comparison with alternative models; and we use
123

382
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
Fig. 3 Example topic models. Topic 1 (a) contains words relating to precision of 3D printing, while Topic 2
(b) to the materials and the printing process. The font size depicts the posterior probability of the words in the
topic
its distilled version, due to its compactness and added efﬁciency. To train a neural inference
network predicting topic distribution in a document, we use ProdLDA with 100 epochs.
After training CTMs, the training and the test documents were represented in terms of the
discovered topics, to be later used as input for the regression method. Figure3 provides their
examples: the topic in 3a includes words describing the accuracy of printing (“resolution”,
“precision”, “accuracy”, “calibration”), while the topic in 3b contains words that appear to
relate to the printing process (“material”, “metal”, “color”, “extruder”, “bed”). At the same
time, it can be noted that the topics contain some words without an obvious pertinence to
these topics (e.g., “affordable”, “shipping”, “ﬁrst”).
Sentence clusters Sentence clusters were created using the USE model pre-trained with
a deep averaging network encoder, available on the Tensorﬂow Hub. Before constructing
sentence embeddings, all named entities (names of people, products, companies, etc.) were
removed from the sentences, in order to prevent grouping of sentences by their association in
the same campaign descriptions. Sentence embeddings were clustered using k-Means, with
optimal values of k being determined via cross-validation while training the main regression
model. Constructed clusters were labelled with the same keywords that were extracted in
the keyword extraction step described earlier in this section. Table 3 shows example clusters
created with this process.
The ﬁrst cluster contains sentences where the emphasis is on low cost of the product, the
second cluster—sentences describing professional credentials of the applicant team, and the
third cluster—sentences relating to using 3D printers to print edible objects.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
383
Table 3 Examples of automatically labelled sentence clusters
Cluster label: Cut Costs, Affordable Price Tag, Lowcost
- In order to ensure high performance and lower costs we made custom electronics
- Decreasing the overall manufacturing cost eventually enables us to offer the all-metal—at a truly affordable price
- Through rigorous design principles, our talented engineering team has been able to cut costs without cutting corners
- Every design choice has been taken in order to reduce the ﬁnal cost and to increase easy-to-use features, without compromising ﬁlament quality
- We may do whatever we can to save the cost, but never in components that will affect the print quality
- To bring the cost down, we combine our technology with an ultra-high resolution panel
- By bringing our product directly to the customer we can keep cost down and innovate quicker
- This way we can offer high quality components but for a far lower price
Cluster label: Majoring, Computer Expert, Computer programmer
- He’s the tech guru behind the—and was the driving force behind this project’s inception
- He has hands-on experience in circuit design and is helping with the electrical aspects of the printer
- That’s what led him to become an electronics engineer and a 3D printing expert
- He’s had much experience with ergonomics, machine design, product development and other machine-related development
- Apart from working on this project, he is a computer programmer and a talented soccer player
- He spent over a year perfecting the design and in 2015 launched it as a company.
- Leonardo is a computer expert as well as electronic and—is the designer ﬁnally—is the marketing expert
- Deeply passionate by the project, he brings his web experience and knowledge to this project
Cluster label: Print Food, Creative Food, Food Creations
- You could print an edible—, or a whole pizza, or pasta - all customised you your speciﬁc requirements.
- In this way you can personalize your print or food with your own drawing
123

384
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
Table 3 continued
Cluster label: Print Food, Creative Food, Food Creations
- Print a holder for your—Pro—, make parts for your model airplane, or print unique and custom baking decorations and or cookie cutters
- Hence you will also have the possibility to print food objects you created yourself
- Create your own design or download a printing template onto your smart device and select the printing conditions for your food capsule
- Within several minutes your individually created and delicious food object will be printed
- What about designing fun shapes on your computer and 3D print them on crackers for an astonishing cocktail?
- Imagine baking at tray of intricate cookies, or cakes printed with the— —
Long dashes stand for deleted named entities (names of people, locations, products, and companies)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
385
Table 4 A comparison of Random Forest and LASSO models trained on text-based features (Keywords,
CTMs, and sentence clusters) against a median baseline
Random Forest
LASSO
RMSE
, %
MAE
, %
RMSE
, %
MAE
, %
Baseline
2.33
1.30
2.33
1.30
Keywords
2.12
−8.85**
1.25
−4.20*
2.33
0.10
1.32
0.88
CTMs
2.09
−10.12*
1.24
−4.87*
2.19
−5.90**
1.27
−2.44*
Sentence clusters
2.22
−4.75
1.29
−1.05
2.18
−6.23*
1.28
−1.59
Statistically signiﬁcant differences are indicated by asterisks: “*”—α=0.05, “**”—α=0.01 and “***” —
α=0.001
4.4 Model evaluation
To create models of pledged investment, we apply two regression algorithms, a polynomial
Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) (Tibshirani, 1994) and Random
Forest (Breiman, 2001). Unlike other widely used learning methods, both algorithms are
known to be capable of handling large amounts of features relative to the number of obser-
vations, which is the case with our dataset. Each model is trained using text-based features
as input and the amount of pledged investment at the end of the campaign as output.
During model training, we determine the best settings for the hyperparameters of the
methods (alpha in LASSO, the number of trees, maximum tree depth, the size of the feature
subset, the size of training instances subset in Random Forest) using an exhaustive grid
search with a ten-fold cross-validation. Once a model with optimal hyperparameter settings
was trained, it was applied to the test set to quantify its quality. Considering that the dataset
is relatively small, to make use of all data for model evaluation, we performed a test-set
evaluation of the best hyperparameter combination using cross-validation with ten folds, i.e.
the entire dataset was split into ten parts, a new model was trained on nine parts and evaluated
on the last part; the process was run ten times so that each of the ten parts was used as a test
set. The evaluation metrics reported for each model in Sect.5 are averages over the folds.
The baseline in our experiments is a simple model that always outputs the median of
the pledged investment estimated from the training data. As evaluation metrics, we use the
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). Both measure the
differences between the model-predicted and ground-truth values, but RMSE gives greater
emphasis to large, albeit rare errors than MAE, and so RMSE and MAE can be compared to
detect presence of rare large errors.
5 Results and discussion
5.1 The effect of text-based features
In the ﬁrst set of experiments, we evaluate the predictive power of text-based features in
models of funding raised in Kickstarter campaigns. Random Forest and LASSO models
were trained on each of the three types of predictors, and compared to the baseline. To
determine of differences between models are statistically signiﬁcant, we use a two-tailed
paired t-test. Table 4 shows the obtained RMSE and MAE rates as well as the differences to
the baseline.
123

386
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
Table 5 Human agreement on
the manual selection of useful
predictors among the keywords,
CTMs, and sentence clusters
PSA
%intersection
Keywords
0.36
7.09
CTMs
0.117
4
Sentence clusters
0.607
34.3
Models trained on each type of text-based features outperform the baseline by reducing the
error rates by between 4.75% and 10.1%, except for the LASSO model trained on keywords.
The reductions in the error rates compared to the baseline are signiﬁcant with most of the
models. The differences between the three non-baseline models are rather small: for Random
Forests, they are never greater than 4.3% in terms of RMSE and 3.1% in terms of MAE. For
LASSO, the greatest differences are 6.3% in RMSE and 2.4% in MAE. Only in the case
of LASSO, models based on CTMs and sentence clusters were signiﬁcantly better than the
model built over keywords, at α=0.001, and only in terms of MAE.
Based on these results, we conclude that keywords, CTMs, and sentence clusters do
capture certain signals about the likelihood of a successful campaign, but we were not able
to ﬁnd reliable evidence for one type of textual features having a greater predictive power
than others.
5.2 Interpretation of features by human raters
Next, we look at how much human raters agree on their interpretation of the text-based
features, namely whether they select the same features as potentially useful indicators of
successful crowdfunding campaigns. Two human raters were presented with the lists of
keywords, CTMs, and sentence clusters that have been used to create the corresponding best-
performingmodelsdescribedabove.Theraterswereinstructedtoproducebinaryjudgements,
i.e. indicate those elements in each list that, in their opinion, reﬂected a topic or a concept that
may potentially inﬂuence an investor’s decision to make an investment into a crowdfunding
campaign.
Table 5 reports the agreement between the two raters in terms of the Positive Speciﬁc
Agreement (Fleiss, 1975), which is a measure of interrater agreement speciﬁcally suited for
those cases where one of the two labels presents the main interest, but is much more infrequent
than the other label. Because of this, PSA appears particularly suitable in this experiment,
as our primary concern is selection of interpretable features. The table shows also the size
of the intersection subset, i.e. the subset of cases where both raters assigned the “selected”
label to a keyword, CTM or sentence cluster.
We can see that raters have a much greater agreement on the selection of sentence clusters
(PSA=0.6) than on the selection of keywords (PSA=0.36). The agreement on selection of
useful CTMs is very low (PSA=0.11). The size of the intersection subset is also the largest
with the sentence clusters: of all sentence clusters, the percentage of those which both raters
deemed as potentially relevant to an investment decision was 34.3% of the original number
of clusters, which several times more than such subsets for keywords (7.09%) and CTMs
(4%). Based on these results, we conclude that sentence clusters are interpreted similarly by
the two raters, while their understandings of the meaning and the relevance of the keywords
and CTMs to the problem at hand may be quite different with different human readers of the
campaign descriptions.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
387
Table 6 Mean Average Precision
scores obtained by Random
Forest and LASSO models
trained over different types of
text-based predictors
Random Forest
LASSO
Keywords
0.13
0.20
CTMs
0.17
0.20
Sentence clusters
0.17
0.27
Table 7 Models trained on manually selected semantic features compared to corresponding models trained
on the full sets of semantic features
Random Forest
LASSO
RMSE
, %
MAE
, %
RMSE
, %
MAE
, %
Keywords
2.38
12.05***
1.32
5.96***
2.34
0.39
1.31
−0.06
CTMs
2.24
7.18***
1.28
3.35*
2.23
1.62
1.28
0.64
Sentence clusters
2.12
−4.34*
1.25
−2.84
2.14
−1.74
1.27
−1.24
Signiﬁcant differences are indicated with asterisks
In addition, we considered how much the raters’ judgements of the features were in
agreement with automatic feature ranking. The features were ranked by their SHAP values,
as determined within each of the models from the experiments in Sect.5.1. The quality of
each feature ranking was then measured in terms of Mean Average Precision at K (MAP@K),
a well-known performance measure used for evaluating document relevance rankings by a
Document Retrieval system (Manning et al., 2008). The measure ranges between 0 and 1,
with 1 corresponding to the case when all documents manually labelled as relevant to a query
appear at the top of the ranked list produced by the system. Table 6 shows the MAP@20
scores obtained for each of the six models.
The feature rankings produced by all the models have low MAP scores (none are greater
than 0.27), i.e., human raters did not select many highly predictive features as helping to
understand factors affecting a campaign?s success, and the overall interpretability of the
models was relatively low. At the same time, we note that models created with sentence
clusters have somewhat higher MAP scores than corresponding models with keywords and
CTMs, i.e., human-selected sentence clusters tend to be ranked higher by their SHAP values
than the other two types of textual features. Thus, this ﬁnding further supports our earlier
conclusion that it is easier for human raters to identify useful and informative predictors
among sentence clusters than among keywords or topic models.
5.3 Manually selected features
To further elaborate the quality of the models, we evaluate the contribution of features that
have been selected by both judges, i.e., the interpretable keywords, CTMs, and clusters, within
the models of raised crowdfunding capital. Table 7 presents the results of the evaluation.
These results suggest that manual selection helps to improve the sentence clusters models,
reducing the error rate by 1.7% to 4.3% compared to models trained on the full set of features.
The difference is signiﬁcant for the RMSE rates of the RF model. On the other hand, we ﬁnd
that keywords and CTMs models do not beneﬁt from manual selection of features, and in
fact the models become worse, at a signiﬁcant level, if trained on human-selected features.
The error rates of these sentence clusters are consistently lower than the median baseline:
123

388
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
for Random Forests, the reductions are 8.8% in RMSE (signiﬁcant at α=0.05) and 3.8% in
MAE; for LASSO, they are 7.8% in RMSE (signiﬁcant at α=0.05) and 2.8% in MAE.
Overall, we conclude that manually selected sentence clusters are not only easier to inter-
pret, but also are better at predicting the success of a campaign than manually selected CTMs
and keywords as well as the full set of semantic clusters.
5.4 SHAP feature importances
To obtain insights into which of the manually selected sentence clusters have the greatest
inﬂuence on the predicted pledged amount of investment, we examined their importances,
as determined by the model-independent SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) method
(Lundberg and Lee, 2017). To calculate the SHAP values we used the SHAP software pack-
age, developed by Lundberg and Lee (2017).
Figures 4 and 5 depict these importances within the Random Forest and the LASSO
models. A SHAP value of a feature quantiﬁes its contribution towards the predicted value of
the target variable (in this case, the pledged amount of investment for a particular campaign).
The features in the plots are sorted by their mean SHAP values in the test set. Thus, the
features at the top have a greater inﬂuence on the predicted target value than those down
the list. Each dot on the plot represents a campaign, with red dots indicating high values
of the feature, namely high numbers of sentences present in the document that belong to a
particular cluster, while blue dots indicate low values of the features. The position of each dot
relative to the horizontal axis shows the SHAP values, with positive SHAP values indicating
an increase in the predicted pledged amount compared to a base value (i.e., the average of
the target variable across all instances), and negative SHAP values indicating a decrease in
the predicted pledged amount.
The ranking of the features in both plots exhibit a lot of similarities, thus conﬁrming
conclusions that can be drawn from the plots. The sentence clusters are understandable to
humans with knowledge of the context. For example, Simple Design, Simplistic Design,
Parts Easy (the cluster at rank 1 in both plots) gathers together sentences that relate
to simplicity of design and consequent ease of assembly. Here are examples of sentences
belonging to the cluster (the values in parentheses show the cosine similarity of the sentence
to the cluster centroid):
• “The— —is an extremely simplistic design with few parts which makes assembly a
breeze. (0.777)”
• “We’ve tried to keep assembly as simple as possible with many of the trickier components
such as the— — now being pre assembled. (0.648)”
• “The slider is made of fewer components, integrating many functions in a single part, for
equivalent performances and easier maintenance. (0.486)”
The large average SHAP value of this cluster suggests that such messages are likely to
appeal to investors since simple and elegant design reﬂects the development effort and hints
at quality of the product.
Computer Free Printing, Printing Files, Thingiverse (the cluster ranked 2 in
both plots) relates to the interface between the 3D printer at the heart of a campaign and
the model ﬁles that users may print. Sentences in this cluster mention the presence of data
storage and processing to allow ﬁles to be printed without being connected to a computer.
This feature is likely to appeal to investors as it demonstrates the ﬂexibility and usability of
the product.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
389
Fig. 4 SHAP values produced using the Random Forest model trained on manually selected sentence clusters
Fig. 5 SHAP values produced using the LASSO model trained on manually selected sentence clusters
123

390
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
Resin Printer, Red Resin, Dental Resin (Cluster 3 in Fig.4 and Cluster 10 in
Fig.5) relates to resin printers, i.e. those that use a liquid polymer as opposed to the more
commonly encountered ﬁlament. This cluster is relevant because resin printers for small scale
applications and low cost have taken longer to develop than the prevailing ﬁlament printers.
This represents a new technology that would be attractive to investors and purchasers. These
ﬁndings tally with the results of a number of previous studies that showed that language used
to describe the technical characteristics of a product are predictive of crowdfunding success
(e.g., Chaichi, 2021).
The SHAP analysis suggests these sentence clusters to positively relate to investment suc-
cess, which is intuitive and understandable to humans. The analysis allows ranking of factors,
to further support human decision-making. A seemingly counter-intuitive ﬁnding, which fur-
ther demonstrates the value of this analysis are clusters Crowdfunding, Funding Goal,
Profit (Cluster 9 in Fig.4), Cost- Effective Prices, Manufacturing Price, Pur-
chasing Power (Cluster 20 in Fig.4) and Colors, Potential Improvements, Funds
(Cluster 14 in Fig.5). These clusters mostly relate to achieving funding goals, and the impor-
tant role that investors or backers have played. For example, Crowdfunding, Funding
goal, Profit contains:
• “All we need is your help to reach our goal to produce. (0.638)”
• “We’re here because we wouldn’t be able to turn our idea into a reality without initial
funding. (0.58)”
• “This money isn’t going to make us rich or successful, but it is a means of starting on
our path. (0.506)”
• “We are a small team with a large vision, and we need your help to make it a reality.
(0.466)”
• “We are not dreamers who want to make a one shoot product, we work daily for Fortune
500 companies, we know how to do it. (0.457)”
While these sentences were most likely written with the intention of demonstrating a con-
nection with a community of investors, the SHAP analysis suggests they may be detrimental
to success. A plausible explanation is that they cast some doubt in the mind of investors
with regard to the risk of achieving the campaign aims. Whereas describing a well-designed
product with desirable features and technology suggests a professional approach, suggesting
that the campaign can only succeed with the investor’s support may have the opposite effect.
In particular, reminding the investor of the speculative nature of the vision, or the small size
of the team or insisting the campaign is not a dream can have an unexpected negative effect.
It is noteworthy that this ﬁnding is very similar to the ﬁnding reported in Kaminski
and Hopp (2019) that discussion of “legitimizing activities”, such as patents, prototypes, or
money (as indicated by the signiﬁcance of corresponding words in BoW representations),
are among the worst textual content to be used in a campaign description. This ﬁnding is
also in line with the observation by Elenchev and Vasilev (2017) that a negative correlation
exists between the emphasis on monetary aspects in project descriptions and the outcomes
of fundraising campaigns. The SHAP analysis of the models further demonstrates that sen-
tence clusters have the capacity to explain which themes discussed in campaign descriptions
attract the attention of potential backers and how they inﬂuence the decisions to invest into a
project.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
391
6 Discussion and conclusion
6.1 Theoretical implications
This paper addresses the general problem of using text analytics to explain human deci-
sions in business contexts, thus contributing to a growing body of literature on the use of
Explainable AI in NLP. The speciﬁc application of NLP we investigated was the prediction
of reward-based crowdfunding campaign success, a topic, which has recently garnered a lot
of attention from researchers due to its immediate practical implications. Using machine
learning theory as the starting point, our study attempted to discover textual characteristics
that are predictive of successful crowdfunding campaigns from available past observations.
The main contributions of our study can be summarized as follows.
The study proposes a new method to extract features from text that can be used in a pre-
dictive model of crowdfunding campaigns, potentially alongside non-textual features. The
novelty of the method rests on the fact that it is based on semantic clustering of sentences,
as opposed to individual words and phrases used in previous research, which enables oper-
ationalisation of complex meaning contained in the text. The method is applicable in many
other predictive analytics problems, where relevant textual data is available.
Our experimental evaluation has shown that the method is able to produce useful predictive
features; the improvement to model quality that the sentence cluster features provide is
comparable to the improvement achieved with the established methods of keyword extraction
and topic modelling. In addition, experiments with human raters showed that the meaning of
sentence cluster features is much easier for humans to interpret than keywords and contextual
topic clusters. This points to the ability of the sentence clustering method to provide greater
insights into the kinds of information contained in text that are relevant for modelling non-
textual phenomena, such as the amount of funds raised in a crowdfunding campaign.
This study offers a key theoretical contribution to operations management theory by shap-
ing explainable models of human decisions based on analysis of natural language text. This
type of contribution is exempliﬁed by Holweg et al. (2015) as a key manner for providing
key theoretical inputs to operations management theory. Speciﬁcally, the fact that this study
offers a new way for making better or more inclusive explanations of human decision-making
within a crowdfunding campaign context, is an important contribution to the whole natural
language processing theoretical body of literature. The fact that this contribution stems from
empirical evidence is certainly of great value for operations management literature as per
Kilduff et al. (2011).
6.2 Implications for practice
Returning to the original challenge, our research offers limited guidance to founders on how
to craft the wording of a campaign in order to improve the chance of success (Lipusch et al.,
2020). Where such guidance exists, it might focus on the writing style or emphasis (Wang et
al., 2020; Peng et al., 2022), but not necessarily which features or characteristics will appeal
most to funders. The method demonstrated in this study can be applied in speciﬁc contexts
to identify the most pertinent aspects to highlight or avoid while writing the campaign. In the
sample of campaigns analysed, text suggesting the campaign depends upon the funder seems
to have a negative relation with success. This is in line with studies suggesting founders
should avoid emphasising risk or relying too much on emotional appeal over credibility
(Majumdar and Bose, 2018). Psychological ownership is viewed positively in crowdfunding
123

392
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
(Nesij Huvaj et al., 2023). Yet in this case there may be a ﬁne line between making potential
funders feel they are part of the campaign or leaving them suspicious of whether it can succeed
without them. Such subtle differences are difﬁcult to identify or predict, so the method offers
important opportunities to analyse the context and select appropriate wording.
In a broader perspective our work also offers guidance to practitioners wishing to base
predictions on natural language analysis; they are advised to go beyond traditional keyword-
based or topic modelling methods and, instead, use the sentence-clustering method we
propose. In doing so, they will achieve increased transparency and improved explainability,
both of which will render their predictions more credible as well as more open to scrutiny.
6.3 Limitations and suggestions for future research
There are a number of limitations of this study that future research will hopefully be able
to overcome. The proposed feature extraction method was evaluated within a model that
included only text-based features. However, as discussed in Sect.2.2, previous research has
shown that there are strong non-textual indicators of success of a crowdfunding campaign,
such as campaign duration, fund-raising goal, the experience of the applicants, and others. To
understand the relative importance of the text-based features, they will need to be incorporated
in a model alongside the non-textual indicators. Evaluation of such a comprehensive model
will also demonstrate the practical utility of the insights that the text-based features can
provide about the potential success of a given campaign. Another limitation of this study is
that the method was evaluated on data from a narrow subject domain, 3D printing technology.
Future work may aim to establish if the results we have obtained are generalisable to other
types of products that are commonly present on crowdfunding platforms.
Funding Not applicable.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest Viktor Pekar declares that he has no conﬂict of interest. Marina Candi declares that she has
no conﬂict of interest. Ahmad Beltagui declares that he has no conﬂict of interest. Nikolaos Stylos declares
that he has no conﬂict of interest. Wei Liu declares that she has no conﬂict of interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Code availability Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
393
References
Ahn, J., Hwang, J., Kim, D., Choi, H., & Kang, S. (2020). A survey on churn analysis in various business
domains. IEEE Access, 8, 220816–220839. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3042657
AL-Smadi, M., Hammad, M. M., Al-Zboon, S. A., AL-Tawalbeh, S., Cambria, E. (2023). Gated recurrent unit
with multilingual universal sentence encoder for Arabic aspect-based sentiment analysis. Knowledge-
Based Systems, 261, 107540. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2021.107540
Amplayo, R. K., Lee, S., & Song, M. (2018). Incorporating product description to sentiment topic models for
improved aspect-based sentiment analysis. Information Sciences, 454–455, 200–215. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ins.2018.04.079
Aprigliano, V., Emiliozzi, S., Guaitoli, G., Luciani, A., Marcucci, J., & Monteforte, L. (2023). The power
of text-based indicators in forecasting Italian economic activity. International Journal of Forecasting,
39(2), 791–808. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2022.02.006
Astrakhantsev, N. A., Fedorenko, D. G., & Turdakov, D. Y. (2015). Methods for automatic term recognition
in domain-speciﬁc text collections: A survey. Programming and Computer Software, 41(6), 336–349.
https://doi.org/10.1134/S036176881506002X
Ayoub, J., Yang, X. J., & Zhou, F. (2021). Combat covid-19 infodemic using explainable natural language
processing models. Information Processing & Management, 58(4), 102569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ipm.2021.102569
Babayoff, O., & Shehory, O. (2022). The role of semantics in the success of crowdfunding projects. PLOS
ONE, 17(2), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0263891
Baldi, P. Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architectures. In: Guyon, I., Dror, G., Lemaire, V.,
Taylor, G., Silver, D. (eds.) Proceedings of ICML Workshop on Unsupervised and Transfer Learning.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 27, pp. 37–49. PMLR, Bellevue, Washington, USA
(2012). https://proceedings.mlr.press/v27/baldi12a.html
Ban, G.-Y., & Keskin, N. B. (2021). Personalized dynamic pricing with machine learning: High-dimensional
features and heterogeneous elasticity. Management Science, 67(9), 5549–5568. https://doi.org/10.1287/
mnsc.2020.3680
Bao, Y., & Datta, A. (2014). Simultaneously discovering and quantifying risk types from textual risk disclo-
sures. Management Science, 60(6), 1371–1391. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2014.1930
Behl, A., Dutta, P., Luo, Z., & Sheorey, P. (2022). Enabling artiﬁcial intelligence on a donation-based crowd-
funding platform: A theoretical approach. Annals of Operations Research, 319(1), 761–789. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10479-020-03906-z
Belleﬂamme, P., Omrani, N., & Peitz, M. (2015). The economics of crowdfunding platforms. Information
Economics and Policy, 33, 11–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infoecopol.2015.08.003
Bianchi, F., Terragni, S., & Hovy, D. (2021). Pre-training is a hot topic: Contextualized document embeddings
improve topic coherence. In: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
2: Short Papers), pp. 759–766. Association for Computational Linguistics, Online. https://doi.org/10.
18653/v1/2021.acl-short.96. https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-short.96
Blei, D. M., & Lafferty, J. D. (2007). A correlated topic model of Science. The Annals of Applied Statistics,
1(1), 17–35. https://doi.org/10.1214/07-AOAS114
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3, 993–1022.
Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–32. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1010933404324
Candi, M., Roberts, D. L., Marion, T., & Barczak, G. (2018). Social strategy to gain knowledge for innovation.
British Journal of Management, 29(4), 731–749. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.12280
Cecchini, M., Aytug, H., Koehler, G. J., & Pathak, P. (2010). Making words work: Using ﬁnancial text as a
predictor of ﬁnancial events. Decision Support Systems, 50(1), 164–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.
2010.07.012
Cer, D., Yang, Y., Kong, S.-y., Hua, N., Limtiaco, N., St. John, R., Constant, N., Guajardo-Cespedes, M., Yuan,
S., Tar, C., Strope, B., & Kurzweil, R. (2018). Universal sentence encoder for English. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations
(pp. 169–174). Association for Computational Linguistics, Brussels, Belgium. https://doi.org/10.18653/
v1/D18-2029. https://aclanthology.org/D18-2029
Chaichi, N. (2021). Perceived Value of Technology Product Features by Crowdfunding Backers: The Case of
3D Printing Technology on Kickstarter Platform. https://doi.org/10.15760/etd.7580
123

394
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
Chakraborty, S., & Swinney, R. (2021). Signaling to the crowd: Private quality information and rewards-based
crowdfunding. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 23(1), 155–169. https://doi.org/10.
1287/msom.2019.0833
Cheng, C., Tan, F., Hou, X., & Wei, Z. (2019). Success prediction on crowdfunding with multimodal deep
learning. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
IJCAI-19 (pp. 2158–2164). International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Organization,
Macao, China. https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/299
Chen, J. H., Goldstein, M. K., Asch, S. M., Mackey, L., & Altman, R. B. (2016). Predicting inpatient clinical
order patterns with probabilistic topic models vs conventional order sets. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 24(3), 472–480. https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocw136
Chew, A. W. Z., & Zhang, L. (2022). Data-driven multiscale modelling and analysis of covid-19 spatiotemporal
evolution using explainable ai. Sustainable Cities and Society, 80, 103772. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.
2022.103772
Chiu, C.-C., Wu, C.-M., Chien, T.-N., Kao, L.-J., & Qiu, J. T. (2022). Predicting the mortality of icu patients by
topic model with machine-learning techniques. Healthcare. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10061087
Choi, J.-A., & Lim, K. (2020). Identifying machine learning techniques for classiﬁcation of target advertising.
ICT Express, 6(3), 175–180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icte.2020.04.012
Cialdini, R. B. (2001). The science of persuasion. Scientiﬁc American, 284(2), 76–81.
Danilevsky, M., Qian, K., Aharonov, R., Katsis, Y., Kawas, B., & Sen, P. (2020). A survey of the state of
explainable AI for natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the Asia-Paciﬁc
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 10th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (pp. 447–459). Association for Computational Linguistics. https://
aclanthology.org/2020.aacl-main.46
Davazdahemami, B., Kalgotra, P., Zolbanin, H. M., & Delen, D. (2023). A developer-oriented recommender
model for the app store: A predictive network analytics approach. Journal of Business Research. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2023.11
Davies, W. E., & Giovannetti, E. (2018). Signalling experience and reciprocity to temper asymmetric infor-
mation in crowdfunding evidence from 10,000 projects. Technological Forecasting and Social Change,
133, 118–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.03.011
Desai, N., Gupta, R., & Truong, K. (2015). Plead or pitch? The role of language in kickstarter project success.
http://cs229.stanford.edu/proj2015/239_report.pdf
Du, Q., Fan, W., Qiao, Z., Wang, A. G., Zhang, X., & Zhou, M. (2015). Money talks: A predictive model on
crowdfunding success using project description. In Americas Conference on Information Systems.
Elenchev, I., & Vasilev, A. (2017). Forecasting the success rate of reward based crowdfunding projects.
Econstor preprints, ZBW - Leibniz Information Centre for Economics. https://EconPapers.repec.org/
RePEc:zbw:esprep:170681
Elshendy, M., Colladon, A. F., Battistoni, E., & Gloor, P. A. (2018). Using four different online media sources
to forecast the crude oil price. Journal of Information Science, 44(3), 408–421. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0165551517698298
Etter, V., Grossglauser, M., & Thiran, P. (2013). Launch hard or go home! predicting the success of kickstarter
campaigns. In Proceedings of the First ACM Conference on Online Social Networks. COSN ’13 (pp.
177–182). Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/2512938.2512957
Fleiss, J. L. (1975). Measuring agreement between two judges on the presence or absence of a trait. Biometrics,
31, 651–659.
Frydrych, D., Bock, A., Kinder, T., & Koeck, B. (2014). Exploring entrepreneurial legitimacy in reward-based
crowdfunding. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 16, 247–269.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13691066.2014.916512
Greenberg, M. D., Pardo, B., Hariharan, K., & Gerber, E. (2013). Crowdfunding support tools: Predicting
success & failure. In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA ’13
(pp. 1815–1820). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2468356.2468682.
Gregoriades, A., Pampaka, M., Herodotou, H., & Christodoulou, E. (2021). Supporting digital content market-
ing and messaging through topic modelling and decision trees. Expert Systems with Applications, 184,
115546. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.115546
Gunduz, H. (2021). An efﬁcient stock market prediction model using hybrid feature reduction method based
on variational autoencoders and recursive feature elimination. Financial Innovation, 7(1), 28. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s40854-021-00243-3
Haag, F., Hopf, K., Vasconcelos, P. M., Staake, T. (2022). Augmented cross-selling through explainable AI—A
case from energy retailing.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
395
Hansen, S., & McMahon, M. (2016). Shocking language: Understanding the macroeconomic effects of cen-
tral bank communication. Journal of International Economics, 99, 114–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jinteco.2015.12.008
Haynes, C., Palomino, M., Stuart, L., Viira, D., Hannon, F., Crossingham, G., & Tantam, K. (2022). Auto-
matic classiﬁcation of national health service feedback. Mathematics, 10, 983. https://doi.org/10.3390/
math10060983
Hogenboom, A., Brojba-Micu, A., & Frasincar, F. (2021). The impact of word sense disambiguation on stock
price prediction. Expert Systems with Applications, 184, 115568. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.
115568
Holweg, M., Boer, H., Schmenner, R., Pagell, M., Kilduff, M., & Voss, C. (2015). Making a meaningful
contribution to theory. International Journal of Operations & Production Management. https://doi.org/
10.1108/IJOPM-03-2015-0119
Jacobs, B. J. D., Donkers, B., & Fok, D. (2016). Model-based purchase predictions for large assortments.
Marketing Science, 35(3), 389–404. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2016.0985
Jeong, B., Yoon, J., & Lee, J.-M. (2019). Social media mining for product planning: A product opportunity
mining approach based on topic modeling and sentiment analysis. International Journal of Information
Management, 48, 280–290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.09.009
Kaminski, J., & Hopp, C. (2019). Predicting outcomes in crowdfunding campaigns with textual, visual, and
linguistic signals. Small Business Economics, 55, 627–649.
Kang, Y., Cai, Z., Tan, C.-W., Huang, Q., & Liu, H. (2020). Natural language processing (nlp) in management
research: A literature review. Journal of Management Analytics, 7(2), 139–172. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23270012.2020.1756939
Khan,W.,Malik,U.,Ghazanfar,M.A.,Azam,M.A.,Alyoubi,K.H.,&Alfakeeh,A.S.(2020).Predictingstock
market trends using machine learning algorithms via public sentiment and political situation analysis.
Soft Computing, 24(15), 11019–11043. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-019-04347-y
Kilduff, M., Mehra, A., & Dunn, M. B. (2011). From blue sky research to problem solving: A philosophy of
science theory of new knowledge production. Academy of Management Review, 36(2), 297–317. https://
doi.org/10.5465/amr.2009.0164
Kim,P.H.,Buffart,M.,&Croidieu,G.(2016).Tmi:Signalingcredibleclaimsincrowdfundingcampaignnarra-
tives. Group & Organization Management, 41(6), 717–750. https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601116651181
Langer, M., Oster, D., Speith, T., Hermanns, H., Kästner, L., Schmidt, E., Sesing, A., & Baum, K. (2021).
What do we want from explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (xai)? - a stakeholder perspective on xai and a
conceptual model guiding interdisciplinary xai research. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 296, 103473. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.artint.2021.103473
Le, Q., & Mikolov, T. (2014). Distributed representations of sentences and documents. In Xing, E. P., Jebara, T.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research (Vol. 32, pp. 1188–1196). PMLR, Bejing, China. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v32/
le14.html
Lehman, L. -w., Long, W., Lee, J., & Mark, R. (2012). Risk stratiﬁcation of icu patients using topic models
inferred from unstructured progress notes. AMIA ... Annual Symposium proceedings/AMIA Symposium.
AMIA Symposium (pp. 505–511).
Li, H. A., & Ma, L. (2020). Charting the path to purchase using topic models. Journal of Marketing Research,
57(6), 1019–1036. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022243720954376
Lipusch, N., Dellermann, D., Bretschneider, U., Ebel, P., & Leimeister, J. M. (2020). Designing for crowd-
funding co-creation: How to leverage the potential of backers for product development. Business &
Information Systems Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00628-w
Loginova, E., Tsang, W. K., Heijningen, G., Kerkhove, L.-P., & Benoit, D. F. (2021). Forecasting directional
bitcoin price returns using aspect-based sentiment analysis on online text data. Machine Learning. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10994-021-06095-3
Lukkarinen, A., Teich, J., Wallenius, H., & Wallenius, J. (2016). Success drivers of online equity crowdfunding
campaigns. Decision Support Systems, 87, 26–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2016.04.006
Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S. -I. (2017). A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions. In: Guyon, I.,
Luxburg, U.V., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper_ﬁles/paper/2017/ﬁle/8a20a8621978632d76c43dfd28b67767-Paper.pdf
Macqueen, J. (1967). Some methods for classiﬁcation and analysis of multivariate observations. In In 5th
Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability (pp. 281–297).
Mahbub, N., Le, A., & Zhuang, J. (2022). Online crowd-funding strategy: a game-theoretical approach to
a kickstarter case study. Annals of Operations Research, 315(2), 1019–1036. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-020-03857-5
123

396
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
Majumdar, A., & Bose, I. (2018). My words for your pizza: An analysis of persuasive narratives in online
crowdfunding. Information & Management, 55(6), 781–794. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2018.03.007
Manning, C. D., Raghavan, P., & Schütze, H. (2008). Introduction to information retrieval. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Mehta, V., Mehra, R., & Verma, S. S. (2021). A survey on customer segmentation using machine learning
algorithms to ﬁnd prospective clients. In 2021 9th International Conference on Reliability, Infocom
Technologies and Optimization (Trends and Future Directions) (ICRITO) (pp. 1–4). https://doi.org/10.
1109/ICRITO51393.2021.9596118
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean, J. (2013). Distributed representations of
words and phrases and their compositionality. In: Burges, C.J., Bottou, L., Welling, M., Ghahramani,
Z., Weinberger, K.Q. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 26. Curran
Associates, Inc., Harrah’s Lake Tahoe, NV. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_ﬁles/paper/2013/ﬁle/
9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Paper.pdf
Mitchell, T. M. (1997). Machine learning (Vol. 1). McGraw-hill.
Mitra, T., & Gilbert, E. (2014). The language that gets people to give: Phrases that predict success on kickstarter.
In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social
Computing. CSCW ’14, pp. 49–61. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https://
doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531656
Mollick, E. (2014). The dynamics of crowdfunding: An exploratory study. Journal of Business Venturing,
29(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2013.06.005
Naderi Semiromi, H., Lessmann, S., & Peters, W. (2020). News will tell: Forecasting foreign exchange rates
based on news story events in the economy calendar. The North American Journal of Economics and
Finance, 52, 101181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.najef.2020.101181
Nesij Huvaj, M., Darmody, A., & Smith, R. S. (2023). Psychological ownership and disownership in reward-
based crowdfunding. Journal of Business Research, 158, 113671. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2023.
113671
Nucciarelli, A., Li, F., Fernandes, K. J., Goumagias, N., Cabras, I., Devlin, S., Kudenko, D., & Cowling, P.
(2017). From value chains to technological platforms: The effects of crowdfunding in the digital game
industry. Journal of Business Research, 78, 341–352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.12.030
Parhankangas, A., & Renko, M. (2017). Linguistic style and crowdfunding success among social and com-
mercial entrepreneurs. Journal of Business Venturing, 32(2), 215–236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.
2016.1
Park, E., Park, J., & Hu, M. (2021). Tourism demand forecasting with online news data mining. Annals of
Tourism Research, 90, 103273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annals.2021.103273
Pekar, V. (2020). Purchase intentions on social media as predictors of consumer spending. In Proceedings of
the 14th International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media. ICWSM 2020 (pp. 545–556). AAAI
Press. https://aaai.org/ojs/index.php/ICWSM/article/view/7322
Peng, N., Ghazvininejad, M., May, J., & Knight, K. (2018). Towards controllable story generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the First Workshop on Storytelling (pp. 43–49). Association for Computational Linguistics,
New Orleans, Louisiana. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-1505. https://aclanthology.org/W18-1505
Peng, L., Cui, G., Bao, Z., & Liu, S. (2022). Speaking the same language: the power of words in crowdfunding
success and failure. Marketing Letters, 33, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11002-021-09595-3
Pennebaker, J. W., Booth, R. J., & Francis, M. E. (2007). Linguistic inquiry and word count (liwc2007).
Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. (2014). GloVe: Global vectors for word representation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (pp.
1532–1543). Association for Computational Linguistics, Doha, Qatar. https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-
1162. https://aclanthology.org/D14-1162
Poostchi, H., & Piccardi, M. (2018). Cluster labeling by word embeddings and WordNet’s hypernymy. In Pro-
ceedings of the Australasian Language Technology Association Workshop 2018, Dunedin, New Zealand
(pp. 66–70). https://aclanthology.org/U18-1008
Pramanik, A., Das, A. K., Pelusi, D., & Nayak, J. (2023). An effective fuzzy clustering of crime reports
embedded by a universal sentence encoder model. Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.3390/math11030611
Rashed, A., Kutlu, M., Darwish, K., Elsayed, T., & Bayrak, C. (2021). Embeddings-based clustering for target
speciﬁc stances: The case of a polarized turkey. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on
Web and Social Media, 15(1), 537–548. https://doi.org/10.1609/icwsm.v15i1.18082
Rose, S., Engel, D., Cramer, N., & Cowley, W. (2010). 1. Automatic Keyword Extraction from Individual
Documents (pp. 1–20). Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470689646.ch1
Rubin, T. N., Chambers, A., Smyth, P., & Steyvers, M. (2012). Statistical topic models for multi-label document
classiﬁcation. Machine Learning, 88(1), 157–208. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10994-011-5272-5
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:367–397
397
Saikh, T., Anand, A., Ekbal, A., & Bhattacharyya, P. (2019). A novel approach towards fake news detection:
Deep learning augmented with textual entailment features. In E. Métais, F. Meziane, S. Vadera, V.
Sugumaran, & M. Saraee (Eds.), Natural Language Processing and Information Systems (pp. 345–358).
Cham: Springer.
Sanh, V., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., & Wolf, T. (2019). Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: Smaller, faster,
cheaper and lighter. arXiv:1910.01108
Sarica, S., Luo, J., & Wood, K. L. (2020). Technet: Technology semantic network based on patent data. Expert
Systems with Applications, 142, 112995. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.112995
Schlegel, U., Arnout, H., El-Assady, M., Oelke, D., & Keim, D. A. (2019). Towards a rigorous evaluation of
xai methods on time series. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop
(ICCVW) (pp. 4197–4201). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCVW.2019.00516
Sert, O. C., ¸Sahin, S. D., Özyer, T., & Alhajj, R. (2020). Analysis and prediction in sparse and high dimensional
text data: The case of dow jones stock market. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications,
545, 123752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.123752
Sheth, D., Gupta, A. R., & D’Mello, L. (2021). Using universal sentence encoder for semantic search of
employee data. In 2021 International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Computing Appli-
cations (ICCICA) (pp. 1–4). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCICA52458.2021.9697114
Srivastava, A., & Sutton, C. (2017). Autoencoding variational inference for topic models. In International
Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=BybtVK9lg
Stylos, N., & Zwiegelaar, J. (2019). In: Sigala, M., Rahimi, R., & Thelwall, M. (Eds.) Big Data as a Game
Changer: How Does It Shape Business Intelligence Within a Tourism and Hospitality Industry Context?
(pp. 163–181). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-6339-9_11
Stylos, N., Zwiegelaar, J. B., & Buhalis, D. (2021). Big data empowered agility for dynamic, volatile, and
time-sensitive service industries: The case of tourism sector. International Journal of Contemporary
Hospitality Management.
Thonet, T., Cabanac, G., Boughanem, M., & Pinel-Sauvagnat, K. (2017). Users are known by the company
they keep: Topic models for viewpoint discovery in social networks. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. CIKM ’17 (pp. 87–96). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3132847.3132897
Thorsrud, L. A. (2020). Words are the new numbers: A newsy coincident index of the business cycle. Journal
of Business & Economic Statistics, 38(2), 393–409. https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2018.1506344
Tibshirani, R. (1994). Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
Series B, 58, 267–288.
Velampalli, S., Muniyappa, C., & Saxena, A. (2022). Performance evaluation of sentiment analysis on text and
emoji data using end-to-end, transfer learning, distributed and explainable ai models 13(2), 167–172.
Velmurugan, M., Ouyang, C., Moreira, C., & Sindhgatta, R. (2021). Evaluating stability of post-hoc explana-
tions for business process predictions. In H. Hacid, O. Kao, M. Mecella, N. Moha, & H.-Y. Paik (Eds.),
Service-Oriented Computing (pp. 49–64). Cham: Springer.
Wang, W., Chen, W., Zhu, K., & Wang, H. (2020). Emphasizing the entrepreneur or the idea? the impact of
text content emphasis on investment decisions in crowdfunding. Decision Support Systems, 136, 113341.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2020.113341
Wolfe, M. T., Patel, P. C., & Manikas, A. S. (2021). Shock and awe: Loudness and unpredictability in twitter
messages and crowdfunding campaign success. Journal of Innovation and Knowledge, 6(4), 246–256.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jik.2021.06.002
Xie, P., & Xing, E. P. (2013). Integrating document clustering and topic modeling. CoRR arXiv:1309.6874.
Xie, P., & Xing, E. P. (2013). Integrating document clustering and topic modeling. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. UAI’13 (pp. 694–703). AUAI Press,
Arlington, Virginia, USA.
Yan, J., Zhang, C., Zha, H., Gong, M., Sun, C., Huang, J., Chu, S., & Yang, X. (2015). On machine learning
towards predictive sales pipeline analytics. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v29i1.9455
Yeh, T.-L., Chen, T.-Y., & Lee, C.-C. (2019). Investigating the funding success factors affecting reward-based
crowdfunding projects. Innovation, 21(3), 466–486. https://doi.org/10.1080/14479338.2019.1585191
Younkin,P.,& Kuppuswamy,V.(2018).Thecolorblind crowd?founder race and performance in crowdfunding.
Management Science, 64(7), 3269–3287. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2017.2774
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123