TITLE: Artificial intelligence and blockchain implementation in supply chains: a pathway to sustainability and data monetisation?
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04785-2
---

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04785-2
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Artiﬁcial intelligence and blockchain implementation
in supply chains: a pathway to sustainability and data
monetisation?
Naoum Tsolakis1,2
· Roman Schumacher3
· Manoj Dora4
· Mukesh Kumar3
Accepted: 17 May 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Digitalisation is expected to transform end-to-end supply chain operations by leveraging the
technical capabilities of advanced technology applications. Notwithstanding the operations-
wise merits associated with the implementation of digital technologies, individually, their
combined effect has been overlooked owing to limited real-world evidence. In this regard,
this research explores the joint implementation of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Blockchain
Technology (BCT) in supply chains for extending operations performance boundaries and
fostering sustainable development and data monetisation. Speciﬁcally, this study empirically
studied the tuna ﬁsh supply chain in Thailand to identify respective end-to-end operations,
observe material and data-handling processes, and envision the implementation of AI and
BCT. Therefore, we ﬁrst mapped the business processes and the system-level interactions
to understand the governing material, data, and information ﬂows that could be facilitated
throughthecombinedimplementationofAIandBCTintherespectivesupplychain.Themap-
ping results illustrate the central role of AI and BCT in digital supply chains’ management,
while the associated sustainability and data monetisation impact depends on the parameters
and objectives set by the involved system stakeholders. Afterwards, we proposed a uniﬁed
framework that captures the key data elements that need to be digitally handled in AI and
B Naoum Tsolakis
ntsolakis@ihu.gr
Roman Schumacher
rers3@cam.ac.uk
Manoj Dora
manoj.dora@brunel.ac.uk
Mukesh Kumar
mk501@cam.ac.uk
1
Centre for International Manufacturing, Institute for Manufacturing (IfM), Department of
Engineering, School of Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0FS, UK
2
Department of Supply Chain Management, School of Economics and Business Administration,
International Hellenic University, 570 01 Thermi, Greece
3
Industrial Resilience Research Group, Institute for Manufacturing (IfM), Department of
Engineering, School of Technology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0FS, UK
4
Brunel Business School, Brunel University London, London UB8 3PH, UK
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
/ Published online: 21 June 2022

BCT enabled food supply chains for driving value delivery. Overall, the empirically-driven
modelling approach is anticipated to support academics and practitioners’ decision-making
in studying and introducing digital interventions toward sustainability and data monetisation.
Keywords Supply chain digitalisation · Artiﬁcial intelligence · Blockchain technology ·
Sustainability · Data monetisation · Fish supply networks
1 Introduction
The digitalisation of business operations is critical for traditional enterprises to compete in the
digitaleconomy era (Weill& Woerner,2018). In this regard, the adoption of advanced systems
and applications such as the Internet of Things (IoT), Blockchain Technology (BCT), Cloud
Computing, Data Analytics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), in tandem with the development
and maturity of relevant digital skills and capabilities, are fundamental for the digital trans-
formation of businesses (Akter et al., 2022). Individually, each digital application presents
speciﬁc technical merits and differently enacts upon data and information. In the data analysis
ﬁeld, AI is “a system’s ability to interpret external data correctly, to learn from such data,
and to use those learnings to achieve speciﬁc goals and tasks through ﬂexible adaptation”
(Haenlein & Kaplan, 2019, p.1). The market value of AI in the food and beverages industry
is expected to reach US$29.94 billion by 2026, at a CAGR of 45.8% (ResearchAndMarkets,
2021). In the hardware domain, BCT is a distributed ledger enabling secure data sharing for
better visibility and transparency in supply chains (Kamble et al., 2019). The global market
size of BCT in agriculture and the food sector is projected to reach US$948 million by 2025,
at a CAGR of 48.1% (MarketsAndMarkets, 2020).
Notwithstanding the advantages of digital systems and applications, their interconnectiv-
ity could help overcome inherent limitations and unleash additional technical capabilities,
harnessing productivity beneﬁts and fostering corporate growth (Akter et al., 2022). Indica-
tively, AI, the most impactful application in manufacturing at the beginning of the 21st
Century, typically leverages centralised computing and data storage infrastructure to explore
(continuous) data ﬂows for (real-time) decision-making (Nasar et al., 2020). However, AI
systems encounter complicated issues such as data security and interoperability, adversar-
ial attacks, morality, and ethics (Awad et al., 2018). To a greater extent, AI is considered
a “black box”, and scepticism pertains to the use of emanating analysis results in critical
decision-making. In a similar vein, BCT, as a standalone application, ensures decentralised
data and decision storage across supply chains but cannot be used to analyse data and generate
intelligence for informing the decision-making process (Salah et al., 2019). However, within
the dynamic global business landscape, interactive decision-making based on analysis and
interpretation of real-time and reliable data and information stemming from multiple diverse
sources is becoming prominent (Toorajipour et al., 2021) for a range of purposes such as
avoiding risks and product recalls. In this regard, the combined implementation of AI and
BCT and other cutting-edge technologies (e.g., sensor-driven automation for gathering shop
ﬂoor data) is catalytic to complement technical capabilities, create actual business value and
enable competitiveness (Hughes et al., 2022).
Research evidence recognises that BCT can augment the implementation of AI in both
upstream and downstream supply chain operations (Grover et al., 2022). Speciﬁcally, BCT
is considered an adequate digital application to ensure interpretable and trustworthy AI in
real-world settings via ascertaining data security, privacy, reliability, usability, dependability,
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
158

performance, and governance (Nasar et al., 2020). Equivalently, AI-based solutions could
support BCT implementations to redeﬁne industrial operations across multiple fronts, includ-
ing: (i) being more proactive; (ii) enabling autonomous processes; (iii) allowing personalised
services; and (iv) transitioning to production planning based on predictions (Toorajipour
et al., 2021). In addition, leveraging the synergistic technical capabilities of multiple digital
systems and applications such as AI and BCT helps pursue Sustainable Development Goals
(Del Río Castro et al., 2021). Collaborative digital ecosystems promote sustainable supply
chains performance via enabling the improved management of resources, supporting waste
monitoring and management, reducing energy consumption, and informing the development
and diffusion of sustainable ﬁnancing instruments (Belhadi et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022).
The combined implementation of data-driven digital technologies is particularly valuable
in a food supply chain context due to the increasing demand for veriﬁable transparency and
traceability evidence regarding product safety and quality (Aung & Chang, 2014). Speciﬁ-
cally, integrating AI and BCT could expand the data gathering, interoperability and analysis
capabilities across end-to-end echelons of operations to enable supply network security, cost-
competitive resiliency, and sustainability, thus ultimately leading to enhanced consumers’
trust (Bechtsis et al., 2021). Major retailers have already implemented BCT, namely: (i)
‘Walmart’ for tracing agricultural products in the U.S. and pork in China; (ii) ‘Carrefour’ for
tracking milk supply chains; and (iii) ‘Alibaba’ for addressing food fraud (Kshetri, 2018). At
an institutional level, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration pilots an AI-driven blockchain
implementation to dynamically assess foodborne illness risks from imported food supplies
and enhance end-to-end tracking and tracing of goods (Mearian, 2019).
In terms of international trade, AI and BCT could help unleash beneﬁts for the involved
system stakeholders. For example, the European Union (EU) is Thailand’s third-largest export
destination for seafood products after the U.S. and Japan, accounting for 10% of the total
exports. In fact, in 2017, the value of Thailand’s total exports of ﬁshery products was worth
about US$5.93 billion (Kishimoto, 2019). To this effect, the potential exclusion of Thailand
from exporting seafood products to the EU is associated with signiﬁcant economic and
social ramiﬁcations. In April 2015, Thailand was issued a ‘yellow card’ for violating EU
standards concerning ﬁsheries management. The ‘yellow card’ is a formal notice signalling
that the exporting country does not take sufﬁcient measures to tackle illegal ﬁshing. In
case appropriate measures are not subsequently implemented, the country concerned will be
excluded from trade operations with the EU (European Commission, 2015); Thailand was
delisted in 2019 (IUU Watch, 2020). Illegal overﬁshing and ﬁshing of endangered species are
two major sustainability concerns that the Thai ﬁsh industry must tackle to remain delisted
(European Commission, 2015). Illegal ﬁshing is not a phenomenon exclusively concerning
Thailand but instead constitutes a global issue requiring immediate and decisive action. On
the business side, illegal ﬁshing is a severe externality that threatens the entire industry (Ryan
et al., 2014). From a social viewpoint, as a typical example of an economic common good,
ﬁsh is ‘rivalrous’ (i.e., the consumption from one person excludes the consumption of another
person) and non-excludable (i.e., people who have not paid for it cannot be prevented from
having access to it). Overﬁshed species have tripled in the last half-century, and one-third
of all ﬁsh stocks are no longer at their biologically sustainable levels (FAO, 2020). The
sustainability implications extend beyond the purely maritime ecosystem. Billions of people
depend on ﬁsh as a source of protein, and millions live from ﬁshing (WWF, 2020).
A central problem in the legal action against illicit ﬁshing activities is the lack of
transparency across the supply chain. Globally, many ﬁshers do not comply with ﬁsheries
legislation and can sell their catch on the market without proof of compliance (Macfadyen
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
159

et al., 2019). Responding to the transparency challenge, AI and BCT have proven effec-
tive tools to reduce information asymmetry and increase transparency across supply chains
(Bumblauskas et al., 2020; Ebinger & Omondi, 2020). However, multiple and diversiﬁed data
archetypes often exist in end-to-end supply chains. Key challenges in implementing these
technologies are often related to limited processing capabilities of unstructured, incomplete,
and sometimes inaccurate data (Choi et al., 2020). Furthermore, a lack of systems think-
ing in supply chain participants can lead to signiﬁcant challenges in implementing such
technologies in complex industrial contexts (Camaréna, 2020). To a greater extent, AI and
BCT implementations can leverage data to inform decision-making in business processes
and provide data-driven products and services. Therefore, the concept of ‘data monetisation’
emerges, i.e., “… using data from an organization to generate proﬁt” (Faroukhi et al., 2020,
p.1). Data monetisation related to the traceability awareness of consumers and production
costs of suppliers and manufacturers has been investigated (Fan et al., 2022). Research ﬁnd-
ings indicate that consumers aware of traceability are willing to pay a higher price in the
supply chain, up to a certain threshold where the traceability awareness impact diminishes
(Fan et al., 2022).
A key challenge to digital-driven traceability and sustainability in food refers to the lack of
appropriate information technology-based tools that can inform the design of supply chains
for agility and dynamic change (Klein et al., 2016). Therefore, digital implementations shall
emerge as knowledge-based activities (Yu, 2009), emanating from the empirical understand-
ing of complex enterprise phenomena at a conceptual modelling level (Guizzardi et al.,
2013). Concerning modelling, methodologies are required to rapidly redesign digital supply
chains to respond to the socio-technical and environmental developments whilst ensuring
data analysis, information ﬂows, and operational understanding (Fayoumi & Loucopoulos,
2016).
This research aims to explore the interplay among AI, BCT and supply chain operations
that could promote sustainability and value delivery, with a particular focus on food networks.
We share the view that material ﬂows, data-based transactions and information generation,
enabled through AI and BCT, can allow actors across the supply chain to monetise these data
(i.e., harness value). To this effect, the objective of this research is to devise a systematic anal-
ysis approach for understanding the interplay among digital implementations and the supply
chain ecosystem that allows for exploring the associated sustainability and data monetisation
opportunities. Therefore, we attempt to address the following research question: How can
the interplay of digital technologies in food supply chains be captured for sustainability and
data monetisation?
To respond to the articulated research query, we ﬁrst employ business process mapping
and a Systems Thinking perspective to capture material, data, and information ﬂows across
dynamic supply chain operations. As the implementation of AI and BCT can facilitate the
fundamental ﬂows across an end-to-end supply chain, the mapping process focuses on the role
of digital technologies. By applying such a mapping approach, this research represents the
dynamics and determines the performance of operations in an illustrative tuna manufacturing
supply chain. In particular, the business process mapping allows capturing the signiﬁcant
key data elements to be visible (e.g., via BCT infrastructure) and interpretable (e.g., via
AI algorithms) to all involved stakeholders. Furthermore, the Systems Thinking perspective
provided the possibility to capture the interplay among the corresponding ‘AI-BCT-supply
chain’ structural elements and explore the underpinning dynamics.
Akter et al. (2022) stressed the need to investigate the combined use of emerging technolo-
gies in digital business transformation for operational excellence and sustainable growth. This
research contributes to the Operations Management ﬁeld by proposing an empirically-driven
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
160

framework that provides an understanding of the ‘digital technology – supply chain’ system
structure and the interplay between these two domains for proactively assessing the ema-
nating operations-wise beneﬁts, responding to a documented gap in the community (Sodhi
et al., 2022). Speciﬁcally, this research’s ﬁndings guide the joint implementation of AI and
BCT in supply chains for leveraging these two technologies’ inherent synergic value and
inform supply chain managers’ expectations at the initial stage of these emerging technolo-
gies’ adoption. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the ﬁrst studies that highlight
the unique advantages emanating from the combined implementation of AI and BCT and
discuss the resulting sustainability and data monetisation gains in ﬁsh supply chains.
The remainder of this research is structured as follows. Section 2 overviews the research
background on AI and BCT in supply chains by highlighting beneﬁts, implementation
challenges and sustainability implications. Section 3 details the underpinning research
methodology for designing supply chains based on AI and BCT. Section 4 outlines ﬁsh
supply chains and essential key data elements, while Sect. 5 elaborates on the case study of
the ﬁshery supply chain ecosystem in Thailand. A proposed research framework is inserted
in Sect. 6. Conclusions, implications, limitations, and future research avenues are explored
in the ﬁnal Sect. 7.
2 Artiﬁcial intelligence and blockchain in supply chains
The introduction of AI in supply chain management facilitates the orchestration and opti-
misation of network operations via: (i) revealing complex behavioural patterns through
multifaceted analysis of data (e.g., classiﬁcation, optimisation, clustering); (ii) perceiving the
surrounding environment to inform autonomous activities and proactively address emerging
performance and quality issues; (iii) informing supply chain design, simulation and planning;
and (iv) enabling negotiation-based collaborative modelling (Toorajipour et al., 2021). More-
over, BCT is an application that enables “transparent, secure, decentralized ledgers, smart
contracts and reliable networks for sustainable supply chain management” (Kouhizadeh
et al., 2021, p.15). Therefore, this research proposes the joined and complementary imple-
mentation of AI and BCT to increase supply chain efﬁciency and sustainability, focusing on
the food sector.
In order to identify the extant research on the utilisation of emerging technologies, speciﬁ-
cally AI and BCT, in the context of supply chains, we performed a critical literature taxonomy.
For this purpose, we conducted a structured Boolean-type keyword search in the Scopus
database (Aivazidou et al., 2016). Although we acknowledge that both the Scopus and Web
of Science databases cover the vast majority of scientiﬁc journals in the ﬁelds of business and
management, natural sciences and engineering that are relevant to this study (Mongeon &
Paul-Hus, 2016), we exclusively used the Scopus database for our literature search queries.
We focused on Scopus because it is a widely accepted database for searching and mapping
the extant literature (Fahimnia et al., 2019; Pournader et al., 2020). A systematic litera-
ture review extends the scope of this research. The Boolean keyword search was conducted
using the following combination in the “Article title, Abstract, Keywords” ﬁeld: {“Artiﬁcial
Intelligence” AND “Blockchain” AND “Supply Chain”}. The search was further limited to
journal articles’ publications written in English. The time horizon of publications was left
unrestricted. By the 5th of January 2022, the search returned 36 results. After reading the
abstracts, nine papers were excluded as deemed irrelevant to the scope of this research. The
remaining 27 results are listed in Table 1.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
161

Table 1 Critical taxonomy of the existing research
Study
Supply chain type
Methodology
Technology
Technology scope in
supply chains
AI
BCT
Joint Implementation (AI &
BCT)
Agrawal and Narain (2021)
Not speciﬁed
Structural modelling
✓
✓
Digital transformation;
Technology adoption
Barczak et al. (2019)
Not speciﬁed
Case study
✓
✓
Technology
implementation risks
Baz et al. (2022)
Medical
Literature review
✓
✓
Covid-19 pandemic risk
management
Bechtsis et al. (2021)
Food
Mixed (Case study &
Literature review)
✓
Data monetisation
Cagliano et al. (2021)
Not speciﬁed
ANOVA
✓
✓
Technology adoption
Chidepatil et al. (2020)
Waste
Case study
✓
Circular supply chains
Dillenberger et al. (2019)
Not speciﬁed
Case study
✓
Logistics optimisation
Dwivedi et al. (2021)
Not speciﬁed
Literature review
✓
BCT – Internet of
Things integration
Ebinger and Omondi (2020)
Not speciﬁed
Literature review
✓
✓
Supply chain
transparency
Eluubek kyzy et al. (2021)
Agriculture
Technical framework
✓
Data monetisation
Ethirajan et al. (2020)
Manufacturing
Case study
✓
✓
Operational optimisation
of supply chains
Hartley and Sawaya (2019)
Manufacturing and
services (multiple)
Case study
✓
✓
Assessment of
technology potential
Hopkins (2021)
Not speciﬁed
Survey
✓
✓
Supply chain innovation
Kale et al. (2020)
Healthcare
Conceptualisation
✓
Supply chain
transparency and
efﬁciency
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
162

Table 1 (continued)
Study
Supply chain type
Methodology
Technology
Technology scope in
supply chains
AI
BCT
Joint Implementation (AI &
BCT)
Kamble et al. (2022)
Manufacturing
Literature review
✓
✓
Sustainability
Liu et al. (2021)
Food
Literature review
✓
✓
Key applications
Luo and Choi (2022)
Not speciﬁed
Literature review
✓
✓
Literature categorisation
Mehta et al. (2021)
Oil and gas
System modelling
✓
Data security
Nandi et al. (2021)
Not speciﬁed
Conceptualisation
✓
✓
Sustainability
Probst (2020)
Fish
Literature review
✓
✓
Supply chain
transparency
Reyes et al. (2020)
Not speciﬁed
Literature review
✓
✓
Technology
implementation
Rodríguez-Espínola et al.
(2020)
Humanitarian
operations
Case study
✓
Disaster management
Sgantzos and Grigg (2019)
Not speciﬁed
Literature review
✓
Data integrity
Singh and Chaddah (2021)
Pharmaceutical
Survey
✓
Supply chain security
Sobb et al. (2020)
Military
Literature review
✓
✓
Cyber security
Stanislawski and Szymonik
(2021)
Multiple
Survey
✓
✓
Technology impact on
market positioning
Zhou et al. (2020)
Not speciﬁed
Conceptualisation;
Literature review
✓
Fraud detection
AI Artiﬁcial intelligence; BCT Blockchain technology
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
163

2.1 Artificial intelligence
As information becomes increasingly available throughout global supply chains, so do the
expectations for AI’s use of this information (Sanders et al., 2019). In fact, a study from McK-
insey estimated that AI analytics could add around US$13 trillion (or 16%) to annual global
GDP by 2030, while essential supply chain relevant operations (e.g., logistics, retailing)
could be beneﬁted the most (Bughin et al., 2018). Accordingly, supply chains’ efﬁciency and
productivity are set to increase signiﬁcantly due to the use of AI over the next decade. In the
supply chain spectrum, the introduction of AI implementations adds value by: (i) facilitating
supply network design and reconﬁguration through vetting and classifying potential stake-
holders (e.g., alternative suppliers), facilities and technologies (Govindan et al., 2017); (ii)
analysing big data for explaining and assessing risks thus promoting supply chain resilience
(Papadopoulos et al., 2017); (iii) supporting near real-time, automated and optimal decision-
making via analysing large amounts of data from diverse sources (e.g., web, social media,
information systems of involved supply chain actors) to address uncertainty and demand
volatility (Baryannis et al., 2019); and (iv) enabling learning, reasoning and self-correction
of supply chain operations whilst promoting validation of information for particular purposes
such as contracting (Shen et al., 2019).
Contemporarily, creating sustainable global supply chains has emerged as one of the most
urgent yet unresolved industrial challenges (Dauvergne, 2020). End-to-end global supply
chain operations profoundly impact sustainability (Carter & Washispack, 2018). Most neg-
ative environmental impacts do not emerge from direct manufacturing operations but from
end-to-end supply chain operations that involve sourcing, distribution, production, and logis-
tics (Sanders et al., 2019). Although many research scholars propagate AI as ground-breaking
for the design of ‘green’ supply chains, others see the implementation of AI in supply chains
as an acceleration of existing negative inﬂuences on sustainability.
This research acknowledges that the discussion on the advantages and disadvantages of
AI for sustainability can be conducted on many levels. To this end, Table 2 provides an
overview of frequently identiﬁed sustainability beneﬁts and challenges stemming from the
implementation of AI in supply chains.
2.1.1 Sustainability beneﬁts
The implementation of AI is recognised for enabling various operational beneﬁts, such as
increasing productivity and efﬁciency (Camaréna, 2020; Cubric, 2020; Di Vaio et al., 2020;
Sanders et al., 2019), thus leading to increased economic sustainability. Indicatively, AI is
used to optimise the harvesting and processing of crops, e.g., by using drones with cam-
eras and machine learning algorithms to determine the decomposition rate of vegetables
(Camaréna, 2020). Additionally, AI supported by other constituent technologies facilitates
the sorting of food supplies whilst continuously monitoring the hygiene level across opera-
tions (Di Vaio et al., 2020). Similar beneﬁts could also be achievable for the ﬁshing industry
on multiple fronts, from monitoring ﬁsh harvesting and downstream industrial processing to
ensuring transparency and traceability across international trade operations (Tsolakis et al.,
2021). AI can further help reduce operational costs related to human errors, labour, and equip-
ment (Cubric, 2020) or costs related to fuel consumption for production and transportation
(Dauvergne, 2020). Except for the beneﬁts at an (internal) operations level, AI has also been
identiﬁed to provide beneﬁts for the end-to-end supply chain management. Such beneﬁts
include improved customer demand management and forecasting (Cubric, 2020), increased
supply chain transparency (Ebinger & Omondi, 2020), decision-support on the pricing of
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
164

Table 2 Literature taxonomy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence implementation for supply chain sustainability
Author(s)
AI aim
AI implementation beneﬁts
AI implementation challenges
Study nature
Study methodology
Baryannis et al. (2019)
Identiﬁcation,
assessment,
mitigation and
monitoring of SC
risks
Enables accelerated and adaptive
decision making based on large
datasets
Provides
automated
decision-
making, predictive and learning
capabilities
Enables increased SC visibility
N.A.–N.S
Ql
Literature review
Camaréna (2020)
AI for transitioning
food systems
Supports increase in productivity
(production optimisation)
Ensures automation of seeding,
crop yield, harvesting, etc
Informs decision-making
Enables machine learning for
detecting
the
decomposition
rate of vegetables
Enables machine learning and
machine vision to detect para-
sites on ﬁsh
Helps detect environmental
pollution
Legal and ethical issues of respon-
sibility and liability (e.g., through
automated decision-making)
Exacerbation of tensions between
social and technical engineering
Jeopardising of data conﬁdentiality
(e.g., by hacking by competitors
and foreign powers)
Privacy rights infringements of farm-
ers by governments through apply-
ing AI for SC traceability
Lack of required systems thinking
by participants in the food system
Ql
Literature review
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
165

Table 2 (continued)
Author(s)
AI aim
AI implementation beneﬁts
AI implementation challenges
Study nature
Study methodology
Chidepatil et al. (2020)
Blockchain and
sensor-driven AI
for transforming
the circular
economy
Facilitates information sharing
among SC members
Enables smart contracts in the
procurement processes
between SC members
Lack of reliable information about
availability, quantity, quality, and
suitability
Ql
Case study
Cubric (2020)
Drivers and barriers
to AI adoption in
business and
management
Supports increased productivity
Promotes cost reductions (e.g.,
reduced human errors, equip-
ment cost, reduction of human
labour, etc.)
Supports decision-making (e.g.,
informed decisions, more accu-
rate forecasting, etc.)
Outlines more sustainable
processes to ﬁt consumer
demand (e.g., agriculture)
Labelling/structuring data can be
costly
Support of infrastructure is necessary
Lack of training data may lead to
reduced performance of AI algo-
rithms
Data may be unstructured and thus
challenging to share
Data conﬁdentiality issues
Generalisability of data may not be
possible
Difﬁculties in reusing AI models for
different purposes
Lack of knowledge about the
beneﬁts of AI for speciﬁc problems
Ql
Literature review
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
166

Table 2 (continued)
Author(s)
AI aim
AI implementation beneﬁts
AI implementation challenges
Study nature
Study methodology
Dauvergne (2020)
Environmental
impact of AI
Promotescorporateefﬁciencyand
productivity gains
Enhances energy efﬁciency of
transnational corporations, e.g.,
automation of cooling systems
with AI
Promotes efﬁciency and reliabil-
ity gains of renewable energies,
e.g., forecasting weather, ﬁne-
tuning energy storage, etc
Helps reduce fuel consumption by
increasing efﬁciency in produc-
tion and logistics
Supports programs to cut costs of
packaging and shipping
Negative environmental impact
Increases in consumption and pro-
duction outweigh positive effects
on corporate social responsibility
Enhanced social inequality
Accelerated natural resources extrac-
tion
Racial and ethnic proﬁling of
customers
Ql
Literature review
Di Vaio et al. (2020)
Impact of AI on
agri-food SCs
Promotes testing concerning food
safety at every stage of the SC
Promotes increases in efﬁciency
and productivity
Enables food savings, improves
the hygiene of production sites,
and helps clean up production
equipment quickly
Enables food sorting (e.g., opti-
cal sensor-based solutions with
machine learning capabilities)
Helps ensure hygiene standards
(e.g., use of cameras to moni-
tor the compliance with hygiene
standards)
Helps the use of drones to assess
the ripening status of crops
Enhanced social inequality
Privacy issues due to AI application
data
Required signiﬁcant changes in
business models
Ql
Literature review
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
167

Table 2 (continued)
Author(s)
AI aim
AI implementation beneﬁts
AI implementation challenges
Study nature
Study methodology
Ebinger and Omondi
(2020)
Transparency in
sustainable SCs
Enables traceability and tracking
through the collection and pro-
cessing of big data for end-to-
end SC visibility
Fosters cooperation and partner
selection via real-time infor-
mation sharing for decision-
making processes
Promotes governance via end-to-
end SC data collection and pro-
cessing
Assists in strategic and
operational risk assessment via
data analytics
Individualisation of digital solutions
in companies via using internal data
architecture
Lack of standardised information
leading to difﬁculties in choosing
appropriate solutions to increase
transparency
Many approaches used are still in the
trial phase and offer only limited
solutions
Ql
Literature review
Min (2010)
Support of
decision-making:
strategic/
operational/
tactical
Provides a decision support tool
that can help ﬁrms connect with
customers, suppliers and SC
partners
Facilitates information exchange
among SC entities
Facilitates understanding of SC
dynamics
Supports the logistics outsourcing
or contract manufacturing deci-
sions
Supports supplier selection
Facilitates real-time pricing and
reverse auctioning involving
SC partners
Solutions may be too costly
Difﬁcult to produce solutions due to
the complexity and ill-structured
nature of the problem
Relative youth and broad spectrum of
the SC management discipline
AI solutions may be too difﬁcult for
decision-makers to comprehend
Difﬁculties in implementation for
handling risks in cross-functional
or cross-border contexts due to
knowledge acquisition bottlenecks
Ql
Literature review
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
168

Table 2 (continued)
Author(s)
AI aim
AI implementation beneﬁts
AI implementation challenges
Study nature
Study methodology
Mota et al. (2015)
AI for economic,
environmental and
social design and
planning
Helps improve all sustainabil-
ity dimensions (i.e., economic,
environmental, social)
Promotes cost reductions and mit-
igation of environmental haz-
ards through modelling (e.g.,
reducing warehouses)
Helps increase social
sustainability with a slight
compromise of economic
performance
Indicators for sustainability in the
dimensions
considered
for
this
work are imperfect/can be signiﬁ-
cantly improved
No possibility to evaluate the social
dimension of an SC per se
Consideration of only a single SC
Qn
Generic multi-objective
mathematical
programming model
Orji and Wei (2015)
Fuzzy logic and
system dynamics
for sustainable
supplier selection
Helps in the modelling of
supplier selection criteria for
decision support
No spatial and temporal considera-
tions regarding decisions
Criteria and alternatives in the model
are ﬁxed
Qn
Fuzzy logic and system
dynamics
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
169

Table 2 (continued)
Author(s)
AI aim
AI implementation beneﬁts
AI implementation challenges
Study nature
Study methodology
Sanders et al. (2019)
AI for sustainable
SCs
Helps improve demand manage-
ment
Promotes increased operational
productivity
Promotes increased operational
efﬁciency
Enables
increased
SC
trans-
parency,
traceability
and
security
Supports decision support (e.g.,
pricing)
Inﬂiction of severe economic and
social cost
Creation of biases and discrimination
through machine learning applica-
tions
Potential failure of AI algorithms to
detect misinformation
Ql
Literature review
Ting et al. (2014)
Quality assurance in
food SCs
Supports decision-making
Helps create and transfer quality
relevant information
Promotes inspection cost reduc-
tions
Promotes quality level enhance-
ments
Promotes increased customer sat-
isfaction
Enhances SC visibility
Increasing costs for transportation
Requirement of signiﬁcant time to
identify dominant association rules
by computational methods
Qn
Association mining
AI Artiﬁcial intelligence; SC Supply chain; Ql. Qualitative; Qn. Quantitative
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
170

products (Min, 2010; Sanders et al., 2019), and information sharing among supply chain
stakeholders (Chidepatil et al., 2020).
From a social sustainability perspective, transparency is one of the key beneﬁts that AI
can deliver, particularly downstream a supply chain. For example, AI can inform customers
about making more conscious purchasing decisions towards responsibly sourced and pro-
duced goods due to the advanced data processing capabilities that allow tracing the upstream
supply chain to the raw materials stage (Chidepatil et al., 2020). Furthermore, AI-driven appli-
cations can contribute to social welfare; for example, socially assistive robots can decrease
the workload of caregivers and enhance the well-being of the elderly population by enabling
mobility, social contacts, and cognitive support (Cubric, 2020).
Moreover, the implementation of AI can help promote environmental sustainability. In the
energy domain, AI can contribute to reducing fuel consumption by increasing efﬁciency in
energy conversion and logistics. Furthermore, AI can provide efﬁciency and reliability gains
of renewable energies, e.g., by increasing weather forecast accuracy and ﬁne-tuning energy
storage (Dauvergne, 2020).
2.1.2 Implementation challenges
The challenges for AI implementation comprise technical, ethical, legal, managerial, and
socio-economic considerations. A major technical challenge for adopting AI in business
operations relates to the availability and use of data. Data available to ﬁrms is often unstruc-
tured and difﬁcult to share between the supply chain members. Structuring this data can be
very costly. Furthermore, the data used for a speciﬁc case might not be generalisable (Cubric,
2020). For example, problems can arise by (small) datasets, which do not accurately reﬂect
reality, or by overﬁtting the AI algorithm to the training data set. On the other end, a lack
of training data may lead to reduced performance of the elaborated AI algorithms (Cubric,
2020). In addition, a lack of standardisation of information can lead to difﬁculties in choosing
the right AI solution. There is a trend toward individualising companies’ digital solutions via
internal data architecture (Ebinger & Omondi, 2020).
Another challenge arising with the use of data for AI is the possibility of privacy rights
infringement. For example, using AI-enabled traceability of food products across a supply
chain by governments or competitors can inﬂict infringement on farmers’ privacy rights
(Leone, 2017). Furthermore, project datasets often contain conﬁdential information, leading
to signiﬁcant technical barriers to adopting AI-driven solutions in industrial applications.
Additionally, the application of AI may impose social problems with ethnical and racial pro-
ﬁling. Indicatively, facial recognition algorithms in a shopping mall in St. Petersburg already
proﬁle customers by age, ethnicity, and gender (Dauvergne, 2020), thus raising privacy con-
cerns.
In addition to ethical and legal challenges related to data, the implementation of AI encoun-
ters signiﬁcant barriers owing to the relative youth and broad spectrum of the discipline (Min,
2010). Due to the early development and application stage, many AI-based solutions are
demonstrated only in pilot/trial demonstrators and offer limited practical solutions (Ebinger
& Omondi, 2020). Accordingly, there is often a lack of managerial awareness about the
implementation beneﬁts of AI in corporations (Cubric, 2020). In this regard, any AI-based
solutions might be complicated for decision-makers to comprehend (Min, 2010).
Lastly, despite the beneﬁts stemming from the implementation of AI in an industrial
context, a range of signiﬁcant social risks is involved (Di Vaio et al., 2020). As technologies
like autonomous driving are developing fast, unemployment issues for professional truck
drivers might arise in the long term (Sanders et al., 2019). The possibility of AI-driven
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
171

solutions replacing human labour will exacerbate social and technical engineering tensions
(Camaréna, 2020).
2.2 Blockchain technology
Blockchain is a type of database that stores data in blocks distributed across a network of
operations in a decentralised manner. New data and information added by an actor across
a supply chain would be shared with the other actors almost instantly. The data blocks are
interlinked with a hash (i.e., cryptographic ‘ﬁngerprint’) of all previous blocks.
Considering the food sector, blockchain implementation in supply chains is reasonably
nascent but growing since the technology enables digital ‘passports’ to physical products.
For example, Project Provenance Ltd uses the Ethereum blockchain to help producers prove
the authenticity and origin of yellowﬁn and skipjack tuna in ﬁsh supply chains in Indonesia
(Provenance, 2016). Furthermore, Intel piloted blockchain in seafood supply chains via using
Hyperledger Sawtooth (del Castillo, 2017). In addition, the World Wide Fund for Nature
also piloted the use of blockchain to trace ﬁsh from its origin, speciﬁcally focusing on the
tuna industry of the Paciﬁc Islands (WWF, 2018). Lastly, FishCoin developed a blockchain
traceability platform for ﬁsheries and modelled incentives for participants to share data in
return for tokens (Fishcoin, 2018).
2.2.1 Sustainability beneﬁts
Blockchain creates opportunities for improving national sector-speciﬁc supply chains to
drive competitiveness, trade, and the triple-helix of sustainability (Kimani et al., 2020). In
terms of economic sustainability, for example, the World Trade Organisation expects that
the removal of trade barriers owing to the implementation of blockchain could result in new
trade operations of more than US$1 trillion during the next decade (Ganne, 2018). The EU
recognises the enabling role of BCT to supply chains and international trade, particularly in
terms of: (i) customs facilitation; (ii) greater inclusivity of small and medium enterprises;
(iii) sustainable trade realisation; and (iv) accelerated clearance processes at borders and
terminals thus minimising waiting times (Copigneaux et al., 2020).
In the social sustainability domain, BCT enables data security and immutability owing to
its technical characteristics that prevent modifying the shared data blocks without ‘breaking’
the chain (Babich & Hilary, 2020). In this regard, the implementation of BCT in a supply
network allows increased levels of traceability hence enabling importers’ judgement over the
responsible sourcing and processing of products (Copigneaux et al., 2020).
Experts also share the view that BCT fosters environmental sustainability in international
supply chain operations. Particularly, blockchain allows the digitalisation of trade documen-
tation, thus leading to less use of paper (Copigneaux et al., 2020). To a greater extent, BCT
can lead to fewer carbon emissions, e.g., by reducing the fuel consumption of freight vehicles
waiting at the borders (Copigneaux et al., 2020).
2.2.2 Implementation challenges
The practical use of BCT entails several organisational, technical, and operational challenges
and barriers that need to be overcome, including: (i) data storage capacity and scalability;
(ii) security weaknesses and threats; (iii) anonymity and data privacy; (iv) legal issues; and
(v) consensus among blockchain participants (Reyna et al., 2018).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
172

From an organisational perspective, inter-organisational and intra-organisational barriers
to adoption exist, mainly including ﬁnancial resources, organisational readiness, legal and
regulatory compliance, and standardisation (Dutta et al., 2020). Most importantly, the limited
awareness of professionals about blockchain hinders its adoption in supply chains (Kamble
et al., 2019). To a greater extent, behavioural expectations and limited trust among multiple
stakeholders in a supply network can imperil BCT implementation initiatives (Queiroz &
Fosso Wamba, 2019).
From a technical viewpoint, challenges for implementing BCT in supply chain operations
refer to scalability, interoperability, product governance, and latency (Dutta et al., 2020).
Considering the global operations in modern supply chains and the inclusion of multiple
stakeholders, from tier level suppliers to end consumers, the challenges of blockchain inte-
gration in supply chain operations are pivotal (Dutta et al., 2020). In addition, as BCT ensures
secure data transactions, the size of the data blocks is a key factor impacting the performance
and efﬁciency of such a digital platform (Li et al., 2019).
At an operational level, technological systems’ compatibility, adaptability, standardis-
ation, and expandability are the main challenges to BCT implementation across supply
networks (Sharma et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019). Speciﬁcally, in the food sector, the modus
operandi typically requires myopic traceability involving only directly linked actors. How-
ever, the increased frequency of disruptions, food scandals, and product recalls have implied
the necessity for establishing chain visibility and traceability, possibly enabled via BCT, to
foster resiliency (Katsaliaki et al., 2021) ultimately. Nevertheless, this need to apply “diligent
and time-consuming bookkeeping and labeling by all members of a facility” is challenging,
particularly in the food sector (Bumblauskas et al., 2020, p.3). An engineering challenge
is also the energy supply and storage capacity of such devices (e.g., sensors’ battery life
longevity, servers’ energy requirements) to enable near real-time data gathering.
2.3 Artificial intelligence and blockchain technology integration
Considering that AI and blockchain are relatively nascent, real-world joint implementations
of these technologies are rare. Nevertheless, few scientiﬁc works theoretically discuss the
advantages and disadvantages of respective integrated solutions.
First, the integrated implementation of AI and BCT serves to overcome inherent limita-
tions characterising each of these individual technologies. On the one end, in the application
of AI, trustworthiness, explainability, and lack of sufﬁcient data and privacy issues are often
signiﬁcantbarrierstoimplementation.Ontheotherend,blockchaindemonstratesweaknesses
in terms of scalability and efﬁciency. Therefore, the integrated implementation of both tech-
nologies can compensate for the individual weaknesses in a complementary manner (Dinh
& Thai, 2018; Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., 2020).
AI can provide efﬁcient data-driven decision support for various business problems. How-
ever, complications in the ﬂow of data and information across a supply chain can negatively
affect the performance of AI algorithms which require accurate, reliable, and timely input
(Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., 2020). Blockchain can ensure such ﬂows by serving as a plat-
form for managing and sharing data and information from multiple sources whilst ensuring
the traceability and accountability of the ﬂows (Dinh & Thai, 2018; Rodríguez-Espíndola
et al., 2020).
Data that is systematically stored on enterprise blockchains can eliminate a vast amount
of time in pre-processing and can inform supply chain decision-making. Dillenberger et al.
(2019) reported multiple real-world use cases around the IBM Blockchain Platform. For
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
173

example, IBM’s data science tool IBM Watson Studio combined AI and BCT to optimise
logisticsprocesses,i.e.,topredictpotentialshippingdelaysusinghistoricalshipping,weather,
and location data. BCT enabled access to relevant structured data from the supply chain, while
AI could predict the delays based on this data. Furthermore, using BCT as a decentralised
platform to share data and information enables a more efﬁcient allocation of resources in
need within the platform, where the prioritisation of stakeholders or destinations can be
supported by AI (Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., 2020). In addition, AI-driven decisions may
lack interpretability, leading to ambiguity and lack of implementation of analysis algorithms
as decisions cannot be trusted or veriﬁed by humans. Blockchain can help overcome this
challenge by ensuring the traceability of data processing and decisions throughout a supply
network (Dinh & Thai, 2018).
Vice versa, AI can beneﬁt blockchain (Dinh & Thai, 2018). For example, AI can intelli-
gently maintain BCT, optimise and ensure the quality and robustness of smart contracts, and
automate malicious behaviour detection in the blockchain (Zheng et al., 2019). More pre-
cisely, AI-powered algorithms can detect failures and performance bottlenecks in blockchain
systems, and they can further be employed to detect bugs in smart contracts (Zheng et al.,
2019). Improving the security of the blockchain is signiﬁcant to maintaining trust in the
technology. Prior cyber-attacks on blockchain-based systems, for example, the Decentralised
AutonomousOrganisation(DAO)orbitcoingold,ledtosigniﬁcanteconomicandreputational
damage. In the case of the DAO, hackers stole cryptocurrency worth about US$50 million
by exploiting the vulnerabilities of a smart contract that was used on top of a blockchain
platform (De, 2017; Dinh & Thai, 2018). Analytics using blockchain data can be used to
identify fraudulent or malicious behaviour of the respective users (Zheng et al., 2019).
In addition, AI can enable the storage of high quality and reliable information that can be
shared among stakeholders. A real-world example was presented by Chidepatil et al. (2020),
who investigated a case on plastic feedstock in collaboration with the Radical Innovations
Group Finland, a technology provider for Circular Economy solutions. Currently, chemical
feedstocks are preferred over recycled plastic feedstocks by manufacturers, mainly due to a
lack of information about the quality and availability of recycled plastics. The study results
showed that AI could help improve the information about recycled plastics in circular supply
chains. AI can train a system to recognise and segregate waste properly and generate relevant
information about the grade of the recycled material. The information is stored and shared
on a blockchain, thus improving the transparency of information about supply chain rele-
vant indicators, such as quality, suitability and availability of plastic feedstock, incentivising
stakeholders to move from virgin polymers to recycled materials.
The combined implementation of AI and BCT in a supply chain context can help over-
come inherent technical limitations. Thereafter, leveraging the synergistic action of these
digital technologies helps apply a dynamic decision-making process and foster operational
improvements to harness triple-helix sustainability beneﬁts from preventing resources over-
exploitation to tackling fraudulent incidents, eliminating product recalls, and promoting
gender and cultural equality. Ultimately, the operational improvements driven by data-centric
decision-making directly promote data monetisation through cost reductions and proﬁt gen-
eration (Bechtsis et al., 2021). Following the notion pertinent to the healthcare sector, the
gathered (anonymised) data could also be used as a source of income (Kamel Boulos et al.,
2018).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
174

2.4 Literature remarks
Our literature taxonomy revealed limited evidence on critical decision-making enabled by
the secure management of trustworthy data streams via BCT whilst ensuring real-time data
processing via AI implementations (Bechtsis et al., 2021). In the existing supply chain man-
agement research on AI and BCT, the two technologies are mainly viewed in isolation, and
the beneﬁts of their combined use remain largely unexplored. Furthermore, most studies
focus on technical aspects of these technologies per se, whilst the supply chain implications
are often only superﬁcially discussed.
The majority of extant studies are literature reviews that discuss AI and BCT under the
umbrella of digital technologies; case studies that explore the beneﬁts of jointly implement-
ing the two technologies for different purposes such as supply chain optimisation or waste
prevention are scant. Especially, our literature review showed that only ﬁve works discuss the
joint implementation of BCT and AI in the context of supply chain management. It becomes
evident that the nascent area of sustainability, coupled with transparency and traceability
as thematically related sub-areas, is gaining importance to motivate consumers’ trust (Shen
et al., 2022). Nevertheless, the food sector is still under-researched as a safety-critical and
sustainability-relevant area. We recognise this research gap and argue that the joint imple-
mentation of AI and BCT has the potential to address the problem of data and information
accessibility in food supply chains to promote operational efﬁciency, sustainability, and value
delivery. In this respect, this research proposes a framework for the integrated implementa-
tion of AI and BCT in food supply chains as a pathway to the triple-helix of sustainability
and data monetisation.
3 Methodology
Considering that this research shall develop a practical framework for implementing AI and
blockchain in supply chains, the object of scrutiny has to be a real-world case study (Gibbert
et al., 2008). The theoretical lens and the research approach based on which this study was
conducted are described in the following sub-sections.
3.1 Theoretical lens
In the complex and dynamically changing global business landscape, to assess the digi-
tal transformation of supply chains for sustainability and data monetisation, this research
adopted the lens of Proudlove et al. (2017). The latter described two pertinent stages: (i)
conceptualisation of the business processes along with the material, data, and information
ﬂows; and (ii) coding of the conceptual model for enabling real-time simulations to inform
potential structures of the underpinning ﬂows, assess alternative scenarios and inspire policy
debate.
First, an “activity-based” approach is required to map supply chain operations as building
blocks and ensure consistency in the understanding and interpretation of processes and ﬂows
(e.g., material, data, information) among all stakeholders (Holweg et al., 2018). In this regard,
we adopted the principles of the Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN), which is a
formalised modelling language for conceptually mapping internal business procedures in a
standardised manner (OMG, 2014).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
175

Second, owing to the dynamic nature of food products’ characteristics and the pillars of
sustainability and the associated performance, managers shall be able to consider supply
chain operations over time (Sterman, 2000). To this effect, we used Systems Thinking to
comprehend the underpinning interactive relations of such a complex system (Forrester,
1961), and we complementarily leveraged System Dynamics to develop a time-dependent
view of its behaviour (Machuca, 1998). System Dynamics is a method that has been proven
successful in policy-making, strategy decision-making and scenario planning (Srai et al.,
2022) and could be employed to model the feedback loops that determine the dynamic
behaviour of digitally enabled supply chain operations. The role of System Dynamics as a
structural theory to explain, analyse and understand operations phenomena is well recognised
(Größler et al., 2008).
The use of System Dynamics as the logic of enquiry in assessing alternative policy sce-
narios over the environmental and economic sustainability dimensions of food supply chains
has been widely applied in the extant literature, such as in the case of water footprint in the
UK poultry sector (Tsolakis et al., 2018). Thereafter, System Dynamics-based causal-loop
diagrams can be interpreted into simulation models based on stock-and-ﬂow diagrams to:
determine and approximate material inventories, identify key data elements and information
sources, analyse model parameters, assess the impact of alternative supply chain structures
and operations (enabled by AI and BCT joint implementations), and articulate a portfolio of
alternative material, data, and information ﬂows.
Ultimately, the integration of these approaches, in terms of conceptual modelling and
simulation structuring, leads to articulating a framework for supply chain ecosystems that
aim toward sustainability and data monetisation enabled by AI and BCT implementations
(Fig. 1).
3.2 Research approach
As this research aims to propose a practical framework emanating from theoretical foun-
dations, a case study research approach was adopted (Yin, 2003). In this regard, the case
of the Thai ﬁshery industry was selected as an appropriate paradigm for the potential joint
implementation of AI and BCT due to the need to tackle challenges pertinent to the Sustain-
able Development Goals of the United Nations and improve the export outlook of this Thai
industry (Tsolakis et al., 2021). Figure 2 illustrates the methodology process ﬂow that was
applied in this research.
3.2.1 Empirical evidence
In order to identify supply chain operations, pertinent key data elements, and material and
information ﬂows necessary for exploring the behaviour of a system combining AI and BCT,
expert interviews and physical walkthroughs were conducted in Thailand, as detailed in
Table 3. In particular, thirteen open-ended interviews with experts in the Thai ﬁsh industry
and three physical walkthroughs in related multinational organisations were conducted to
map the respective supply chain processes and identify the potential for joint implementation
of AI and BCT. The selected informants covered the main stakeholders in the Thai ﬁsh
industry ecosystem and are classiﬁed into seven key categories of actors, including ﬁshermen,
traders, processors, wholesalers, technology providers, certiﬁcation organisations and the
government. The number of engaged experts is deemed sufﬁcient as it enables to holistically
collect information through different perspectives such as processes, technical, social, and
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
176

Fig. 1 Methodological lens for conceptualising Artiﬁcial Intelligent and blockchain technology implementations in supply chains
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
177

Fig. 2 Flowchart of the research methodology
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
178

Table 3 Empirical research approach and data gathering mechanism
Research approach
Data gathering mechanism
Description
Expert interviews
Thai ﬁsh ecosystem
qualitative, open-ended interviews
(recorded and transcribed) – 13 Experts
1 Vessel owner
1 Seafood trader
2 Seafood purchasing managers (a pro-
cessor and a wholesaler)
6 Managing directors of tech providers
1 General manager and auditor of the
Marine Stewardship Council
2 Government ofﬁcers
Digital technologies & supply chain man-
agement
qualitative, open-ended interviews – 4
Experts
4 Digital technology and supply chain
managers (for validation purposes)
Field observations
Physical walkthroughs in multinational
organisations
2 Fishermen in commercial ﬁshing oper-
ations
1 Processor
legal issues. The triangulation of data available from different experts (along with the used
secondary evidence) within the same system helped address bias phenomena stemming from
the interview process, ensuring the quality of the research ﬁndings (Yin, 2009). The protocol
used to conduct the semi-structured interviews is inserted in Appendix 1.
For validation and veriﬁcation purposes regarding the feasibility of the envisioned AI
and BCT implementation framework in supply chains, we consulted four digital technol-
ogy and supply chain experts with long-standing experience in digital transformation and
advancements within network operations.
Empirical evidence was gathered from a single ﬁsh industry case study involving experts
from different business echelons in Thailand. Notwithstanding the generalisability limitations
of single case study research (Voss et al., 2002), the related focus provides unusual research
access (Yin, 1993) and the range of involved informants allows the in-depth exploration
of the studied phenomenon (Gobbi & Hsuan, 1995). Furthermore, single case studies are
recommended to examine novel interventions such as AI and BCT.
3.2.2 Supply chain mapping
In order to understand the ﬁsh supply chain operations and the respective material, data, and
information ﬂows, we mapped the current state of the Thai ﬁsh ecosystem by combining
primary and secondary evidence. We performed interviews and physical walkthroughs to
observe and comprehend supply chain operations in the industry (Srai, 2017).
Understanding the current state of operations is essential to outline a future state
emerging from the joint implementation of AI and BCT. To this effect, supply chain
mapping was selected as an appropriate approach to capture the operations and the mate-
rial/data/information ﬂows in the Thai ﬁsh ecosystem of operations (Srai, 2017). The entailed
business processes are the conceptual building blocks in the developed supply chain mapping
diagrams (Holweg et al., 2018).
Considering the research scope on AI and BCT, an inherent need to ensure consistency
with established information technology-based reference frameworks existed. Therefore,
to ensure such consistency, we selected the BPMN as an approach to notate operations
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
179

and the associated material/process/data/information ﬂows. In particular, the OMG BPMN
2.0 was selected, which is typically used to model business processes to inform processes’
implementation. The BPMN is speciﬁed in detail by the ISO/IEC 19,510:2013 and the OMG
Speciﬁcation v2.0.2 (http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN). Rosing et al. (2014) provided an
operational summary of the formalisations used to develop BPMN diagrams.
3.2.3 System conceptualisation
Following empirical evidence gathering, in tandem with the literature analysis on AI and BCT
implementations, we adopted the Systems Thinking view (Forrester, 1961). We used the prin-
ciples of System Dynamics to depict, explicate and comprehend the interplay of these digital
technologies and supply chain operations for sustainability and data monetisation (Meadows,
1980). System Dynamics has been proven successful in capturing the sustainability impact
of food supply chains involving commodities such as phosphorus (El Wali et al., 2021), milk
(Mangla et al., 2021) and wine (Taghikhah et al., 2021).
Digital technologies such as AI and blockchain are within the scope of System Dynamics
modelling (Bhattacharyya & Nair, 2019). In addition, such digital interventions are useful for
investigating the dynamics of systems like supply chains (Afanasyev et al., 2022). Therefore,
we captured the structural interdependencies among AI, BCT, and supply chains through a
group model building process grounded in the System Dynamics literature (Vennix, 1996).
The resulting causal loop diagram is a qualitative system map that visualises the ‘AI-BCT-
supply chain’ system constructs, structural elements, and interrelations. We envision that this
view provides an essential, actionable framework in Operations Management.
4 Fish supply chains
Fish products are essential for global food and nutritional security (FAO, 2020). Nevertheless,
a range of factors may have a detrimental impact on the global supply of ﬁsh products,
including: (i) growing global demand for seafood; (ii) emerging role of ﬁsh in human diets;
(iii) increasing economic considerations of national and global ﬁsh trade; (iv) increasing
fraudulent incidents regarding ﬁsh safety and quality; and (v) elevated consumers’ awareness
aboutﬁshprovenanceandauthenticity(Gopietal.,2019).Therefore,interventionstoimprove
tracking and tracing of ﬁsh supplies to prevent bad practices are required to help build
consumer trust, reduce fraudulent incidents and product recalls, improve public health, and
generally enhance the triple-helix of sustainability in the industry (Velez-Zuazo et al., 2021).
Technology-enabled traceability and analytics are even more prominent for the Thai ﬁsh
industry, considering that the national exports of ﬁsh and ﬁshery products are valued at
approximately US$6.3 billion per year (Suwannapoom, 2021). A few years ago, the European
Commission issued a yellow card to Thailand and temporarily stopped any ﬁsh imports from
the country due to the magnitude of illegal, unreported, and unregulated ﬁshing activities
(European Commission, 2015). Therefore, implementing an end-to-end supply chain system
for seafood tracking and tracing enabled by AI and BCT could modernise the sector and
foster export opportunities.
Fish supply chains are complex ecosystems involving a plethora of stakeholders (Fig. 3).
At an operational level, the main material ﬂow across the respective supply chain is seafood.
However, secondary material ﬂows also involve various products supplied by tier-level sup-
pliers, including packaging materials and other food ingredients. At a policy-making level,
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
180

Fig. 3 Generic ﬁsh supply chain structure and process ﬂow Source: adapted from Zhang (2014)
in a ﬁsh supply chain ecosystem, governmental authorities and external certiﬁcation organ-
isations, such as the Marine Stewardship Council, ISO or HACCP, are involved in the
management and audit of the respective supply chain processes (Aung & Chang, 2014).
The stakeholders engaged in the supply chain would have to comply with the regulations and
standards set by these organisations to be allowed to involve in domestic and/or international
trade activities.
4.1 Digital technology challenges
Key technology-wise challenges in ﬁsh supply chains can be divided into three main cat-
egories: (i) inconsistencies in traceability standards; (ii) limited interoperability among the
involved technology systems and databases; and (iii) limited trust among network actors.
First, it is challenging to implement a reliable full-chain traceability system in ﬁshery sup-
ply chain ecosystems because this would require commitment and collaboration from every
actor in the value chain to consistently provide reliable and accurate data and information
(Global Dialogue, 2016). Many ﬁrms in seafood supply chains articulate that inconsistent
global technology and traceability standards are signiﬁcant obstacles to enabling full-chain
traceability (Sterling et al., 2015). Quality standards and systems such as Good Manufactur-
ing Practices, ISO 9001 or HACCP are widely accepted and implemented internationally to
prevent food adulteration, product recalls, or safety hazards that may compromise consumer
safety. However, these standards do not specify requirements for food supply chain traceabil-
ity but rather determine operational practices during food processing; collected data is not
communicated across the supply chain. Instead, regulations regarding product recalls often
represent the only mandatory requirement for food traceability (Thompson et al., 2005). The
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
181

requirements typically vary between countries and often provide minimal clarity on indi-
vidual operators’ roles to ensure traceability or are non-existent (UK FSA, 2017). At the
same time, global supply chains are positively related to product recalls due to information
asymmetry between actors and lack of product traceability (Steven et al., 2014), indicating
that a lack of harmonised requirements for traceability may manifest in compromised con-
sumer safety. For example, the lack of supply chain traceability standards and associated
risks became evident through high proﬁle recall incidents such as the horsemeat scandal,
which led to a tidal wave of media responses and the withdrawal of contaminated processed
food. The recall occurred when food processing companies unwittingly sourced horsemeat
from Eastern European suppliers and incorporated it into their products (Falkheimer et al.,
2015).
Second, interoperability, i.e., “the ability of different information technology systems and
software applications to communicate, exchange data, and use the information that has been
exchanged” (HIMSS, 2013), is a critical issue in ﬁsh supply chains considering the nature of
the traded commodity and the high complexity of the network. The complexity of ﬁsh supply
chains is characterised by the global dispersion of the respective network and the diversity of
actors involved, including ﬁshers, buyers, processors, wholesalers, transporters, and retailers
(Thompson et al., 2005). Extant research suggests that supply chain complexity exacerbates
its interoperability due to the heterogeneity of interfaces and characteristics that deﬁne the
supply chain (Chalyvidis et al., 2013).
Third, both industry actors’ and consumers’ limited trust is another key challenge in the
sector. Data availability and information signals can be disregarded in case the data cannot be
trusted. Industries depend on certiﬁcation organizations such as ISO, MSC or governments to
verify information related to ﬁsh supplies (Global Dialogue, 2016). However, certiﬁcations
are costly, while audits are performed periodically (usually on an annual basis). In addition,
investigations regarding certiﬁcation practices in ﬁsh supply chains could lead to further
controversy about the trustworthiness of the elaborated ecolabels (McVeigh, 2021).
4.2 Key data elements
The quality of a traceability system, like blockchain, depends on the ability to collect and
analyse necessary data from diverse sources. Different standards have different requirements,
but generally, most standards, such as the EU Regulation 104/2000 and the EU Regulation
2065/2001,wouldrequirecompaniestorecordthespeciesoforigin,catchareaandproduction
method (European Commission, 2009).
Other standards, such as the TraceFish, document the necessary key data elements in ﬁsh
supply chains. TraceFish standards were funded by the European Commission and coordi-
nated by the Norwegian Institute of Fisheries and Aquaculture (Fiskeriforskning) to focus
on developing a ‘Traceability of Fish Products’ (Andre, 2013). At the end of the project
in 2002, CEN, the European Committee for Standardisation, published three standards that
specify key data elements for ﬁsh supply chains. Particularly, TraceFish stressed the need for
labelling based on unique identiﬁcation numbers for all resources and end-products (Andre,
2013).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
182

5 Thai ﬁsh supply network ecosystem
The ﬁsh supply network ecosystem in Thailand involves operations at three different ech-
elons: (i) commercial ﬁshing; (ii) trading; and (iii) canning, which were identiﬁed as part
of our ongoing research (Tsolakis et al., 2021). We excluded the local ﬁshing operations
from our analysis, despite their signiﬁcant aggregated scale in terms of business operations
magnitude and volume, since no data recordings are ofﬁcially required by local ﬁshermen.
We further assumed that the canned ﬁsh manufacturing operations rely on the procurement
of ﬁsh supplies at scale, which is feasible only via commercial ﬁshing activities.
5.1 Data capture and traceability
First, in terms of data capture at the commercial ﬁshing operations echelon, the data sources
refer to the Vessel Monitoring System (i.e., Global Positioning System tracker) and a vessel’s
logbook. Every commercial vessel is regulated to have an installed and updated Vessel Moni-
toring System. Therefore, the recorded data can be deemed neither sufﬁcient nor reliable due
to: (i) the possibility of intended/unintended malfunctioning equipment; (ii) the absence of
data-recording standards; and (iii) the lack of automated data gathering mechanisms. Indica-
tively, 20% tolerance on the weight of ﬁsh catch is allowed to ﬁshermen by governmental
regulations, while manual recordings of endangered ﬁsh species caught are not reliable. Fur-
thermore, the ﬁsh catch is preserved in buckets that are manually ﬁlled with ice, but the cold
storage temperature and ﬁsh freshness are not monitored during a vessel’s journey, which can
last several days (i.e., 15–20). A photographic copy of the logbook is mandatory to be shared
with arrival port authorities; however, this format does not allow the automated extraction of
data related to the performed ﬁshing activities.
Second, during trading, the unloading of the ﬁsh occurs on a metallic platform exposed
to open-air environmental conditions. In addition, the weighting of the ﬁsh is performed via
potentially decalibrated or malfunctioning equipment (i.e., a typical scale), while the sorting
of the ﬁsh is manually performed with every sorting container receiving handwritten paper-
based labelling. The pricing of the sorted ﬁsh is determined via auctions that might not reﬂect
the actual value of the traded commodities (e.g., ﬁsh freshness, skin damages).
Third, at the manufacturing stage, the inbound tuna is manually sorted by weight and
quality control inspections are based on random sampling. Downstream the processing stage,
data capturing occurs systematically due to the proprietary industrial production equipment
(e.g., batch number). However, the only tracing element refers to the vessel that caught the
tuna, while the place of origin is not recorded.
5.2 Artificial intelligence and blockchain in operations
Considering that this research envisions the future state of supply chain operations in the
Thai ﬁsh industry enabled by AI and BCT, it is ﬁrst essential to capture speciﬁc features
of the ﬁsh supply network ecosystem based on the investigated businesses and comprehend
unit operations performed at existing sites. Second, it is required to clarify the role of AI and
BCT implementations in data and information according to the intended operational objec-
tives and strategic commitments. Knowledge about the current state of operations helps to
comprehend the underpinning material and information ﬂows and identify key data elements
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
183

that digital technologies could gather, process, share and analyse to ensure transparency, vis-
ibility, tracking and tracing. Third, the supply chain impact needs to be depicted and revised
based on the global operations and business landscape developments.
Therefore, we argue that the future state of ﬁsh supply chains, enabled by the joint imple-
mentation of AI and blockchain, has to be considered across three levels: (i) supply network
ecosystem; (ii) AI and BCT implementation; and (iii) supply chain impact. The respective
business process map of the Thai ﬁsh supply chain ecosystem enabled by AI and BCT is
illustrated in Fig. 4.
At the ﬁrst level, ‘Supply Network Ecosystem’, the supply chain operations are captured,
including: (i) commercial ﬁshing operations; (ii) trading; and (iii) canned tuna manufacturing
(Tsolakis et al., 2021). Most importantly, key data elements that are being recorded (basically
manually) are captured to inform the AI and BCT system. Although research on ‘Supply
Network Ecosystems’ appears to be scarce and currently under development (Barbieri et al.,
2021), applying a broader view on the supply chain related to the operations of individual
actors has already shown to be an effective approach to assess sustainability in various
dimensions (Hohn & Durach, 2021).
At the second level, ‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence & Blockchain’, identiﬁed key data elements
can be gathered in a common database and shared across all partners via BCT. In this regard,
data collected via blockchain primarily concerns inter-organisational data between upstream
and downstream participants, either public or private, that actors are inclined to share and help
synchronise the network operations (Wang et al., 2021). Therefore, AI can complement BCT
by gathering near real-time public domain data to supplement the existing data and informa-
tion ﬂows. Considering that in the current state of operations, integrated data capture, data
consistency and data interoperability archetypes are not being applied, AI algorithms could
facilitate such data-related processes (Dillenberger et al., 2019). Furthermore, AI algorithms
could enable automated data collection, triangulation, and validation (Kudashkina et al.,
2022; Tiwari & Khan, 2019). In addition, AI algorithms may enable analyses of the data
ﬂows to detect possible disruptions (e.g., related social media posts) and inform about the
agile conﬁguration of the supply chain (e.g., identify reliable alternative suppliers) (Bottani
et al., 2019).
At the third level, ‘Supply Chain Impact’, the output of AI and BCT implementations
enables informed decision-making, allows accountability, and enhances collaboration and
coordination across end-to-end supply chains (Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., 2020). Optimal
dynamic decisions about operational aspects such as distribution and inventory management
ensure improved network performance regarding service level, quality control, timeliness,
and inventory position. Therefore, improvements in resources appropriation, lead times,
wastage, and product recalls are achieved, ultimately leading to sustainable performance
(Tsolakis et al., 2021). The improved efﬁciency further enables the delivery of value, both
upstream and downstream of the supply chain, thus supporting competitiveness and driving
data monetisation (Bechtsis et al., 2021).
5.3 Interplay between digital technologies and supply chain operations
The complexity and non-linear behaviour of the digital-enabled ﬁsh supply network system
are captured through a causal loop diagram developed based on the principles of System
Dynamics. Causal loop diagrams have been successfully used as a mapping approach for
capturing the macro-level interactions among essential structural elements of future state
supply chains (Tsolakis & Srai, 2018).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
184

Fig. 4 Business process map of the Thai ﬁsh supply network ecosystem enabled by Artiﬁcial Intelligence and blockchain Source: based on Tsolakis et al. (2021)
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
185

The underpinning interrelations between the ‘AI-BCT-supply chain’ digital technology
system and the supply chain system are captured through feedback loops. Feedback loops
capture sequences of causes and effects transcending every loop (Georgiadis & Vlachos,
2004). Across each loop, system variables experience either an increase (represented by a
positive polarity, “ + ”) or a decrease (represented by a negative polarity. “ −”). Therefore,
the entire loop, comprising of a sequence of interrelated system variables, is ultimately
characterised as either reinforcing (denoted as “R”) or balancing (denoted as “B”). Based
on the literature ﬁndings and our empirical research, we synthesised the interplay among all
components of the ‘AI-BCT-supply chain’ system in the form of a causal loop diagram.
Overall, the causal loop diagram of the investigated ‘AI-BCT-supply chain’ system, vali-
dated by technology experts and operations managers, comprises 94 feedback loops (Fig. 5).
The overall validation and veriﬁcation process described earlier provided conﬁdence in the
relevant system considerations and the potential implications of AI and BCT implementa-
tions on the sustainability of supply chains and data monetisation. The conceptual system
model was built using the Academic version of the System Dynamics simulation software
Vensim® PLE (× 64). However, 81 loops consider AI and BCT, of which 18 are reinforcing,
and 14 are balancing. Furthermore, there are 49 pertinent loops where the effect depends
on set objectives and parameters. Indicatively, in the reinforcing loop R1, the larger the
‘Blockchain Data Transactions Volume’, the greater the ‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Process-
ing Rate’ to process the available data in a timely manner. The intensity in AI-based analytics
generates greater output in terms of quality that improves ‘Decision-making Effectiveness’.
Fig. 5 Causal loop diagram of the Thai ﬁsh supply network system enabled by Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
blockchain technology
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
186

Such informed decisions then guide targeted and accurate ‘Interventions for Operational
Improvements’ that help deliver elevated value and promote ‘Data Monetisation’ across all
echelons of operations, such as on the ‘Fish Processing Rate’. Operational improvements in
the respective processes necessitate the more systematic monitoring and gathering of ‘Key
Data Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations’, thus leading to increased ‘Blockchain
Data Transactions Volume’.
Similarly, in the balancing loop B1, increased ‘Blockchain Data Transactions Volume’
requires increased ‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing Rate’ for enhancing ‘Decision-
making Effectiveness’ based on the magnitude of the generated data analysis insights.
Informed decision-making then leads to targeted ‘Interventions for Operational Improve-
ments’ that generate value and ‘Data Monetisation’ for the ‘Fish Processing Rate’, thus
increasing the ‘Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory’. However, the higher the inventory level,
the lower the ‘Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy’, leading to increased ‘Fishing Orders’
and greater ‘Commercial Fishing Operations Rate’. Following that, intensiﬁed ﬁshing oper-
ations lead to greater ‘Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations’ that increase the
‘Blockchain Data Transactions Volume’. A list of the 81 feedback loops governing the sys-
tem’s behaviour, enabled by AI and BCT, is inserted in Appendix 2.
Notably, the systems map demonstrates that AI and BCT implementations can have a
signiﬁcant role in the operational performance of food supply network systems, as 81 out of
the total 94 feedback loops are based on the pertinent variables. However, the sustainability
and data monetisation impact stemming from the implementation of AI and BCT depends
on the objectives and parameters set by the supply chain stakeholders, as denoted by the 49
loops with unspeciﬁed polarity.
6 Artiﬁcial intelligence and blockchain in supply chains: a uniﬁed
framework
The design of modern and complex supply chains, speciﬁcally in the food sector, primarily
involves existing data structures and technology speciﬁcations utilised by every involved
stakeholder. However, data consistency, data capture, systems compatibility, data inter-
operability, and data architecture related issues pose signiﬁcant technical barriers to the
coordination and synchronisation of network operations (Tsolakis et al., 2021). Considering
the limited visibility of unexpected/emergent situations and risks (e.g., Suez Canal blockage)
and contemporary developments (e.g., raw material price ﬂuctuations), supply chains could
beneﬁt from jointly adopting digital technologies such as AI and BCT.
First, the implementation of BCT, supported by an extended network of sensory infras-
tructure (e.g., radio-frequency identiﬁcation), and AI shall be used complementarily (Babich
& Hilary, 2020) to enable automated and tamper-proof data gathering and analysis. The com-
bined implementation of digital interventions can help overcome inherent technical barriers
of the supply chains, complement the capabilities of the individual technology applications,
and drive sustainable performance and data monetisation, speciﬁcally within the context of
volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity in global supply chain operations (Bechtsis
et al., 2021).
Second, the case study analysis results revealed that the combined implementation of AI
and BCT provides multiple unique advantages to ﬁsh supply chains that lead to sustainability
performance improvements. Notably, AI and BCT can enable the reduction of data gaps.
This advantage results from integrating supply chain internal data streams through BCT and
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
187

external data streams through AI. While BCT enables immutable data ﬂows across nodes in
end-to-end supply chains, AI supports collecting and evaluating data from external sources.
Considering the improved data availability enabled by these technologies, we support that the
near real-time analysis of supply chain system data and information ﬂows enables security,
operational efﬁciency, and productivity (Ekramifard et al., 2020), which ultimately foster
sustainable performance (Pimenidis et al., 2021).
Third, our results further showed that AI enables data interoperability by overcoming
sources of data inconsistency caused by supply chain complexity and diverse data recording
and sharing archetypes and protocols. AI can integrate inconsistencies due to misaligned
interfaces in the supply chain. Tackling inconsistencies is critical as the lack of data inter-
operability is still considered one of the signiﬁcant barriers to BCT adoption for supply
chain-related purposes (Dutta et al., 2020). Lastly, we showcased that streamlining internal
and external data can help overcome an essential barrier to adopting these technologies: a lack
of data monetisation for increasing economic efﬁciency. Data monetisation primarily stems
from devising realistic market and operations scenarios and informing the decision-making
process, leading to enhanced competitiveness.
Pertaining to this efﬁciency, transparent and traceable production enables improvements
in fair and ethical procurement, responsible handling, and conservation of resources by
reducing illegal, unreported, and unregulated ﬁshing. Demand and supply data can then be
used to evaluate more efﬁcient trading/wholesaling processes by optimising pricing whilst
enabling sustainability considerations (e.g., ﬁsh freshness). In addition, a more transparent
ﬁsh supply chain provides the basis for operational efﬁciency, for example, by improving
material/product handling conditions and thus ensuring downstream health and safety of
consumers. Figure 6 illustrates the method-agnostic uniﬁed framework for supply chain sus-
tainability and data monetisation enabled by the joint implementation of AI and BCT.
Fig. 6 Supply chain ecosystem framework, enabled by Artiﬁcial Intelligence and blockchain, for sustainability
and data monetisation
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
188

7 Conclusions
The digitalisation of food supply chains can help transparency and traceability while driv-
ing sustainable performance and data monetisation. As the decision-making process in food
supply chains takes place on three levels, i.e., strategic, tactical, and operational (Tsolakis
et al., 2014), data sharing and analysis should be performed at every echelon where the most
pertinent value beneﬁts are applicable. To a greater extent, data integration, data analysis and
data/information sharing can inform the decision-making process about supply chain objec-
tives whilst ensuring data monetisation. Our ﬁndings help respond to the enunciated research
query by investigating a real-world ﬁsh supply chain and providing a business process map
capturing the pertinent material, data, and information ﬂows, followed by a systems map
visualising the underpinning interrelations enabled through the joint implementation of AI
and BCT in operations. The proposed uniﬁed framework summarises the key data elements
that need to be recorded, shared, and analysed across the main echelons of a food supply
chain as a basis for successfully implementing AI and BCT in operations.
7.1 Academic contributions
Our research contributes to the Operations Management ﬁeld by proposing a framework for
the integrated implementation of AI and BCT to overcome the inherent limitations of these
digital technologies. The framework implies the use of static in nature mapping tools (e.g.,
BPMN), while dynamic phenomena and the complex nature of the supply chain ecosystem
can be captured through systems approaches (e.g., System Dynamics).
Our analysis output suggests that the processing level of data is not being captured on
the blockchain, which has a signiﬁcant impact on achieving sustainable goals. To this effect,
the importance of data analytics, involving System Dynamics and machine learning, as a
key element of BCT implementation is particularly emphasised to inform real-time decision
making for sustainability and data monetisation. This particular area of information generated
from diverse data sources has not been comprehensively studied in the extant literature.
Furthermore, our systems map demonstrates that the behaviour of a ‘digital technology-
supply chain operations’ system is mainly dictated by the applied digital technologies and
the operational objectives. This observation about system interactions was revelatory to the
research team and the involved experts.
Although the topic of the individual implementation of AI and BCT has been explored
in the extant body of the Operations Management literature from a theoretical perspective
to the best of our knowledge, this research is the ﬁrst to provide an understanding of the
‘digital technology-supply chain operations’ system structure and the underpinning interplay.
Moreover, the combination of business process and systems mapping provided conﬁdence
in the relevant considerations while unveiling the approach’s revelatory power.
7.2 Practical implications
Overall, the output of the iterative mapping process led to the realisation of the following
aspects of the Thai ﬁsh supply chain:
• An overarching view on key industrial/institutional actors and primary value-adding oper-
ations.
• A product perspective is emphasised through respective material ﬂows.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
189

• Key data elements (or data triggers) enable the tracking and tracing of ﬁsh supplies and
seafood throughout end-to-end operations.
• A business process perspective indicates relevant material, data, and information ﬂows.
• A systems perspective reveals the system interactions that dictate sustainability and data
monetisation.
Speciﬁcally, the ﬁndings of our case study ﬁrst highlighted the weaknesses in the ﬁsh
supply chain and revealed opportunities for driving sustainability and data monetisation in
ﬁshery ecosystems. As a critical outcome of our empirical engagement with experts, we
observed that neither data-sharing nor visibility mechanisms exist across the three identiﬁed
levels of operations, namely: (i) commercial ﬁshing; (ii) trading; and (iii) canning. The
observed manual data capture and recording mechanisms, and communication thereof, are
considered neither sufﬁcient nor reliable for transparency, traceability, sustainability, and
data monetisation purposes.
Second, it is evident that a mere analysis of the data in standardised formats, like the pro-
posed BPMN diagram, is only the ﬁrst step in introducing digital interventions. Investigating
the underpinning interplay among material, data, and information ﬂows, enabled by AI and
BCT implementations, can help inform operational interventions that foster sustainability
and data monetisation.
Third, the proposed uniﬁed framework captures the key data elements that need to be
digitally handled in AI and BCT enabled supply chain operations in the food sector for driving
value delivery. Finally, in line with the observations of Choi (2020) for the banking sector,
we further argue that the combined implementation of AI and BCT can assist certiﬁcation
bodies in their functional role, thus possibly reducing the respective service fees.
7.3 Limitations
This research is characterised by limitations that could motivate future research. First, the
proposed framework is based on empirical evidence from a single case study of the Thai ﬁsh
industry. Therefore, additional case studies in the food sector (from both developed and devel-
oping countries) need to be investigated to validate and improve the proposed framework.
Further case studies will allow the generalisability of our framework whilst capturing and
unveiling any additional idiosyncratic elements of the food industry. Second, in the context of
our ﬁeldwork, some ﬁshermen hesitated to provide information on ﬁshing methods and data
records. This hesitancy may be attributed to the fact that ﬁshermen did not implement the
rapid changes in institutional regulations in a timely manner. Third, our research approach
focuses on the operations-wise implications of AI and BCT implementations without delving
into the technical details.
7.4 Future research
Despite the blockchain-related beneﬁts for supply chains, businesses are still sceptical about
adopting digital technologies in operations due to consumers’ limited appreciation of the
merits of AI and blockchain, and the high technical complexity and implementation cost
(Kumar et al., 2019). Future studies will expand our focus from the ﬁsh supply chain to the
agricultural sector in terms of system efﬁciency and sustainability, especially concerning lim-
ited natural and business resources such as water (Aivazidou & Tsolakis, 2021). In addition,
the barriers to the implementation of AI and BCT through data privacy concerns identiﬁed in
this study will motivate new research ideas for the implementation of these technologies in
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
190

terms of data ownership, which will further explore the trade-off between information losses
and privacy protection.
Finally, there are research opportunities for implementing AI and blockchain in indus-
tries other than the agri-food sector, such as the automotive, pharmaceutical, and aerospace
industries. The proposed framework for the combined implementation of AI and BCT will
ultimately need to be actively tested in a pragmatic context to investigate the impact of supply
chain design, conﬁguration, and management on the functionality of these technologies in
an industrial context.
Acknowledgements This research is supported by the Industrial Resilience Research Group at the Department
of Engineering, University of Cambridge. This research has received funding from: Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under Grant Reference No. EP/S036091/1, Project Full Title: “UK
Manufacturing Symbiosis NetworkPlus” (UKMSN+); EPSRC under Grant Reference No. EP/K02888X/1,
Project Full Title: “Engineering Driven Sustainable Supply Networks - A UK/India Collaborative Study”; UK-
India Education and Research Initiative (UKIERI) under Grant Reference No. UKUTP201100194, Project Full
Title: “Understanding Indian and UK Food Industries”; and EPSRC under Grant Reference No. EP/R513180/1,
Project Full Title: “Industrial Resilience: Risks and Mitigation Strategies in the Automotive Industry”.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix 1
Interview protocol
In order to conduct the semi-structured interviews, a series of questions were designed,
focusing on the Key Data Elements used by the engaged Thai ﬁsh supply chain stakeholders
for traceability purposes. The questions were open-ended and revolved around the issues:
• Is there an established ﬁsh traceability system across your operations?
• What is the data recording method used in your operations (e.g., paper-based, barcode,
RFID)?
• What are the Key Data Elements recorded in your operations?
• How are the Key Data Elements recorded (e.g., manually, automatically)?
• Is there a data-sharing system between ﬁsh supply chain stakeholders?
• In what ways can blockchain transform the ﬁshery industry?
• What are the key implementation challenges of digital traceability and transparency tech-
nologies in the ﬁshery industry?
Following the interviews, data collection methods were evaluated by participating in phys-
ical walkthroughs, observing the process, and analysing whether it can be veriﬁable. The data
collected from the case study was compared with the list of Key Data Elements recommended
by TraceFish (i.e., an acceptable standard in the industry and a standard that focuses on ﬁsh-
ery) to determine the completeness of every stakeholder’s data set. An indicative tool used
to collect detailed information requirements in a structured manner from the engaged ﬁsh
supply chain stakeholders is inserted in Table 4.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
191

Table 4 Detailed information requirements on Key data elements–Interview supporting tool
No.
Available
Recorded
Who recorded it?
Where did the data come from? How was
it measured?
Where is it recorded?
Shall
Should
Maybe
Notes
...
Shall Compulsory information, e.g., name and address of processing establishment; Should Recommended information, e.g., product temperature; Maybe Additional information,
e.g., ﬁsh quality schemes
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
192

Appendix 2
System dynamics model structure
Table 5 inserts a list of the 81 feedback loops governing the supply chain system’s behaviour,
enabled by AI and BCT.
Table 5 Structure of the feedback loops of the system’s causal loop diagram.
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Reinforcing, R1
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Processing Rate →Key Data
Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R2
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate
→Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R3
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key
Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R4
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate
→Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R5
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R6
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate
→Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded Fish
Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R7
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
193

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Reinforcing, R8
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna
Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations
Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R9
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R10
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →
Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R11
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory
→Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R12
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R13
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna
Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations
Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data
Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions
Volume
Reinforcing, R14
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →
Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory
→Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
194

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Reinforcing, R15
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory
→Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R16
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna
Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations
Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded Fish
Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R17
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →
Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Reinforcing, R18
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →
Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory
→Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Balancing, B1
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders
→Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Balancing, B2
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna Fish
Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
195

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Balancing, B3
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders
→Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish
Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Balancing, B4
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory
Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key
Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions
Volume
Balancing, B5
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market
Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna
Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations
Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Balancing, B6
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Balancing, B7
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market
Demand for Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Balancing, B8
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded
Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable Performance →
Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
196

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Balancing, B9
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable Performance →
Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Balancing, B10
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory
Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish
Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Balancing, B11
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Balancing, B12
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Balancing, B13
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna Fish
Units Inventory →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable Performance →
Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Balancing, B14
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Artiﬁcial Intelligence Data Processing
Rate →Decision-making Effectiveness →Interventions for Operational
Improvements →Data Monetisation →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable Performance →
Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory
→Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
197

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Dependant, D1
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate
→Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D2
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Processing Rate →Key Data
Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D3
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key
Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D4
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D5
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D6
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded
Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D7
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate
→Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D8
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D9
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →
Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D10
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate
→Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded Fish
Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D11
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders
→Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D12
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders
→Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D13
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna
Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations
Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D14
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
198

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Dependant, D15
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders
→Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish
Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D16
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded
Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna Fish Units
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D17
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders
→Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish
Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D18
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →
Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D19
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory
Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key
Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions
Volume
Dependant, D20
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna
Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations
Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data
Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions
Volume
Dependant, D21
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market
Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna
Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations
Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D22
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D23
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory
Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key
Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions
Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
199

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Dependant, D24
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market
Demand for Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D25
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D26
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D27
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D28
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders
→Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish
Trading Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing
Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D29
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D30
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →
Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D31
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory
Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish
Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
200

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Dependant, D32
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory
Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish
Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D33
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded
Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable Performance →
Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D34
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →
Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D35
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable Performance →
Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D36
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Sales of Canned Tuna
→Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →
Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D37
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded
Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable Performance →
Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna
Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations
Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D38
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Processing Rate →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D39
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
201

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Dependant, D40
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →
Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market
Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna
Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations
Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D41
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D42
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →
Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory
→Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D43
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna
Fish Units Inventory →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable Performance →
Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →
Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →
Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory
→Fish Trading Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D44
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →
Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market
Demand for Canned Tuna →Sales of Canned Tuna →Canned Tuna Fish Units
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fishing
Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D45
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory
Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish
Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies
Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Key Data Elements Volume—Fish
Processing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
Dependant, D46
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Trading Operations Rate →Traded
Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →Canned Tuna Fish Units
Inventory →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable
Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired
Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing
Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key Data Elements
Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions Volume
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
202

Table 5 (continued)
Feedback loop
Causal effect sequence
Dependant, D47
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish
Processing Rate →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Sales of Canned Tuna
→Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →
Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →
Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing
Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading Operations Rate →
Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Trading Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D48
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →
Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable Performance →Sustainable Performance
Discrepancy →Market Demand for Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna
Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →
Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →
Key Data Elements Volume—Fish Processing Operations →Blockchain Data
Transactions Volume
Dependant, D49
Blockchain Data Transactions Volume →Fish Catch Inventory →Fish Trading
Operations Rate →Traded Fish Supplies Inventory →Fish Processing Rate →
Canned Tuna Fish Units Inventory →Sales of Canned Tuna →Sustainable
Performance →Sustainable Performance Discrepancy →Market Demand for
Canned Tuna →Desired Canned Tuna Inventory →Canned Tuna Inventory
Discrepancy →Fishing Orders →Commercial Fishing Operations Rate →Key
Data Elements Volume—Fishing Operations →Blockchain Data Transactions
Volume
References
Afanasyev, V., Chernyshenko, V., Kuzmin, V., Voronin, V., & Mkrttchian, V. (2022). Advanced information
technology for development of electric power market. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, 118, 119–127. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-021-07324-8
Agrawal,P.,&Narain,R.(2021).Analysisofenablersforthedigitalizationofsupplychainusinganinterpretive
structural modelling approach. International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management.
https://doi.org/10.1108/ijppm-09-2020-0481
Aivazidou, E., & Tsolakis, N. (2021). Investigating dynamic interconnections between organic farming adop-
tion and freshwater sustainability. Journal of Environmental Management, 294, 112896. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112896
Aivazidou, E., Tsolakis, N., Iakovou, E., & Vlachos, D. (2016). The emerging role of water footprint in supply
chain management: A critical literature synthesis and a hierarchical decision-making framework. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 137, 1018–1037. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.07.210
Akter, S., Michael, K., Uddin, M. R., McCarthy, G., & Rahman, M. (2022). Transforming business using
digital innovations: The application of AI, blockchain, cloud and data analytics. Annals of Operations
Research, 308(1–2), 7–39. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03620-w
Andre, V. (2013). Review and analysis of current traceability practises. Norway: committee on Fisheries,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Available at: http://www.fao.org/coﬁ/30159-
03016d7904191838c67f5d7da55b3430f.pdf (accessed 24 September 2020).
Aung, M. M., & Chang, Y. S. (2014). Traceability in a food supply chain: Safety and quality perspectives.
Food Control, 39, 172–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2013.11.007
Awad, E., Dsouza, S., Kim, R., Schulz, J., Henrich, J., Shariff, A., Bonnefon, J.-F., & Rahwan, I. (2018). The
moral machine experiment. Nature, 563(7729), 59–64. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0637-6
Babich, V., & Hilary, G. (2020). OM Forum – Distributed ledgers and operations: What operations man-
agement researchers should know about blockchain technology. Manufacturing and Service Operations
Management, 22(2), 223–240. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0752
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
203

Barbieri, P., Ellram, L., Formentini, M., & Ries, J. (2021). Emerging research and future pathways in digi-
tal supply chain governance. International Journal of Operations and Production Management, 41(7),
1021–1034. https://doi.org/10.1108/ijopm-07-2021-903
Barczak, A., Dembi´nska, I., & Marzantowicz, Ł. (2019). Analysis of the risk impact of implementing digital
innovations for logistics management. Processes, 7(11), 815. https://doi.org/10.3390/pr7110815
Baryannis, G., Validi, S., Dani, S., & Antoniou, G. (2019). Supply chain risk management and artiﬁcial
intelligence: State of the art and future research directions. International Journal of Production Research,
57(7), 2179–2202. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1530476
Baz, M., Khatri, S., Baz, A., Alhakami, H., Agrawal, A., & Ahmad Khan, R. (2022). Blockchain and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence applications to defeat COVID-19 pandemic. Computer Systems Science and Engineering,
40(2), 691–702.
Bechtsis, D., Tsolakis, N., Iakovou, E., & Vlachos, D. (2021). Data-driven secure, resilient and sustainable
supply chains: Gaps, opportunities, and a new generalised data sharing and data monetisation framework.
International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.1957506
Belhadi, A., Kamble, S., Gunasekaran, A., & Mani, V. (2021). Analyzing the mediating role of organizational
ambidexterity and digital business transformation on industry 4.0 capabilities and sustainable supply
chain performance. Supply Chain Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-04-2021-0152
Bhattacharyya, S. S., & Nair, S. (2019). Explicating the future of work: Perspectives from India. Journal of
Management Development, 38(3), 175–194. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMD-01-2019-0032
Bottani, E., Murino, T., Schiavo, M., & Akkerman, R. (2019). Resilient food supply chain design: Modelling
framework and metaheuristic solution approach. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 135, 177–198.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.05.011
Bughin, J., Seong, J., Manyika, J., Chui, M., & Joshi, R. (2018). Notes from the AI frontier: Modeling the
impact of AI on the world economy. McKinsey & Company. Available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/~/
media/McKinsey/Featured%20Insights/Artiﬁcial%20Intelligence/Notes%20from%20the%20frontier%
20Modeling%20the%20impact%20of%20AI%20on%20the%20world%20economy/MGI-Notes-from-
the-AI-frontier-Modeling-the-impact-of-AI-on-the-world-economy-September-2018.ashx (accessed 10
September 2020).
Bumblauskas, D., Mann, A., Dugan, B., & Rittmer, J. (2020). A blockchain use case in food distribution: Do
you know where your food has been? International Journal of Information Management, 52, 102008.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.09.004
Cagliano, A., Mangano, G., & Rafele, C. (2021). Determinants of digital technology adoption in supply chain.
An exploratory analysis. Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal, 22(2), 100–114.
Camaréna, S. (2020). Artiﬁcial intelligence in the design of the transitions to sustainable food systems. Journal
of Cleaner Production, 271, 122574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122574
Carter, C. R., & Washispack, S. (2018). Mapping the path forward for sustainable supply chain management:
A review of reviews. Journal of Business Logistics, 39(4), 242–247. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbl.12196
del Castillo, M. (2017). Intel demos seafood tracking on Sawtooth Lake blockchain. Available at: https://www.
coindesk.com/intel-demos-seafood-tracking-sawtooth-lake-blockchain (accessed 25 August 2020).
Chalyvidis, C., Ogden, J., & Johnson, A. (2013). Using supply chain interoperability as a measure of supply
chain performance. Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal, 14(3), 52–73. https://doi.org/10.
1080/16258312.2013.11517321
Chidepatil, A., Bindra, P., Kulkarni, D., Qazi, M., Kshirsagar, M., & Sankaran, K. (2020). From trash to cash:
How blockchain and multi-sensor-driven artiﬁcial intelligence can transform circular economy of plastic
waste? Administrative Sciences, 10(2), 23. https://doi.org/10.3390/admsci10020023
Choi, T.-M. (2020). Supply chain ﬁnancing using blockchain: Impacts on supply chains selling fashionable
products. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03615-7
Choi, T. M., Guo, S., & Luo, S. (2020). When blockchain meets social-media: Will the result beneﬁt social
media analytics for supply chain operations management? Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 135, 101860. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2020.101860
European Commission (2009). EUR-Lex: Access to European Union law. Available at: https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=celex%3A32009R1224 (accessed 19 September 2020).
European Commission (2015). EU acts on illegal ﬁshing: Yellow card issued to Thailand while South Korea &
Philippines are cleared. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_15_4806
(accessed 11 September 2020).
Copigneaux, B., Vlasov, N., Bani, E., Tcholtchev, N., Lämmel, P., Fuenfzig, M., Snoeijenbos, S., Flickenschild,
M., Piantoni, M., & Frazzani, S. (2020). Blockchain for supply chains and international trade: Report
on key features, impacts and policy options. Brussels: Directorate-General for Parliamentary Research
Services (EPRS), Secretariat of the European Parliament. Available at: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
RegData/etudes/STUD/2020/641544/EPRS_STU(2020)641544_EN.pdf (accessed 15 September 2020).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
204

Cubric, M. (2020). Drivers, barriers and social considerations for AI adoption in business and management:
A tertiary study. Technology in Society, 62, 101257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101257
Dauvergne, P. (2020). Is artiﬁcial intelligence greening global supply chains? Exposing the political economy
of environmental costs. Review of International Political Economy. https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.
2020.1814381
De, N. (2017). Hacks, Scams and Attacks: Blockchain’s 2017 Disasters. Available at: https://www.coindesk.
com/hacks-scams-attacks-blockchains-biggest-2017-disasters (accessed 15 September 2020).
Del Río Castro, G., González Fernández, M. C., & Uruburu Colsa, Á. (2021). Unleashing the convergence
amid digitalization and sustainability towards pursuing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs):
A holistic review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 280, 122204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.
122204
Di Vaio, A., Boccia, F., Landriani, L., & Palladino, R. (2020). Artiﬁcial intelligence in the agri-food system:
Rethinking sustainable business models in the COVID-19 scenario. Sustainability, 12(12), 4851. https://
doi.org/10.3390/SU12124851
Global Dialogue (2016). What is the Global Dialogue? Available at: https://traceability-dialogue.org/what-is-
the-global-dialogue/ (accessed 25 August 2020).
Dillenberger, D. N., Novotny, P., Zhang, Q., Jayachandran, P., Gupta, H., Hans, S., Verma, D., Chakraborty,
S., Thomas, J. J., Walli, M. M., Vaculin, R., & Sarpatwar, K. (2019). Blockchain analytics and artiﬁcial
intelligence. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 63(2), 8645631. https://doi.org/10.1147/JRD.
2019.2900638
Dinh, T. N., & Thai, M. T. (2018). AI and blockchain: A disruptive integration. Computer, 51(9), 48–53.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2018.3620971
Dutta, P., Choi, T.-M., Somani, S., & Butala, R. (2020). Blockchain technology in supply chain operations:
Applications,challengesandresearchopportunities.TransportationResearchParte:LogisticsandTrans-
portation Review, 142, 102067. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2020.102067
Dwivedi, S., Roy, P., Karda, C., Agrawal, S., & Amin, R. (2021). Blockchain-based Internet of Things and
industrial IoT: A comprehensive survey. Security and Communication Networks, 2021, 7142048. https://
doi.org/10.1155/2021/7142048
Ebinger, F., & Omondi, B. (2020). Leveraging digital approaches for transparency in sustainable supply chains:
A conceptual paper. Sustainability, 12(15), 6129. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12156129
Ekramifard, A., Amintoosi, H., Seno, A. H., Dehghantanha, A., & Parizi, R. M. (2020). A systematic literature
review of integration of blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence. In K. K. Choo, A. Dehghantanha, &
R. Parizi (Eds.), Blockchain cybersecurity trust and privacy Advances in Information Security. Cham:
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-38181-3_8
El Wali, M., Golroudbary, S. R., & Kraslawski, A. (2021). Circular economy for phosphorus supply chain
and its impact on social sustainable development goals. Science of the Total Environment, 777, 146060.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146060
Eluubek kyzy, I., Song, H., Vajdi, A., Wang, Y., & Zhou, J. (2021). Blockchain for consortium: A practical
paradigm in agricultural supply chain system. Expert Systems with Applications, 184, 115425. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.115425
Ethirajan, M., Kandasamy, J., & Kumaraguru, S. (2020). Connecting engineering technology with enterprise
systems for sustainable supply chain management. Smart and Sustainable Manufacturing Systems, 4(1),
33–48. https://doi.org/10.1520/SSMS20190037
Fahimnia, B., Pournader, M., Siemsen, E., Bendoly, E., & Wang, C. (2019). Behavioral operations and supply
chain management – A review and literature mapping. Decision Sciences, 50(6), 1127–1183. https://doi.
org/10.1111/deci.12369
Falkheimer, J., & Heide, M. (2015). Trust and brand recovery campaigns in crisis: Findus Nordic and the
horsemeat scandal. International Journal of Strategic Communication, 9(2), 134–147. https://doi.org/
10.1080/1553118x.2015.1008636
Fan, Z., Wu, X., & Cao, B. (2022). Considering the traceability awareness of consumers: Should the supply
chain adopt the blockchain technology? Annals of Operations Research, 309, 837–860. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-020-03729-y
FAO (2020). The state of world ﬁsheries and aquaculture 2020. Sustainability in action. Rome: Italy. Available
at: http://www.fao.org/state-of-ﬁsheries-aquaculture (accessed 15 September 2020).
Faroukhi, A. Z., El Alaoui, I., Gahi, Y., & Amine, A. (2020). Big data monetization throughout Big Data Value
Chain: A comprehensive review. Journal of Big Data, 7, 3. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0281-5
Fayoumi, A., & Loucopoulos, P. (2016). Conceptual modeling for the design of intelligent and emergent
information systems. Expert Systems with Applications, 59, 174–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.
2016.04.019
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
205

Fishcoin (2018). Fishcoin: A blockchain based data ecosystem for the global seafood industry. White Paper.
Available at: https://ﬁshcoin.co/ﬁles/ﬁshcoin.pdf (accessed 25 August 2020).
Forrester, J. (1961). Industrial dynamics (1st Eds.). Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Press.
UK FSA (2017). An International Comparison of Guidance on Food Recall Systems. UK Food Standards
Agency. Available at: https://old.food.gov.uk/sites/default/ﬁles/recall-systems-comparison.pdf (accessed
03 February 2022).
Ganne, E. (2018). Can Blockchain revolutionize international trade? Geneva: World Trade Organization.
Available at: https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/blockchainrev18_e.pdf (accessed 15 Septem-
ber 2020).
Georgiadis, P., & Vlachos, D. (2004). The effect of environmental parameters on product recovery. European
Journal of Operational Research, 157(2), 449–464. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(03)00203-0
Gibbert, M., Ruigrok, W., & Wicki, B. (2008). What passes as a rigorous case study? Strategic Management
Journal, 29(13), 1465–1474. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.722
Gobbi, C., & Hsuan, J. (1995). Collaborative purchasing of complex technologies in healthcare: Implica-
tions for alignment strategies. International Journal of Operations and Production Management, 35(3),
430–455. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-08-2013-0362
Gopi, K., Mazumder, D., Sammut, J., & Saintilan, N. (2019). Determining the provenance and authenticity
of seafood: A review of current methodologies. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 91, 294–304.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2019.07.010
Govindan, K., Fattahi, M., & Keyvanshokooh, E. (2017). Supply chain network design under uncertainty:
A comprehensive review and future research directions. European Journal of Operational Research,
263(1), 108–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.04.009
Größler, A., Thun, J.-H., & Milling, P. M. (2008). System dynamics as a structural theory in operations
management. Production and Operations Management, 17(3), 373–384. https://doi.org/10.3401/poms.
1080.0023
Grover, P., Kar, A. K., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2022). Understanding artiﬁcial intelligence adoption in operations
management: Insights from the review of academic literature and social media discussions. Annals of
Operations Research, 308, 177–213. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03683-9
Guizzardi, G., Wagner, G., de Almeida Falbo, R., Guizzardi, R. S. S., & Almeida, J. P. A. (2013). Towards
ontological foundations for the conceptual modeling of events. In: W. Ng, V. C. Storey, J. C. Trujillo (Eds).
Conceptual Modeling. ER 2013. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 8217. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41924-9_27
Haenlein, M., & Kaplan, A. (2019). A brief history of artiﬁcial intelligence: On the past, present, and future
of artiﬁcial intelligence. California Management Review, 61(4), 5–14.
Hartley, J. L., & Sawaya, W. J. (2019). Tortoise, not the hare: Digital transformation of supply chain business
processes. Business Horizons, 62(6), 707–715. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2019.07.006
HIMSS (2013). Deﬁnition of Interoperability. Available at: https://www.himss.org/sites/hde/ﬁles/d7/
FileDownloads/HIMSS%20Interoperability%20Deﬁnition%20FINAL.pdf (accessed 25 August 2020).
Hohn, M., & Durach, C. (2021). Additive manufacturing in the apparel supply chain — Impact on supply chain
governance and social sustainability. International Journal of Operations and Production Management,
41(7), 1035–1059. https://doi.org/10.1108/ijopm-09-2020-0654
Holweg, M., Davies, J., De Meyer, A., Lawson, B., & Schmenner, R. W. (2018). Process theory: The principles
of operations management (1st Eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hopkins, J. (2021). An investigation into emerging industry 4.0 technologies as drivers of supply chain inno-
vation in Australia. Computers in Industry. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103323
Hughes, L., Dwivedi, Y. K., Rana, N. P., Williams, M. D., & Raghavan, V. (2022). Perspectives on the future
of manufacturing within the Industry 4.0 era. Production Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09537287.2020.1810762
Kale, R. V., Raipurkar, A. R., & Chandak, M. B. (2020). A ppe kit supply chain management system using
blockchain smart contract. International Journal of Interdisciplinary Global Studies, 14(4), 172–180.
Kamble, S., Gunasekaran, A., & Arha, H. (2019). Understanding the blockchain technology adoption in supply
chains-Indian context. International Journal of Production Research, 50(7), 2009–2033. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00207543.2018.1518610
Kamble, S., Gunasekaran, A., Parekh, H., Mani, V., Belhadi, A., & Sharma, R. (2022). Digital twin for sustain-
able manufacturing supply chains: Current trends, future perspectives, and an implementation framework.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 176, 121448. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.
121448
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
206

Kamel Boulos, M. N., Wilson, J. T., & Clauson, K. A. (2018). Geospatial blockchain: Promises, challenges,
and scenarios in health and healthcare. International Journal of Health Geographics, 17(1), 25. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s12942-018-0144-x
Katsaliaki, K., Galetsi, P., & Kumar, S. (2021). Supply chain disruptions and resilience: A major review and
future research agenda. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03912-1
Kimani, D., Adams, K., Attah-Boakye, R., Ullah, S., Frecknall-Hughes, J., & Kim, J. (2020). Blockchain,
business and the fourth industrial revolution: Whence, whither, wherefore and how? Technological Fore-
casting and Social Change, 161, 120254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120254
Kishimoto, M. (2019). Thai seafood industry buoyed by lifting of EU “yellow card”. Avail-
able at: https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Business-trends/Thai-seafood-industry-buoyed-by-lifting-of-
EU-yellow-card (accessed 21 September 2020).
Klein, A. Z., Gomes da Costa, E., Vieira, L. M., & Teixeira, R. (2016). The use of mobile technology in
management and risk control in the supply chain: The case of a Brazilian beef chain. International
Business: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications, 646–666.
Kouhizadeh, M., Saberi, S., & Sarkis, J. (2021). Blockchain technology and the sustainable supply chain:
Theoretically exploring adoption barriers. International Journal of Production Economics, 231, 107831.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107831
Kshetri, N. (2018). 1 Blockchain’s roles in meeting key supply chain management objectives. International
Journal of Information Management, 39, 80–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.12.005
Kudashkina, K., Corradini, M. G., Thirunathan, P., Yada, R. Y., & Fraser, E. D. G. (2022). Artiﬁcial Intelligence
technology in food safety: A behavioral approach. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 123, 376–381.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2022.03.021
Kumar, A., Liu, R., & Shan, Z. (2019). Is blockchain a silver bullet for supply chain management? Techni-
cal challenges and research opportunities. Decision Sciences, 51(1), 8–37. https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.
12396
Kumar, S., Sharma, D., Rao, S., Lim, W. M., & Mangla, S. K. (2022). Past, present, and future of sustainable
ﬁnance: Insights from big data analytics through machine learning of scholarly research. Annals of
Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04410-8
Leone, L. (2017). Beyond Connectivity: The Internet of Food Architecture Between Ethics and the EU
Citizenry. Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics, 30(3), 423–438. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10806-017-9675-6
Li, Y., Chu, X., Feng, J., Tian, D., & Mu, W. (2019). Blockchain-based quality and safety traceability system
for the table grape supply chain. International Agricultural Engineering Journal, 28(4), 373–385. http://
114.255.9.31/iaej/EN/Y2019/V28/I4/41
Liu, Y., Ma, X., Shu, L., Hancke, G., & Abu-Mahfouz, A. (2021). From Industry 4.0 to Agriculture 4.0: Current
status, enabling technologies, and research challenges. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
17(6), 4322–4334.
Luo, S., & Choi, T. (2022). Operational research for technology-driven supply chains in the industry 4.0 era:
Recent development and future studies. Asia-Paciﬁc Journal of Operational Research, 39(1), 2040021.
Macfadyen, G., Hosch, G., Kaysser, N., & Tagziria, L. (2019). The IUU Fishing Index, 2019. Poseidon
AquaticResourceManagementLimitedandtheGlobalInitiativeAgainstTransnationalOrganizedCrime.
Available at: https://oursharedseas.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/IUU-Fishing-Index-Report-web-
version-1.pdf (accessed 15 September 2020).
Machuca, J. A. D. (1998). Improving POM learning: Systems thinking and transparent-box business sim-
ulators. Production and Operations Management, 7(2), 210–227. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1937-5956.
1998.tb00453.x
Mangla, S. K., Kazancoglu, Y., Ekinci, E., Liu, M., Özbiltekin, M., & Sezer, M. D. (2021). Using system
dynamics to analyze the societal impacts of blockchain technology in milk supply chainsrefer. Trans-
portation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 149, 102289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tre.2021.102289
MarketsAndMarkets
(2020).
Blockchain
in
agriculture
and
food
supply
chain
market.
Avail-
able at: https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/blockchain-agriculture-market-and-food-
supply-chain-55264825.html (accessed 23 September 2020).
McVeigh,
K.
(2021).
Blue
ticked
off:
the
controversy
over
the
MSC
ﬁsh
‘ecolabel’.
Avail-
able at: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/jul/26/blue-ticked-off-the-controversy-over-
the-msc-ﬁsh-ecolabel (accessed 12 January 2022).
Meadows, D. H. (1980). The unavoidable a priori. In: J. Randers (Eds.), Elements of the System Dynamics
method. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
207

Mearian, L. (2019). FDA to pilot A.I., consider blockchain, to track and trace food. Available
at: https://www.computerworld.com/article/3391565/fda-to-pilot-ai-consider-blockchain-to-track-and-
trace-food.html (accessed 29 August 2021).
Mehta, D., Tanwar, S., Bodkhe, U., Shukla, A., & Kumar, N. (2021). Blockchain-based royalty contract trans-
actions scheme for Industry 4.0 supply-chain management. Information Processing and Management,
58(4), 102586.
Min, H. (2010). Artiﬁcial intelligence in supply chain management: Theory and applications. Inter-
national Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 13(1), 13–39. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13675560902736537
Mongeon, P., & Paul-Hus, A. (2016). The journal coverage of Web of science and Scopus: A comparative
analysis. Scientometrics, 106(1), 213–228. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-015-1765-5
Mota, B., Gomes, M. I., Carvalho, A., & Barbosa-Povoa, A. P. (2015). Towards supply chain sustainability:
Economic, environmental and social design and planning. Journal of Cleaner Production, 105, 14–27.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.07.052
Nandi, S., Hervani, A., Helms, M., & Sarkis, J. (2021). Conceptualising Circular economy performance
with non-traditional valuation methods: Lessons for a post-Pandemic recovery. International Journal of
Logistics Research and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1080/13675567.2021.1974365
Nassar, M., Salah, K., ur Rehman, M. H., & Svetinovic, D. (2020). Blockchain for explainable and trustworthy
artiﬁcial intelligence. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 10(1), 1340.
OMG (2014). Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN). Object Management Group (OMG) Speciﬁca-
tion v.2.0.2. Available at: https://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN (accessed 15 September 2020).
Orji, I. J., & Wei, S. (2015). An innovative integration of fuzzy-logic and systems dynamics in sustainable
supplier selection: A case on manufacturing industry. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 88, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2015.06.019
Papadopoulos, T., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Altay, N., Childe, S. J., & Fosso-Wamba, S. (2017). The
role of big data in explaining disaster resilience in supply chains for sustainability. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 142, 1108–1118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.03.059
Pimenidis, E., Patsavellas, J., & Tonkin, M. (2021). Blockchain and Artiﬁcial Intelligence managing a secure
and sustainable supply chain. In H. Jahankhani, A. Jamal, & S. Lawson (Eds.), Cybersecurity, privacy and
freedomprotectionintheconnectedworld.AdvancedSciencesandTechnologiesforSecurityApplications
(pp. 367–377). Cham: Springer.
Pournader, M., Shi, Y., Seuring, S., & Koh, S. C. L. (2020). Blockchain applications in supply chains, transport
and logistics: A systematic review of the literature. International Journal of Production Research, 58(7),
2063–2081. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1650976
Probst, W. (2020). How emerging data technologies can increase trust and transparency in ﬁsheries. ICES
Journal of Marine Science, 77(4), 1286–1294. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsz036
Proudlove, N. C., Bisogno, S., Onggo, B. S. S., Calabrese, A., & Levialdi Ghiron, N. (2017). Towards fully-
facilitated discrete event simulation modelling: Addressing the model coding stage. European Journal
of Operational Research, 263(2), 583–595. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.06.002
Provenance (2016). From shore to plate: Tracking tuna on the blockchain. Available at: https://www.
provenance.org/tracking-tuna-on-the-blockchain#conclusions (accessed 25 August 2020).
Queiroz, M. M., & Fosso Wamba, S. (2019). Blockchain adoption challenges in supply chain: An empirical
investigation of the main drivers in India and the USA. International Journal of Information Management,
46, 70–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.11.021
ResearchAndMarkets (2021). Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Global Food & Beverages Market - Forecasting
Astronomical Growth at a CAGR of 45.77% from 2021 to 2026. Available at: https://www.businesswire.
com/news/home/20210617005608/en/Artiﬁcial-Intelligence-in-the-Global-Food-Beverages-Market---
Forecasting-Astronomical-Growth-at-a-CAGR-of-45.77-from-2021-to-2026---ResearchAndMarkets.
com (accessed 28 June 2021).
Reyes, P. M., Visich, J. K., & Jaska, P. (2020). Managing the dynamics of new technologies in the global
supply chain. IEEE Engineering Management Review, 48(1), 156–162. https://doi.org/10.1109/EMR.
2020.2968889
Reyna, A., Martín, C., Chen, J., Soler, E., & Díaz, M. (2018). On blockchain and its integration with IoT.
Challenges and opportunities. Future Generation Computer Systems, 88, 173–190. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.future.2018.05.046
Rodríguez-Espíndola, O., Chowdhury, S., Beltagui, A., & Albores, P. (2020). The potential of emergent disrup-
tive technologies for humanitarian supply chains: The integration of blockchain, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and 3D printing. International Journal of Production Research, 58(15), 4610–4630. https://doi.org/10.
1080/00207543.2020.1761565
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
208

Ryan, R. W., Holland, D. S., & Herrera, G. E. (2014). Ecosystem externalities in ﬁsheries. Marine Resource
Economics, 29(1), 39–53. https://doi.org/10.1086/676288
Salah, K., Rehman, M. H. U., Nizamuddin, N., & Al-Fuqaha, A. (2019). Blockchain for AI: Review and open
research challenges. IEEE Access, 7, 10127–10149. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2890507
Sanders, N. R., Boone, T., Ganeshan, R., & Wood, J. D. (2019). Sustainable supply chains in the age of AI
and digitization: Research challenges and opportunities. Journal of Business Logistics, 40(3), 229–240.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jbl.12224
Sgantzos, K., & Grigg, I. (2019). Artiﬁcial intelligence implementations on the blockchain. Use cases and
future applications. Future Internet. https://doi.org/10.3390/ﬁ11080170
Sharma, P. K., Kumar, N., & Park, J. H. (2018). Blockchain-based distributed framework for automotive
industry in a smart city. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 15(7), 4197–4205. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TII.2018.2887101
Shen, B., Choi, T.-M., & Minner, S. (2019). A review on supply chain contracting with information considera-
tions: Information updating and information asymmetry. International Journal of Production Research,
57(15–16), 4898–4936. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1467062
Shen, B., Dong, C., & Ng, C. T. (2022). Preface: Special issue on Technology-driven supply chain management
with OR applications in industrial 4.0 era. Asia-Paciﬁc Journal of Operational Research. https://doi.org/
10.1142/S0217595921020036
Singh, D., & Chaddah, J. (2021). A study on application of blockchain technology to control counterfeit
drugs, enhance data privacy and improve distribution in online pharmacy. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Health
Management, 16(3), 59–66.
Sobb, T., Turnbull, B., & Moustafa, N. (2020). Supply chain 4.0: A survey of cyber security challenges,
solutions and future directions. Electronics. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics9111864
Sodhi, M. S., Seyedghorban, Z., Tahernejad, H., & Samson, D. (2022). Why emerging supply chain technolo-
gies initially disappoint: Blockchain, IoT, and AI. Production and Operations Management. https://doi.
org/10.1111/poms.13694
Srai, J. S. (2017). Mapping industrial systems – A supply network perspective on enabling technologies,
processes and actors. International Journal of Manufacturing Technology and Management, 31(1–3),
82–99. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJMTM.2017.082019
Srai, J. S., Joglekar, N., Tsolakis, N., & Kapur, S. (2022). Interplay between competing and coexisting policy
regimens within supply chain conﬁgurations. Production and Operations Management, 31(2), 457–477.
https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13553
Stanisławski, R., & Szymonik, A. (2021). Impact of selected intelligent systems in logistics on the creation
of a sustainable market position of manufacturing companies in Poland in the context of Industry 4.0.
Sustainability. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13073996
Sterling, B., Gooch, M., Dent, B., Marenick, N., Miller, A., & Sylvia, G. (2015). Assessing the value and role
of seafood traceability from an entire value-chain perspective. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science
and Food Safety, 14(3), 205–268. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.12130
Sterman, J. (2000). Business dynamics: Systems thinking and modeling for a complex world. Irwin/McGraw-
Hill.
Steven,A.,Dong,Y.,&Corsi,T.(2014).Globalsourcingandqualityrecalls:Anempiricalstudyofoutsourcing-
supplier concentration-product recalls linkages. Journal of Operations Management, 32(5), 241–253.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2014.04.003
Suwannapoom, S. (2021). Country ﬁsheries trade: Thailand. SEAFDEC: Southeast Asian Fisheries Develop-
ment Center. Available at: http://www.seafdec.org/county-ﬁsheries-trade-thailand/ (accessed 29 August
2021).
Taghikhah, F., Voinov, A., Shukla, N., Filatova, T., & Anufriev, M. (2021). Integrated modeling of extended
agro-food supply chains: A systems approach. European Journal of Operational Research, 288(3),
852–868. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.06.036
Thompson, M., Sylvia, G., & Morrissey, M. T. (2005). Seafood traceability in the United States: Current
trends, system design, and potential applications. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food
Safety, 4(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-4337.2005.tb00067.x
Ting, S. L., Tse, Y. K., Ho, G. T. S., Chung, S. H., & Pang, G. (2014). Mining logistics data to assure the quality
in a sustainable food supply chain: A case in the red wine industry. International Journal of Production
Economics, 152, 200–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.12.010
Tiwari, K., & Khan, M. S. (2019). An action research approach for measurement of sustainability in a multi-
echelon supply chain: Evidences from Indian sea food supply chains. Journal of Cleaner Production,
235, 225–244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.06.200
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
209

Toorajipour, R., Sohrabpour, V., Nazarpour, A., Oghazi, P., & Fischl, M. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence in
supply chain management: A systematic literature review. Journal of Business Research, 122, 502–517.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.09.009
Tsolakis, N., Keramydas, C., Toka, A., Aidonis, D., & Iakovou, E. (2014). Agrifood supply chain manage-
ment: A comprehensive hierarchical decision-making framework and a critical taxonomy. Biosystems
Engineering, 120, 47–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2013.10.014
Tsolakis, N., Niedenzu, D., Simonetto, M., Dora, M., & Kumar, M. (2021). Supply network design to address
United Nations sustainable development goals: A case study of blockchain implementation in Thai ﬁsh
industry. Journal of Business Research, 131, 495–519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.08.003
Tsolakis, N., & Srai, J. S. (2018). Mapping supply dynamics in renewable feedstock enabled industries: A
systems theory perspective on ‘green’ pharmaceuticals. Operations Management Research, 11(3–4),
83–104. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12063-018-0134-y
Tsolakis, N., Srai, J. S., & Aivazidou, E. (2018). Blue water footprint management in a UK poultry supply
chain under environmental regulatory constraints. Sustainability, 10(3), 625. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su10030625
Velez-Zuazo, X., Alfaro-Shigueto, J., Rosas-Puchuri, U., Guidino, C., Pasara-Polack, A., Riveros, J. C., &
Mangel, J. C. (2021). High incidence of mislabeling and a hint of fraud in the ceviche and sushi business.
Food Control, 129, 108224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2021.108224
Vennix, J. A. M. (1996). Group model building: Facilitating team learning using System Dynamics (1st ed.).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
von Rosing, M., White, S., Cummins, F., & de Man, H. (2014). Business Process Model and Notation – BPMN.
In M. von Rosing, H. von Scheel, & A.-W. Scheer (Eds.), The Complete Business Process Handbook
(pp. 433–457). Morgan Kaufmann.
Voss, C., Tsikriktsis, N., & Frohlich, M. (2002). Case research in operations management. Interna-
tional Journal of Operations and Production Management, 22(2), 195–219. https://doi.org/10.1108/
01443570210414329
Wang, Y., Singgih, M., Wang, J., & Rit, M. (2019). Making sense of blockchain technology: How will it
transform supply chains? International Journal of Production Economics, 211, 221–236. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.02.002
Wang, Z., Zheng, Z., Jiang, W., & Tang, S. (2021). Blockchain-enabled data sharing in supply chains: Model,
operationalization, and tutorial. Production and Operations Management, 30(7), 1965–1985. https://doi.
org/10.1111/poms.13356
IUU Watch (2020). EU Carding Decisions. Available at: http://www.iuuwatch.eu/map-of-eu-carding-
decisions/ (accessed 15 September 2020).
Weill, P., & Woerner, S. L. (2018). Is your company ready for a digital future? MIT Sloan Management Review,
59(2), 21–25.
WWF
(2018).
New
blockchain
project
has
potential
to
revolutionise
seafood
industry.
Avail-
able at: https://www.wwf.org.nz/media_centre/news/?15541/New-Blockchain-Project-has-Potential-to-
Revolutionise-Seafood-Industry (accessed 25 August 2020).
WWF (2020). Overﬁshing: Overview. Available at: https://www.worldwildlife.org/threats/overﬁshing
(accessed 15 September 2020).
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and methods (3rd Edn.). Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE
Publications.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th Edn.). Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE
Publications.
Yin, R. K. (1993). Applications of case study research. Sage.
Yu, E. S. (2009). Social modeling and i*. In: A. T. Borgida, V. K. Chaudhri, P. Giorgini, E. S. Yu (Eds).
Conceptual Modeling: Foundations and Applications. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 5600.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02463-4_7
Zhang, J., & Bhatt, T. (2014). A guidance document on the best practices in food traceability. Comprehensive
Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 13(5), 1074–1103. https://doi.org/10.1111/1541-4337.12103
Zheng, Z., Dai, H.-N., & Wu, J. (2019). Blockchain intelligence: When blockchain meets Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Computer Science, 1–5. http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.06485
Zhou, H., Sun, G., Fu, S., Fan, X., Jiang, W., Hu, S., & Li, L. (2020). A distributed approach of big data mining
for ﬁnancial fraud detection in a supply chain. Computers, Materials and Continua, 64(2), 1091–1105.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:157–210
210