TITLE: A systematic literature review on the use of big data analytics in humanitarian and disaster operations
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04904-z
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04904-z
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A systematic literature review on the use of big data analytics
in humanitarian and disaster operations
Abhilash Kondraganti1
· Gopalakrishnan Narayanamurthy1
· Hossein Shariﬁ1
Accepted: 2 August 2022 / Published online: 21 November 2022
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
At the start of this review, 168 million individuals required humanitarian assistance, at the
conclusion of the research, the number had risen to 235 million. Humanitarian aid is critical
notjustfordealingwithapandemicthatoccursonceeverycentury,butmoreforassistingamid
civil conﬂicts, surging natural disasters, as well as other kinds of emergencies. Technology’s
dependability to support humanitarian and disaster operations has never been more pertinent
and signiﬁcant than it is right now. The ever-increasing volume of data, as well as innovations
in the ﬁeld of data analytics, present an incentive for the humanitarian sector. Given that the
interaction between big data and humanitarian and disaster operations is crucial in the coming
days, this systematic literature review offers a comprehensive overview of big data analytics
in a humanitarian and disaster setting. In addition to presenting the descriptive aspects of the
literature reviewed, the results explain review of existent reviews, the current state of research
by disaster categories, disaster phases, disaster locations, and the big data sources used. A
framework is also created to understand why researchers employ various big data sources in
different crisis situations. The study, in particular, uncovered a considerable research disparity
in the disaster group, disaster phase, and disaster regions, emphasising how the focus is on
reactionary interventions rather than preventative approaches. These measures will merely
compound the crisis, and so is the reality in many COVID-19-affected countries. Implications
for practice and policy-making are also discussed.
Keywords Humanitarian · Disaster · Big data · Analytics · Systematic literature review
1 Introduction
Humanitarian crises have been on the rise (UN OCHA, 2020), and, due to the increasing com-
plexity of human societies, are threatening societies’ livelihood more than ever. According to
UNDRR (2020b), the number of natural disasters has doubled from the period of 1980–1999
to the period of 2000–2019. Response to the events and crises costs the global society some
extensive amounts (e.g., according to Financial Tracking Service (2021), the funding require-
ments in 2020 were estimated at $38.54 billion). While accessing such funds is increasingly
B Abhilash Kondraganti
abhilash.kondraganti@liverpool.ac.uk
1
University of Liverpool Management School, Chatham Street, Liverpool L69 7ZH, UK
123

1016
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
challenging to provide for, the bigger issue is the cost-effectiveness in operations to prevent
excessive reliance solely on funding.
Generally, as most aspects of the modern society, use of new and emerging technologies
has been a major part of the new solutions to old and new problems. For instance, disaster
relief operations are mainly logistical, accounting for 60 to 80% of total humanitarian relief
spending (Lacourt & Radosta, 2019; Van Wassenhove, 2006). Owing to the lack of analysis
and relief efforts duplication, it is estimated about 35 to 40% of these logistical expenses are
frittered(Dayetal.,2012;KwapongBaffoe&Luo,2020).Thecrucial,uncertain,andintricate
nature of ﬁeld operations necessitates swift decision-making (Knox Clarke & Campbell,
2020). Furthermore, the ﬁeld of humanitarian and disaster operations (HDO) is diversifying
with the engagement of individuals including volunteers and crowdsourcing participants
who may not be closely associated or afﬁliated with humanitarian organisations and lack
adequate training. As a result, the deployment of new technologies, particularly big data
analytics (BDA), has become a critical component in resolving concerns about collaboration,
efﬁciency,andefﬁcacyincrisisandreliefoperations(Dubeyetal.,2019;Jebleetal.,2019;UN
OCHA, 2021). HDO has seen considerable transformations over the years, from traditional
volunteers to digital volunteers (Behl et al., 2021a, 2021b), and from conventional donations
totechnology-drivencrowdfundingplatforms(Behl&Dutta,2020;Behletal.,2021a,2021b).
Evidently, the application of BDA in the humanitarian and disaster sector has been rare
(Centre for Humanitarian Data, 2019), and way behind the commercial business sector. On
the other hand, usefulness of these technologies has been a matter of debate. As examples,
while Swaminathan (2018) argues that, incorporating BDA may also enable humanitarian
organisations in experiencing operational improvements, Sharma and Joshi (2019) opined
that data does not accurately reﬂect the situation on the ground, and relying signiﬁcantly
on BDA may undermine humanitarian operations. A line of disagreement can be the social
and human sides of humanitarian operations, where the core humanitarian principle of being
humane (UN OCHA, 2010) might be challenging to achieve if sent in a data-driven non-
human context.
In our study, HDO are deﬁned as operational activities involved in any stage of a human-
itarian crisis or disaster, including mitigation initiatives, preparedness efforts, relief-related
activities, and recovery associated actions. The future of HDO in the light of BDA is an
important topic, which has been partially addressed with many questions and challenges to
engage with and answer. While the literature on the subject has been growing, it still does
not encompass all of the existing collective views, challenges, aspects of the use of new tech-
nologies (BDA here), and ways ahead for the sector. Such challenges are further intensiﬁed
when considering the scope and depth of the problems in hand including: types of disasters;
contextual aspects of the problem such as geographical, social and economic issues; and
complexities of the process to adopt, successfully apply and manage implications of the new
technologies.
The academic research domain is yet to become mature on the use of BDA in the HDO
ﬁeld. The use of technology in HDO witnessed a surge at some point, particularly after the
2010 Haiti earthquake (Burns, 2015; Ragini et al., 2018; Read et al., 2016; Sandvik et al.,
2014), but still remains as a discussion point largely. After a decade, another disaster, COVID-
19, as an unprecedented event, has brought the attention back on BDA where data driven
decision making is signiﬁcantly increased (Gazi & Gazis, 2020). But what has happened in
the last 10 years, how far have we come in this ﬁeld, and what key issues are there for the
research community to consider that need new insight and answers. This research attends this
matter and attempts to review the state of academic research on BDA in HDO. The article
aims at delivering a thorough review of the subject matter as well as insights into areas where
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1017
the future research could focus. The main objective of this review is to examine and evaluate
how BDA has been employed in numerous disasters, disaster phases, and disaster locations
in the ﬁeld of HDO to assess how far the research has progressed so far. To achieve this, three
research questions (RQ) are designed for this study as follows:
RQ1. How has the research on the application of BDA for HDO evolved over time?
RQ2. What is the status of the BDA application across different disaster categories, disaster
phases, disaster locations, and what different types of big data have been used?
RQ3. What are the key theoretical lenses used to examine and explain BDA application in
HDO?
The study contributes to the subject domain by offering a research background to under-
stand the state of disasters and the review of extant literature reviews in the ﬁeld. The method
utilised to undertake the review, including the review protocol, search strategy, and article
quality assessment, is outlined in the following section. The outcomes of the review are
reported and discussed in the sections that follow. Finally, the paper offers areas for fur-
ther research to enhance the application of BDA in the HDO sector, as well as the review’s
limitations.
2 Research background
This research integrates humanitarian crisis and disaster operations together. Humanitarian
operations takes place to alleviate human suffering where local mechanisms are inadequate
to accommodate and offer the necessary assistance (ReliefWeb, 2008). Disaster operations,
on the other hand, include activities carried out before, during, and after a disaster to save
lives, reduce economic damage, and restore normalcy (Altay & Green III, 2006). This section
discusses the current state of different disaster categories, and evaluates existing literature
reviews in the ﬁeld to assess the ﬁeld’s progress.
2.1 State of the disaster types
Before getting into the actual review, this study needs to understand what types of disasters
are out there and how these are classiﬁed over the years in order to report disasters in review
articles in the form of a standardised list. Besides, adhering to the standard list of disasters
leads to better reporting and ease in comparisons.
The exploration revealed that there is no particular norm when it comes to disaster types.
Scholars initially described disasters into two types, ‘natural’ and ‘man-made’ (Berren et al.,
1980; de Boer, 1990) or ‘natural’ and ‘human-induced’ (Gray, 1982) but the new type of dis-
asters ‘industrial’ (Taylor, 1990) and ‘hybrid’ (Shaluf et al., 2001; Shaluf, 2007a, 2007b) are
added to the list at later years. Altay and Green III (2006) in their review of disasters in opera-
tion management separated disasters mainly into natural and man-made and the continuation
review by Galindo and Batta (2013) also retains the same description for disasters. These are
again altered in the last decade and changed the description to natural and human-made or
human-induced disasters (Khan et al., 2020). Disasters in the twenty-ﬁrst century are never
constant as the human race has witnessed and is continuously witnessing new and different
kinds of modern disasters in this century (De Smet et al., 2012). Hence the type of disasters
is changing over the years. Eshghi and Larson (2008) reviewed twentieth-century disasters
to build a new classiﬁcation and described that the variance in initial classiﬁcations is due
to the difference in describing the disasters and their impacts. Although the categorisation is
inconsistent and changing over time, natural disasters and human-induced disaster categories
are commonly used and considered as a broader generic group.
123

1018
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
As Luki´c et al. (2013) suggested, natural disasters can be categorised based on the physical
cause of the incident. Further, a common classiﬁcation is necessary to have global standards
andthiswillhelpinassessingdisasterswithoutanyhazardbias,thresholdbias,andaccounting
bias. Guha-Sapir and Below (2002) assessed and compared three well-known global disaster
datasets EM-Dat (by CRED), NatCatSERVICE (by Munich Re), and Sigma (by Swiss Re).
One of the key issues that surfaced from this comparison is the lack of standardisation
of methods and deﬁnitions. These differences were mainly attributed to the discrepancies
in disaster typology. To overcome this, disaster databases EM-Dat and NatCatSERVICE
have come together to implement a standard disaster classiﬁcation which is reviewed and
agreed upon by other databases and OCHA (Wirtz et al., 2014). The new classiﬁcation
provides two generic categories of natural and technological, which comprise the entire
disaster spectrum. The ﬁrst generic category, natural disasters are further divided into six
groups namely biological, climatological, extraterrestrial, geophysical, hydrological, and
meteorological. The second generic category technological disasters, is in the place of human-
induced disasters and covers three groups; industrial, transport, and miscellaneous (Guha-
Sapir, 2008). The new classiﬁcation hierarchy is established on a ‘triggering event’ logic
(Below et al., 2009). The same classiﬁcation is implemented for CRED’s annual disaster
statistical review from 2007 reports and followed by many other databases.
However, Integrated Research on Disaster Risk (IRDR) program sponsored by the United
Nations Ofﬁce for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) tested the operating viability of the
new classiﬁcation provided by CRED and Munich Re in national databases, and concluded
that implementation of this classiﬁcation in national databases is difﬁcult. The reason given
was that national databases run primarily at the peril level and CRED classiﬁcation is more of
a top-down approach where bottom-level disaster types are exclusively associated with sub-
types therefore to main types, as shown in Fig. 1. This allowed IRDR to work on revising the
existing framework. The relationship between peril and main disaster event is not exclusive
in the revised classiﬁcation meaning perils can be linked to multiple disaster categories in the
Fig. 1 Disaster classiﬁcation: CRED (2008) by Guha-Sapir (2008) versus IRDR (2014). Source: compilation
by author
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1019
Fig. 2 Comparison of the ﬁrst-level classiﬁcation between CRED versus IRDR versus UNDRR. Source: com-
pilation by author
main event as illustrated in Fig. 1. However, the main level classiﬁcation of natural disasters
remains the same in the IRDR classiﬁcation (IRDR, 2014).
The bottom-level classiﬁcation is such an uneven segment in the disaster typology, it
changes from time to time from one event to another depending on the deﬁnite occurrence
and causes for loss. A great deal of work has gone into the CRED’s disaster classiﬁcation since
the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, and their initiation through EM-Dat to improve and
standardise the classiﬁcation has opened doors for academicians and United Nations (UN)
organisations to try and implement the disaster classiﬁcation in their area of work.
IRDR is only focused on natural events and the UNDRR’s latest work is dedicated to all
event approach following the Sendai Framework (UNDRR, 2020a). The new list has avoided
a hierarchical approach in classifying disasters, citing the dynamic relationship between
various events will be inadequate in hierarchical style and preferred non-hierarchical or ﬂat
list (UNDRR, 2020a). Figure 2 depicts the generic and group-level disasters in CRED, IRDR,
and UNDRR.
Global disaster databases and UNDRR classiﬁed disasters based on the causative dimen-
sion and this has been the popular choice. This study is not looking into the peril level
classiﬁcation for the categorisation of disasters in articles but only takes into consideration
of the disaster generic group (e.g. natural disaster) and the ﬁrst level disaster group (e.g. geo-
physical). This review will be using CRED’s classiﬁcation of natural disasters as it is simple,
distinguishes between all-natural disasters, and more importantly separates from non-natural
disasters. The remaining disasters in the review will be identiﬁed as human-induced disasters.
2.2 Review of reviews
There have been no reviews in the ﬁeld of BDA and HDO before 2016. Although the research
in the ﬁeld has been marginal over the years, it has recently accelerated as a result of the
volatile world we now live in. Furthermore, this discipline is becoming more interconnected
and multidisciplinary, making it difﬁcult to keep up with the ongoing research and remain on
the cutting edge (Snyder, 2019). This research has revealed 13 review studies and surveys of
123

1020
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
the literature conducted thus far, of which an examination shows that 77% of these studies
are not comprehensive. This means the studies either only look at one type of disaster (Balti
et al., 2020), one particular disaster phase (Cumbane & Gidófalvi, 2019), one form of big data
source (Wang & Ye, 2018), one element of disaster (Sarker et al., 2020a), or the combination
of multiple technologies (Khan et al., 2020). Table 1 summarises all thirteen studies identiﬁed
and brieﬂy describes each review’s emphasis. The identiﬁed reviews are of several forms,
including systematic literature review (SLR), literature review (LR), literature survey (LS),
and systematic literature survey (SLS).
A review study on the intersection of BDA and HDO is considered a full-scale review.
Full-scale literature review papers are very few in this ﬁeld, and only three papers, Akter
and Wamba (2019); R1, Gupta et al. (2019); R2, and Sharma and Joshi (2019); R3 have
been identiﬁed from the list. The ﬁrst two reviews, which were conducted around the same
time, offered more positive perspectives by outlining the beneﬁts and emphasised the need
for use of big data in a humanitarian and disaster setting. The third review has attempted to
bring the arguments of the challenges and negative effects related to the use of big data in
relief operations. The search string that was used to shortlist the studies is clearly stated in
R1 and R2, but this was not the case in R3, which stated that studies were obtained using
several databases, but did not include the search string that could help scholars reproduce
the results for further veriﬁcation. The period was ﬂexible in these review papers, R2 and
R3 did not restrict themselves to a speciﬁc period, however, R1 acknowledges that it did
come across very few articles before 2010, therefore it chose to focus on studies published
between 2010 and 2017. The primary reason for undertaking an SLR on top of the already
existing three papers is that close to 70% of articles on the review topic are published in
the last 3 years, meaning, after the research conducted for R1 and R2. More speciﬁcally,
our study contains only seven articles that are reviewed in either R1 or R2. This number
further approves the necessity for an SLR in the ﬁeld to revisit the review areas that were not
covered in R3 (even if they were covered in R1 and R2) such as Classiﬁcation: by research
methodologies, Classiﬁcation: by disaster phase, Disaster occurrence (year), and Theoretical
underpinnings. The blind eye on the management subject area is evident in which, R1 papers
from the management ﬁeld are just above ﬁve and in R2 the number is below ﬁve. There is a
marginally better number in the current study with roughly 10% of papers coming from the
management domain but it is nowhere near the top two preferred subject areas of the ﬁeld.
Besides a few similarities and a good range of dissimilarities in the inclusion and exclusion
criteria between the ﬁrst two review papers, the theoretical underpinning debate is discussed
in both studies. R1 explicated the lack of representation of theories in the ﬁeld and offered
some ideas on a few theories as a future research direction. On the other hand, understanding
the ﬁeld from the organisational theoretical lens is one of the research objectives of R2. This
study can’t stress enough the importance of theoretical requirements in the ﬁeld of BDA in
HDO. Although R3 was not forthcoming in presenting the important aspect of search criteria
that is required for any review, it does stand as the inimitable review in this nascent ﬁeld
as it brings a different view of big data in humanitarian relief, called negative effects. The
review divided the articles into three groups: supportive, mixed, and critical. Drawing upon
the critical section, a total of eight challenges were discussed. Some challenges are related
to ethical concerns, errors caused by either language or culture, and issues with the existence
of big data itself.
The three full-scale reviews along with the current review are compared in Table 2 to see
how the full-scale reviews are advancing in the ﬁeld of BDA and HDO. The assessment is
based on the review results, and how the authors classiﬁed the extant research in their review.
The review area named as ‘distribution’ in the table is descriptive where the distribution of
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1021
Table 1 Total number of existing reviews in the ﬁeld. Source: compilation by author
Review article
Author (year)
Review focus
Review
type
Big data analytics for emergency communication networks:
A survey
Wang et al. (2016)
Survey on the combination of technologies
SLS
Social media analytics for natural disaster management
Wang and Ye (2018)
Review on one type of big data source, and one type of
disaster generic group
LR
A review on application of data mining techniques to
combat natural disasters
Goswami et al. (2018)
Survey on one type of disaster generic group
LS
Big data and disaster management: a systematic review and
agenda for future research
Akter and Wamba (2019)
Full-scale review
SLR
Big data in humanitarian supply chain management: a
review and further research directions
Gupta et al. (2019)
Full-scale review
SLR
The rising role of big data analytics and IoT in disaster
management: Recent advances, taxonomy and prospects
Shah et al. (2019)
Review on the combination of technologies
SLR/LS
Review of big data and processing frameworks for disaster
response applications
Cumbane and Gidófalvi (2019)
Review on one type of disaster phase
SLR
Challenges of using big data for humanitarian relief: lessons
from the literature
Sharma and Joshi (2019)
Full-scale review
LR
Climate change adaptation and resilience through big data
Sarker et al. (2020b)
Review on one type of disaster group
SLR
Multi-hazard disaster studies: Monitoring, detection,
recovery, and management, based on emerging
technologies and optimal techniques
Khan et al. (2020)
Survey on multiple technologies
SLS
Big Data and Emergency Management: Concepts,
Methodologies, and Applications
Song et al. (2020)
Survey on multiple technologies
LS
Disaster resilience through big data: Way to environmental
sustainability
Sarker et al. (2020a)
Review on one element of disaster management
SLR
A review of drought monitoring with big data: Issues,
methods, challenges and research directions
Balti et al. (2020)
Review on one type of disaster
LR
123

1022
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
articles is available from the respective database they chose for review. Because descriptive
results were not considered for this review, we will not present any distribution categories.
The remaining review areas which are highlighted in bold are the compilation of outcomes
that emerged after reviewing the set of papers. Being the very ﬁrst full-scale review in the
ﬁeld, R1 mostly produced a basic analysis while at the same time classiﬁed papers in three
different review areas. R2 which is focused on the humanitarian supply chain papers provided
less descriptive outcomes and more analysis on the review papers with supplying enablers
and concerns for big data. R3, which was published after the ﬁrst two reviews, emerged as the
less descriptive one and classiﬁed articles with real case disasters and reference to the data
sources used in the papers. This review will provide a comprehensive overview of the ﬁeld,
incorporating the lessons learnt from the previous three reviews. The reader should bear in
mind that this table does not in any way measure the quality of these reviews.
This study identiﬁed seven review areas to examine, and these areas were chosen logically
to represent the two review themes, HDO and BDA. To begin, it is essential to analyse the
event in terms of what it is (disaster type), what stage it is in (disaster phase), and where
it occurred (disaster location) from the aspect of disaster/humanitarian crisis management.
We added ’when it occurred’ (disaster year) to this to observe how scholars choose events;
recent or historical disasters. Then, from the standpoint of BDA, we are interested in the types
of big data (sources of big data) that have been used/examined in previous studies. We still
regard this as a nascent ﬁeld, thus we provided the types of research (research methodologies)
undertaken in the ﬁeld as well as the theories (theoretical underpinnings) that are applied to
assess how far we have come.
Table 2 Comparison between three reviews in the ﬁeld. Source: compilation by author
Review area
R1
R2
R3
This review
Distribution: by authors
✓
✘
✘
✘
Distribution: by universities
✓
✘
✘
✘
Distribution: by countries
✓
✘
✓
✘
Distribution: by subject areas
✓
✓
✘
✘
Classiﬁcation: by research methodologies
✓
✓
✘
✓
Classiﬁcation: by disaster phase
✓
✘
✘
✓
Classiﬁcation: by research (data) cluster
✓
✘
✘
✘
Distribution: source title
✘
✓
✘
✘
Big data enablers
✘
✓
✘
✘
Big data concerns
✘
✓
✘
✘
Classiﬁcation: by disasters or disaster categories
✘
✘
✓
✓
Classiﬁcation: by source of big data
✘
✘
✓
✓
Classiﬁcation: by argument (supportive, mixed, critical)
✘
✘
✓
✘
Disaster locations
✘
✘
✓
✓
Disaster occurrence (year)
✘
✘
✘
✓
Theoretical underpinnings
✓
✓
✘
✓
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1023
3 Methodology
A systematic literature review (SLR) is a research approach that is used to gather and critically
evaluate the current state of knowledge on the study topic to address research questions. SLR
was implemented as a result of four important considerations. First and foremost, it seeks
to provide clarity to the overall process through the use of a review protocol and a carefully
planned search strategy (Booth et al., 2012). Second, the authors wish to prevent any bias in
performing the study, particularly selection and publication bias, and SLR principles can help
to reduce this and facilitate the development of more accurate results (Becheikh et al., 2006).
Third, it must be transparent throughout the review process (Booth et al., 2012) and, fourth,
it has to be reproducible for other researchers interested in extending this research (Booth
et al., 2012). The principles of Denyer and Tranﬁeld (2009) and Tranﬁeld et al. (2003), two
commonly employed SLR techniques in management, were adopted in this review, and they
are also preferred in the operation and supply chain domain (El Baz et al., 2019; Gligor &
Holcomb, 2012; Tachizawa & Wong, 2014).
Fig. 3 Systematic literature review process. Source: Adopted from Tranﬁeld et al. (2003) and Denyer and
Tranﬁeld (2009)
123

1024
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
3.1 Review protocol
The research protocol facilitates the execution of the second stage of the study, ’conducting
a literature review,’ which is the fundamental component of this research in the SLR process
depicted in Fig. 3. The goal of this protocol is to eliminate any researcher bias (Tranﬁeld
et al., 2003), therefore a search strategy with a clear set of rules is in place to ﬁnd the relevant
journal articles for this study. As a result, the search for existing literature is facilitated by the
selection of a more appropriate citation database, and Scopus was selected for this review.
Scopus is regarded as the most comprehensive multidisciplinary database, with more journal
coverage than Web of Science (Aghaei Chadegani et al., 2013).
3.2 Search strategy
The search strategy used to shortlist academic literature utilising inclusion and exclusion
criteria determines the efﬁcacy of SLR (Snyder, 2019). Using the Boolean operators, a search
string in Scopus was created which represents both BDA and HDO in the search results. The
authors are cautious that inserting more keywords may signiﬁcantly narrow the search and
perhaps omitany relevantliterature. As a result, the search string is notrigorous and is as broad
as feasible. Because this is a rapidly evolving ﬁeld, and as a measure, authors are mindful in
selecting search keywords. BDA is split into two terms: ’big data’ and ’analytics,’ because
some research papers might have used either name in the keywords, abstract, or title rather
than the complete phrase BDA. These keywords are linked with two others, "humanitarian"
and "disaster," which represent the ﬁeld of HDO. The complete search string that was used
is listed below.
(("analytics" AND "humanitarian") OR ("analytics" AND "disaster") OR ("big data"
AND "humanitarian") OR ("big data" AND "disaster"))
The search criteria, as indicated in Table 3, consist of ﬁve levels that have aided in the
selection of relevant articles, and this was executed within Scopus. The search string was used
Fig. 4 Research publication over the years by the number of articles. Source: compilation by author
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1025
Table 3 Search criteria results in Scopus. Source: compilation by author
Level
Criteria
Description
Results
L1
Search area
Title, keyword, abstract
n = 1563
L2
Subject area
Computer science, engineering, decision
sciences, social sciences, business,
management and accounting
n = 1354
L3
Document type
Article, review
n = 483
L4
Source type
Journal
n = 468
L5
Language
English
n = 417
inthesearcharea,whichresultedin1,563articlesintheﬁrstlevel.Duetothemultidisciplinary
nature of the study ﬁeld, ﬁve suitable subject areas have been included at level two, bringing
the total to 1,354. Only peer-reviewed articles are considered in this review, limiting the
total to 483 at level three. The rationale for analysing solely published material is that it
can improve the review’s quality because most publications undergo a thorough peer-review
process (Light & Pillemer, 1984). Additionally, the number dropped to 468 when only journal
papers are considered at level four. Finally, ﬁltering our search to papers written in English
yields a total of 417 articles. Although there was no constraint on publication year during the
search, the earliest paper can be tracked back to 2009, as seen in Fig. 4. The data collection
procedure began in April 2020, with the ﬁrst search conducted on April 29th, and the follow-
up searches conducted on July 23rd and December 31st of the same year to update the
sample.
4 Abstract and full-text review
An additional shortlisting process is used by evaluating the search results employing inclu-
sion and exclusion criteria. The abstracts of 417 papers were thoroughly studied, but,
when authors thought that the abstract content was insufﬁcient to establish the article’s
relevance, a full-text review was undertaken. This procedure eliminated around 62% of the
papers, leaving 160 for full-text review. One example of an article that has been omitted is
‘Predicting Heart Diseases from Large Scale IoT Data Using a Map-Reduce Paradigm’ (Abd
& Manaa, 2020). While this article does not discuss humanitarian or disaster operations, it
was surfaced in the list due to the inclusion of the key terms ‘big data’ and ‘disaster’ in the
abstract.
This study is concept-centric, with a framework designed to capture the key themes in
each study to achieve comprehensiveness (Webster & Watson, 2002). For full-text papers,
the inclusion criterion is based entirely on one parameter; ‘Is the article at the intersection
of BDA and HDO?’ This evaluation has been carried out by classifying articles into three
distinct categories. Table 4 shows that category one has the most relevant publications to the
study topic. For instance, Dubey et al.’s (2018) article titled ‘Big data and predictive analytics
in humanitarian supply chains: Enabling visibility and coordination in the presence of swift
trust’ focused on both humanitarian and BDA, hence listed in category one. Category two,
on the other hand, is marginally relevant and one such example for this category is ‘Disaster
management in the digital age’ (Talley, 2020), which discusses various technologies that can
be used in disaster management, including BDA. Wherein articles from category three are
123

1026
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
Table 4 Full-text review results. Source: compilation by author
Category
Description
Results
1
The focus of the article is on HDO and BDA as the key point
n = 54
2
Considerable insights in the article on the intersection of BDA with HDO
n = 32
3
The article is not relevant to the research area
n = 74
unrelated and do not contribute to the advancement of this review. If we look at Mann’s
(2018) paper, ‘Left to Other Peoples’ Devices? A Political Economy Perspective on the Big
Data Revolution in Development’, it shifts data 4 development (D4D) focus to the economic
development, hence placed in category 3. This review considered articles from categories 1
and 2, containing 86 studies, 13 of which were reviews. We opted to produce ﬁndings for
conceptual, empirical, and model papers, totalling 73 articles.
5 Results
The authors report important ﬁndings from the ﬁnal set of papers in this section, which were
identiﬁed following ﬁt assessment criteria and are structured into seven review areas in six
sub-sections. First category outlines which disasters are more concentrated and where the
research is inadequate. The second category reveals which disaster stages are more popular
among academics. The third category focuses on disaster locations, as well as how many of
these are on real-world disasters and their group. The fourth category is about the big data
sources utilised to perform the research and which of these are common in each disaster
phase. The ﬁfth category brieﬂy discusses studies associated with theories. At the end of the
section, results allied with research methodologies utilised in articles are also presented.
5.1 Disaster categories
Scholars had put more importance on natural occurrences, as seen in Fig. 5 because natu-
ral disasters comprise more than half of disasters reviewed in the literature. Within the ﬁrst
generic group ’natural disasters’, geophysical disasters such as volcanic activity, earthquakes,
and tsunamis, along with hydrological disasters including ﬂoods and heavy rains were stud-
ied. Floods and earthquakes are the predominant choices for researchers in this category
of sudden-onset disasters. The interest in geophysical disasters revolves around situational
awareness prior to the disaster (Amato et al., 2019), public emotion (Yang et al., 2019), supply
chain resilience (Papadopoulos et al., 2017), and information exchange behaviour (Li et al.,
2018). Further, demand estimation for shelters (X. Zhang et al., 2020b), and the development
of an information system to assist logistic operations in reaching the affected people (Warnier
et al., 2020) were prioritised. Scholars investigated various aspects of the hydrological dis-
aster group, including responding to the disaster through sentiment analysis (Ragini et al.,
2018), bridging the information gap between responding organisations (van den Homberg
et al., 2018), and understanding the severity of the disaster (Kankanamge et al., 2020). In
addition, academics were interested in forecasting the disaster (Puttinaovarat & Horkaew,
2019), and estimating the need for relief supplies (Lin et al., 2020) in the hydrological group.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1027
Fig. 5 Disaster group in articles-separated by generic and ﬁrst-level disaster group. Source: compilation by
author
Researchers are also paying attention to another sudden-onset disaster group, meteorologi-
cal disasters which include hurricanes and typhoons. The research in this group focuses on
understanding the needs of impacted people and how their priorities change (Malawani et al.,
2020), examining the societal impacts (Zhang et al., 2020a), understanding human activities
in disasters (Liu et al., 2020), sociodemographic factors inﬂuencing disaster response (Fan
et al., 2020), and public behaviour (Chae et al., 2014). The research in these three disaster
groups is quite diversiﬁed, and much emphasis has been placed on them, not only because
they are more common, but also because of the economic damage and fatalities that they
inﬂict. The work in these three disaster groups is entirely empirical and model based, with
the majority of them (77%) focused on real disaster cases.
The group of climatological disasters has received very little attention, with a focus on
wildﬁre and study on the heatwave. Further biological disaster group research is insigniﬁcant
with only one publication addressing the epidemic crisis. In their research, a couple of schol-
ars focused on multiple disasters inside the natural disaster generic group, with earthquake
being one of the multiple disasters. The remainder of papers under the independent category
123

1028
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
of natural disasters are generic and not particular to any disaster group. Human-induced
disasters have rarely been examined; as per the Swiss Re (2021) report, 37% of disasters
reported in 2018 were caused by humans, with a 10-year average of more than 30%. How-
ever, researchers’ interest in this area is negligible. Bahir and Peled (2016) attempted to
identify the location of the conﬂict in their research by analysing textual messages, whereas
Rogstadius et al. (2013) and Zhang et al. (2016) studied situational awareness during civil
war and riots, respectively. There is a potential in the human-induced disaster segment and
big data such as satellite imagery and mobile data that could be signiﬁcant for those working
in the ﬁeld and monitoring the trends of the situation to better act. These talking points,
however, must be translated into better research and then tested in the ﬁeld. Further, several
articles did not cover either of the disaster generic groups, and this contains conceptual and
empirical work mainly related to the general humanitarian supply chain, ethics, and privacy.
In one publication, the technology was evaluated in a non-disaster context, therefore it was
not allocated to any of the disaster groups. There are also articles on the mix of natural and
human-induced disasters in which the majority of them are general and discussed humani-
tarian principles (Sandvik et al., 2017), and humanitarian data sets (Bell et al., 2021).
5.2 Disaster phase
Disaster occurrences and scenarios in the previous research are divided into four phases-
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery (Cumbane & Gidófalvi, 2019; Kankanamge
et al., 2020; Sarker et al., 2020a). Figure 6 illustrates the articles distribution across these
four stages, as well as the inclusion of additional categories, where the combined number of
articles from mitigation, preparedness, and recovery is not even a third of the total number
of articles from the response stage, thereby demonstrating a drastic imbalance in research
between the four stages. The work done thus far in the mitigation phase has primarily focused
on two aspects. The ﬁrst is nowcasting disaster impact and disaster forecasting to mitigate
signiﬁcant risks (Avvenuti et al., 2017; Puttinaovarat & Horkaew, 2019; Qayum et al., 2020),
and the second is gaining a better knowledge of people’s emotions and situations to assist
in minimising the impact (Amato et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Zamarreño-Aramendia
et al., 2020). In the preparedness phase, Bag et al. (2021) sought to identify the barriers
in employing BDA in the humanitarian supply chain, as well as their interrelationships.
This empirical work is timely because there is less research in the preparedness stage in the
contextofBDAinHDO,anditshouldhelptobroadentheconversation.Moreover,researchon
disaster preparedness in the event of a sudden-onset disaster has to be considerably increased.
Because the preparation window is much shorter in this scenario, near-real time and real-time
data are more signiﬁcant. Scholars’ top priority over the years has been response events, and
this is same for practitioners and policymakers. The response phase is the most intensive,
and the established mechanisms will be more overwhelming in this phase than in any other
phase. As a result, the disaster response articles in extant research covered all disaster groups
except biological, utilised all types of data sources, and spanned across all regions. The
focus needs to shift as acting early on can have substantial results on HDO. According to
the Boston Consulting Group (2015) report, ﬁnancial beneﬁts can be as much as double,
which implies that spending one dollar before a disaster can save two dollars during the
response, and it can also save 1 week of response time on average. This anticipated action may
also result in saving lives. Articles focused on more than one phase categorised as multiple
and they used the same source of big data, social media (SM). Though this segment is the
combination of multiple phases, they all are centred on the combination of response-recovery
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1029
Fig. 6 Articles based on disaster phase. Source: compilation by author
(crisis management), with only one research focusing on preparedness-response-recovery.
The authors’ focus during these crisis management phases is on evaluating the sentiments of
the affected people, the severity of disaster damage, and data management procedures. The
work of Shan et al. (2019) is stimulating in that their model for measuring disaster damage
evaluated both physical and emotional damage to people in real-time.
A signiﬁcant amount of research talk about the complete cycle of disaster with nearly
half of them being conceptual papers. Of these, the majority of work is generalised dialogue
and articles focused on organisational mindfulness (Amaye et al., 2016) and group privacy
(Gerdes, 2020). Also, it is worth noting the work of Iglesias et al. (2020) on building reference
architecture for big data, as well as critical components required for the system. Furthermore,
the authors highlighted the potential uses of big data in each crisis phase for a variety of tasks
based on the core capabilities developed by the National Response Framework. The empirical
and model work, on the other hand, concentrated on signiﬁcant conditions across phases
such as coordination in supply chain (Dubey et al., 2018, 2019), crisis communication (Jin &
Spence, 2020; Kibanov et al., 2017), and understanding public behaviour (Chae et al., 2014).
However, a considerable number of publications did not examine any disaster phase(s), hence
classiﬁed into the independent category. This category includes papers on the hype around
big data (Read et al., 2016), challenges (Bell et al., 2021), big data in digital humanitarian
practices (Burns, 2015), and ethics of big data (Taylor, 2016).
123

1030
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
5.3 Disaster locations and occurrence
Disasters strike in any region, and no place is immune, especially when it comes to natural
disasters. However, some regions are severely impacted by both economic damage and human
casualties. The Asian region continues to be disaster-prone, and it is one of the world’s most
severely affected regions (Swiss Re, 2021), therefore it is expected that scholars will favour
examining the events in this region, as shown in Fig. 7. The Americas are the second most
studied region, however, academics prefer the United States over the South American region,
with seven out of eight articles focusing on the United States, with a focus on hurricanes.
One of the reasons for the high emphasis on the North American region is economic loss.
Though human loss in North America is one of the lowest in the world, economic loss is
the highest, accounting for nearly 52% of the overall world losses (Swiss Re, 2021). Other
regions, Europe, Oceania, and Africa, have got much less attention. Africa has the second-
highest number of disaster-related human mortality, behind Asia (Swiss Re, 2021), yet it
is the least concentrated in this domain, where disaster and humanitarian assistance can
be extremely crucial. Furthermore, while a couple of papers focus on multiple locations
(Chaudhuri & Bose, 2020; Mulder et al., 2016), the vast majority are from the independent
category, including some empirical and all conceptual articles where the investigation is not
location-driven. Scholars studied disaster areas using a variety of technological platforms,
including data processing and analytical tools Apache Spark (Avvenuti et al., 2018; Ragini
et al., 2018), ScatterBlogs (Thom et al., 2016), and Weka (Kankanamge et al., 2020) along
with programming languages such as R (Malawani et al., 2020; Sangameswar et al., 2017)
and Python (Shan et al., 2019; Warnier et al., 2020).
Figure 8 categorises disasters according to the year in which they occurred. The scholars
picked disasters which happened between 2011 and 2019, with an average time gap between
disaster incidents and research publication is three and half years. The year 2012 was one of
the most expensive hurricane seasons in Atlantic history, and the fact that the most academic
research selected disasters from the same year (as seen in the ﬁgure below) was due to an
increase in scholarly interest in hurricane Sandy in the United States. Also, disaster that
spanned across two different years were reported by more papers. As limited research is
conducted by considering actual disasters as cases, the general category ends up with high
number of publications that do not focus on real-world disasters. The remaining number of
Fig. 7 Region of disaster. Source: compilation by author
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1031
Fig. 8 Year of disaster based on real cases in articles. Source: compilation by author
articles, which studied actual disasters, were broken down by regions in the “Appendix 2”,
to discover which disasters were the most prominent in each region. Except for biological
disasters, each group has at least one study on real disasters. Research on climatological
disasters was only conducted in Europe and Oceania, whereas hydrological disasters are
topped in the Asian region.
5.4 Sources of big data
This review further examined the literature on the basis of data utilised for research, and Fig. 9
displaysallofthebigdatasourcesinvestigated.Spatialdataincludingsatellite,aerial,andmap
data mainly serve as a visual aid for humanitarian and disaster responders, and researchers
rely on these data sources to obtain greater accuracy (Lin et al., 2020; Nagendra et al., 2020).
Oﬂi et al. (2016) chose aerial imaging over satellite imaging in their research because the
Fig. 9 Big data sources across disaster phases in articles. Source: compilation by author
123

1032
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
processing time is shorter with aerial imagery. Aerial imagery is helpful for measuring small-
scale disasters because it lowers cost, gives data in a timely manner, and avoids capturing
difﬁculties because it is taken below the clouds (Meier, 2015). However, this will depend
on the time and scale of the crisis, as satellite data will be beneﬁcial for gathering precise
texture information over a much larger area and approximately measuring height-related data,
which can help quantify the damage intensity on the ground (Yu et al., 2018). When Mulder
et al. (2016) examined crowdsourcing data in their study, they pointed out that by the time
the data reaches the decision-makers, the original ’crowd’ (often affected people) may have
been eliminated from the information ﬂow. In addition to their critical viewpoint, Givoni
(2016) advocated for a cautious approach by studying two crowdsourcing platforms, the
micro mappers and missing maps. Despite considerable technological developments, mobile
phone data sources remain important and scholars explored the use of passive (positioning)
and active (SMS) data to cover information gaps such as impacted people’s location and need
(Cinnamon et al., 2016; Nasim & Ramaraju, 2019). The most signiﬁcant disclosure is the
use of SM data with a staggering number of publications, which is not conﬁned to developed
countries, but is applied across every region, spanning all disaster phases, and being employed
in majority of the disaster groups. Behl and Dutta (2019) work further conﬁrms that scholars
employed SM data extensively in their studies. A signiﬁcant number of articles are general,
with no emphasis on data sources, and a large proportion of them are conceptual studies.
Figure 9 also illustrates the comparison of the usage of various data sources across disaster
phases, and this shows that academics preferred to use multiple data sources to better identify
the needs of affected people at the disaster response stage than any other stage. To overcome
the discrepancy when using multiple data sources, Grifﬁth etal. (2019) stated thatdata mustbe
cleaned to a signiﬁcant extent, and cross-referencing between the sources must be performed.
People responding to disasters often need to consider the impact of disasters on infrastructure,
situation reports that update the ground reality, and information that describes risk levels,
necessitating the use of several data sources (Warnier et al., 2020). In addition, scholars
who studied the disaster response phase used all of the data sources shown in Fig. 9. The
dominance of SM is not just in the response phase, but also when scholars studied multiple
phases where it is the major source used for research. SM is not the preferred data source for
examining disaster preparedness and recovery. People’s engagement in SM typically grows
from preparation to response and declines from response to recovery, according to Yan and
Pedraza-Martinez (2019), while on some occasions scholars have turned to SM platforms
during the mitigation phase.
Scholars preferred Twitter (20 articles) and Weibo (4 articles) within the SM data source
to explore solutions to HDO-related challenges. Twitter’s apparent dominance stems mostly
from the fact that it includes huge volumes of publicly accessible data that is easy to com-
prehend, and most signiﬁcantly, it offers timely data (Thom et al., 2016). Nevertheless,
over-reliance on Twitter may pose bias-related concerns due to the extensive use of a single
SM (Avvenuti et al., 2018), and data noise will be higher (Sherchan et al., 2017). Weibo,
another SM network, has been featured in a few articles, but these studies have only been
conducted in Asia. Furthermore, in one instance, academics used multiple SM data sources
for their research, with Twitter being one among them. The utilisation of multiple SM net-
works as a data source, according to the researchers, provides a comprehensive view of the
disaster’s unfolding (Chaudhuri & Bose, 2020; Sherchan et al., 2017). Organisations may
choose data sources in operations for a variety of reasons, including the best match for their
circumstance in a disaster, availability or even ﬁnancial capability to acquire data. While
all three reasons appear rational, organisations should strive to select the ﬁrst one, which is
based on the best ﬁt for the type of disaster, stage of disaster, and location of the disaster. Data
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1033
cleansing and processing are key components of data analysis, accounting for 80% of overall
data analysis (Grifﬁth et al., 2019), therefore selecting an adequate data source is critical for
operational efﬁciency.
5.5 Theoretical underpinnings
The employment of theories is necessitated not just because of the intrinsic complexity of
the HDO ﬁeld, but also because of the context in which they occur (Galindo & Batta, 2013;
Oloruntoba et al., 2019). The largest portion of the research in the examined articles did not
apply any theories, and where they were used, there was no clear preference for one theory
over another, not to mention that no single theory appeared more than once. The smaller
percentageoftheoriesinresearchpublicationsmightbeattributedtotheimportanceofapplied
research in the HDO ﬁeld, where practitioners place a high value on practical relevance
(Oloruntoba et al., 2019). The limited utilisation of theory has been mentioned in Akter and
Wamba’s (2019) study, however, there appears to be a modest shift and improvement in
theory usage over the last couple of years. Despite recent advances, the theory development
in HDO is still in infancy, and there is a need and opportunity for researchers to integrate,
expand, or even contradict theories to progress knowledge and overcome gaps (Oloruntoba
et al., 2019).
Amaye et al. (2016) integrated organisational mindfulness processes with information
system design theory to develop a mindfulness-based information systems assessment frame-
work for making better decisions in emergency management circumstances. In an attempt
to explain resilience, Papadopoulos et al. (2017) employed the TOSE resilience theoretical
framework to investigate the use of big data in humanitarian supply chain networks for sus-
tainability. From empirically testing their theory, authors demonstrated that the exchange
of quality information in relief operations, public–private partnerships, and swift trust work
as enablers of resilience in the humanitarian supply chain. In their research, Dubey et al.
(2018) used a contingent resource-based view, in which the authors regarded big data
predictive analytics as a capability for organisations that might be beneﬁcial in visibility
creation and coordination building, and swift trust could affect this relationship. Prasad et al.
(2018) deployed resource dependence theory to investigate the interaction between non-
governmental organisations (NGOs) and supply-chain partners and how this relationship
affects the power dynamic in big data generation. According to the authors, partners in the
supply chain have the ability to compel NGOs to employ BDA in their actions, which was
empirically tested in three NGOs. Li et al. (2018), on the other hand, investigated popula-
tion behaviour during disaster using a sociological theory called social exchange theory. The
authors focused their investigation on people who were not impacted by the earthquake and if
their actions on social platforms varied from those who were affected. Further, the organisa-
tional information processing theory was formulated into the humanitarian setting by Dubey
et al. (2019) as an outcome. The authors empirically demonstrated that BDA capability has
a favourable effect on both collaborative performance and swift trust.
Jeble et al. (2019) developed a conceptual model by interlinking two theories, resource-
based view and social capital. In their work, authors developed a model based on big data
and predictive analytics as a capability with tangible, intangible, and human resources, as
well as social aspects such as trust, participation, social norms, and network to help improve
performance in humanitarian supply chains. The road and distribution network will not be
the same once the disaster strikes, because pre-disaster transportation models do not consider
disaster-related disruptions. The use of social support theory in Yan and Pedraza-Martinez
123

1034
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
(2019) was to explore what elements inspire SM users to respond to the relief organisations’
posts during disasters and what form of social support the user interactions with organisations
are connected with. The study by Warnier et al. (2020) utilises graph theory to investigate
how to reach disaster-affected populations through these networks. Their research examined
the transportation network using a variety of metrics, including centrality measurements,
dynamic network properties, and intrinsic network properties. The work of Susha (2020) built
a critical success factor (CSF) theoretical framework, found several elements for establishing
data collaboratives, and streamlined them to the most relevant factors.
5.6 Research methodologies
We also looked into the research methodologies used in the articles to understand where the
research is heading and what methods scholars prefer to study the ﬁeld. Figure 10 depicts
the distribution of articles into reviews, conceptual, and empirical and model papers. Though
this is not a mature ﬁeld, the amount of empirical and model research is predominant so
far. In this, qualitative research (interviews, case studies, ethnography) is commonly used to
study the activities engaged in the disaster response stage, but with a substantially lower ratio
of theories used. On the other hand, quantitative research utilising surveys is minimal but
studied events across various disaster phases, and the theory usage ratio is signiﬁcantly better
than qualitative studies. In addition, a few researchers employed mixed-method techniques
with a focus on supply chain and situational awareness across disaster phases.
Scholars who employed models conducted extensive research on the Asian region, with
half of them focusing on real-world disasters. Scholars developed models utilising MLP
neural network, Apache Spark, and Python to better understand the needs of those affected.
And relying exclusively on traditional approaches is no longer a viable option, thus scholars
have either shifted to completely new data types or combined traditional data with new
data types. In the segment of conceptual papers, scholars concentrated more on advocacy
style in discussing the necessity of BDA or how to approach it, and a few papers highlighted
difﬁcultiesoftechnologyutilisationintheHDO.However,theorydevelopmentorframework-
related work is less visible in this part. “Appendix 4” shows the conceptual papers as well
as the empirical & model studies. The review portion is discussed in length earlier in the
’review of reviews’ section.
Fig. 10 Research methods in
articles. Source: compilation by
author
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1035
6 Discussion
HDO management has progressed over the years in terms of establishing international mech-
anisms (UNDRR, 2015), assessing the needs for relief supplies (Apte et al., 2016), and even
improving community-based disaster management (Zhang et al., 2013). Unfortunately, these
developments have not been able to control the increasing number of fatalities, impacted pop-
ulations, or economic losses, which have risen substantially from 1980–1999 to 2000–2019.
Existing research that incorporates BDA into HDO focuses on disaster groups that are
signiﬁcant due to their frequency of occurrence, such as geophysical, hydrological, and
meteorological. Concentrating entirely on frequent disasters does not help the ﬁeld progress.
Climatological and biological disasters should not be overlooked simply because they are
less common than other disasters, and this does not imply that their impacts would be min-
imal. For instance, COVID-19, which began as an infectious disease has now evolved into
an ongoing pandemic and a signiﬁcant humanitarian crisis. If the early stages of an event are
neglected, a hazard can turn into a disaster and a humanitarian crisis. Mami Mizutori, the UN
Special Representative for Disaster Risk Reduction, has stated that “it is time to recognise
that there is no such thing as a natural disaster” (UNDRR, 2021) highlighting that we bear
a great deal of responsibility for resolving this, and our actions have to be decisive. Increas-
ing research in less-focused disaster categories alone will not sufﬁce. The disaster response
phase is heavily concentrated in the context of BDA and HDO that the combined research
of the other three phases mitigation, preparedness, and recovery makes up less than a third
of the response phase. Mitigation and preparedness strategies have been widely debated as
ways to lessen the negative effects of humanitarian crises and disasters (Asghar et al., 2006;
Oteng-Ababio, 2013). This has been proven to be effective in terms of time and cost sav-
ings in two of the UN organisations’ preparedness investments in three countries, according
to pilot research conducted by Boston Consulting Group (2015). If that is so evident, why
the research is not moving in this direction and investigate how BDA can bring additional
value? Because, traditional HDOs are reactive, with relief agencies waiting for a disaster to
unfold before initiating any humanitarian aid (Goldschmidt & Kumar, 2016). In 2020, UN
OCHA launched a pilot programme called anticipatory humanitarian action in Bangladesh,
using predictive analytics to intervene before the disaster (ﬂood) occurred. As a result, more
people were reached, aid became cheaper and faster, and the quality of assistance improved
(UN OCHA, 2021). To see this initiative through in a central humanitarian agency, a lot of
ﬁrsts had to happen, and such pilot projects at a larger scale won’t be able to drive smaller
organisations in the third sector. This could change if more research on pre-disaster phases
involving local aid organisations is conducted.
Each HDO is distinct in its own right, just as each humanitarian crisis or disaster is unique
in its own way. Every nation may not have the same emergency response systems, and the
impacts will vary. Similarly, the research performed on each region differs in the ﬁeld, with
a substantial level of research in one region and a limited level of research in the other.
However, the fact that Africa and South America were not represented in the 30 papers on
actual disaster cases in review is cause for concern. Disasters and humanitarian crises pose
a high to very high risk in Africa and a medium to high risk in South America (Thow et al.,
2020). More focus in these regions, especially on Africa, would be particularly valuable
because much of humanitarian work and the funding is directed here and the effective use of
these funds is essential. The data availability and variations of multiple data sources can be a
challenge in considering Africa and South America for research. Nonetheless, Humanitarian
Data Exchange (HDX) currently includes data grids for 27 locations, 19 of which are in
123

1036
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
these two areas (Centre for Humanitarian Data, 2021). SM platforms remain popular data
sources in examining the real case disasters and humanitarian crises (21 out of 30 articles),
which ﬁts well as long as privacy, ethical, and validation concerns are addressed. Though
SM cannot be a one-size-ﬁts-all solution for every data-related problem in HDO, The use of
an additional data source, such as authoritative data, would complement SM data and could
address validation concerns (Wang & Ye, 2018). A dialogue should be initiated to determine
which big data sources are more suited to each disaster group and why, and how this can
improve HDO efﬁciency. Based on existing research, a framework has been constructed in
the “Appendix 3” that demonstrates what led scholars to select the speciﬁc big data source
across several disaster groups. This was not possible in a few disaster groups due to a lack of
empirical investigation, and for that reason, authors’ views are included, which are indicated
in bold in the same table. The framework was created by combining existing taxonomies on
big data sources from UN Global Pulse (2012) and Qadir et al. (2016).
The scientiﬁc interest in the topic has increased greatly, and the year 2015 would be
considered as an inﬂection point, with research moving at a breakneck pace since then. As
a result, we opted to take stock of advancements in the ﬁeld, as the years 2019 and 2020
had witnessed a tremendous amount of work. Though this is a multidisciplinary topic, and
the work integration of multiple subject areas will only assist grow the ﬁeld further so that
practitioners could make better use of it, researchers from the management subject area can
increase their attention towards this topic to holistically enrich it.
6.1 Implications for practice
Some of the scholars highlighted how their study ﬁndings can be put into practice. Prasad
et al. (2018) argued that third sector organisations must identify the important data attributes,
as well as the change in expected results such as lead times and cost due to these data
attributes, prior to the intervention. Yan and Pedraza-Martinez (2019) discussed how the
usage of SM as a data source might be enhanced, and suggested that relief organisations use
SM platforms for actionable information reaching volunteers, and donors. Furthermore, the
use of SM as a big data source by public authorities should not be reactive, which necessitates
a cultural shift in these organisations, and Zamarreño-Aramendia et al. (2020) made multiple
recommendations on how SM can be used by the authorities. Fan et al. (2020) on the other
hand, emphasised that response managers should consider the size of the population while
employing SM to provide relief supplies to address spatial inequality. The work of Kontokosta
and Malik (2018) on how the use of multiple big data sources can be helpful to reach the
most affected people with a minimum capacity of resilience is noteworthy, and their REDI
index is aimed at community organisations.
6.2 Future research directions
Table 5 outlines possible directions for future studies from the standpoint of big data, through
which a single or various big data sources can be employed to perform the research.
In recent times, the most devastating disaster categories have been biological and cli-
matological, while being mostly overlooked by academics, with just a ﬂeeting reference in
the current literature. The biological disaster group might receive a lot of attention from
researchers in the coming years as a result of the COVID-19. Is it necessary to wait for a
signiﬁcant climate crisis to unfold before expanding this disaster group’s research capabili-
ties? Scholars need to bring attention to these understudied disaster categories in the natural
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1037
Table 5 Future directions to research in the ﬁeld of BDA and HDO. Source: compilation by author
Big data source
Research directions (RD)
Research questions
SM
Research and practice reports validation-related concerns on the substantial usage of
SM in HDO, which could result in operational inefﬁciencies. Though
comprehensive population representation of disaster impact as a whole is always a
challenge when using data, it is substantially higher with SM data. However, due to
the data characteristics of SM, it is unlikely to completely avoid using it in disaster
operations. Therefore, future research should investigate how validation-related
concerns of SM can be addressed by HDO
Can a combination of additional big data sources be used to supplement SM to
overcome validation related concerns?
Are there characteristics of SM data that can assist in distinguishing between
valid and in-valid data, both extracted from SM platforms? If yes, what
approach can be adopted to identify or detect those characteristics?
How can the geosocial challenge associated with population representative
sample in SM, particularly with Twitter, be overcome?
One of the repeatedly cited motivation for using SM as a data source in HDO is its
ease of availability in comparison to other data sources. However, research has to
investigate further to identify other reasons for frequent selection of SM data and
compare it with reasons for selecting or not selecting other data sources
What are the motivations (in addition to easy availability) for adoption of SM
as a data source in HDO?
What data sources can humanitarian organisations and disaster relief agencies
utilise outside SM and other than Twitter within SM?
What do humanitarian organisations stand to gain and lose by utilising outside
SM data sources and alternative sources other than Twitter within SM,
especially in relief operations?
Understanding public emotions during disasters and providing psychological relief is
equally important as providing physical relief supplies and rescuing impacted
individuals. SM has more information with the required data characteristics than any
other big data source, future research can analyse them to understand the role they
can play in delivering psychological relief and its impact on disaster response
What role can SM data play in providing psychological relief during the
pre-disaster phases (when there is less SM activity) and how?
What contributions could psychological relief data gathered from SM make to
disaster response?
Multiple sources
The nature of traditional HDO is reactive because donors want to see how severe a
humanitarian crisis or disaster is before allocating funds. Future research has to
investigate the use of predictive analytics in pre-disaster stages involving local relief
organisations. This study can contribute to further discussions about the use of BDA
in the early stages of a disaster and whether it provides any beneﬁts to the
stakeholders involved
What factors should be taken into account to build the predictive model using
multiple big data sources (authoritative data and data exhaust) even before a
disaster occurs?
To what extent may the application of BDA in the pre-disaster stages inﬂuence
the effectiveness of relief operations?
123

1038
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
Table 5 (continued)
Big data source
Research directions (RD)
Research questions
A considerable portion of academic research has investigated the HDO ﬁeld by
integrating multiple big data sources. In some circumstances, it was to supplement
other data sources, but in others, it was absolutely vital. Relying on a single data
source may become inadequate in the future. Research has to be undertaken to
understand which combinations of big data sources are suitable for which disaster
group
What challenges emerge when selecting speciﬁc big data sources for speciﬁc
disaster categories?
Is the selection of speciﬁc big data sources always situational or certain combi-
nations can be discovered based on the characteristics of disasters?
How to shortlist the best ﬁtting data sources for different disaster categories?
All sources
available
Each big data source may or may not possess all of the following characteristics:
volume, variety, veracity, and velocity. Moreover, having these four characteristics
in data may not be essential for some disasters or stages of disasters. The research
can be carried out to identify the data characteristic requirements for distinct
disasters and disaster stages, as well as to construct a framework to serve as a guide
What characteristics should big data sources possess across different stages of
HDO?
How do humanitarian organisations choose between one big data source over
the other?
How do organisations ﬁll the voids caused by the absence of data characteristics
in the available big data sources at a particular stage?
How is the use of BDA distinguished between slow-onset and sudden-onset
disasters?
When evaluating the BDA in HDO, the disaster response stage stood out because it
was the focus of the majority of the studies. Currently, the majority of disaster relief
activities take place during the response stage, which is attributed to high logistical
waste. A study is needed to further extend the claims of improved disaster response
with the application of BDA, specifying what improvements and how much can be
accomplished
What is the impact of BDA adoption on relief demand estimations?
What tangible improvements can be expected in disaster response relief opera-
tions as a result of employing BDA?
How can these tangible gains be measured in the context of disaster response?
We need to understand if the use of BDA in local and national NGOs humanitarian
operations in the global south assist them to be more cost-effective, less reliant on
the global north, and also keep up with the north counterparts in delivering the aid.
Research should examine the learnings from third-sector organisations that have
already implemented big data in their HDO
What are the enablers of BDA adoption in local and national NGO’s?
What are the similarities and differences in the adoption of BDA in local and
national NGOs when compared to that of international NGOs?
There seems to be little evidence or even conversation emerging from human-induced
disasters, where there is more scope for anticipatory humanitarian action. It is
essential to scientiﬁcally validate whether the BDA assists decision-makers in
making rational decisions in the event of man-made disasters
What role do NGOs play in anticipating civil conﬂicts, and how might the data
sources they possess enable them to engage in conﬂict prevention and resolu-
tion activities?
In the event of a man-made crisis, what actionable information can be gained
from situational awareness derived using BDA?
What contributions can the BDA make to keep online extremism from
escalating into ofﬂine violence?
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1039
disaster generic group, as well as level the research in the human-induced disaster generic
group to evaluate how BDA may or may not be effective in certain disaster groups. If the
knowledge gap between these two disaster generic groups widens further, this might lead
to inconsistent suppositions and rationales for BDA in the HDO spectrum. Grifﬁth et al.
(2019) consider humanitarian logistics to be an immature ﬁeld from an analytical standpoint
because the solutions developed from the research efforts may not be employed in actual
disaster settings due to computational burdens. This is something the academic community
should take into account, rather than only developing models, they should strive to provide
techniques, tools, and prospective solutions that can be used in real HDO settings.
7 Conclusion
At the start of this review, 168 million people required various forms of humanitarian relief,
by the end of the study, that ﬁgure had increased to 235 million. There is no time to waste, and
certainly no data to be lost. Organisations in this ﬁeld, such as NGOs, disaster management
agencies, and other humanitarian societies, need to focus on exploring the use of BDA with
the same tenacity as proﬁt-driven enterprises while keeping ethical issues in check. Fortu-
nately, academic research in this ﬁeld is growing at a rapid pace, with the years 2019 and 2020
accounting for more than half of all research. Although signiﬁcant progress has been made in
the management subject domain, the total contribution has been minimal. Because it is a mul-
tidisciplinary ﬁeld, various subject areas make important contributions. However, scholars
from the management domain need to engage more in the advancement of the ﬁeld. This study
aimed to tackle three research questions and the topic in a systematic and more integrated
manner. First, research on the application of BDA in HDO has substantially increased in
recent years, demonstrating academics’ interest and ability to investigate whether or not big
data could improve the way humanitarian and disaster management operate. Second, the state
of BDA application in the ﬁeld remains lopsided among different disaster locations, disaster
categories, and disaster stages, and research efforts were not utilised where they are more
critical. Putting the emphasis on responding to disasters whilst overlooking the other three
phases, mitigation, preparedness, and recovery will not lead to a comprehensive development
of the ﬁeld. Additionally, a heavy reliance on SM as a big data source has a factual, bias, and
ethical concerns that need to be addressed. Third, a lack of theoretical frameworks is visible
in the discipline; while this appears to be improving recently, the proportion of publications
with a theoretical viewpoint in total papers published each year is not encouraging. Despite
these signiﬁcant ﬁndings, the review also has a few limitations, which the authors are aware
of when undertaking the review.
7.1 Limitations
There are three key limitations: one in database selection, one in exclusion criteria that was
not part of the ﬁve-level search criteria, and one owing to the usage of SLR as a method.
Though the selection of database is rational in this study, if the additional resources and
time are available, web of science as an additional database could be incorporated for future
studies. This addition may introduce a few more publications to the evaluation process and
offer a much richer view of the subject. The second limitation is a Scopus-speciﬁc feature.
To ﬁlter the results, the database provides two options: ’Exclude’ and ’Limit to’. The subject
area is one of the options to ﬁlter the results in Scopus, but it does not offer a unique split
123

1040
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
for papers by using the ‘Limit to’ condition. Because Scopus allocates each paper to several
subject areas, it is not possible to get a unique number of articles listed in each subject area
by using the ’Limit to’ condition. The authors’ reasoning for utilising this condition instead
of ’Exclude’ is that the ’Exclude’ condition removes any publications with subject areas
indicated in the ’Limit to’ list (including subject areas in which the authors are particularly
interested but will be omitted because each article contains tags of multiple subject areas).
Furthermore, while the review was rigorous, it is possible that the author omitted a few studies
because they did not ﬁt the pre-deﬁned inclusion/exclusion criteria.
Funding Not applicable.
Availability of data and material Not applicable.
Code availability Not applicable.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest Not applicable.
Ethics approval Not applicable.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent for publication Yes.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1041
Appendix
Appendix 1: Final list of articles considered for review by publishing year in Scopus
Appendix 2: Real case disasters (by disaster group) employed in articles based
on the disaster region
123

1042
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
Appendix 3: The selection and rationale behind big data sources in each disaster group
Authoritative data
Crowdsourcing
data
Data exhaust
Online data
Sensor data
Biological
• As a result of the
ongoing biological
disaster, the use of
this data source is
likely to increase in
the future, and it can
be supplemented with
other data sources.
• This will help
identify needs
and resources,
and in
strengthening
community
resilience,
which is
currently
being
implemented
through
platforms like
Ushahidi.
• Helps in understanding the
characteristics, and dynamics
of the affected population.
• High level of spatial and
temporal resolution.
• Population
movements/mobility
information.
• Situational information.
• Can produce risk maps.
• This will be crucial in
analysing public
sentiment and behaviour.
Enables humanitarian
responders in tailoring
their approach to crisis
preparation and
response.
• Sensor data generation will
increase in the coming
years, so the potential in
biological disasters needs to
be explored beyond
tracking the population
activities during a disaster.
Climatological
• Damage predictions.
• To monitor
environmental
information such as
solar radiation,
temperature, wind
velocity, etc.
• Input from
citizens
reporting a ﬁre
occurrence.
• This is largely owned by
private entities; how entry
barriers can be
circumvented; and how
passive data such as
transactional data might be
used in drought and wildﬁre
disasters.
• Enhance situational
awareness.
• Visual contextual
information.
• Information channel to
citizens.
• Accessible to people.
• Identifying vegetation.
• Information on the area’s
slope and elevation.
• Fire detection in the forest.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1043
Authoritative data
Crowdsourcing
data
Data exhaust
Online data
Sensor data
Geophysical
• Although this data
(governmentproduced
land, population, and
shelter data) is not
often used on its own,
it is utilised in
conjunction with other
data sources.
• Developing
situational
awareness.
• Capable of
bridging
information
gaps.
• Logistics
network data.
• Participation
barriers are
kept to a
minimum.
• Infrastructure quality
post-disaster.
• Situational reports.
• Damage assessments.
• Population data.
• Information exchange
behaviour.
• Situational awareness.
• Public emotions.
• Community resilience.
• Supply chain resilience.
• Real-time data.
• Population distribution
(spatiotemporal).
Hydrological
• Precipitation levels.
• Rainfall forecasting.
• Identifying the
worst-affected areas.
• Historical information
on the impacted
population, and relief
supplies.
• The length of
the rainfall.
• Drainage
capacity issue.
• Intensity of
rainfall.
• Location of affected
individuals.
• Safety checks can be
monitored.
• Sentiment analysis.
• Disaster severity.
• Public safety.
• Location-routing problem.
• Situational awareness.
• Filling information gaps.
• Estimating relief supplies.
• Identifying logistics routes.
• Identifying severity of
disaster by area.
• Co-ordination.
Meteorological
• To measure
neighbourhood
boundaries.
• To obtain geographic
delineation.
• Damage and loss
statistics.
• The
ground-level
report is
critical in
sudden-onset
disasters to
better plan for
and respond to
crises, which is
not addressed
in previous
research.
• To identify the
neighbourhood-level resilience
capacity.
• Societal impacts.
• People needs: change in
priorities.
• Sociodemographic factors.
• Public behaviour.
• Geo-tagged human activities.
123

1044
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
Authoritative data
Crowdsourcing
data
Data exhaust
Online data
Sensor data
Human-Induced
• Personnel movements
and locations.
• Information ﬂows
related to missions.
• Actionable
information.
• Mobile CDRs, which are not
currently being used in this
context, will be able to
generate near realtime data
on the affected population.
Other passive data adds to a
better understanding of
population behaviour at
various stages of a crisis.
• Situation awareness.
• Identifying the location of
the event.
• Improvement in decision
support.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1045
Appendix 4: Methodological distribution of existing research
Conceptual
Empirical & model
Burns (2015), Sandvik et al., (2014, 2017), Read et al.
(2016), Swaminathan (2018), Givoni (2016),
Amaye et al. (2016), Burger et al. (2019), Fast
(2017), Talley (2020), Gregg Greenough and Nelson
(2019), Jeble et al. (2019), Tullis and Kar (2020),
Gerdes (2020), Iglesias et al. (2020)
Papadopoulos et al. (2017), Rogstadius et al.
(2013), Chae et al. (2014), Ragini et al. (2018),
Oﬂi et al. (2016), Dubey et al., (2018, 2019),
Landwehr et al. (2016), Mulder et al. (2016),
Prasad et al. (2018), Cinnamon et al. (2016), Li
et al. (2018), Kontokosta and Malik (2018),
Avvenuti et al., (2017, 2018), Tomaszewski and
MacEachren (2012), Kibanov et al. (2017),
Zhang et al., (2016, ), Amato et al. (2019),
Taylor (2016), Thom et al. (2016), Graham et al.
(2015), van den Homberg et al. (2018), Shan
et al. (2019), Sangameswar et al. (2017), Grifﬁth
et al. (2019), Yan and Pedraza-Martinez (2019),
Kankanamge et al. (2020), Bahir and Peled
(2016), Liu et al. (2020), Yang et al. (2019),
Sherchan et al. (2017), Khoury (2019), Wang
et al., (2019a, 2019b), Madianou (2019),
Chaudhuri and Bose (2020), Susha (2020),
Warnier et al. (2020), Nasim and Ramaraju
(2019), Puttinaovarat and Horkaew (2019), Fathi
et al. (2020), Abburu (2017), Nagendra et al.
(2020), Malawani et al. (2020), Wu et al. (2020),
Fan et al. (2020), Lin et al. (2020),
Zamarreño-Aramendia et al. (2020), Romascanu
et al. (2020), Qayum et al. (2020), Park et al.
(2020), Zhang et al., (2020a, 2020b), Jin and
Spence (2020), Akhtar et al. (2020), Bell et al.
(2021), Bag et al. (2021)
References
Abburu, S. (2017). GIS based interoperable platform for disaster data exchange using OGC standards and spa-
tial query. International Journal of Web Portals, 9(1), 29–51. https://doi.org/10.4018/IJWP.2017010103
Abd, F. M., & Manaa, M. E. (2020). Predicting heart diseases from large scale IoT data using a map-reduce
paradigm. Open Computer Science, 10(1), 422–430. https://doi.org/10.1515/comp-2020-0204
Aghaei Chadegani, A., Salehi, H., Md Yunus, M. M., Farhadi, H., Fooladi, M., Farhadi, M., & Ale Ebrahim,
N. (2013). A comparison between two main academic literature collections: Web of science and scopus
databases. Asian Social Science, 9(5), 18–26. https://doi.org/10.5539/ass.v9n5p18
Akhtar, P., Osburg, V. S., Kabra, G., Ullah, S., Shabbir, H., & Kumari, S. (2020). Coordination and collab-
oration for humanitarian operational excellence: Big data and modern information processing systems.
Production Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2020.1834126
Akter, S., & Wamba, S. F. (2019). Big data and disaster management: A systematic review and agenda for
future research. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 939–959. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-
017-2584-2
Altay, N., & Green, W. G., III. (2006). OR/MS research in disaster operations management. European Journal
of Operational Research, 175(1), 475–493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2005.05.016
Amato, F., Moscato, V., Picariello, A., & Sperli’ì, G. (2019). Extreme events management using multimedia
social networks. Future Generation Computer Systems, 94, 444–452. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.
2018.11.035
123

1046
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
Amaye, A., Neville, K., & Pope, A. (2016). BigPromises: Using organisational mindfulness to integrate big
data in emergency management decision making. Journal of Decision Systems, 25, 76–84. https://doi.
org/10.1080/12460125.2016.1187419
Apte, A., Gonçalves, P., & Yoho, K. (2016). Capabilities and competencies in humanitarian operations. Jour-
nal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 6(2), 240–258. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JHLSCM-04-2015-0020
Asghar,S.,Alahakoon,D.,&Churilov,L.(2006).Acomprehensiveconceptualmodelfordisastermanagement.
Journal of Humanitarian Assistance, 1360(0222), 1–15.
Avvenuti, M., Cresci, S., Del Vigna, F., Fagni, T., & Tesconi, M. (2018). CrisMap: A big data crisis mapping
system based on damage detection and geoparsing. Information Systems Frontiers, 20(5), 993–1011.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-018-9833-z
Avvenuti, M., Cresci, S., La Polla, M. N., Meletti, C., & Tesconi, M. (2017). Nowcasting of earthquake
consequences using big social data. IEEE Internet Computing, 21(6), 37–45. https://doi.org/10.1109/
MIC.2017.4180834 Article 8114618.
Bag, S., Gupta, S., & Wood, L. (2021). Big data analytics in sustainable humanitarian supply chain: Barriers
and their interactions. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03790-7
Bahir, E., & Peled, A. (2016). Geospatial extreme event establishing using social network’s text analytics.
GeoJournal, 81(3), 337–350. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-015-9622-x
Balti, H., Ben Abbes, A., Mellouli, N., Farah, I. R., Sang, Y., & Lamolle, M. (2020). A review of drought
monitoring with big data: Issues, methods, challenges and research directions. Ecological Informatics,
60, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2020.101136 Article 101136.
Becheikh, N., Landry, R., & Amara, N. (2006). Lessons from innovation empirical studies in the manufacturing
sector: A systematic review of the literature from 1993–2003. Technovation, 26(5–6), 644–664. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2005.06.016
Behl, A., Chavan, M., Jain, K., Sharma, I., Pereira, V. E., & Zhang, J. Z. (2021a). The role of organizational cul-
ture and voluntariness in the adoption of artiﬁcial intelligence for disaster relief operations. International
Journal of Manpower. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-03-2021-0178
Behl, A., & Dutta, P. (2019). Humanitarian supply chain management: A thematic literature review and future
directions of research. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 1001–1044. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-018-2806-2
Behl, A., & Dutta, P. (2020). Engaging donors on crowdfunding platform in Disaster Relief Operations (DRO)
using gamiﬁcation: A Civic Voluntary Model (CVM) approach. International Journal of Information
Management, 54, 102140.
Behl, A., Dutta, P., Luo, Z., & Sheorey, P. (2021b). Enabling artiﬁcial intelligence on a donation-based
crowdfunding platform: A theoretical approach. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-020-03906-z
Bell, D., Lycett, M., Marshan, A., & Monaghan, A. (2021). Exploring future challenges for big data in the
humanitarian domain. Journal of Business Research, 131, 453–468. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.
2020.09.035
Below, R., Wirtz, A., & Guha-Sapir, D. (2009). Disaster category classiﬁcation and peril terminology for
operational purposes. C. f. R. o. t. E. o. Disasters. Retrived from, https://www.cred.be/node/564
Berren, M. R., Beigel, A., & Ghertner, S. (1980). A typology for the classiﬁcation of disasters. Community
Mental Health Journal, 16(2), 103–111. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00778582
Booth, A., Papaioannou, D., & Sutton, A. (2012). Systematic approaches to a successful literature review.
SAGE.
Boston Consulting Group. (2015). UNICEF/WFP return on investment for emergency prepared-
ness study. Retrived from, https://www.wfp.org/publications/unicefwfp-return-investment-emergency-
preparedness-study
Burger, A., Oz, T., Kennedy, W. G., & Crooks, A. T. (2019). Computational social science of disasters:
Opportunities and challenges. Future Internet, 11(5), 1–31. https://doi.org/10.3390/ﬁ11050103 Article
103.
Burns, R. (2015). Rethinking big data in digital humanitarianism: Practices, epistemologies, and social rela-
tions. GeoJournal, 80(4), 477–490. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-014-9599-x
Centre for Humanitarian Data. (2019). Predictive analytics. Retrived from, https://centre.humdata.org/
predictive-analytics/
Centre for Humanitarian Data. (2021). The state of open humanitarian data 2021: Assessing data availability
across humanitarian crises. Retrived from, https://reliefweb.int/report/world/state-open-humanitarian-
data-2021-assessing-data-availability-across-humanitarian
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1047
Chae, J., Thom, D., Jang, Y., Kim, S., Ertl, T., & Ebert, D. S. (2014). Public behavior response analysis in
disaster events utilizing visual analytics of microblog data. Computers and Graphics (pergamon), 38(1),
51–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cag.2013.10.008
Chaudhuri, N., & Bose, I. (2020). Exploring the role of deep neural networks for post-disaster decision support.
Decision Support Systems, 130, 113234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2019.113234
Cinnamon, J., Jones, S. K., & Adger, W. N. (2016). Evidence and future potential of mobile phone data for
disease disaster management. Geoforum, 75, 253–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2016.07.019
Cumbane, S. P., & Gidófalvi, G. (2019). Review of big data and processing frameworks for disaster response
applications. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information, 8(9), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijgi8090387 Article 387.
Day, J. M., Melnyk, S. A., Larson, P. D., Davis, E. W., & Whybark, D. C. (2012). Humanitarian and disaster
relief supply chains: A matter of life and death. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 48(2), 21–36.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-493X.2012.03267.x
de Boer, J. (1990). Deﬁnition and classiﬁcation of disasters: Introduction of a disaster severity scale. Journal
of Emergency Medicine, 8(5), 591–595. https://doi.org/10.1016/0736-4679(90)90456-6
De Smet, H., Lagadec, P., & Leysen, J. (2012). Disasters out of the box: A new ballgame? Journal of Contin-
gencies Crisis Management, 20(3), 138–148. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5973.2012.00666.x
Denyer, D., & Tranﬁeld, D. (2009). Producing a systematic review.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Roubaud, D., Fosso Wamba, S., Giannakis, M., & Foropon, C.
(2019). Big data analytics and organizational culture as complements to swift trust and collaborative
performance in the humanitarian supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 210,
120–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.01.023
Dubey, R., Luo, Z., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Hazen, B. T., & Douglas, M. A. (2018). Big data and predictive
analytics in humanitarian supply chains: Enabling visibility and coordination in the presence of swift
trust. International Journal of Logistics Management, 29(2), 485–512. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-02-
2017-0039
El Baz, J., Laguir, I., & Stekelorum, R. (2019). Logistics and supply chain management research in Africa: A
systematic literature review and research agenda. International Journal of Logistics Management, 30(1),
8–38. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-09-2017-0242
Eshghi, K., & Larson, R. C. (2008). Disasters: Lessons from the past 105 years. Disaster Prevention and
Management: An International Journal, 17(1), 62–82. https://doi.org/10.1108/09653560810855883
Fan, C., Esparza, M., Dargin, J., Wu, F., Oztekin, B., & Mostafavi, A. (2020). Spatial biases in crowdsourced
data: Social media content attention concentrates on populous areas in disasters. Computers, Environment
and Urban Systems, 83 (101514), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2020.101514
Fan, C., Zhang, C., Yahja, A., & Mostafavi, A. (2021). Disaster City Digital Twin: A vision for integrating artiﬁ-
cial and human intelligence for disaster management. International Journal of Information Management,
56, 102049. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.102049
Fast, L. (2017). Diverging data: Exploring the epistemologies of data collection and use among those working
on and in conﬂict. International Peacekeeping, 24(5), 706–732. https://doi.org/10.1080/13533312.2017.
1383562
Fathi, R., Thom, D., Koch, S., Ertl, T., & Fiedrich, F. (2020). VOST: A case study in voluntary digital
participation for collaborative emergency management. Information Processing and Management, 57(4),
102174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2019.102174
Financial Tracking Service. (2021). Trends in response plan/appeal requirements. Retrived from, https://fts.
unocha.org/appeals/overview/2021
Galindo, G., & Batta, R. (2013). Review of recent developments in OR/MS research in disaster operations
management. European Journal of Operational Research, 230(2), 201–211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejor.2013.01.039
Gazi, T., & Gazis, A. (2020). Humanitarian aid in the age of CoviD-19: A review of big data crisis analytics and
the general data protection regulation. International Review of the Red Cross, 102(913), 75–94. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S1816383121000084
Gerdes, A. (2020). A moderate interpretation of group privacy illustrated by cases from disaster management.
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 28(4), 446–452. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-5973.
12336
Givoni, M. (2016). Between micro mappers and missing maps: Digital humanitarianism and the politics
of material participation in disaster response. Environment and Planning d: Society and Space, 34(6),
1025–1043. https://doi.org/10.1177/0263775816652899
Gligor, D. M., & Holcomb, M. C. (2012). Understanding the role of logistics capabilities in achieving supply
chain agility: A systematic literature review. Supply Chain Management, 17(4), 438–453. https://doi.org/
10.1108/13598541211246594
123

1048
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
Goldschmidt, K. H., & Kumar, S. (2016). Humanitarian operations and crisis/disaster management: A retro-
spective review of the literature and framework for development. International Journal of Disaster Risk
Reduction, 20, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2016.10.001
Goswami, S., Chakraborty, S., Ghosh, S., Chakrabarti, A., & Chakraborty, B. (2018). A review on application
of data mining techniques to combat natural disasters. Ain Shams Engineering Journal, 9(3), 365–378.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asej.2016.01.012
Graham, C., Thompson, C., Wolcott, M., Pollack, J., & Tran, M. (2015). A guide to social media emergency
management analytics: Understanding its place through Typhoon Haiyan tweets. Statistical Journal of
the IAOS, 31(2), 227–236. https://doi.org/10.3233/sji-150893
Gray, R. A. (1982). Disasters: Natural, nuclear, and classiﬁcatory. RQ, 22(1), 42–47.
Greenough, P. G., & Nelson, E. L. (2019). Beyond mapping: A case for geospatial analytics in humanitarian
health. Conﬂict and Health, 13(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13031-019-0234-9 Article 50.
Grifﬁth, D. A., Boehmke, B., Bradley, R. V., Hazen, B. T., & Johnson, A. W. (2019). Embedded analyt-
ics: Improving decision support for humanitarian logistics operations. Annals of Operations Research,
283(1–2), 247–265. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2607-z
Guha-Sapir, D., & Below, R. (2002). Quality and accuracy of disaster data: A comparative analyse of 3 global
data sets. Retrived from, https://www.cred.be/node/288
Guha-Sapir, D. (2008). Disaster data: A balanced perspective (Vol. 13). CRED Crunch.
Gupta, S., Altay, N., & Luo, Z. (2019). Big data in humanitarian supply chain management: A review and
further research directions. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 1153–1173. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10479-017-2671-4
Iglesias,C.A.,Favenza,A.,&Carrera,Á.(2020).Abigdatareferencearchitectureforemergencymanagement.
Information (switzerland), 11(12), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.3390/info11120569 Article 569.
IRDR. (2014). Peril classiﬁcation and hazard glossary. Retrived from, https://www.irdrinternational.org/
knowledge_pool/publications/173
Jeble, S., Kumari, S., Venkatesh, V. G., & Singh, M. (2019). Inﬂuence of big data and predictive analytics and
social capital on performance of humanitarian supply chain: Developing framework and future research
directions. Benchmarking, 27(2), 606–633. https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-03-2019-0102
Jin, X., & Spence, P. R. (2020). Understanding crisis communication on social media with CERC: Topic model
analysis of tweets about Hurricane Maria. Journal of Risk Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/13669877.
2020.1848901
Kankanamge, N., Yigitcanlar, T., Goonetilleke, A., & Kamruzzaman, M. (2020). Determining disaster severity
through social media analysis: Testing the methodology with South East Queensland Flood tweets. Inter-
national Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 42, 101360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2019.101360
Article 101360.
Khan, A., Gupta, S., & Gupta, S. K. (2020). Multi-hazard disaster studies: Monitoring, detection, recovery, and
management, based on emerging technologies and optimal techniques. International Journal of Disaster
Risk Reduction, 47, 101642. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101642
Khoury, B. J. (2019). Logistics data analytics alongside voucher programme phases. Journal of Humanitarian
Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 9(3), 332–351. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-06-2018-
0050
Kibanov, M., Stumme, G., Amin, I., & Lee, J. G. (2017). Mining social media to inform peatland ﬁre and
haze disaster management. Social Network Analysis and Mining, 7(1), 579–600. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13278-017-0446-1 Article 30.
Knox Clarke, P., & Campbell, L. (2020). Decision-making at the sharp end: A survey of literature related to
decision-making in humanitarian contexts. Journal of International Humanitarian Action, 5, 1–14.
Kontokosta, C. E., & Malik, A. (2018). The Resilience to Emergencies and Disasters Index: Applying big
data to benchmark and validate neighborhood resilience capacity. Sustainable Cities and Society, 36,
272–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2017.10.025
Kwapong Baffoe, B. O., & Luo, W. (2020). Humanitarian relief sustainability: A framework of humanitarian
logistics digital business ecosystem. Transportation Research Procedia, 48, 363–387.
Lacourt, M., & Radosta, M. (2019). Strength in numbers—Towards a more efﬁcient humanitarian aid: Pooling
logistics resources. Retrived from, https://reliefweb.int/report/world/strength-numbers-towards-more-
efﬁcient-humanitarian-aid-pooling-logistics-resources
Landwehr, P. M., Wei, W., Kowalchuck, M., & Carley, K. M. (2016). Using tweets to support disaster planning,
warning and response. Safety Science, 90, 33–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2016.04.012
Li, L., Zhang, Q., Tian, J., & Wang, H. (2018). Characterizing information propagation patterns in emergencies:
A case study with Yiliang Earthquake. International Journal of Information Management, 38(1), 34–41.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.08.008
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1049
Light, R. J., & Pillemer, D. B. (1984). Summing up. The science of reviewing research. Harvard University
Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvk12px9
Lin, A., Wu, H., Liang, G., Cardenas-Tristan, A., Wu, X., Zhao, C., & Li, D. (2020). A big data-driven dynamic
estimation model of relief supplies demand in urban ﬂood disaster. International Journal of Disaster Risk
Reduction, 49, 101682. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101682
Liu, Z., Du, Y., Yi, J., Liang, F., Ma, T., & Pei, T. (2020). Quantitative estimates of collective geo-tagged
human activities in response to typhoon Hato using location-aware big data. International Journal of
Digital Earth, 13(9), 1072–1092. https://doi.org/10.1080/17538947.2019.1645894
Luki´c, T., Gavrilov, M. B., Markovi´c, S. B., Komac, B., Zorn, M., Mladan, D., Dordevi´c, J., Milanovi´c,
M., Vasiljevi´c, D. A., Vujiˇci´c, M. D., Kuzmanovi´c, B., & Prentovi´c, R. (2013). Classiﬁcation of natural
disasters between the legislation and application: Experience of the Republic of Serbia. Acta Geographica
Slovenica, 53(SPL.1), 149–164. https://doi.org/10.3986/AGS53301
Madianou, M. (2019). Technocolonialism: Digital innovation and data practices in the humanitarian response
to refugee crises. Social Media and Society, 5(3), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305119863146
Malawani, A. D., Nurmandi, A., Purnomo, E. P., & Rahman, T. (2020). Social media in aid of post disaster
management. Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy, 14(2), 237–260. https://doi.org/
10.1108/TG-09-2019-0088
Mann, L. (2018). Left to other peoples’ devices? A political economy perspective on the Big Data revolution
in development. Development and Change, 49(1), 3–36. https://doi.org/10.1111/dech.12347
Meier, P. (2015). Digital humanitarians: How big data is changing the face of humanitarian response. Taylor
and Francis. https://doi.org/10.1201/b18023
Mulder, F., Ferguson, J., Groenewegen, P., Boersma, K., & Wolbers, J. (2016). Questioning Big Data: Crowd-
sourcing crisis data towards an inclusive humanitarian response. Big Data and Society, 3(2), 1–13. https://
doi.org/10.1177/2053951716662054
Nagendra, N. P., Narayanamurthy, G., & Moser, R. (2020). Management of humanitarian relief operations
using satellite big data analytics: The case of Kerala ﬂoods. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10479-020-03593-w
Nasim, M., & Ramaraju, G. V. (2019). Using passive anonymous mobile positioning data & aggregation ana-
lytics to enhance tool-sets for ﬂood relief agencies. International Journal of Engineering and Advanced
Technology, 8(5), 657–663.
Oﬂi, F., Meier, P., Imran, M., Castillo, C., Tuia, D., Rey, N., Briant, J., Millet, P., Reinhard, F., Parkan, M., &
Joost, S. (2016). Combining human computing and machine learning to make sense of big (aerial) data
for disaster response. Big Data, 4(1), 47–59. https://doi.org/10.1089/big.2014.0064
Oloruntoba, R., Hossain, G. F., & Wagner, B. (2019). Theory in humanitarian operations research. Annals of
Operations Research, 283(1–2), 543–560. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2378-y
Oteng-Ababio, M. (2013). ‘Prevention is better than cure’: Assessing Ghana’s preparedness (capacity) for
disaster management. Jàmbá: Journal of Disaster Risk Studies, 5(2), 1–11.
Papadopoulos, T., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Altay, N., Childe, S. J., & Fosso-Wamba, S. (2017). The
role of Big Data in explaining disaster resilience in supply chains for sustainability. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 142, 1108–1118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.03.059
Park, M., Jung, D., Lee, S., & Park, S. (2020). Heatwave damage prediction using random forest model in
Korea. Applied Sciences (switzerland), 10(22), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10228237 Article 8237.
Prasad, S., Zakaria, R., & Altay, N. (2018). Big data in humanitarian supply chain networks: A resource
dependence perspective. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1–2), 383–413. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-016-2280-7
Puttinaovarat, S., & Horkaew, P. (2019). Application programming interface for ﬂood forecasting from geospa-
tial big data and crowdsourcing data. International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies, 13(11),
137–156. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.v13i11.11237
Qadir, J., Ali, A., ur Rasool, R., Zwitter, A., Sathiaseelan, A., & Crowcroft, J. (2016). Crisis analytics: Big
data-driven crisis response. Journal of International Humanitarian Action, 1(1), 1–21.
Qayum, A., Ahmad, F., Arya, R., & Singh, R. K. (2020). Predictive modeling of forest ﬁre using geospatial
tools and strategic allocation of resources: EForestFire. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk
Assessment, 34(12), 2259–2275. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00477-020-01872-3
Ragini, J. R., Anand, P. M. R., & Bhaskar, V. (2018). Big data analytics for disaster response and recovery
through sentiment analysis. International Journal of Information Management, 42, 13–24. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.05.004
Read, R., Taithe, B., & Mac Ginty, R. (2016). Data hubris? Humanitarian information systems and the mirage of
technology. Third World Quarterly, 37(8), 1314–1331. https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2015.1136208
ReliefWeb. (2008). Glossary of humanitarian terms. Retrived from, https://reliefweb.int/report/world/
reliefweb-glossary-humanitarian-terms-enko
123

1050
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
Rogstadius, J., Vukovic, M., Teixeira, C. A., Kostakos, V., Karapanos, E., & Laredo, J. A. (2013). CrisisTracker:
Crowdsourced social media curation for disaster awareness. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
57(5), 4:1-4:13. https://doi.org/10.1147/JRD.2013.2260692 Article 6601695.
Romascanu, A., Ker, H., Sieber, R., Greenidge, S., Lumley, S., Bush, D., Morgan, S., Zhao, R., & Brunila, M.
(2020). Using deep learning and social network analysis to understand and manage extreme ﬂooding.
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 28(3), 251–261. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-5973.
12311
Sandvik, K. B., Gabrielsen Jumbert, M., Karlsrud, J., & Kaufmann, M. (2014). Humanitarian technology: A
critical research agenda. International Review of the Red Cross, 96(893), 219–242. https://doi.org/10.
1017/S1816383114000344
Sandvik, K. B., Jacobsen, K. L., & McDonald, S. M. (2017). Do no harm: A taxonomy of the challenges of
humanitarian experimentation. International Review of the Red Cross, 99(904), 319–344. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S181638311700042X
Sangameswar, M. V., Nagabhushana Rao, M., & Satyanarayana, S. (2017). An algorithm for identiﬁcation
of natural disaster affected area. Journal of Big Data, 4(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-017-
0096-1 Article 39.
Sarker, M. N. I., Peng, Y., Yiran, C., & Shouse, R. C. (2020a). Disaster resilience through big data: Way to
environmental sustainability. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 51, 101769. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101769
Sarker, M. N. I., Yang, B., Lv, Y., Huq, M. E., & Kamruzzaman, M. M. (2020b). Climate change adaptation
and resilience through big data. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
11(3), 533–539. https://doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2020.0110368
Shah, S. A., Seker, D. Z., Hameed, S., & Draheim, D. (2019). The rising role of big data analytics and IoT in
disaster management: Recent advances, taxonomy and prospects. IEEE Access, 7, 54595–54614. https://
doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2913340 Article 8698814.
Shaluf, I. M. (2007a). Disaster types. Disaster Prevention and Management: An International Journal, 16(5),
704–717. https://doi.org/10.1108/09653560710837019
Shaluf, I. M. (2007b). An overview on disasters. Disaster Prevention and Management: An International
Journal, 16(5), 687–703. https://doi.org/10.1108/09653560710837000
Shaluf, I. M., Ahmadun, F. R., & Said, A. M. (2001). A review of disaster and crisis. Disaster Prevention and
Management: An International Journal, 12(1), 24–32. https://doi.org/10.1108/09653560310463829
Shan, S., Zhao, F., Wei, Y., & Liu, M. (2019). Disaster management 2.0: A real-time disaster damage assessment
model based on mobile social media data—A case study of Weibo (Chinese Twitter). Safety Science,
115, 393–413. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2019.02.029
Sharma, P., & Joshi, A. (2019). Challenges of using big data for humanitarian relief: Lessons from the literature.
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 10(4), 423–446. https://doi.org/10.
1108/JHLSCM-05-2018-0031
Sherchan, W., Pervin, S., Butler, C. J., Lai, J. C., Ghahremanlou, L., & Han, B. (2017). Harnessing Twitter and
Instagram for disaster management. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 61(6), 81–812. https://
doi.org/10.1147/JRD.2017.2729238 Article 8167723.
Snyder, H. (2019). Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guidelines. Journal of
Business Research, 104, 333–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.07.039
Song, X., Zhang, H., Akerkar, R. A., Huang, H., Guo, S., Zhong, L., Ji, Y., Opdahl, A. L., Purohit, H., Skupin,
A., Pottathil, A., & Culotta, A. (2020). Big data and emergency management: Concepts, methodologies,
and applications. IEEE Transactions on Big Data. https://doi.org/10.1109/TBDATA.2020.2972871
Susha, I. (2020). Establishing and implementing data collaborations for public good: A critical factor analysis
to scale up the practice. Information Polity, 25(1), 3–24. https://doi.org/10.3233/IP-180117
Swaminathan,J.M.(2018).Bigdataanalyticsforrapid,impactful,sustained,andefﬁcient(RISE)humanitarian
operations. Production and Operations Management, 27(9), 1696–1700. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.
12840
Swiss Re. (2021). Natural catastrophes in 2020. S. R. M. Ltd. Retrived from, https://www.swissre.com/
institute/research/sigma-research/sigma-2021-01.html
Tachizawa, E. M., & Wong, C. Y. (2014). Towards a theory of multi-tier sustainable supply chains: A systematic
literature review. Supply Chain Management, 19, 643–653. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-02-2014-0070
Talley, J. W. (2020). Disaster management in the digital age. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
64(1–2), 1:1-1:5. https://doi.org/10.1147/JRD.2019.2954412 Article 8907407.
Taylor, A. J. (1990). A pattern of disasters and victims. Disasters, 14(4), 291–300. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1467-7717.1990.tb01074.x
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
1051
Taylor, L. (2016). The ethics of big data as a public good: Which public? Whose good? Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society a: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 374(2083), 20160126.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2016.0126
Thom, D., Krüger, R., & Ertl, T. (2016). Can twitter save lives? A broad-scale study on visual social media ana-
lytics for public safety. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 22(7), 1816–1829.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2015.2511733 Article 7364284.
Thow, A., Vernaccini, L., Poljansek, K., & Marin Ferrer, M. (2020). INFORM report 2020: Shared evidence
for managing crisis and disaster. P. O. o. t. E. Union. Retrived from, https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.
eu/repository/handle/JRC120275
Tomaszewski,B.,&MacEachren,A.M.(2012).Geovisualanalyticstosupportcrisismanagement:Information
foraging for geo-historical context. Information Visualization, 11(4), 339–359. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1473871612456122
Tranﬁeld, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed
management knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of Management, 14(3), 207–222.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.00375
Tullis, J. A., & Kar, B. (2020). Where is the provenance? Ethical replicability and reproducibility in GIScience
and its critical applications. Annals of the American Association of Geographers. https://doi.org/10.1080/
24694452.2020.1806029
UN OCHA. (2010). OCHA on message: Humanitarian principles. Retrived from, https://www.unocha.org/
node/897
UN OCHA. (2020). Global humanitarian overview 2021. Retrived from, https://reliefweb.int/report/world/
global-humanitarian-overview-2021-enarfres
UN OCHA. (2021). Acting before the ﬂood an anticipatory humanitarian action pilot in Bangladesh.
Retrived from, https://reliefweb.int/report/bangladesh/acting-ﬂood-anticipatory-humanitarian-action-
pilot-bangladesh-march-2021
UNGlobalPulse.(2012).Bigdatafordevelopment:Challengesandopportunities.Retrivedfrom,https://www.
unglobalpulse.org/document/big-data-for-development-opportunities-and-challenges-white-paper/
UNDRR. (2015). Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction 2015–2030. Retrived from, https://www.undrr.
org/publication/sendai-framework-disaster-risk-reduction-2015-2030
UNDRR. (2020a). Hazard deﬁnition and classiﬁcation review. Retrived from, https://www.undrr.org/
publication/hazard-deﬁnition-and-classiﬁcation-review
UNDRR. (2020b). Human cost of disasters an overview of the last 20 years 2000–2019.
UNDRR. (2021). Sendai framework 6th anniversary: Time to recognize there is no such thing as a natural
disaster - we’re doing it to ourselves. Retrived from, https://www.undrr.org/news/sendai-framework-6th-
anniversary-time-recognize-there-no-such-thing-natural-disaster-were
van den Homberg, M., Monné, R., & Spruit, M. (2018). Bridging the information gap of disaster responders
by optimizing data selection using cost and quality. Computers and Geosciences, 120, 60–72. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2018.06.002
Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2006). Blackett memorial lecture humanitarian aid logistics: Supply chain manage-
ment in high gear. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 57(5), 475–489. https://doi.org/10.1057/
palgrave.jors.2602125
Wang, J., Meyer, M. C., Wu, Y., & Wang, Y. (2019a). Maximum data-resolution efﬁciency for fog-computing
supported spatial big data processing in disaster scenarios. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, 30(8), 1826–1842. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2019.2896143 Article 8630038.
Wang, J., Sato, K., Guo, S., Chen, W., & Wu, J. (2019b). Big data processing with minimal delay and guaranteed
data resolution in disaster areas. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 68(4), 3833–3842. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2018.2889094 Article 8585069.
Wang, J., Wu, Y., Yen, N., Guo, S., & Cheng, Z. (2016). Big data analytics for emergency communication
networks: A survey. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, 18(3), 1758–1778. https://doi.org/10.
1109/COMST.2016.2540004 Article 7429689.
Wang, Z., & Ye, X. (2018). Social media analytics for natural disaster management. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 32(1), 49–72. https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2017.1367003
Warnier, M., Alkema, V., Comes, T., & Van de Walle, B. (2020). Humanitarian access, interrupted: Dynamic
near real-time network analytics and mapping for reaching communities in disaster-affected countries.
Or Spectrum, 42(3), 815–834. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00291-020-00582-0
Webster, J., & Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a literature review.
MIS Quarterly: Management Information Systems, 26(2), xiii–xxiii.
Wirtz, A., Kron, W., Löw, P., & Steuer, M. (2014). The need for data: Natural disasters and the challenges of
database management. Natural Hazards, 70(1), 135–157. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-012-0312-4
123

1052
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 335:1015–1052
Wu, X., Cao, Y., Xiao, Y., & Guo, J. (2020). Finding of urban rainstorm and waterlogging disasters based
on microblogging data and the location-routing problem model of urban emergency logistics. Annals of
Operations Research, 290(1–2), 865–896. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-2904-1
Yan, L., & Pedraza-Martinez, A. J. (2019). Social media for disaster management: Operational value of the
social conversation. Production and Operations Management, 28(10), 2514–2532. https://doi.org/10.
1111/poms.13064
Yang, T., Xie, J., Li, G., Mou, N., Li, Z., Tian, C., & Zhao, J. (2019). Social media big data mining and
spatio-temporal analysis on public emotions for disaster mitigation. ISPRS International Journal of
Geo-Information, 8(1), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi8010029 Article 29.
Yu, M., Yang, C., & Li, Y. (2018). Big data in natural disaster management: A review. Geosciences (switzer-
land), 8(5), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.3390/geosciences8050165 Article 165.
Zamarreño-Aramendia, G., Cristòfol, F. J., De-San-eugenio-vela, J., & Ginesta, X. (2020). Social-media
analysis for disaster prevention: Forest ﬁre in artenara and valleseco, Canary Islands. Journal of Open
Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity, 6(4), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.3390/joitmc6040169
Article 169.
Zhang, C., Yao, W., Yang, Y., Huang, R., & Mostafavi, A. (2020a). Semiautomated social media analytics
for sensing societal impacts due to community disruptions during disasters. Computer-Aided Civil and
Infrastructure Engineering, 35(12), 1331–1348. https://doi.org/10.1111/mice.12576
Zhang, J., Ahlbrand, B., Malik, A., Chae, J., Min, Z., Ko, S., & Ebert, D. S. (2016). A visual analytics
framework for microblog data analysis at multiple scales of aggregation. Computer Graphics Forum,
35(3), 441–450. https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12920
Zhang, X., Yi, L., & Zhao, D. (2013). Community-based disaster management: A review of progress in China.
Natural Hazards, 65(3), 2215–2239. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-012-0471-3
Zhang, X., Yu, J., Chen, Y., Wen, J., Chen, J., & Yin, Z. (2020b). Supply-demand analysis of urban emergency
shelters based on spatiotemporal population estimation. International Journal of Disaster Risk Science,
11(4), 519–537. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13753-020-00284-9
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123