TITLE: Impact of artificial intelligence adoption on online returns policies
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03602-y
---

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03602-y
S.I. : ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN OPERATIONS
MANAGEMENT
Impact of artiﬁcial intelligence adoption on online returns
policies
Guangyong Yang1 · Guojun Ji1 · Kim Hua Tan2
Published online: 10 April 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
The shift to e-commerce has led to an astonishing increase in online sales for retailers.
However, the number of returns made on online purchases is also increasing and have a
profound impact on retailers’ operations and proﬁt. Hence, retailers need to balance between
minimizing and allowing product returns. This study examines an ofﬂine showroom versus
an artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) online virtual-reality webroom and how the settings affect
customers’ purchase and retailers’ return decisions. A case study is used to illustrate the AI
application. Our results show that adopting artiﬁcial intelligence helps sellers to make better
returns policies, maximize reselling returns, and reduce the risks of leftovers and shortages.
Our ﬁndings unlock the potential of artiﬁcial intelligence applications in retail operations and
should interest practitioners and researchers in online retailing, especially those concerned
with online returns policies and the consumer personalized service experience.
Keywords Artiﬁcial intelligence · Returns policies · Ofﬂine showroom · Fit · Exchange
1 Introduction
Concerning products sold online that have nondigital attributes, the most signiﬁcant downside
is that consumers’ cognition comes from looking at pictures rather than the actual items. For
example, apparel products sold online are affected by the size differences, which increase
product uncertainty regarding the ﬁt, and the color differences between the items and the
B Kim Hua Tan
kim.tan@nottingham.ac.uk
Guangyong Yang
gyyang@xmu.edu.cn
Guojun Ji
jiking@xmu.edu.cn
1
School of Management, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China
2
Nottingham University Business School, Jubilee Campus, Nottingham, UK
123

704
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
pictures. To induce apprehensive consumers to make a purchase, especially under no reason
returns policy and competitive pressure, many online retailers/sellers may offer full (or nearly
full) refunds. Examples of sellers providing full refunds include Zappos.com and Saks Fifth
Avenue (Altug and Aydinliyim 2016). It is worth noting, however, that returning purchased
products is costly to both consumers and sellers. Even though the consumer returning a
product can make a full refund claim, she must pay the return cost. For example, purchasing
return and exchange freight insurance has becoming a necessary guarantee for consumers
to buy online (Chen 2019). In addition, consumers may incur packaging and shipping costs
associated with returning an item. It has been reported that approximately 72% of Chinese
consumers hope to purchase online and return ofﬂine, which reveals that consumers with high
return cost may be reluctant to purchase products online (McKinsey 2015). However, con-
sumer returns substantially aggravate online operation and erode sellers’ proﬁts, especially
those returns that have no defects. Sprague et al. (2008) report that about 95% of returns have
no defects. Furthermore, Gartner’s survey of 300 retailers around the world showed that more
than 52% of returns can only be salvaged (Overseas Chinese News Network 2015). All this
shows that the depreciation of returns over time may further lower the proﬁt margin the seller
can expect. Consequently, ﬁnding the right balance between minimizing returns and provid-
ing full refunds is extremely challenging. This paper focuses on two types of operational
innovation adopted by online sellers: an ofﬂine showroom focusing on providing a physi-
cal experience, and artiﬁcial intelligence focusing on offering a personalized virtual-reality
experience.
As commonly practiced, creating an ofﬂine showroom is widely deemed a crucial measure
in reducing returns by preventing consumers from purchasing products that they realize
afterwardstheydislike.Forexample,theleadingonline-ﬁrstWarbyParkercreatesshowrooms
in some markets, and returns in the trading areas of the showrooms decrease by 1% (Bell et al.
2018). As reported in Pauwels and Neslinb (2015), adding an ofﬂine channel can increase the
total revenue of omnichannel sellers by nearly 20%. Furthermore, a survey of 479 managers
conducted by RetailWire revealed that the consumer experience in the showroom is the most
important ingredient of consumer satisfaction, ahead of product assortment and promotion
(Iyer and Kuksov 2012).
Aside from ofﬂine showrooms, the adoption of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is currently
emerging to assist online consumers when purchasing products. This paper examines three
types of artiﬁcial intelligence technologies: virtual ﬁtting technologies, chatbots, and intelli-
gent recommendation agents.
(1) Artiﬁcial intelligence virtual ﬁtting technologies.
To lower the matching uncertainty of online clothing sales, previous and existing virtual ﬁtting
technologies focus on letting consumers ascertain the effectiveness of matching different
clothing items. However, artiﬁcial intelligence virtual ﬁtting technology, which uses data and
algorithms, helps sellers quickly and accurately proﬁle the consumer’s clothing preferences,
and recommend the style and products that consumers are actually interested in, which can
be regarded as matching the artiﬁcial intelligence recommendation. For example, the leading
online seller Haomaiyi develops virtual ﬁtting technologies to provide each consumer with
an exclusive artiﬁcial intelligence fashion consultant, which helps to convert 12.4% of ﬁtting
consumers into purchasers and reduce the return rate of some brands by about 30% (You
2017). Other examples include Stitch Fix, an online personal styling service that relies on
artiﬁcial intelligence to accurately unlock consumer preferences as well as product trends, and
to specialize in clothing matching subscription sales; and Modiface, which adopts artiﬁcial
intelligence to provide a virtual trial experience for Sephora (Hua Ying capital 2018) and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
705
online retail that provides virtual ﬁtting-room technologies to increase the probability of
purchases and reduce the probability of returns (Gallino and Moreno 2018).
(2) Artiﬁcial intelligence chatbots.
Artiﬁcial intelligence chatbots that efﬁciently scan databases using sophisticated natural lan-
guage processing tools are being adopted to enhance consumer engagement, and provide a
higher quality of services and product ﬁt information (Cohen 2017). In addition, AI chat-
bots are as effective as proﬁcient workers and four times more effective than inexperienced
workers, which may enhance consumer purchases (Luo et al. 2019).
(3) Intelligent recommendation agents.
Using data-driven recommendation algorithms can result in a nearly 14% increase in proﬁts
for an online retailer (Ettl et al. 2019). In addition, employing intelligent recommendation
agents with collaborative ﬁltering can effectively recommend better ﬁt products (Alexan-
drescuetal.2017).Althoughtheseartiﬁcialintelligenceapplicationscannotentirelyeliminate
ﬁt uncertainty caused by nondigital attributes of products, creating an ofﬂine showroom
allows consumers to ascertain product ﬁt information prior to making a purchase. However,
the consumer must incur ofﬂine visiting costs, which may reduce the customer’s willingness
to engage in this experience. An artiﬁcial intelligence virtual-reality experience may greatly
lower rather than eliminate product ﬁt uncertainty, and the consumer can have experience
from online channels without having to pay, or with having a lower cost; in other words,
adopting artiﬁcial intelligence not only increases customer attachment to the product but also
rather objectively recommends better-matching exchanges. In general, both operation inno-
vations—ofﬂine showrooms and virtual-reality showrooms—generally provide contrasting
experiences.
Furthermore, existing work that mainly empirically and experimentally examines how AI
adoption affects online returns policies pays little attention to reselling returns and demand
uncertainty, yet as mentioned above, reselling returns substantially complicates the opera-
tion and erodes margins, while demand uncertainty may amplify the risk of product leftover
and shortage. Consequently, incorporating these considerations is the focus of this paper.
Speciﬁcally, we focus on comprehensively balancing artiﬁcial intelligence adoption through
a personalized virtual-reality experience that may lower product ﬁt uncertainty, after-sales
services that accurately and objectively recommend horizontally and vertically differenti-
ated exchanges, initial stocking decision for proﬁtability, and tractability for practical online
operation. We ﬁrst adopt an analytic newsvendor model to examine the effects of artiﬁcial
intelligence adoption on online returns polices, then use the data from Stitch Fix to comple-
ment the analytical model, thus better guiding the recommended exchanges and coping with
the challenges of fairness of consumer’s purchase caused by big data killing events (that is,
the seller sets prices higher for a product when consumer browsing and purchasing frequency
increases).
Our results have substantial implications for online sellers. First, if the cost of consumer
returns is determined to be relatively low, the consumer prefers to make an uninformed
purchase directly; thus, the seller should adopt artiﬁcial intelligence to enhance a virtual-
reality experience that substantially lowers returns. If the consumer return cost is high, we
caution that lowering consumer return costs prompts more consumers to make uninformed
purchases directly, which leads to an increasing number of returns. Second, compared with
not allowing returns, if the level of lessening misﬁt with an initial purchase or objectively
recommending an exchange with a subsequent return is relatively high, adopting artiﬁcial
intelligence can beneﬁt the seller. Third, compared with a physical showroom instead of not
123

706
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
allowing returns, adopting artiﬁcial intelligence expands the range of relevant parameters.
Last, artiﬁcial intelligence should accurately recommend vertically differentiated exchanges
with relatively high marginal proﬁt.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We provide a review of related literature in
Sect. 2. We present the model formulation and study providing full refunds only in Sect. 3.
We then study providing an ofﬂine showroom in Sect. 4. We examine the value of artiﬁcial
intelligence adoption in Sect. 5. Managerial implications for practice and for research are
explored in Sect. 6. In Sect. 7, we provide concluding remarks.
2 Literature review
Our paper draws on the following research streams: consumer returns, product ﬁt informa-
tion, and artiﬁcial intelligence application. The ﬁrst related stream of research examines
consumer returns from misﬁt without any product defects in a single-channel setting. Chou
et al. (2020) examine an optimal inventory policy in which returns are forecast to depend on
past demands. Shulman et al. (2009) ﬁnd that even if provision of product ﬁt information
possibly eliminates returns, returns can be part of an optimal product sales process. Su (2009)
examines the impact of returns policies on supply chain performance. Hsiao and Chen (2012)
argue that consumer returns are offered only when the high-segment consumers incur a high
hassle cost. Shang et al. (2017) examine how the extent and beneﬁt of wardrobing affect
pricing decisions. Hu et al. (2019) ﬁnd that ignoring returns may lead to overpricing and
can cause signiﬁcant revenue loss. Altug and Aydinliyim (2016) examine how consumers’
discount-seeking purchase deferrals affect online returns policies. Tran et al. (2018) explore
the relative preference of a quota-based policy versus a partial-refund policy. Xiao and Shi
(2016) examine two revelation mechanism models of a supply chain under asymmetric infor-
mation, where the retailer provides store assistance to reduce the rate of consumer returns.
There are additional related studies that focus on the dual channel context, including the
following: Ofek et al. (2011) examine the impact of product returns on the strategies of
online retailers and brick-and-mortar retailers. Letizia et al. (2018) study how the trade-off
between product marginal value and uncertainty about product ﬁt affects the manufacturer’s
sales channel design. Dijkstra et al. (2017) study dynamic policies for transshipment of
returns cross-channel. Most of the above studies focus on the design of returns policies in
a single-channel or multichannel context. Our work extends those ﬁndings, further studying
the impact of artiﬁcial intelligence adoption.
The second related stream of research examines creating ofﬂine showroom as well as prod-
uct ﬁt information. Jing (2018) examines competition between a traditional and an online
retailer in the presence of showrooming. Bell et al. (2018) report that online-ﬁrst retailers
can realize demand and operational efﬁciency beneﬁts from opening showrooms. Gao and
Su (2017) ﬁnd that physical showrooms may prompt retailers to reduce store inventory. Xu
et al. (2017) examine the complementary and substitution impact of the tablet channel on
the smartphone and PC channels. Pauwels and Neslinb (2015) assess the revenue impact of
adding brick-and-mortar stores to already existing catalog and Internet channels. Avery et al.
(2012) study the impact of adding retail channels on catalog sales and Internet sales. Gallino
and Moreno (2018) explore how providing virtual ﬁt information helps both customers and
retailers. Generally, the above studies focused on ofﬂine showrooms and product ﬁt infor-
mation while we in particular examined the inﬂuence of ofﬂine showrooms and artiﬁcial
intelligence adoption on online returns policies. Additionally, there has been recent interest
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
707
regarding the consumer experience. Iyer and Kuksov (2012) examine how providing a shop-
ping experience affects pricing and advertising strategies. Kumar et al. (2014) examine how
personal income inﬂuences service purchase decisions. We incorporate reselling returns and
demand uncertainty into studies concerning consumer experience.
Third, our work is closely related to artiﬁcial intelligence adoption. Fosso Wamba et al.
(2019) identify a set of internal and external factors related to the adoption and use of
social media technologies by the New South Wales state emergency service in Australia.
Fan et al. (2018) examine the factors impacting healthcare professionals to adopt an artiﬁcial
intelligence-based medical diagnosis support system. Luo et al. (2019) ﬁnd that artiﬁcial
intelligence chatbots are as effective as proﬁcient workers and four times more effective than
inexperienced workers in engendering customer purchases. Leung et al. (2018) examine how
artiﬁcial intelligence automation removes the possibility for consumers to internalize the
outcomes of the consumption experience. Alexandrescu et al. (2017) ﬁnd that employing
artiﬁcial intelligence agents that rely on dynamically weighted graphs can effectively rec-
ommend better ﬁt products. Sivamani et al. (2018) examine a decision support system for
the nutritional management of livestock using the Bayesian model based on fuzzy rules. Li
et al. (2018) explore how demand chain management can perform better in the electronic
commerce environment by studying website behavior data and using data analytics tools.
Ettl et al. (2019) examine how to recommend a personalized discounted product bundle to
an online shopper through data-driven algorithms. These studies did not involve reselling
returns whereas the present paper complements this literature by analytically examining the
impact of both artiﬁcial intelligence adoption and reselling returns on online returns policies.
To summarize the contribution of our work relative to the existing literature, there has
been no research that speciﬁcally focuses on supplementing online returns policies, creating
ofﬂine showrooms, and adopting artiﬁcial intelligence; our work incorporates these three
aspects.
3 The model
We consider an online monopolist seller who sells a product. For brevity, the entire sales
horizon is partitioned into two periods: period t1 at regular sales price p and period t2 at
salvage value s. The initial inventory and unit procurement cost to the seller are q and c,
respectively. We characterize market demand as a mass of inﬁnitesimal consumers, and
each consumer has the most unit demand, which shows that the impact of the individual
consumer on the total demand can be negligible. The total number of consumers who decide
to make a purchase in period t1 is a random variable x ≥0 with distribution function F (·),
complementary cdf F(·)  1 −F(·) and density function f (·). Intuitively, consumers are
unsure whether the product meets their preferences. Let m ϵ (0, 1) denote the probability that
a consumer really likes the product. Liking the product derives a value v from it, and a value
of zero otherwise. In period t2, the seller salvages all leftovers at discount price s through
other channels (markets); in other words, these leftovers may be resold to a liquidator who
pays only a small fraction of the original value (Ng and Stevens 2015). To a certain extent,
a positive value of s reﬂects the seller’s capability to resell the returns through secondary
channels (Letizia et al. 2018; Shulman et al. 2009). For instance, online seller Jingdong.com
auctions returns on Treasure Island web, which can be considered a clearing channel. We
make the usual assumption that s ≤c.
123

708
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
We assume that the seller offers full refunds and consumers are allowed to return the
product only once. Consumers can discover and learn the product ﬁt gap only after receiving
and sometimes using the product. In the case of a misﬁt, the consumers return the products and
claim a full refund p. However, consumers incur costs t associated with returning items (Altug
and Aydinliyim 2016; Dukes and Zhu 2019). Furthermore, value depreciation of returns over
time may lower the seller’s proﬁt margin. For simplicity, products unsold in period t1 are
labeled as new products, and products sold but returned are called returns. We assume that
v is sufﬁciently high such that all consumers get a non-negative surplus. A summary of our
notation is provided in “Appendix A”.
3.1 Benchmark model
As a benchmark model, we ﬁrst consider the setting without allowing returns; that is, each
consumer will make an uninformed purchase, then the total demand is x. The seller’s expected
proﬁt is given as
B(q)  pEmin(q, x) + s[q −Emin(q, x)] −cq.
(1)
Differentiating B(q) w.r.t. q, we can calculate the optimal quantity. The ﬁrst-order con-
dition (sufﬁcient owing to proﬁt function concavity) yields q∗
B  F−1[(c −s)/(p −s)], then
the resulting optimal proﬁt is given by ∗
B  (p −s)
 q∗
B
0
x f (x)dx.
3.2 Providing full refunds
Common practice in many industries, such as electronics, household, and fashion reveals that
the vast majority of returns are for full (or approximately full) refunds because of competitive
pressure as well as no reason returns policies. When the seller provides full refunds for returns,
intuitively, the consumer is always capable of returning it and claiming a full refund upon
ﬁnding product misﬁt. Hence, the total demand is also x.
3.2.1 Salvaging all returns (R policy)
When all returns are salvaged in period t2, the seller’s expected proﬁt can be expressed as
R(q)  pEmin(q, x) −(p −s)(1 −m)Emin(q, x) + s[q −Emin(q, x)] −cq.
(2)
In Eq. (2), the ﬁrst item represents the revenue from the products sold, the second item
indicates the loss from consumers returning products, the third item captures revenues from
salvaging new products, and the last item is the procurement cost.
In a similar fashion, we can immediately get the optimal quantity q∗
R  F−1[
c−s
(p−s)m ], and
the resulting optimal proﬁt ∗
R  (p −s)m
 q∗
R
0
x f (x)dx.
Proposition 1 The seller’s optimal proﬁt ∗
R is increasing convex in m.
See “Appendix B” for the proof.
Proposition 1 reveals that, as the probability m of a consumer really liking the product
increases, more consumers buy and keep the product, decreasing returns and risk of leftovers;
hence, we expect the optimal quantity and resulting optimal proﬁt to increase.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
709
3.2.2 Quick resale of returns (Q policy)
Assumption 1 When returns can be resold quickly, the sales price of returns is the same as
that of the new products.
Assumption 1 argues that when the seller can resell the returns quickly, these returns can
be resold as new products (i.e., the sales price of returns is also p). This assumption is a
reasonable approximation, as follows: ﬁrst, we do not consider returns caused by product
damage, end of lifecycle and speculation, but mainly focus on the returns due to misﬁt;
second, the return cost is incurred by consumers because the reason for the return is on the
consumer’s side; third, through simple reprocessing (such as repacking), the performance
and intrinsic value of returns are the same as that of new products, so that consumers have
the same willingness to pay for both new products and returns. Likewise, we assume that the
cost of reprocessing returns is negligible as in Akçay et al. (2013). Taken together, returns
can be resold as new products. A closely related paper is that by Crocker and Letizia (2014),
who also assumed the resale of returns at the same sales price of new products.
Next, we characterize the seller’s decision problem. First, when demand x≤q, the number
of products sold is x, and the number of returns is (1−m)x because the fraction (1 −m) of sales
turns into returns. Interestingly, even if returns can be recovered quickly and resold in period
t1, because demand is less than the stocking quantity, consumers no longer purchase returns;
thus, all returns can eventually be salvaged in period t2. Second, when x>q, the number of
sales is q, the number of returns is S0  (1 −m)q, and the remaining D0  x −q will
cause consumers to encounter shortages when they buy products. Comparing S0 and D0, if
x < [1+(1−m)]q, then S0 > D0, the number sold to the remaining consumers encountering
shortages is D0, and the number of returns is (1−m)D0; similarly, all returns will eventually
be resold at a salvage value. Meanwhile, the unsold new products S0 −D0 in period t1 can
also only be salvaged; if x ≥[1 + (1 −m)]q, then S0 ≤D0, consumers who cannot purchase
a new product (due to unavailability) will purchase a return; thus, the number sold to the
remaining consumers is S0, and the number of returns is S1  (1 −m)2q; at the same time,
the remaining D1  x −[1+(1−m)]q consumers have not yet purchased products because of
shortages. Following the same logic as above, if x < [1+(1−m)+(1−m)2]q, then S1 >D1,
the quantity sold to the remaining consumers is D1 and the number of new products needed
to be salvaged is S1 −D1; if x ≥[1+(1−m)+(1−m)2]q, then S1 ≤D1, the number sold to
the remaining consumers is S1, the number of returns is S2  (1 −m)3q, and the number of
consumers who cannot purchase the product becomes D2  x −[1+(1−m)+(1−m)2]q, and
so on. Essentially, all consumers may return products with a poor match, and these returns
will eventually be salvaged in period t2. Hence, the seller’s proﬁt is as follows:
Q(q)  p
 q
0
xdF(x) −(p −s)
 q
0
(1 −m)xdF(x) + p
 +∞
q
qdF(x)
−(p −s)
 +∞
q
(1 −m)qdF(x) + s
 q
0
(q −x)dF(x) −cq
.
(3)
After calculation and arrangement, Eq. (3) becomes
Q(q)  (p −s)mEmin(x, q) −(c −s)q.
(4)
Solving this optimization problem allows us to get the optimal quantity q∗
Q

F−1[
c−s
(p−s)m ], and the resulting optimal proﬁt ∗
Q  Q(q∗
Q).
123

710
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
Proposition 2 The seller’s optimal quantity and proﬁt are the same under Q policy and
R policy, but both are lower than not allowing returns policy, i.e., q∗
Q  q∗
R < q∗
B, and
∗
Q  ∗
R < ∗
B.
Proposition 2 highlights that even though the seller is capable of quickly reselling returns,
those consumers who buy returned products may still return it if they ﬁnd that the products
cannot meet their expectations, implying that all returns would be eventually salvaged. In
other words, only consumers who are really satisﬁed with the product will keep the product;
thus, the seller bears all losses caused by uninformed purchases resulting from product misﬁt.
From the seller’s perspective, the two types of reselling policies are the same. Conversely,
if returns are not allowed, all consumers make an uninformed purchase and undertake all
losses caused by product misﬁt, which beneﬁts the seller. Consequently, compared with not
allowing returns, providing full refunds may not beneﬁt the seller.
Next, we examine whether creating an ofﬂine showroom or artiﬁcial intelligence adoption
is helpful in lessening or even eliminating the potential downside of the seller providing full
refunds compared with not allowing returns.
4 Creating an oﬄine showroom
Ideally, creating an ofﬂine showroom can be helpful for consumers to ascertain product ﬁt
prior to making a purchase. We make the following simplifying assumption. On visiting the
showroom, a consumer can entirely determine the ﬁt information and make an informed
purchase. That is, those consumers who really like the product buy it and keep it; otherwise,
theydonotpurchaseit.Thisassumptionisreasonableasfollows:Fromapracticalperspective,
an ofﬂine showroom can provide auxiliary guidance regarding product purchase, such as
experts allaying consumer’s concerns about product ﬁt gap. In the event of a poor match
or even full mismatch, the consumer does not purchase the product. Considering this, a
fraction m of consumers who are satisﬁed with the product buy and keep it, which we label
as the “demand lessening effect”. From a theoretical perspective, Shulman et al. (2009),
Balakrishnan et al. (2014), Gao and Su (2017), and Bell et al. (2018) all consider that after
physically touching the product, trialing the product and receiving on-site consultation in the
showroom, a consumer will not return the product after purchase.
Following convention (e.g., Ofek et al. 2011; Jing 2018), we assume that consumers
are heterogeneous with respect to their cost β of visiting showroom. Thus, let G (·) with
support [0, ¯β] denote the cumulative distribution of β and g (·) denote its density, and
G(β)  1 −G(β). Each consumer needs to balance between visiting the showroom and
purchasing online directly by comparing the expected surplus. First, she visits the showroom
to inspect the product. If satisﬁed, she then switches to the online channel for purchase,
yielding an expected surplus μb  m(v −p) −β. More importantly, she does not return
the product. Second, if choosing to buy online directly, she can get an expected surplus
μn  m(v −p) −(1 −m)t, where m(v −p) denotes the payoff of keeping the product, and
(1 −m)t is the loss of returning it. According to un  ub, we get βR  (1 −m)t, such that
if ofﬂine visiting cost β is less than βR, the consumer prefers visiting the showroom, which
we label “informed consumer”; when β is greater than βR, she tends to make an uninformed
online purchase directly, which we label “uninformed consumer”.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
711
4.1 Salvaging returns
Similarly, when all returns are resold at a salvage value (ER policy), the seller’s expected
proﬁt can then be expressed as
E R(q)  p

q
G(βR)+mG(βR)
0
[G(βR) + mG(βR)]x f (x)dx
+ p

q
G(βR)
q
G(βR)+mG(βR)
[G(βR)x + (q −G(βR)x)] f (x)dx
+ p
 +∞
q
G(βR)
q f (x)dx + s

q
G(βR)+mG(βR)
0

q −[G(βR) + mG(βR)]x

f (x)dx
−(p −s)(1 −m)Emin[q, G(βR)x] −cq.
(5)
In Eq. (5), (1 −m)Emin[q, G(βR)x] denotes the total number of returns, where the ﬁrst
item corresponds to the revenue when x ≤q/[G(βR) + mG(βR)]: G(βSR)x and mG(βSR)x
represent the sales to uninformed and informed consumers, respectively. The second item
represents the revenue when q/[G(βR) + mG(βR)] < x ≤q/G(βR), where G(βR)x and
q −G(βR)x represent the sales to uninformed and informed consumers, respectively. The
third item indicates the revenue when x > q/G(βSR), and the seller only sells the products
to uninformed consumers. The fourth item comes from salvaging new units. The ﬁfth item
represents the loss caused by returns. The last item is the procurement cost.
After calculation and arrangement, Eq. (5) becomes:
(6)
E R(q)  (p −s)Emin

q, [G(βR) + mG(βR)]x

−(c −s)q
−(p −s)(1 −m)Emin[q, G(βR)x].
Solving this optimization problem, we have the following Proposition 3:
Proposition 3 (1) Under ER policy, the optimal quantity q∗
E R should satisfy
dE R
dq
 (p −s)F

q
G(βR) + mG(βR)

−(1 −m)(p −s)F

q
G(βR)

−(c −s)  0.
(7)
(2) The seller’s optimal proﬁt ∗
E R is increasing in both t and s.
See the “Appendix B” for the proof.
The above results reveal that when the seller creates an ofﬂine showroom, (i) increasing
consumer return costs (higher βR) induces a higher proportion of consumers to fully ascertain
product ﬁt gap before purchase, thus lowering the loss caused by consumer returns. This
argues that less uninformed consumers purchase online directly, which leads to a reduction
in returns. Taken together, the seller gets an increase in optimal proﬁt. In other words, the
seller is better off increasing the return cost and discouraging returns (Akçay et al. 2013). As
a consequence, the seller beneﬁts from providing a showroom rather than looking for ways
to reduce consumer return costs. (ii) Increasing the salvage value the seller can extract from
leftovers, including returns, helps increase proﬁts.
The following Proposition 4 compares optimal proﬁt under ER policy, R policy, and
benchmark policy.
123

712
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
Proposition 4 The seller’s optimal proﬁt under ER policy is generally higher than under R
policy, but lower than that of not allowing returns, i.e.,∗
R ≤∗
E R < ∗
B.
See “Appendix B” for the proof.
AccordingtoProposition4,ﬁrst,regardlessofwhethertheselleraddsanofﬂineshowroom,
all leftovers, including returns, are salvaged in period t2. Under R policy, all consumers make
an uninformed purchase, which leads to a higher number of returns. Moreover, under ER
policy, informed consumers buy products and keep them, which leads to a reduction in
returns. These together, with a higher marginal loss of providing full refunds, increase the
seller’s optimal proﬁt and be generally higher than R policy. Second, by comparing Eq. (2)
and Eq. (6), we show that providing full refunds exclusively (R policy) is a special setting of
ER policy when βR  0, and all consumers make an uninformed online purchase directly.
Furthermore, under ER policy, we get that βR≥0, and with the increase in consumer return
costs (higher βR), more consumers tend to visit the showroom ﬁrst, which heavily reduces
returns; hence, the seller’s optimal proﬁt under ER policy is generally higher than that under
R policy. Though creating an ofﬂine showroom may result in fewer returns, it lessens the
demand base because those consumers who visit the showroom and ﬁnd a poor match or
entire misﬁt do not make a purchase, implying that the optimal proﬁt of the seller under ER
policy is lower than that of not allowing returns.
4.2 Quick resale of returns
When returns can be quickly resold in period t1 (EQ policy), or if ofﬂine visiting cost β is
less than βR, the consumer tends to make an informed purchase; otherwise, she makes an
uninformed online purchase directly.
Next, we examine the seller’s decision problem. First, when demand x ≤q/[G(βR) +
mG(βR)], sales to informed and uninformed consumers are mG(βSR)x and G(βSR)x,
respectively. In this respect, even though returns are recovered quickly and resold in
period t1, because demand is less than the stocking quantity, no consumers need to
purchase returns; thus, all returns are salvaged eventually in period t2. Second, when
q/[G(βR) + mG(βR)] < x ≤q/G(βR), the number of new products sold to uninformed
consumers is G(βR)x, then the number of products available for sale to informed consumers
is S0  q−G(βR)x+(1−m)G(βR)x, where q−G(βR)x denotes the number of new products
that can be sold to informed consumers, and (1 −m)G(βR)x units are bought but returned
by uninformed consumers, while the demand of informed consumers is D0  mG(βSR)x.
Comparing S0 and D0, if x ≤q/m, then S0 ≥D0, the sales to informed consumers are
D0, and the number of products that need to be salvaged is q −mx; if x > q/m, then
S0 < D0, the sales to informed consumers become S0, and these products are not returned.
Third, when x > q/G(βR), the number of new products sold to uninformed consumers is
q, the number of returns is S10  (1 −m)q, while the remaining demand of uninformed
consumers is Dn0  G(βR)x −q. Comparing S10 and Dn0, (i) if x < [1 + (1 −m)]q/G(βR),
then S10 > Dn0, the number of new products sold to remaining uninformed consumers
is Dn0, the number of returns becomes (1 −m)Dn0, and the sales to informed consumers
become S10 −Dn0; likewise, these products are not returned. Because all uninformed con-
sumers have purchased products and are only allowed to return them once, these returns
(1 −m)Dn0 are ﬁnally resold to informed consumers. (ii) If x ≥[1 + (1 −m)]q/G(βR),
we have that S10 ≤Dn0, the sales to remaining uninformed consumers become S10, and
the number of returns becomes S11  (1 −m)S10, which are also available for sale. Mean-
while, demand of uninformed consumers who have not purchased the product becomes
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
713
Dn1  Dn0−S10. Following the same logic as above, if x < [1+(1−m)+(1−m)2]q/G(βR),
then S11 > Dn1, the number sold to the remaining uninformed consumers is Dn1, and the sales
to informed consumers become S11 −Dn1. Likewise, the remaining uninformed consumers
no longer purchase products and these returns are eventually resold to informed consumers;
if x ≥[1 + (1 −m) + (1 −m)2]q/G(βR), we have that S11 ≤Dn1, the number sold to
the remaining uninformed consumers is S11, and the number of returns is (1 −m)S11. The
rest may be deduced by analogy, and all returns (1 −m)q are eventually resold to informed
consumers. More importantly, these consumers will not return the products.
Considering this discussion, if demand is less than the initial inventory, even though the
seller is capable of reselling returns quickly, these returns will ﬁnally be salvaged (see case
(1)). Conversely, if demand is greater than the stocking quantity (in case of a shortage), and
the seller decides to resell returns quickly, these returns are essentially resold to informed
consumers in period t1 (see case (2) and case (3)). Hence, the seller’s optimization problem
involves maximizing
E Q(q)


q
G(βR )+mG(βR)
0

p[G(βR) + mG(βR)]x −(p −s)(1 −m)G(βR)x + s[q −(G(βR) + mG(βR))x]

dF(x)
+

q
G(βR )
q
G(βR )+mG(βR)
[pG(βR)x −p(1 −m)G(βR)x]dF(x) +

q
m
q
G(βR )+mG(βR)
[p mG(βR)x

 

D0
+s (q −mx)

 

S0−D0
]dF(x)
+

q
G(βR )
q
m
p[q −mG(βR)x

 

S0
]dF(x) +
 +∞
q
G(βR )
[pq + p(1 −m)q]dF(x) −p
 +∞
q
G(βR )
(1 −m)qdF(x) −cq.
(8)
After calculation and arrangement, Eq. (8) becomes:
E Q(q)  (p −s)Emin(mx, q) −(c −s)q.
(9)
Solving this optimization problem, we have the optimal quantity q∗
E Q  mF−1[(c −
s)/(p −s)], and the resulting optimal proﬁt ∗
E Q  m(p −s)
 F−1( c−s
p−s )
0
x f (x)dx.
Proposition 5 Under EQ policy, the optimal initial quantity q∗
E Q, and the resulting optimal
proﬁt ∗
E Q are a linear increasing in the product ﬁt probability m, and do not depend on
consumer return cost t.
See “Appendix B” for the proof.
Proposition 5 shows that, (1) when a seller creates an ofﬂine showroom, those consumers
visiting the showroom make an informed purchase; therefore, the actual number of informed
consumers making purchases becomes mG(βR)x, while uninformed consumers purchase
online directly and choose to return products in case of misﬁt. More importantly, only when
new products are out of stock can these returns be resold to informed consumers who do
not return the in period t1, leading to the total number mx of consumers keeping products.
Furthermore, increasing ﬁt probability m increases the number of consumers keeping prod-
ucts, which results in an increase in the quantity and optimal proﬁt. (2) The optimal quantity
and proﬁt do not depend on consumer return costs, which can be interpreted as follows: by
comparing Eq. (6) and Eq. (9), we show that EQ policy is the special case of ER policy when
βR  ¯β, and all consumers mx make informed purchases. Furthermore, under ER policy,
then βR ≤¯β. Not all consumers make informed purchases; that is, a proportion of consumers
still make uninformed purchases and possibly return products, which, together with a higher
123

714
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
marginal loss of the seller offering full refunds, leads to a lower optimal proﬁt compared with
EQ policy. These results argue that the maximum value of a showroom is extracted through
supplementing the ofﬂine showroom with the quick resale of returns. More interestingly,
lowering consumer return costs to encourage purchases or increasing consumer return costs
to discourage returns may not affect the seller’s proﬁts.
In Proposition 6 below, we compare EQ policy, R policy and a policy of not allowing
returns in terms of stocking quantity and optimal proﬁt.
Proposition 6 (1)
Given
f ′(x)
≥
0,
let
sEQ
be
the
unique
solution
to
F−1( p−c
p−s ) f [F−1( p−c
p−s )] 
c−s
p−s . If s ≤sE Q, then q∗
E Q ≥q∗
R; if s ≥sE Q, there
exists a threshold m* such that when m ≤m∗, then q∗
E Q ≥q∗
R; when m > m∗, then
q∗
E Q < q∗
R.
(2) The seller’s optimal proﬁt under EQ policy is generally higher than under R policy,
but lower than not allowing returns, i.e., ∗
R ≤∗
E Q < ∗
B.
See “Appendix B” for the proof.
The condition f ′(x) ≥0 in Proposition 6 is sufﬁcient but not necessary. The increasing
density condition holds, for example, in the case of a power distribution with an order greater
than or equal to one.
Three cases are discussed in Proposition 6. First, if a salvage value s that the seller can
charge is less than sEQ, the inventory quantity under EQ policy is higher than the R policy.
This can be interpreted as follows: for R policy, all consumers make an uninformed purchase,
which leads to a larger number of returns, combined with a low salvage value leading to a
low inventory; under EQ policy, informed consumers keep products after purchase, which
indirectly lowers returns. However, a fraction of returns from uninformed purchases can be
resold to informed consumers, which further lessens the remaining returns that need to be
salvaged in period t2 and indirectly decreases the risk of excess inventory, thus leading to an
inventory quantity higher than that which occurs in the R policy. Second, if a salvage value
s is greater than sEQ, whether the inventory quantity under EQ policy is higher than that
of the R policy depends on the product ﬁt probability m. Speciﬁcally, when m is less than
m*, consumers are heavily unsure about ﬁt; under EQ policy, visiting ofﬂine an showroom
becomes more attractive for consumers, thus more consumers make informed purchases.
This indirectly reduces returns, which combined with a higher salvage value results in a
higher inventory quantity compared with the R policy. However, when m is higher than
m*, consumers more reliably determine ﬁt uncertainty; hence, visiting ofﬂine an showroom
becomes less attractive. In this respect, more consumers make uninformed online purchases
directly, yet a higher product match probability directly reduces returns; thus, the inventory
quantity under EQ policy is lower than that of the R policy.
Finally, the seller’s optimal proﬁt under EQ policy is higher than that of the R policy,
and this is explained by comparing the proportion of uninformed and informed consumers
between R policy and EQ policy. R policy is the special case of ER policy when βR 0, and
all consumers make uninformed purchases; EQ policy is the special case of ER policy when
βR ¯β, and all consumers make informed purchases. Under EQ policy, then βR ϵ [0, ¯β]. This
implies that a proportion of consumers is uninformed, and the remaining consumers become
informedpurchasers.AsmentionedinProposition5,increasingconsumerreturncosts(higher
βR) converts more uninformed consumers into informed consumers, which greatly reduces
returns. Hence, the seller beneﬁts from an ofﬂine showroom instead of providing full refunds
only. Furthermore, compared with not allowing returns, though creating an ofﬂine showroom
may result in no loss due to returns because ﬁt uncertainty is fully solved, it decreases demand
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
715
base because those consumers who visit the showroom and ﬁnd a poor match or entire misﬁt
do not make purchases. Therefore, the optimal proﬁt under EQ policy is lower than that of
not allowing returns.
5 Artiﬁcial intelligence adoption
In this section we analyze how adopting artiﬁcial intelligence that effectively lowers product
ﬁt uncertainty and objectively recommends better matching exchanges affects the returns
policies when the seller provides full refunds for returns.
5.1 Artificial intelligence eliminates fit uncertainty
First, we consider the ideal setting in which the application of artiﬁcial intelligence entirely
eliminates product ﬁt uncertainty. In other words, on obtaining the artiﬁcial intelligence
personalized virtual-reality experience, the consumer discovers and learns ﬁt information
completely, then makes an informed purchase. Hence, the actual number of consumers who
make purchases and keep the products is mx. Considering this, artiﬁcial intelligence adoption
and creation of an ofﬂine showroom are equal in eliminating product ﬁt uncertainty. The
seller’s expected proﬁt can be shown as
A(q)  pE min(mx, q) + s[q −E min(mx, q)] −cq.
(10)
In Eq. (10), the ﬁrst item corresponds to the revenue from the products kept, the second
item captures revenues from salvaging the new products, and the last item is the procurement
cost.
Solving this optimization problem allows us to have the optimal quantity q∗
A  mF−1[(c−
s)/(p −s)], and the resulting optimal proﬁt ∗
A  m(p −s)
 F−1[(c−s)/(p−s)]
0
x f (x)dx.
Lemma 1 If artiﬁcial intelligence adoption entirely eliminates product ﬁt uncertainty, the
optimal quantity q∗
A and optimal proﬁt ∗
A are a linear increase in the product ﬁt probability
m.
Lemma 1 shows that as the probability m of a consumer really liking the product increases,
the number of consumers keeping products increases, thus increasing the quantity and optimal
proﬁt.
Proposition 7 Suppose that artiﬁcial intelligence adoption fully eliminates ﬁt uncertainty.
Compared with creating an ofﬂine showroom, artiﬁcial intelligence adoption better beneﬁts
the seller, i.e., ∗
E R ≤∗
E Q  ∗
A. However, the seller prefers not allowing returns to
offering an artiﬁcial intelligence experience, i.e., ∗
A < ∗
B.
Proposition 7 highlights that the optimal proﬁt of a seller adopting artiﬁcial intelligence
technologies is not less than creating an ofﬂine showroom. Speciﬁcally, by comparing Propo-
sitions 3 and 7, we ﬁnd that employing artiﬁcial intelligence may beneﬁt the seller more than
creating an ofﬂine showroom when all returns are eventually salvaged. This is because the
former induces all consumers to make an informed purchase while the latter only encour-
ages a fraction of consumers to make an informed purchase. Furthermore, adopting artiﬁcial
intelligence while salvaging returns provides sellers with proﬁts equal to those provided by
creating an ofﬂine showroom and reselling returns quickly. However, compared with not
123

716
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
allowing returns, the adoption of artiﬁcial intelligence leads to a lower proﬁt for the seller.
This follows from when returns are not allowed, even though consumers make uninformed
purchases, they do not return them in the case of misﬁt. This means that all consumers
make an “implicit” informed purchase, greatly increasing the seller’s proﬁts. However, as
mentioned before, adopting artiﬁcial intelligence lessens the demand base and the resulting
proﬁt. Hence, the artiﬁcial intelligence experience still leads to a lower proﬁt for the seller
compared with not allowing returns.
5.2 Artificial intelligence lowers fit uncertainty
More practically, products such as apparel comprise a digital attribute and a nondigital
attribute; thus, adopting artiﬁcial intelligence technologies (virtual ﬁtting-room technolo-
gies, chatbots, intelligent recommending agents) may (i) greatly lower the search cost and
product ﬁt gap of consumers through accurate analysis of their preferences, and (ii) expand
the demand base by converting more browsers into purchasers and recommending products
to other potential consumers who need but do not know assistance from artiﬁcial intelligence
technologies. For example, virtual ﬁtting technologies developed by the online seller HAO-
MAIYI may help increase purchasers by 12.4%, and reduce the return rate of some brands
by about 30% (You 2017). In addition, Gallino and Moreno (2018) reported that virtual
ﬁtting-room technologies result in an approximately 71.8% of total incremental beneﬁt from
browsers into purchasers, and 16.6% from lower returns.
To clarify our results, we make the following simplifying assumption. First, the proba-
bility of return (1 −m) falls to (1 −m)(1 −λ) once a consumer gets personalized artiﬁcial
intelligence experience (0≤λ ≤1), where λ captures the level of product ﬁt uncertainty
reduced by the artiﬁcial intelligence experience. Second, we denote the expanding (or less-
ening) demand base by using θ(λ)x, where θ(λ)>1 represents that implementing artiﬁcial
intelligence expands the demand base by accurately recommending products to browsers
and other potential consumers. Intuitively, this demand expanding effect is also explained as
the artiﬁcial intelligence personalized experience increasing consumers’ attachment to the
product. In addition, Kim and Krishnan (2015) report that providing more ﬁt information
induces higher sales. Conversely, θ(λ)<1 captures a setting where the artiﬁcial intelligence
experience may be perceived as less knowledgeable and less empathetic by consumers, as
in Luo et al. (2019). Intuitively, the artiﬁcial intelligence experience should not diminish the
demand base, thus we assume that dθ(λ)/dλ=θ’(λ)≥0. All returns are salvaged eventually
in period t2. The seller’s expected proﬁt can be expressed as
P(q)  p[1 −(1 −m)(1 −λ)]Emin[θ(λ)x, q] + s(1 −m)(1 −λ)Emin[θ(λ)x, q]
+ s[q −Emin(θ(λ)x, q)] −cq
.
(11)
In Eq. (11), the ﬁrst item corresponds to the revenue from the products kept, the second
item indicates the loss from consumer returns, the third item captures revenues from salvaging
new products, and the last item is the procurement cost.
Solving the optimization problem allows us to get the optimal quantity as follows:
q∗
P  θ(λ)F−1 c −s
p −s
1
m + (1 −m)λ

.
(12)
The optimal proﬁt is given by ∗
P  (p−s)[m+(1−m)λ]θ(λ)
 F−1[ c−s
p−s
1
m+(1−m)λ ]
0
x f (x)dx.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
717
Proposition 8 Suppose that providing an artiﬁcial intelligence personalized experience stim-
ulates the demand base and lessens ﬁt uncertainty. Then, there exists two thresholds, λ1 and
λ2 (λ1 <λ2) such that when λ ≤λ1, then ∗
P ≤∗
E Q ≤∗
B; when λ ∈(λ1, λ2], then
∗
E Q < ∗
P ≤∗
B; when λ > λ2, then ∗
E Q ≤∗
B < ∗
P.
See “Appendix B” for the proof.
Proposition8provesaninterestingandstrongconnectionbetweentheartiﬁcialintelligence
experience and offering full refund. Theoretically, when the additional ﬁt information that
artiﬁcial intelligence adoption provides is available, potential browsers are more likely to
become purchasers, and purchasers are less likely to return purchased products.
First, compared with not allowing returns, if the level of lowering ﬁt uncertainty by artiﬁ-
cial intelligence adoption is less than threshold λ2 (λ ≤λ2), it is not conducive for consumers
to ascertain ﬁt information, which not only leads to a large number of returns and result-
ing losses, but also is not conducive to the conversion of browsers into purchasers. In this
respect, the seller should not provide an artiﬁcial intelligence personalized experience. How-
ever, if the level of lowering ﬁt uncertainty is generally high (λ >λ2), it is more helpful for
consumers when they ascertain product ﬁt. Thus, an artiﬁcial intelligence personalized expe-
rience not only leads to a substantial reduction in returns and resulting losses, but converts
more browsers or even other potential uninformed consumers into actual purchasers. Con-
sidering this discussion, the seller is better off providing an artiﬁcial intelligence experience
when offering full refunds.
Second, compared with creating an ofﬂine showroom instead of not allowing returns,
implementing artiﬁcial intelligence expands the range of parameter λ. In other words, even
though λ is less than λ2, as long as it is greater than λ1, i.e., λ ϵ [λ1, λ2), adopting artiﬁcial
intelligence still beneﬁts the seller more than creating an ofﬂine showroom. This is because
the latter reduces the fraction of consumers buying products, which reduces the optimal proﬁt.
Therefore, when λ is above λ1, the increased revenue from both expanding the demand base
and reducing returns sufﬁciently compensates for the loss of the remaining returns, which
makes the seller’s total proﬁt higher than when providing an ofﬂine showroom; by contrast, if
λ is below λ1, regarding providing an artiﬁcial intelligence experience, the increased revenue
from the above two aspects does not compensate for the loss of the remaining returns,
indicating that the seller should provide an ofﬂine showroom rather than implement artiﬁcial
intelligence.
5.3 Artificial intelligence recommends better-matching exchanges
In this section, we examine what exchange products the adopted artiﬁcial intelligence should
accurately and objectively recommend to consumers who hope to make a full refund claim in
the case of returns. In other words, we focus on whether the artiﬁcial intelligence that the seller
employs deeply analyzes the reason for returns and accurately recommends better-matching
alternatives effectively enhances the value of after-sales services (i.e., the return experience).
To a certain extent, providing full refunds is helpful for consumers to search and ascertain
the best ﬁt information. Ertekin (2018) provides evidence that the ofﬂine return experience
inﬂuences consumer exchange and repurchase behavior through salesperson competence and
selling pressure. More crucially, selling pressure may come from a fraction of the commission
depending heavily on sales performance. Unlike the traditional ofﬂine experience, Luo et al.
(2019) show that online artiﬁcial intelligence chatbots are as effective as salespeople in
terms of competence but do not have the selling pressure of salespeople. Taken together, the
123

718
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
artiﬁcial intelligence return experience helps consumers learn the true reason for the misﬁt
of the initial purchase, ﬁnd a better-matching exchange and eventually keep it.
In broad terms, an exchange (alternative) recommended by artiﬁcial intelligence can
be partitioned into horizontally and vertically differentiated products. Compared with the
product initially sold, a horizontally differentiated exchange has similar characteristics but
with better-matching information, which can be explained as the replacement of the same
subcategory. A vertically differentiated exchange has not only a higher quality but also better-
matching information, which can be regarded as a cross-category replacement. Shulman et al.
(2009) consider horizontally differentiated exchanges that better ﬁt consumers’ expectations
but has the same net proﬁt margin p −c as the initial products, but Samorani et al. (2019)
focus on vertically differentiated exchange, reporting that if a consumer initially purchases a
JVC for US$159.99, then replaces it during the exchange with an SON for US$229.98, the
consumer eventually keeps it. We assume that upon returning products, a fraction ρ ϵ [0, 1]
of consumers buy the recommended exchange, and the remaining consumers choose to make
a full refund claim. For simplicity, we also assume that an exchange is modeled exogenously.
For each exchange or repurchase product, the seller obtains a net proﬁt margin w. Hence, the
seller’s proﬁt can be expressed as
AR(q)  pmEmin(q, x) + s(1 −ρ)(1 −m)Emin(q, x)
+ ρ(s + w)(1 −m)Emin(q, x) + s[q −Emin(q, x)] −cq.
(13)
In Eq. (13), the ﬁrst item corresponds to the revenue from the products kept, the second
item indicates the loss from returns, the third item captures revenues from exchanges, the
fourth item captures revenues from salvaging the new products, and the last item is the
procurement cost.
Solving this optimization problem allows us to get q∗
AR  F−1[
c−s
(p−s)m+ρw(1−m)], and
∗
AR  [(p −s)m + ρw(1 −m)]
 q∗
AR
0
x f (x)dx.
Lemma 2 Supposing that artiﬁcial intelligence objectively recommends better-matching
exchanges, the optimal proﬁt ∗
AR is a convex increase in w.
Lemma 2 reveals that as the net proﬁt margin w of exchanges increases, the seller can
keep some or all of the proﬁt margin from the initial sales, which results in an increase in
optimal proﬁts.
Proposition 9 When artiﬁcial intelligence can objectively recommend better-matching
exchanges, (i) there exists a threshold w∗∈(0, (p −s)/ρ) such that if w ≤w∗, then
∗
AR ≤∗
E Q < ∗
B; if w ∈(w∗, (p −s)/ρ], then ∗
E Q < ∗
AR < ∗
B; if w > (p −s)/ρ,
then ∗
AR > ∗
B > ∗
E Q. (ii) ∗
AR > ∗
R.
Proposition 9 highlights how the application of artiﬁcial intelligence affects the seller’s
proﬁts.
(i) Comparison between employing artiﬁcial intelligence and not allowing returns.
Compared with not allowing returns, if the net marginal proﬁt of an exchange recommended
by artiﬁcial intelligence is sufﬁciently high (w > (p−s)/ρ), such as a vertically differentiated
product with a relatively high marginal proﬁt, it helps to increase the proﬁts of the seller by
facilitating consumers’ continuous searches. Considering this discussion, returns should not
be deemed as cost centers to be minimized but rather as opportunities to extract value from
returned products. Additionally, sometimes some consumers may delay an exchange and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
719
buy another product a few days later (Samorani et al. 2019). Moreover, if a recommended
exchange has a low marginal proﬁt (w ≤(p −s)/ρ), even though allowing returns provides
for the consumer’s continuous search, it may not beneﬁt the seller because salvaging returns
seriously erodes the proﬁt margin of initial sales. This, together with a lower proﬁt margin of
an exchange, results in a reduction in revenues. Taken together, the seller should minimize
returns. For example, the marginal proﬁt of a horizontally differentiated exchange is p −c, as
in Shulman et al. (2009), which is far below (p −s)/ρ, making the proﬁt of the seller lower
than not allowing returns. This follows from the seller’s revenue from the sales of exchanges
needing to compensate for the full refunds of the fraction of consumers returning products.
Conversely, when returns are not allowed, the seller does not need to compensate consumer
loss caused by product mismatch. Taking these two aspects into account, application of
artiﬁcial intelligence may not beneﬁt the seller more than not allowing returns.
(ii) Comparison between artiﬁcial intelligence application and creating ofﬂine showroom.
Now that the threshold w* is less than (p −s)/ρ, adopting artiﬁcial intelligence expands
the range of parameter w. Further, if w ∈(w∗, (p −s)/ρ], adopting artiﬁcial intelligence
is still more beneﬁcial to the seller than creating an ofﬂine showroom. This is because the
latter reduces the fraction of consumers buying products, leading to a reduction in the seller’s
proﬁts. Therefore, as long as w is greater than w*, the increased revenue from exchanges
compensates sufﬁciently for the loss of salvaging returns, which leads to an increase in the
seller’s proﬁts to a point that is higher than that from providing an ofﬂine showroom.
Combining all the above discussions, though sometimes implementing artiﬁcial intel-
ligence cannot signiﬁcantly eliminate returns, it still provides after-sales service (return)
experiences, which is also conducive to sellers because accurately recommending exchanges
for returns is helpful for consumers who seek a better-matching exchange continuously, and
also helps to increase the proﬁts of the seller.
5.4 Case analysis of Stitch Fix
In this section we analyze how Stitch Fix adopted artiﬁcial intelligence to decrease consumer
returns as well as increase its proﬁtability.
First, Stitch Fix’s artiﬁcial intelligence, which uses massive data and algorithms, can
accurately recommend matching apparel products. Broadly, there are two competitive strate-
gies in online business: focusing on low prices and fast shipping, such as Amazon.com,
Taobao.com, and JD.com, and focusing on creating a signiﬁcantly superior personalized
service experience, such as Stitch Fix. With the emergence of new retail operations, increas-
ingly more consumers pay greater attention to the personalized service experience. Stitch
Fix meets this experience by accumulating massive amounts of data and adopting artiﬁcial
intelligence. According to a 2016 Internet trend report, if Stitch Fix’s artiﬁcial intelligence
predicts that consumers have a 100% probability of purchasing some kind of clothing, the
actual probability of consumers’ purchases is as high as 90% (Meeker 2016). This shows
that adoption of artiﬁcial intelligence greatly lowers the product ﬁt uncertainty and helps the
vast majority of consumers make an informed purchase, thus heavily lessening the number
of returns.
Second, the consumer incurs the return cost. A consumer needs to pay a US$20 styling
fee up front, then Stitch Fix mails a box containing ﬁve clothing items personalized to her
within the agreed period. If the consumer does not like them, she may return them to make
a full refund claim, but incurs the return cost of US$20, speciﬁcally, the US$20 styling fee
she paid in advance is converted into the return cost (Lake 2018). More realistically, many
123

720
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
consumers tend to avoid the trouble of the return and keep the items, which further lowers
returns to a certain extent.
Third, the proﬁt margin of clothing sold by Stitch Fix is high. Stitch Fix’s proﬁt margin
rate increased from 35.2% in 2014 to 44.5% in 2017 (Zhen 2017). Consequently, a relatively
high proﬁt margin not only is helpful for Stitch Fix to heavily invest in personalized service
innovation, but rather helps to compensate for the loss caused by salvaging consumer returns.
In addition, Gallino and Moreno (2018) estimate that the cost of apparel products sold by
Metail, which offers virtual ﬁtting-room technologies, only accounts for 30% of the revenue.
This also shows that a high marginal proﬁt can hedge against the loss caused by salvaging
remaining returns. Essentially, the high proﬁt margin of clothing sales is the core driver of
artiﬁcial intelligence adoption.
Finally, the repurchase rate of consumers is very high. According to statistics, in 2016
and 2017, the repurchase rate of Stitch Fix’s consumers was 83% and 86%, respectively
(Zhen 2017). This shows that the adoption of artiﬁcial intelligence by Stitch Fix signiﬁcantly
enhances the personalized service experience of after-sales, and accurately recommends
better-matching exchanges as well as subsequent repurchase products to consumers, which
help to increase its long-term beneﬁts and sustainable proﬁtability.
Considering this discussion, artiﬁcial intelligence adoption is helpful for consumers to
make an informed purchases, and for Stitch Fix to recommend better-matching apparel prod-
ucts.
6 Managerial implications of artiﬁcial intelligence adoption
6.1 Implications for practice
First, artiﬁcial intelligence adoption that accurately recommends vertically differentiated
exchanges with a relatively high marginal proﬁt may be helpful for sellers to increase proﬁts
when consumers return initial product. Consequently, returns might be deemed as opportu-
nities to facilitate consumers’ continuous searches of exchanges.
Second, theoretically, artiﬁcial intelligence adoption that accurately proﬁles consumer
browsing and purchasing data and preferences by using data insight technologies may
effectively lessen or even eliminate product ﬁt uncertainty, which is helpful for sellers to
segment consumers, maximizing extraction of consumer surplus. However, with the con-
tinuous fermentation of big data killing events, increasingly more consumers immediately
delete browsing and purchasing records after purchasing products, which is not good for
artiﬁcial intelligence that accurately proﬁles consumer intrinsic preferences. Therefore, we
caution that the seller must carefully consider the fairness of each consumer’s purchase caused
by continuous fermentation of big data killing events when adopting artiﬁcial intelligence
technologies and agents.
Third, when a seller introduces a new product, consumers face extreme product ﬁt uncer-
tainty. In this case, two types of operational innovation can be adopted. It is also worth
noting, however, that the return cost is becoming an important factor inﬂuencing whether
consumers buy products online. More speciﬁcally, if the return cost turns out to be relatively
low, consumers prefer to make uninformed purchases directly, resulting in a larger number
of returns. In this respect, the seller is better off adopting artiﬁcial intelligence to enhance
the personalized virtual-reality experience through which returns are greatly decreased. If
the consumer returns cost is high, conventional wisdom holds that the seller should lower
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
721
the consumer returns costs by permitting in store returns for online purchases, or allowing
consumers to purchase return freight insurance to reduce the cost of returns. We caution
that lowering consumer returns costs prompts more consumers to make uninformed pur-
chases directly, which leads to an increasing number of returns. A more effective measure
for the seller is to provide an artiﬁcial intelligence virtual-reality experience, encouraging
consumers to make informed purchases. As the product lifecycle progresses, consumers get
more information regarding the product ﬁt gap and tend to make a more informed purchases
directly, which lowers the value of the service experience. Correspondingly, both ofﬂine
showrooms and artiﬁcial intelligence technologies extract a lower value of the service expe-
rience.
Last, from the perspective of operational innovation, creating an ofﬂine showroom may
focus heavily on avoiding a fraction of returns, but possibly lessen the actual demand
base; however, artiﬁcial intelligence adoption may balance reducing the probability of
returns and expanding the demand base. More importantly, adopting artiﬁcial intelli-
gence in a new retail operation deeply enhances the personalized service experience,
which creates stickiness of consumers. Consequently, supplementing artiﬁcial intelligence
adoption with a policy of allowing returns may beneﬁt sellers even though consumers
sometimes abuse the returns policies. This is reﬂected in helping the seller achieve two
transformations, including (i) from exclusively selling products and services to entirely
managing consumers’ personalized lifestyles; and (ii) from the initial proﬁt center to
the novel retail infrastructure service provider based on the value and experience cen-
ter.
6.2 Implications for research
First, the implication for research of our study was to combine three existing areas: (i)
online returns policies, (ii) creation of ofﬂine showrooms, and (iii) application of artiﬁ-
cial intelligence technologies. By incorporating the above areas, we hopefully are better
able to provide a new vision for interdisciplinary integration. Second, existing studies
mainly empirically and experimentally examine how artiﬁcial intelligence adoption affects
online returns policies whereas our research complements this literature by analytically
incorporating reselling returns as well as demand uncertainty, and speciﬁcally analyzing
the case of Stitch Fix to further reveal how artiﬁcial intelligence effectively deals with
online returns under a new retail operation. Finally, we use an analytic modeling method
to compare two types of operational innovation: ofﬂine showrooms focusing on the physical
experience and artiﬁcial intelligence adoption focusing on a personalized virtual experi-
ence.
7 Conclusions
The lack of touch-and-feel experience for online purchases increases product ﬁt uncertainty,
which reduces the purchase initiative of consumers. The implied “insurance” mechanism
of the seller providing full (or nearly full) refunds induces more consumers to buy prod-
ucts. However, how to resell returns that do not have defects has become the most apparent
side effect of sellers’ operations. Therefore, it is crucial for practitioners and academics to
ascertain how online sellers can balance minimizing returns and allowing returns. Motivated
by practice of online business, this paper focused on exploring two types of operational
123

722
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
innovation: ofﬂine showrooms and artiﬁcial intelligence adoption. Creating ofﬂine show-
rooms may help consumers have opportunities to touch and try products, thus increasing
their acceptances of the products. However, the adoption of artiﬁcial intelligence may lower
product ﬁt uncertainty and improve after-sales services. Furthermore, the previous empirical
and experimental studies regarding both operational innovations provide little information
regarding reselling returns and demand uncertainty, but both have a profound impact on
online operations. Considering this discussion, this paper focused on examining whether
artiﬁcial intelligence adoption is more beneﬁcial to sellers than ofﬂine showrooms or even
not allowing returns, and how these affect consumers’ purchase decisions as well as sellers’
returns policies.
We obtained the following valuable results. First, artiﬁcial intelligence adoption is bet-
ter for accurately recommending vertically differentiated exchanges with a relatively high
marginal proﬁt. Second, compared with the seller’s most desired no returns policy, whether
artiﬁcial intelligence adoption substantially beneﬁts the seller depends on how much it lessens
misﬁt and expands the demand base with initial sales. Third, compared with creating ofﬂine
showrooms, artiﬁcial intelligence adoption expands the range of the level of lessening misﬁt
and the net proﬁt margin of exchange recommended. Last, we caution that the seller must
rationally consider the fairness of consumers’ purchases caused by continuous fermentation
of big data killing events when adopting artiﬁcial intelligence to accurately proﬁle consumers’
preferences.
This analysis can be extended in several directions. First, our research mainly focuses on
the impact of artiﬁcial intelligence adoption on online returns policies, with the rise of the
new retail mode, more online sellers need to integrate online and ofﬂine channel operations
to provide a seamless consumer experience; hence, research on how artiﬁcial intelligence
affects omnichannel returns policies can further extract value from artiﬁcial intelligence.
Second, this paper studied how consumer returns are driven by product ﬁt uncertainty. How-
ever, in practice, even though the product sometimes does meet a consumer’s expectation,
she still returns it and makes an illegitimate claim intentionally, which can be regarded as
abusing the returns policy. Thus, evaluating the effect of artiﬁcial intelligence adoption on
abuse of the returns policy is an interesting avenue of future research. Finally, we focused
on how artiﬁcial intelligence objectively recommends better-matching exchanges, but as
mentioned before, big data killing events make increasingly more consumers reluctant to
buy products (exchanges) recommended by artiﬁcial intelligence. Consequently, studying
the game between sellers who desire to proﬁle more accurate consumer preferences by
adopting artiﬁcial intelligence and consumers who avoid artiﬁcial intelligence monitoring
as much as possible can better reveal the applicability of artiﬁcial intelligence technolo-
gies.
Acknowledgements Theauthorsthank theeditorsand two refereesfor their helpful suggestionsand comments
during the review process. This research is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant
Numbers 71872158, 71871197 and 71571151).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
723
Appendix A: Notation
Variable notation
x: The total demand
p, s: Sales price (salvage value)
m: Product ﬁt probability
t, β: Consumer return costs (ofﬂine visiting cost)
v: Consumer value with product ﬁt
λ: The level of AI lowering ﬁt uncertainty
ρ: Fraction of consumers buying exchanges
w: Net proﬁt margin of an exchange
q, P: The stocking quantity (the proﬁt of seller)
Appendix B: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1 To make q∗
B ≥0 holds, condition m ≥m  (c −s)/(p −s) must be
satisﬁed.
dq∗
B
dm 
1
f (q∗
B)
c −s
m2(p −s) > 0;
d2q∗
B
dm2  −f ′(q∗
B)
[ f (q∗
B)]2
dq∗
B
dm
c −s
m2(p −s) −
1
f (q∗
B)
2(c −s)
m3(p −s).
From Envelope Theorem, we can get d∗
B
dm
 (p −s)Emin(q∗
B, x) > 0, and d2∗
B
dm2

(p −s)F(q∗
B) dq∗
B
dm > 0. Thus ∗
B is increasing convex in m.
Proof of Proposition 3 After calculation, we can get
∗
E R  (p −s)
⎧
⎨
⎩q∗
E R −[G(βR) + mG(βR)]

q∗
E R
G(βR)+mG(βR)
0
F(x)dx
⎫
⎬
⎭
−(c −s)q∗
E R −(p −s)(1 −m)
⎧
⎨
⎩q∗
E R −G(βR)

q∗
E R
G(βR)
0
F(x)dx
⎫
⎬
⎭.
From envelope theorem, we can immediately have
d∗
E R
dβR
 ∂∗
E R
∂βR
 (p −s)(1 −m)g(βR)

q∗
E R
G(βR)
q∗
E R
G(βR)+mG(βR)
x f (x)dx > 0.
By noting that dβR/dt  1 −m ≥0, we have d∗
E R/dt > 0.
In additive have that
d∗
E R
ds
 ∂∗
E R
∂s
 [G(βR) + mG(βR)]

q∗
E R
G(βR)+mG(βR)
0
F(x)dx + (1 −m)Emin[q∗
E R, G(βR)x] > 0.
123

724
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
Proof of Proposition 4 If βR  0(i.e.,t  0), then we have that ∗
E R  ∗
R, which together
with βR ≥0 and d∗
E R/dβR > 0 lead to ∗
E R ≥∗
R. In a similar fashion, we can get that
∗
E R < ∗
B.
Proof of Proposition 5 We can easily have
dq∗
E Q
dm
 F−1( p−c
p−s ),
d2q∗
E Q
dm2
 0,
d∗
E Q
dm
 (p −
s)
 F−1( p−c
p−s )
0
x f (x)dx and
d2∗
E Q
dm2
 0. Thus,q∗
E Q and ∗
E Q all linear increasing in m.
Proof of Proposition 6 (1) Comparison of inventory quantity. When m  m, we have q∗
E Q 
mF−1( p−c
p−s ) > q∗
R  0; when m  1, we have q∗
E Q  q∗
R. By noting that q∗
E Q is linear
increasing in m whereas q∗
R is increasing concave in m, then there are two possible
outcomes between q∗
E Q and q∗
R: (i) for all m, then q∗
E Q > q∗
R; (ii) there exists a threshold
m*, when m ≤m∗, then q∗
E Q ≥q∗
R; when m > m∗, then q∗
E Q < q∗
R. As noted,
dq∗
E Q
dm
is a constant, whereas dq∗
R
dm is decreasing in m. For m  1, if
dq∗
E Q
dm
< dq∗
R
dm , case (i) is
satisﬁed; if
dq∗
E Q
dm
> dq∗
R
dm , case (ii) holds.
Based on
dq∗
E Q
dm

m1 
dq∗
R
dm

m1, we can get F−1(1 −z) f [F−1(1 −z)]  z, where
z  c−s
p−s . From this equation, the unique solution z0 is obtained. Substituting z0 in z
above, we obtain that sE Q  p −p−c
1−z0 . Hence, if s < sE Q, we have
dq∗
E Q
dm
< dq∗
R
dm and
q∗
E Q > q∗
R; if s ≥sE Q, we can obtain that
dq∗
E Q
dm
≥dq∗
R
dm . Correspondingly, case (ii) is
satisﬁed.
(2) Comparison of optimal proﬁt. When m  m, we have ∗
R  0 and ∗
E Q  (p −
s)m
 F−1( p−c
p−s )
0
x f (x)dx > 0. When m 1, we have q∗
E Q  q∗
R and ∗
E Q  ∗
R. By
noting that ∗
E Q is linear increasing in m whereas ∗
R is increasing convex in m, we
can show that ∗
E Q > ∗
R.
Proof of Proposition 8 Differentiating the proﬁt function ∗
P w.r.t. λ, we can now get
d∗
P
dλ
 (p −s)

(1 −m)θ(λ) + [m + (1 −m)λ]θ′(λ)
 
q∗
P
θ(λ)
0
x f (x)dx
+ (c −s)q∗
P
1 −m
m + (1 −m)λ > 0.
By noted that θ(λ) ≥1, then we can get that ∗
P

λ1  θ(λ)|λ1∗
B ≥∗
B.
Assume
that
θ(λ)|λ0

1,
we
can
obtain
that
∗
P

λ0

m(p −
s)
 F−1[
c−s
m(p−s) ]
0
x f (x)dx  ∗
R.
Noted that
d∗
P|λ0
dm
 d∗
R
dm > 0, and ∗
P

λ0,m1  ∗
B, we can get that ∗
P

λ0 < ∗
B
if m < 1.
References
Akçay, Y., Boyacı, T., & Zhang, D. (2013). Selling with money-back guarantees: The impact on prices,
quantities, and retail proﬁtability. Production and Operations Management, 22, 777–791.
Alexandrescu, A., Butincu, C. N., & Craus, M. (2017). Recommending products and services belonging to
online businesses using intelligent agents. Service Science, 9, 338–348.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
725
Altug, M. S., & Aydinliyim, T. (2016). Counteracting strategic purchase deferrals: The impact of online
retailers’ return policy decisions. Manufacturing and Service Operation Management, 18, 376–392.
Avery, J., Steenburgh, T., Deighton, J., & Caravella, M. (2012). Adding bricks to clicks: Predicting the patterns
of cross-channel elasticities over time. Journal of Marketing, 76, 96–111.
Balakrishnan, A., Sundaresan, S., & Zhang, B. (2014). Browse-and-switch: Retail-online competition under
value uncertainty. Production and Operations Management, 23, 1129–1140.
Bell, D. R., Gallino, S., & Moreno, A. (2018). Ofﬂine showrooms in omnichannel retail: Demand and opera-
tional beneﬁts. Management Science, 64, 1629–1651.
Chen, W. (2019). Is there no worry about returning goods after buying freight insurance? Youth times, October
31, A15. http://www.qnsb.com/fzepaper/site1/qnsb/html/2019-10/31/content_681573.htm.
Chou, M. C., Sim, C., & Yuan, X. (2020). Policies for inventory models with product returns forecast from
past demands and past sales. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-0354
5-4.
Cohen, M. C. (2017). Big data and service operations. Production and Operations Management. https://doi.
org/10.1111/poms.12832.
Crocker, K. J., & Letizia, P. (2014). Optimal policies for recovering the value of consumer returns. Production
and Operations Management, 23, 1667–1680.
Dijkstra, A. S., Van der Heide, G., & Roodbergen, K. J. (2017). Transshipments of cross-channel returned
products. International Journal of Production Economics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2017.09.001.
Dukes, A., & Zhu, Y. (2019). Why customer service frustrates consumers: Using a tiered organizational
structure to exploit hassle costs. Marketing Science. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2019.1149.
Ertekin, N. (2018). Immediate and long-term beneﬁts of in-store return experience. Production and Operation
Management, 27, 121–142.
Ettl, M., Harsha, P., Papush, A., & Perakis, G. (2019). A data-driven approach to personalized bundle pricing
andrecommendation.Manufacturing&ServiceOperationsManagement.https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.
2018.0756.
Fan, W., Liu, J., Zhu, S., & Pardalos, P. M. (2018). Investigating the impacting factors for the healthcare
professionals to adopt artiﬁcial intelligence-based medical diagnosis support system (AIMDSS). Annals
of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-2818-y.
Fosso Wamba, S., Edwards, A., & Akter, S. (2019). Social media adoption and use for improved emergency
services operations: The case of the NSW SES. Annals of Operations Research, 283, 225–245.
Gallino, S., & Moreno, A. (2018). The value of ﬁt information in online retail: Evidence from a randomized
ﬁeld experiment. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 20, 767–787.
Gao, F., & Su, X. (2017). Online and ofﬂine information for omnichannel retailing. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management, 19, 84–98.
Hsiao, L., & Chen, Y. (2012). Returns policy and quality risk in e-business. Production and Operation Man-
agement, 21, 489–503.
Hu, X., Wan, Z., & Murthy, N. N. (2019). Dynamic pricing of limited inventories with product returns.
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 21, 501–518.
Hua Ying capital. (2018). Artiﬁcial intelligence reshapes the retail industry! It’s time to adapt or die. Touzhong
Network. April 10. https://www.chinaventure.com.cn/cmsmodel/news/detail/325144.html.
Iyer,G.,&Kuksov,D.(2012).Competitioninconsumershoppingexperience.MarketingScience,31,913–933.
Jing, B. (2018). Showrooming and Webrooming: Information externalities between online and ofﬂine sellers.
Marketing Science, 37, 469–483.
Kim, Y., & Krishnan, R. (2015). On product-level uncertainty and online purchase behavior: An empirical
analysis. Management Science, 61, 2449–2467.
Kumar, V., Umashankar, N., Kim, K. H., & Bhagwat, Y. (2014). Assessing the inﬂuence of economic and
customer experience factors on service purchase behaviors. Marketing Science, 33, 673–692.
Lake, K. (2018). Stitch Fix’s CEO on selling personal style to the mass market. Harvard Business Review, 96,
35–40.
Letizia, P., Pourakbar, M., & Harrison, T. (2018). The impact of consumer returns on the multichannel sales
strategies of manufacturers. Production and Operations Management, 27, 323–349.
Leung, E., Paolacci, G., & Puntoni, S. (2018). Man versus machine: Resisting automation in identity-based
consumer behavior. Journal of Marketing Research, 55, 818–831.
Li, L., Chi, T., Hao, T., & Yu, T. (2018). Customer demand analysis of the electronic commerce supply chain
using Big Data. Annals of Operations Research, 268, 113–128.
Luo, X., Tong, S., Fang, Z., & Qu, Z. (2019). Frontiers: Machines vs. humans: The impact of artiﬁcial
intelligence chatbot disclosure on customer purchases. Marketing Science, 38, 937–947.
McKinsey. (2015). China digital consumer survey report: Growing desire for choice and change. March 15.
https://www.useit.com.cn/thread-8502-1-1.html.
123

726
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:703–726
Meeker, M. (2016). Internet trend report 2016. June 2.
Ng, S., & Stevens, L. (2015). Where your unwanted Christmas gifts get a second life. Wall Street Journal.
December 27. http://www.wsj.com/articles/where-your-unwanted-christmas-gifts-get-a-second-life-145
1212201.
Ofek, E., Katona, Z., & Sarvary, M. (2011). “Bricks and clicks”: The impact of product returns on the strategies
of multichannel retailers. Marketing Science, 30, 42–60.
Overseas Chinese News Network. (2015). Some people are happy and others are sad when returning goods in
the United States. http://m.sohu.com/a/19783164_108995. June 23, 2015.
Pauwels, K., & Neslinb, S. A. (2015). Building with bricks and mortar: The revenue impact of opening physical
stores in a multichannel environment. Journal of Retailing, 91, 182–197.
Samorani, M., Alptekino˘glu, A., & Messinger, P. P. (2019). Product return episodes in retailing. Service
Science, 11, 263–278.
Shang, G., Ghosh, B. P., & Galbreth, M. R. (2017). Optimal retail return policies with wardrobing. Production
and Operations Management, 26, 1315–1332.
Shulman, J. D., Coughlan, A. T., & Canan Savaskan, R. (2009). Optimal restocking fees and information
provisioninanintegrateddemand-supplymodelofproductreturns.ManufacturingandServiceOperation
Management, 11, 577–594.
Sivamani, S., Choi, J., & Cho, Y. (2018). A service model for nutrition supplement prediction based on Fuzzy
Bayes model using big data in livestock. Annals of Operations Research, 265, 257–268.
Sprague, B., Steger, T., & Douthit, D. (2008). Big trouble with no trouble found returns: Confronting the high
cost of customer returns. Research Report.
Su, X. (2009). Consumer returns policies and supply chain performance. Manufacturing and Service Operation
Management, 11, 595–612.
Tran,T.,Gurnani,H.,&Desiraju,R.(2018).Optimaldesignofreturnpolicies.MarketingScience,37,649–667.
Xiao, T., & Shi, J. (2016). Consumer returns reduction and information revelation mechanism for a supply
chain. Annals of Operations Research, 240, 661–681.
Xu, K., Chan, J., Ghose, A., & Han, S. P. (2017). Battle of the channels: The impact of tablets on digital
commerce. Management Science, 63, 1469–1492.
You, T. (2017). HAOMAIYI virtual ﬁtting: Let each consumer have their own artiﬁcial intelligence fashion
consultant. May 10. https://www.sohu.com/a/139458214_472705.
Zhen, Y. (2017). Stitch Fix’s US$4 billion valuation is based on this approach. November 15. http://news.efu.
com.cn/newsview-1241371-1.html.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123