TITLE: Contemporary approaches in matheuristics an updated survey
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06302-z
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06302-z
ORIGINAL - SURVEY OR EXPOSITION
Contemporary approaches in matheuristics an updated
survey
Marco Antonio Boschetti1
· Vittorio Maniezzo2
Received: 29 June 2024 / Accepted: 16 September 2024 / Published online: 22 October 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Matheuristicsareproblemindependentframeworksthatusemathematicalprogrammingtools
to obtain high quality heuristic solutions. They are structurally general enough to be applied
to different problems with little adaptation to their abstract structure, so they can be consid-
ered as new or hybrid metaheuristics based on components derived from the mathematical
model of the problems of interest. In this survey, we emphasize the mathematical tools and
describe how they can be used to design heuristics. We focus on mixed-integer linear pro-
gramming and report representative examples from the literature of how it has been used for
effective heuristic optimization. References to contributions to matheuristics deriving from
neighboring research areas such as Artiﬁcial Intelligence or Quantum Computing are also
included. We conclude with some ideas for possible future developments. This paper extends
an original version published in 4OR with new sections on CMSA, Incremental Core, AI
hybrids and Quantum Heuristics, and includes references to several recent publications.
Keywords Matheuristics · Mathematical programming · Heuristics
1 Introduction
Matheuristics are problem independent frameworks that use mathematical programming
tools to obtain high quality heuristic solutions. This deﬁnition is compatible with the more
general one of metaheuristics, but it emphasizes the foundation on a mathematical model of
the problem to be solved, a model that is used at some point in the method.
The area of matheuristics was initiated in a workshop of the same name in 2006 (Maniezzo,
2006). The need to focus on model-based heuristics arose from the scant, if any, attention paid
to mathematical models, and more generally to Mathematical Programming (MP) techniques
and results, in the design of traditional metaheuristics. The workshop was successful in
This is an updated version of the paper “Matheuristics: using mathematics for heuristic design” that appeared
in 4OR, 20(2), 173-208 (2022).
B Marco Antonio Boschetti
marco.boschetti@unibo.it
Vittorio Maniezzo
vittorio.maniezzo@unibo.it
1
Department of Mathematics, University of Bologna, Cesena, Italy
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Bologna, Cesena, Italy
123

664
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
drawing the attention of the optimization community to this area of research, resulting in a
dedicated workshop series.
Of course, heuristics based on mathematical models existed before 2006, since the early
years of operations research, but they were often limited to algorithms tailored to speciﬁc
problems, thus lacking the necessary generality to make them a framework, besides often
being proposed as lesser status contributions accompanying exact methods for the same
problems. Nevertheless, some earlier contributions ﬁt well into the deﬁnition of matheuristics,
and indeed acted as openers, prompting the ﬁeld proposal. They are included in the present
survey.
During its nearly 20 years of existence, several publications have surveyed the ﬁeld,
including a textbook citeMBS21 and several surveys and special issues. (e.g., Boschetti et al.
(2009); Maniezzo et al. (2009); Fischetti and Fischetti (2018); Maniezzo and Stützle (2020);
Boschetti et al. (2023)). In particular, in the two years since a previous survey of ours was
published in Boschetti and Maniezzo (2022), nearly 200 publications with explicit reference
to matheuristics have appeared, motivating the update represented by this paper.
Speciﬁcally,inourtextbook(Maniezzoetal.,2021)wesurveymatheuristicsfromthepoint
of view of metaheuristics, both describing metaheuristic hybrids that include MP components
and showing that some mathematical approaches, even if they have long appeared in the
literature, such as decomposition methods, can be used to deﬁne original matheuristics.
The survey in Boschetti and Maniezzo (2022) takes a different approach, focusing on the
mathematical tools and then describing how they can be used to design heuristics. Finally, the
survey in Boschetti et al. (2023) approaches the topic from yet another angle, emphasizing
matheuristics that provide both primal and dual bounds, that is, not only a feasible integer
solution (with an associated upper bound, making reference to minimization problems as we
will do throughout the paper), but also an associated lower bound. This is a speciﬁc feature
of matheuristics, where the bounds help one to evaluate the performance of the method with
higher precision, on any given instance.
This survey, in accordance with Boschetti and Maniezzo (2022), begins in section 2 with
the introduction of the MP notation used throughout the paper regarding mixed integer linear
programming models, their LP relaxations, and the corresponding duals. First, we introduce
approaches that rely directly on the MIP formulation of the problem (MIPping, Very Large
Scale Neighborhood Search, CMSA), then we move on to describe the possible use of dual
variables and reduced costs in constructive heuristics and in matheuristic frameworks such
as Kernel Search or Incremental Core.
Moving away from the use of exact solvers, sect. 3 shows how the structure of branch
and bound can be adapted for the design of heuristic frameworks, two examples being Beam
Search and ANTS. Similarly, in sect. 4, we consider some variants of branch and bound,
focusing on branch and cut and its use in diving heuristics and corridor methods. Finally,
in sect. 5, we turn our attention to dynamic programming and show how it can be used in
matheuristics, leading to Dynasearch and Fore and Back.
Section 6 focuses on decompositions and their potential for designing heuristic algorithms
capable of solving difﬁcult and large instances, and for developing fully distributed and paral-
lel heuristic algorithms. In particular, we consider the Lagrangian, Dantzig-Wolfe, Benders’,
and surrogate relaxations, all of which have been the seeds of matheuristic approaches.
The ﬁnal algorithmic sections are sect. 7, where we survey some of the many proposals
where mathematics has been applied as a component of well-known metaheuristics, thereby
obtainingmetaheuristichybrids,andsect. 8,whichprovidesaﬁrstbriefoverviewoftherecent
ﬁeld of quantum heuristics, which are algorithms that, while not directly using mathematical
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
665
Fig. 1 MP solution methods and matheuristics
programming, rely heavily on mathematics for their functioning. We conclude the paper in
sect. 9, where we discuss some possible future research directions.
The structure described so far is too strict to fully capture the diversity of foundations that
have led to state-of-the-art matheuristics, since many of them may involve or be based on
different mathematical tools. Figure1 shows more derivations from MP methods, listed in the
middle layer of the graph, and matheuristic frameworks, listed in the third layer. The structure
of the dependencies quickly gets cluttered, even if only the most common connections in the
literature are drawn, while others exist that are not drawn because they have been used in
only a few contributions.
123

666
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
2 Mathematical programming
Solving a real-world problem can be very challenging, and in the case of NP-complete prob-
lems, even ﬁnding a feasible solution for hard instances can be computationally prohibitive. If
we want to use some mathematics to solve it, the ﬁrst step is to deﬁne a mathematical model,
and one possible way of doing this formalization is to use mathematical programming. In
this case, a model can have the following general form:
min{ f (x) : x ∈X}
(1)
where the objective function f (x) can be a linear or nonlinear function or, in the case of
multi-objective optimization, a plurality of functions. The feasible region X may be deﬁned
by linear or nonlinear inequalities, and some components of the solution x may be discrete
(e.g., integer or binary).
A model accurately describes a real-world problem if we have f (x1) < f (x2), if the
solution x1 is also better than x2 in the real world, and if the constraints allow all real-
world feasible solutions but forbid the infeasible ones. Deﬁning a mathematical model that
exactly describes a real-world problem can be very difﬁcult, and the resulting model may
be too expensive to solve. In this case, we can deﬁne an approximate model, accepting that
the optimal solution found may not be optimal or feasible for the original problem, or we
can consider the possibility of solving the problem heuristically, or modeling only some
subproblems within the heuristic algorithm.
We have a vast literature on effective mathematical tools for solving the model when the
objective function and the inequalities deﬁning the feasible region are linear functions. In
addition, in the last few decades we also have an increasing number of mathematical tools
for nonlinear models, in particular for quadratic programming.
Focusing on linear programming, given a problem (1), where the objective function f (x)
and the inequalities deﬁning X are linear, if variables x must be integers, the model becomes
an Integer Linear Programming (ILP) model, and it can be written as follows:
zI L P = min cx
(2)
s.t. Ax ≥b
(3)
x ≥0, integer
(4)
where c ∈Rn, b ∈Rm, A ∈Rmn, and x ∈Zn. If only some of the variables must be integers,
we have a Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model. For simplicity, we will only
consider MILP models, since an ILP model is a special case where the set of continuous
variables is empty.
If we relax the integrality constraints of a MILP model, we have its LP-relaxation that
can be written as follows:
zL P = min cx
(5)
s.t. Ax ≥b
(6)
x ≥0
(7)
where x ∈Rn. Its dual problem is:
zD = max wb
(8)
s.t. wA ≤c
(9)
w ≥0
(10)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
667
where w ∈Rm are the dual variables corresponding to constraints (6).
The complementary slackness theorem states that an optimal L P variable x j can be
positive if and only if its reduced cost c′
j = c j −m
i=1 ai jwi is equal to zero (see Bazaraa et
al. (1990)). This property can be used to guide heuristic algorithms to a feasible near-optimal
solution.
Useful tools for solving a MILP problem, both exactly and heuristically, are branch and
bound methods, dynamic programming, and decomposition methods, possibly including sur-
rogate relaxation, which are described in the next sections.
In this survey we focus our attention on linear programming, and in this case a preliminary
point we need to make is the increasing effectiveness of Mixed Integer Programming (MIP)
solvers, i.e. the well-known software solutions that take the problem model as input in MIP
format and compute its solution.
2.1 Mipping
Modern MIP solvers include a variety of advanced techniques to attack hard problems, such
as strong branching, i.e., solving LP models to control branching strategy, lift-and-project to
generate cuts, reduced-cost heuristics, and others. It has been found that the solution of very
hard MIPs can take advantage of the solution of a number of "collateral" linear programs,
e.g. the solution of knapsacks to separate valid inequalities, whose solutions allow to guide
the main steps of the MIP solver (Fischetti et al., 2009). Moreover, for simple MIPs, ﬁnding
good-quality MIP solutions may require a computational time comparable to that needed
to solve their LP relaxation. It is therefore computationally worthwhile to use these MIP
models, instead of the linear relaxations of the problem, to guide the MIP solvers in their
most important steps, or to solve MIP subproblems to optimality anyway, in order to speed
up the solution of the whole problem we are interested in.
Fischetti et al. (2009) proposed to use the verb "MIPping" to denote the activity of trans-
lating some crucial decisions to be made within a MIP algorithm into a MIP model. MIPping
can be effective for both exact and heuristic solutions. In this review, we are speciﬁcally
interested in heuristic design, i.e., the possible beneﬁts of using a MIP solver to produce
heuristic primal solutions for a generic MIP. Several contributions have been proposed in this
direction, many of which overlap with other approaches presented in other sections of this
review. In fact, this is the case for local branching or RINS, which are paradigms that use the
black-box MIP solver to explore large solution neighborhoods deﬁned by introducing simple
invalid linear inequalities into the MIP model; these approaches are described in section 4.1.
Here, to mention just a few contributions that closely follow the idea of including MIP models
to construct large neighborhoods that are effectively explored by a black-box MIP solver to
obtain high-quality solutions, we point to the works of De Franceschi et al. (2006); Hewitt
et al. (2010), and Salari et al. (2010).
In de Franceschi et al. an auxiliary ILP model is used while solving the Vehicle Routing
Problem (VRP). The subproblem allows to determine how to optimally reassign sequences
of customers that will be part of the overall solution.
The work of Hewitt et al. on the ﬁxed-charge network ﬂow problem relies on neighborhood
search. Again, non-polynomial neighborhood problems arise that require solving carefully
chosen integer programs derived from the arc-based formulation of ﬁxed-cost network ﬂow
instances that are subproblems of the problem of interest.
123

668
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
Salari et al. consider the open VRP and implement an optimized destruct-and-repair
approach where the current solution is randomly destroyed (i.e., customers are randomly
removed) and repaired by speciﬁcally deﬁned ILP models.
More recently, Bigler et al. (2023) propose to pipeline the solution of subproblems to
obtain a fully feasible solution and, similarly, Boccia et al. (2023) pipelines the solution of
an AGV scheduling problem with battery constraints into a three-stage matheuristic based
on the sequential solution of the two subproblems arising from the decomposition of the
problem, adding a ﬁnal local search, while (Solyali & Sural, 2022) does the same for a
multivehicleinventoryroutingproblemandWangetal.(2023)foramulti-daytaskassignment
problem, while (Gnägi & Baumann, 2021) proposes a two-stage approach consisting of a
global optimization stage in which the problem includes all variables and a local optimization
stage in which the subproblems include only a subset of variables.
A notable contribution is represented by the feasibility pump algorithm (Fischetti et al.,
2005), originally proposed as a general means of obtaining feasible solutions to initialize
MIP searches, exploiting the observation that a solution is integer feasible if it coincides with
its rounding. This approach proved to be effective and has been incorporated into several MIP
solvers. A recent extension of this approach has been proposed in Gandibleux and Hanaﬁ
(2024).
2.2 Very large-scale neighborhood search
Very Large-Scale Neighborhood Search, or VLSNS (Ahuja et al., 2002, 1999, 2000;
Maniezzo et al., 2021), intersects much the idea of MIPping, and in fact, it could even
be considered as denoting the area of matheuristics as a whole. It is not an algorithm, but
a conceptual framework to be used when trying to design methods for solving combinato-
rial optimization problems. It suggests to "concentrate on neighborhood search algorithms
where the size of the neighborhood is ‘very large’ with respect to the size of the input data",
typically, exponentially large. However, VLSNS can be mentioned each time an algorithm
works on neighborhoods that are too large for exhaustive search. Clearly, when the search
of the large neighborhood is made by a MIP solver, VLNSN reduces to MIPping. However,
specialized algorithms can be used for solving the arising subproblems, and this can give
VLSNS a distinctive denotation.
To help make the class less indistinct, Ahuja et al. (2002) proposed a categorization of
VLSNS methods into three classes:
1. Variable-depth methods, which implement only a heuristic partial search of exponentially
large neighborhoods.
2. network ﬂow based improvement algorithms, local search methods which use network
ﬂow techniques to identify improving neighbors.
3. Local search based on neighborhoods deﬁned over subclasses or restrictions of NP-hard
problems, that are solvable in polynomial time.
This categorization, allowing for exceptions, is widely accepted in the literature to dis-
tinguish what is truly VLSNS from what is, more generally, local search over a very large,
possibly exponential, neighborhood. We note that algorithms belonging to these three classes
were proposed even before the introduction of VLSNS (which is also true for matheuristics
in general), but the classiﬁcation helps to quickly understand the basic working components.
At its core, VLSNS is a paradigm that can be used to design local search heuristics
where the best neighbor of the incumbent solution can be found to solve a speciﬁc com-
binatorial problem. This secondary problem, to be solved at each local search step, must
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
669
be solved efﬁciently, thus supporting full exploration of even exponential neighborhoods.
VLSNS uses mathematical programming to deﬁne and explore neighborhoods. When pos-
sible, this enhances local search algorithms, which produce better solutions when they are
allowed to explore large neighborhoods, but exhaustive exploration of the whole of large
neighborhoods can be very time consuming, so the time to ﬁnd its local optimum is very
long. VLSNS allows using results from mathematical programming to achieve polynomial
time exploration of exponential neighborhoods.
The paradigmatic example of heuristic exploration of NP-hard neighborhoods is based on
the correspondence between an improving cyclic exchange and a negative-cost subset disjoint
cycle in an improvement graph (Thompson & Psaraftis, 1993). When we deal with sequences
of exchanges based on paths instead of cycles, the contributions overlap with those presented
under other names, such as dynasearch (see sect. 5.1) or ejection chains (see section 7.1).
Moreover, speciﬁc approaches were presented as Large Neighborhood Search (Pisinger &
Ropke, 2010) and later generalized by allowing multiple destroy and repair operators to
obtain Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search, ALNS (Ropke & Pisinger, 2006), which has
enjoyed continued success in the matheuristics community (Souto et al., 2021; Ferone et al.,
2023). Anyway, the idea of path- or cycle-based exchange neighborhoods has been applied
to very different problems, including the vehicle routing problem (Thompson & Psaraftis,
1993), the minimum makespan machine scheduling problem (Gendreau et al., 2006), the
graph coloring problem (Chiarandini et al., 2008), mixed pickup and delivery demand and
time windows (Lehmann & Winkenbach, 2024) and timetabling problems (Meyers & Orlin,
2006), among others.
An example of efﬁciently solvable subproblems was presented by Ahuja et al. using Halin
graphs (Ahuja et al., 2002), but the idea was used even before that, for example for a matching
neighborhood for the traveling salesman problem (TSP) (Sarvanov & Doroshko, 1981), and
later to several other problem areas, such as scheduling (Brueggemann & Hurink, 2011,
2007) or generalized assignment (Mitrovi´c-Mini´c & Punnen, 2008, 2009).
Application-oriented works can be found for the ready-mixed concrete delivery problems
(Schmid et al., 2010), for parcel delivery network design (Kweon et al., 2024) and for the
founder sequence reconstruction problem (Roli et al., 2012).
2.3 Construct, merge, solve and adapt
Construct, Merge, Solve and Adapt (Blum et al., 2016; Blum, 2024) (CMSA) is a hybrid
approach in the same line as generate-and-solve, an approach which dictates to generate
reduced instances of the problem of interest and to solve them by an exact solver trying to
obtain a feasible solution to the whole problem.
CSMA specializes the approach by generating, at each iteration, a reduced sub-instance of
the original, such that a solution to the sub-instance is also a solution to the original problem
instance. This is achieved by generating a number of feasible solutions to the original instance
in a probabilistic manner, whose components are then merged to deﬁne the sub-instance. An
exact solver is then applied to the sub-instance to obtain a possibly higher quality solution.
Finally, the sub-instance is adapted by removing some of the solution components, guided
by an aging mechanism.
CSMA is a general framework, an extension of the idea of storing in memory all interesting
solutions generated during the search by a local search-based heuristic, and applying as a
post-optimization procedure an appropriate set partitioning model, where the variables are
123

670
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
the components of the stored solutions and the objective is to recombine some of them to
obtain a better, previously undiscovered solution.
Consequently, CMSA can be easily applied to any problem for which a randomized
constructive heuristic and an exact model are known. CSMA has enjoyed signiﬁcant interest
since its proposal, having been applied to, among others, such diverse problems as Minimum
Common String Partition, Minimum Covering Arborescence, Multidimensional Knapsack,
Taxi Sharing, Maximum Disjoint Dominating Sets, Far from Most String, and others.
A related approach is proposed in Vadseth et al. (2021) for the inventory routing problem,
where a small set of routes is generated to start with, and the route set is iteratively updated
based on the optimal solution from the previous iteration.
2.4 Kernel search
Kernel Search (KS) was introduced in Angelelli et al. (2007), and then extended in Angelelli
et al. (2010), as a heuristic method leveraging on LP-relaxation, duality and reduced costs.
KS is a matheuristic approach that uses MILP solvers to obtain heuristic, possibly optimal,
solutions to instances encoded as (mixed) integer linear programming problems. In fact, KS
was ﬁrst presented as a method for solving MILP problems deﬁned on binary variables
modeling item selection. The binary variables were possibly mixed with other integer or
continuous variables related to the selected items. Later contributions extended the method
to effectively deal with other problems that do not involve a selection stage.
The central idea of KS is to use some method, typically an LP relaxation, to identify a
subset (a kernel) of promising decision variables, and then to partition the remaining ones
into buckets. The buckets are concatenated to the kernel one by one to see if better solutions
can be found that include some of the bucket variables. To do this, KS goes through two
phases: initialization and expansion.
In the initialization phase, the MILP formulation F of the instance to solve is ﬁrst used
to identify a promising subset of variables, which could enter the optimal solution. These
variables are selected as the initial kernel. One way to identify them could be by means of the
LP-relaxation of F and the corresponding reduced costs, but other methods could be used as
well. The variables not in the kernel are partitioned into subsets, the buckets. The best-found
solution is initialized by calling a MILP solver on the kernel subset, possibly allowing it
restricted computational resources (time, memory, or whatever), in the hope of ﬁnding for
this easier instance a feasible primal solution.
This is followed by the expansion phase, where a sequence of MILP subproblems is solved.
Each i-th subproblem is constrained to a subset of the problem variables that includes the
current kernel and a subsequent bucket. The subproblems are further constrained to include
at least one bucket variable in the solution and to provide a solution whose cost is better than
the best solution found so far. If such a solution is found, it becomes the new best solution
and its non-zero variables are included in the kernel. The procedure is iterated and terminates
when no kernel expansions can be found.
Applications of the method include portfolio selection (Angelelli et al., 2007, 2012), mul-
tidimensional knapsack (Angelelli et al., 2010), but also ﬁnancial index tracking (Guastaroba
& Speranza, 2012), time-dependent rural postman optimization (Zanotti et al., 2019), and
supply chain optimization (Zhang et al., 2019). A recent application along these lines is pre-
sented on the Family Traveling Salesman Problem, a variant of the TSP where nodes can be
part of clusters and it is only necessary to visit a predeﬁned number of nodes in each cluster
(Nourmohammadzadeh et al., 2023).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
671
Fig. 2 Incremental Core, upper and lower bound evolution (from Boschetti et al. (2023))
2.5 Incremental core
A matheuristic similar to kernel search is Incremental Core, a framework originally proposed
as an exact method and then recognized for its heuristic effectiveness as well (Boschetti et
al., 2004, 2008). The method relies on the hyperparameters ρmax and Δmax used to generate
a subset of variables X′ (i.e., the core) among which the search is performed. ρmax speciﬁes
the maximum reduced cost ρ j (min problems) that a variable x j can have in order to be
included in X′, i.e., x j is considered only if ρ j ≤ρmax. Δmax deﬁnes the maximum number
of variables to include in X′. We include in the core X′ the least reduced cost variables until
we exceed the maximum reduced cost ρmax or the maximum number of variables Δmax, i.e.,
ρ j ≤ρh, if j ∈X′ and h /∈X′, and |X′| ≤Δmax. Let ρ∗be the maximum reduced cost of
the variables in the core X′, i.e., ρ∗= max{ρ j : j ∈X′}. However, if X′ includes all the
original variables we set ρ∗= ∞.
The optimal solution of the subproblem is a valid upper bound for the original problem
and if ρ∗is greater than or equal to the gap between the upper and lower bounds, the solution
is optimal. Otherwise, it is possible to increase ρmax in the hope of obtaining an improved
heuristic solution, or possibly an optimal one given the larger gap.
An extremely helpful element of the Incremental Core approach is the use of an additive
bounding procedure (Fischetti & Toth, 1989). It assumes that there are several fast lower
bounding procedures for the problem of interest, each of which exploits a different substruc-
ture of the problem, and each of which returns a dual vector. The procedures are then applied
in sequence, each returning a dual vector that is used to replace the original costs with the
corresponding reduced cost vector, which in turn is used as input to the next procedure, which
returns its new dual vector, and so on. After each procedure, the lower bound can possibly
be increased.
Figure 2 shows a trace of an Incremental core search on a resource-constrained project
scheduling problem (from Mingozzi et al. (1998)) based on an additive lower bound. In the
example shown, the problem was solved to proven optimality. In the ﬁgure, one can see the
incremental contributions of the four successively computed bounds, which can be seen in
the increasing steps of the lower bound trace, together with the contribution of each of these
bounds to the improvement of the best feasible solutions.
123

672
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
3 Branch and bound
There is certainly no need to remind the reader what a branch-and-bound approach is, but
we include this introduction to deﬁne the notation that will be used in the sections presenting
relevant matheuristics.
A typical branch and bound implementation solves at the root node of the tree search a
relaxation, for example, the LP-relaxation, of the original problem L P0 obtaining a bound
and, if its optimal solution is infeasible, for example being fractional (i.e., in the solution at
least one integer variable is fractional), it generates a number of branches L Pi (i.e., child
nodes of the current node), each one exploring a subset of the search-space and excluding the
current infeasible solution. According to the speciﬁc search strategy the branch and bound
selects one of the unexplored (i.e., not solved yet) problem L Pi and if the solution is still
infeasible it generates further branches. During this process, all nodes having a lower bound
(for a minimization problem) greater or equal to the current best upper bound (i.e., the value
of the best feasible solution found) can be eliminated, reducing the search space.
3.1 Beam search
One matheuristic approach that speciﬁcally targets branch and bound is beam search (BS),
whosecentralideacanbetracedbacktoLowerre(1976).BSisavariantofstandardtreesearch
that limits the number of descendants that are expanded at each iteration. The core ideas of BS
were originally introduced in the context of artiﬁcial intelligence, and were later transferred
to optimization. The ﬁrst problems for which BS was used were scheduling problems, but
BS has since proven successful on many other diverse combinatorial optimization problems.
BS does not complete the search that would normally be performed by branch-and-bound
algorithms, so it is an approximation method and a matheuristic in its own right. In fact, BS
has been proposed as an effective heuristic method, and as such it has been improved and
hybridized with other heuristics, such as ant colony optimization (see sect. 7.2).
Moreover, other matheuristics closely related to BS have been proposed. One is the Pilot
Method (Duin & Voß, 1999), which consists of a partial enumeration strategy, where the
possible expansions of each partial solution are evaluated by means of a pilot heuristic.
Another one is the Filter&Fan method (Greistorfer & Rego, 2006), which starts with a
feasible solution and builds a search tree, where branches correspond to submoves in the
neighborhood of the solution and where each node corresponds to a solution obtained as a
result of the sequence of submoves associated with the root-node path. In this algorithm, the
initial candidate list of moves is ﬁltered at each tree level by evaluating each move in the
list with respect to all the solutions at that level. The best moves at each level are included
in the candidate list of the next level and the corresponding solutions are the nodes of the
successive level.
Fig. 3 Beam search, δ = 2
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
673
Fig. 4 Complete (left) and approximate (right) tree search
The characterizing idea of BS is to allow the extension of partial solutions into a limited
number of offsprings. This is similar to other approaches reported in this review, such as
VLSNS (sect. 2.2), Diving (sect. 4.1) or the Corridor Method (sect. 4.2), but in the case
of BS the focus is on the result, the number of offsprings, and not on the method to limit
their number. At each BS iteration, the algorithm extends a partial solution from a set T,
the beam, generating a possibly limited number of offsprings. Each offspring is either a
complete solution, or it is inserted into the set T itself, in case it is a partial solution worth
further analysis (Fig. 3).
At the end of the expansions, BS selects from T up to δ (a parameter called the beam width)
solutions. The selection is based on some criterion for ranking the expected usefulness of an
expansion, for example, based on bounds to the cost of the completions. Figure4 shows a
part of a possible beam search expansion tree. At each level, each active node generates all
of its offsprings (3 for each node, in the ﬁgure), then only δ od them are selected and allowed
to expand to the next search level. The parameter δ is the beam width, it is 2 in the case of
the ﬁgure.
BS was applied for example to scheduling problems, both in a straightforward way (Ow
& Morton, 1988) and extended with some additional features, applied to the two-machine
total completion time ﬂow shop scheduling problem in Della Croce et al. (2004) and to open
shop scheduling and to simple assembly line balancing in Blum (2005) and Blum (2008),
respectively.
3.2 ANTS
Another matheuristic based on branch and bound is ANTS (Maniezzo, 1999). It could be
framed in Chapter 7 as it is a variant of Ant Colony Optimization, a well-known metaheuristic,
but since it leverages on the analogy of a general ACO approach with branch and bound, it
ﬁts best here.
ANTS is actually an acronym for Approximate Nondeterministic Tree Search, and it actu-
allyrepresentsoneoftheﬁrstalgorithmsproposedintheliteraturetoincorporateMPelements
into a metaheuristic structure. The general approach here is still a constructive one, where
solutions are constructed step by step, at each step computing a bound on the cost of the best
feasible solution that can be obtained by completing the current partial solution. Backtrack-
ing occurs when a complete solution is reached or, possibly, when no feasible improving
solution can be identiﬁed.
There are a few major differences with respect to standard branch and bound; the main one
being that the search is not allowed to backtrack to partial solutions, but always starts from
scratch, so no stack data structure is needed and the search can run in parallel. However, a
global data structure (the trail matrix) is updated after each solution completion, quantifying
the correlation between variable assignments and the quality of the ﬁnal solution obtained
123

674
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
with those assignments. Node expansion is then probabilistically determined based on both
the bounds and this trail data.
It follows that the tree search is not exact, but approximate, and that it is not deterministic,
given the random choice of descendants, hence the name ANTS. Figure4 shows the two
search strategies.
Several other MP-related elements have been incorporated into ANTS. One is the pro-
posal to initialize the trail matrix not randomly or with an ad hoc user parameter, as in other
ACO codes, but with the primal values of the decision variables as they appear in the optimal
bound solution (if the bound is computed by linear programming). Another is the possibility
of pruning expansion branches, again when the bound is computed by means of linear pro-
gramming, using the reduced costs of the decision variables, which in turn allows to eliminate
a priori some variables in the node expansion. This leads to a reduction of the number of
possible moves, and thus to a reduction of the search space.
Other details are more ACO-speciﬁc and thus of limited interest for this review. These
include dynamic ﬁtness scaling to reduce the risk of search stagnation and promote ﬁne-
tuning in the late stages of search, and a simpliﬁed probability distribution function to be
used in node expansion.
Finally, we note that ANTS has been proposed with two alternative branching strategies.
The ﬁrst is depth-ﬁrst, where the node expanded at each level is the descendant of the
incumbent node with the least cost lower bound. The second strategy is the beam search
alike, where a number of nodes are expanded at the same level before branching deeper into
the search tree. This second strategy has been thoroughly investigated in another ACO variant
called Beam-ACO (Blum, 2005), which we already cited in the section dedicated to beam
search.
4 Branch and cut
Branch and bound is not usually implemented in its simplest form, but it is integrated by
enhancing elements. Two well-known variants of the branch and bound are the branch-and-
cut and the branch-and-price (Wolsey, 2020). The branch-and-cut tries to add at each node
L Pi some valid inequalities, which are inequalities that are redundant in the original MILP
model but violated by some fractional solutions, possibly increasing the value of the lower
bound. Branch-and-price considers only a subset of the original variables, and at each node
of the tree search it adds some new variables that have the potential to be in the optimal
solution. These two approaches can be combined into a branch-and-price-and-cut (Wolsey,
2020). Branch and cut can be converted directly into a heuristic (He et al., 2023; Skålnes et
al., 2023), but all the possibilities outlined have given rise to matheuristics.
4.1 Diving heuristics
A family of heuristics is known as diving heuristics (Bixby et al., 2000). These are methods
that progressively complete a partial solution up to its possible feasibility; they can be seen
as diving into a solution without the possibility of backtracking. This work is common to all
constructive heuristics, but what distinguishes diving heuristics is that they are characterized
by working on the mathematical formulation of the problem to be solved, typically adding
cuts in order to converge to feasibility. Some of these heuristics have proven remarkably
effective and are included as standard components of general MIP solvers. Two well-known
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
675
diving heuristics are Relaxation Induced Neighborhood Search (RINS) (Danna et al., 2005)
and Local Branching (Fischetti & Lodi, 2003).
Both methods are self-sufﬁcient, complete heuristics, but they came to be used as elective
algorithms to be applied at some branch and bound nodes in order to improve the incumbent
feasible partial solution. They can be applied to a generic MIP problem of the form
zMIP = min

j∈J
c j x j
(11)
s.t.

j∈J
ai j x j ≤bi,
i ∈I
(12)
x j ∈{0, 1},
j ∈B, B ̸= ∅
(13)
x j ≥0, integer,
j ∈G
(14)
where the index set of the decision variables, J = B ∪G, is composed of B, the index
set of binary decision variables, and of G, the possibly empty index set of general integer
nonnegative variables.
During the search, while expanding a branch tree, two solutions are compared: the
incumbent feasible solution (if one is found) xh and the bound solution at the current
node ˜x. The incumbent solution is a heuristically feasible solution for the MIP, which is
not guaranteed to be optimal. The bound solution is usually the solution of the continuous
relaxation of the MIP. Typically, the two solutions will have some variables that take the
same values, while other variables are different. RINS is a technique that tries to force the
two solutions to agree on all variables, while Local Branching is a local search heuristic that
explores a neighborhood of xh.
RINS is based on the assumption that the values taken by variables in a good or optimal
solution are often common to the values taken by the same variables in good lower bound
solutions. It follows that selecting an appropriate set of values for the bounded variables and
completing this assignment seems to be a promising approach. The selection is made by
ﬁxing all variables that have the same values in the bound and in the incumbent solutions,
and letting the solver try to optimally solve the remaining MIP problem, called sub-MIP,
within a given node bound or with an objective cutoff.
One advantage of RINS, when applied within a branch-and-cut procedure, is that the
continuous relaxation changes at every node of the tree, and this directly implements a
diversiﬁcation of the starting points for the completions. However, since RINS could be
computationally demanding and since bounds of related nodes typically do not change by
much, it is convenient to apply this procedure only periodically, after a given number of new
nodes are explored.
The sub-MIP can be quite large if too few variables were ﬁxed, so its solution could take
a time comparable with that of the original problem. The issue of the complexity of the
heuristic procedure is faced by setting a limit on the computational resources available for
optimization, usually in the form of a limit to the number of nodes that can be expanded
during the search. If a solution is found, it may become the new incumbent feasible solution,
otherwise, nothing happens.
Local Branching is similar to RINS, in that it starts with an incumbent feasible solution
xh and deﬁnes neighborhoods specifying which variables to ﬁx in further exploration, but
it does so directly addressing the issue of how many variables are to be ﬁxed by explicitly
dictating their number at each iteration.
123

676
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
To understand how the local branching works, we consider two feasible solution vectors
xh and x for problem MIP, where the variable subset only contains binary variables (but this
request can be partially lifted), i.e., J = B and G = ∅. Solution xh is the incumbent feasible
solution and x will be a neighboring feasible solution. Their Hamming distance is Δ(xh, x) =
|{ j ∈B : |xh
j −x j| = 1}|, and the binary support of xh, i.e., the subset of binary variables
which take the value of 1 in the reference solution is denoted by Sh = { j ∈B : xh
j = 1}.
LocalBranchingdeﬁnesalimitedneighborhoodofxh thatwillbeexploredbythesub-MIP,
consisting only of the solutions satisfying the additional constraint Δ(xh, x) ≤k, where k is
a radius parameter. Analogously to RINS, the local branching sub-MIP includes all cutting
planes and variable bounds deriving from valid inequalities found during the exploration of
the global branch-and-cut tree and ignores variable bounds imposed by branching, which are
valid only on a subtree.
The limit on the size of the neighborhood is enforced by adding to the formulation so-called
local branching constraints. Given the value of the parameter k, the k-opt neighborhood
N(xh, k) of xh of an incumbent solution is deﬁned as the set of feasible solutions of the
original MIP satisfying the additional local branching constraint:
Δ(xh, x) =

j∈Sh
(1 −x j) +

j∈B\Sh
x j ≤k
(15)
where the two sums count the number of variables changing their value from 1 to 0 and from
0 to 1, with respect to xh.
4.2 Corridor method
The Corridor Method (CM) is a general search method originally proposed by Sniedovich
and Voß (2006) as a dynamic programming (DP) heuristic overlay, and later extended beyond
DP to other exact approaches, such as branch and bound.
In its general form, CM attempts to solve a possibly NP-hard optimization problem for
which we know an exact method (branch and bound, branch and cut, dynamic programming,
or other) that could solve it effectively on relatively small instances. However, the instances
of interest are too large to guarantee the possibility of obtaining an optimal solution within an
acceptable time, and direct application of the exact method becomes impractical. Therefore,
CM tries to apply the exact method over successive restricted parts of the solution space of
the given problem. The restriction is obtained by applying exogenous constraints, e.g. in the
form of cuts, which deﬁne local neighborhoods around points of interest.
The constraints often result in neighborhoods that are exponentially large, but that are
structured in such a way that the chosen exact method can efﬁciently solve the restricted sub-
instances. The name "corridor" for the method comes from its ﬁrst application, which made
use of DP as the exact module. In this setting, the constraints were used to control the state
trajectory followed by DP using search. The trajectory was forced not to change too much
from its past path, thus it was constrained in its progression as when walking along a corridor.
This initial reference to DP was then lifted, permitting the use of other exact techniques at
the core, for example MIP, where the corridor is deﬁned around incumbent solutions, and
the solver is forced to move along a trajectory connecting successive sub-MIP solutions. In
this case, the CM represents a further variation of the idea of solving to optimality a possibly
exponential neighborhood of the incumbent solution.
The execution depends on a control parameter, δmax, which speciﬁes the maximum “width
of the corridor”, i.e., the maximum size of the subproblems passed on to the exact method.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
677
Another generally accepted feature is the use of a dynamic corridor width (Caserta et
al., 2010; Caserta & Voß, 2014). In fact, it is possible to adjust the width of the corridor
according to the presence or absence of improving solutions in the current neighborhood. If
an improving solution is found in a small neighborhood, the current solution is updated and
a new corridor is deﬁned around this new solution. Otherwise, the width of the corridor is
increased in the hope of ﬁnding feasible solutions.
The ﬁrst application where CM was tested was the block relocation problem (Caserta
& Voß, 2009a,b; Caserta et al., 2011), and speciﬁcally on applications requesting to stack
container terminals in a yard. In this problem, an initial collection of stacks of blocks is
given, for example, stacks of containers in a port terminal. Moreover, a pickup list of the next
containers to collect is known. The containers (blocks) have to be picked up following the
given sequence. For each block to be picked, if there are other blocks above it, the pickup
operation requires to relocate the overlapping blocks into other stacks. The same problem
arises in the management of block stacking warehouses, where items -usually pallets- are
simply stacked on top of one another, with no supporting infrastructure. Here stacks are
divided into successive substacks where only the topmost block of each ﬁrst substack can be
accessed. Each ﬂoor strip identiﬁes a stack. The blocks relocation problem requires to ﬁnd
the relocation sequence for each pickup operation so that the number of future relocation
moves for accessing blocks of interest is minimized.
A problem closely related to block relocation is warehouse pre-marshalling, where we
have a block-stacking warehouse, but we are asked to sort the initial conﬁguration using a
minimum number of relocations so that as few as possible new relocations will be needed
when blocks will have to be picked. This is in contrast to the block relocation problem, where
the objective was to retrieve the blocks according to the picking list and using a minimum
number of relocations. The approach was later extended, including a statistical estimator that
can account for uncertainties in the picking lists that will be received after pre-marshalling
(Maniezzo et al., 2020).
Another successful application of the CM was about DNA sequencing (Caserta & Voß,
2014). The problem asked to ﬁnd the order in which sequences of nucleotides appear in an
unknown fragment of the DNA. The problem has some similarities with the TSP; following
this, the authors propose to model it as an Orienteering Problem and proceed to solve it by
CM. A similar approach was used also for solving the capacitated lot-sizing problem (Caserta
et al., 2010).
5 Dynamic programming
Dynamic Programming (DP) is a well-known method for solving integer linear problems
based on Bellman’s Optimality Principle, which states that “optimal policy has the property
thatwhatever the initialstate and the initialdecisions, the remaining decisions mustconstitute
an optimal policy with respect to the state resulting from the ﬁrst decision”. Bellman (1957).
Following this principle, DP splits the process of constructing the solution into an ordered
set of stages and at each stage it enumerates all the possible states. A DP algorithm considers
a stage at a time in the given order and for each state of the current stage it is able to evaluate
the best move from a state of the immediately previous stage, applying one of the possible
decisions available at the current stage.
For example, consider the classical 0–1 knapsack problem, where we must choose among
n items, having weight wi and value pi, the ones that maximize the sum of their values
123

678
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
and have the sum of their weights smaller or equal to the knapsack capacity W, i.e. zK P =
maxx∈{0,1}n{n
i=1 pi xi : n
i=1 wi xi ≤W}.
The problem solved at a stage j and state w considers only the ﬁrst j items and a knapsack
of capacity w, that is zK P( j, w) = maxx∈{0,1} j { j
i=1 pi xi :  j
i=1 wi xi ≤w}, and the
corresponding recursion is:
zK P( j, w) = max{zK P( j −1, w), zK P( j −1, w −w j) + p j}
(16)
Noticethat,foreachstatew ofthecurrentstage j,weconsidertheonlytwopossibledecisions:
do not include or include the item j. It is straightforward that zK P(0, w) = 0, for every 0 ≤
w ≤W, and that we cannot include the item j if w < w j, i.e., zK P( j, w) = zK P( j −1, w).
DP can be applied to more complex problems, and in these cases each state can have a
more complex structure (e.g., set, sequence, etc.) and the possible decisions can also be more
complex. For example, in a DP for the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), the stage j could
correspond to the length of the Hamiltonian path and the states are deﬁned by the possible
subsets of clients and the last visited client. The decision is about the next client to include
in the path.
DP algorithms can also be used to generate columns for a model in exact methods, but
also in heuristic algorithms. In addition, DP algorithms can be used to compute bounds on
the value of the optimal solution, and in these cases some approximation can also be applied,
such as the state-space relaxation (Christoﬁdes et al., 1981).
As it was the case for generic MIP, also DP has been used for getting heuristic solutions.
Here we outline two DP-based matheuristics, Dynasearch and Fore-and-back.
5.1 Dynasearch
Dynasearch (Congram et al., 2002) makes use of DP as a large neighborhood exploration
enabler, thus it could have been equally well listed under VLSNS. The idea is to improve a
current solution by combining simple search steps, thereby deﬁning complex neighborhoods.
The basic simple steps, in order to be viable for dynasearch, need to be mutually independent,
which means that they must not have any combined impact, neither on the cost function nor
on the feasibility of candidate solutions. This independence guarantees that the overall effect
of a combined step can be computed as the sum of the effects of the single composing steps.
Given the combined steps, dynasearch makes use of DP to organize search. The general
dynasearch recursion is usually presented for permutation problems, where the independence
of the search steps is guaranteed by the constraint that the moves operate on disjunct subsets
of the permutation indices.
The recursion equation can be presented with reference to a permutation problem trying
to ﬁnd the permutation  = (π( j), j = 1, . . . , n) that minimizes a given cost function. The
recursion equation is deﬁned assuming that the maximum cost reduction, considering moves
modifying the solution up to position j, can be obtained by selecting the maximum value
computed either by keeping the assignment at position j or by changing it with a combination
of the best assignment up to a position i < j with the best move sequence from position i
up to position j, for each j ∈J.
Dynasearch has been applied to different optimization problems, mostly scheduling prob-
lems that involve search in a space of permutations, for example the earliness-tardiness
scheduling problem (Sourd, 2006), the single machine total weighted tardiness problem
(Congram et al., 2002), or the dynamic berth allocation of container ships (Nishi et al.,
2020). However, also non scheduling problems have been attacked using dynasearch, includ-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
679
ing vehicle routing problems (Ergun et al., 2006) and generalized knapsack problems (Cunha
& Ahuja, 2005).
5.2 Fore and back
Forward-and-Back, also called Forward&Backward or F&B (Bartolini et al., 2008; Bartolini
& Mingozzi, 2009), can be seen as an extension of Beam Search (BS, see sect. 3.1) that can
increase its effectiveness if the problem is properly structured. Similar to BS, Fore-and-Back
becomes an exact solution method when run without computational resource limitations.
However, by design it is mainly concerned with heuristic solving, trying to get high quality
solutions quickly.
Fore-and-back is a primal only method, but it is able to compute bounds to the cost of
completing the partial solutions that are iteratively constructed, and it is therefore able to
discard partial solutions from expansion thereby pruning the search trees. It can do this
because it alternates BS-like searches in opposite directions of expansion, each time storing
partial results and their costs in memory. These can be used as a lookahead to complete partial
solutions when searching in the opposite direction. The algorithm therefore works best when
the problem suggests a natural direction of partial solution expansions, which can also be
reversed.
It has been observed that there is a signiﬁcant subset of combinatorial optimization
problems that can be optimized by fore-and-back. These are problems that have a regular
substructure that can be decomposed into n subproblems that are linked by a set of coupling
constraints. For example, in the case of the TSP, the subproblems can be related to the node
to visit at the k-th position.
Fore-and-Back exploits this structure, by means of an iterative heuristic algorithm, that
adopts a memory-based look-ahead strategy that exploits the knowledge gained in its past
search history. In detail, it iterates a partial exploration of the solution space by generating
a sequence of beam search-like trees of two types, called forward and backward trees. Each
node at level h of a tree represents a partial solution, made of h components. At each iteration
t, the algorithm generates a forward tree Ft if t is odd, or a backward tree Bt if t is even.
In generating the tree, the partial solution is extended to a feasible solution using the partial
solutions generated at the previous iteration in the complementary tree, and the cost of the
resulting solution is used to bound the quality of the best complete solution that can be
obtained.
This is the case, for example, for the generalized assignment problem, where subproblems
could refer to the assignments of individual clients and the capacity constraints act as linking
constraints, or vice versa (subproblems deﬁned on capacities and linking constraints on
assignments, see Maniezzo et al. (2021)).
6 Decomposition methods
Decomposition methods allow us to break a difﬁcult problem into smaller and easier sub-
problems that can be solved separately, and to obtain the overall solution by “recomposing”
the individual solutions of each subproblem. Decompositions have a long history in opti-
mization, and they come in many different ﬂavors, ranging from constraint programming
to logical decomposition, from dynamic programming to linear decomposition, and many
others.
123

680
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
In this section, we overview how three well-known and intertwined decomposition meth-
ods, namely Lagrangian, Dantzig-Wolfe, and Benders decompositions, have been used as
seeds for classes of heuristic algorithms, plainly to be included among matheuristics.
A good introduction to the topic of decompositions in mathematical programming is in
Bazaraa et al. (1990), while the close relationship among decomposition methods is outlined
in Boschetti and Maniezzo (2009). Reviews of literature presenting decomposition-based
matheuristics can also be found in Boschetti et al. (2009) and Raidl (2015).
In the literature, decomposition methods are mainly applied to continuous, mixed-integer,
and pure integer linear programming problems with suitable speciﬁc structures. In particular,
decompositions of a mathematical formulation can be trivially obtained when the constraint
matrix is block-separable. More interesting cases arise when blocks can be identiﬁed in
the constraint matrix, but they are linked by some constraints (linking constraints) or by
some variables (linking variables). We will concentrate only on some speciﬁc cases, as the
interested reader can anyway refer to the abundant literature on general decomposition in
optimization.
In the next subsections we show some details about Lagrangian relaxation and column
generation useful in the development of heuristic algorithms.
Duality and decomposition methods provide some very useful data that can feed heuristic
algorithms, in particular, dual variables and Lagrangian penalties have the power to gather
information on the overall structure of the problem and of the speciﬁc instance to be solved.
As the reduced and penalized costs drive the exact methods to the optimal solution, they
can be of help also for the heuristic approaches. In the following we show how duality can
be used for developing constructive heuristics, and we further extend this opportunity to
the dual and penalized costs and the primal solutions generated during the execution of the
decomposition approaches.
6.1 Lagrangian heuristics
Lagrangian decomposition has been the seed for several heuristic algorithms, most of which
are based on one of the best-known approaches to solving the Lagrangian dual, the subgradi-
ent algorithm originally proposed by Shor et al. (1985). This is an iterative procedure that, at
each iteration k, computes a new approximation λk+1 of the Lagrangian multipliers in such
a way that, for k →+∞, λk is an optimal or near optimal solution of the corresponding
Lagrangian dual.
The subgradient algorithm generates at each iteration a new (possibly infeasible) primal
solution xk, a new Lagrangian penalty vector λk and thus new penalized costs c′ = c −λkA.
These can be useful parameters for heuristic algorithms, typically constructive heuristics,
which use the penalized costs to choose moves or apply some repair procedures to the
infeasible primal solutions.
A note is worth making for the penalty update. Considering for example relaxed inequality
constraints, the Lagrangian multipliers would be updated by a simple local search as follows:
λk+1
i
= max{0, λk
i + αkgk
i },
i ∈V
(17)
where gk
i is the i-th component of the subgradient (i.e., the amount of infeasibility on the
corresponding relaxed constraint) and αk is the length of the step along the search direction
given by the subgradient itself. The literature proposes several rules to update the step size
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
681
αk. The standard update rule proposed by Polyak (1969) is:
αk = βk ¯z −zL R(λk)
gk2
(18)
where ¯z is an overestimate of the optimal Lagrangian dual solution zL R. Polyak proved the
convergence of the method for ϵ ≤βk ≤2. Unfortunately, according to this approach, the
optimization process is based on global parameters, the elements of the subgradient g, which
restricts the potential for distributed or parallel implementation of this type of decomposition.
However, there exist alternative update rules such as the quasi-constant step size update that
addresses this issue. Applications exploiting this possibility and devising a matheuristic for
a peer to peer network design problem have been presented in Boschetti et al. (2011, 2019).
Alternative approaches to solving the Lagrangian dual are the multiplier adjustment
(Fisher et al., 1986), the volume algorithm (Barahona & Anbil, 2000), or the bundle methods
(Hiriart-Urruty & Lemarechal, 1993). All of these methods generate new primal solutions
and penalties at each iteration, and provide the same opportunities for developing heuristics
as the subgradient method.
A large number of heuristic algorithms using Lagrangian penalties have been proposed
in the literature. These algorithms are known as Lagrangian heuristics, and there is a huge
variety of them, literally hundreds of contributions. For example, just focusing on loca-
tion problems, contributions include work on general location problems (Beasley, 1993),
on capacitated plant location problems (Agar & Salhi, 1998; Barcelo & Casanova, 1984;
Sridharan, 1991), or on facility location (Holmberg & Ling, 1997), among others.
Lagrangian heuristics are typically primal heuristics that try to ﬁx the subproblem solution
so as to have something feasible and hopefully of good quality. Interestingly, Lagrangian
relaxation also allows to exploit the dual information contained in the Lagrangian penalties.
In fact, there is a strong relationship between the Lagrangian penalties and the dual variables
associated with the same constraints, which can be used, for example, in dual ascent methods.
The literature shows that for some models it is possible to generate, for any set of Lagrangian
penalties, a dual solution with the same value of the Lagrangian bound. This has many
advantages; indeed, it is possible to use dual variables, penalties, and primal solutions to
feed some heuristic algorithm for generating new improved feasible solutions, but also for
generating new variables in a column generation fashion (see sect. 6.2).
This possibility has been implemented in Boschetti and Maniezzo (2015), where the
authors describe an application to a real-world urban logistics problem for a medium-sized
city, the core of which is modeled as a multitrip vehicle routing problem with time windows,
pickups and deliveries, and a heterogeneous ﬂeet. The proposed matheuristic is based on the
dual ascent procedure applied to an extended set covering model (SC), where columns are
generated based on the dual information derived from the Lagrangian penalty vector.
Similarly, in Boschetti et al. (2020), dual ascent is used for the problem of the generation
of pivot tables, that are one of the most popular tools for data visualization in both business
and research applications, however, their intelligibility becomes progressively lower when
the quantity of data to be visualized increases, causing the so-called information ﬂooding
problem. To cope with the information ﬂooding problem, a so-called shrink operation enables
users to balance the quantity of data to present with their approximation. The authors propose
amodelforoptimizingtheimplementationoftheshrinkoperationassetpartitioningproblems
with a side constraint, that is solved by a matheuristic that combines a dual ascent procedure,
a Lagrangian pricing approach, and a Lagrangian heuristic.
123

682
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
6.2 Dantzig–Wolfe heuristics
Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition (Dantzig & Wolfe, 1960) is a procedure best applied to prob-
lems that can be formulated on a constraint matrix where some constraints can be grouped
in a block-diagonal structure, while the remaining ones are left as coupling constraints.
The master problem contains all coupling constraints, it is initialized on columns contain-
ing none or only one of the blocks, then the columns corresponding to the successive blocks
are added, deﬁning successive subproblems. The master problem contains all currently active
columns and checks whether each subproblem can add ("generate") some of its columns to
the current basis, thereby improving the objective function.
This abstract structure has been generalized into column generation methods, that proved
highly effective on a wide range of combinatorial optimization problems. Matheuristics have
been obtained both turning column generation into heuristics and heuristically applying
Dantzig-Wolfe to general MILP formulations.
6.2.1 Column generation heuristics
Column generation approaches, rooted in Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition, are very effective
when the number of variables is huge, as it happens for many real-world problem models.
OneoftheclassicalexamplesistheBinPackingProblem(BPP)thatconsistsinminimizing
the number of bins of capacity W required for loading the set I of m items of size wi. Among
the possible models, one of the most effective is zBPP = minx∈{0,1}|S|{
j∈S x j : 
j∈Si x j =
1, i ∈I}, where S is the index set of all feasible conﬁgurations (i.e., subset of items having a
total size smaller than or equal to W) and Si are the conﬁgurations containing item i. Instead
of enumerating all the feasible conﬁgurations (i.e., columns/variables), we only generate the
conﬁgurations having the potential to be in the optimal solution. For doing that, we generate a
small initial set of columns (e.g., a feasible heuristic solution), then we solve the LP-relaxation
of BPP and using the current dual variables ui, i ∈I, we generate a new column solving the
knapsack problem zKP = maxy∈{0,1}m{
i∈I ui yi : 
i∈I wi yi ≤W}. If its solution y∗is
such that 
i∈I ui y∗
i ≤1, we have reached the optimal solution of the LP-relaxation of BPP,
otherwise we add the new column having the coefﬁcients deﬁned by the values of solution
y∗.
In many applications, the generation of the columns requires the solution of difﬁcult
problems,thereforewemayconsiderthepossibilitytoheuristicallygeneratethecolumns.The
result can be a procedure that applies exact column generation when the heuristic procedure
does not ﬁnd any candidate columns or that only uses the heuristically generated columns,
thus the overall algorithm deﬁnitely is a heuristic (see, for example, Boschetti and Maniezzo
(2015)).
Another possibility is to generate more columns at a time. For example, we can generate
the k least reduced cost columns using the current dual solution (see Boschetti et al. (2004);
Mingozzi et al. (1999)). Similarly, we can also select (price) the k least reduced cost columns
from the complete set of columns already available (see Boschetti et al. (2020, 2008)). In
these cases, if we solve the resulting reduced problem, its optimal solution (if there exists) is
certainly a heuristic solution for the original problem, but we are able to prove its possible
optimality or estimate its maximum distance from the optimal solution. This feature has
a great potential, because it is not usually possible to estimate the maximum gap between
heuristic and optimal solutions and thereby obtain a certiﬁcate of the solution quality. More-
over, the literature typically shows that the better the quality of the dual solution, the better
the quality of the heuristic solution. An example of a column generation code applied to
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
683
ridesharing services can be found in He et al. (2024), one applied to learning of classiﬁcation
trees in Patel et al. (2024).
6.3 Benders heuristics
Benders’ decomposition (Benders, 1962) is another decomposition technique that is best
applied to linear problems whose formulation has a block diagonal structure. In the context
of Benders, it is worth noting that this block structure has often been pointed out and used in
stochastic programming applications where blocks are derived from scenarios.
In a Benders decomposition, the constraints of the problem are divided into two subsets,
where one (possibly initially empty) subset belongs to the master problem. If the solution
for the subproblem is infeasible, then cuts are generated (the "Benders cuts", generalized to
"combinatorial Benders cuts" when the original problem is not an LP but a mixed integer
linear problem (Codato & Fischetti, 2004)) and added to the master problem, with the goal of
driving it to feasibility. The updated master problem is then solved again, and the procedure
continues until no cuts can be generated.
Observing that Benders decomposition adds new cuts, thus constraints, at each iteration,
the approach is called “row generation”, as opposed to the column generation deriving from
Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition.
Benders decomposition has been the least utilized for designing matheuristics. There have
been a number of implementations of Benders’ based heuristics, but they are usually very
problem-dependent, not easy to abstract and generalize into a matheuristics, that is into a
framework that can be readily adapted to different problems. One such effort was presented
in Boschetti and Maniezzo (2009), where a "bendHeuristic" pseudocode suggested to use the
standard Benders’ decomposition and cutting planes insertion framework, applied to the LP
relaxation of the problem of interest in case it is a combinatorial one, essentially suggesting to
solve heuristically the master problem. This bars the possibility to obtain a provably optimal
solution, but produces an approach that was successfully tested on different combinatorial
optimization problems, including the single capacitated facility location, the multi-mode
project scheduling and the membership overlay problem.
This structure is closely related to combinatorial Benders’ cuts (Codato & Fischetti,
2004), a decomposition scheme that is deﬁned over a master Integer Linear Problem with
no continuous variables, but containing combinatorial information on the feasible integer
variable combinations, and a slave Linear Program, which possibly returns combinatorial
inequalities to be added to the current master. The inequalities are associated with infeasible
subsystems of the relevant linear system, and must be separated efﬁciently in case the master
solution is integer. The overall solution mechanism is closely akin to Benders’ decomposition,
but the cuts we produce are purely combinatorial, and quite similar to the bendHeuristic
outlined above, the difference being in the focus on heuristic solution of the latter and on
tightening bounds of the former.
6.4 Surrogate relaxation heuristics
Surrogate relaxation was ﬁrst proposed for integer programming by Glover (1965, 1968). It
is less common than other techniques discussed in this section, but its principle is simple, as
it proposes to replace a set of constraints by their linear combination.
123

684
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
Given the problem zP = min{cx : Ax ≥b, x ∈X}, if we surrogate the constraints
Ax ≥b by the non-negative surrogate multipliers μ, we have the surrogate problem zSR(μ) =
min{cx : μAx ≥μb, x ∈X}.
A simple example can be derived for the Set Partitioning Problem (SPP). Given a collection
S of subsets of the items I, the SPP minimizes the sum of the values of the subsets of S that are
in the solution covering each item of I exactly once, i.e., zSPP = minx∈{0,1}|S|{
j∈S p j x j :

j∈Si x j = 1, i ∈I}, where Si is the collection of subsets containing the item i. A surrogate
relaxation can be obtained replacing the set partitioning constraints as follows:

j∈Si
x j = 1, i ∈I
⇒

i∈I

j∈Si
μi x j =

i∈I
μi
(19)
where each non-negative surrogate multiplier μi is associated to each constraint i ∈I.
The resulting problem is a 0–1 knapsack problem with equality constraint, i.e., zSR(μ) =
minx∈{0,1}|S|{
j∈S p j x j : 
j∈S w j x j = W}, where W = 
i∈I μi, w j = 
i∈I j μi, and
I j = {i ∈I : j ∈Si}.
Solving the surrogate dual problem zSR = max{zSR(μ) : μ ≥0} we deﬁne the surrogate
multipliers μ, that maximize the lower bound zSR(μ). An important theoretical result is that
surrogate duality gaps are at least as small as Lagrangian duality gaps, possibly smaller (see
the theoretical analyses of surrogate duality proposed by Greenberg and Pierskalla (1970);
Glover (1975), and Dokka et al. (2021)).
The surrogate dual can also be solved using iterative approaches, similar to the subgradient
method for the Lagrangian relaxation (section 6.1). At each iteration, we have a possibly
unfeasible primal solution that can be repaired by some heuristic procedures. For example,
when we apply the surrogate relaxation to the SPP as shown in (19) the primal solution
obtained can be unfeasible because some “row” is not covered exactly once. In this case,
a procedure can eliminate or add some columns from the solution in order to recover the
feasibility; the difﬁculty is how to implement this procedure to have feasible solutions of
good quality.
A seminal paper about surrogate heuristics is Glover (1977) where the authors deﬁne a
general framework and gives some insights for implementing effective heuristic algorithms.
Other interesting surrogate heuristics are proposed by Lorena and Belo Lopes (1994) for the
set covering problem and by Boyer et al. (2009); Dokka et al. (2021) for the 0–1 multidi-
mensional knapsack problem. The algorithm proposed by Lorena and Belo Lopes (1994)
is based on a continuous surrogate relaxation and subgradient optimization, while (Boyer
et al., 2009) deﬁnes a surrogate relaxation and solves the relaxed problem by a modiﬁed
dynamic-programming algorithm. The algorithm proposed by Dokka et al. (2021) uses the
information generated during the solution of the surrogate dual to drive a primal heuristic,
whereas Narciso and Lorena (1999) and Senne and Lorena (2000) consider a combined
application of Lagrangian and surrogate relaxation.
7 Metaheuristic hybrids
Metaheuristics are problem agnostic approaches that can be turned into solution algorithms
for speciﬁc problems with little additional detail. Dating back to the 70s, they have tradi-
tionally strived for simplicity, with little or no mathematical component in their operation.
Metaheuristics have often proven their undoubted effectiveness, but as awareness of their
potential limitations has grown, so has awareness of the possible contributions that MP com-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
685
ponents can make to them. Most well-accepted metaheuristic frameworks have included MP
components, and the resulting algorithm is often presented in the literature as a metaheuris-
tic hybrid (along with combinations of metaheuristics among themselves, such as genetic
algorithms with simulated annealing).
7.1 Single solution heuristics
Metaheuristic approaches can be classiﬁed according to several criteria, one of which is the
number of solutions evolved at each stage of the algorithm: a single solution or multiple solu-
tions. This section deals with metaheuristic algorithms that evolve a single solution, all of
which are essentially extensions of a basic local search procedure. Many different approaches
have been presented that could be included here. We choose four of them, namely Simulated
Annealing, Tabu Search, Iterated Local Search, and Variable Neighborhood Search, as rep-
resentatives of the class.
Matheuristic components have been used to complement each of them, along with most
of the relevant unreported ones. The techniques used to include mathematical components
in the basic structure of the considered metaheuristic tend to be general and independent of
the speciﬁc metaheuristic of interest.
7.1.1 Iterated local search
Iterated Local Search (ILS, Lourenço et al. (2002)) is an extension of plain local search, where
a simple mechanism is added to avoid to get stuck in local optima. It has been generalized into
Stochastic Local Search (Hoos & Stützle, 2004) to make evident the idea of implementing a
sampling of the search space based on the local optima identiﬁed by whichever speciﬁc local
search is implemented. The sampling can be easily achieved by repeating a random generation
of a starting solution and applying the local optimizer to it, but there is experimental evidence
that a tighter control on the starting solutions can lead to better results.
ILS guides a local search heuristic at its core by generating a reasoned sequence of starting
solutions. This usually leads to better results than if one were to use repeated random trials
of that same core heuristic. The algorithm can be very simple, as it only prescribes to start
from a solution, ﬁnd its local optimum with reference to a speciﬁc quality measure, perturb
the incumbent solution, optimize this new one, and so on. Any local search procedure can be
included, from simple ones such as, for example in the case of the TSP, 2-opt and 3-opt (i.e.,
complete explorations of variations of 2 or 3 solution components), to very involved ones
such as Lin Kernighan or local branching (see sect. 4.1).
ILS builds upon a number of internal procedures. A feasible solution is generated by any
constructive approach, and the results often turn out to be signiﬁcantly independent of the
starting solution. More relevant for the quality of the results is the perturbation step, that
requires to modify the current solution into a new one, which is not too close to the original
one, otherwise it would fall into the same local optimum basin of attraction, nor too far from
it, otherwise the whole algorithm becomes a random restart. It is helpful to this end to be
able to control the amount of perturbation to be imposed on the instance to solve.
ILS can also make use of different mathematical elements, as surveyed in Lourenço et
al. (2010). Lopes et al. (2015) describe how ILS can be used for approximately solving
a linear integer programming (IP) formulation of a real-life machine reassignment problem
proposed in a Google ROADEF/EURO Challenge. A combination with a heuristic for solving
123

686
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
a nonlinear formulation of a subproblem arising in a cutting stock problem application is
presented in Umetani et al. (2003).
7.1.2 Variable neighborhood search
Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS, Mladenovic and Hansen (1997)) proposes a variation
of the ILS idea by implementing a sequence of neighborhoods at each main search iteration,
instead of a single one. This phase is called a Variable Neighborhood Descent (VND) and
it is followed by a perturbation of the incumbent solution as in ILS. In the VND context,
perturbation is often implemented as the generation of a random solution in one further, larger
neighborhood.
This procedure is motivated by the observation that a local minimum with respect to one
neighborhood is not necessarily a local minimum for other neighborhoods. Only a global
optimum is guaranteed to be a local optimum for any neighborhood function.
The core idea of varying the neighborhood used during search has been implemented in
many different ways, giving rise to many variants, such as variable neighborhood descent,
basic variable neighborhood search, reduced variable neighborhood search, and variable
neighborhood decomposition search. Here we present a version where VNS contains at its
heart a basic neighborhood sequencing procedure, the VND method.
VND is usually simple to implement and effective, thus it was chosen as a primary method
forsolvingverydifferentproblems,andalsoitsmatheuristicsextensionsreﬂectthisﬂexibility.
An inclusion of a local branching neighborhood is described in Hu and Raidl (2006), a
combination with integer linear programming for the generalized minimum spanning tree
problem in Hu et al. (2008), but several applications involve VNS including a MIP based
local search (Prandtstetter & Raidl, 2008; Fonseca et al., 2016; Pirkwieser & Raidl, 2010).
A further interesting extension, named Relaxation Guided Variable Neighborhood Search
(Puchinger & Raidl, 2008), makes use of the general multiple-neighborhood VNS scheme,
but the order in which the different neighborhoods are sequenced is not hardcoded but it
is determined dynamically by solving relaxations of them. The objective values of these
relaxations are used as indicators for the potential gains of searching the corresponding
neighborhoods.
7.1.3 Simulated annealing
Simulated Annealing was introduced in Kirkpatrick et al. (1983) based on the Monte Carlo
model of Metropolis et al. (1953). The general structure is therefore similar to the local
search algorithm, where an incumbent solution x is iteratively updated, possibly moving it
to another solution x′ in its neighborhood N(x), except that in the case of SA the moves can
be made also toward worsening solutions.
Worse solutions are accepted in probability, where the probability of acceptance decreases
with the decrease in quality of the solution. The move acceptance formula for worsening
solutionsmimicstheMetropolisformula,derivedinturnfromthenumeratoroftheBoltzmann
equation, where the energy values are replaced by the objective function values (i.e., high
energy corresponds to high cost). Since the anneal permits an effective decrease of the free
energy, the simulated anneal hopefully provides an effective means to decrease the solution
costs.
SA is another very simple algorithm, and simple to combine with mathematical modules.
An example applied to a school timetable problem can be found in Avella et al. (2007),
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
687
where SA is superimposed to a VLSNS, whose neighborhood is explored by solving an
Integer Programming problem. Another timetable application is described in Gunawan et al.
(2012), where the authors design a simple matheuristic where an initial solution, obtained by
solving a Lagrangian relaxation of the problem, is later improved by a SA.
7.1.4 Tabu search
Tabu Search (TS, Glover (1989, 1990)) is another iterative procedure, which extends a core
local search to help it escape from local optima. This is achieved by making use of an
additional memory structure whose objective is to prevent the algorithm from repeatedly
visit the same solutions. The memory of past search is stored in the tabu list, and used to
limit the successive moves. Since this is the only limitation, TS grants the possibility to accept
worsening moves when they are anyway neighborhood best.
The tabu list thus acts as a short-term memory structure, and it is possibly combined with
other structures implementing a long-term memory. Moreover, usually it is not solutions that
are stored in the tabu list, but moves, that correspond to the local search moves that modiﬁed
a current solution leading it to the next explored one. The tabu list prevents reversing the
stored moves for a number of iterations speciﬁed by a parameter called tabu tenure. This
permits escaping from local optima and supports therefore search diversiﬁcation. The long
term memory, when present, collects information about the explored regions of the search
space and is used to direct search toward unexplored regions, thereby providing a strategic
diversiﬁcation guidance.
There are multiple possibilities for integrating this basic working with MP elements. For
example, Gendron et al. (2016), working on the Multicommodity Fixed-Charge Network
Design Problem, propose to solve an LP relaxation of the problem and possibly ﬁx it to get a
heuristic solution. Then, in order to avoid returning to already explored solutions a cut is added
to the LP formulation, taking the place of the tabu list. Similarly, Yaghini et al. (2013) use
added cuts combining a cutting-plane neighborhood structure and a tabu search metaheuristic
for the capacitated p-median problem. The neighborhood structure they propose consists ﬁrst
in closing an open median, then, generating a LP model by relaxing binary constraints and
adding new constraints. The LP solution is the new neighbor. The neighborhood structure is
then combined with a standard tabu search. Ngueveu et al. (2009) deﬁned the neighborhood
based on a b-matching (or b-directed ﬂow) problem for a m-peripathetic VRP, a VRP variant
deﬁned on a periodic horizon and asking to use each arc at most once per period. The
b-matching suggests the arcs to test in neighborhood exploration.
7.2 Population heuristics
A specialized strand of metaheuristics research, bordering and often overlapping with artiﬁ-
cial intelligence, studied heuristics that evolve whole sets of candidate solutions, often called
"populations" of solutions (a widespread strong critique of the excessive use of metaphors
in optimization was published by Sörensen (2015)). Genetic algorithms were among the
ﬁrst results, and after their success it became common to take inspiration from some natural
phenomenon to design heuristics. This chapter considers three representative population-
evolving metaheuristics, namely genetic algorithms, ant colony optimization, and scatter
search (with path relinking), and shows how they have been complemented with mathemat-
ical programming modules to achieve better performance.
123

688
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
7.2.1 Evolutionary algorithms
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs), also referred to as Evolutionary Computation (EC), have
been designed loosely following a population evolution inspiration. They are a collection of
different methods sharing a few properties; the most important being that they are iterative
methods updating a set of solutions, where a solution at an iteration’s set is selected in
probability to be included in the next iteration, with a probability depending on its quality, as
measured by the function to optimize. This in EC terms becomes "selective pressure drives
the species living in a given environment to structures that ensure a better probability of
surviving and of reproducing". The literature proposes several EC methods, including Genetic
Algorithms, Evolution Strategies, Evolutionary Programming and Genetic Programming.
Genetic algorithms (GAs, Holland (1975); Goldberg (1989)) are thus iterative search
algorithms where a set of solutions is updated at each iteration. The update is made applying
to each solution a minimal local search step (named mutation), just a random change of
the value of one or of a few solution variables, a recombination operator applied to pairs
of solutions (named crossover), swapping between them the values of randomly chosen
variables, and usually a montecarlo sampling with repetition (named selection) to update the
solution set. Initially, GAs were proposed for working on solutions codiﬁed as equal length
strings of boolean variables, then they have been generalized to different representations. The
denotation Genetic algorithms is in the plural, because it does not signify an algorithm, rather
a class of algorithms, which share the general structure outlined above, but can implement
the three essential components in widely different ways.
Evolution Strategies (ES, Beyer and Schwefel (2002)) are algorithms similar to GAs, but
they have been designed for continuous variables and undergo a more prescriptive description.
The general structure of the ES is again one main loop on a set of candidate solutions, which
are modiﬁed by three main operators, named selection, reproduction, and mutation. Peculiar
to ES is the encoding within the real valued array that represents a solution of both the data
and of the control parameters of the operators that will act upon it.
The inclusion of MP modules has been primarily focused on optimizing the crossover
operator, the primary search motor of ES. Two main lines have been investigated: ﬁxing the
solution parts common to both parents and optimizing the rest (Yagiura & Ibaraki, 1996) or
making the union of the parent solution components and optimizing within that set (Aggarwal
et al., 1997). The most successful among these two lines has been the ﬁrst one, as it proposes
a solution to a common problem arising in variable ﬁxing (see also Sect.4.1): how many
variables to ﬁx. If the number is too small, the optimization will likely produce one of the
two parents, while if it is too high, there is little advantage with respect to solving the whole
problem.
Optimized crossover has been applied to supply management problems (Borisovsky et
al., 2009) and to the problem of balancing transfer lines with multi-spindle machines (Dolgui
et al., 2010). A different contribution leveraged on the possibility of optimizing a two-
level formulation of a relay placement problem for wireless sensor networks (Flushing &
Di Caro, 2012). The top level problem was solved by the GA, while a MILP solver completed
the solution by solving the subproblem. A combination of a genetic algorithm and an ILP
formulation can be found in Dang et al. (2021).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
689
7.2.2 Ant colony optimization
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO Dorigo and Stützle (2004)) is the name given to a class of
algorithms, which expand and generalize ideas originally presented in a parallel constructive
method called Ant System (Colorni et al., 1991; Dorigo et al., 1996).
A characteristic feature of all ACO algorithms is the way solutions are constructed. Again,
the algorithm has a main loop in which a set of solutions is constructed at each iteration.
Each solution is probabilistically built from scratch, based on a driving heuristic and a shared
memory structure that takes into account the expected quality of solutions, including each
particular component. The structure is updated each time a new solution is completed, so
that its quality and components can be evaluated, and is the basis for indirect communication
between the successive construction threads.
Two contributions framing MP within ACO algorithms were already presented above,
namely ANTS (Sect.3.2) and Beam-ACO (Sect.3.1), but other examples exist. A case was
proposed by Reimann (2007), where the author proposed an ACO method for solving a
symmetric traveling salesman problem where the attractiveness among pairs of customers is
deﬁned using information derived by the calculation of a Minimum Spanning Tree Problem.
Another is due to D’Andreagiovanni (2014), working on cooperative wireless networks. In
this case, the quality of the feasible solutions found through the ant-construction phase is
reﬁned by a modiﬁed Relaxation Induced Neighborhood Search (RINS, see Sect.4.1).
7.2.3 Particle swarm optimization
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO, Kennedy and Eberhart (1995)) is a derivative-free, con-
tinuous optimization method that refers to swarms in its metaphorical language. As in the
previous cases in this section, the algorithm is based on a main loop in which a set of solutions
is updated. The tentative solutions are expected to explore the search space by moving within
it. Each solution applies a velocity vector to its current position to obtain a new position. The
velocity vector is speciﬁc to each solution, it has some inertia, but it is also inﬂuenced by
the best solutions found in the solution history or by the best solution found by the whole
solution set.
PSO was conceived for solving continuous optimization problems, but it has been bent
also toward combinatorial problems. One work presenting a PSO-based matheuristic applied
to the binary cutting stock problem, in a comparison context, was presented by Sanchez
et al. (2018). The authors used a column generation framework (see Sect.6.2), where the
master problem was solved by a MIP solver, and the subproblem was solved using different
metaheuristic algorithms, among which PSO.
D.F. (2014) couples PSO with a MILP solver ﬁrst letting PSO run until the stopping
criterion is met, then feeding its results to a MILP solver, thus letting it start from a high
quality incumbent solution. They successfully applied this technique to the thermal unit
commitment problem in power generation planning, a problem arising in energy production
deﬁned over a quadratic cost function.
7.3 Artificial intelligence hybrids
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has positioned itself as the dominant technology of recent years,
penetrating a wide range of applications. Matheuristics have not been immune to contami-
nation, and various ways of incorporating AI components into model-based heuristics have
123

690
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
emerged since our last review, although the ﬁrst contributions are older. An early survey of
AI hybrids, including model-based heuristics, can be found in Talbi (2016).
The area seems to be promising and still largely unexplored, as suggested by the diversity
of the contributions. Among the variety of suggestions, we note, for example, Abbasi et
al. (2020) who proposed an approach to solving large instances of stochastic optimisation
problems using a machine learning method. They used various AI models to approximate the
relationship between the parameters of the problem and the optimal values of the decision
variables.
A description of the characteristics of speciﬁc instances has also been used in the work
(Maniezzo & Zhou, 2023), which proposes to train a multilayer perceptron to adapt a default
hyperparameter conﬁguration to each speciﬁc instance to be solved, identifying the variations
to be made to each of the algorithm control parameters. The effectiveness of this approach
is demonstrated for a Lagrangian heuristic.
Artiﬁcial intelligence, and in particular machine learning, has been explicitly incorporated
in various ways into the optimization procedures themselves. In the context of stochastic pro-
gramming, Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) have been used in Nikzad and Bashiri (2023),
where the authors develop a two-stage stochastic mathematical model for the problem of asset
protection with cooperation between protection centers. ANNs are used to generate possible
precise scenarios, followed by two matheuristic algorithms, the ﬁrst of which includes a
learning mechanism. In the case of more standard MIP, Wu et al. (2022) propose an unsuper-
vised learning-driven matheuristic that uses solutions associated with the linear programming
relaxation of a production-distribution problem to build clustering models. The clustering
results are then processed by a genetic algorithm to try to progressively improve feasible
solutions.
An application to the management of mining complexes under uncertainty, a process that
involves mining, processing, stockpiling, waste management, and transportation activities, is
proposed (Lamghari et al., 2022), where the solution procedure is staged and a matheuristic
is proposed that integrates relaxation and decomposition components from exact algorithms
with machine learning techniques such as reinforcement learning and artiﬁcial neural net-
works and with simple local improvement and randomized search heuristics.
8 Quantum heuristics
Quantum Computing (QC) is a research area with great potential that has attracted the interest
of many researchers. Although it is not yet mature enough to have real-world applications, a
reference to Quantum Heuristics (QHs) could not be missing in this updated survey.
Quantum heuristics refer to methods and algorithms based on quantum computing to
ﬁnd approximate solutions to complex problems that are hard to solve exactly. QC and
QHs leverage the principles of quantum mechanics, such as superposition, entanglement,
and quantum tunneling, to explore solution spaces more efﬁciently than classical algorithms
(see, Nielsen and Chuang (2000, 2010)). Additionally, QC and QHs can take advantage from
the availability of speciﬁc hardware solutions (see, e.g., de Leon et al. (2021); Heng et al.
(2022); Mohseni et al. (2022)).
In this section we focus our attention on QHs applied to combinatorial optimization prob-
lems, with a particular interest for the approaches that make use of nonlinear programming
and of quantum mathematics for their solution.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
691
Some of the most promising approaches are based on the reformulation of optimization
problems as Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) problems that are solved
using some QC or quantum-inspired methods. Glover et al. (2019, 2022) show in their
tutorials how a wide range of combinatorial optimization problems can be modelled and
solved as QUBO problems.
QUBO problems could be solved by classical methods, but with performances that are not
particularly interesting and not sufﬁcient to represent an alternative to the known approaches
for solving combinatorial optimization problems. The real turning point was the demon-
stration of the equivalence between the QUBO model and the Ising model, which plays a
prominent role in quantum mechanics (see, Glover et al. (2019, 2022); Gemeinhardt et al.
(2023)). The Ising model is a mathematical model used in statistical mechanics to describe
phase transitions in magnetic systems; in particular, this model consists of discrete variables
representing magnetic dipole moments of atomic spins that can be in one of two states (+1
or -1). The mathematical approaches and hardware solutions developed to solve an Ising
model can be applied to solve a QUBO model and thus the corresponding combinatorial
optimization problem.
Well-known quantum heuristic approaches for solving optimization problems, especially
combinatorial optimization problems, include Quantum Annealing, Variational Quantum
Algorithms, Quantum Walks, Quantum-Inspired Algorithms, and Hybrid Quantum-Classical
Algorithms.
QuantumAnnealing(QA)isaquantumheuristicapproachthatreplacesclassicalsimulated
annealing methods. One of the ﬁrst QA algorithms was proposed by Farhi et al. (2001), who
developed an approach based on quantum adiabatic evolution and applied it to Exact Cover,
which is an NP-complete problem. QA has attracted a lot of interest because it can also beneﬁt
from the use of real quantum hardware devices, such as those produced by companies like D-
WaveSystemInc(Hengetal.,2022;Oshiyama&Ohzeki,2022).Manyauthorshaveproposed
solvers for QUBO based on QA. For example, Oshiyama and Ohzeki (2022) compares four
solvers on some well-known instances. The solvers are D-Wave Hybrid Solver Service (HSS),
Toshiba Simulated Bifurcation Machine (SBM), Fujitsu Digital Annealer (DA), and classical
simulated annealing.
The Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) use a classical optimizer to train a
parametrized quantum circuit. The interested reader can ﬁnd an interesting and deep survey
in Cerezo et al. (2021). Regarding the application to combinatorial optimization problems,
among the most effective VQA approaches we can include the Variational Quantum Eigen-
solver (VQE) and the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA). In addition,
Gemeinhardt et al. (2023) proposes a systematic mapping study that reviews the current state
of the art in QA and VQA approaches applied to CO problems.
The Quantum Walks are the quantum analogs of classical random walks and are used in
some optimization algorithms (see, Kadian et al. (2021); Campos et al. (2023)). The claim is
that quantum walks can explore very large solution spaces more efﬁciently. However, Kadian
et al. (2021) points out that quantum walk application in the ﬁeld of optimization problems
needs further research.
Quantum-inspired algorithms are classical algorithms inspired by quantum computing
principles. Even if they do not run on quantum hardware, they borrow ideas from quantum
mechanics to improve performance. In the literature, many papers propose a wide variety of
quantum-inspired algorithms; among them, for example, Han and Kim (2002) proposes an
evolutionary algorithm, Chiang et al. (2014) a tabu search, and Dupont et al. (2023) a greedy
one. New advances for quantum-inspired optimization are described in Du et al. (2023),
123

692
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
which proposes extensions to more general Polynomial Unconstrained Binary Optimization
(PUBO) models as important alternatives to traditional approaches.
The Hybrid Quantum-Classical Algorithms use quantum computing for parts of the
problem where it can provide a signiﬁcant speedup or better solution quality and classi-
cal computing for the rest. The combination can lead to heuristic solutions that are better
than purely classical ones. However, there are no signiﬁcant differences compared to the
concept of quantum-inspired algorithms.
Quantum Computing approaches still have some speciﬁc issues that limit their use for
solving real-world problems. The main limitations are: noise and decoherence which can
affect their ability to ﬁnd optimal solutions; the complexity in translating real-world problems
into QUBO or Ising models; the limited number of qubits available in the current quantum
annealers, which limits the size of problems they can handle.
9 Conclusions and future research directions
This survey is an update of a previously published one by the same authors (Boschetti &
Maniezzo, 2022) and a testimony to the liveliness of the ﬁeld of matheuristics, as it shows
that the two intervening years witnessed a wealth and diversity of contributions that we could
hardly combine in the text.
The survey is mainly concerned with the heuristic approaches that use linear programming,
but the developments in the hybrids of different models in recent years offer new possibilities.
We have already noted that several heuristic approaches have been proposed based on
nonlinear models, possibly relying on mathematical tools that are not very effective for
the exact solution of real-world problems, but that become useful in heuristic algorithms.
For example, a non-convex mixed-integer nonlinear programming model is proposed in
Terzi et al. (2023) later solved by a number of approximate approaches including genetic
algorithms, late acceptance hill climbing and simulated annealing, or the encompassing
generalized quadratic assignment problem has been tackled with a matheuristic framework,
the magnifying glass, which has proved its effectiveness also on other linear and nonlinear
problems.
Anotherareawherematheuristicsisenjoyinganincreasingamountofsuccessisinstochas-
tic programming. Applications here would deserve a more in-depth report, we will just
mention a general survey that appeared in Juan et al. (2023), progressive hedging applied
to home health care planning (Nikzad et al., 2021), inventory routing problem with time
windows and stochastic demands tackled by an ALNS hybrid (Alarcon & Ortega, 2023),
stochastic facility location (Turkeš et al., 2021), and home health care staff sizing solved
by a two-stage stochastic programming model including a ﬁx-and-optimize phase to reﬁne
solutions (Nikzad et al., 2023).
Finally, we have included in this update a ﬁrst tentative survey of quantum heuristics, an
emerging area where the classical mathematical programming is not yet central, but where the
sophisticated mathematical tools of the quantum computing are fundamental to the operation
of the heuristic.
The era we live in, characterized by big data and machine learning, emphasizes the impor-
tance of mastering very large instances. The integration of heuristics, capable of quickly
converging on quality solutions, and mathematical programming, capable of optimizing even
instances deﬁned over millions of variables, seems to be a very promising area of research
to pursue. As in the case of machine learning, it will also be essential to be able to take full
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
693
advantage of the increasing possibilities offered by advances in hardware. Attention to the
internal structure of algorithms will be important and is already being analyzed. For exam-
ple, we have mentioned that decomposition methods offer the possibility to develop fully
decentralized heuristic algorithms and thus to exploit parallel architectures such as GPU
and many-core computers. In fact, it is possible to design heuristic algorithms where the
local optimization procedures can produce near-optimal solutions to the global problem by
exchanging minimal data between the local components. This is very promising for complex,
large-scale problems that arise in real-world systems where many individual entities have to
make some decisions that are supposed to be globally optimal, such as in communication
and supply chain networks or urban trafﬁc management.
We would like to conclude this update by reiterating that there are approaches described
in the mathematical literature that have not proven effective enough to be used for exact
methods, and therefore have not become very popular, but that could be effective for designing
heuristics. An example is the surrogate relaxation discussed in sect. 6.4, which has interesting
properties that have great potential even for designing exact methods, but which can also be
used for designing heuristic algorithms, possibly in combination with other approaches such
as Lagrangian relaxation. There are probably some other neglected mathematical methods
that could be rediscovered to design new matheuristics, in addition to being now suitable for
inclusion also in exact methods.
Funding Open access funding provided by Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di Bologna within the CRUI-
CARE Agreement.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they do not have any Conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abbasi, B., Babaei, T., Hosseinifard, Z., Smith-Miles, K., & Dehghani, M. (2020). Predicting solutions of
large-scale optimization problems via machine learning: A case study in blood supply chain management.
Computers & Operations Research, 119, 104941.
Agar, M., & Salhi, S. (1998). Lagrangean heuristics applied to a variety of large capacitated plant location
problems. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 49, 1072–1084.
Aggarwal, C., Orlin, J., & Tai, R. (1997). An optimized crossover for the maximum independent set. Operations
Research, 45, 226–234.
Ahuja, R. K., Ergun, O., Orlin, J. B., & Punnen, A. P. A. (2002). Survey of very large-scale neighborhood
search techniques. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 123, 75–102.
Ahuja, R.K., Orlin, J.B., & Sharma, D. (1999). New neighborhood search structures for the capacitated mini-
mum spanning tree problem. Technical Report 99-2, Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering,
University of Florida.
Ahuja, R. K., Orlin, J. B., & Sharma, D. (2000). Very large-scale neighborhood search. International Trans-
actions in Operational Research, 7(4–5), 301–317.
123

694
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
Angelelli, E., Mansini, R., & Speranza, M.G. (2007). Kernel search: a heuristic framework for MILP problems
with binary variables. Technical report, Department of Electronics for Automation, University of Brescia,
R.T.2007-04-56.
Angelelli, E., Mansini, R., & Speranza, M. G. (2010). Kernel search: a general heuristic for the multi-
dimensional knapsack problem. Computer and Operations Research, 37(11), 2017–2026.
Angelelli, E., Mansini, R., & Speranza, M. G. (2012). Kernel search: A new heuristic framework for portfolio
selection. Computational Optimization and Applications, 51(1), 345–361.
Avella, P., D’Auria, B., Salerno, S., & Vasil’ev, I. (2007). A computational study of local search algorithms
for Italian high-school timetabling. Journal of Heuristics, 13, 543–556.
Barahona, F., & Anbil, R. (2000). The volume algorithm: Producing primal solutions with a subgradient
method. Mathematical Programming, 87, 385–399.
Barcelo, J., & Casanova, J. (1984). A heuristic Lagrangean algorithm for the capacitated plant location problem.
European Journal of Operational Research, 15, 212–226.
Bartolini, E., Maniezzo, V., & Mingozzi, A. (2008). An adaptive memory-based approach based on partial
enumeration. In: V. Maniezzo, R. Battiti, J.P. Watson (eds.) LION 2, LNCS 5313, pp. 12–24. Springer
Bartolini, E., & Mingozzi, A. (2009). Algorithms for the non-bifurcated network design problem. Joutnal of
Heuristics, 15(3), 259–281.
Bazaraa, M. S., Jarvis, J., & Sherali, H. D. (1990). Linear Programming and Network Flows. John Wiley &
Sons.
Beasley, J. (1993). Lagrangian heuristics for location problems. European Journal of Operational Research,
65, 383–399.
Bellman, R. (1957). Dynamic programming and the numerical solution of variational problems. Operations
Research, 5(2), 277–288.
Benders, J. F. (1962). Partitioning procedures for solving mixed-variables programming problems. Numerische
Mathematik, 4, 280–322.
Beyer, H. G., & Schwefel, H. P. (2002). Evolution strategies - a comprehensive introduction. Natural Com-
puting, 1(1), 3–52.
Bigler, T., Kammermann, M., & Baumann, P. (2023). A matheuristic for a customer assignment problem in
direct marketing. European Journal of Operational Research, 304(2), 689–708.
Bixby, R. E., Fenelon, M., Gu, Z., Rothberg, E., & Wunderling, R. (2000). MIP: Theory andpractice - closing
the gap. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Blum, C. (2005). Beam-ACO - hybridizing ant colony optimization with beam search: An application to open
shop scheduling. Computers and Operations Research, 32(6), 1565–1591.
Blum, C. (2008). Beam-ACO for simple assembly line balancing. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 20(4),
618–627.
Blum, C. (2024). Construct, Merge. Solve & Adapt. Computational Intelligence Methods. Cham: Springer.
Blum, C., Pinacho, P., López-Ibáñez, M., & Lozano, J. A. (2016). Construct, merge, solve & adapt a new
general algorithm for combinatorial optimization. Computers & Operations Research, 68, 75–88.
Boccia, M., Masone, A., Sterle, C., & Murino, T. (2023). The parallel agv scheduling problem with battery
constraints: A new formulation and a matheuristic approach. European Journal of Operational Research,
307(2), 590–603.
Borisovsky, P., Dolgui, A., & Eremeev, A. (2009). Genetic algorithms for a supply management problem:
MIP-recombination vs greedy decoder. European Journal of Operational Research, 195(3), 770–779.
Boschetti, M., & Maniezzo, V. (2009). Benders decomposition, Lagrangean relaxation and metaheuristic
design. Journal of Heuristics, 15, 283–312.
Boschetti, M., Maniezzo, V., & Rofﬁlli, M. (2009). Decomposition techniques as metaheuristic frameworks.
In: V. Maniezzo, T. Stützle, S. Voß (eds.) Matheuristics. Annals of Information Systems, vol 10. Springer,
Boston, MA
Boschetti, M. A., Golfarelli, M., & Graziani, S. (2020). An exact method for shrinking pivot tables. Omega,
93, 10–44.
Boschetti, M. A., Letchford, A. N., & Maniezzo, V. (2023). Matheuristics: Survey and synthesis. International
Transactions in Operational Research, 30(6), 2840–2866.
Boschetti, M. A., & Maniezzo, V. (2009). Benders decomposition, Lagrangian relaxation and metaheuristic
design. Journal of Heuristics, 15(3), 283–312.
Boschetti, M. A., & Maniezzo, V. (2015). A set covering based matheuristic for a real-world city logistics
problem. International Transactions in Operational Research, 22(1), 169–195.
Boschetti, M. A., & Maniezzo, V. (2022). Matheuristics: Using mathematics for heuristic design. 4OR, 20(2),
173–208.
Boschetti, M. A., Maniezzo, V., & Rofﬁlli, M. (2011). Fully distributed Lagrangian solution for a peer-to-peer
overlay network design problem. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 23(1), 90–104.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
695
Boschetti, M.A., Maniezzo, V., Rofﬁlli, M., & Bolufé Röhler, A. (2009). Matheuristics: Optimization, simu-
lation and control. In: M. Blesa, C. Blum, L. Di Gaspero, A. Roli, M. Sampels, A. Schaerf (eds.) Hybrid
Metaheuristics, HM 2009. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 5818, Springer
Boschetti, M. A., Maniezzo, V., & Strappaveccia, F. (2019). Membership overlay design optimization with
resource constraints (accelerated on gpu). Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 133, 286–296.
Boschetti, M. A., Mingozzi, A., & Ricciardelli, S. (2004). An exact algorithm for the simpliﬁed multi depot
crew scheduling problem. Annals of Operations Research, 127, 177–201.
Boschetti, M. A., Mingozzi, A., & Ricciardelli, S. (2008). A dual ascent procedure for the set partitioning
problem. Discrete Optimization, 5(4), 735–747.
Boyer, V., Elkihel, M., & El Baz, D. (2009). Heuristics for the 0–1 multidimensional knapsack problem.
European Journal of Operational Research, 199(3), 658–664.
Brueggemann, T., & Hurink, J. L. (2007). Two exponential neighborhoods for single machine scheduling. OR
Spectrum, 29, 513–533.
Brueggemann, T., & Hurink, J. L. (2011). Matching based very large-scale neighborhoods for parallel machine
scheduling. Journal of Heuristics, 17(6), 637–658.
Campos, R., Casares, P. A. M., & Martin-Delgado, M. A. (2023). Quantum Metropolis Solver: A quantum
walks approach to optimization problems. Quantum Machine Intelligence, 5(2), 28. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s42484-023-00119-y
Caserta, M., Ramirez, A., & Voß, S. (2010). A math-heuristic for the multi-level capacitated lot sizing problem
with carryover. In: C.D. Chio, et al. (eds.) Applications of Evolutionary Computation. EvoApplications
2010. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 6025, pp. 462–471. Springer
Caserta, M., & Voß, S. (2009). A cooperative strategy for guiding the corridor method. In: N. Krasnogor, et al.
(eds.) Nature Inspired Cooperative Strategies for Optimization (NICSO 2008). Studies in Computational
Intelligence, vol 236. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
Caserta, M., & Voß, S. (2009). Corridor selection and ﬁne tuning for the corridor method. In: T. Stützle
(ed.) Learning and Intelligent Optimization. LION 2009. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 5851.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
Caserta, M., & Voß, S. (2014). A hybrid algorithm for the DNA sequencing problem. Discrete Applied
Mathematics, 163, 87–99.
Caserta, M., Voß, S., & Sniedovich, M. (2011). Applying the corridor method to a blocks relocation problem.
Operations Research Spektrum, 33, 915–929.
Cerezo, M., Arrasmith, A., Babbush, R., Benjamin, S. C., Endo, S., Fujii, K., McClean, J. R., Mitarai, K.,
Yuan, X., Cincio, L., & Coles, P. J. (2021). Variational quantum algorithms. Nature Reviews Physics,
3(9), 625–644. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-021-00348-9
Chiang, H. P., Chou, Y. H., Chiu, C. H., Kuo, S. Y., & Huang, Y. M. (2014). A quantum-inspired tabu search
algorithm for solving combinatorial optimization problems. Soft Computing, 18(9), 1771–1781. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00500-013-1203-7
Chiarandini, M., Dumitrescu, I., & Stützle, T. (2008). Very large-scale neighborhood search: Overview and case
studies on coloring problems. In: C. Blum, M.J. Blesa, A. Roli, M. Sampels (eds.) Hybrid Metaheuristics,
vol. 114 of Studies in Computational Intelligence, pp. 117–150. Springer
Christoﬁdes, N., Mingozzi, A., & Toth, P. (1981). State-space relaxation procedures for the computation of
bounds to routing problems. Networks, 11(2), 145–164.
Codato, G., & Fischetti, M. (2004). Combinatorial benders’ cuts. In D. Bienstock & G. Nemhauser (Eds.),
Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization (pp. 178–195). Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Hei-
delberg: Springer.
Colorni, A., Dorigo, M., & Maniezzo, V. (1991). Distributed optimization by ant colonies. In: F. Varela,
P. Bourgine (eds.) Proceedings of the European Conference on Artiﬁcial Life, ECAL’91, Paris, pp.
134–142. Elsevier Publishing, Amsterdam
Congram, R. K., Potts, C. N., & van de Velde, S. (2002). An iterated dynasearch algorithm for the single-
machine total weighted tardiness scheduling problem. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 14(1), 52–67.
Cunha, C. B., & Ahuja, R. K. (2005). Very large scale neighborhood search for the k-constrained multiple
knapsack problem. Journal of Heuristics, 11, 465–481.
Dang, Q. V., van Diessen, T., Martagan, T., & Adan, I. (2021). A matheuristic for parallel machine scheduling
with tool replacements. European Journal of Operational Research, 291(2), 640–660.
Danna, E., Rothberg, E., & Pape, C. (2005). Exploring relaxation induced neighborhoods to improve MIP
solutions. Mathematical Programming, 102(1), 71–90.
Dantzig, G. B., & Wolfe, P. (1960). Decomposition principle for linear programs. Operations Research, 8,
101–111.
De Franceschi, R., Fischetti, M., & Toth, P. (2006). A new ilp-based reﬁnement heuristic for vehicle routing
problems. Mathematical Programming B(105 (2-3)), 471-499
123

696
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
Della Croce, F., Ghirardi, M., & Tadei, R. (2004). Recovering beam search: Enhancing the beam search
approach for combinatorial optimization problems. Journal of Heuristics, 10(1), 89–104.
D.F., R., Viana, A., Pedroso. J. (2014). Metaheuristic search based methods for unit commitment. International
Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems, 59, 14–22.
Dokka, T., Letchford, A., & Mansoor, M. (2021). On the complexity of surrogate and group relaxation for
integer linear programs. Operations Research Letters, 49(4), 530–534.
Dokka, T., Letchford, A., & Mansoor, M. (2021). Revisiting surrogate relaxation for the multi-dimensional
knapsack problem. Submitted to Operations Research Letters
Dolgui, A., Eremeev, A., & Guschinskaya, O. (2010). MIP-based GRASP and genetic algorithm for balancing
transfer lines. In: Matheuristics, p. 189-208
Dorigo, M., Maniezzo, V., & Colorni, A. (1996). Ant system: optimization by a colony of cooperating agents.
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics), 26(1), 29–41.
Dorigo, M., & Stützle, T. (2004). Ant Colony Optimization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Du, Y., Wang, H., Hennig, R., Hulandageri, A., Kochenberger, G., & Glover, F. (2023). New advances for
quantum-inspired optimization. International Transactions in Operational Research n/a(n/a). https://doi.
org/10.1111/itor.13420.
Duin, C., & Voß, S. (1999). The pilot method: A strategy for heurisic repetition with application problem in
graphs. Networks, 34, 181–191.
Dupont, M., Evert, B., Hodson, M. J., Sundar, B., Jeffrey, S., Yamaguchi, Y., Feng, D., Maciejewski, F. B.,
Hadﬁeld, S., Alam, M. S., Wang, Z., Grabbe, S., Lott, P. A., Rieffel, E. G., Venturelli, D., & Reagor,
M. J. (2023). Quantum-enhanced greedy combinatorial optimization solver. Science Advances, 9(45),
eadi0487. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adi0487
D’Andreagiovanni, F.A. (2014). Hybrid exact-ACO algorithm for the joint scheduling, power and cluster
assignment in cooperative wireless networks. In: G. Di Caro, G. Theraulaz (eds.) Bio-Inspired Models
of Network, Information, and Computing Systems, pp. 3–17. Springer
Alarcon,EmilioJ.,&Ortega,K.F.D.(2023).Asampling-basedmatheuristicforthecontinuous-timestochastic
inventory routing problem with time-windows. Computers & Operations Research, 152, 106129.
Ergun, O., Orlin, J. B., & Steele-Feldman, A. (2006). Creating very large scale neighborhoods out of smaller
ones by compounding moves. Journal of Heuristics, 12(1–2), 115–140.
Farhi, E., Goldstone, J., Gutmann, S., Lapan, J., Lundgren, A., & Preda, D. (2001). A quantum adiabatic
evolution algorithm applied to random instances of an np-complete problem. Science, 292(5516), 472–
475. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1057726
Ferone, D., Festa, P., Fugaro, S., & Pastore, T. (2023). Hybridizing a matheuristic with alns for the optimal col-
lection and delivery of medical specimens. International Transactions in Operational Research n/a(n/a),
1–27
Fischetti, M., & Fischetti, M. (2018). Matheuristics. In: Handbook of Heuristics, vol. 1-2, pp. 121–153.
Springer
Fischetti, M., Glover, F., & Lodi, A. (2005). The feasibility pump. Mathematical Programming, 104(1), 91–
104.
Fischetti, M., & Lodi, A. (2003). Mathematical Programming. Ser. B. Local branching, 98(1–3), 23–47.
Fischetti, M., Lodi, A., & Salvagnin, D. (2009). Just mip it! In V. Maniezzo, T. Stützle, & S. Voss (Eds.),
Matheuristics, Hybridizing Metaheuristics and Mathematical Programming, Annals of Information Sys-
tems. (Vol. 10). Boston, MA: Springer.
Fischetti, M., & Toth, P. (1989). An additive bounding procedure for combinatorial optimization problems.
Operation Research, 37, 319–328.
Fisher, M. L., Jaikumar, R., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (1986). A multiplier adjustment method for the gener-
alized assignment problem. Management Science, 32(9), 1095–1103.
Flushing, E.F., & Di Caro, G.A. (2012). Exploiting synergies between exact and heuristic methods in opti-
mization: an application to the relay placement problem in wireless sensor networks. In: G. Di Caro,
G. Theraulaz (eds.) BIONETICS 2012, Lecture Notes for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering, vol 134, pp. 250–265
Fonseca, G. H., Santos, H. G., & Carrano, E. G. (2016). Integrating matheuristics and metaheuristics for
timetabling. Computers & Operations Research, 74, 108–117.
Gandibleux, X., & Hanaﬁ, S. (2024). A primal matheuristic for multi-objective binary linear optimization
problems. In: Metaheuristics, proceedings MIC 2024 conference. Lorient (France)
Gemeinhardt, F., Garmendia, A., Wimmer, M., Weder, B., & Leymann, F. (2023). Quantum combinatorial
optimization in the nisq era: A systematic mapping study. ACM Computer Survery 56(3). https://doi.
org/10.1145/3620668.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
697
Gendreau, M., Guertin, F., Potvin, J. Y., & Seguin, R. (2006). Neighborhood search heuristics for a dynamic
vehicle dispatching problem with pick-ups and deliveries. Transportation Research Part C Emerging
Technologies, 14, 157–174.
Gendron, B., Hanaﬁ, S., & Todosijevi´c, R. (2016). An efﬁcient matheuristic for the multicommodity ﬁxed-
charge network design problem. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 49(12), 117–120.
Glover, F. (1965). A multiphase-dual algorithm for the zero-one integer programming problem. Operations
Research, 13, 879–919.
Glover, F. (1968). Surrogate constraints. Operations Research, 16, 741–749.
Glover, F. (1975). Surrogate constraint duality in mathematical programming. Operations Research, 23, 434–
451.
Glover, F. (1977). Heuristics for integer programming using surrogate constraints. Decision Sciences, 8(1),
156–16.
Glover, F. (1989). Tabu search - part I. ORSA Journal on Computing, 1(3), 190–206.
Glover, F. (1990). Tabu search - part II. ORSA Journal on Computing, 2(1), 14–32.
Glover, F., Kochenberger, G., & Du, Y. (2019). Quantum bridge analytics i a tutorial on formulating and using
qubo models. 4OR, 17(4), 335–371. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10288-019-00424-y
Glover, F., Kochenberger, G., Hennig, R., & Du, Y. (2022). Quantum bridge analytics i: a tutorial on formulat-
ing and using qubo models. Annals of Operations Research, 314(1), 141–183. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-022-04634-2
Gnägi, M., & Baumann, P. (2021). A matheuristic for large-scale capacitated clustering. Computers & Oper-
ations Research, 132, 105304.
Goldberg, D. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search. Reading, USA: Optimization and Machine Learning.
Addison-Wesley Professional.
Greenberg, H. J., & Pierskalla, W. P. (1970). Surrogate mathematical programming. Operations Research, 18,
924–939.
Greistorfer, P., & Rego, C. (2006). A simple ﬁlter-and-fan approach to the facility location problem. Computers
& Operations Research, 33, 2590–2601.
Guastaroba, G., & Speranza, M. G. (2012). Kernel search: an application to the index tracking problem.
European Journal of Operational Research, 217(1), 54–68.
Gunawan, A., Ming Ng, K., & Leng Poh, K. (2012). A hybridized Lagrangian relaxation and simulated
annealing method for the course timetabling problem. Computers & Operations Research, 39(12), 3074–
3088.
Han, K. H., & Kim, J. H. (2002). Quantum-inspired evolutionary algorithm for a class of combinatorial
optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 6(6), 580–593. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TEVC.2002.804320
He,P.,Jin,J.G.,Trépanier,M.,&Schulte,F.(2024).Acolumn-generationmatheuristicapproachforoptimizing
ﬁrst-mile ridesharing services with publicly- and privately-owned autonomous vehicles. Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 160, 104516.
He, X., Pan, Q. K., Gao, L., & Neufeld, J. S. (2023). An asymmetric traveling salesman problem based
matheuristic algorithm for ﬂowshop group scheduling problem. European Journal of Operational
Research, 310(2), 597–610.
Heng, S., Kim, D., Kim, T., & Han, Y. (2022). How to solve combinatorial optimization problems using
real quantum machines: A recent survey. IEEE Access, 10, 120106–120121. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2022.3218908
Hewitt, M., Nemhauser, G. L., & Savelsbergh, M. W. P. (2010). Combining exact and heuristic approaches for
the capacitated ﬁxed-charge network ﬂow problem. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 22(2), 314–325.
Hiriart-Urruty, J.B.,& Lemarechal, C. (1993). Convex analysis and minimization algorithms II: Advanced
theory and bundle methods. A Series of Comprehensive Studies in Mathematics 306
Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Holmberg, K., & Ling, J. (1997). A lagrangean heuristic for the facility location problem with staircase costs.
European Journal of Operational Research, 97(1), 63–74.
Hoos, H., & Stützle, T. (2004). Stochastic Local Search-Foundations and Applications. San Francisco, CA,
USA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Hu, B., Leitner, M., & Raidl, G. R. (2008). Combining variable neighborhood search with integer linear
programming for the generalized minimum spanning tree problem. Journal of Heuristics, 14(5), 473–
499.
Hu, B., & Raidl, G.R. (2006). Variable neighborhood descent with self-adaptive neighborhood ordering. In:
Proceedings of the 7th EU/ME meeting on Adaptive, Self-Adaptive and Multi-Level Metaheuristics
123

698
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
Juan, A. A., Keenan, P., Martí, R., Javier Panadero, S. M., Carroll, P., & Oliva, D. (2023). A review of the role
of heuristics in stochastic optimisation: From metaheuristics to learnheuristics. Annals of Operations
Research, 320, 831–861.
Kadian, K., Garhwal, S., & Kumar, A. (2021). Quantum walk and its application domains: A systematic
review. Computer Science Review, 41, 100419. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2021.100419 . https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574013721000599
Kennedy, J., & Eberhart, R. (1995). Particle swarm optimization. In: Proceedings of ICNN’95 - International
Conference on Neural Networks, 4, 1942–1948.
Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C., & Vecchi, M. (1983). Optimization by simulated annealing. Science, 220, 671–680.
Kweon, O., Kim, B. I., Lee, G., Im, H., Chung, C. Y., & Lim, O. K. (2024). Parcel delivery network optimization
problem considering multiple hubs and consolidation of small-sized parcels. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 191, 110113.
Lamghari, A., Dimitrakopoulos, R., & Senécal, R. (2022). A matheuristic approach for optimizing mineral
value chains under uncertainty. Optimization and Engineering, 23, 1139–1164.
Lehmann, J., & Winkenbach, M. (2024). A matheuristic for the two-echelon multi-trip vehicle routing problem
with mixed pickup and delivery demand and time windows. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, 160, 104522.
de Leon, N. P., Itoh, K. M., Kim, D., Mehta, K. K., Northup, T. E., Paik, H., Palmer, B. S., Samarth, N.,
Sangtawesin, S., & Steuerman, D. W. (2021). Materials challenges and opportunities for quantum com-
puting hardware. Science, 372(6539), 2823. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb2823
Lopes, R., Morais, V. W., Noronha, T. F., & Souza, V. (2015). Heuristics and matheuristics for a real-life
machine reassignment problem. International Transactions in Operational Research, 22, 77–95.
Lorena, L., & Belo Lopes, F. (1994). A surrogate heuristic for set covering problems. European Journal of
Operational Research, 79(1), 138–150.
Lourenço, H.R., Martin, O., & Stützle, T. (2002). Iterated local search. In: F. Glover, G. Kochenberger (eds.)
Handbook of Metaheuristics, International Series in Operations Research & Management Science, pp.
321–353. Kluwer Academic Publishers
Lourenço, H.R., Martin, O., & Stützle, T. (2010). Iterated local search: Framework and applications. Handbook
of Metaheuristics, 2nd. Edition., International Series in Operations Research and Management Science
146, 363-397. Kluwer Academic Publishers
Lowerre, B. (1976). The HARPY speech recognition system. Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, Pitts-
burgh, PA
Maniezzo, V. (1999). Exact and approximate nondeterministic tree-search procedures for the quadratic assign-
ment problem. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 11(4), 358–369.
Maniezzo, V. (2006). Matheuristics 2006 conference web portal. http://astarte.csr.unibo.it/Matheuristics2006/.
Conference url
Maniezzo, V., Boschetti, M., & Gutjahr, W. (2020). Stochastic premarshalling of block stacking warehouses.
Omega. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2020.102336
Maniezzo, V., Boschetti, M., & Stuezle, T. (2021). Matheuristics: Algorithms and Implementations. EURO
Advanced Tutorials on Operational Research: Springer International Publishing.
Maniezzo, V., & Stützle, T. (2020). (eds): Special issue: Matheuristics and metaheuristics. International Trans-
actions in Operational Research 27, 1
Maniezzo, V., Stützle, T., & Voß, S. (2009). Matheuristics: Hybridizing metaheuristics and mathematical
programming. Annals of Information Systems 10
Maniezzo, V., & Zhou, T. (2023). Learning individualized hyperparameter settings. Algorithms 16(6)
Metropolis, N., Rosenbluth, A. W., Rosenbluth, M. N., Teller, A. H., & Teller, E. (1953). Equation of state
calculations by fast computing machines. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 21(6), 1087–1092.
Meyers, C., & Orlin, J.B. (2006). Very large-scale neighborhood search techniques in timetabling problems.
In: E.K. Burke, H. Rudová (eds.) Proceedings of the 6th international conference on practice and theory
of automated timetabling VI (PATAT’06), pp. 24–39. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg
Mingozzi, A., Boschetti, M. A., Ricciardelli, S., & Bianco, L. A. (1999). Set partitioning approach to the crew
scheduling problem. Operations Research, 47, 873–888.
Mingozzi, A., Maniezzo, V., Ricciardelli, S., & Bianco, L. (1998). An exact algorithm for the resource-
constrained project scheduling problem based on a new mathematical formulation. Management Science,
44, 714–729.
Mitrovi´c-Mini´c, S., & Punnen, A. P. (2008). Very large-scale variable neighborhood search for the generalized
assignment problem. Journal of Interdisciplinary Mathematics, 11(5), 653–670.
Mitrovi´c-Mini´c, S., & Punnen, A. P. (2009). Variable intensity local search. In V. Maniezzo, T. Stützle, &
S. Voß (Eds.), Matheuristics: Hybridizing metaheuristics and mathematical programming, Annals of
Information Systems (Vol. 10, pp. 245–252). US, Boston, MA: Springer.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
699
Mladenovic, N., & Hansen, P. (1997). Variable neighborhood search. Computers and Operations Research,
24(11), 1097–1100.
Mohseni, N., McMahon, P. L., & Byrnes, T. (2022). Ising machines as hardware solvers of combinatorial
optimization problems. Nature Reviews Physics, 4(6), 363–379. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-022-
00440-8
Narciso, M., & Lorena, L. (1999). Lagrangean/surrogate relaxation for generalized assignment problems.
European Journal of Operational Research, 114(1), 165–177.
Ngueveu, S.U., Prins, C., & Wolﬂer, R. (2009). A hybrid tabu search for the m-peripatetic vehicle routing
problem. In: V. Maniezzo, T. Stützle, S. Voß (eds.) Matheuristics. Annals of Information Systems, vol
10. Springer, Boston, MA
Nielsen, M. A., & Chuang, I. L. (2000). Quantum computation and quantum information (1st ed.). Cambridge
University Press.
Nielsen, M. A., & Chuang, I. L. (2010). Quantum computation and quantum information (2nd ed.). Cambridge
University Press.
Nikzad, E., & Bashiri, M. (2023). A two-stage stochastic programming model for collaborative asset protection
routing problem enhanced with machine learning: a learning-based matheuristic algorithm. International
Journal of Production Research, 61(1), 81–113.
Nikzad, E., Bashiri, M., & Abbasi, B. (2021). A matheuristic algorithm for stochastic home health care
planning. European Journal of Operational Research, 288(3), 753–774.
Nikzad, E., Bashiri, M., & Abbasi, B. (2023). Home healthcare staff dimensioning problem for temporary
caregivers: A matheuristic solution approach. Computers & Operations Research, 152, 106126.
Nishi, T., Okura, T., Lalla-Ruiz, E., & Voß, S. (2020). A dynamic programming-based matheuristic for the
dynamic berth allocation problem. Annals of Operations Research, 286, 391–410.
Nourmohammadzadeh, A., Sarhani, M., & Voss, S. (2023). A matheuristic approach for the family traveling
salesman problem. Journal of Heuristics, 29(4), 435–460.
Oshiyama, H., & Ohzeki, M. (2022). Benchmark of quantum-inspired heuristic solvers for quadratic uncon-
strained binary optimization. Scientiﬁc Reports. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-06070-5
Ow, P., & Morton, T. (1988). Filtered beam search in scheduling. International Journal of Production Research,
26, 297–307.
Patel, K. K., Desaulniers, G., & Lodi, A. (2024). An improved column-generation-based matheuristic for
learning classiﬁcation trees. Computers & Operations Research, 165, 106579.
Pirkwieser, S., & Raidl, G.R. (2010). Variable neighborhood search coupled with ILP-based very large neigh-
borhood searches for the (periodic) location-routing problem. In: M. Blesa, C. Blum, G. Raidl, A. Roli,
M. Sampels (eds.) Hybrid Metaheuristics, HM 2010. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 6373, p.
174-189. Springer
Pisinger, D., & Ropke, S. (2010). Large neighborhood search. In M. Gendreau & J. Potvin (Eds.), Handbook
of Metaheuristics, International Series in Operations Research & Management Science (Vol. 146, pp.
399–419). Boston, MA: Springer.
Polyak, B. (1969). Minimization of unsmooth functionals. USSR Computational Mathematics and Mathemat-
ical Physics, 9(3), 14–29.
Prandtstetter, M., & Raidl, G. R. (2008). An integer linear programming approach and a hybrid variable
neighborhood search for the car sequencing problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 191(3),
1004–1022.
Puchinger, J., & Raidl, G. R. (2008). Bringing order into the neighborhoods: Relaxation guided variable
neighborhood search. Journal of Heuristics, 14(5), 457–472.
Raidl, G. (2015). Decomposition based hybrid metaheuristics. European Journal of Operational Research,
244, 66–76.
Reimann, M. (2007). Guiding ACO by problem relaxation: a case study on the symmetric TSP, . In: T. Bartz-
Beielstein, et al (eds.) Hybrid Metaheuristics. HM 2007. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 4771,
45–56.
Roli, A., Benedettini, S., Stützle, T., & Blum, C. (2012). Large neighbourhood search algorithms for the
founder sequence reconstruction problem. Computers & Operations Research, 39, 213–224.
Ropke, S., & Pisinger, D. (2006). An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the pickup and delivery
problem with time windows. Transpoprtation Science, 40(4), 455–472.
Salari, M., Toth, P., & Tramontani, A. (2010). An ilp improvement procedure for the open vehicle routing
problem. Computer Operation Research, 37(12), 2106–2120.
Sanchez, I., Mora, J., Santos, C., Gonzalez-Mendoza, M., & Montiel Moctezuma, C. (2018). Solving binary
cutting stock with matheuristics using particle swarm optimization and simulated annealing. Soft Com-
puting, 22(18), 41–53.
123

700
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 343:663–700
Sarvanov, V. I., & Doroshko, N. N. (1981). Approximate solution of the traveling salesman problem by a local
algorithm with scanning neighborhoods of factorial cardinality in cubic time. Software Algorithms and
Programs, Mathematics Institute of the Belorussia Academy of Science, Minsk, 31, 11–13.
Schmid, V., Doerner, K. F., Hartl, R. F., & Salazar-González, J. J. (2010). Hybridization of very large neighbor-
hood search for ready-mixed concrete delivery problems. Computers and Operations Research, 37(3),
559–574.
Senne, E. L. F., & Lorena, L. A. N. (2000). Lagrangean/surrogate heuristics for p-median problems. In M.
Laguna & J. L. Gonzalez-Velarde (Eds.), Computing Tools for Modeling, Optimization and Simulation:
Interfaces in Computer Science and Operations Research (pp. 115–130). Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Shor, N., Kiwiel, K., & Ruszcaynski, A. (1985). Minimization methods for non-differentiable functions. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Skålnes, J., Vadseth, S.T., Andersson, H., & Stålhane, M. (2023). A branch-and-cut embedded matheuristic
for the inventory routing problem. Computers & Operations Research 159
Sniedovich, M., & Voß, S. (2006). The corridor method. A dynamic programming inspired metaheuristic.
Control and Cybernetics, 35(3), 551–578.
Solyali, O., & Sural, H. (2022). An effective matheuristic for the multivehicle inventory routing problem.
Transportation Science, 56(4), 1044–1057.
Sörensen, K. (2015). Metaheuristics - the metaphor exposed, international transactions in operational research.
Special Issue: Matheuristics: Model-Based Metaheuristics, 22(1), 3–18.
Sourd, F. (2006). Dynasearch neighborhood for the earliness-tardiness scheduling problem with release dates
and setup constraints. Operations Research Letters, 34(5), 591–598.
Souto, G., Morais, I., Mauri, G. R., Ribeiro, G. M., & González, P. H. (2021). A hybrid matheuristic for the
two-stage capacitated facility location problem. Expert Systems with Applications, 185, 115501.
Sridharan, R. (1991). A lagrangian heuristic for the capacitated plant location problem with single source
constraints. European Journal of Operational Research, 66, 305–312.
Talbi, E. G. (2016). Combining metaheuristics with mathematical programming, constraint programming and
machine learning. Annals of Operations Research, 240(1), 171–215.
Terzi, M., Ouazene, Y., Yalaoui, A., & Yalaoui, F. (2023). Matheuristics vs. metaheuristics for joint lot-sizing
and dynamic pricing problem with nonlinear demands. Computers & Operations Research, 163, 106507.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2023.106507
Thompson, P. M., & Psaraftis, H. N. (1993). Cyclic transfer algorithms for multivehicle routing and scheduling
problems. Operations Research, 41, 935–946.
Turkeš, R., Sörensen, K., & Cuervo, D. P. (2021). A matheuristic for the stochastic facility location problem.
Journal of Heuristics, 27, 649–694.
Umetani, S., Yagiura, M., & Ibaraki, T. (2003). One-dimensional cutting stock problem to minimize the number
of different patterns. European Journal of Operational Research, 146(2), 388–402.
Vadseth, S. T., Andersson, H., & Stålhane, M. (2021). An iterative matheuristic for the inventory routing
problem. Computers & Operations Research, 131, 105262.
Wang, Y., Liu, H., Peng, B., Wang, H., & Punnen, A. P. (2023). A three-phase matheuristic algorithm for the
multi-day task assignment problem. Computers & Operations Research, 159, 106313.
Wolsey, L. (2020). Integer Programming (2nd ed.). John Wiley & Sons.
Wu, T., Zhang, C., Chen, W., Liang, Z., & Zhang, X. (2022). Unsupervised learning-driven matheuristic for
production-distribution problems. Transportation Science, 56(6), 1677–1702.
Yaghini, M., Karimi, M., & Rahbar, M. A. (2013). Hybrid metaheuristic approach for the capacitated p-median
problem. Applied Soft Computing, 13(9), 3922–3930.
Yagiura, M., & Ibaraki, T. (1996). The use of dynamic programming in genetic algorithms for permutation
problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 92, 387–401.
Zanotti, R., Mansini, R., Ghiani, G., & Guerriero, E. (2019). A Kernel search approach for the time-dependent
rural postman problem. In: WARP3, 3rd International Workshop on Arc Routing Problems. Pizzo (Cal-
abria, Italy)
Zhang, Y., Chu, F., Che, A., Yu, Y., & Feng, X. (2019). Novel model and kernel search heuristic for multi-
period closed-loop food supply chain planning with returnable transport items. International Journal of
Production Research, 57(23), 7439–7456. Taylor & Francis
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123