TITLE: Noise traders in an agent-based artificial stock market
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05528-7
---

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05528-7
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Noise traders in an agent-based artiﬁcial stock market
Xiaoting Dai1 · Jie Zhang2 · Victor Chang3
Received: 18 September 2021 / Accepted: 9 July 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
This paper investigates whether noise traders can survive in the long run and how they
inﬂuence ﬁnancial markets by proposing an agent-based artiﬁcial stock market, as one simu-
lation model of computational economics. This market contains noise traders, informed and
uninformed traders. Informed and uninformed traders can learn from information by using
Genetic Programming, while noise traders cannot. The system is ﬁrst calibrated to real ﬁnan-
cial markets by replicating several stylized facts. We ﬁnd that noise traders cannot survive or
they just transform to other kind of traders in the long run, and they increase market volatil-
ity, price distortion, noise trader risk, and trading volume in the market. However, regulation
intervention, e.g., price limits, transaction tax and longer settlement cycle, can affect noise
trader’s surviving period and their inﬂuence on markets.
Keywords Noise traders · Agent-based modeling · Computational economics · Simulation
models · Price limits · Transaction tax · The settlement cycle · Risk and volatility dynamics
1 Introduction
Black (1986) made his Presidential Address and expressed, “Noise makes ﬁnancial markets
possible. Noise causes markets to be somewhat inefﬁcient, but often prevents us from taking
advantage of inefﬁciencies.” According to the Grossman–Stiglitz paradox, asset prices would
perfectly reveal traders’ private information, thereby undermining the incentive to collect
costly information in the ﬁrst place. Noise traders are often deﬁned as the ones who use
“incorrect” information during decision-making. Bloomﬁeld et al. (2009), and Black (1986)
described noise traders as the agents who may trade against recent price movements and
result in their own losses without considering informational fundamentals. Choi et al. (2020)
believed that noise traders result in irreplaceable risks and they have long been considered
to have uninformed investment decisions with cognitive bias. They also provided pieces of
evidence that noise traders could undermine the valuations of ﬁrms. Banerjee and Green
B Victor Chang
victorchang.research@gmail.com; v.chang1@aston.ac.uk
1
Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China
2
Xi’an Jiaotong Liverpool University, Suzhou, China
3
Aston University, Birmingham, UK
123
/ Published online: 7 August 2023
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744

(2015) explained that noise traders make their investment decisions based on a spurious
signal that they believe to be correct and informative. Ding et al. (2019) also assume that
noise traders have different misperceptions of the risky assets in their model, which create
“noise trader risk”.
Classical ﬁnance theory assumes that traders are forming fully rational expectations about
future cash ﬂows and investment risks. The classical theory concedes that noise traders
cannot be rational and believes that noise traders’ positions are offset by smart investors’
actions. Nevertheless, proponents of behavioral ﬁnance challenge this view by invoking the
implications of investors’ cognitive biases for the price formation process. Several theoretical
studies provide a framework in which noise traders’ attention can lastingly affect asset pricing
(Black 1986; DeLong et al. 1991). Generally, although previous studies acknowledge the
existence of noise traders and inﬂuences of noise traders on ﬁnancial markets, there are
remaining debates on noise trader’s precise role in ﬁnancial markets, especially whether they
can survive in the long term. We extend this line of research and attempt to investigate whether
noise traders could survive in the long run, and how they inﬂuence market volatility, price
distortion,noisetraderrisk,andtradingvolumeinthemarket.Furthermore,wealsocontribute
to examine the consequences of imposing ﬁnancial regulations. We also attempt investigate
how regulatory intervention affects noise trader’s surviving period and their inﬂuences on
markets. We ﬁnd that noise traders could not survive or they just transform to other kind of
traders in the long run, and they increase market volatility, price distortion, noise trader risk,
and trading volume in the market. However, regulation intervention can affect noise trader’s
surviving period and their inﬂuence on markets. Price limit and transaction tax shorten the
surviving periods of noise traders, while they can survive in longer periods with a longer
settlement cycle. Nevertheless, imposing regulation not only inﬂuences the activities of noise
traders but also the qualities of the market.
2 Literature review
A large amount of ﬁnance literature acknowledges the prominent role of noise traders in
ﬁnancial markets and uses noise trading to explain market anomalies. Black (1986) and
DeLong et al. (1990) are the most inﬂuential early works on this topic. The risk raised by
noise traders as “noise trader risk” could be a major source of volatility and increase system-
atic risk in the market. Researchers argue that noise traders’ sentiment could change discount
(DeLong et al. 1990; Bodurtha et al. 1995; Choi and Choi 2018; Park et al. 2019) and the
volatility of closed-end funds (Brown 1999). Before the 1980s, researchers paid little atten-
tion to noise traders. Mainstream neoclassical ﬁnance postulates that the market value of an
asset reﬂects different levels of available information and assumes that all market participants
are rational. However, many market anomalies, such as momentum proﬁt, contrarian proﬁt,
overreaction or underreaction, and information pricing errors, could not be validly explained
by neoclassical ﬁnance theories, such as Efﬁcient Market Hypothesis (EMH) and Capital
Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), etc. For instance, behavioral ﬁnance researchers explained
the momentum proﬁt combined with behavioral phenomena of biased self-attribution (Daniel
et al. 1998), conservatism in expectations (Barberis and Vishny 1998), and selective infor-
mation conditioning (Hong et al. 2000). Moreover, Chordia and Shivakumar (2002) explain
that the momentum proﬁt is based on good macroeconomic conditions and the underlying
ﬁrm’s size, trading volume and earnings. Behavioral ﬁnance theories step in and use noise
trading to provide an adequate explanation for these observed market anomalies. Behavioral
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
716

ﬁnance researchers attempt to explain contrarian proﬁt resulting from naive traders who pay
more attention to recent information than past information, and then overreaction occurs.
Cerruti and Lombardini (2022) present a game theoretical model that formalizes the inter-
actions between noise traders and fundamental traders and use to provide an interpretation
framework for periods of euphoria followed by sudden collapse in stock prices. Although
attention has been given to noise traders (Zhang and Kalev 2021; Hernandez-Montoya et al.
2022; Ma et al. 2022; Russ 2022), there are remaining debates on noise trader’s precise role
in ﬁnancial markets, especially whether they can survive in the long term.
One possible explanation is the market selection hypothesis: In ﬁnancial markets, arbi-
trageurs would drive asset prices close to fundamental values; noise traders trade with
arbitrageurs would make losses in the long term, then disappear from the market. Well-
known studies support the market selection hypothesis, including Alchian (1950), Friedman
(1953), Fama (1965) and Sandroni (2000). By contrast, DeLong et al. (1991) showed that
noise traders could earn higher returns than rational traders and dominate the ﬁnancial market
in the long run. They argue that noise traders who might take on more risk than traders having
rational expectations result in higher expected returns. Since DeLong et al. (1991)’s paper,
many studies followed up the market selection question and had different conclusions. For
example, the results from Blume and Easley (1992) supported DeLong et al. (1991), while
Sandroni (2000) supported the market selection hypothesis. Blume and Easley (2006) pro-
vided a possible explanation for such variation between results: the equilibrium allocations
in Pareto optimal is listed in Sandroni (2000)’s model, but not Pareto optimal in DeLong et al.
(1991) or Blume and Easley (1992). Luo (2018) examines the long-run survival of earnings
ﬁxed traders in a competitive securities market with one risk-free asset and one risky asset.
He found that even earnings ﬁxated traders lose money to rational traders and eventually
disappear. Theoretical models were used in the studies mentioned above.
Another set of studies emphasize the impact of noise trading on the markets. Liu et al.
(2021) believed that market liquidity could be signiﬁcantly affected by rational and irrational
trading behavior factors. They believe that rational traders fully reveal the intrinsic value
of the asset while irrational traders reﬂect their cognitive biases in information processing.
Bloomﬁeld et al. (2009) conducted experiments that proved that noise traders improve market
liquidity, such as increasing trading volume and depth and reducing the price impact of market
orders. They concluded that their trading also results in weakening the ability of market prices
to reveal new information. Peress and Schmidt (2020, 2021) used the method of episoding of
sensational news to distract noise traders and then found that market liquidity and volatility
decrease when noise traders are distracted in the market. These ﬁndings supported that noise
traders contribute to complex market behaviors, both positively and negatively. DeLong et al.
(1991) presented a model of portfolio allocation with an assumption that noise traders do not
affect prices. However, Kogan et al. (2006) pointed out that whether noise traders can survive
in the market is independent of whether they affect prices. This study demonstrated that even
noise traders could not survive in the long run and they still have a persistent impact on asset
prices by using a parsimonious model with no intermediate consumption. This conclusion
was also stand in Lee et al. (1991). Based on incorrect beliefs, irrational investors make their
investment choices by taking positions in extremely unlikely states of the economy.
Bloomﬁeld et al. (2009) said one of the effects of the Tobin tax might be serving to drive
out noise traders. However, they concluded that transaction tax would affect noise traders
and reduce informed traders’ activities and proﬁtability, so tax actually could not reduce the
impact of noise trading on ﬁnancial markets. With a similar purpose, China sets the 10%
price limit in the stock market and imposes a T + 1 settlement cycle in the market. The
US Securities and Exchange Commission make an amendment to Rule 15c6-1(a) under the
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
717

Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to shorten the settlement cycle from 3 business days to
2 business days (from T+3 to T+2) for most broker-dealer transactions. Numerous existing
studies investigated effects of these regulations on market qualities (e.g. Aktas et al. 2021;
Burns et al. 2017; Cappelletti et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019; Cipriani et al. 2022; Colliard
and Hoffmann 2017; Deb et al. 2010; Gomber et al. 2016; Kim et al. 2013; Lien et al. 2020;
Pomeranets and Weaver 2018; Veryzhenko et al. 2017), but very few of them paid attention
to the effects on noise trading speciﬁcally. We ﬁnd that noise traders help increase trading
volume and market volatility. Similarly, it contributes to other traders’ investment return
while decreasing price distortion from the asset’s fundamental value. Price limit, transaction
tax and shortening settlement cycle would reduce the impact of noise trading on market
qualities. The third research contribution is that we construct an agent-based limit order
artiﬁcial stock market (ASM), as one of model of computational economics, based on the
framework presented in Yeh and Yang (2010). In our simulation models, three types of traders
are introduced: informed, uninformed and noise traders. Informed and uninformed traders’
trading strategies are generated and updated via genetic programming (GP), while noise
traders have biased beliefs about the value of the asset. It presents one application of artiﬁcial
intelligence.
The ﬁrst research contribution of this paper is to provide a conclusion that whether noise
traders can survive in the long run because there are a lot debates on noise trader’s precise
role in the markets. We attempt to provide evidences by using computational experiments to
simulate ﬁnancial markets, which is a different method from those in literature. The second
research contribution may be that we investigate how noise trading is affected by market
regulation, including transaction tax, price limit and settlement cycles, in which could have
some policy value. Moreover, this paper also contributes to applications of computational
economics. Computational experiments are used in the research, in which allows us to set
up experiments (simulations) in a controlled environment to ﬁnd the results. Agent-based
intelligence, as a popular technique of computational research, is applied in the investiga-
tion. The paper also contributes to employing simulation models. It captures the complex
micro characteristics of investors sufﬁciently, including heterogeneous beliefs and trading
strategies. It provides simulations of real ﬁnancial markets and makes results reasonable and
reliable after models are calibrated. Our paper is also contributing to investigate risk and
volatility dynamics. We attempt to ﬁnd that how noise traders inﬂuence market volatility,
price distortion, noise trader risk, and trading volume in the market, and also their changes
under ﬁnancial regulations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sect.2, the design of our ASM and relevant
settings are introduced. We also compare statistical features of our artiﬁcial stock market with
real stock markets in the world. Section3 explains the results and the sensitivity analysis.
Section4 presents the conclusion of this paper.
3 Experimental design
3.1 Methodology
There are three advantages that modeling an artiﬁcial stock market with interacting agents.
The ﬁrst advantage is that ASM also allows us to set up experiments (simulation) in a
controlled environment to ensure the accuracy of the conclusion. ASM can also capture the
complex micro characteristics of investors sufﬁciently, including heterogeneous beliefs and
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
718

trading strategies. Due to the lack of data, empirical studies cannot easily be set up to trace
noise trading. An artiﬁcial stock market would no longer have limitations of data availability.
Our ASM model is based on the framework of Yeh and Yang (2010), which is followed the
model of Santa Fe ASM of Arthur et al. (1997) and Lebaron et al. (1999), and the studies of
Brock and Hommes (1998).
3.2 Market structure
3.2.1 Assets
Two assets are introduced in our market. One is a risk-free asset (bonds) paying interests at
a constant rate. The gross return of the risk-free asset is R = 1 + r f for one period, where
r f is the risk-free interest rate. The other asset is a risky asset (stock), paying a stochastic
dividend which is assumed to be a AR(1) (the ﬁrst-order auto-regressive) process:
Dt+1 = D + ρ(Dt −D) + μt+1
(1)
where D is the average dividend over a long period. ρ is a coefﬁcient to indicate how fast
the dividend value approaches the average value. μ is positive white noise, μt = N(0, σ 2
u )
. The setting of dividends is similar to that used in Lebaron et al. (1999). This process helps
to avoid the dividend process getting too close to non-stationary dividend processes.
3.2.2 Wealth
The trader i‘s wealth at t, Wt is given by
Wt = RBi,t + (Pt+1 + Dt+1 −RPt)hi,t
(2)
where Bt is bonds, Pt is the current stock price per share and hi,t indicates the shares of the
stock held by trader i at time t.
The reservation price (P R
i ) at time period t is derived based on the expectation of each
trader, which follows Yeh and Yang (2010).
P R
i
= Ei,t(Pt+1 + Dt+1) −λhi,tVi,t(Rt+1)
R
(3)
where Rt+1 is the excess return at time t + 1, i.e. Pt+1 + Dt+1 −RPt, and Vi,t(Rt+1) is the
forecast of trader i regarding the conditional variance at time t + 1 given his/her information
up to t.
3.2.3 Traders
In this market, we consider three types of traders.
• Informed traders (I): I traders can receive private and informative signals about the
dividend and fundamental value of the risky asset. They are rational investors in the
market (e.g., institutional investors). I traders generate expectations of future stock prices
via updated trading strategies through a learning system (namely Genetic Programming
(GP), which will be further discussed later)
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
719

• Uninformed traders (U): U traders are also rational agents. Like I traders, they also update
trading strategies through GP. However, they do not receive any private information and
hence only update their expectations using public information, such as recent dividends
and stock prices (e.g., liquidity providers or hedge funds).
• Noise traders (N): N traders trade on a spurious signal that they believe is correct and
informative, while the signal is purely noise. They do not have a learning system but have
a biased belief about next period stock price as the previous period clearing price, given
by a noise term (e.g., retail investors normally have a cognitive bias (Alldredge 2020)).
3.2.4 The learning system and traders’ beliefs
The dissemination and the process of information play an important role in ﬁnancial markets.
Different information sets can give an investor signiﬁcant advantages with the technological
revolution (Afzali and Martikainen 2021).
Genetic Programming (GP) is deﬁned as a technique by running computer programs that
are encoded as a set of genes that evolved using an evolutionary algorithm. Langdon and Poli
(2002) provided a detailed explanation of the technical issues of GP. The GP is inspired by the
natural process and considered as a computational method aiming to ﬁnd the optimal solution
(Vovan et al. 2021). In our model, both informed and uninformed traders study the market
and update their trading strategies via GP. The function set and terminal set are displayed in
Table 1. Both informed traders and uninformed traders use dividends and stock price in the
recent past ﬁve periods as a terminal set, but in addition to that, informed traders also have
private information about dividends (fundamental value of the stock) in the current period.
Traders have heterogeneous learning frequencies between 5 to 95 periods. Informed and
uninformed traders form their believes about future stock price and dividends as following:
Ei,t(Pt+1 + Dt+1) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
(Pt + Dt)

1 + θ0 tanh( ln(1+ fi,t)
ω
)

i f fi,t ≥0
(Pt + Dt)

1 −θ0 tanh( ln(|−1+ fi,t|)
ω
)

i f fi,t < 0
(4)
where fi,t is determined as a forecasting accuracy indicator. θ and ω are constants.
We employ a setting for noise traders similar as Banerjee and Green (2015). Noise traders
form their believes without learning, but purely utilizing a biased belief about the previous
period clearing prices:
Ei,t(Pt+1 + Dt+1) = Pt + Dt + εi,t
(5)
where εi,t = N(0, σ 2
ε ) is biased belief of trader i.
3.2.5 Price determination
Ingeneral,accordingtothedifferentmarketliquidityproviders,theﬁnancialmarketisdivided
into the quote-driven market based on the market-maker mechanism (Back and Baruch 2004)
and the order-driven market based on the continuous double auction mechanism, which is
the mechanism used in this paper. The former is provided by market makers, while the latter
is provided by limit orders under a continuous double auction trading mechanism. The early
ﬁnancial market was mainly based on the market maker mechanism, which made the main
research on the existing market microstructure mostly focused on the framework based on
the market maker mechanism, thus forming a three-way game market model composed of
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
720

buyers, market makers and sellers. Nowadays, the rapid development of electronic infor-
mation technology has made the continuous two-way auction mechanism more and more
widely used in the modern ﬁnancial market, and has become the basis of automatic match-
ing trading system in almost all the order-driven markets, including the stock exchanges in
Tokyo, Toronto, Sydney, Stockholm and China’s Shanghai and Shenzhen (Domowitz and
Steil 1999).
The price determination of this paper is realized by a simpliﬁed continuous double auction
process. The process is similar to the framework of Yeh and Yang (2010). There are N rounds
ofthecontinuousdoubleauctionprocessineachperiod,whichdeterminetradinginformation.
The highest price for buying (the best bid Bb) and the lowest price for selling (the best ask
Ba) are observable for traders. Traders make orders, i.e. accept a bid (an ask) or submit an
order based on their own reservation prices of the risky asset. The process works as follows.
Traders may come across four scenarios: (1) both Bb and Ba exist; (2) only Ba exists; (3) only
Bb exists; and (4) neither bid nor ask exists. In the ﬁrst scenario, the trader will either post a
market buy (sell) order at Ba(Bb) whenP R
i
> Ba(P R
i
< Bb); or post a limit buy (sell) order
at his reservation price when Bb ≤P R
i
≤Ba and P R
i
≥(Ba + Bb)/2 (P R
i
< (Ba + Bb)/2).
In the second scenario, the trader will post a market buy order at Ba when P R
i
> Ba; or he
will post a limit buy order at his reservation price when P R
i
≤Ba. Under the third condition,
the trader will post a market order and sell at Bb when P R
i
< Bb;or he will post a limit sell
order at his reservation price when P R
i
≥Bb. Under the fourth condition, the trader will post
a limit buy or a limit sell order at his reservation price in equal chance. The traders are not
simultaneous entering into the market at the beginning of the market. The order of traders
entering into the continuous double auction process is random in each price determination
period.
Margin trading and short selling have been implemented in many countries’ ﬁnancial stock
markets in order to provide market liquidity. Therefore, we also attempt to employ margin
trading and short selling in each experiment. Each trader has the opportunity to choose margin
trading or short selling before each round of their trading.
3.3 Experimental designs
Table 1 lists important parameters used in the ASM. Totally 100 traders are in the ASM
and each one has initial money of 2000 bonds and 1 stock. The return for bonds is a 0.04%
interest rate in each period. The average dividend is 0.01. We collect a total of 20,000 periods
for each simulation run. We tried to collect data for more than 20,000 periods and found that
there is no signiﬁcant difference among results.
In order to investigate the impact of noise traders on ﬁnancial markets, keeping other
variables ﬁxed, we design 10 basic experiments (B0, B1, B2,…, B9) with 0%, 10%, 20%, …,
90%noisetraderstostartwithinthemarketrespectively.TheexperimentsarelistedinTable2.
The results presented for each experiment in Sect. 3 are the average of 10 simulation runs.
To study the effect of market regulation on noise trading, we also run these 10 experiments
under the following pairs of scenarios:
(1) without price limit versus with 10% price limit. Ten experiments of constant 10% price
limit with different proportions of noise traders are presented by PL0, PL1, PL2,…, PL9
in Table 2;
(2) without transaction tax versus with 0.1% transaction tax. Ten experiments with 0%, 10%, 20%,
…, 90% noise traders in the market with 0.1% transaction tax are presented by TT0,TT1,TT2,…,TT9;
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
721

Table 1 Settings of the simulated system
The artiﬁcial stock market
Initial bonds
2000
The Initial number of stocks
1
Stock initial price
25
Interest rate (r)
0.0004
Dividend for each period
0.01 + 0.95(Dt −0.0.1) + N(0, 0.02)
Number of periods
The survivability of noise traders
Number of traders
100
Number of strategies of each trader
2
Evolutionary cycle
2
θ0
0.2
ω
15
λ
0.5
Function set
{i f else, +, −, ×, ÷, sqrt, sin, con, abs}
Terminal set of informed traders

Pt−1, ..., Pt−5, Dt, Dt−1, ..., Dt−5, Pf

Terminal set of uninformed traders

Pt−1, ..., Pt−5, Dt−1, ..., Dt−5, Pf −1

Probability of immigration
0.1
Probability of crossover
0.7
Probability of mutation
0.2
Based on the empirical properties presented in Table 3 and the ﬁrst q–q plot in Fig.1, the model speciﬁcation
of our simulation is calibrated to mimic these stylized facts in the real ﬁnancial stock market. The important
parameters in the system are then presented in this table. Each trader in the market has an initial wealth of
2000 cash and 1 stock. The return for cash is a 0.8% interest rate during each period. The initial stock price
in the system is 25. The risky asset (stock), paying a stochastic dividend which is assumed to be an AR(1)
process. 20,000 periods for each simulation run are collected. The second and third parts of Table 1 present
important parameters in the learning process, which is GP
Table 2 Distribution of all experiments
The proportion of noise traders
0%
10%
20%
…
80%
90%
Name of experiments
Basic
B0
B1
B2
…
B8
B9
10% Price limit
PL0
PL1
PL2
…
PL8
PL9
0.1% Transaction tax
TT0
TT1
TT2
…
TT8
TT9
T+1 settlement cycle
SC0
SC1
SC2
…
SC8
SC9
In order to investigate the impact of noise traders on ﬁnancial markets, we design 10 basic experiments (B0, B1,
B2,…B9) with 0%, 10%, 20%, …, 90% noise traders to start with in the market respectively. The experiments
listed in the table are under the following pairs of scenarios: (1) without price limit vs. with 10% price limit;
(2) without transaction tax versus with 0.1% transaction tax; (3) T + 0 versus T + 1 settlement cycles
(3) T + 0 versus T + 1 settlement cycles. Ten experiments of 0%, 10%, 20%, …, 90% noise
traders in the market, which are named SC0, SC1, SC2,…, SC9, can test the effect of the
T + 1 settlement cycle.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
722

Table 3 Stylized facts of market returns
Series
Period
rmin
rmax
|r|
Skewness
Kurtosis
Panel A: Financial markets
Nasdaq
1971-2022
−11.32
13.17
0.62
−0.07
8.87
S&P 500
1980-2022
−19.34
11.50
0.56
−0.84
19.09
FTSE 100
1984-2022
−11.22
9.84
0.86
−0.40
7.91
HSI
1986-2022
−23.33
8.82
1.99
−1.02
31.79
Nikkei
1984-2022
−16.50
20.15
1.62
−0.16
9.57
Series
rmin
rmax
|r|
Skewness
Kurtosis
Panel B: Artiﬁcial stock market (ASM)
Minimum
−15.67
−0.18
0.01
−6.20
3.01
Media
−8.563
5.09
0.02
−0.14
11.94
Average
−4.06
6.49
0.347
−0.63
30.11
Maximum
0.016
29.49
2.11
0.91
232.85
Panel A summarizes basic statistical properties of the Nasdaq Composite Index (Nasdaq), the S&P 500 in the
U.S., and FTSE 100 index in the U.K., Hang Seng Index (HSI) in Hong Kong, and Nikkei 225 in Japan. The
ﬁrst column of Table 3 presents the name of these indexes and the second column shows the time periods
that the stock indices are considered for analysis. The next two columns describe the minimum returns and
maximum logarithmic returns in percentage. Panel B shows the results of ASM
3.4 Model calibration and statistics of stock price
This section shows several statistical properties observed in ﬁnancial markets and then
presents how our model replicates these features. Table 3 Panel A summarizes basic sta-
tistical properties of the Nasdaq Composite Index (Nasdaq), the S&P 500 in the U.S., and
FTSE 100 index in the U.K., Hang Seng Index (HSI) in Hong Kong, and Nikkei 225 in Japan.
The ﬁrst column of Table 3 presents the name of these indexes and the second column shows
the time periods that the stock indices are considered for analysis. The next two columns
describe the minimum and maximum logarithmic returns in percentage. It is clear that the
largest absolute daily returns range from 9.84 to 33.33%. We simply use the average of abso-
lute returns to measure the market volatility shown in the ﬁfth column. It ranges from 0.76
to 1.09%. The skewness of raw returns, which presents in the sixth column, are all negative.
The kurtosis of raw returns of all ﬁnancial markets is larger than three, indicating fat tails.
We present the results of ASM in panel B. It illustrates those statistic properties of stock
prices in our ASM from 100 basic simulation runs (10 runs for each basic experiment). The
stock price shows negative skewness and fat tail on average. Positive kurtosis could suggest
the distribution of price returns are fat-tail across all timescales. It is therefore suggesting
that large price movements occur in trading, which is very important in ﬁnancial markets
(McGroarty et al. 2019). Comparing with the empirical results summarized in Panel A, our
model matches several ﬁnancial markets within a reasonable range.
We further provide two quantile-quantile plots (q–q plot), which aim to test whether two
sets of samples come from the same distribution. It provides a visual comparison of the
sample to the theoretical distribution. The two q–q plots in Fig.1 show the comparison of the
return of S&P 500 to the standard normal distribution and the comparison of the return of
our ASM to the standard normal distribution, respectively. In general, the points in the two
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
723

Fig. 1 Quantile–quantile plots(q–q plots) of ﬁnancial market and ASM. Notes: The two q–q plots in Fig.1
show the comparison of the return of S&P 500 to the standard normal distribution and the comparison of the
return of our ASM to the standard normal distribution, respectively
plots fall approximately along the 45-degree reference line. It means that two sets of sample
data in one q–q plot come from the same distributions.
Based on the stylized facts of daily data in the ﬁnancial markets presented in Table 3 and
the calibrated approaches displayed in Fig.1, the ASM is calibrated to mimic those facts of
ﬁnancial markets. The ASM speciﬁcations with control parameters are then produced and
displayed in Table 1.
4 Results
4.1 Survival of noise traders
We ﬁrst run the experiment with 10% noise traders, 10% informed traders and 80% unin-
formed traders (experiment B1) to investigate how long noise traders can survive or transform
to other kind of traders. Then we keep informed traders at 10%, but increase noise traders by
10% meanwhile reduce uninformed traders by 10% at a time (experiment B2) until there are
90% noise traders, 10% informed traders and 0% uninformed traders in the market (experi-
ment B9). We allow margin trading or short selling. In order to investigate how long noise
traders could survive or transform to other kind of traders, once a trader quits the market
and there is no new noise traders entry, which is different from experiments below to test the
impacts on the market. Within all these nine experiments, noise traders are the only type of
traders that gradually disappear in the market during the ﬁrst 20,000 periods. We record the
last period before noise traders completely disappear or transform to other kind of traders
in the market as the survival period for noise traders. We use the data starting from the ﬁrst
period until one type of trader is driven out from the market completely.
Figure 2 shows the survival period for noise traders in each experiment (B1,...,B9). It is
generally suggested that noise traders cannot exist as noise traders in the long-term period
no matter how many of them are in the ﬁnancial market in the ﬁrst place. They are driven
out of the market or transform to other kind of traders at the end. In the 10% noise traders
experiment, all noise traders lose their all wealth by around 9,000 periods. However, the
period increases as the proportion of noise traders become larger. Noise traders can exist as
noise traders for at least 11,000 periods (assuming 10 periods for each trading days, 11,000
periods are equivalent to (1100/252) 4.4 years) when the noise proportion is 50% or above.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
724

Fig. 2 Survival periods of noise trader. Notes: Fig.2 shows the survival period for noise traders in each
experiment (B1,...,B9)
Fig. 3 Wealth levels of different types of traders. Notes: Fig.3 indicates changes of wealth level overtime for
three types of traders, averaging those experiments with initial 80% noise traders
Figure3 indicates changes of wealth level overtime for three types of traders, averaging those
experiments with initial 80% noise traders. Other experiments of different distributions of
traders also provide similar pictures with Fig.3. In general, noise traders tend to make a
loss after entering the market and are ﬁnally being driven out of the market or transforming
to other kind of traders because of inaccurate beliefs. This conclusion is consistent with the
arguments of Friedman (1953), Blume and Easley (2006) and Sandroni (2000). As Bloomﬁeld
et al. (2009) concluded, in real stock markets, noise traders could be normally considered
as retail investors who lack informational advantages and have inaccurate beliefs to make
investment decisions. They usually act as unwise contrarians and consistently lose money in
stock markets. However, they may transform from noise traders to fundamental or other kind
of traders instead of disappearing. As William et al. (2006) argue that trades do not simply
occur in order to generate proﬁt, they may generate information, accelerate learning, create
commitments and enhance social capital, all of which sustain traders’ long term survival in
the market.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
725

4.2 The impacts on the market
Having concluded that noise traders could not survive in the long run, we proceed to gain
more insight on how noise traders inﬂuence the market, as indicated by market volatility, price
distortion, trade volume, price dynamics and other traders’ proﬁts. In this part’s experiments,
we assume that there is a new market participant once a trader quit the market, which is
the different setting from the above experiment when investigating the survivability of noise
traders.
4.2.1 Price dynamics, volatility, noise trader risk and distortion
The impact of noise traders on stock price dynamics is illustrated in Fig.4. Figure4 displays
typical results of simulation runs in ten basic experiments (noise proportion rises from 0% to
90%) respectively. In the ﬁrst experiment with 0% noise trader, price dynamics are relatively
ﬂat, moving just around the initial price of 25. The price ranges from 20.7 to 45.4 in the
experiment with a 30% noise ratio. The price ﬂuctuation becomes more signiﬁcant when the
noise ratio increases and arrived peak under a 90% noise ratio: from a minimum of 8.2 to a
maximum of 63.5.
Skillful informed and uninformed traders update their trading strategies to reﬂect recent
market information (or/and private information), but noise traders do not learn from the
market and they use false information, so it is likely that informed and uninformed traders
have similar expectations, but noise traders expect differently. Hence noise traders cause
ﬂuctuation in stock prices. We also examine the market volatility with heterogeneous beliefs
in our artiﬁcial stock market. According to Westerhoff (2003), the market volatility (Pv) can
be measured by
Pv =
100
NT −1
NT
t=1
 
Pt −Pt−1
Pt−1
 
(6)
where Pt is the price per share of the stock, Pt−1 is the price of the last period and NT is the
number of periods.
The left panel of Fig.5 presents the tracks of market volatility for all simulations under
different noise trader proportions (from 0% to 90%), which helps us to visualize the inﬂu-
ence. The solid and dashed lines represent the mean and standard deviation of the ten runs,
respectively. It is obvious that market volatility increases on average when the proportion of
noise trading is raised. The value is 0.03% when there are 0% noise traders and it reaches
the highest point of 1.28% when there are 90% noise traders in the market. Moreover, the
standard deviation of volatility also increases when there are more noise traders. This reveals
that noise trading plays an important role in increased volatility. It is consistent with the
results provided by Ramiah et al. (2015). They identify that noise traders can be seen as a
major source of volatility. A noise trader makes the decision that buys or sells stocks based
on incorrect beliefs. They have sentiment or feelings in trading without considering any fun-
damentals, making their investment decisions more bearish. It can explain that the market
volatility goes up when there are more noise traders. Herve et al. (2019) used online search
data and combined an original approach with a new measurement to ﬁnd that noise traders
provide an extra risk and increase volatility. Peress and Schmidt (2020) also supported that
noise traders increase volatility by employing a new method of episoding of sensational news
to distract noise traders.
According to the literature, “noise trader risk” is described as the risk risen by noise traders
according to the literature, we aim to investigate the exact relationship between noise trader
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
726

Fig. 4 Price dynamics of simulations based on different proportions of noise traders. Notes: Fig.4 displays
typical results of simulation runs in ten basic experiments (noise proportion rises from 0% to 90%) respectively
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
727

Fig. 4 continued
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
728

Fig. 5 Volatility, Noise trader risk and Distortion. Notes: The left panel of Fig.5 presents the tracks of market
volatility for all simulations under different noise trader proportions (from 0 to 90%). The second picture in
Fig.5 presents the relationship between noise trader risk and the proportion of noise traders. The last diagram
in Figure 5 represents how noise traders affect price distortion. The solid and dashed lines represent the mean
and standard deviation of the ten runs, respectively
risk and the proportion of noise traders (from 0 to 90%) in the market. Following the deﬁnition
provided by Scruggs (2007), noise trader risk can be seen as the volatility, such as standard
deviation, of return of one stock. We then examine the noise trader risk by considering the
standard deviation of stock returns. The second picture in Fig.5 presents the relationship
between noise trader risk and the proportion of noise traders. It reveals that noise traders help
increase the standard deviation of stock returns, which can be seen as an indicator of noise
trader risk. In the market with 0% noise traders, the standard deviation is equal to 0.08%
and it reaches almost 2.18% in the market with 90% noise traders. We provide evidence
that the systematic risk as well as its standard deviation rise when the increasing number
of noise traders in the market, which is consistent with the literature (Odean 1998; Brown
1999; Nguyen and Daigler 2005 and Herve et al. 2019). Choi and Choi (2018) and Park et al.
(2019) also use empirical evidence to suggest that individual trading could be weighted as a
proxy for noise trader risk because they believe that individuals have been regarded as noise
traders for a long time.
The price distortion (PD) is a straightforward way to measure the informational efﬁciency
of a market. It considers how quickly and how well stock prices reﬂect true values. This
measurement examines the degree of pricing error from the fundamental price, which is
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
729

deﬁned as following by Westerhoff (2003)
PD = 100
NT
NT
t=1
 
Pt −Pf
Pf
 
(7)
where Pf refers to the fundamental price according to Pf = Dt/r f (Gordon’s dividend
discountmodel).ThelastdiagraminFig.5representshownoisetradersaffectpricedistortion.
Price distortion increases on average as noise traders become more. We ﬁnd that the lowest
value of price distortion is 2.91% in the market without any noise traders, while it reaches the
highest point of 59.75% in the market with 90% noise traders. We conclude that the existence
of noise traders reduces the informational efﬁciency of the market by examining the pricing
error. They act the role that harms market efﬁciency and makes an effort to keep prices from
adjusting to true values.
4.2.2 Trading volume
Asanimportantsubjectofmeasuringmarketliquidity,tradingvolumecanalsobeexaminedto
investigate whether or not noise trading beneﬁts market liquidity. Liu et al. (2021) believe that
market liquidity is signiﬁcantly affected by rational and irrational trading behavior factors.
The upper left part of Fig.6 illustrates the relationship between trading volume and the
proportion of noise traders (from 0 to 90%) on average of all simulations, as well as the
standard deviation of the ten runs. In general, trading volume increases from 38.03 to 55.50
as the proportion of noise traders from 0 to 90%. This reveals that noise traders help provide
liquidity and are beneﬁcial to the market. Peress and Schmidt (2020) also supported that noise
traders increase liquidity by employing a new method of exploiting episodes of sensational
news to distract noise traders. However, the speed of increasing trend is different from the
different degrees of noise trading introduced by noise traders. Interestingly, trading volume
increases fast when there is not much noise trading according to the convex line. The average
number of trading volumes becomes somewhat stationary, around 55.50, when the noise
proportion is between 60 and 90%. The decreasing standard deviation of trading volume
when there are more noise traders also provides a similar conclusion. It may indicate that
noise trading has little inﬂuence on market liquidity when noise trading occupies more than
60% of the market. It might be because that noise traders trade randomly and do not consider
any information. The trading volume would not have signiﬁcant change when the majority of
traders are noise traders in the market because information would not change their investment
decision.
The bottom left part of Fig.6 shows the average trading volume given rise by each noise
trader in the market. Each trader has a different trading amount in different experiments. It is
generally an increasing line which indicates that the trading volume of each noise trader rises
as their group becomes larger. Noise traders will trade more when there is a larger number
of their group. It is because noise traders make investment decisions without considering
new information or change of market structure and they trade just based on biased beliefs.
More different orders are then presented in the market. Therefore, it is easier for them to
make transactions when there are more noise traders in the market. The right panel of Fig.6
presents the trading volume change provided by each of uninformed and informed traders on
average, respectively. Obviously, each trader trades more as the proportion of noise traders
increases, although the lines of these diagrams are not exactly the same. This result also helps
to indicate that the trading activity in the market is signiﬁcantly affected by noise traders.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
730

Fig. 6 Trading volume. Notes: The upper left part of Fig.6 illustrates the relationship between trading volume
and the proportion of noise trading on average of all simulations. The upper right part presents the change
of average trading volume of each uninformed trader according to the increasing proportion of noise traders.
The following two parts show each noise and informed trader’s trading volume on average respectively as the
increasing proportion of noise traders. The solid and dashed lines represent the mean and standard deviation
of the ten runs, respectively
4.2.3 Proﬁt analysis
The wealth effect arising from the noise traders is also an important subject that market
regulators may consider. We examine the net proﬁt on average of different kinds of traders
at the last period. As we expected, noise traders who trade with no rational reason lose all
their money to informed and uninformed traders. Figure7 presents the average net proﬁt
(increased wealth / initial wealth) of informed and uninformed traders on average. The solid
and dashed lines represent the net proﬁt of informed and uninformed traders, respectively. It
is clear that both these two kinds of traders earn proﬁt, and informed traders do better. They
earn more on average when the proportion of noise traders increases. Informed traders have
the highest net proﬁt of 116% when 90% of noise traders are in the market. Uninformed
traders have a similar pattern with them; they reach the highest net proﬁt of 99% when the
proportion of noise traders is 80%. When noise trader proportion increases, less uninformed
traders are in the market. The diagram indicates that informed traders could increase proﬁt
and it reveals that it is easier for informed traders to make proﬁt than uninformed traders.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
731

Fig. 7 Proﬁts of informed and uninformed traders. Notes: Fig.7 presents the average net proﬁt (increased
wealth/initial wealth) of informed and uninformed traders on average. The solid and dashed lines represent
the net proﬁt of informed and uninformed traders, respectively
Uninformed traders also raise their proﬁt shows that they also beneﬁt from trading with noise
traders.
4.3 Regulatory intervention
Our results suggest that noise traders increase market volatility, price distortion and trade
volume. They also help increase informed and uninformed traders’ proﬁts by losing all
their wealth in the long run. We further investigate whether noise trader’s activity or their
inﬂuences on the market will be affected by imposing several regulations: including price
limit, transaction tax and different security settlement cycles.
4.3.1 Price limit
10% price limit is imposed in the market. Figure8 summarizes how the price limit inﬂuences
noise traders’ activity. The left diagram shows the different survivability of noise traders based
on the simulated markets with or without considering the 10% price limit. Their survival
periods shorten on average by imposing the price limit. For instance, noise traders lose all
their wealth after 14,000 periods when 90% of noise traders are in the market. However, they
shorten the period to 10,000 in the market with the price limit. The right panel of Fig.8 shows
the average number of price limit hits resulted from all traders’ expectations for each period.
We ﬁnd that the number of limit hits signiﬁcantly increases as the noise traders become more.
For example, the average number of price limit hits is 0.15 when there are 10% noise traders,
10% informed traders, and 80% uninformed traders, while it is 2.91 when there is 90% noise
traders and 10% informed traders. It suggests that noise trader’s expectation, which is based
on incorrect beliefs, is signiﬁcantly limited by the 10% price limit imposition. The shorten
survival periods may be because that their bid-ask range would be narrower and other traders
then have more opportunities to make the deal in the market. Hence, noise traders lose all
their wealth and are driven out of the market faster.
Figure 9 shows the effect of the 10% price limit on the noise trader risk, volatility, price
distortion and trade volume. The solid and lines with the symbol ♦represent the results
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
732

Fig. 8 Survival periods with or without considering price limit / Proportion of price limit hits of all traders’
expectation for each period. Notes: Fig.8 summarizes how the price limit inﬂuences noise traders’ activity.
The left diagram shows the different survivability of noise traders based on the simulated markets with or
without considering the 10% price limit. The right panel of Fig.8 shows the average number of price limit hits
resulted from all traders’ expectations for each period
without and with considering price limit, respectively. The dashed line shows the standard
deviation of ten runs considering the 10% price limit. From the ﬁgure, we can ﬁnd that
imposition of price limit helps reduce noise trader risk and market volatility no matter the
composition of traders. With 90% noise traders, noise trader risk reduces from 2.18 to 1.54%
once we consider the price limit. At the same time, volatility reduced from 1.28 to 1.01%. The
conclusion is consistent with the price limit hits provided in Fig.8—the narrower of noise
trader’s bid range results in the shortening of price ﬂuctuations. Hence, the market volatility
is then reduced by imposing the price limit. It is consistent with one of the aims of imposing
a price limit, repressing excessive speculation. Based on the same explanation, noise trader
risk is also reduced because noise trader’s bid range is limited by imposing price limits. Yeh
and Yang (2010) investigate the inﬂuence of different levels of price limits on the market and
they also ﬁnd that price limit reduces market volatility.
The third diagram in Fig.9 indicates that how the price limit affects the price distortion.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd that the 10% price limit increases price distortion. In other words, price
limit diminishes the ability of market prices to adjust to fundamental value. This may be
because not only noise traders, but also informed or uninformed traders’ expectations are
limited by the imposition of price limits. Imposing price limits may result in fundamental
prices falling outside the price limit range.
The fourth diagram in Fig.9 illustrates the change of trading volume with or without
the 10% price limit. The inﬂuence of price limits on trading volume is not stationary, not
like that on volatility and price distortion. The trading volumes are quite low when the
noise trader’s proportion is less than 30% in the market with a price limit, especially when
there are only 10% noise traders and 90% informed and uninformed traders. The reason
may be that informed and uninformed traders have similar expectations of the next period’s
stock price after considering market information; the difference of their forecasting values
becomes smaller once we impose price limits into the market. In other words, price limit
helps raise homogeneous beliefs among these traders, reducing the trading volume. Informed
or uninformed traders may improve their proﬁts by not trading at all. However, noise traders
trade based on incorrect beliefs and lose their wealth on average. Not surprisingly, trading
volume increases as there are more noise traders. The reducing of noise traders’ bid range
with price limits, which indicates by price limit hits in Fig.9, makes trades easier for all
participants and then the trading volume increases. It also explains that noise traders lose
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
733

Fig. 9 Noise trader risk, volatility, price distortion and trading volume with or without imposing price limit.
Notes: Fig.9 shows the effect of the 10% price limit on the noise trader risk, volatility, price distortion and
trade volume. The solid and lines with the symbol ♦represent the results without and with considering price
limit, respectively. The dashed line shows the standard deviation of ten runs considering the 10% price limit
money more quickly with more transactions when we impose a 10% price limit in the market.
Hence, whether or not price limit diminishes trade volume depends on different structures of
market traders.
4.3.2 Transaction tax
Figure 10 shows the inﬂuence of transaction tax on markets. We introduce 0.1% of the trading
value as the amount of transaction tax. The solid and lines with the symbol ♦represent the
results without and with considering the transaction tax, respectively. The dashed line shows
the standard deviation of the ten runs with considering transaction tax. We cannot clearly ﬁnd
a monotonic relationship between noise trader risk and the degree of noise proportion in the
market. In this part, it is inappropriate to draw a conclusion that how the imposition of 0.1%
transaction tax inﬂuences the market according to the ﬁgure. The second picture also shows
that market volatility is not clearly and signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by imposing the transaction
tax. The third part of Figure 10 shows the change of price distortion by considering tax. The
relationship between transaction tax and price distortion is monotonic from this picture. The
imposition of 0.1% transaction tax slightly results in higher price distortion. The conclusion
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
734

Fig. 10 Noise trader risk, volatility, price distortion and trading volume with or without imposing a transaction
tax. Notes: Fig.10 shows the inﬂuence of transaction tax on the noise trader risk, volatility, price distortion
and trade volume of the market. The solid and lines with the symbol ♦represent the results without and with
considering the transaction tax, respectively. The dashed line shows the standard deviation of the ten runs with
considering transaction tax
is consistent with Lensberg et al. (2015), which indicated that price efﬁciency is lower when
imposition the transaction tax into the market. The reason may be that imposing a transaction
tax will encourage traders to reconsider and re-balancing their portfolios in response to new
information when the transaction tax causes the trade unproﬁtable. Therefore, transaction
tax may inﬂuence the trader’s response to information and then price efﬁciency.
As expected, the trading volume is inﬂuenced by the presence of transaction tax, according
to the third part of Fig.10. The imposition of transaction tax reduces trading volume for most
of the simulation runs. In the market with 10% noise traders, volume is not inﬂuenced by
imposing transaction tax, while it is about 1.14 times greater with 90% of noise traders. It
reveals that transaction tax has more restrictive effects on those markets with more noise
beliefs. As noise traders trade less, they may lose their money to other traders more slowly.
However, there is a tax they still need to pay. Figure11 presents the surviving periods of
noise traders with or without considering transaction tax, respectively. We ﬁnd that noise
traders are driven out of the market more quickly when we consider the tax in the market.
The reason might be that noise traders trade randomly and do not based on any information
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
735

Fig. 11 Survival periods of noise traders with or without imposing a transaction tax. Notes: Fig.11 presents
the surviving periods of noise traders with or without considering transaction tax, respectively
advantages. It is different with informed traders that only trade on information. Therefore,
informed traders would rather choose not to have the transaction after they carefully consider
the net proﬁts with transaction taxes, while noise traders might not. Noise traders would just
buy or sell and pay more transaction taxes without any consideration. In this care, they might
lose their money more quickly.
4.3.3 Settlement cycles
The settlement cycle is deﬁned as a process that securities completes trading for certain
securities or bonds. The cycle can be introduced as the timeline, described as the number of
business days after one trade occurs. The cycle is normally described as T + 0, T + 1, T+2
or T+3, and we introduce T + 0 and T + 1 in this paper, the two most popular settings.
In Fig.12, the solid and lines with the symbol ♦represent the results by applying T + 0
and T + 1, respectively. The dashed line shows the standard deviation of the 10 simulation
runs when considering the T+1 cycle. We ﬁnd that widening the settlement cycle from T+0
to T + 1 helps decrease the noise trader risk and market volatility, especially when there are
more noise traders. Interestingly, widening from T + 0 to T + 1 insigniﬁcantly affects noise
trader risk and market volatility when there is no noise trader (10% of informed traders and
90% of uninformed traders). The reason may be that the widening of settlement cycle restricts
the speculation of traders by limiting the process of completing their settlement trades. It
indicates that traders cannot complete the trades and make money in a short period to make
big price ﬂuctuation by lower trading frequency.
Price distortion, provided in the third part of Fig.12, increases by widening the settlement
cycle from T + 0 to T + 1. The value of price distortion is 59.75% and 74.61% in the
market, with 90% of noise traders in the markets of T + 0 and T + 1, respectively. The
result is consistent with the SEC Press Release on March 22, 2017 (SEC 2017): shortening
the standard settlement cycle will enhance transactional efﬁciency in securities markets. It
reveals that the length of the settlement process will diminish more ability of market prices
to adjust to new information or generally informational efﬁciency. Thus, regulators should
consider shortening the settlement cycle to achieve this policy goal.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
736

Fig. 12 Noise trader risk, volatility, price distortion and trading volume with different settlement cycles
(T + 0/T + 1). Notes: Fig.12 shows the inﬂuence of different settlement cycle on the noise trader risk,
volatility, price distortion and trade volume of the market.The solid and lines with the symbol ♦represent the
results by applying T + 0 and T + 1, respectively. The dashed line shows the standard deviation of the 10
simulation runs when considering the T + 1 cycle
The fourth part of Fig.12 presents that how the settlement cycle affects the trading volume.
It can be found that shortening the settlement cycle increase the market trading volume no
matter how many noise traders are in the market. It is likely because that shortening the
settlement cycle limits the trading frequency of rational traders to ﬁnish the deal.
Figure 13 presents the survivability of noise traders by imposing T+0 or T+1. It is clear
that widening the settlement cycle from T + 0 to T + 1 helps noise traders survive in longer
periods. In other words, noise traders are driven out of the market more quickly when we
employ T + 0. This ﬁnding is consistent with the conclusion draws from Fig.12. There is
higher volatility and liquidity by using T + 0, and T + 0 also increases the ability of market
prices to adjust to new information. It helps informed and uninformed traders ﬁnish their
trading in a shorter period. Following that, it could help increase the efﬁciency and ability to
make proﬁts of informed and uninformed traders. Therefore, noise traders may take shorter
periods to lose all their money to others.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
737

Fig. 13 Survival periods with different settlement cycles (T+0 / T+1). Notes: Fig.13 presents the survivability
of noise traders by imposing T + 0 or T + 1
4.4 Sensitivity analysis
We perform the sensitivity analysis to investigate how the ﬁndings are sensitive to the param-
eters of the simulated model. We perform the analysis by considering different parameters,
such as the initial wealth of each trader and the learning behavior of informed and unin-
formed traders, the probability combination of mutation and crossover in the GP. Figure14
presents the results by considering different parameters. We test whether the results of volatil-
ity and price distortion are inﬂuenced by the change of those chosen parameters in the model.
The ﬁrst two pictures summarize the volatility and distortion under different wealth levels:
M0 = 1000 and M0 = 3000, in which M0 is the initial wealth of each trader. The follow-
ing two panels display the outcomes under different probability combinations of mutation
and crossover: m = 0.3; c = 0.6 and m = 0.4; c = 0.5. We ﬁnd that the results do not have
signiﬁcantly differ from those observed in the calibrated model, indicating that noise traders
increase volatility and price distortion.
5 Conclusion
This paper constructs an agent-based limit order ASM based on the framework presented in
Yeh and Yang (2010). Three types of traders are introduced in the market: informed, unin-
formed and noise traders. Informed and uninformed traders’ trading strategies are generated
and updated via GP, while noise traders have biased beliefs about the fundamental value of
the asset. This paper aims to use computational method to investigate whether or not noise
traders survive in the long term. We ﬁnd that noise traders are eventually driven out of the
market no matter how many they are in the market. We construct 10 simulated ﬁnancial
markets with different proportions of noise traders, from 0 to 90%, with a step size of 10%.
They all provide evidence that informed and uninformed traders make money from them
and noise traders lose all their money or transform to other kind of traders in the end in all
simulated models. Nevertheless, the survival period becomes longer as their group is larger
in the market. They can survive in the longest period when there are 90% of noise traders
in the market.This is identical to real world trading environment. Since the stock market is
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
738

Volatility and distortion under M0 = 1000.
Volatility and distortion under M0 = 3000.
Volatility and distortion under m = 0.3; c = 0.6.
Volatility and distortion under m = 0.4; c = 0.5.
Fig. 14 Volatility and distortion in the sensitivity analysis. Notes: Fig.14 presents the results by considering
different parameters
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
739

zero-sum game, informed traders may gain all the proﬁts eventually as the result of informa-
tion advantages. Furthermore, higher percentage of informed traders should be able to gain
more proﬁts from the noise traders within the same period. This could increase the speed that
noise traders losing all their money. For example, developed markets like US markets are
dominated by institutional investors, which refers to the informed traders in our simulation
system since retail investors which refers to noise traders has been driven out of the market
in the process of market self development. In emerging markets, like China, the majority
market participants are retail investors.
This paper also examines how noise traders inﬂuence the ﬁnancial market, including risk
and volatility dynamics, price distortion and liquidity. It is found that noise traders help
increase noise trader risk, volatility, trading volume in the market. However, they diminish
the market ability of stock prices to adjust to new information. Furthermore, we also make
an analysis of imposing price limit, transaction tax and different settlement cycles from
T + 0 to T + 1. We ﬁnd that noise traders are driven out of the market or transform to other
kind of traders by imposing price limit and transaction tax in the market. The reason might
be that noise traders’ bid-ask range would be narrower and other traders then have more
opportunities to make the deal in the market with price limit. Hence, noise traders lose all
their wealth faster. Noise traders trade randomly and do not based on any information. It is
different with informed traders that only trade on information. Therefore, informed traders
would rather choose not to have the transaction after they carefully consider the net proﬁts
with transaction taxes, while noise traders might not. Noise traders would just buy or sell
and pay more transaction taxes without any consideration. In this care, they might lose their
money more quickly in the market with transaction tax. Nevertheless, widening the settlement
cycle from T+0 to T+1 helps noise traders survive in longer periods. This might be that T+0
helps informed and uninformed traders ﬁnish their trading in a shorter period. Following that,
it could help increase the efﬁciency and ability to make proﬁts of informed and uninformed
traders. Therefore, noise traders may take shorter periods to lose all their money to others.
We also ﬁnd that a 10% price limit contributes to limit noise trading as it helps reduce
noise trader risk and volatility. Informed and uninformed traders have more opportunities to
make money from a shorter range and then noise traders cannot survive extended periods
with a 10% price limit, which further diminishes the ability of stock prices to adjust to new
information. This means a 10% price limit inﬂuences noise trading, as well as informed and
uninformed trading. The imposition of transaction tax slightly increases the price distortion
while decreasing the trading volume. Noise traders are driven out of the market more quickly
when we consider tax in the market. When we widen the settlement cycle from T + 0 to
T + 1, we ﬁnd that noise trader risk, volatility and trading volume signiﬁcantly reduced. At
the same time, T+1 also diminishes the ability of informed and uninformed traders to ﬁnish
their trading in a short period. In this way, it reduces the market efﬁciency. It eventually helps
noise traders by losing money slowly to informed and uninformed traders. We ﬁnd that noise
traders can survive longer periods when the settlement cycle is T + 1. In sum, these three
regulations do not have consistent effects on limiting noise trading and the ﬁnancial market.
Also, the effects of different regulations on noise traders or the ﬁnancial stock market are
signiﬁcant distinguishing. For example, price limit, transaction tax and T+0 settlement cycle
might be imposed into stock market if regulators aim to lower the proportion of noise traders.
However, regulator may not consider imposing price limit when they aim to improve market
efﬁciency. Therefore, regulators should make appropriate regulations deliberately to achieve
speciﬁc or different policy goals.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
740

Due to the limitation of computations experiments, the settings of our ASM is more simple
than real ﬁnancial stock market. Therefore, future work might be the robustness test that check
some aspects using data-sets from the real market, not just the generated ASM model array.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Professor Victor Chang for the research support from VC
Research (VCR 0000146) and acknowledge the support of Humanities and Social Sciences Youth Foundation,
Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China [award number: 22YJC790161].
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix
Genetic Programming (GP) is a technique by running computer programs that are encoded
as a set of genes that evolved using an evolutionary algorithm. As an important part of
artiﬁcial intelligence, GP is determined by the parse tree structure, which contains functions
and terminals. Generally, the terminal set is composed of those dependent variables, such
as stock prices or dividends. The elements of the function set can be explained as functions
used to combine the terminals with building up the functions. For example,
A = 6B(C + 5)
(8)
The GP tree structure is described as follows:
Fig. 15 GP tree strcuture. Notes:
Fig.15 is the description of the
GP tree structure
The ﬁrst function model is generated randomly according to the pre-speciﬁed terminal and
function set. The performance of each function model is evaluated by the resulting ﬁtness.
GP generates new function models in three ways: immigration, crossover and mutation. They
help form new functions in the following generation. Immigration is the process that gives an
existed function, and thus immigration shows no innovation in creating forecasting models.
The crossover procedure randomly selects one point from each of two GP trees, which are
named parents here. Then exchange the whole parts below that point of the parents to generate
a new function model. The procedure shows that combining two kinds of knowledge into one
idea. The mutation is used to randomly change a part of the sub-tree of the original function
tree. It can be regarded as an innovation relying on current knowledge.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
741

References
Afzali, M., & Martikainen, M. (2021). Network centrality and value relevance of insider trading: Evidence
from Europe. The Financial Review, 56(2), 1–27.
Aktas, O. U., Kryzanowski, L., & Zhang, J. (2021). Volatility spillover around price limits in an emerging
market. Finance Research Letters, 39, 101610.
Alchian, A. A. (1950). Uncertainty, evolution, and economic theory. The Journal of Political Economy, 58,
211–221.
Alldredge, D. M. (2020). Institutional trading, investor sentiment, and lottery-like stock preferences. The
Financial Review, 55(4), 603–624.
Arthur, W. B., Holland, J. H., Palmer, B. L. R. G., & Tayler, P. (1997). Asset pricing under endogenous
expectations in an artiﬁcial stock market. Social Science Electronic Publishing, 23(9), 1487–1516.
Back, K., & Baruch, S. (2004). Information in securities markets: Kyle meets Closten and Milgrom. Econo-
metrica, 72(2), 433.
Banerjee, S., & Green, B. (2015). Signal or noise? uncertainty and learning about whether other traders are
informed. Journal of Financial Economics, 117, 398–423.
Barberis, N., & Vishny, A. (1998). A model of investor sentiment. Journal of Financial Economics, 49,
307–343.
Black, F. (1986). Noise. Journal of Finance, 41, 529–43.
Bloomﬁeld, R., O’Hara, M., & Saar, G. (2009). How noise trading affects markets: An experimental analysis.
The Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2275–2302.
Blume, L., & Easley, D. (1992). Evolution and market behavior. Journal of Economic Theory, 58, 9–40.
Blume, L., & Easley, D. (2006). If you’re so smart, why aren’t you rich? Belief selection in complete and
incomplete markets. Econometrica, 74, 929–966.
Bodurtha, J., Kim, D., & Lee, C. (1995). Closed-end country funds and U.S. Market sentiment. Review of
Financial Studies, 3, 879–918.
Brock, W. A., & Hommes, H. C. (1998). Heterogeneous beliefs and routes to chaos in a simple asset pricing
model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 22, 1235–1274.
Brown, G. (1999). Volatility, sentiment and noise traders. Financial Analysts Journal, 55, 82–90.
Burns, J. R., Anderson, J. E., Saunders, K. B., & Gyer, C. F. (2017). Sec shortens standard settlement cycle to
t+2. Journal of Investment Compliance, 18(3), 11–15.
Cappelletti, G., Guazzarotti, G., & Tommasino, P. (2017). The stock market effects of a securities transaction
tax: Quasi-experimental evidence from Italy. Journal of Financial Stability, 31, 81–92.
Cerruti, G., & Lombardini, S. (2022). Financial bubbles as a recursive process lead by short-term strategies.
International Review of Economics & Finance, 82, 555.
Chen, T., Gao, Z., He, J., Jiang, W., & Xiong, W. (2019). Daily price limits and destructive market behavior.
Journal of Econometrics, 208(1), 249–264.
Choi, P. M. S., & Choi, J. H. (2018). Is individual trading priced in stocks. Journal of International Money
and Finance, 85, 76–92.
Choi, P. M. S., Choi, J. H., & Chung, C. Y. (2020). Do individual traders undermine ﬁrm valuation? Finance
Research Letters, 36(101567), 1–10.
Chordia, T., & Shivakumar, L. (2002). Momentum, business cycle, and time-varying expected returns. Journal
of Finance, 57, 985–1019.
Cipriani, M., Guarino, A., & Uthemann, A. (2022). Financial transaction taxes and the informational efﬁciency
of ﬁnancial markets: A structural estimation. Journal of Financial Economics, 146(3), 1044.
Colliard, J.-E., & Hoffmann, P. (2017). Financial transaction taxes, market composition, and liquidity. The
Journal of Finance, 72(6), 2685–2715.
Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D., & Subrahmanyam, A. (1998). Investor psychology and security market under- and
over-reactions. Journal of Finance, 53, 1839–1885.
Deb, S. S., Kalev, S. P., & Marisetty, V. B. (2010). Are price limits really bad for equity markets? Journal of
Banking & Finance, 34, 2462–2471.
DeLong, J. B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. H., & Waldmann, R. J. (1990). Noise trader risk in ﬁnancial markets.
Journal of Political Economy, 98(4), 703–738.
DeLong, J. B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. H., & Waldmann, R. J. (1991). The survival of noise traders in
ﬁnancial markets. Journal of Business, 64, 1–19.
Ding, W., Mazouz, K., & Wang, Q. (2019). Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns: New
theory and evidence. Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, 53, 493–525.
Domowitz, I., & Steil, B. (1999). Automation trading costs and the structure of the securities trading industry
(Vol. 33). Brookings Institution Press.
Fama, E. (1965). The behavior of stock market prices. Journal of Business, 38, 34–105.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
742

Friedman, M. (1953). The case for ﬂexible exchange rates, in essays in positive economics. University of
Chicago Press.
Gomber, P., Haferkorn, M., & Zimmermann, K. (2016). Securities transaction tax and market quality—the
case of France. European Financial Management, 22(2), 313–337.
Hernandez-Montoya, A. R., Rodriguez-Martinez, C. M., Rodriguez-Achach, M. E., & Hernandez-Enriquez,
D. (2022). Entropy variations of multi-scale returns of optimal and noise traders engaged in bucket shop
trading. Mathematics, 10(2), 215.
Herve, F., Zouaoui, M., & Belvaux, B. (2019). Noise traders and smart money: Evidence from online searches.
Economic Modelling, 83, 141–149.
Hong, H., Lim, T., & Stein, J. (2000). Bad news travels slowly: Size, analyst coverage, and the proﬁtability of
momentum strategies. Journal of Finance, 55, 265–295.
Kim, K. A., Liu, H., & Yang, J. (2013). Reconsidering price limit effectiveness. The Journal of Financial
Research, 36(4), 493–517.
Kogan, L., Wang, J., Ross, S. A., & Westerﬁeld, M. (2006). The impact and survival of irrational traders.
Journal of Finance, 61(1), 195–229.
Langdon, W. B., & Poli, R. (2002). Foundations of genetic programming. Book.
Lebaron, B., Arthur, W. B., & Palmer, R. (1999). Time series properties of an artiﬁcial stock market. Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 23(9–10), 1487–1516.
Lee, M., Shleifer, A., & Thaler, H. R. (1991). Investor sentiment and the close-end fund puzzle. Journal of
Finance, 46, 75–109.
Lensberg, T., Schenk-Hoppe, R. K., & Ladley, D. (2015). Costs and beneﬁts of ﬁnancial regulation: Short-
selling bans and transaction taxes. Journal of Banking and Finance, 51, 103–118.
Lien, D., Hung, P.-H., & Pan, C.-T. (2020). Price limit changes, order decisions, and stock price movements:
An empirical analysis of the Taiwan stock exchange. Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting,
55, 239–268.
Liu, Q., Tse, Y., & Zheng, K. (2021). The impact of trading behavioral biases on market liquidity under
different volatility levels: Evidence from the chinese commodity futures market. The Financial Review,
56(2), 1–22.
Luo, G. Y. (2018). On the survival of earnings ﬁxated traders in an informational environment. China Finance
Review International, 8(1), 109.
Ma, T., Fraser-Mackenzie, P., Sung, M., Kansara, A., & Johnson, J. (2022). Are the least successful traders
those most likely to exit the market? A survival analysis contribution to the efﬁcient market debate.
European Journal of Operational Research, 299(1), 330.
McGroarty, F., Booth, A., Gerding, E., & Chinthalapati, V. R. (2019). High frequency trading strategies,
market fragility and price spikes: An agent based model perspective. Annals of Operations Research,
282, 217244.
Nguyen, D., & Daigler, R. (2005). A return-volume-volatility analysis of futures contracts. Review of Futures
Markets, 15, 265–293.
Odean, T. (1998). Volume, volatility, price, and proﬁt when all traders are above average. Journal of Finance,
53, 1887–1934.
Park, C., Choi, P. M. S., & Choi, J. H. (2019). Is individual trading priced in the preferred stock discount.
Emerging Markets Review, 38, 326–346.
Peress, J., & Schmidt, D. (2020). Glued to the tv: Distracted noise traders and stock market liquidity. The
Journal of Finance, 75(2), 1083–1133.
Peress, J., & Schmidt, D. (2021). Noise traders incarnate: Describing a realistic noise trading process. Journal
of Financial Markets, 54, 100618.
Pomeranets, A., & Weaver, D. G. (2018). Securities transaction taxes and market quality. Journal of Financial
& Quantitative Analysis, 53(1), 455–484.
Ramiah, V., Xu, X., & Moosa, I. A. (2015). Neoclassical ﬁnance, behavior ﬁnance and noise traders: A review
and assessment of the literature. International Review of Financial Analysis, 41, 85–100.
Russ, D. (2022). Multidimensional noise and non-fundamental information diversity. North American Journal
of Economics and Finance, 59, 101593.
Sandroni, A. (2000). Do markets favor agents able to make accurate predictions? Econometrica, 68, 1303–
1341.
Scruggs, J. T. (2007). Noise trader risk: Evidence from the Siamese twins. Journal of Financial Markets, 10(1),
76–105.
SEC (2017). Adopts t+2 settlement cycle for securities transactions. SEC Press.
Veryzhenko, I., Harb, E., Louhichi, W., & Oriol, N. (2017). The impact of the French ﬁnancial transaction tax
on hft activities and market quality. Economic Modelling, 67, 307–315.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
743

Vovan, T., Phamtoan, D., Tuan, L. H., & Nguyentrang, T. (2021). An automatic clustering for interval data
using the genetic algorithm. Annals of Operations Research, 303, 359–380.
Westerhoff, F. (2003). Speculative markets and the effectiveness of price limits. Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 28(3), 493–508.
William, P., Fenton-O’ Creevy, M., & Nicholson, N. (2006). Noise trading and the management of operational
risk; Firms, traders and irrationality in ﬁnancial markets. Journal of Management Studies, 43(6), 1357.
Yeh, C.-H., & Yang, C.-Y. (2010). Examining the effectiveness of price limits in an artiﬁcial stock market.
Journal of Economic Dynamic and Control, 34, 2089–2108.
Zhang, C., & Kalev, P. (2021). How noise trading affects informational efﬁciency: Evidence from an order-
driven market. Paciﬁc-Basin Finance Journal, 68, 101605.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:715–744
744