TITLE: Preface: The modeling and simulation of complex systems
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04247-1
---

Vol.:(0123456789)
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:423–424
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04247-1
1 3
PREFACE
Preface: The modeling and simulation of complex systems
Christian Stummer1   · Martin Zsifkovits2 · Karl F. Doerner3 
Published online: 1 September 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Complex systems are a common phenomenon in real-world decision-making. The com-
plexity of such systems arises from the numerous relationships involved and various 
interactions among diverse entities of the system or between a given system and its envi-
ronment. As traditional analytical approaches often fall short of suitably capturing the 
behavior of complex systems, computer simulations come into play. These simulations pro-
vide an opportunity to alter a modeled system, observe its emergent behavior, and, thus, 
answer “what if” questions regarding the effectiveness of possible measures that can be 
applied in an attempt to achieve the decision-maker’s aim.
This special section discusses recent advances in the modeling and simulation of com-
plex systems through the following four papers, one of which is a survey paper and the 
other three are regular papers. It should be noted that all four papers are published under 
an open-access license that implies that their results can be more easily disseminated to a 
broader community.
The survey article by William Rand and Christian Stummer provides an overview of 
the strengths and criticisms of using an agent-based approach for modeling new product 
market diffusion. This application case is certainly a prime example of a complex system 
whose behavior is difficult to foresee, as it is driven by the actions and reactions of con-
sumers, distributors, competitors, and other stakeholders, all of whom are heterogeneous 
in terms of their individual characteristics, attitudes, needs, and objectives. The paper pro-
vides both an introduction to the field as well as a thorough discussion of related challenges 
and research opportunities.
In the paper by David Schmaranzer, Roland Braune, and Karl F. Doerner, a simulation-
based optimization technique for the headway optimization of complex urban mass rapid 
transit systems is developed. The problem is multi-objective by nature, in which trade-off 
solutions for costs versus service levels are calculated. As a solution technique, a two-
phase algorithm is developed that combines a single objective evolution strategy with a 
multi-directional local search. For the evaluation of the solutions within the metaheuristic 
search techniques, a discrete event simulation model of an urban mass rapid transit sys-
tem is integrated into the optimization procedure. Further, for the evaluation of the results, 
 * Christian Stummer 
 
christian.stummer@uni-bielefeld.de
1 
Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany
2 
Universität der Bundeswehr, Neubiberg, Germany
3 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

424
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:423–424
1 3
realistic data pertaining to the subway network of Vienna are used as input—for example, 
network structure, fleet size, fluctuating demand by using hourly origin–destination matri-
ces, and passenger distribution on waiting platforms and in vehicles. The developed solu-
tion technique outperforms the existing state-of-the-art methods.
Sabrina Backs, Hermann Jahnke, Lars Lüpke, Mareike Stücken, and Christian Stummer 
propose an agent-based simulation approach that can be employed to investigate the effec-
tiveness of two supply chain strategies in an apparel market (i.e., fast fashion vs. traditional 
fashion) with varying product and communication strategies in several market scenarios. 
An apparel market constitutes a complex system, in which several competing manufactur-
ers may utilize different supply chain strategies, while the purchasing decisions of con-
sumers are driven by the consumers’ heterogeneous preferences as well as recommenda-
tions obtained through word-of-mouth communication with their peers, normative social 
influence, first-hand experience, or advertising events. By contrasting the findings from the 
simulation experiments with results from an established analytical approach, the authors 
demonstrate the strengths of their approach to studying the behavior of a complex system.
In the final paper, Margaretha Gansterer, Richard Hartl, and Sarah Wieser consider an 
application in the sharing economy. This new form of collaborative utilization of resources 
is typically organized through platforms that facilitate the exchange of goods or services. 
The authors examine a collaborative pickup and delivery problem in which carriers can 
exchange requests. Pickup and delivery is a complex problem in the field of vehicle rout-
ing. In the study, the potential of collaboration under a centralized framework is analyzed. 
Additional constraints are included in the model to obtain fair and balanced solutions. The 
problem is solved with a metaheuristic search technique. Different simulation studies have 
revealed that centralized collaborative frameworks have the potential to generate consider-
able cost savings. This problem can also potentially be studied in a dynamic stochastic set-
ting with volatile profits due to stochastic travel times. As a solution technique, a discrete-
event or agent-based simulation is suggested.
Editing a special section in an issue of Annals of Operations Research would not have 
been possible without the most valuable inputs of numerous people. First, we would like 
to thank the authors for their contributions. In addition, we greatly appreciate the valuable 
help provided by the referees. Last but not least, we are grateful to Editor-in-Chief Endre 
Boros for his support as well as to Katie D’Agosta and Ann Pulido for their assistance 
throughout the editing process.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.