TITLE: Disaster management in Bangladesh: developing an effective emergency supply chain network
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2018
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-3081-y
---

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-3081-y
S.I. : APPLICATIONS OF OR IN DISASTER RELIEF OPERATIONS,
PART II
Disaster management in Bangladesh: developing
an effective emergency supply chain network
Mahmud Akhter Shareef1 · Yogesh K. Dwivedi2 · Rafeed Mahmud3 ·
Angela Wright4 · Mohammad Mahboob Rahman1 · Hatice Kizgin5 ·
Nripendra P. Rana5
Published online: 29 October 2018
© The Author(s) 2018
Abstract
This study has addressed and identiﬁed the problems in managing the existing emergency
supply chain of Bangladesh in all phases of operation in terms of the primary drivers of
the supply chain. It has also attempted to conceptualize and suggest an effective emergency
supply chain. In this context, a thorough ﬁeld investigation in several districts was conducted
among the employees of the organizations sharing common information with similar proto-
cols and implications (interoperable). Information was collected from the employees of all
the participating organizations involved in disaster management through a semi-structured
questionnaire based survey. The respondents addressed and illustrated several intercon-
nected reasons which are inhibiting proper forecasting, procurement, storage, identiﬁcation of
affected people, and distribution. The respondents pointed out that the mismatching of objec-
tives in the different organizations resulted in non-interoperability among the participating
organizations. These issues are related to the malfunctioning of management with multidi-
mensional organizational conﬂicts. Reﬂecting those issues, an emergency supply chain for
disaster management is proposed in this study.
Keywords Emergency supply chain · Interoperability · Effective supply chain · Disaster
management · Logistics management · Relief distribution
1 Introduction
During any natural or manmade disaster, different local and foreign donor agencies, NGOs,
organizations of United Nations and government organizations try to maintain an effective
supply chain to provide shelter and relief to the affected people. It is widely recognized
that the success of emergency relief distribution fundamentally depends on maintaining the
B Yogesh K. Dwivedi
ykdwivedi@gmail.com
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
123

1464
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
supply network effectively, efﬁciently, and in a timely fashion (Alessandra 2012; Dubey et al.
2015; Dwivedi et al. 2017; Jabbour et al. 2017b). Research studies on emergency supply chain
and relief distribution (Aldrich et al. 2016; Bernados 2017) have investigated many issues
concerning the successful operation of this management and the efﬁcient utilization of relief.
These studies revealed that identiﬁcation of the actual needs during a disaster, arrangement
of the required items in a timely fashion, and the distribution of these reliefs urgently are
the key issues to enhance the success of emergency distribution management and to reduce
damage to human beings and other lives, including natural resources.
Several scholarly research studies have explored, in this connection, many technological,
organizational, and supply chain factors to develop a comprehensive model of effective
emergency disaster management (Bozarth and Handﬁeld 2015; Dubey et al. 2015; Dwivedi
et al. 2017; Ekanayake et al. 2013; Jabbour et al. 2017a; Kovács and Spens 2011; Shibin et al.
2017c; Van Wassenhove 2006). These issues have substantially highlighted the effectiveness
of supply chain management, the roles of participating organizations, interoperability among
them, networking, the utilization of information and communication technology management
in monitoring and forecasting a disaster, and, ﬁnally, the attitude and performance of the relief
workers in managing these activities properly and timely.
The success of the emergency supply chain is highly rooted in the effective management
of the participating organizations and their interoperable communications, as, during a dis-
aster, typically many public (both civil and army) and private organizations and NGOs work
together to minimize the damages and provide urgent relief to compensate for emergency
loss (Balcik et al. 2010; Vanany et al. 2009). Therefore, complex and short term admin-
istrative structures are initiated during this period, which often create inter-organizational
conﬂicts which may have a severe negative impact on the appropriate utilization of relief
and distribution operations. Planning, organizing, leading, and controlling—all the promi-
nent four phases of effective organizational management face cutting-edge challenges due
to open or subtle conﬂicts, mismatching, and non-cooperation among the employees work-
ing under the same administrative jurisdiction (Dwivedi et al. 2017; Hsiao et al. 2017; Van
Wassenhove 2006). Cultural conﬂicts, corruption, scope of ill empowerment, overlapping
responsibilities, non-transparent and undeﬁned roles, inappropriate allocation of authorities,
undisciplined activities, misuse, and delayed response—all these issues may have a serious
compounding impact on the operation of the emergency supply chain (Altay and Labonte
2014; Balcik et al. 2010; Lee 2004).
Existing literature on disaster management (Balcik et al. 2010; Dubey et al. 2014; Lee
2004; McCoy 2008; Majewski et al. 2010; Maon et al. 2009; Stephenson 2005; Van Wassen-
hove2006)haveinvestigatedmanyissueswhichareinhibitingorbarringtheproperutilization
of the resources deployed during an emergency to overcome any physical losses and physical
and psychological sufferings. Van Wassenhove (2006) has investigated back-ofﬁce logistics
and distribution management during a disaster and analyzed the humanitarian aspect of emer-
gency operations conducted by army and private organizations. The authors have illustrated
that timely distribution is hampered severely due to diversity in aim, objective, and pur-
pose of different participating organizations. The scholarly studies on disaster management
(Balcik et al. 2010) and green purchasing (Dubey et al. 2013) have explored the undeﬁned
and non-prioritized loop-holes in humanitarian supply chain management and design of pro-
curement. They revealed that forecasting and proper identiﬁcation of the affected people are
the primary problematic areas in this distinct supply chain management. Several studies on
structure of emergency supply chain (Alessandra 2012; Balcik et al. 2010; Balcik and Bea-
mon 2008; Beamon and Balcik 2008; Dubey et al. 2017b) postulated that lack of experience
and the incompetence of employees of different organizations are the root cause of inefﬁ-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1465
ciency. Studies analyzing inventory management (Chen et al. 2017; Johansson and Olsson
2017; Taleizadeh 2018) have also denoted that inappropriate and inadequate allocation of
resources and its mismanagement are the key inhibiting forces in achieving operational suc-
cess. The authors Park et al. (2013) have analyzed the emergency supply chain management
of Japan and revealed that the absence of effective organizational structure is a burning issue
in the balanced operation of emergency supply chain management during a disaster. Shed-
ding light on these studies, it is explicitly identiﬁed that, so far, most of the researchers have
investigated many fragmented issues of emergency supply chain management externally;
however they overlooked a number of important areas. These are:
1. They did not consider the inefﬁciency from the individual organizational perspective
internally (Bui et al. 2000; Dwivedi et al. 2017). Precisely, the aforementioned studies
did not look at the problem of inefﬁciency from the weaknesses of the participating
organizations, i.e., they did not consider that the organization itself can be the problem.
2. The reviewed studies did not reﬂect the mismatching of interoperability of the par-
ticipating organizations (Balcik et al. 2010; McCoy 2008). Studies have skipped the
administrative problems of the integrated organizational structure.
3. Existing studies have inadequately explored the communication interoperability among
the employees of the organizations involved in disaster operations (Alessandra 2012;
Surana et al. 2005).
4. Most studies conducting this kind of research considered the traditional nature of supply
chain; although an emergency supply chain has signiﬁcant differences in the nature of the
operation, necessity of comprehensiveness, structure of collaboration, and absence and
mismatching of established structures (Beamon and Balcik 2008; Majewski et al. 2010;
Maon et al. 2009; Oloruntoba and Gray 2006).
5. Studies have addressed issues in light of disasters in developed countries (McLachlin
and Larson 2011; Whybark et al. 2010; Xu and Beamon 2006). These scholarly research
studieshaveheuristicallyﬁguredoutthetraditionalproblemsinlogisticsmanagementand
resources allocation in emergency supply chain management from a generic perspective.
However, in terms of the operation, organizational involvement and integration, admin-
istrative conﬂict, accountability, transparency, corruption, and resources, experiences of
developed countries may have potential differences which necessitate the importance of
conducting comprehensive research examining the research gap in existing research in a
developing country. Typically, and due to environmental change, Bangladesh is a natural
disaster prone country and faces severe and chronic problems due to disasters every year,
particularly ﬂoods and cyclones. These disasters cause severe damage to property and shel-
ter, loss of human and animal lives, and enormous suffering to poor people in that country.
However, since these natural disasters happen unexpectedly and require urgent support, an
emergency supply chain should provide extraordinary help and relief, as the damages exceed
the ability of the affected and helpless community to meet and fulﬁll its demand through
regular resources. On the other hand, since Bangladesh is a developing country, its ability
to meet these urgent requirements through designing an efﬁcient supply chain is very prob-
lematic. Considering the primary strategic drivers (parameters of supply chain performance)
of a supply chain network, existing studies (Allevi et al. 2018; Dubey et al. 2017a; Geor-
giadis and Besiou 2008; Surana et al. 2005; Whybark et al. 2010; Xu and Beamon 2006)
have identiﬁed many problems in facilities, inventory, transportation, information, sourcing,
and pricing, while managing supply chain during emergencies in Bangladesh. Particularly,
the Bangladeshi emergency supply chain experiences some traditional problems in planning,
123

1466
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
forecasting, procurement, storage and inventory management, and distribution (Dwivedi et al.
2017).
The emergency supply chain management of the Bangladeshi government should tradi-
tionally be engaged in managing the entire network and key stakeholders involved in storing
relief items, estimating damages and affected people, distributing food and non-food items
and other necessary supporting services, and fulﬁlling the requirements of distressed people
during and after any disaster. Generally, during an emergency, many organizations including
government organizations (civil and military), donor agencies, and Non-government organi-
zations (NGOs) work together with the local elected bodies to perform all the important tasks
related to planning, forecasting, procurement, storage and inventory management, and distri-
bution. A typical problem in the emergency supply chain management in Bangladesh arises
due to the absence of an effective system of interoperability among organizations working
during an emergency. As a result, the emergency supply chain management of Bangladesh,
like other countries, has many problems, but has enough scope to improve and minimize the
weaknesses and problems and develop an effective supply chain.
Therefore, this study has two main objectives that will address the research question:
As the ﬁrst objective, this study will address and identify the problems in managing the
existing supply chain of Bangladesh in all phases of operation in terms of the primary drivers
of the supply chain. By fulﬁlling this objective, this study will explore the research question:
Why is the existing supply chain of Bangladesh not effective during an emergency operation?
The second objective of this study is to conceptualize and suggest an effective emergency
supply chain. This objective will meet the research question: What constitutes an effective
supply chain during an emergency?
The next section of this exploratory study explores the background information of the
existing emergency supply chain in Bangladesh. The methodology applied to encapsulate the
research question is articulated in the following section. Result interpretation, discussion, and
managerial implications are explained just after the methodology section. Then conclusions
are presented. Then, future research guidelines and the limitations of this study are explained.
2 The emergency supply chain in Bangladesh
According to an extensive study conducted by Dwivedi et al. (2017), there are mainly two
types of supply chain operated by the Bangladeshi government to assist distressed people.
The ﬁrst one is to help poor people regularly throughout the year irrespective of any speciﬁc
disaster (Humanitarian). The second one is operated during any disaster (Emergency). The
regular (First one) supply chain of the Bangladeshi government for relief distribution is pri-
marily based on humanitarian grounds. Its objective is to provide food items like rice/wheat,
assorted dry food, non-food items like CI sheets, blankets, tents, and cash to distressed people
throughout the year. This government support is termed humanitarian support for distressed
and extremely poor people. There are 12 criteria for considering anyone from root level
as distressed and extremely poor people. Out of those 12 criteria, only one parameter is
disaster affected people. However, to be considered as distressed and extremely poor peo-
ple, at least 4 criteria must be met (Disaster Management Bureau 2015). The criteria are
shown in “Appendix” section. During any natural disaster (Second one), the government
of Bangladesh operates their entire emergency supply chain for assessment, procurement,
and relief distribution through the same network. The humanitarian supply chain network is
operated throughout the year with the aim of providing assistance to generally poor people.
Here, the objective is to alleviate poverty. On the other hand, the emergency supply chain is
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1467
operated during and after any natural disaster. The objective is to provide support to those
people who are severely affected by a disaster (Disaster Management Bureau 2015).
According to the report prepared by WFP (2017), present relief items include food, non-
food, and cash. Generally, in the month of July, the Department of Disaster Management
(DDM) gets the approved budget from the Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief
(MoDMR). Based on the budget, the DDM ofﬁce calls for open tender in September to
purchaseblankets,CIsheetsandothersupportingnonfooditems.Afterpurchasingtheseitems
centrally, inventories are stored in central warehouses in Dhaka, Chittagong, and Khulna.
These items are used for both types (regular throughout the year and emergency) of supply
chain networks. In the following year, around September, these items are sent to all districts
considering the population and poverty index. On the other hand, the government generally
procures rice and wheat under the Ministry of Food (MoF). These items are stored in each
Upazila food warehouse under the MoF. Considering the area, the population, and the number
of Upazila and Union, the DDM ofﬁce sends an allotment letter for rice to the District Relief
and Rehabilitation Ofﬁcer (DRRO). Whenever needed, DRROs from the district ofﬁce, send
a requisition for rice to the Upazila food warehouse and receive this for distribution. Cash
taka is directly handled by the DRRO. Sometimes additional food items or cash taka is paid
to each district to buy some other relief items like dry food (Disaster Management Bureau
2015).
During an emergency (during and after any disaster), the Project Implementation Ofﬁcer
(PIO), with the help of volunteers, union parishad chairmen and ward councilors, under
the guidance of the UNO, assesses relief requirements and sends it to the DRRO ofﬁce.
Applying intuition and experience, the DRRO adjusts this requirement (generally, the DRRO
reduces this quantity signiﬁcantly), and, after compiling data from all Upazilas, sends it
to the Dhaka DDM ofﬁce. The DDM ofﬁce again adjusts this amount using intuition and
experience (generally the DDM reduces this quantity signiﬁcantly) and sends the allotment
order to the concerned district. This reduction in two phases generally happens because of the
bullwhip effect (exaggerated demand from the PIO and then from the DRRO). Estimation,
Procurement, and distribution of the regular supply chain of the Bangladeshi government
(up to district level) which is operated on humanitarian ground is entirely top down. From
a typical point of view, this system is termed the PUSH system, which procures and stores
goods in advance of demand from the rural distressed and extremely poor people. This uses
a forecast of requirements and moves them through the supply chain to points of the central
districts or where they are to be stored as ﬁnal delivery goods inventory. This inventory is built
up to counter predictable variability in demand. There are three kinds of districts categorized
as A, B, and C, based on the number of Upazila and Union (Disaster Management Bureau
2015).
Based on this categorization, A type of districts (big) gets 2 Lac taka GR cash and 100
MT GR rice per year as the minimum ﬁxed amount. B type districts get 1.5 lac taka cash and
75 MT rice. C type gets 1 lac taka cash and 50 MT rice. For non-food items like blankets,
the minimum quantity of ﬁxed amount per year depends on two criteria, population (50%
weight) and the poverty index (50% weight). Last year another ﬁxed amount of cash (5 lac
taka) was distributed in each district to purchase dry food for distressed and extremely poor
people (Dwivedi et al. 2017). However, for distribution, from district level downstream, it is
a bottom up or PULL system where distribution happens in the supply chain only in response
to the demand of rural distressed and extremely poor people, on signals from downstream
stages. Collecting information of requirements from different wards in municipality or union
level, demand is accumulated and placed at the district level. So this humanitarian supply
chain management of the Bangladeshi government is a combination of Push–Pull system.
123

1468
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
MoDMR
Financial 
Budget
District Level Administraon: Modify 
Required Quanty
DC
DRRO
Collecon of Distressed People and 
Damage Upazila Administraon
UNO
PIO
Esmaon for Distressed People and 
Damage
Esmaon for Distressed People and 
Damage
Local Elected Bodies in Ward: 
Data Collector
Esmaon for 
Distressed People and 
Damage
Volunteer in Ward: Data 
Collector
Volunteer in Ward: Data 
Collector
Distressed People
Distressed People
Distressed People
DDM
Fix and 
Approve
Fig. 1 Emergency reverse/requisition distribution channel
On the other hand, during an emergency, although the same supply chain network is used,
its estimation process is bottom up, i.e., a reverse supply network is used (Fig. 1). Then
relief items are distributed through forward network (Fig. 2) (Dwivedi et al. 2017; WFP
2017).Therefore, fundamentally, for disaster management, the supply chain network has two
components, reverse supply chain network and forward supply chain network. This supply
chain network is a PULL system. Nevertheless, total allotment does not fully comply with the
PULL system, because at different levels, heuristically at administrative authority levels, the
quantity of requirement/demand assessed from ﬁeld level, i.e., ﬁnal disbursement points is
substantially adjusted (basically reduced) based on authority (Kahn 2008; Tatham and Pettit
2010). Based on the aforementioned information, this study has revealed two components of
emergency supply chain networks of the Bangladeshi government as shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1469
Storage for Blankets, 
CI Sheets, and Dry Food 
Central Warehouse at 
Dhaka
Food warehouse 
at Upazila
District Administraon: Release Approved 
Amount
DC
DRRO
Release, Distribuon, and 
Clearance
Upazila Administraon
Storage for Blankets, CI
Sheets, and Dry Food 
Central Warehouse at 
Chiagong
Selecon for Recipient 
and Distributor 
Union Parishad 
Selecon for 
Recipient and 
Distributor
Ward: Distributor
Selecon for Recipient 
and Distributor 
Municipality: Mayor
Ward: Distributor
Ward: Distributor
Distressed People
Distressed People
Distressed People
DDM
Disburse 
Adjusted 
Amount
Storage for Blankets, 
CI Sheets, and Dry Food 
Central Warehouse at 
Khulna
Fig. 2 Emergency forward distribution channel
3 Methodology
Since Bangladesh is a natural disaster prone zone and recently experiencing many emergen-
cies due to environmental change, this study has investigated the emergency supply chain
in Bangladesh. In this regard, the study has explored all stakeholders’ perceptions, i.e., the
employees of different government organizations, foreign donor agencies, and NGOs who
are responsible for operating the entire disaster management operation in Bangladesh. To
capture this evaluation, this present study has conducted a semi-structured questionnaire
based survey among the employees of the participating organizations in Bangladesh in the
disaster affected districts. This questionnaire was developed from the literature review and
through discussion with a well-structured focus group composed of twelve members (six
123

1470
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
Table 1 Summary of data source
Profession
Status in disaster
management
No. of participated
employees
Male
Female
Average age
District commissioner
(DC)
Formal Head
20
18
2
48
District Relief and
Rehabilitation
Ofﬁcer (DRRO)
District Coordinator
20
20
0
54
Project
Implementation
Ofﬁcer (PIO)
Field ofﬁcer
50
44
6
36
Non-government
organization (NGO)
With government, and
independently
40
22
18
29
Donor agencies
With government, and
independently
10
7
3
42
Defense departments
Independently,
however
maintaining
coordination with
Civil departments
10
10
0
34
Volunteer
Under Government
Field Ofﬁcer and
Independently
30
15
15
27
Local elected body
Provide data about
affected people and
help in distribution
20
12
8
41
academics in Bangladesh who have experience in managing supply chain and six practition-
ers who have experience in conducting procurement and relief distribution during a natural
disaster).
A sample of 200 people was randomly selected from twenty (20) disaster affected districts
in Bangladesh. These people were selected from District commissioners (DCs—public sec-
tor), DRROs (public sector, local coordinators), UNOs and PIOs (ﬁeld level public ofﬁcers),
army ofﬁcers responsible for relief distributions, ofﬁcers from local donor agencies, NGOs,
International donor organizations, volunteers appointed by government (who are responsi-
ble for identifying affected people and distribute reliefs), and local elected bodies. All the
above-mentioned people directly participate in different phases of an emergency operation
before, during, and after a natural disaster. From each district, ten people were selected from
the mentioned organizations. Several discussions were also conducted with the Director,
DDM and other ofﬁce members. Similarly, the authors of this study also met and discussed
with several high ofﬁcials of MoDMR and MoF. The questionnaire was distributed in the
month of February, 2018. The appointed research assistants were responsible to collect the
response during the following week. However, an interview of approximately 15–30 min
was conducted to get a detailed explanation of their responses. A total of 194 responses
were collected. The entire empirical study was conducted by the researchers with the help
of ﬁve research assistants who gathered the data directly. A summary of the collected data is
presented in the Table 1.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1471
4 Result interpretation, discussion, and managerial implication
The respondents addressed and illustrated several interconnected reasons which are inhibiting
proper forecasting, procurement, storage, identiﬁcation of affected people, and distribution.
The respondents pointed out that the mismatching of objectives in the different organiza-
tions resulted in non-interoperability among the participating organizations. These issues
are related to the malfunctioning of management with multidimensional organizational con-
ﬂicts. Since all the members are working to accomplish the same ultimate goal, although
with different attitudes, their identiﬁcations and evaluations had sufﬁcient congruency in
perceiving the existing emergency supply chain during a disaster. Their concepts, heuristic
ideas, and precise statements on the central problems for inefﬁciency and ineffectiveness
of emergency supply chain management, focusing on managerial and administrative issues,
were analyzed, interpreted, and categorized into groups for commonality and different groups
for dissimilarity with justiﬁcation and signiﬁcance.
To present these different statements with categorization to reveal some common phe-
nomenon, the information gathered was rearranged according to the principles of matrix
thinking. Researchers working on analyzing long statements to reveal commonalities in
answers have used this technique (Patton 1981). Text analytics was used as the software
to analyze collected information and deﬁne commonalities through categorization. This is
a very useful tool to interpret qualitative information. Typically, long statements were bro-
ken down into small keywords to reveal common and precise issues for inefﬁciencies in the
emergency supply chain during disaster.
The aforementioned problems and issues identiﬁed can be grouped into the following 10
(Ten) overall problems:
1. Shortage of facilities for the supply chain
2. Lack of empowerment of downstream execution-level administration
3. Cost management
4. Longer lead time in estimation, procurement, storage, carrying, and distribution
5. Difﬁculties in targeting and segmenting proper area and proper people
6. Lack of interoperability in coordination and communication among relevant government
bodies. In this context, non-interoperability can be deﬁned as the absence or lack of
communication and information-sharing with similar protocols and implications among
the government and private organizations including defense departments and local and
international NGOs involved in the same work (Tatham and Pettit 2010).
7. Improper estimation and selection of items (not need-based)
8. Shortage of human resource and weak organogram
9. Relatively unstable information management
10. Vertical management and top down bureaucracy
These problems occur at different phases of the emergency supply chain management.
The following sections will discuss the classiﬁcation and categorization of the problems into
certain speciﬁc components of supply chain management. The aforementioned problems and
challenges are connected with the following 8 (eight) areas of supply chain parameters. This
categorization was primarily conducted manually by analyzing implications of the collected
information (shown in Table 2). Text analytics was also used as the software for grouping.
A focus group with six university professors from Bangladesh and UK having expertise
in supply chain and disaster management was also involved to verify this grouping and
categorization. The following Table 2 has illustrated the relations of the aforementioned
problems, categorized into ten groups, with eight areas supply chain parameters. Literature
123

1472
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
Table 2 Relations of identiﬁed problems with eight areas of supply chain parameters
Identiﬁed
problems
Supply chain parameters
Planning and
strategy
development
Forecasting or
need assessment
Procurement and
item selection
Stock
management and
inventory control
Logistics
management
Distribution Information management
including coordination
and interoperability
Administrative
management
Shortage of
facilities
√
√
√
√
√
Lack of
empowerment
√
√
√
√
√
Cost management
√
√
√
√
Longer lead time
√
√
√
√
√
√
Difﬁculties in
targeting and
segmenting
√
√
√
√
Lack of
interoperability
√
√
√
√
√
√
Improper
estimation and
selection of
items
√
√
√
√
√
Shortage of
human resource
and weak
organogra
√
√
√
Unstable
information
managemen
√
√
√
√
Vertical
management
and top down
bureaucracy
√
√
√
√
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1473
was also reviewed (Dubey et al. 2017a; Dwivedi et al. 2017; Jabbour et al. 2017a; Kovács
and Spens 2011; McLachlin and Larson 2011; Maon et al. 2009) to examine and reveal the
causal effects of these problems with the supply chain parameters. It is identiﬁed that all the
individual problems are related to several areas of parameters.
a. Planning and strategy development
1. According to the standing orders on disaster of Bangladesh government, the deﬁnition
of distressed people is based on 12 criteria (attached in “Appendix” section) where
only one parameter is related to ‘affected by disaster’. Primarily district coordinators
(DRRO) told that, to be qualiﬁed for humanitarian relief, out of those 12 criteria,
one must fulﬁll at least 4 criteria. It explicitly shows that the government emergency
supply chain for relief distribution is potentially not dependent on a natural disaster.
2. Implied demand uncertainty: According to the DRROs, there are problems in seg-
menting the population due to the portion of the demand that the supply chain is
targeting or plans to satisfy, not the entire demand, as this may sometimes be inﬂu-
enced by local external power. It also came out from the empirical study that local
elected bodies try to partially politicize disaster management.
3. During an emergency, this implied demand uncertainty increases since the lead time
is essentially shorter. Therefore, although government central strategy is to assist
distressed people due to natural disaster, segmentation, targeting, and selection for
relief sometimes are inﬂuenced by an external recommendation.
4. Volunteers (under CPP) are sufﬁciently trained and play the key role before, during,
and after a cyclone warning, assessing damage, and distributing relief. However, as
per the statements of volunteers, they have no direct honorium. Although they are
recruited as volunteers, there is no motivational tangible reward for them.
5. To package dry food with several items in the Upazila level, the PIO does not have
any allotment for purchasing bags. Bags are important to provide dry food to those
families who are bound to stay in ﬂood or cyclone affected areas. Consequently, PIOs
somehow manage it from the budget of purchasing food items.
6. Speedboat or regular manual boats are important carriers in ﬂood affected areas,
coastalbelts,andriversides.DRROs,UNOs,PIOsneedtovisitthoseplacesfrequently
through this waterborne carrier. However, there is no maintenance cost for any speed
boat.
7. Fuel is not supplied for hiring external boats. DRROs told that there is no speciﬁc
budget for purchasing fuel for external boats hired to travel ﬂood affected areas. It is
managed from out of pocket expense.
8. The Labour rates in the food warehouses under the MoF are too high to be managed
by the DRRO ofﬁce. Similarly, in the central warehouse in Chittagong (Dewanhat),
since it is a designated food warehouse (under the food department), its labour is
controlled by food warehouse labour rates. They are highly monopolized (almost
unionized) and raise the wage (Taka 500/MT, whereas the general wage in that place
is Taka 300/MT).
4.1 Summary of the main issues in this category
1. Since this is emergency work; the policy for overhead costs should be ﬂexible.
2. Food warehouse labour supply and rates are permanent problems for the district and
Upazila level authorities to distribute relief transparently.
123

1474
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
3. Demotivation of volunteers is a concern for developing effective supply chain structures.
b. Forecasting or need assessment
1. Director, DDM told that ﬁxed allotment is given based on population, poverty index,
and area of the district, not based on historical data.
2. Risk data from historical evidence is not available to any DRRO ofﬁces. So, for
any newly appointed DRROs, during any disaster, when the PIO/UNO sends any
requirement for relief, they reduce it by a certain quantity based on the bullwhip
effect from the assessed demand, based on intuition or previous experience.
3. Since historical data for risk is absent, typically DRROs send a requisition to the
DDM, Dhaka, several times. Correspondingly there is a waste of processing time,
procurement time, and supply and distribution time. This ﬁning is certiﬁed by the
district commissioners and DRROs.
4.2 Summary of the main issues in this category
1. This is one of the major and fundamental problems of supply chain. Relatively inappro-
priate demand estimation based on forecasting, but not considering historical data of risk
(push system) or actual need assessment (pull system) can create weakness in
a. Forming an effective supply chain structure
b. Stocking and inventory management
c. Lead time in providing relief to affected people, although this time span is the primary
driver and most sensitive criterion to minimize loss and suffering of disaster affected
people.
d. Managing expenditure
2. Just based on intuition or experience, reduction in ﬁeld level assessment of demand
is a problem in estimation. For example, in one district (anonymity is maintained as
per the request of the concerned DRRO), demand was placed (as a pull system) in 2016
August for 40,000 blankets, but delivered amount is 22,000. Why this number is deducted
is not explained anywhere. This reduction leads to placement of the same requisition
several times which ultimately causes transportation cost hiking, lead time extension,
and minimization of the professional responsibility to place an accurate requisition.
c. Procurement and item selection
1. PIOs remarked that in dry food packages, they sometimes provide matches (for light-
ing a ﬁre to cook) which is not suitable in ﬂood areas (Gas Lighter is preferable). In
item selection process, ﬁled ofﬁcers do not have authority or involvement.
2. They do not have life jackets, although it is essential in coastal belts and river side
areas. Particularly in the remote Upazilas, the PIO does not have any life jacket to
travel to distressed people and distribute relief. It severely hampers relief distribution
at the coastal remote places.
3. During a disaster, particularly ﬂooding, there is a potential time gap between avail-
ability of rice as relief and the time of consumption since rice needs to be cooked,
which is difﬁcult in areas submerged under ﬂood water. More cash in reserve purse
is required to buy dry food.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1475
4.3 Summary of main issues in this category
The selection of relief package items(food and nonfood) is very much a random and indis-
criminate process. This problem leads to a lower value in expenditure and a lower fulﬁllment
of requirements in the context of cost.
1. Field ofﬁcers and volunteers told that particularly during ﬂoods and cyclones, supplying
rice or wheat which needs cooking may not be appropriate. In this context, although relief
items may be delivered to the affected people on time (efﬁcient lead time), actual lead
time for availability-to-consumption is very poor.
d. Stock management and inventory control
1. Under the condition of anonymity, Director, DDM admitted that food storage in
nearbyUpazilaisdependentonthecapacityofthefoodwarehouse(LSD),andthis
is not aligned with the risk of losses (severity of losses due to disaster X frequency
of possibility of occurrence) due to a disaster. In each Upazila, there is a LSD
food warehouse; however its capacity is designed to fulﬁll the requirements of the
population of that Upazila, focusing on their poverty, i.e. demand uncertainty. But
for actual requirements during disaster, it should also consider implied demand
uncertainty inﬂuenced by the risk of disaster.
2. The capacity of Upazila level food warehouses is not entirely dependent on actual
requirement of food for residents of that Upazila who need relief, i.e., average
number of distressed people in that Upazila, i.e., food requirement during disaster.
It depends on the convenience of collecting food and population. As a result,
sometimes, during a disaster when a huge amount of rice is required to provide
assistance to disaster affected people of a certain Upazila, that Upazila food
warehouse may not be sufﬁcient to meet the requirements. Then, the PIO and
the UNO take the allotment from another Upazila’s food warehouse. It creates
a longer lead time to deliver food. All the DRROs and PIOs expressed their
frustrations for this issue.
3. There is no departmental warehouse in a district or Upazila level under the DDM.
Yearly ﬁxed allotments of blankets, CI sheets, are stored in a general room of the
district commissioner’s ofﬁce. These relief items are stored under the authority of
districtcommissioners,althoughpractically,DRROsarethecoordinators.Around
10% of inventories (particularly blankets) are damaged due to damp weather and
improper storage facilities. Putting an excessively dead load in a very narrow
space (particularly CI Sheets) also hampers the structural safety of old district
level DC buildings.
4. Rooms used as DC’s warehouses are mostly old and not properly maintained.
This increases the inventory management cost.
5. Since there is no dedicated warehouse in the district level, and in many districts
the DC ofﬁce is very old (Plinth level is not enough above the highest ﬂood level),
storage rooms of blankets and CI sheets may be submerged under water during
severe ﬂoods.
6. Each year a new allotment (without adjustment) and a renewal of an existing
quantity can create the storage and availability of surplus inventory in one district
where risk of disaster losses (severity X frequency of possibility of disaster)
is relatively low. The resulting over stocking of inventories in some districts is
worthy of examination.
123

1476
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
Through ﬁeld level investigation, it is identiﬁed that in some districts (where the
number of disaster affected people is less) (to maintain anonymity, names of the
districts are not mentioned) stored numbers of CI sheets and blankets are much
higher than their yearly requirements. Cash deposition is also much higher (due
to cash-in being much higher than cash-out) than their ofﬁcial entitlement as an
A/B/Ctypeofdistrict.Ontheotherhand,insomedistricts,thesestoredinventories
are much less than the yearly entitlement, since the inventory-in amount is less
than the inventory-out due to the severity of the disaster in those districts.
7. Cash taka is typically stored in Banks. So, during emergency, DRROs, UNOs,
and PIOs manage cash from local wealthy people. Sometimes this dependency
increases the lead time of distribution. DRROs explicitly told that this system
should be changed.
8. The DDM ofﬁce procures CI sheets, blankets, tents, etc., each year in Septem-
ber–October and stores them in central warehouses in Chittagong (3@ 2000 MT
capacity), Khulna (3@ 2000 MT capacity), and Dhaka (4 @ 2000 MT capacity).
They allot these stored items in the next year at the same time. So, they keep these
inventories for around 1 year.
Regarding blanket storage in a central warehouse by the DDM ofﬁce, it is pur-
chased centrally by DDM around September. It will be stored for 1 year. These
blankets will be delivered in the next year, around September. For example, the
DRRO of district X will receive that. Then he will unload these and store them
in the local DC’s room up to November (around 3 months). In November, he will
send it to different Upazilas for distribution.
GAP Analysis If the purchase of blankets could be decentralized, for example,
the local DRRO of district X would purchase those in November (since the cold
season is predictable), then the government could save money in the following
areas (suppliers can deliver the products to the distribution location) and purchase-
to-consumption cycle could be reduced signiﬁcantly.
Lead time
Existing supply chain purchase-to-consumption time is around 15 months
If all DRROs purchase these blankets locally, this purchase-to-consumption
time can be reduced to almost zero.
Overhead cost
In existing supply chain, excess Stocking cost in a central warehouse (including
Transportation cost, Labour cost, and Handling loss) for 15 months per blanket.
4.4 Summary of the main issues in this category
1. There is enough scope to improve stocking and inventory management under the DDM
and the MoF. The existing centralized purchasing policy and the stocking of relief items
for around 1 year is causing an increase in transportation and stocking costs, longer lead
time to deliver relief to disaster affected people, and additional loss of relief items.
2. Around 20% (10%+10%) inventory is lost due to stocking of relief items in the DC’s
non-dedicated store rooms.
3. Centralized procurement policy is causing price hiking and extra lead time for
procurement-to-consumption
e. Logistics management
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1477
1. Representatives from foreign donors told that after a cyclone, roads in remote areas
frequently are blocked due to fallen trees and electrical poles. Sometimes, there is
a shortage of equipment in disaster prone Upazilas to remove the heavy items from
roads to aid quick movement of relief transport.
2. The transportation facility under the DRRO ofﬁce or the PIO ofﬁce is very limited, old,
and potentially not usable. Frequently, while distributing relief, they seek assistance
from other sources for transportation. It is a tragic scenario. Due to this reason, often
distribution is disturbed and takes longer time.
3. In many districts, there is no river transport like a boat or speedboat under the DRRO
(district level) or the PIO (Upazila level). During a ﬂood or a disaster, the district level
relief ofﬁcer entirely depends on the requisition of boats by elected bodies or other
administrative ofﬁcers. DRROs recommended that this policy should be changed to
maintain smooth distribution system.
4. In most of the districts, there are no departmental pickups or functional vehicles
under the DRRO. During any tornado or sudden natural disaster, during the night,
a pickup under the DRRO is essential. Nevertheless, for direct relief distribution
during a sudden disaster, DRROs depend on other sources. It increases lead time for
distribution.
4.5 Summary of main issues in this category
1. The management of the emergency supply chain substantially depends on logistic man-
agement. However, this sector is not properly designed. The absolute shortage of an
appropriate transportation facility is a signiﬁcant problem for demand forecasting, esti-
mation, carrying, and relief distribution.
2. The proper design of road connectivity for relief distribution is also an important concern
in this regard.
f. Distribution
1. During a disaster in the remote unions, due to the unavailability of at least one paved
road to a shelter center or Upazila headquarter (like Companygang in Sylhet), relief
transportation is seriously affected resulting in longer lead times for distribution. This
ﬁnding is acknowledged by the foreign donors and NGO workers.
2. To reduce the lead time for estimation, procurement, and distribution, manpower
under the DRRO ofﬁce is a major problem. In most of the districts, under the DRRO’s
ofﬁce, there is an acute shortage of manpower. As a result, tracking of the estimation,
procurement, and distribution is a challenging concern. DRROs recommended that
this policy should be reviewed.
3. Manpower is also a concern for the central warehouses. As a result, loading and
unloading time increases substantially and the cost of loading also soars.
4. There is no speciﬁc allotment for transportation cost. District level ofﬁcers frequently
depend on the Union Parishad Chairman or an out of the pocket source for carrying
the cost. In these circumstances, in many cases, the DRRO directly sends loaded
trucks to Upazila (UNO) without unloading, although the entire quantity of the truck
might not be needed at that time.
4.6 Summary of the Main issues in this category
1. The distribution of relief items often experiences severe problems due to the absence of
planned design of at least one road to the Upazila shelter center.
123

1478
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
2. The transportation budget is not appropriately allocated for carrying relief. In this regard,
dependency on the elected bodies as the receiver hampers the control of the relevant
authorities (DRRO, PIO) in relief distribution.
3. Distribution is also sometimes hampered due to the shortage of manpower in the DRRO’s
ofﬁce and central warehouse.
4. Distribution at the appropriate time and correct place is affected in some Upazilas due
to the remote location of those Upazilas from the DRRO ofﬁce. The absence of special
arrangements for those Upazilas creates serious challenges in distributing relief during
an emergency to meet needs.
g. Information management including coordination and interoperability
1. In the district level, they do not have a list of buildings at risk during an earthquake,
although there are many old buildings including the local DCs ofﬁce. So, for any
severe earthquake, this absence of a list and preparedness can cause a longer lead
time to assess, estimate damage, and distribute relief.
2. The DRRO ofﬁce is not directly connected with the Bangladesh meteorological
department to continuously receive forecasts of a sudden cyclone or a tornado.
Although now there is a mobile number (1090) to get a weather forecast, it is not
automatic and does not ensure seamless ﬂow of information to the DRRO. In this
system, a DRRO needs to monitor this general forecasting self-willingly. Information
is not supplied directly to DRROs by the meteorological department to alert them.
3. Citizens are sometimes reluctant to respond immediately. It increases alerting and
pre-movement times during a disaster to seek shelter.
4. Uncertainty concerning the demands of affected people is very high, as often infor-
mation is not readily available and there is a lack of integration and coordination
concerning other resources like livestock during a disaster.
4.7 Summary of the main issues in this category
1. Availability and accessibility of information and its sharing is a problem for the proper
management of the emergency supply chain. All the major stakeholders involved in
disaster management clearly denoted that lack of information and its sharing is a vital
problem during disaster. There is a signiﬁcant gap between civil and defense departments
to share information.
2. Disaster management is an urgent task. Shortage of on-spot training is a chronic and
severe problem for the proper management of the emergency supply chain.
h. Administrative management
1. Most of the DRROs get this district level highest position almost at the end of their
careers (55+). However, for effective reaching out to distressed people during an
emergency, this position needs to be extremely dynamic. Natural disaster and urgent
relief distribution requires ﬂexible and dynamic coordination and communication.
Reaching out with relief at the right time and at the right place is the key to executing
disaster management. At this age (close to retirement), it is challenging. This can
create problem at all stages, such as estimation, procurement, and distribution.
2. DRROs have a limited opportunity for promotion in their job. It is a strong factor
in job demotivation and has a detrimental effect on performance. This can create
problems in all stages of estimation, procurement, and distribution.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1479
3. Sometimes local external (not directly afﬁliated with supply chain) inﬂuences can
cause problems in assessing losses, estimating disaster affected people, and distribut-
ing relief in different localities (wrong segmentation and targeting).
4. The administrative distance between the DC and the DRRO sometimes creates red
tape or delay. DRROs have expertise in estimation and distribution, and are responsi-
ble for overall relief management. On the other hand, the local DC has the authority
to approve any demand and requirement and distribution. Other than DCs, all the
major participating agencies suggested that this authority delegation policy should
be revised.
5. The DC also has the authority to govern employees under the ofﬁce of the DRRO,
whereas the DRRO is responsible for performance of relief distribution. Authority
and responsibility is not given proportionately which may generate:
a. Less amount of estimation
b. Less storage and inventory
c. Delay in ﬁlling out a D form and SOS form for requisition
d. Longer lead time for estimation, procurement, and distribution
e. Problems in employee management
f. Inadequacy in information sharing
4.8 Summary of main issues in this category
1. Sometimes absence of balanced organogram and inappropriate authority and responsibil-
ity delegation may create signiﬁcant problems in emergency supply chain management
during any kind of disaster. While designing the administrative structure, the special
nature of this job for assessing, estimating, procuring, and distributing relief before,
during, and after disaster are not appropriately considered.
2. Responsibility and authority is not properly balanced.
Based on the analysis of the responses and aforementioned ﬁndings, this study has offered
the following emergency supply networks for the Bangladesh government (Shown in Figs. 3,
4).
The primary issues addressed and investigated in this semi-structured questionnaire are
the major loopholes identiﬁed by the participating members in this multi-organizational
emergency task as the fundamental causes of inefﬁcient structures in the supply chain. There-
fore, the ﬁndings of this study provide a deep insight to practitioners concerning a practical
disaster management supply network. They can understand the typical problems and inter-
organizational conﬂicts during any emergency supply chain management event. It will help
in the construction an effective supply network.
5 Conclusion
The emergency supply chain management of the Bangladeshi government should customarily
be engaged in managing the entire network and be key stakeholders in storing relief items,
estimating damages and number of people affected, distributing food and non-food items
and other necessary supporting services, and answering the requirements of distressed peo-
ple during and after any disaster. The existing emergency supply chain of the Bangladeshi
government for relief distribution is sufﬁciently well managed and working nicely. It has
many excellent examples to demonstrate its efﬁciency and effectiveness. However, like any
123

1480
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
Ministry
Budget
District Administraon: Verify
DC
DRRO
Collecon of Distressed People and Damage
Upazila Administraon
UN
PIO
Esmaon for Distressed People and 
Damage
Esmaon for Distressed People and Damage
Pouroshova Mayor
Ward: Need 
Esmaon for 
Distressed People and 
Damage
Ward: Need 
Ward: Need Assessment
Distressed People
Distressed People
Distressed People
DDM
Verify and 
Approve
Fig. 3 Emergency reverse/requisition distribution channel after disaster
supply chain system, this emergency supply chain has enough scope to improve, with a view
to minimizing the weaknesses and problems.
In this context, a thorough ﬁeld investigation in several districts was conducted. Infor-
mation was collected from employees of all the organizations which typically participate in
emergency disaster management through a semi-structured questionnaire based survey. Sev-
eral discussions and meetings with different ministries, departments, and agencies were also
conducted. Based on this comprehensive study and SWOT analysis, several major and minor
strengths, opportunities, threats and weaknesses of the existing emergency supply chain are
addressed. Considering those problems under different drivers of the supply chain, speciﬁc
categorizations of problems are established. Reﬂecting those issues, an emergency supply
chain for disaster management is proposed in this study.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1481
Distressed People
Distressed People
Storage for Blankets, CI 
Sheets, and Dry Food at 
District Warehouse 
Food 
warehouse at 
Upazila
District Administraon: Release Approval
DC
DRRO
Selecon for Recipient and 
Distributor 
Union Parishad Chairman
Selecon for Recipient and Distributor
Pouroshova Mayor
Ward: Distributor
Selecon for Recipient 
and Distributor 
Municipality: Mayor
Ward: Distributor
Ward: Distributor
Distressed People
DDM
Release Order as 
per Need 
Issue Distribuon Clearance
Upazila Administraon 
UNO
PI
Fig. 4 Emergency forward distribution channel during and after disaster (based on need assessment from
source)
This study has demonstrated some potential difference between emergency supply chain
management in Bangladesh and the same in developed countries. In the developed countries
like Japan, USA, Canada, Australia, Europe, humanitarian supply chain is fundamentally
controlled as an actual demand based pull system (Goulding et al. 2017; Jabbour et al.
2017b; Kahn 2008; Park et al. 2013; Reininger et al. 2013; Xu and Beamon 2006), whereas
Bangladeshi procurement system is largely dependent on forecasting. Authority delegation
andadministrativeconﬂictbetweendifferentparticipatingorganizationsisaseriouschallenge
both for developed and developing countries (Alessandra 2012; Balcik and Beamon 2008).
Selection of item is fundamentally need based in humanitarian supply chain of developed
countries (Goulding et al. 2017). Rhetorically, it is suggested by the ﬁeld ofﬁcers; however
123

1482
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
for Bangladesh, it is determined centrally. Interoperability among organizations is an acute
problem for emergency supply chain; however developed countries have set strong guideline
to overcome this challenging issue (Dubey et al. 2017a; Maon et al. 2009). The requirements
for proper estimation, distribution, and maintenance of an effective supply chain network
and their interoperability are the key issues for disaster management in Bangladesh.
When this study refers to the emergency supply chain management of the Bangladeshi
government, it primarily refers to the management of the supply chain of the Bangladeshi
government during a natural disaster. This study essentially considers the range of activi-
ties designed to maintain control over disaster and emergency situations and to prepare a
framework for providing support to at risk persons to help them avoid or recover from the
impact of the disaster quickly. It seeks to highlight and draw attention to the supply chain of
both forward and reverse networks. When planning and organizing an effective emergency
supply chain management for disaster management, the fundamental issues are the institu-
tional arrangement of disaster management, disaster management policies, a comprehensive
disaster management program, community based disaster management, and a risk reduction
program. Finally, a comprehensive recommendation list is prepared to improve the existing
emergency supply chain of the Bangladeshi government for natural disaster management
(food, non-food and cash). Among those recommendations, the following key elements can
be summarized.
1. For an effective supply chain strategy, the deﬁnition of distressed people in a natural
disaster should be well structured and predeﬁned. It should be distinguished from regular
poverty management on humanitarian grounds. To select beneﬁciaries and estimate the
amount of assistance due to a natural disaster, only the actual requirements of any
individual family reﬂecting losses due to a disaster should be considered.
2. Pre, during, and post disaster period, the roles and responsibilities of all regular employ-
ees involved in emergency supply chain should be clearly deﬁned and, accordingly,
motivated through different incentives for better performance. In the Pre, during, and
post disaster period (cyclone), the roles and responsibilities of volunteers (Fifty Thou-
sand) under a cyclone preparedness program (CPP) are also important. Involvement,
integrity, and motivation are the essential components for their full potential to be
realised. Although these people are completely involved as volunteers during a cyclone,
there will be no question of payment, but for day-night extraordinary dedication, there
must be some motivational rewards.
3. The probable relief requirement quantity for each Upazila should be determined based
on demand forecasting against risk of losses (historical data). But after disaster, relief
should be delivered to the affected Upazila based on the actual need assessment from
the source by the PIO.
4. FortheGovernment’semergencysupplychain,actualneedassessmentisveryimportant.
Very dynamic, swift, and coordinated ﬁeld assessment is essential. At different authority
levels, this assessed demand derived from the source (Union level) is randomly reduced
anticipating an exaggeration of the demand amount (bullwhip). This reduction is not
done based on any scientiﬁc scale. Field level ofﬁcers (PIO) should be properly trained
to assess actual needs during and after a disaster. If the policy of the government is to
provide full support to all affected people due to disaster, this assessed amount from the
source should not be reduced based on conjectured bullwhip effect.
5. Item selection, both food and non-food, is critical for covering needs during a dis-
aster. In this regard, relief items during any natural disaster like ﬂood, cyclone, and
earthquake should be standardized. There should be a reality-based list of items which
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1483
should be standardized long before any disaster. Several speciﬁc and unique issues
should be considered to select the relief items, such as nature (for instance raining after
cyclone), surroundings (submerged under water), supports (cooking arrangements) etc.
Food items where the availability-to-consumption cycle is almost zero (dry food against
rice)are most important. This list should be circulated to all stakeholders in order to
ensure good coordination during the response.
6. Through ﬁeld investigation and statistical study of historical data of risk, a committee
should be established to prepare a map of the location and required capacity of food
warehouses in each Upazila, considering the actual requirement of stocking due to
disaster or poverty. Accordingly, based on actual requirement, the capacity of food
warehouse should be ﬁxed, and new warehouses should be constructed, if needed.
Old warehouses under the Ministry of Food (MoF) should be renovated to minimize
maintenance costs and waste of food during ﬂoods through proper stock management.
7. Presently the government procurement policy for blankets and CI sheets is centralized
(from Dhaka). The procurement and stocking policy of government should be decentral-
ized to minimize lead time of stocking-to-consumption and transportation cost. Based
on the requirement/allotment (approved centrally by DDM), each district should indi-
vidually call for tenders and procure these non-food items locally at the required time.
8. The government has a plan to construct one warehouse in each district (total 64). These
warehouses will be 3 storied building, each ﬂoor with a capacity to stock around 1000
MT inventory (Ground ﬂoor for dry food, 1st ﬂoor for blankets and CI sheets, 2nd
ﬂoor for ofﬁces). Instead of keeping these non-food items in a central warehouse in
Dhaka, Khulna, and Chittagong, through district level procurement, it can be stored in
a district level warehouse (dedicated warehouse, not in a DC’s allocated room). While
constructing those district level warehouses, a storage strategy should be prepared to
minimize lead time for distribution and transportation cost.
9. New allotment and renewal of food, non-food, and cash for each district should be
scrutinized, veriﬁed, and ﬁnally adjusted reﬂecting actual requirements. This estima-
tion can be conducted by risk analysis of historical data. In a particular year, before
a new allotment of food, non-food, and cash from the DDM ofﬁce, previous balances
kept/reserved by the DRRO ofﬁce at district level under different names of government
sectors should be considered to adjust the stocking/inventory amount. This way, surplus
stocking in some non-vulnerable districts or under stocking in some vulnerable districts
can be standardized.
10. A transport committee should determine transport modalities like pickup, speedboat,
boat, and other vehicles, taking into account the special nature of different Upazilas
(like river area, coastal belt, hilly area, forest etc.)
11. A shortage of manpower under the DRRO and the PIO ofﬁce and in central warehouses is
a problem for time-bound relief distribution. Relief distribution is an emergency task, so
for this kind of supply chain, distribution needs a very dynamic and ﬂexible organogram.
An expert committee should determine the actual requirement of manpower for the
DRRO and PIO ofﬁce and warehouse.
12. Roles and responsibilities and coordination should be clearly deﬁned in the organogram
of disaster management for all levels. Empowerment of different ofﬁcers should be
clearly based on the involvement and responsibility deﬁned in the emergency supply
chain. Particularly, for better efﬁciency, delegation of proper authority to the DRRO
ofﬁce against their assigned responsibility should be conﬁrmed. Since DRROs have
special training on relief distribution and they are playing a key role in the district level
disaster operation, their authority should be appropriately aligned with responsibility.
123

1484
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
6 Limitation and future research direction
Like any exploratory study, this research has several limitations which may be addressed
through future academic endeavors. This study did not incorporate the perceptions of con-
sumers, i.e., affected people. They can provide deep insight into identifying critical areas to
be improved. Future research can be conducted highlighting affected people’s perception.
The selection of the sample from each organization may not be fully representative as the
number of employees from different organizations participating in emergency management
varies signiﬁcantly. The speciﬁc type of disaster was not considered while capturing employ-
ees’ perceptions. Emergency operations may vary in different disasters. Therefore, future
researchers may wish to consider the effect of a speciﬁc disaster type as the moderating
variable.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,andrepro-
duction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide
a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
Appendix
At least four criteria must be met to be considered as a distressed and extreme poor per-
son/family to receive humanitarian assistance. These are:
1. The family who has no land or no land other than a living establishment.
2. The family who is dependent on daily labor income.
3. The family who is dependent on a female worker or begging.
4. The family who has no mature earnable male member and the family has scarcity.
5. The family where school going kids have to work to earn money.
6. The family who has no money generating property.
7. The family where the head person is rejected, separated, divorced, and the family has
scarcity.
8. The family where the head person is a freedom ﬁghter and has scarcity.
9. The family where the head person is disabled, incapable, and has scarcity.
10. The family who did not receive a micro loan.
11. The family who is now in critical need of food or money due to natural disaster.
12. The family where the members cannot get two daily meals.
References
Aldrich, D. P., Page, C., & Paul, C. J. (2016). Social capital and climate change adaptation. In H. von Storch
(Ed.), Climate science: Oxford research encyclopedias. Oxford University Press.
Alessandra, C. (2012). Humanitarian logistics: Cross-sector cooperation in disaster relief management (Chap-
ter 2, P. 13). Berlin: Springer.
Allevi, E., Gnudi, A., Konnov, I. V., & Oggioni, G. (2018). Evaluating the effects of environmental regulations
onaclosed-loopsupplychainnetwork:Avariationalinequalityapproach.AnnalsofOperationsResearch,
261(1), 1–43.
Altay,N.,&Labonte,M.(2014).Challengesinhumanitarianinformationmanagementandexchange:Evidence
from Haiti. Disasters, 38(S1), S50–S72.
Balcik, B., & Beamon, B. M. (2008). Facility location in humanitarian relief. International Journal of Logistics:
Research and Applications, 11(2), 101–121.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1485
Balcik, B., Beamon, B. M., Krejci, C. C., Muramatsu, K. M., & Ramirez, M. (2010). Coordination in humanitar-
ian relief chains: Practices, challenges and opportunities. International Journal of Production Economics,
126(1), 22–34.
Beamon, B. M., & Balcik, B. (2008). Performance measurement in humanitarian relief chains. International
Journal of Public Sector Management, 21(1), 4–25.
Bernados, S. J. (2017). Warning from the Gods: Perceptions and coping strategies of the drought-stricken
communities in a Philippine Province: A phenomenological approach. International Journal of Asian
Social Science, 7(8), 628–634.
Bozarth, C. C., & Handﬁeld, R. B. (2015). Introduction to operations and supply chain management. New
York: Prentice Hall.
Bui, T., Cho, S., Sankaran, S., & Sovereign, M. (2000). A framework for designing a global information
network for multinational humanitarian assistance/disaster relief”. Information Systems Frontiers, 1(4),
427–442.
Chen, J., Liang, L., & Yao, D. Q. (2017). Pre-positioning of relief inventories for non-proﬁt organizations: A
newsvendor approach. Annals of Operations Research, 259(1), 35–63.
Disaster Management Bureau. (2015). National plan for disaster management, standing orders on disaster.
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.
Dubey, R., Ali, S. S., Aital, P., & Venkatesh, V. G. (2014). Mechanics of humanitarian supply chain agility and
resilience and its empirical validation. International Journal of Services and Operations Management,
17(4), 367–384.
Dubey, R., Altay, N., & Blome, C. (2017a). Swift trust and commitment: The missing links for humanitarian
supply chain coordination? Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2676-z.
Dubey, R., Bag, S., Ali, S. S., & Venkatesh, V. G. (2013). Green purchasing is key to superior performance:
An empirical study. International Journal of Procurement Management, 6(2), 187–210.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., & Ali, S. S. (2015). Exploring the relationship between leadership, operational
practices, institutional pressures and environmental performance: A framework for green supply chain.
International Journal of Production Economics, 160(February), 120–132.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Childe, S., Shibin, K., & Wamba, S. (2017b). Sustainable
supply chain management: Framework and further research directions. Journal of Cleaner Production,
142(Part 2), 1119–1130.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Shareef, M. A., Mukerji, B., Rana, N. P., & Kapoor, K. K. (2017). Involvement in emergency
supply chain for disaster management: A cognitive dissonance perspective. International Journal of
Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1378958.
Ekanayake, S., Prince, M., Sumathipala, A., Siribaddana, S., & Morgan, C. (2013). We lost all we had in a
second: Coping with grief and loss after a natural disaster. World Psychiatry, 12(1), 69–75.
Georgiadis, P., & Besiou, M. (2008). Sustainability in electrical and electronic equipment closed-loop supply
chains: A system dynamics approach. Journal of Cleaner Production, 16(15), 1665–1678.
Goulding, C., Kelemen, M., & Toru, K. (2017). Community based response to the Japanese Tsunami: A bottom-
up approach. European Journal of Operational Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.11.066.
Hsiao, B., Shu, L., Yu, M. M., Shen, L.-K., & Wang, D.-J. (2017). Performance evaluation of the Taiwan
railway administration. Annals of Operations Research, 259(1), 119–156.
Jabbour, C. J. C., Janeiro, R. C., de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. L., Gobbo Junior, J. A., Salgado, M. H., & Jugend, D.
(2017a). Social aspects of sustainable supply chains: Unveiling potential relationships in the Brazilian
context. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2660-7.
Jabbour, C. J. C., Sobreiro, V. A., de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. L., de Souza Campos, L. M., Mariano, E. B., &
Renwick, D. W. S. (2017b). An analysis of the literature on humanitarian logistics and supply chain
management: Paving the way for future studies. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.100
7/s10479-017-2536-x.
Johansson, L., & Olsson, F. (2017). Quantifying sustainable control of inventory systems with non-linear
backorder costs. Annals of Operations Research, 259(1), 217–239.
Kahn, M. S. A. (2008). Disaster preparedness for sustainable development in Bangladesh. Disaster Prevention
and Management, 17(5), 662–671.
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. M. (2011). Trends and developments in humanitarian logistics—A gap analysis.
International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 41(1), 32–45.
Lee, H. (2004). The triple—A supply chain. Harvard Business Review, 82(10), 102–112.
Majewski, B., Navangul, K. A., & Heigh, I. (2010). A peek into the future of humanitarian logistics:
Forewarned is forearmed. Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal, 11(3), 4–19.
Maon, F., Lindgreen, A., & Vanhamme, J. (2009). Developing supply chains in disaster relief operations
through cross-sector socially oriented collaborations: A theoretical model. Supply Chain Management,
14(2), 149–167.
123

1486
Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
McCoy, J. (2008). Humanitarian response: Improving logistics to save lives. American journal of disaster
medicine, 3(5), 283–293.
McLachlin, R., & Larson, P. D. (2011). Building humanitarian supply chain relationships: Lessons from
leading practitioners. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 1(1), 32–49.
Oloruntoba, R., & Gray, R. (2006). Humanitarian aid: An agile supply chain? Supply Chain Management:
An International Journal, 11(2), 115–120.
Park, Y., Hong, P., & Roh, J. J. (2013). Supply chain lessons from the catastrophic natural disaster in Japan.
Business Horizons, 56(1), 75–85.
Patton, M. Q. (1981). Creative evaluation. San Anselmo: Sage.
Reininger, B. M., Rahbar, M. H., Lee, M. J., Chen, Z., Alam, S. R., Pope, J., et al. (2013). Social capital and
disaster preparedness among low income Mexican Americans in a disaster prone area. Social Science
and Medicine, 83, 50–60.
Shibin, K. T., Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., et al. (2017c). Examining sustainable supply chain management
of SMEs using resource based view and institutional theory. Annals of Operations Research. https://do
i.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2706-x.
Stephenson, M. (2005). Making humanitarian relief networks more effective: Operational coordination, trust
and sense making. Disasters, 29(4), 337–350.
Surana, A., Kumara, S., Greaves, M., & Raghavan, U. N. (2005). Supply chain networks: A complex adaptive
systems perspective. International Journal of Production Research, 43(15), 4235–4265.
Taleizadeh, A. A. (2018). A constrained integrated imperfect manufacturing-inventory system with preventive
maintenance and partial backordering. Annals of Operations Research, 261(1), 303–337.
Tatham, P., & Pettit, S. (2010). Transforming humanitarian logistics: The journey to supply network
management. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 40, 609–622.
Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2006). Humanitarian aid logistics: Supply chain management in high gear. Journal
of the Operational Research Society, 57(5), 475–489.
Vanany, I., Zailani, S., & Pujawan, N. (2009). Supply chain risk management: Literature review and future
research. International Journal of Information Systems and Supply Chain Management, 2(1), 16–33.
WFP. (2017). Forecast-Based Emergency Preparedness Project Bangladesh. www.ifrc.org. Accessed June
2018.
Whybark, D. C., Melnyk, S. A., Day, J., & Davis, E. (2010). Disaster relief supply chain management: New
realities, management challenges, emerging opportunities. Decision Line, 41(3), 4–7.
Xu, L., & Beamon, B. M. (2006). Supply chain coordination and cooperation mechanisms. The Journal of
Supply Chain Management, 42, 4–12.
Aﬃliations
Mahmud Akhter Shareef1 · Yogesh K. Dwivedi2 · Rafeed Mahmud3 ·
Angela Wright4 · Mohammad Mahboob Rahman1 · Hatice Kizgin5 ·
Nripendra P. Rana5
Mahmud Akhter Shareef
mahmud_akh@yahoo.com
Rafeed Mahmud
mahmud.rafeed@gmail.com
Angela Wright
Angela.Wright@cit.ie
Mohammad Mahboob Rahman
mahboob.rahman@northsouth.edu
Hatice Kizgin
hatice.kizgin@swansea.ac.uk
Nripendra P. Rana
nrananp@gmail.com
1
School of Business and Economics, North South University, Dhaka, Bangladesh
123

Annals of Operations Research (2019) 283:1463–1487
1487
2
Emerging Markets Research Centre, School of Management, Swansea University, Swansea, UK
3
Human Environment and Resource Development for Society (HERDS), Dhaka, Bangladesh
4
Department of OPD, School of Business, CIT, Cork, Ireland
5
Emerging Markets Research Centre (EMaRC), School of Management, Swansea University Bay
Campus, Fabian Way, Swansea SA1 8EN, UK
123