TITLE: On the combination of water emergency wells and mobile treatment systems: a case study of the city of Berlin
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03800-8
---

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03800-8
S.I.: DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT OF HUMANITARIAN SUPPLY
CHAINS
On the combination of water emergency wells and mobile
treatment systems: a case study of the city of Berlin
Christoph Stallkamp1
· Florian Diehlmann1 · Markus Lüttenberg1 ·
Marcus Wiens1 · Rebekka Volk1 · Frank Schultmann1
Accepted: 12 September 2020 / Published online: 7 October 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
A shortage of water leads to severe consequences for populations. Recent examples like
the ongoing water shortage in Kapstadt or in Gloucestershire in 2007 highlight both the
challengesauthoritiesfacetorestorethewatersupplyandtheimportanceofinstallingefﬁcient
preparedness measures and plans. This study develops a proactive planning approach of
emergency measures for possible impairments of water supply systems and validates this
with a case study on water contamination in the city of Berlin. We formulate a capacitated
maximalcoveringproblemasamixed-integeroptimizationmodelwherewecombineexisting
emergency infrastructure with the deployment of mobile water treatment systems. The model
selects locations for mobile water treatment systems to maximize the public water supply
within deﬁned constraints. With the extension to a multi-objective decision making model,
possible trade-offs between the water supply coverage and costs, and between the coverage
of differently prioritized demand points are investigated. Therefore, decision makers beneﬁt
from a signiﬁcantly increased transparency regarding potential outcomes of their decisions,
leading to improved decisions before and during a crisis.
Keywords Humanitarian logistics · Water contamination · Emergency wells · Disaster ·
GIS · Optimization
Christoph Stallkamp and Florian Diehlmann have contributed equally to this work.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-
03800-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
B Christoph Stallkamp
christoph.stallkamp@kit.edu
1
Institute for Industrial Production (IIP), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany
123

260
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
1 Introduction
1.1 Motivation
Critical infrastructures are organizations and facilities with great importance to the pub-
lic. Failure can lead to supply shortages of essential services as well as possible disruption
of public safety (BMI 2009; UNISDR 2009). In case of an emergency, it is necessary to
limit damages to critical infrastructures and to prevent possible corresponding disruptions of
services (Wannous and Velasquez 2017). This objective is particularly relevant due to new
security policy risks like international terrorism and signiﬁcant natural risks that have an
enhanced potential to damage critical infrastructures (Bross et al. 2019). Therefore, authori-
ties need to update their continuity plans regularly and make sure that each part of the critical
infrastructure is protected.
The water supply system and the sewage system are one of the critical infrastructures of
a city (BMI 2009). Potential damage to the system can lead to the unavailability of drinking
water. For example, a contamination led to disruptions in Toledo (Redfern et al. 2018) and
Flint (Ruckart et al. 2019). Moreover, the system can be affected by natural disasters. For
example, an earthquake caused signiﬁcant disturbance of the water system in Los Angeles in
1994 (Davis 2014), a long-lasting drought put the supply in Kapstadt under heavy pressure
(Enqvist and Ziervogel 2019). Moreover, severe ﬂooding led to a collapse of the water
distribution of Gloucestershire (Rundblad et al. 2010) and Simbach am Inn in Germany
(Bross et al. 2019). While a lot of measures and contingencies are in place to repair and
reestablish water supply, it is important to develop plans to mitigate the consequences of a
disruption.
Drinking water is critical for the survival of the population. Therefore, operators of critical
infrastructure are obliged to develop contingency plans. For example, German water supply
companiesneedtoimplementpreventivemeasuresforstrengtheningthesafetyofpublicwater
supply. If companies lack capacities to re-establish normal operations, German authorities
need to ensure alternative supply measures (BBK 2016a).
Dependent on the level of the disruption, authorities can activate a variety of specialized
disaster management agencies or divisions. Besides safety and security actors like ﬁreﬁght-
ers, police, or the military, authorities can activate the Federal Agency for Technical Relief
(THW), which provides technical support in the context of civil protection and disaster
assistance (Deutscher 1990). The agency consists of volunteers that form different specialist
groups, including drinking water specialist groups equipped with resources to establish an
emergency water supply. These resources include mobile water treatment systems, water
transportation containers, and vehicles (BBK 2016a). Other specialist groups provide emer-
gency repair, supply, or rescue (BBK 2016b).
While the Federal Ofﬁce for Civil Protection and Disaster relief (BBK) coordinates crisis
interventions on a national level (BBK 2016b), each federal state in Germany is in charge of
their own disaster measures. In case of water supply disruptions, they can, for example, install
mobile pipes from regions with functioning water systems or use transportation trucks (BBK
2016b). In severe cases, when a huge number of people cannot be supplied otherwise, German
authorities can activate more than 5,200 independent emergency water wells throughout the
country that enable quick access to groundwater (Fischer and Wienand 2013).
However, even though measures to maintain and check the wells are in place, it is not
certain that each well works properly (Boehme et al. 2012). Moreover, the well system
was designed and installed during the cold war (Fischer and Wienand 2013). Even though
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
261
authorities occasionally install new fountains, it can be debated if the locations reﬂect the
current distribution of the population properly. Therefore, the focus of our study is to analyze
the effectiveness of wells in a hypothetical disaster and to investigate, how these wells can
be supported by a more ﬂexible technology.
1.2 Problem description and contribution
Mobile water treatment systems represent a ﬂexible option to complement the emergency
supply by wells. However, the decision making on the placement of these mobile systems is
highly complex and depends on multiple factors, such as suitable locations, distance to the
beneﬁciaries, or available budget. This is especially complex in disaster relief since parts of
the population in different and sometimes critical physical constitution need different types of
help [see for instance IFRC (2011), who state that they “prioritize to help the most vulnerable
and ensure that immediate emergency needs are being met].” Decision making is especially
challenging for authorities responsible for the whole population. While they are focused on
maximizing the supply for the vulnerable part of the population, they still need to make sure
that the non-vulnerable parts of the population receives sufﬁcient amounts of water or help
as well.
Therefore, we developed a multi-criteria decision model to support decision makers in
implementing an emergency water supply chain in case of the disruption of the public water
supply. This model allows to consider different objectives within the optimization and, there-
fore, to analyze possible trade-offs (e.g. cost vs. coverage, focus on vulnerable vs. less
vulnerable parts of the population).
The model consists of three parts: determination of the spatial demand and the supply of
the existing emergency water supply infrastructure, identiﬁcation of potential locations for
mobile water treatment systems, as well as the selection of locations for them.
Consequently, the article contributes to the body of literature in three signiﬁcant ways.
First, we provide a guideline to transparently assess available capacities for the ﬁrst time to
enable decision makers to assess their own systems’ conditions and capacities. Second, we
develop a novel maximum covering model to support decision makers designing emergency
water supply chains. The developed model combines various extensions for the maximum
covering location problem. In contrast to previous models, our approach allows to jointly
consider existent service infrastructure with additional facilities, while integrating the inven-
tory allocation of facilities to demand points. Third, the importance of considering trade-offs
is obvious since authorities need to regard multiple stakeholders and their needs within their
decision making. Furthermore, it is necessary to understand the consequences of prioritiz-
ing parts of the population. With our methodology, various trade-offs can be identiﬁed in a
clear-cut way.
The paper is structured as follows. After the review of related literature in the following
section, we provide an overview of the model in Sect. 3. Following, we apply the model
in the context of a case study for a hypothetical terror attack (water contamination) on the
public water supply of the city of Berlin, Germany in Sect. 4. The results of that case study
are highlighted in Sect. 5 and discussed in Sect. 6.
123

262
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
2 Literature review
2.1 Water emergencies
Jain (2012) highlights the challenge of possible contamination of drinking water sources after
an emergency, especially if there is a lack of infrastructure to purify water. He classiﬁes four
groups of possible contaminants: (1) microbiological contaminants, (2) chemical contami-
nants, (3) radiological contaminants, and (4) physical contaminants. Loo et al. (2012) provide
a comprehensive overview of water treatment systems that purify water from different con-
taminants. They also developed a framework to support authorities and relief organizations
selecting from the multiple water treatment options in emergencies. Water treatment systems
are classiﬁed according to their operating principle (Loo et al. 2012) or their capacity, ranging
from point-of-use systems for the intervention on a household level to small-scale-systems
on community level (Peter-Varbanets et al. 2009).
Several papers analyze the effectiveness of speciﬁc water treatment technologies reducing
the concentration of water contaminants in different emergency settings. Clasen and Boisson
(2006) note that household-based ceramic ﬁlters helped to improve the drinking water quality
among the population affected by ﬂooding in the Dominican Republic in 2003. Clasen et al.
(2006) provide an overview of several water puriﬁcation technologies deployed after the
Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004. They highlight that a timely, comprehensive, and effective
response to restore drinking water is essential to save lives and outline conditions under
which household water treatment technologies are useful to provide relief to an affected
population. Dorea et al. (2009) describe the intervention with a clariﬁer on a community
level and provide performance data from the Indian Ocean tsunami. Garsadi et al. (2009)
extend the investigated treatment systems in this aftermath by the discussion of the practical
experiences of the deployment of mobile water treatment systems. Mahmood et al. (2011)
evaluate household sand ﬁlters in the aftermath of an earthquake that damaged over 4000
water and sanitation schemes in northern Pakistan in 2005. Lantagne and Clasen (2013)
document the impact of a household intervention with chlorine and ﬁlter products distributed
after the 2010 earthquake in Haiti.
Since the number of natural and man-made disasters is expected to rise, e.g. due to climate
change, migration, diseases or terror attacks, it is necessary to develop holistic concepts to
encounter the consequences of the disasters as effectively as possible (Wu et al. 2019). This
also includes integrated concepts for drinking water supply and water treatment technologies.
2.2 Covering approaches
According to Church and Murray (2019), public actors’ location decisions are often formu-
lated as covering problems to represent the principle of equity while placing public facilities
and services. There are two types of location covering models, Location Set Covering Prob-
lems (LSCP) and Maximal Covering Location Problems (MCLP). While LSCPs seek to
cover total demand while minimizing the number of facilities needed, MCLPs maximize the
covered demand based on a given number of facilities (Church and Murray 2019).
According to Toregas (1970), an application of the LSCP is placing emergency response
services with a maximal accepted service time. Other applications are ensuring the access
of services for people with disabilities (Kwan et al. 2003), the siting of bus stops (Murray
2001), or the placing of warning sirens (Current and O’Kelly 1992).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
263
On the other hand, possible applications for the MCLP are the placing of health clinics
(Bennett et al. 1982) or ﬁre stations (Murray 2013) in case only a limited number can be
set up. Church and ReVelle (1974) suggest that MCLPs for given planning applications can
be solved by varying the number of facilities. This allows to create a trade-off between the
coverage provided and the investment in facilities (Church and Murray 2019). This additional
information allows the decision maker to weigh between service level and cost.
Li et al. (2011) provide an overview of various extensions of the MCLP and LSCP like
implementing quality levels of service, multiple types of service, or ensuring back up cover-
age. Moreover, Church and Murray (2019) mention extensions regarding integrating existing
service systems and hierarchical services.
Loree and Aros-Vera (2018) highlight that allocating inventory from facilities to demand
points is another important aspect while designing post disaster humanitarian supply chains.
Integrating the inventory allocation decision into the facility location decision links the opti-
mization of facility locations with the consequences for the supplied population (Lin et al.
2012). Loree and Aros-Vera (2018) discuss three models with the objective to maximize
the covered demand (Jia et al. 2007; Murali et al. 2012; Hong et al. 2012). Only Jia et al.
(2007) and Hong et al. (2012) base their models on possible facility locations and specify the
numbers of facilities that are to be placed. However, none of the models considers multiple
facility types to meet the demand and none considers trade-offs.
Consequently, our MCLP differs from available humanitarian location-allocation mod-
els by including the following model components: it determines facility locations, while
simultaneously considering multiple facility types that combine efforts to provide relief
and maximize coverage. In addition, capacity constraints, the allocation of inventory to the
demand points, and multiple sourcing are included. Furthermore, we extended the MCLP
model to include a multi-criteria perspective, allowing for trade-off analysis.
2.3 Multi-objective approaches
Real-world problems include multiple objectives that decision makers have to consider. The
resulting multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) problems combine decisions regarding
cost, environmental risk, service level, or other aspects (Clasen et al. 2006).
Various studies used MCDM methods to ﬁnd optimal solutions for different emergency
settings. Barbaroso˘glu et al. (2002) develop a mathematical model for helicopter mission
planning during disaster relief operations. The model has two sub-problems with conﬂict-
ing objectives leading to the additional development of a multi-criteria analysis. Evaluating
another use case, Bastian et al. (2016) create a multi-criteria decision analysis framework to
optimize the military humanitarian assistance aerial delivery network.
Emergencies in the context of water are also investigated, including hazards and pub-
lic water supply. Gigovi´c et al. (2017) evaluate possible ﬂooding areas in urban areas by
deﬁning factors that are relevant to the hazard of ﬂooding combining the application of
geographical information systems (GIS) and MCDM. Doerner et al. (2009) investigate the
placement of public locations near coasts taking risks of inundation by tsunamis and costs into
account. Singh et al. (2018) evaluate groundwater potential while Al-Weshah and Yihdego
(2018) investigate different approaches to remediate water supply after groundwater pollu-
tion. Tscheikner-Gratl et al. (2017) investigate a multi-objective approach for the maintenance
of water supply systems, while Zimmermann et al. (2018) assess different water infrastruc-
tures. Nolz et al. (2010) introduce a decision support system for planning water distribution
123

264
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
tours with trucks in emergencies. The transportation problem includes a cost criterion based
on travel time and a coverage objective.
Boonmee et al. (2017) provide a comprehensive overview of location-based decision
making problems that are related to humanitarian logistics in emergencies. The survey is
basedondatamodelingtypesandtheclassiﬁcationoffacilitylocationproblems.Furthermore,
it examines pre- and post-disaster situations (Boonmee et al. 2017) and includes multi-
criteria problems. None of the mentioned approaches regard the trade-off between differently
vulnerable groups of the population.
Furthermore, Holguín-Veras et al. (2013) provide an overview of humanitarian logistics
problems with multiple objectives. They discuss incorporating a measure into optimization
problems, which represents the suffering of the population experienced from a lack of access
to goods or services, and name this external effect deprivation cost. Therefore, deprivation
cost functions present an opportunity to prioritize parts of the population (Rivera-Royero
et al. 2016). Shao et al. (2020) provide an overview of the recent literature on the concept of
deprivation cost and highlight challenges associated with this approach. They conclude that
deprivation cost functions are highly sensitive towards the product and the local economic
characteristics (Shao et al. 2020).
To the best of our knowledge, no estimation for water deprivation cost functions in Ger-
many is known. Hence, the application of a deprivation cost approach does not seem to be
mature enough in our context.
2.4 Research gap
The literature review shows that there are no covering models that provide an integrated
concept of combining existing infrastructure with additional mobile water treatment systems.
The developed model allows decision makers to consider already existing infrastructure when
deciding where to place additional mobile water treatment resources in an emergency or
undersupply case.
With the extension of the MCLP model to a MCDM model, comprehensive trade-off
analysis with different priorities are enabled. To the best of our knowledge, there is no such
model combination allowing for a comprehensive analysis of trade-offs between coverage
and length of supply routes, number of deployed water treatment systems or costs. Our
approach also provides valuable insights into the prioritization of certain demand points over
others, especially if deprivation cost functions cannot be applied.
3 Methodology
The model consists of three modules that are described in the following subsections. The
modules (A) and (B) feed the module (C) that consists of the optimization model and enables
trade-off analysis.
3.1 Model requirements
The introduced model aims to support the establishment of a humanitarian supply chain in
the context of an urban water emergency. Modeling an emergency supply chain for a major
city involves the deﬁnition of model boundaries, the collection of required data, and the
formulation of assumptions due to prevailing unknowns and uncertainty.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
265
Fig. 1 Overview of model requirements and modules with the chosen modeling approaches (modules A, B,
C). The requirements are discussed above and are based on the challenges identiﬁed when while designing a
water emergency supply chain. Three model modules are formulated and described to meet the requirements
The main objective is the maximization of the coverage of the public water demand.
In covering models, demand is covered and supplied within a predeﬁned service standard.
The demand coverage is maximized by placing mobile water treatment systems throughout
the city while taking already existing and functioning emergency infrastructure (wells) into
account.
The main challenges are estimating demand, identifying and locating water supply capac-
ities, and determining preferences of the decision maker. The model is supposed to fulﬁll the
following requirements:
1. Estimating demand and identify demand centers within the study area. This includes
different categories of demand such as the demand of residents and patients of high
vulnerable facilities such as hospitals and nursing homes.
2. A second requirement is establishing the available drinking water within the study area.
Possible drinking water sources are already existing emergency infrastructure and location
candidates for mobile water treatment systems.
3. Besides optimizing the total water demand covered, the consecutively optimization of sec-
ondary objectives should be possible to allow analyzing trade-offs between the attainment
of multiple objectives. This enables the decision maker’s preferences to be represented.
Possible trade-offs could be the maximum coverage at a given budget or at least to gain
knowledge on how much a higher coverage would cost.
3.2 Model components
Figure 1 displays an overview of the model requirements and contrasts them with the chosen
modelling approaches to meet these requirements. The water demand module (A) and the
water supply module (B) are two modules to determine the required data for the optimization
module (C). Module (A) locates the water demand by constructing demand points based on
collected data while taking two different categories of demand into account. Module (B) eval-
123

266
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
Fig. 2 Overview of the model and the decision making process. Water demand module (A) and Water supply
module (B) provide data for the optimization module (C). The decision making process is based on a multi-
objective optimization problem and trade-off analysis
uates water supply capacities with respect to their locations and costs. Furthermore, existing
emergency infrastructure is investigated and possible locations for mobile water treatment
systems are deﬁned as solution space. Module (A) and (B) represent the data basis for mod-
ule (C). The core of module (C) is a lexicographical optimization model comprising two
objectives, enabling a consecutive optimization of coverage and associated costs. It allows
the mapping of trade-offs between objectives and the impact of the decision maker’s prefer-
ences. Figure 2 displays the interdependencies of the different modules that are described in
more detail below.
Module (A) determines the demand in case of an emergency. Based on data for population
density per building blocks and the water demand per capita, demand centers can be localized
and their water demand can be calculated resulting in the water demand of regular residents.
Vulnerable patients of hospitals and nursing homes are located at these high care facilities.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
267
Their demand is characterized by the number of beds per institution and the per bed demand.
Additional demand ﬂows can extend the approach.
The available water supply by existing emergency wells is established by module (B).
Data must be identiﬁed that locate the existing emergency infrastructure and its capacities.
Possible locations for mobile water treatment systems are deﬁned by identifying open areas
and by restricting potential candidates based on location criteria such as access to the road
network or a water source. The opportunity to supply locations by tank trucks is evaluated.
The decision making process is described, summarized and solved in module (C). The
established data from modules (A) and (B) is input for a capacitated maximal covering
location problem (CMCLP). A CMCLP was chosen since covering models are typically
used to design emergency services (Daskin 2008). Church and Murray (2019) justify this
with the goals of the public sector, including the provision of good services and fairness that
are implemented through a service level. Moreover, a MCLP is formulated since the number
of available mobile water treatment systems is limited in case of an emergency. Demand
is regarded as covered if the nearest supply is within a predeﬁned distance and provides a
predeﬁned minimum of water.
If emergency infrastructure exists, the model extends this by placing mobile water treat-
ment systems. These two different facility types have both speciﬁc supply capacities. Multiple
facilities can provide service for one demand point.
Chung et al. (1983) describe a basic formulation of CMCLP. Their basic formulation was
extended by additional constraints leading to the following optimization model (see Table 1
for a description of the components).
maximize

i∈I

j∈Ni
zi j ∗ai
(1)
subject to

j∈Ni
zi j ≤1,
∀i ∈I,
(2)
zi j ≥yi j ∗f d,
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈Ni,
(3)

i∈K j
ai ∗zi j ≤c j ∗x j,
∀j ∈J,
(4)

j∈J
s jw≤cw,
∀w ∈W S,
(5)

w∈W
s jw ≤1,
∀j ∈J,
(6)
s jw ≤al jw,
∀j ∈J, ∀w ∈W S, ,
(7)

w∈W S
s jw ≥x j,
∀j ∈J,
(8)

j∈J
x j ≤p,
∀j ∈J,
(9)

j∈DW T
x j ≤q,
∀j ∈J,
(10)
zi j ≤x j,
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈Ni,
(11)
yi j ≥zi j,
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈J,
(12)
yi j ≤zi j ∗M,
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈J,
(13)
123

268
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
Table 1 Notation of sets, parameters and variables used in the optimization model
Sets
i
Index of demand points (i ∈I)
j
Index of water supplying facilities ( j ∈J)
w
Index of water source (w ∈W S)
Ni
Set of water sources within service standard of demand
point i{ j|di j < S}
K j
Set of demand points within service standard of water
supplying facility j{i|di j < S}
FT
Set of existing emergency supply locations { j| supplying
facility j is part of the existing infrastructure}
W T
Set of available water treatment systems { j| supplying
facility j is a water treatment system}
DW T
Set of available water treatment systems that must be
supplied by trucks { j| j ∈WT and distance to water
> dW}
Parameters
dW
Maximal distance allowed for pump supply of water
treatment system
di j
Shortest distance between demand i and supply j
al jw
Binary allocation of supplying facility j to water source
w
ai
Amount of demand at demand point i
c j
Capacity of water supply facility j
cw
Maximum number of water treatment systems that can
be supplied by water source w
S
Desired maximum distance between supply and demand
p
Maximum number of water treatment systems to be
placed in total
q
Maximum number of water treatment systems that can
be supplied by available trucks
f
Minimum percentage of demand that must be supplied
by an allocated facility within the service standard
M
Big number with M > 1000
Decision variables
x j

1, if water treatment system is located at j
0, otherwise
j ∈W T
x j
1
j ∈FT
yi j

1, if demand i is allocated to facility j
0, otherwise
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
269
Table 1 continued
s jw

1, if location j is allocated to water source w
0, otherwise
zi j
Percentage of demand i assigned to facility j
x j ∈{0, 1},
∀j ∈J,
(14)
yi j ∈{0, 1},
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈J,
(15)
zi j ≥0,
∀j ∈J.
(16)
The objective function of the CMCLP is to maximize the total demand covered (1). It
is subject to the constraint that a demand point is satisﬁed by a water source that is located
within a certain distance and receives an amount of water that is lower or equal to its total
demand (2). Therefore, an oversupply is not possible. Moreover, constraint (3) establishes
that the water allocated to a demand point is higher than a percentage that can be predeﬁned
dependent on the context of the case study. Trips for very small quantities of water are thereby
eliminated. Therefore, people are sure that if they take a trip to a water supply facility, they
will get an adequate amount of water. Due to this combination of constraints, the demand
can be covered or partially covered by one or multiple sources within an acceptable distance.
Water supplying facilities have a predeﬁned capacity that must not be exceeded (4). In
addition, constraint (5) ensures that the capacities of water sources are not exceeded by
the number of water treatment systems placed next to it. Each location is allocated to one
water source (6) while the allocation is only possible if it is feasible with respect to other
emergency systems placed at the same water source (7). Constraint (8) establishes that if
a water treatment system is placed at a location, this location must be allocated to a water
source.
A maximal number of p water treatment systems can be sited (9), of which q can be
placed further away from water than a speciﬁed distance (10). Constraint (11) restricts the
allocation of demand to available emergency infrastructure and locations where a water
treatment system has been placed.
Constraint (12) deﬁnes a lower bound and constraint (13), an upper bound for the decision
variable yi j. Constraints (14) to 16 deﬁne the range of values of the decision values.
Due to the constraints described above, it is possible that the available resources are not
sufﬁcient to supply a desired proportion of the population. In Sect. 6.2, we discuss this issue
and suggest a model to analyze this further if decision makers want to extend their analysis
in this direction.
Furthermore, the problem is extended to a multi-objective problem that is solved using a
lexicographic approach, optimizing the objectives coverage and costs in a deﬁned sequence.
This enables the investigation of possible trade-offs between different objectives (Farahani
et al. 2010). Table 2 introduces additional parameters to enable the trade-off analysis.
In general, a lexicographic solution approach optimizes multi-objective problems sequen-
tially in a predeﬁned order and, therefore, it is based on the preferences of the decision maker.
The present model assumes that the decision maker prioritizes coverage higher than cost in
the case of a terror attack or emergency. The coverage is optimized while the cost objective
is not considered. If multiple solutions result in an optimal coverage, the cost objective is
123

270
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
Table 2 Extended notation to enable trade-off analysis: Multi-objective optimization approach, inclusion of
costs and analysis of water treatment systems needed to achieve a deﬁned coverage
Parameters
Multi-objective optimization
perCov
Attainment degree of optimal coverage solution (percentage)
Costs
costEW
Daily cost of operating existing emergency water supply
infrastructure (FT )
costLW
Daily cost of operating a water treatment system not supplied
by trucks (W T \DW T )
costLC
Daily cost of operating a water treatment system supplied by
trucks (DW T )
Number of Water Treatment Systems
perTotalCov
Percentage of the total demand that must be covered
optimized within the determined solution space (Nickel et al. 2011). An objective attainment
degree can extend this approach. Table 2 introduces the parameter perCov that represents
an objective attainment degree and allow deviation from the optimal solution of the demand
covered to enable possible cost savings.
The following equations (17) to (18) display the additions to establish the subsequent cost
minimizing optimization run.
minimize
cost EW ∗

j∈FT
x j + costLW ∗

j∈W T
x j + costLC ∗

j∈DW T
x j
(17)
subject to

i∈I

j∈Ni
zi j ∗ai = perCov ∗Optimal Coverage
(18)
The ﬁrst step of the lexicographic solution approach maximizes the demand covered as
deﬁned in equations (1) to (16) and the optimization approach described above. The coverage
of its optimal solution is then set to the objective attainment degree in equation (18). The
second step of the approach is minimizing the associated cost for the given coverage. There-
fore, objective function (17) is introduced. Constraint (18) enforces that the set coverage is
achieved. The full optimization model for minimizing the total costs also includes constraints
(2) to (16).
4 Case study
In the following, the consequences of a hypothetical terrorist attack on the water supply
infrastructure of Berlin, Germany, is investigated. The city of Berlin is assumed to be a
prestigious target for a terrorist attack, as it is the capital of Germany, with over 3 million
registered residents (Amt für Statistik Berlin-Brandenburg 2019b) in the center of Europe.
Therefore, the city is a suitable case study for the application of the introduced optimization
model and for planning an emergency water supply chain.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
271
4.1 Berlin and its emergency management processes
According to the Berliner Wasserbetriebe (2019), the average water consumption of a Berlin
resident is a total of 110 liters per day. Drinking water and water used to prepare food are
5.5 liters, whereas most of the water is used for personal hygiene or sanitary facilities. Water
supply is ensured by nine waterworks that gain water from bank ﬁltrate, which is extracted
indirectly from surface water. Its quality depends on the condition of lakes and rivers next
to the waterworks (Hiscock and Grischek 2002). Thus, if the surface water is contaminated,
there is a possibility of a disruption of the public water supply (Möller and Burgschweiger
2008).
The responsibility of water supplying companies includes preventive measures for
strengthening the safety of the public water supply (BBK 2016a). If a disruption or fail-
ure of the public water supply can no longer be controlled by the water supply company, the
municipality, district, or state may assist with alternative supply measures (BBK 2016a). In
that case, federal agencies like the THW are deployed, and existing emergency infrastructure
is activated (BBK 2016b).
The THW can provide mobile water treatment systems to establish an emergency supply.
The deployment of these systems results in the need for alternative water sources providing
water to gain drinking water. In the city of Berlin, surface water is a valuable water source for
puriﬁcation systems, since it is easily accessible due to signiﬁcant water surfaces (58.48 km2)
in and around the city (Amt für Statistik Berlin-Brandenburg 2020). Surface water is usually
the most polluted water, leading to stricter requirements for puriﬁcation technologies (Dorea
etal. 2009). If there is no time to identify possible contaminants within the water, a puriﬁcation
system that puriﬁes a broad spectrum of contaminants should be preferred. Riley et al. (2011)
recommend the use of multi-barrier techniques. This technique is, for instance, included in the
UF-15 system of the THW (Al Naqib 2019). Consequently, different levels of contamination
can be puriﬁed simultaneously, allowing supply to the UF-15s from various sources of water
around Berlin. Depending on the severity of the emergency, using multiple sources such as
lakes, rivers, or even ground water can increase the available capacity while simultaneously
not depleting single local water resources.1
Groundwater is usually the preferred source due to less exposure to contamination than
surface water (Doerner et al. 2009). Emergency water wells ensure the availability of ground-
water in Berlin during disruptions of public life and water supply shortages (Fischer and
Wienand 2013). According to Fischer and Wienand (2013), there are more than 900 emer-
gency wells in the city of Berlin.
4.2 Emergency scenario
The investigated emergency scenario comprises the failure of the public water supply of the
city of Berlin after a terrorist attack on the waterworks of the city. As time is needed to run
different detection methods to identify the contaminants, the water supply is shut down and
an emergency water supply network has to be established in the meantime.
We assumed that the groundwater is not contaminated. Therefore, the emergency water
wells can be operated. The large water surfaces of the city of Berlin are additional water
sources, but treatment systems are needed to ensure drinking water quality. The UF-15
treatment systems of the THW are used to extend the existing infrastructure of emergency
1 Note that cities with only one source of water (e.g. Las Vegas with Lake Mead) cannot take advantage of
this increased ﬂexibility.
123

272
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
wells. The water is distributed at the wells and treatment systems. The locations of the wells
are ﬁxed, whereas the UF-15 systems can only be placed at locations that fulﬁll speciﬁc
requirements (see Sect. 4.3.3).
We assumed that besides the public water supply, no other public infrastructure like roads
or power supply was attacked. Roads are accessible and power is available everywhere. The
accessible roads imply that neighboring communities or other federal states could provide
help by supplying bottled water, water tanks, or other resources. The supply of bottled water
is not evaluated since it is not under control of the local authorities. However, knowledge and
equipment stationed in other federal states are deployed and increase the available capacities
of the authorities. The running power supply implies that wastewater treatment systems can
be used for the disposal of sewage. Therefore, the water sources will not get contaminated
with wastewater.
During the crisis, all businesses in the need of drinking water stay closed as their constant
water supply cannot be guaranteed (e.g. hairdresser, ...). However, food supply, pharmacies,
hospitals (critical infrastructure) and businesses in the service sector remain opened. Res-
idents are informed in time so that there is no increase in diseases or other sufferings due
to consumption of contaminated water. Since the attack was not expected, we assume that
private households did not store additional water to complement the emergency water supply.
4.3 Data collection
The data collected consists of the demand structure, the available emergency wells, location
candidates for available water treatment systems and distances between supply and demand.
The following subsections provide an overview of the data while details of the collection and
processing can be found in the supplementary material.
4.3.1 Demand structure
In Germany, the First German Water Securing Regulation (1. WasSV) determines the amount
of water that must be provided to the public in case of an emergency. It distinguishes between
regular persons and persons in highly vulnerable facilities. In our context, we regard hospitals
or nursing homes as vulnerable facilities, as suggested by the Inter-Agency Standing Com-
mittee (IASC 2010) and the Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance
in Humanitarian Action (Sanderson et al. 2012). Regular persons are supplied 15 liters per
day while persons in highly vulnerable facilities are supplied 75 liters per day. Residents of
vulnerable facilities are provided with 150 liters of water per day if it is an intensive care
facility.
Within the attached supplementary material, the collection and processing of the data to
establish discrete demand points for the different demand types is described in detail. The
emergency water demand of the regular residents is 56.23 million liters per day, whereas the
demand of high and intensive care facilities is 6 million liters per day. It has to be mentioned
that people also store water at home that, in theory, reduces the required amount of water
that authorities need to deliver to ensure the well-being of their population. However, we
still regard the full demand of water due to observations made during the ﬁrst wave of the
COVID19-pandemic. Since people panicked and started to purchase goods that the they did
not directly need (e.g. toilet paper), we assume that people would still try to receive water if
they need it and the state offered it to them for free.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
273
Table 3 Daily costs of operating one emergency water well
Cost driver
Expenses
Quantity
Sum
Source
Personal costs
Volunteer THW
22.00 AC
per hour
12
3960.00 AC
THW (2012b)
Equipment costs
Drinking Water Laboratory
18.20 AC
per day
1
18.20 AC
THW (2012b)
Consumables costs
Disinfectant
0.075 AC
per 1 liter
90,000
6750.00 AC
Träger (2019)
Sum
10,728.20 AC
To avoid unnecessary trips, a predeﬁned percentage ensures that, if demand is allocated
to a water supplying facility, an adequate amount of water is supplied per person. We assume
that a threshold of 20% of the German standard for water quantity is suitable, resulting in 3
liters per person and day. This is in line with Sphere Project (2018), that deﬁnes 3 liters as
the absolute minimum in the aftermath of a disaster.
The analysis of demand is limited to the stated types of facilities. Water supply for schools,
food suppliers, or industry is not investigated due to the assumption that these facilities are
closed during the response phase.
4.3.2 Emergency wells
The emergency water supply chain combines existing infrastructure with mobile water treat-
ment systems. The existing infrastructure for water emergencies includes 1028 emergency
wells that are placed throughout the city of Berlin. Their average drinking water output is
90,000 liters per day and well (Langenbach and Fischer 2008).
The supplied water will be disinfected with chlorine if needed (Langenbach and Fischer
2008). It is assumed that the legal maintenance procedures have been followed and that,
therefore, all emergency water wells considered in the optimization model can be accessed
and operated. If this would not be the case, the model parameters can be easily updated and the
optimum locations of water treatment systems for maximum coverage can be recalculated.
The daily costs associated with the operation of an emergency water well are separated into
personal costs and costs associated with equipment and consumables. Table 3 summarizes
the estimated expenses that amount to a rounded 10,700 AC per day per operated well. Based
on the assumption that all 1028 emergency wells are operated during the maximum of 12
hours per day, ﬁxed supply costs of 11,308,000 AC per day arise that can not be inﬂuenced by
the model. The details of the calculation are outlined in the supplementary material.
4.3.3 Mobile water treatment systems
The THW has 14 drinking water specialist groups, each of which has a UF-15 drinking water
treatment system.2 Since the THW is under the control of the German Ministry of Interior,
authorities can control the availability and maintenance of UF-15. Therefore, there is no
2 According to email exchange with THW.
123

274
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
Table 4 Location criteria for location of water treatment systems
Criterion
Description
Value
Source
Access to water
Ability to feed water
treatment systems with
water must be ensured.
Therefore, it must be
possible to bridge the
distance between water
source and system with
a pump. Alternatively,
delivery by truck can
be ensured by the
proximity of the road
network
1200 m
Corsten and Gössinger
(2016),
Feuerwehrschulen
(2018)
Access road network
Transportation of water
to the water treatment
system must be
possible if it can not be
supplied water by
pump. Therefore, the
maximal distance to
next road must not
exceeded the maximal
distance a pump can
bridge
1200 m
Corsten and Gössinger
(2016),
Feuerwehrschulen
(2018)
Distance to demand
Location candidates
must be within the
maximal allowed
supply routes to at least
one demand point
2000 m
EPA (2011), Fischer and
Wienand (2013)
Available area
Operating site must have
a minimum size
60 × 60 m
EPA (2011)
competition with private stakeholders who want to support their processes by purifying water
themselves. And, if a water treatment system would be unavailable, e.g. due to an unexpected
breakdown, the model parameters can be easily updated and the optimum locations of water
treatment systems for maximum coverage can be recalculated.
The UF-15 treats well or surface water using ultraﬁltration with a capacity of 15 m3
per hour (Al Naqib 2019). The operating time of the system is 20 hours per day, which
yields 300,000 liters of water per system and day (THW 2012a). The treated water meets the
drinking water quality standards of the drinking water ordinance (BRD 2018).
Furthermore, we deﬁne the following location criteria (Table 4):
According to EPA (2011), an emergency response site should have an area of more than
60 ×60 m in size, which is also used as criterion for the needed water system operating area.
The locations must be accessible by road to enable deployment and transportation to and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
275
Table 5 Daily costs for operating one mobile water treatment system
Cost driver
Expenses
Quantity
Sum
Source
Personal costs
Volunteer THW
22.00 AC
per hour
18
7920.00 AC
THW (2012b)
Equipment costs
Pumps
35.00 AC
per day
4
140.00 AC
THW (2012b)
Power Generator
4.77 AC
per hour
1
95.40 AC
THW (2012b)
Water Tanks
7.70 AC
per day
12
92.40 AC
THW (2012b)
Drinking Water Laboratory
18.20 AC
per day
1
18.20 AC
THW (2012b)
UF-15
884.00 AC
per day
1
884.00 AC
THW (2012b)
Sum
9150.00 AC
from the site. Since the water treatment system is also used as a distribution station, locations
should be close to demand points (EPA 2011).
The location should also have access to a raw water source (Corsten and Gössinger 2016),
which can provide a water feed of 15 m3 per hour. The usage of a maximum of one pump per
water treatment system is assumed. It can generate the required ﬂow rate up to the distance
of 1200 m. The available number of pumps and their pump capacities separates locations
into locations that can be supplied by pump only and locations that must be supplied with
additional measures. These measures include supplying raw water by tank truck to site. In
the supplementary material, we determined that we need two trucks to supply one treatment
system. The THW has 14 trucks with the needed capacities, limiting the operable number of
water source distant treatment systems to seven.
The criteria described above were used to process data provided by Berlin‘s Geoportal
(Umweltatlas Berlin 2019a). The identiﬁed location candidates are separated into two sets:
the ﬁrst set is within a distance of 1200 m to a water source and can be supplied by one water
pump, while locations in the second set need additional measures to be feasible candidates.
The set of locations that can be supplied with a pump contains 2403 locations. The set
that contains the locations that need alternative supply measures contain of 157 additional
locations.
Table 5 highlights the estimated expenses per day for the operation of an UF-15 system.
The estimation includes personal and equipment costs. The total daily operating costs are
around 9200 AC per system if it is placed next to a water source. If tank trucks have to be
deployed, the costs increase to 10,300 AC due to additional personal costs as well as costs
for the trucks and fuel. For a detailed overview of the data collection and processing see the
supplementary material.
4.3.4 Supply route
We deﬁne the distance between supply and demand points as supply route. This supply
route represents the service standard and is used to select locations for water treatment sys-
tems. Within the case study, supply routes between interacting points are calculated using
the Euclidean distance. However, the assumption of direct links is not applicable when con-
123

276
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
sidering overland routes. Therefore, a tortuosity factor of
√
2 is introduced to embrace real
road conditions (Delivand 2011; Diehlmann et al. 2019).
According to Langenbach and Fischer (2008), reasonable supply routes in the context of
emergency water wells are between 500 and 2000 m. We assume this also applies for the
supply with water treatment systems. Therefore, the maximum service standard is examined
for a supply route of 1250 m, evaluating an intermediate scenario. A sensitivity analysis for
different supply routes lengths follows in the Sect. 6.
4.3.5 Data summary
Table 6 provides an overview of the collected data for the case study. It includes the parameter
settings for the optimization runs. As already mentioned, the collection and processing of
the used data can be found in the supplementary material.
5 Results
This chapter summarizes the results of the optimization. The optimization model is imple-
mented in GAMS and solved with the CPLEX-solver.1
5.1 Computation of model input parameters
Figure 3 provides an overview of the water demand per planning area of the city of Berlin.
The darker the shade of the planning areas or the larger the circles, the higher the demand
in the area. The ﬁgure highlights that special care facilities are often placed within the city
center, while the general demand is distributed rather equally within the city.
Moreover, we identiﬁed 2560 potential locations to place mobile water treatment systems.
Of these possible locations, 2403 are near (< 2 km) a water source, so that a water treatment
system can directly be supplied. In Fig. 4, these areas are highlighted (green). In addition,
there are 157 potential locations that require supplies by tank trucks (red).
5.2 Location analysis
5.2.1 Optimal locations that maximize covering
Figure 5 displays the results of the single objective model with the parameters and input data
stated above. The regular demand points as well as special demand points in central areas
with a high population density are mostly covered. This is a result of the high number of
emergency water wells in this area. Without additional water treatment systems they cover a
total demand of 77%.
The treatment systems are placed in the outer districts of Spandau, Pankow, Reinickendorf,
and Marzahn-Hellersdorf, where the number of emergency wells is lower. All 14 available
water treatment systems are placed within close distance to an adequate water source. The
systems increase the demand covered by seven percentage points leading to a coverage of
84% of the total demand.
1 With a tolerated MIP-gap of 0.5%.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
277
Table 6 Overview of relevant input data for the optimization model
Parameter
Value
Source
Optimization parameters
Distance to water (dW)
1200 m
Feuerwehrschulen (2018)
Desired maximum distance
between supply and demand
(S)
1250 m
Fischer and Wienand (2013)
Number of available water
treatment systems (UF-15
units) (p)
14
Email exchange with THW
Maximum number of water
treatment systems that can be
supplied by trucks (q)
7
Wisetjindawat et al. (2014),
Email exchange with ﬁre
brigade Berlin and THW
Minimum percent of demand
supplied per trip ( f )
20%
Sphere Project (2018)
BRD (1970)
Operating Costs Water
emergency wells (cost EW)
10,700 AC per day
THW (2012b), Träger (2019)
Operating Costs Water
Treatment Systems (costLW)
9200 AC per day
THW (2012b)
Operating Costs Water
Treatment Systems further
away from water source
(costLC)
10,300 AC per day
THW (2012b), Statistisches
Bundesamt (2019)
Spatial demand structure
Number of regular demand
points
14,755
Amt für Statistik
Berlin-Brandenburg (2019a)
Number of special demand
points (hospitals, nursing
homes, sheltered housing)
529
Berliner
Krankenhausgesellschaft
(2019), Privatinstitut für
Transparenz im
Gesundheitswesen (2019)
Emergency Wells
Number of operated emergency
water wells (FT )
1028
Geofabrik (2019)
Daily drinking water supply
(c j)
90,000 liters per well
Fischer and Wienand (2013)
Mobile water treatment systems
Location candidates next to
surface water (W T )
2403
EPA (2011), Corsten and
Gössinger (2016), Fischer
and Wienand (2013),
Feuerwehrschulen (2018),
Umweltatlas Berlin (2019b)
123

278
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
Table 6 continued
Parameter
Value
Source
Location candidates that must
be supplied by trucks (DW T )
157
Wisetjindawat et al. (2014),
email exchange ﬁre brigade
Berlin, email exchange THW
Daily drinking water supply
(c j)
300,000 liters per system THW (2012a)
Distance
Distance Calculation
Euclidean Distance
Mwemezi and Huang (2011)
Tortuosity factor
sqrt(2)
Diehlmann et al. (2019)
Fig. 3 Map of water demand of regular residents and high care facilities in the city of Berlin. The demand of
the residents is aggregated to planning areas of the city. The different colors represent the total water demand
in liters [l]
The total costs associated with the emergency response are 11,128,400 AC per day resulting
from operating the 1028 emergency water wells and 14 water treatment systems.These high
costs indicate the need of a multi-criteria optimization approach including a cost criterion.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
279
Fig. 4 Map of location candidates for placing water treatment systems in the city of Berlin. The locations are
distinguished according to their distance to the closest water source
5.2.2 Optimal locations for cost-efﬁcient maximum covering
A cost-efﬁcient emergency supply enables the investment of saved resources in other areas
of the emergency response.
The results of the proposed lexicographic two-step approach are comparable to the results
of the single objective model with a coverage of 84%. Because other locations in the outer
districts of Spandau, Pankow, Reinickendorf, and Marzahn-Hellersdorf have been chosen,
the solution space for the optimal coverage does not seem to be bijective. However, within the
solution space, no solution is more cost-efﬁcient than the one found with the single objective
model. Therefore, the total costs associated with the lexicographic optimization are also
11,128,400 AC per day. The high operation costs are caused by the emergency water wells
and the assumption that all are operated. These ﬁx costs amount to a rounded 11,000,000 AC
and cannot be inﬂuenced by the model design and decision variables.
5.2.3 Prioritization of special demand over regular demand
As mentioned above, decision makers try to prioritize the highly vulnerable demand points
in disaster relief. To investigate the effects of such a prioritization of demand types, the
lexicographic CMLCP is slightly modiﬁed: the gradual optimization of coverage and costs
123

280
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
Fig. 5 Map of regular and special demand points left uncovered, considering a maximum supply route of 1250
m
is replaced by the gradual optimization of special and regular demand covered. Therefore,
the objective function of the CMCLP is split into covering high care facilities and covering
regular demand points. The model assumes that the decision maker prioritizes the demand
of high care facilities. Therefore, the objectives are optimized in this order.
The result of the modiﬁed lexicographic approach is a total coverage of 81% covering
91% of the demand of high care facilities and 80% of the regular demand. The costs are
11,129,500 AC resulting from operating 1028 emergency water wells, 13 water treatment
systems close to a water source and one water treatment system that has to be supplied by
truck. The map shows that some of the mobile systems are placed in more central districts like
Mitte, Friedrichshain, Charlottenburg, Tempelhof, and Steglitz (see Fig. 6). This emphasizes
the prioritization of the special demand in this area, as high care facilities that were only
partially supplied are now being fully supplied.
6 Discussion
This section discusses the generated results and highlights trade-offs between different objec-
tives. The design and assumptions of the model are also critically reviewed.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
281
Fig. 6 Map of locations of mobile water treatment systems placed when prioritizing high care facilities
6.1 Length of the supply route
The maximum length of the supply route impacts the total demand coverage (Fig. 7). In the
diagram, the length of the supply route ranges between 500 and 2000 m (as suggested by
Langenbach and Fischer 2008). While shorter supply routes decrease the travel distance of
a supplied person, longer maximal supply routes increase the total coverage.
The results show that a short maximum supply route leads to a considerably low coverage
of 63%. The coverage increases by 12 percentage points when the maximal length allowed
is set to 750 m. Within the deﬁned value range, the maximal total coverage is 88%.
As coverage is strongly inﬂuenced by the supply route, a short supply route reduces the
chance that demand can be allocated to a facility within the deﬁned maximum length of the
supply route. However, we can also see that prolonging the supply route from 1250 to 2000 m
only gains 4% additional coverage. Thus, the decision maker has to determine a reasonable
length for the supply routes.
Within this paper, the distance is determined by the linear distance between two points and
a tortuosity factor. Thus, the distance between supply and demand is only an approximation.
Determining the distance based on a network length could increase the accuracy of the results.
6.2 Number of water treatment systems to ensure a specific coverage
To increase the supply, it is possible to purchase additional puriﬁcation systems at additional
cost. Therefore, we analyzed the number of necessary systems to provide predeﬁned coverage
123

282
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
Fig. 7 Achievable coverage dependent on the maximum length of the supply route
with the help of a capacitated location set covering problem (CLSCP). The optimal and
capacitated version of the prototypical LSCP is described by Church and Murray (2019).
The introduced notation is extended by the parameter perT otalCov introduced in Table 2,
which determines the percentage of the total water demand that must be covered.
The CLSCP is locating the minimum number of facilities needed so that the deﬁned cov-
erage can be reached (Church and Murray 2019). Thus, the objective function 19 minimizes
the number of placed facilities. Compared to the prototypical formulation by Church and
Murray (2019), total demand must not be fully covered in our case since total coverage only
has to be higher than a predeﬁned percentage described by constraint 20. Therefore, not every
demand point must be covered within the service standard (21). The other constraints are
equal to the constraints formulated for the CMCLP. Therefore, they are not further discussed.
minimize

i∈W T
x j
(19)
subject to

i∈I

j∈Ni
zi j ∗ai ≥perT otalCov ∗

i∈I
ai,
(20)

j∈Ni
zi j ≤1,
∀i ∈I,
(21)
zi j≥yi j ∗f ,
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈Ni,
(22)

i∈K j
ai ∗zi j ≤c j ∗x j,
∀j ∈J,
(23)

j∈J
s jw≤cw,
∀w ∈W S,
(24)

w∈W
s jw ≤1,
∀j ∈J,
(25)
s jw ≤al jw,
∀j ∈J, ∀w ∈W S,
(26)

w∈W S
s jw ≥x j,
∀j ∈J,
(27)
zi j ≤x j,
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈Ni,
(28)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
283
Fig. 8 Number of water treatment systems required to reach a targeted coverage
yi j ≥zi j,
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈J,
(29)
yi j ≤zi j ∗M,
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈J,
(30)
x j ∈{0, 1},
∀j ∈J,
(31)
yi j ∈{0, 1},
∀i ∈I, ∀j ∈J,
(32)
zi j ≥0,
∀j ∈J.
(33)
Since the introduced CLSCP determines the required number of water treatment systems
to reach a predeﬁned percentage of total coverage, the relationship between both is analyzed.
The nonlinear trade-off curve shows that there is no feasible solution for full coverage while
considering only the identiﬁed locations to place the mobile treatment systems (Fig. 8).
The maximal possible coverage is 99% with 116 required water treatment systems. The
existing infrastructure of emergency water wells is covering 77% of the total demand. A high
number of water treatment systems is needed to yield a signiﬁcant increase in coverage.
In the case study, only 14 systems are available increasing the coverage to 84%. The
purchase and deployment of additional water treatment systems for the THW is therefore
an option to increase the demand coverage. However, a small number of additional systems
would only lead to a small increase of coverage. Moreover, the decision makers have to
decide if an increase in coverage is worth the associated costs or if the money could be spend
more efﬁcient in other ways.
Reasons why full coverage cannot be achieved may result from data quality and data
preparation. Moreover, it is possible that individual persons cannot be reached within the
approved lengths for the supply route. This could include, for example, the inhabitants of the
islands in Lake Tegel, as they are isolated.
Figure 8 also indicates the importance of the existing emergency wells, which can be
accessed easily. Eliminating the capacities of the wells results in a coverage of 7% deploying
the currently available 14 water treatment systems. The highest possible coverage without
wells is 99%. 1,596 mobile treatment systems with an average utilization rate of 7% are
required.
This demonstrates the importance of the existing emergency water wells. Mobile water
treatment systems are not suitable to reach full coverage by themselves and the existing
network of emergency wells should be extended.
123

284
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
Fig. 9 Trade-off between coverage of high care facilities and coverage of regular residents
6.3 Relaxation of constraints for the prioritization of special demand
The objective attainment degree allows a deviation from the optimal solution to investigate
the possible trade-off between coverage of special and regular demand. This degree deﬁnes
the minimum value of the optimal solution that must be reached. The attainment degree of
100% yields an optimal coverage for the special demand of 91%. For this solution, the regular
demand covered is 80% resulting in a total coverage of 81%. By lowering the attainment
degree, it is possible to cover more regular demand points (Fig. 9).
We see that the total coverage varies little within the analysis. The optimal total coverage
of 84% is reached with an attainment degree of 95%. With this attainment degree, 87% of
the special demand and 83% of the regular demand is covered. The coverage of the regular
demand is close to its possible maximum of 86%.
The results show that the impact of the special demand on the total coverage is smaller
than the impact of the regular demand. This results from the lower total demand at high care
facilities, which account for 10% of the total demand. The optimum coverage of the total
demand decreases only slightly when high care facilities are prioritized. The decision maker
has to decide if the prioritization is worth this difference.
6.4 Trade-off between coverage and costs
In the following Subsection, we analyze the trade-off between coverage and costs. However,
we want to point out that this does not hint that authorities would not try to supply as many
people as possible. A reduction of cost could also mean that authorities make resources
available for other measures that support the population as well. For example, authorities
could increase the total supply to the population if a comparably small loss in coverage by
the treatment systems saves enough money to purchase a truck full of bottled water. Even
though it can be discussed that Berlin’s authorities could count on more or less unlimited
ﬁnancial support of the state in such a severe disaster, this probably does not apply to some
authorities in developing countries or Non-Governmental-Organizations (NGOs) working
on a budget.
The trade-off curve between optimum coverage and ﬂexible daily costs shows that a
deviation from the optimal coverage enables potential cost savings (Fig. 10). The ﬂexible
daily costs associated with the optimal coverage are 128,800 AC (14 mobile puriﬁcation
systems * 9200 AC per day).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
285
Fig. 10 Trade-off between cost and coverage displayed based on the attainment degree of the solution for
optimal coverage
The reduction of the attainment degree to 99% leads to cost savings of 9200 AC while
83% of the total demand is covered. Further reduction of the attainment degree leads to a
linear decrease of the daily costs. This trend is interrupted between the attainment degree
of 95% and 94% before continuing linearly after 94%. With the reduction of the attainment
degree below 93% no water treatment systems are placed, and water is only provided with
the existing emergency infrastructure.
In the linear parts of the trade-off curve, the decision maker has to decide whether cost
savings of 18,400 AC are worth it to lose 522,414 liters of water, which could supply more than
34,000 residents. The trade-off curve, therefore, provides the decision maker with a higher
transparency regarding the consequences of his or her decision. Consequently, he or she
can derive more efﬁcient and well-informed decisions on the deployment of water treatment
systems, and use the available budget as efﬁcient as possible.
7 Conclusion and research outlook
The design of an emergency water distribution system represents a difﬁcult challenge for
authorities. A variety of trade-offs has to be regarded for an efﬁcient solution. To support
public decision makers in this process, we developed a capacitated maximal covering location
model based on georeferenced data that maximizes the water demand covered, followed by
a cost minimization step.
We applied the approach to a case study in the city of Berlin, Germany. Therefore, we
extended the model with a multi-objective approach to regard various trade-offs. For example,
we showed that a prioritization of special demand suggests completely different locations for
the mobile treatment systems. Moreover, we increased cost transparency by the investigation
of the trade-off between cost and coverage. This enables the decision maker to know the
effective price (or opportunity cost respectively) of additional water supply facilities in an
emergency.
It can be concluded that the deployment of mobile water treatment systems extending
existing infrastructure increases the covered water demand and the supply of suffering people
signiﬁcantly. Thereby, a high spatial density of existing emergency infrastructure is the basis
for a high coverage within reasonable supply routes. In Berlin, this is demonstrated by a
close network of wells within the city center, already covering 77% of the total demand.
The deployment of additional 14 mobile water treatment systems increased the total demand
123

286
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
covered by only seven percentage points to 84% of the total demand. Furthermore, a supply
based on mobile water treatment systems alone resulted in a total coverage of 7%. Mobile
systems are associated with additional costs, leading to the key trade-off between coverage
and costs.
However, the case study did not regard uncertainties like the functionality of a well or the
availability of treatment systems. Even though legal maintenance procedures both on water
treatmentsystemsandemergencywellsareimplemented,thereisstillariskofwatertreatment
system or well failure. Therefore, the effects of possible malfunction could be analyzed a
priori with the help of a Monte Carlo Simulation or two-stage stochastic programming in
a follow-up study or could be covered posteriori by another model run with respectively
updated data. Moreover, it is reasonable to expect a signiﬁcant time delay between the start
of the crisis and the availability of all treatment systems. Therefore, a stochastic or dynamic
extension of the model could provide valuable information.
Another extension could be to take the geographic distribution of stockpiled water into
consideration and locate the adjusted demand. One example could be that people with larger
apartments are more likely to store water at home than people with small apartments (Bell
and Hilber 2006). Integrating the adjusted demand into the developed model consisting of
wells and mobile water treatment systems might further increase the applicability to the real
world. Furthermore, the adjusted demand might lead to higher coverage rates.
In addition, most of the used data is publicly available. Therefore, the data (and cost data
in particular) could be further validated by experts and adjusted to the way costs are invoiced
or distributed in disaster management practice. Requests to validate the cost estimations led
to the surprising situation that different organizations and authorities could not provide us
with real data, but instead, reciprocally referred to each other. This hints towards a general
cost-transparency problem, which could be addressed in future studies.
In spite of the aforementioned challenges, the approach has the potential to signiﬁcantly
increase the transparency of decisions for decision makers and therefore improve the efﬁ-
ciency of disaster relief management.
Acknowledgements This research was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) in the NOLAN project (Grant Number: 13N14457). Furthermore, we want to thank the employees
at diverse disaster management authorities for their support during the data collection and validation process
and also the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback. Moreover, we acknowledge support by the
KIT-Publication Fund of the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
287
References
Al Naqib, B. (2019). Technische Hilfe in Katastrophen- und Krisenfall: Trinkwasserversorgung. https://
docplayer.org/docview/62/46737109/#ﬁle=/storage/62/46737109/46737109.pdf. Accessed 17 June
2020.
Al-Weshah, R. A., & Yihdego, Y. (2018). Multi-criteria decision approach for evaluation, ranking, and selection
of remediation options: Case of polluted groundwater, kuwait. Environmental Science and Pollution
Research International, 25(36), 36039–36045.
Amt für Statistik Berlin-Brandenburg. (2018). Flächennutzung Berlin. https://www.statistik-berlin-
brandenburg.de/regionalstatistiken/r-gesamt_neu.asp?Ptyp=410&Sageb=33000&creg=BBB&
anzwer=8. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Amt für Statistik Berlin-Brandenburg. (2019a). Einwohnerdichte 2018 (Umweltatlas). https://fbinter.stadt-
berlin.de/fb/index.jsp. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Amt
für
Statistik
Berlin-Brandenburg.
(2019b).
Einwohnerinnen
und
Einwohner
in
Berlin
in
LOR-Planungsräumen. https://daten.berlin.de/datensaetze/einwohnerinnen-und-einwohner-berlin-lor-
planungsr%E4umen-am-31122018. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Barbaroso˘glu, G., Özdamar, L., & Çevik, A. (2002). An interactive approach for hierarchical analysis of
helicopter logistics in disaster relief operations. European Journal of Operational Research, 140(1),
118–133.
Bastian, N. D., Grifﬁn, P. M., Spero, E., & Fulton, L. V. (2016). Multi-criteria logistics modeling for military
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief aerial delivery operations. Optimization Letters, 10(5), 921–
953.
BBK.
(2016a).
Sicherheit
der
Trinkwasserversorgung:
Grundlagen
und
Handlungsempfehlungen
für
Aufgabenträger
der
Wasserversorgung
in
den
Kommunen
in
Bezug
auf
außergewöhn-
liche Gefahrenlagen: Teil 1: Risikoanalyse. Bundesamt für Bevölkerungsschutz und Katastro-
phenhilfe (BBK). https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/Kritis/DE/Band-15_Praxis_BS_
Trinkwasserversorgung.pdf?__blob=publicationFile. Accessed 17 June 2020.
BBK. (2016b). Sicherheit der Trinkwasserversorgung: Grundlagen und Handlungsempfehlungen für
Aufgabenträger
der
Wasserversorgung
in
den
Kommunen
in
Bezug
auf
außergewöhnliche
Gefahrenlagen: Teil 2: Notfallversorgung. Bundesamt für Bevölkerungsschutz und Katastro-
phenhilfe (BBK). https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/Kritis/DE/Band-15_Praxis_BS_
Trinkwasserversorgung.pdf?__blob=publicationFile. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Bell, D. R., & Hilber, C. A. L. (2006). An empirical test of the Theory of Sales: Do household storage
constraints affect consumer and store behavior? Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 4(2), 87–117.
Bennett, V. L., Eaton, D. J., & Church, R. L. (1982). Selecting sites for rural health workers. Social Science
& Medicine, 16(1), 63–72.
Berliner Krankenhausgesellschaft e.V. (2019). Berliner Krankenhaus Verzeichnis. https://www.berliner-
krankenhausverzeichnis.de/. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Berliner Wasserbetriebe. (2019). Wasser im Haushalt. https://www.bwb.de/de/523.php. Accessed 17 June
2020.
BMI. (2009). National strategy for critical infrastructure protection. German Federal Ministry of the Inte-
rior (BMI). https://www.bmi.bund.de/SharedDocs/downloads/EN/publikationen/2009/kritis_englisch.
pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=1. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Boehme, K., Geißler, S., & Schweer, B. (2012). Szenario eines großﬂächigen und lang anhaltenden
Stromausfalls in Berlin: BMBF- Projekt TankNotStrom. https://opus4.kobv.de/opus4-hwr/ﬁles/413/
Szenario+Berlin_2012.11.21.pdf. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Boonmee, C., Arimura, M., & Asada, T. (2017). Facility location optimization model for emergency humani-
tarian logistics. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 24, 485–498.
BRD. (1970). Erste Wassersicherstellungsverordnung: 1. WasSV. Bundesrepublik Deutschland (BRD). https://
www.gesetze-im-internet.de/wassv_1/BJNR003570970.html. Accessed 17 June 2020.
BRD.
(2018).
Verordnung
über
die
Qualität
von
Wasser
für
den
menschlichen
Gebrauch
(Trinkwasserverordnung–TWV).
Bundesrepublik
Deutschland
(BRD).
https://www.gesetze-im-
internet.de/trinkwv_2001/BJNR095910001.html. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Bross, L., Krause, S., Wannewitz, M., Stock, E., Sandholz, S., & Wienand, I. (2019). Insecure security:
Emergency water supply and minimum standards in countries with a high supply reliability. Water,
11(4), 732.
Chung, C., Schilling, D., & Carbone, R. (1983). The capacitated maximal covering problem: A heuristic. In
Proceedings of Fourteenth Annual Pittsburgh Conference on Modeling and Simulation (pp. 1423–1428).
Church, R., & Murray, A. (2019). Location covering models: History, applications and advancements.
Advances in spatial science. Cham, Suisse: Springer.
123

288
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
Church, R., & ReVelle, C. (1974). The maximal covering location problem. Papers of the Regional Science
Association, 32, 101–118.
Clasen, T., & Boisson, S. (2006). Household-based ceramic water ﬁlters for the treatment of drinking water in
disaster response: an assessment of a pilot programme in the Dominican Republic. Water Practice and
Technology. https://doi.org/10.2166/wpt.2006.031.
Clasen, T., Smith, L., Albert, J., Bastable, A., & Fesselet, J.-F. (2006). The drinking water response to the indian
ocean tsunami, including the role of household water treatment. Disaster Prevention and Management:
An International Journal, 15(1), 190–201.
Corsten, H., & Gössinger, R. (2016). Produktionswirtschaft: Einführung in das industrielle Produktionsman-
agement / Hans Corsten. De Gruyter Oldenbourg: Ralf Gössinger.
Current, J., & O’Kelly, M. (1992). Locating emergency warning sirens. Decision Sciences, 23(1), 221–234.
Daskin, M. S. (2008). What you should know about location modeling. Naval Research Logistics, 55(4),
283–294.
Davis, C. (2014). Water system service categories, post-earthquake interaction, and restoration strategies.
Earthquake Spectra, 30(4), 1487–1509.
Delivand, M. (2011). Assessing the feasibility of process chains for energy production from rice straw in
Thailand. Ph.D. Thesis. Dissertation at the Joint Graduate School of Energy and Environment.
Deutscher, Bundestag. (1990). Gesetz über das Technische Hilfswerk (THW-Gesetz - THWG). http://www.
gesetze-im-internet.de/thw-helfrg/THWG.pdf. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Diehlmann, F., Zimmer, T., Glöser-Chahoud, S., Wiens, M., & Schultmann, F. (2019). Techno-economic
assessmentofutilizationpathwaysforricestraw:Asimulation-optimizationapproach.JournalofCleaner
Production, 230, 1329–1343.
Doerner, K. F., Gutjahr, W. J., & Nolz, P. C. (2009). Multi-criteria location planning for public facilities in
tsunami-prone coastal areas. OR Spectrum, 31(3), 651–678.
Dorea, C. C., Luff, R., Bastable, A., & Clarke, B. A. (2009). Up-ﬂow clariﬁer for emergency water treatment.
Water and Environment Journal, 23(4), 293–299.
Enqvist, J. P., & Ziervogel, G. (2019). Water governance and justice in cape town: An overview. Wiley Inter-
disciplinary Reviews: Water, 149(4), e1354.
EPA. (2011). Planning for an Emergency Drinking Water Supply. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/ﬁles/
2015-03/documents/planning_for_an_emergency_drinking_water_supply.pdf. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Farahani, R. Z., SteadieSeiﬁ, M., & Asgari, N. (2010). Multiple criteria facility location problems: A survey.
Applied Mathematical Modelling, 34(7), 1689–1709.
Feuerwehrschulen, Bayern. (2018) . Wasserförderung über lange Schlauchstrecken: Merkblatt. https://www.
sfs-w.de/downloads.html?no_cache=1&download=5008_Inhalt_Wasserfoerderung_2018-05-16.pdf&
did=38. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Fischer, P., & Wienand, I. (2013). Trinkwassernotbrunnen - wasserversorgung in extremsituationen. https://
www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/BBK/DE/Publikationen/PublikationenKritis/notbrunnen_
extremsituation.pdf?__blob=publicationFile. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Garsadi, R., Salim, H. T., Soekarno, I., Doppenberg, A., & Verberk, J. (2009). Operational experience with
a micro hydraulic mobile water treatment plant in indonesia after the “tsunami of 2004”. Desalination,
248(1–3), 91–98.
Geofabrik, GmbH. (2019). OpenStreetMap Data in Layered GIS-Format. http://download.geofabrik.de/osm-
data-in-gis-formats-free.pdf. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Gigovi´c, L., Pamuˇcar, D., Baji´c, Z., & Drobnjak, S. (2017). Application of gis-interval rough ahp methodology
for ﬂood hazard mapping in urban areas. Water, 9(6), 360.
Hiscock, K. M., & Grischek, T. (2002). Attenuation of groundwater pollution by bank ﬁltration. Journal of
Hydrology, 266(3), 139–144.
Holguín-Veras, J., Pérez, N., Jaller, M., van Wassenhove, L. N., & Aros-Vera, F. (2013). On the appropriate
objective function for post-disaster humanitarian logistics models. Journal of Operations Management,
31(5), 262–280.
Hong, J.-D., Xie, Y., & Jeong, K.-Y. (2012). Development and evaluation of an integrated emergency response
facility location model. Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management, 5(1), 4–21.
IASC. (2010). IASC strategy: Meeting humanitarian challenges in urban areas.
IFRC. (2011). The Red Cross Red Crescent approach to disaster and crisis management: Position Paper. https://
www.ifrc.org/PageFiles/91314/1209600-DM-Position-Paper-EN.pdf. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Jain, R. (2012). Providing safe drinking water: A challenge for humanity. Clean Technologies and Environ-
mental Policy, 14(1), 1–4.
Jia, H., Ordóñez, F., & Dessouky, M. (2007). A modeling framework for facility location of medical services
for large-scale emergencies. IIE Transactions, 39(1), 41–55.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
289
Kwan,M.-P.,Murray,A.T.,O’Kelly,M.E.,&Tiefelsdorf,M.(2003).Recentadvancesinaccessibilityresearch:
Representation, methodology and applications. Journal of Geographical Systems, 5(1), 129–138.
Langenbach, M., & Fischer, P. (2008). Trinkwasser- Notbrunnen in Deutschland. bbr - Fachmagazin für
Brunnen- und Leitungsbau, 11.
Lantagne, D., & Clasen, T. (2013). Effective use of household water treatment and safe storage in response to
the 2010 haiti earthquake. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 89(3), 426–433.
Li, X., Zhao, Z., Zhu, X., & Wyatt, T. (2011). Covering models and optimization techniques for emergency
response facility location and planning: A review. Mathematical Methods of Operations Research, 74(3),
281–310.
Lin, Y.-H., Batta, R., Rogerson, P. A., Blatt, A., & Flanigan, M. (2012). Location of temporary depots to
facilitate relief operations after an earthquake. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 46(2), 112–123.
Loo, S.-L., Fane, A. G., Krantz, W. B., & Lim, T.-T. (2012). Emergency water supply: A review of potential
technologies and selection criteria. Water Research, 46(10), 3125–3151.
Loree, N., & Aros-Vera, F. (2018). Points of distribution location and inventory management model for Post-
Disaster Humanitarian Logistics. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review,
116, 1–24.
Mahmood, Q., Baig, S. A., Nawab, B., Shafqat, M. N., Pervez, A., & Zeb, B. S. (2011). Development of low
cost household drinking water treatment system for the earthquake affected communities in northern
pakistan. Desalination, 273(2–3), 316–320.
Möller, K., & Burgschweiger, J. (2008). Wasserversorgungskonzept für Berlin und für das von den BWB
versorgte Umland (Entwicklung bis 2040). Berlin, Germany: Report for BWB.
Murali, P., Ordóñez, F., & Dessouky, M. M. (2012). Facility location under demand uncertainty: Response to
a large-scale bio-terror attack. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 46(1), 78–87.
Murray, A. T. (2001). Strategic analysis of public transport coverage. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences,
35(3), 175–188.
Murray, A. T. (2013). Optimising the spatial location of urban ﬁre stations. Fire Safety Journal, 62, 64–71.
Mwemezi, J. J., & Huang, Y. (2011). Optimal facility location on spherical surfaces: Algorithm and application.
New York Science Journal, 4(7), 21–28.
Nickel, S., Stein, O., & Waldmann, K.-H. (2011). Operations research. Heidelberg: Springer.
Nolz, P. C., Doerner, K. F., & Hartl, R. F. (2010). Water distribution in disaster relief. International Journal
of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 40(8/9), 693–708.
Peter-Varbanets, M., Zurbrügg, C., Swartz, C., & Pronk, W. (2009). Decentralized systems for potable water
and the potential of membrane technology. Water Research, 43(2), 245–265.
Privatinstitut für Transparenz im Gesundheitswesen GmbH. (2019). Betreutes Wohnen und Residenzen in
Berlin. https://www.seniorenportal.de/betreutes-wohnen-in-berlin. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Redfern, R., Micham, J., Daniels, R., & Childers, S. (2018). Something in the water: Hospital responds to
water crisis. Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, 12(5), 666–668.
Riley, M. R., Gerba, C. P., & Elimelech, M. (2011). Biological approaches for addressing the grand challenge
of providing access to clean drinking water. Journal of Biological Engineering, 5(1), 2.
Rivera-Royero, D., Galindo, G., & Yie-Pinedo, R. (2016). A dynamic model for disaster response considering
prioritized demand points. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 55, 59–75.
Ruckart, P., Ettinger, A., Hanna-Attisha, M., Jones, N., Davis, S., & Breysse, P. (2019). The ﬂint water
crisis: A coordinated public health emergency response and recovery initiative. Journal of Public Health
Management and Practice, 25, 84–90.
Rundblad, G., Knapton, O., & Hunter, P. R. (2010). Communication, perception and behaviour during a natural
disaster involving a ‘do not drink’ and a subsequent ‘boil water’ notice: a postal questionnaire study.
BMC Public Health, 10, 641.
Sanderson, D., Knox-Clarke, P., & Campbell, L. (2012). Responding to urban disasters: Learning from previous
relief and recovery operations. In ALNAP, November.
Shao, J., Wang, X., Liang, C., & Holguín-Veras, J. (2020). Research progress on deprivation costs in humani-
tarian logistics. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 42, 10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.
2019.101343.
Singh, L. K., Jha, M. K., & Chowdary, V. M. (2018). Assessing the accuracy of gis-based multi-criteria decision
analysis approaches for mapping groundwater potential. Ecological Indicators, 91, 24–37.
Sphere Project. (2018). The sphere handbook—humanitarian charter and minimum standards in humanitarian
response. Geneva: Sphere Association.
Statistisches Bundesamt. (2019). Daten zur Energiepreisentwicklung - Lange Reihen von Januar 2005
bis August 2019. https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Wirtschaft/Preise/Publikationen/Energiepreise/
energiepreisentwicklung-pdf-5619001.pdf;jsessionid=E9FD1C2DB6A0B38C62AD9A26DCDF4106.
internet712?__blob=publicationFile. Accessed 17 June 2020.
123

290
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:259–290
THW. (2012a). Trinkwasseraufbereitungsanlage THW. Bundesanstalt Technisches Hilfswerk (THW).
https://www.thw.de/SharedDocs/Ausstattungen/DE/Geraete/trinkwasseraufbereitungsanlage.html?
noMobile=1. Accessed 17 June 2020.
THW. (2012b). Verordnung über die Durchführung und Abrechnung von Hilfeleistungen des Technischen
Hilfswerks. https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/thw-abrv/THW-AbrV.pdf. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Toregas, C. (1970). A covering formulation for the location of public service facilities. Ithaca: Cornell Uni-
versity.
Träger, S. (2019). Micropur Forte MF 1T. https://www.krisenpakete.de/Micropur-Forte-MF-1T. Accessed 17
June 2020.
Tscheikner-Gratl, F., Egger, P., Rauch, W., & Kleidorfer, M. (2017). Comparison of multi-criteria decision
support methods for integrated rehabilitation prioritization. Water, 9(2), 68.
Umweltatlas Berlin. (2019a). Geoportal Berlin. https://fbinter.stadt-berlin.de/fb/index.jsp. Accessed 17 June
2020.
Umweltatlas Berlin. (2019b). Reale Nutzung 2015. https://fbinter.stadt-berlin.de/fb/index.jsp. Accessed 17
June 2020.
UNISDR.
(2009).
Terminology
on
disaster
risk
reduction.
https://www.unisdr.org/ﬁles/7817_
UNISDRTerminologyEnglish.pdf. Accessed 17 June 2020.
Wannous, C., & Velasquez, G. (2017). United Nations Ofﬁce for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR)–
UNISDR’s Contribution to Science and Technology for Disaster Risk Reduction and the Role of the
International Consortium on Landslides (ICL). In K. Sassa, M. Mikoš, & Y. Yin (Eds.), Advancing
culture of living with landslides (pp. 109–115). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Wisetjindawat, W., Ito, H., Fujita, M., & Eizo, H. (2014). Planning disaster relief operations. Procedia - Social
and Behavioral Sciences, 125, 412–421.
Wu, J., Huang, C., Pang, M., Wang, Z., Yang, L., FitzGerald, G., et al. (2019). Planned sheltering as an
adaptation strategy to climate change: Lessons learned from the severe ﬂooding in anhui province of
china in 2016. The Science of the Total Environment, 694, 133586.
Zimmermann, M., Felmeden, J., & Michel, B. (2018). Integrated assessment of novel urban water infrastruc-
tures in frankfurt am main and hamburg, germany. Water, 10(2), 211.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123