TITLE: Simulation-based multi-criteria decision making: an interactive method with a case study on infectious disease epidemics
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04321-8
---

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04321-8
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Simulation-based multi-criteria decision making: an
interactive method with a case study on infectious disease
epidemics
Fabian Dunke1
· Stefan Nickel1
Accepted: 27 September 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Whenever a system needs to be operated by a central decision making authority in the pres-
ence of two or more conﬂicting goals, methods from multi-criteria decision making can
help to resolve the trade-offs between these goals. In this work, we devise an interactive
simulation-based methodology for planning and deciding in complex dynamic systems sub-
ject to multiple objectives and parameter uncertainty. The outline intermittently employs
simulation models and global sensitivity analysis methods in order to facilitate the acquisi-
tion of system-related knowledge throughout the iterations. Moreover, the decision maker
participates in the decision making process by interactively adjusting control variables and
system parameters according to a guiding analysis question posed for each iteration. As a
result, the overall decision making process is backed up by sensitivity analysis results pro-
viding increased conﬁdence in terms of reliability of considered decision alternatives. Using
the efﬁciency concept of Pareto optimality and the sensitivity analysis method of Sobol’ sen-
sitivity indices, the methodology is then instantiated in a case study on planning and deciding
in an infectious disease epidemic situation similar to the 2020 coronavirus pandemic. Results
show that the presented simulation-based methodology is capable of successfully addressing
issues such as system dynamics, parameter uncertainty, and multi-criteria decision making.
Hence, it represents a viable tool for supporting decision makers in situations characterized
by time dynamics, uncertainty, and multiple objectives.
Keywords Multi-criteria decision making · Sensitivity analysis · Simulation-based decision
making · Infectious disease epidemic simulation
B Fabian Dunke
fabian.dunke@kit.edu
Stefan Nickel
stefan.nickel@kit.edu
1
Institute of Operations Research, Discrete Optimization and Logistics, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology, Kaiserstr. 12, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
 / Published online: 12 October 2021

1 Introduction
A simulation model is an executable model of a real world system which can be utilized to
elicit information about future system behavior (Law and Kelton 2000). Therefore, a crucial
function of simulation is to support decision makers with prescriptive guidance concerning
future system trajectories. However, the role of simulation as part of model-driven decision
support systems is rather perceived as that of a separated assistance system (Power and Sharda
2007). Neither a systematic integration nor a formalized feedback mechanism between these
tools for computerized decision making is yet established on a general level, but rather in
problem-speciﬁc settings (Hopfe 2009; Heilala et al. 2010; Mahdavi et al. 2010; Kadri et al.
2014a; Fanti et al. 2015). Apart from the technological perspective, many real world systems
exhibit a number of challenging characteristics: Uncertainty in system parameters, com-
plexity in terms of size and relations between entities, involvement of multiple conﬂicting
objectives, large degree of time dynamic system elements (Anderson 1999; Grösser 2017).
As a major advantage, simulation inherently addresses the latter three of these challenges:
No global analytical formula is required to describe the overall system behavior; instead,
individual speciﬁcations of system elements collectively cause a system trajectory to occur
(Banks 2010; Cassandras and Lafortune 2010). Concerning the consideration of two or more
goals in a setting of multi-criteria decision making, simulation beneﬁts from the possibil-
ity to track an arbitrary number of performance measures with virtually no computational
cost. Nonetheless, uncertainty handling cannot be tackled by simulation as a standalone tool.
Therefore, various frameworks have been proposed in the form of parameter variation, sen-
sitivity analysis, or simulation optimization. According to Dellino and Meloni (2015), these
approaches are intrinsically related to each other when simulation is seen as an underlying
method to evaluate the quality of speciﬁc system parameter and control variable settings.
As an application, consider an infectious disease epidemic comparable to the 2020 coro-
navirus pandemic. Political decision makers have to weigh health, societal, and economic
impacts of their decisions inﬂuencing the course of the epidemic, e.g., by shutting down
the economy temporarily (Raboisson and Lhermie 2020; Malmir and Zobel 2021; Pamuˇcar
et al. 2020). This setting is coined by the need for sophisticated decision making amidst
uncertainty, time dynamics, and multiple objectives. Since the population to be considered
is large, a system dynamics simulation is adequate to model infections within the population
over time. The model can then be deployed in a feedback loop with sensitivity analysis meth-
ods to evaluate alternative courses of action. As the output of the entire process, decision
makers learn about the sensitivity of system parameters (which cannot be changed suddenly,
but maybe present opportunities for changes in the long run) and control variables (which
allow for immediately inﬂuencing the course of events), guiding them towards an informed
overall decision. In this sense, decision makers gain conﬁdence in their decisions and develop
a better overall understanding of the system with respect to the different objectives.
The main contribution of the paper consists of a holistic methodological outline for the
analysis of decision making tasks in real-world complex dynamic systems subject to uncer-
tainty, time dynamics, and multiple objectives. As shown in Fig. 1, this is achieved through
a combination of simulation models, sensitivity analysis, and multi-criteria decision making
addressing the mentioned challenges jointly. Used over several iterations, the updating step
leads to increased conﬁdence with respect to the ﬁnal decision. This is particularly favorable
in applications exhibiting uncertainty in critical parameters and strong sensitivity of model
outputs to these parameters. As a result, the decision maker is not only in a position to make a
well-informed decision once, but also understands the system more deeply acquiring knowl-
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
68

Dynamic system
with system parameters
and control variables
Simulation
Variation experiment
with control variables
Multi-criteria decision making
Determination of
Pareto frontier
Simulation
Variation experiment
with system parameters
Sensitivity analysis
Sobol’s method
for control variables
and system parameters
Solution proposals
including sensitivity evaluations
Update of selected control variables
and system parameters
Fig. 1 Algorithmic outline for simulation-based multi-criteria decision making
edge to be used in similar future situations. Methodologically, this conclusion can be drawn
from the detailed sensitivity analysis which is deployed upon system parameters and con-
trol variables throughout the overall process. Moreover, the method represents an adjustable
approach to sequential decision making under uncertainty as it allows to adaptively warm-
start a simulation model with the currently observed system state. In this sense, not only
parameter uncertainty is considered, but also decision adaptability. Finally, the case study
on infectious disease epidemics provides a template for using the methodology in a concrete
practical problem setting. We remark that the goal of the paper is not to provide a perfect
simulation model for the 2020 coronavirus outbreak, but to develop a framework supporting
decision makers in similar situations amenable to simulation-based decision making.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 discusses research on topics
of methodological interest (such as multi-criteria decision making, simulation and optimiza-
tion, sensitivity analysis) and on topics of practical interest (such as epidemics simulation).
The main contribution of the paper is found in Sect. 3: Combining approaches from multi-
criteriadecisionmakingandsensitivityanalysis,weintroduceaninteractivesimulation-based
methodology for planning and deciding in complex dynamic systems which are character-
ized by uncertainty and multiple objectives. The case study in Sect. 4 yields experimental
evidence on how the methodology can support decision makers in an infectious disease
epidemic. Finally, Sect. 5 presents challenging areas for future research.
2 Related work
We discuss existing literature on the different topics combined in this paper. The presentation
has a converging character with respect to these topics in order to show how simulation, multi-
criteria decision making, sensitivity analysis are interrelated.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
69

2.1 Simulation and optimization
Simulation models reproduce the behavior of a real world system in a computerized model to
gain insight into ruling causes and effects relations of the system. Depending on the system,
different modeling paradigms with different abstraction levels are used (Siebers et al. 2010;
Sumari et al. 2013; Tako and Robinson 2018). Discrete-event models proceed based on a
detailed resolution of events. System dynamics are appropriate when large populations are
considered in an aggregated perspective. Recently, agent-based models have gained impor-
tance. They allow to model individual behavior and interactions as the autonomous driving
force of the simulation. This is in contrast to discrete-event models and system dynamics
with their bottom-up and top-down perspectives, respectively (Macal 2010). Multi-method
simulation mixes these approaches when different types of granularity are required (Brails-
ford et al. 2010). Frameworks to streamline multi-method model development are introduced
by Morgan et al. (2017), Mykoniatis (2015). Applications of simulation modeling relevant
to this paper are found for health care including infectious disease treatment in Djanatliev
and German (2013), Gunal (2012), Mustafee et al. (2013), Viana et al. (2014).
The most frequent combination of simulation and optimization comprises the optimization
of parameters of a simulation model with respect to the model output. System parameters are
considered as strategic control variables, and simulation is used as an evaluation function of a
parameter setting (Fu 1994). Since not all parameter settings may be evaluated, optimization
becomes necessary, ranging from meta-heuristics to simulation metamodeling (Carson and
Maria 1997). Reviews focus on different parameter domains (continuous vs. discrete), lead-
ing to methods from ranking and selection to stochastic approximation; metaheuristics are
explicitly discussed to facilitate global optimization (Amaran et al. 2016; Tekin and Sabun-
cuoglu 2004). However, these methods consider single objectives. Methods for parameter
optimization in simulations with multiple objectives are missing except for Zakerifar et al.
(2011) who introduce a kriging simulation metamodel which can be used for parameter
tuning under multiple objectives.
2.2 Sensitivity analysis
Sensitivity analysis provides information on how the output of a model varies depending
on its inputs. Model inputs (factors) can be subdivided into system parameters and control
(or design) variables. Comprehensive overviews are given by Iooss and Lemaître (2015),
Pianosi et al. (2016). A main goal lies in the determination of robust solutions accounting for
parameter uncertainty. It is distinguished between local and global sensitivity analysis; the
former/latter considers variation of one/several parameter(s). Borgonovo and Plischke (2016)
concludes thatsensitivity analysis is a prerequisite to align communication between modelers,
analysts, and decision makers leading to a profound system understanding. In the context
of simulation models, the design of experiments (DoE) prescribes the experimental outline
with respect to the input factor variation according to which model executions are carried
out (Kleijnen 2007). DoE is concerned with limiting computational efforts. Montevechi et al.
(2010) shows how a full factorial design can be reduced to a fractional design by intermediate
screening factor inﬂuences. Gutenschwager et al. (2017) distinguishes between static and
dynamic factor design; the former prescribes a list of factor combinations to be examined,
while the latter allows for dynamic guidance based on sensitivities found previously.
Global sensitivity analysis comprehensively determines single and joint factor inﬂuences
as it allows for simultaneous variations over the entire parameter space (Iooss and Lemaître
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
70

2015). Variance-based sensitivity analysis is rooted in the decomposition of the overall vari-
ancebreakingitdowntocomponentsattributabletofactorgroups(PrieurandTarantola2016).
Compared to the classical analysis of variance in a factorial design, the Sobol’ method consid-
ers input parameters as random variables (Archer et al. 1997). Numerically, Sobol’ indices are
computed through Monte Carlo simulation. In the simulation context, Chan et al. (1997) ﬁnd
the Sobol’ method effective to attribute factor contributions to output variability, eliminating
insigniﬁcant parameters, determining interactions between factor subgroups, and guiding the
search for optimal regions of the parameter space. Chen et al. (2005) further recommends to
use simulation metamodels to diminish computational efforts. A comparison of the Sobol’
method to other sensitivity analysis techniques is presented in Yang (2011).
2.3 Multi-criteria decision making
Multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) deals with making decisions in the presence of
multiple conﬂicting objectives. Depending on the domains of decision alternatives and their
level of measurement, different methods are available. Greco et al. (2016) compiles surveys
on different settings resulting from decision and attribute types including, e.g., preference
modeling, intangible criteria, utility theory. Extensions to uncertainty are found in Durbach
(2014), Mareschal (1986). An overview on multi-criteria optimization for numerical inputs
and objectives with interval scale measurement is discussed in Ehrgott (2005) for various
solution concepts such as dominance, efﬁciency, lexicographic ordering, or scalarization.
Efﬁciency concepts for MCDM problems under uncertainty are presented in Abdelaziz et al.
(1999). As dealing with uncertainty is intractable for realistic multi-criteria problems, several
frameworks connecting simulation and uncertainty are proposed bringing the topic closer
to sensitivity analysis. An overview is given in Broekhuizen et al. (2015) suggesting that
different types of uncertainty could be examined by simulation-based sensitivity analysis.
Various frameworks combine simulation and MCDM. In Aickelin et al. (2018), simu-
lation guides the multi-criteria analysis dynamically by evaluating the quality of different
decision options. A combination of discrete-event simulation, genetic algorithms, Taguchi
robustness and utility-function-based MCDM is established in Al-Aomar (2002) to provide
robust parameter settings in a multi-objective environment. A simulation-guided approach to
conduct a sensitivity analysis of utility function weights of a multi-criteria objective is given
by Butler et al. (1997) who employ random-weighting, rank-order weighting, and assessed-
weightings in simulation models to infer knowledge about effects of simultaneous weight
changes.
Broekhuizen et al. (2015) reviews MCDM under uncertainty in health care by distin-
guishing different approaches including deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analysis.
Deterministic sensitivity analysis is by far the most popular approach, although for multiple
uncertainty sources sophisticated methods are more recommendable. Marsh et al. (2014)
surveys different MCDM methods to improve health care interventions. Different possibil-
ities for health technology assessment under multiple criteria are compared in Thokala and
Duenas (2012). Jun et al. (1999) point out that due to multiple objectives prevalent in health
care, simulation models are particularly viable to decision making.
2.4 Decision support systems
Decision support systems (DSS) are computerized tools and models which assist decision
makers to derive “better” decisions. They build upon existing methods like simulation or
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
71

MCDM and reﬁne them with additional decision-relevant aspects like, e.g., expert opinions,
interactive visualization, databases. A historical overview is given by Power (2008). The
overview Siskos and Spyridakos (1999) emphasizes the future need for integration of artiﬁcial
intelligence. Accordingly, recent research is headed in this direction (Delen and Sharda
2008; Li et al. 2010), e.g., through metamodeling by artiﬁcial neural networks, kriging, or
multivariateadaptiveregressionsplines.FromthecategorizationofDSSintocommunication-
driven, data-driven, document-driven, knowledge-driven, and model-driven DSS (Power and
Sharda 2007), we are concerned with the latter one due to the combination of simulation,
optimization, and sensitivity analysis. Future research is seen in the integration of behavioral
components (e.g., agent-based models) and technological components (e.g., user interfaces).
A particular consideration of multiple criteria is outlined in Korhonen et al. (1992) who
describe how decision makers can be supported in structuring and solving multi-criteria
problems. A framework for integrating uncertainty in trade-offs between different criteria
into a DSS is elaborated in Podinovski (1999). Guariso et al. (1996) suggests to build a DSS
around an integrated simulation and optimization environment to conduct the optimization of
simulationmodelparametersinaseamlessenvironment.ChathaandWeston(2006)combines
discrete-event simulation, systems thinking, and enterprise modeling to obtain an integrated
DSS for decision making amidst the complexity of manufacturing organizations. General
principles and foundations to be followed in designing DSS based on simulation models are
derived in Page (1994). Related to health care, Everett (2002), Kadri et al. (2014b) provide
examples dealing with patient ﬂow and patient scheduling, respectively.
2.5 Epidemics simulation
An overwhelming amount of research is available for epidemiology modeling and analysis.
As surveyed in Brauer et al. (2008), many extensions are available (e.g., stochasticity, pop-
ulation heterogeneity, or aging) for the most basic model for epidemiology dynamics, the
SIR model which subdivides the population into susceptible, infectious, and recovered indi-
viduals. Many case studies using extensions of this model are available such as for diseases
arising from pathogens in water distribution systems (Fajdek et al. 2019) or anthrax attacks
(Chen et al. 2006). In epidemiology, decision making is subsumed under prevention and
intervention measures. Ma et al. (2011) emphasize that streamlined methodologies are nec-
essary to grant fast development once an epidemic arises. Consequently, a database-supported
high-performance epidemic simulation framework is presented. In a similar fashion, but with
focus on the network character, an architecture based on demo- and geographic properties is
developed in Huang et al. (2010). An intervention simulation study related to social distanc-
ing is given in Kelso et al. (2009). Especially in epidemic simulation studies, data and model
assumptions are crucial in terms of decision quality as concluded in Orbann et al. (2017) for
data deﬁnitions and in Özmen et al. (2016) for model assumptions. Accordingly, simulation-
based decision making and sensitivity analysis have to be combined for model validation.
However, no uniﬁed outline is available and the spectrum of methods is vast. Rao et al. (2009)
derive implications through case studies where each one answers a speciﬁc research question
on the avian inﬂuenza outbreak. A sensitivity analysis environment based on Monte Carlo
simulations is applied in Ma and Ackerman (1993), Ma et al. (1993) for multiple objectives
in viral epidemics (illness attack rates, durations, peaks). Parameter variations are carried
out for inﬂuenza (Nsoesie et al. 2012) and Ebola epidemics (Legrand et al. 2007) to gain
knowledge on root causes and effects. Recent topics of epidemics simulations consider the
integration of real world aspects such as mobility patterns (Kopman et al. 2012), integra-
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
72

tion between epidemics and hospital processes (Nikakhtar and Hsiang 2014), and impacts of
epidemics on global supply chains under multiple objectives (Ivanov 2020).
2.6 Research gap and research questions
Asshownbytheliteraturereview,nocomprehensiveframeworkexistsforsupportingdecision
makers in setting control variable values in a dynamic system subject to uncertain data
and several conﬂicting objectives. In particular, methods from different related disciplines
(such as simulation optimization, sensitivity analysis, or multi-criteria decision making)
appear segregated from each other and come with their individual ﬂaws when considered as
part of an integrated approach (such as consideration of single objective only, insufﬁcient
consideration of data assumptions, or dependence on substitute optimality concepts). Hence,
a required initial step for closing this research gap consists of devising a general architecture
of a model-based decision support framework assisting in the selection of control variable
values in dynamic systems under uncertain system parameter values and multiple objectives.
The urgent necessity for such an overarching methodology has become apparent during the
outbreak of the pandemic due to the coronavirus in early 2020. As typical for such novel
situations, vastly no reliable data is available and information is vague. Hence, for such cases
we identify the need for an interactive character of a decision support methodology. Overall,
the research questions can be summarized as follows:
• What is the general structure of a framework for model-based decision support in the
presence of multiple conﬂicting objectives and data uncertainty?
• What is an instantiation of this general outline with respect to a speciﬁc composition of
involved methodological components?
• How can this framework be applied practically?
Section 3 provides answers to the ﬁrst two questions on a methodological level, whereas
the case study on an infectious disease epidemic in Sect. 4 addresses the third question from
a practical perspective.
3 Simulation-based multi-criteria decision support with sensitivity
analysis feedback
Initial phases of a simulation study comprise the statement of the overall mission, speciﬁca-
tions of study requirements and required data, as well as the formation of a conceptual and
an executable model of the dynamic system (Gutenschwager et al. 2017). The ﬁrst two steps
determine which factors are control variables and which are system parameters. Control vari-
ables can be used directly for inﬂuencing the system behavior, whereas system parameters
inﬂuence the system, but cannot be changed in the short term. Uncertain system parameters
require an explicit analysis to increase conﬁdence in decisions on control variables.
We introduce a new interactive methodology for the analysis of complex dynamic systems
under multiple objectives and parameter uncertainty. The analysis is directed at determining
the most favorable values for control variables, accounting for the multi-criteria character and
enriching decisions with sensitivity information on system parameters and control variables.
While several methods are available and viable for the simulation-based one-dimensional
optimization of system parameters or control variables (such as metaheuristics, gradient-
descent, simultaneous perturbation; see Gosavi (2015); Amaran et al. (2016)), the case of
multiple objectives has experienced considerably less attention yet. As outlined in Sect. 1 and
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
73

Step 1
Simulation (control
variables variation)
Current iteration
analysis question of iteration
System parameters conﬁguration S
Set of control variables conﬁgurations C
Step 2
Multi-criteria
decision making
Step 3
Simulation (system
parameters perturbation)
Step 4
Sensitivity
Analysis
Step U Updates of S and C
Fig. 2 Iterative step in the interactive methodology for simulation-based multi-criteria decision support with
sensitivity analysis feedback
displayed in Fig. 1, the methodology proceeds iteratively and allows the decision maker to
interact with the method to cover different topics of interest concerning the system behavior.
Each iteration is based on a guiding analysis question, system parameters conﬁguration, and
set of control variables conﬁgurations to be examined. In each iteration, the following steps
can be used in a customized fashion to answer the current analysis question.
1 SimulationVariationexperimentwithcontrolvariables:Forthecurrentsystemparameters
conﬁguration, collect information on the performance achievable for the current set of
control variables conﬁgurations with respect to the multiple objectives.
2 Multi-criteria decision making Determination of efﬁcient control variables conﬁgura-
tions: From all control variables conﬁgurations considered in step 1, determine which of
them are efﬁcient according to a prescribed criterion of efﬁciency.
3 Simulation Perturbation experiment with system parameters: Perturb the current system
parameters conﬁguration from step 1 and record the effect on the multiple objectives
resulting from the efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations from step 2.
4 Sensitivity analysis Detection of critical control variables and system parameters: Apply
a sensitivity measure upon the multi-criteria decision making results from step 2 and
the perturbation results from step 3 to identify sensitive control variables and system
parameters, respectively.
U Update Re-select the current guiding analysis question, control variables conﬁgurations
andsystemparametersconﬁgurationforthenextiterationbasedonthesensitivityanalysis
results from step 4.
Figure 2 illustrates the outline of one iteration. Due to the update step, the overall procedure
becomes interactive allowing the decision maker to impute a certain setting of special interest
uponeachiterationsuchthatsteps1to4canbetailoredtowardsansweringthecurrentanalysis
question. Over the course of the iterations, the decision maker accumulates an information
pool representing the acquired knowledge on the system behavior.
After introducing the terminology and notation in Sect. 3.1, details on the individual steps
are given in Sects. 3.2 to 3.6. The number of iterations is rather limited as each iteration
answers a speciﬁc analysis question posed by the decision maker to understand the sys-
tem more thoroughly. Therefore, whilst steps 1 to 4 are executed in automated fashion, the
updating step is implemented in interaction with the decision maker.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
74

3.1 Terminology and notation
We denote a control variables conﬁguration, i.e., a tuple of control variable values, by
C := (c1, c2, . . . , cnc) where nc ∈N is the number of control variables and ci with
i ∈{1, 2, . . . , nc} is the value of the ith control variable. A set of control variables con-
ﬁgurations is referred to by C. Likewise, we denote a system parameters conﬁguration, i.e.,
a tuple of system parameter values, by S := (s1, s2, . . . , sns) where ns ∈N is the number of
system parameters and si with i ∈{1, 2, . . . , ns} is the value of the ith system parameter. A
set of system parameters conﬁgurations is referred to by S. As a generalization, the value of
a factor f can either be the value of a control variable or the value of a system parameter. We
denote a factors conﬁguration, i.e., a tuple of factor values, by F := ( f1, f2, . . . , fn f ) where
n f ∈N with n f ≤nc +ns is the number of considered factors and fi with i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n f }
is the value of the ith considered factor. A set of factors conﬁgurations is referred to by F. The
system performance achieved with control variable conﬁguration C under system parameters
conﬁguration S is indicated by the objectives conﬁguration O(C, S) := (o1, o2, . . . , ono)
where no ∈N is the number of objectives and oi with i ∈{1, 2, . . . , no} is the value of the ith
objective. A set of objectives conﬁgurations is referred to by O. The objectives conﬁgurations
obtained by combinations of control variables conﬁgurations from set C and system param-
eters conﬁgurations from set S can be recorded in a performance table O(C, S) consisting
of triples (C, S, O(C, S)) with C ∈C and S ∈S.
3.2 Step 1: Simulation—Variation experiment with control variables
For the current system parameters conﬁguration S, the system performance is evaluated over
all possible control variables conﬁgurations in C. Typically, in the ﬁrst iterations, S represents
a system parameters conﬁguration which is considered most probable or which represents
a conﬁguration of interest; C contains those control variables conﬁgurations that comply
with the degrees of freedom given to the decision maker for the control variables. To obtain
information on the system performance, a simulation model is utilized as a proxy for the
dynamic system. The variation experiment then executes the simulation model for each pair
(C, S)withC ∈C andrecordstheobtainedperformance O(C, S)in O(C, {S}).Algorithm3.1
provides the computational steps to obtain this performance table. With an upper bound T sim
on the runtime for a simulation replication, the algorithm runs in O(|C| · T sim) time. We
remark that in case of prohibitive computational effort for executing individual simulation
replications, simulation metamodels can serve as surrogate models for approximating the
simulation outcome in a computationally efﬁcient manner (Barton and Meckesheimer 2006).
In contrast to the sensitivity analysis based on perturbations of S (cf. step 3), step 1 considers
variation of control variables conﬁgurations in C in order to collect data upon achievable
objectives conﬁgurations for given S. The performance table O(C, {S}) is the input for the
determination of efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations in step 2.
3.3 Step 2: Multi-criteria decision making—Determination of efficient control
variables configurations
To cover a wide array of different approaches to multi-criteria decision making, we introduce
the general notion of an efﬁciency criterion. An efﬁciency criterion is deﬁned as a property
of a control variables conﬁguration that can either be fulﬁlled or not fulﬁlled. A control
variables conﬁguration is called efﬁcient if and only if it fulﬁlls the efﬁciency criterion. The
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
75

Algorithm 3.1 controlVariablesVariation
Input: current system parameters conﬁguration S, set of control variables conﬁgurations C, simulation model
1: initialize O(C, {S}) as an empty table
2: for all C ∈C do
3:
apply simulation model to obtain O(C, S)
4:
add (C, S, O(C, S)) to O(C, {S})
5: end for
Output: performance table O(C, {S})
efﬁciency criterion can be formulated verbally or mathematically as long as its validity for a
control variables conﬁguration can be evaluated computationally.
Step 2 then consists of determining for the current system parameters conﬁguration S
the set of efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations C∗(S) containing all control variables
conﬁgurations in the performance table O(C, {S}) fulﬁlling the efﬁciency criterion. Algo-
rithm 3.2 summarizes the computational steps for efﬁciency criterion E and performance
table O(C, {S}). With an upper bound T ef f on the runtime for an efﬁciency check of a con-
trol variables conﬁguration, the algorithm runs in O(|C| · T ef f ) time. The algorithm output
yields those efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations whose sensitivity with respect to vari-
ations in control variables shall be considered in step 4 and whose sensitivity with respect to
variations in system parameters shall be considered in step 4 after ﬁrst perturbing the current
system parameters conﬁguration S in step 3.
Algorithm 3.2 multiCriteriaDecisionMaking
Input: efﬁciency criterion E, performance table O(C, {S}), evaluation method for E
1: initialize C∗(S) := ∅
2: for all (C, S, O(C, S)) ∈O(C, {S}) do
3:
if E is true for C then
4:
set C∗(S) := C∗(S) ∪{C}
5:
end if
6: end for
Output: set C∗(S) of efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations
We now instantiate step 2 for the case where the efﬁciency criterion E amounts to Pareto
optimality. We emphasize that this just represents one option for determining efﬁcient con-
trol variables conﬁgurations. Other methods for multi-criteria optimization as presented in
Ehrgott (2005); Greco et al. (2016) can be applied similarly. We give the deﬁnition of Pareto
optimality using the notation introduced previously as follows: A control variables conﬁgu-
ration C is Pareto optimal with respect to a given performance table O(C, {S}) if and only
if there is no control variables conﬁguration C′ ∈C with O(C′, S)i ≤O(C, S)i for all
i = 1, . . . , no and O(C′, S)i < O(C, S)i for at least one i ∈{1, . . . , no}. Algorithm 3.3
represents the subroutine to check whether E is true for control variables conﬁguration C
under the efﬁciency criterion of Pareto optimality. Without loss of generality, the algorithm
assumes that smaller values are preferred over larger values for each objective.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
76

Algorithm 3.3 checkParetoOptimality
Input: control variables conﬁguration C, performance table O(C, {S})
1: pareto := true
2: for all (C′, S, O(C′, S)) ∈O(C, {S}) do
3:
if O(C′, S) = O(C, S) then
4:
dominated = f alse
5:
else
6:
dominated := true
7:
for i := 1 to no do
8:
if O(C, S)i < O(C′, S)i then
9:
dominated := f alse
10:
end if
11:
end for
12:
end if
13:
if dominated == true then
14:
pareto := f alse
15:
end if
16: end for
Output: indication pareto about Pareto optimality of C in C
3.4 Step 3: Simulation—Perturbation experiment with system parameters
For each efﬁcient control variables conﬁguration C ∈C∗(S), we examine how the objectives
conﬁguration O(C, S) changes when up to ns elements of the current system parameters
conﬁguration S = (s1, s2, . . . , sns) are varied slightly. The set of system parameters conﬁg-
urations which results from perturbing S is subsequently denoted by S(S). We record the
obtained values of O(C, S′) for all S′ ∈S(S) in performance tables O({C}, S(S)). Hence,
this step serves as a preparatory data collection step for the sensitivity analysis in step 4.
Typically, S(S) shall contain variations in those system parameters of S which present them-
selves to the decision maker with a high degree of uncertainty. As explained in Sect. 3.2, the
use of simulation metamodels can be considered in case of substantial computational effort
for executing individual simulation replications. As an alternative for the two for all-loops
(which can be interpreted as a full factorial design considering the candidate system parame-
ters conﬁgurations and the efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations), computational effort in
the generation of the array of performance tables O({C}, S(S)) with C ∈C∗(S) can be dimin-
ished through employing an alternative experimental design. Such an experimental design
should be capable of providing a suitable representation of the system parameters and/or
control variables conﬁguration space (Vu et al. 2016). Algorithm 3.4 outlines the procedure
to collect the data subsequently needed for the sensitivity analysis. With an upper bound T sim
on the runtime for a simulation replication, the algorithm runs in O(|C∗(S)| · |S(S)| · T sim)
time. The array of performance tables O({C}, S(S)) with C ∈C∗(S) is used in step 4 in
order to analyze (in an aggregated form) the sensitivity of the objectives conﬁgurations with
respect to perturbations in S as observed over C∗(S).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
77

Algorithm 3.4 systemParametersVariation
Input: current system parameters conﬁguration S, set of efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations C∗(S),
simulation model
1: deﬁne the set of perturbed system parameters conﬁgurations S(S)
2: for all C ∈C∗(S) do
3:
initialize O({C}, S(S)) as an empty table
4:
for all S′ ∈S(S) do
5:
apply simulation model to obtain O(C, S′)
6:
append (C, S′, O(C, S′)) to O({C}, S(S))
7:
end for
8: end for
Output: array of performance tables O({C}, S(S)) with C ∈C∗(S)
3.5 Step 4: Sensitivity analysis—Detection of critical control variables and system
parameters
To obtain sensitivity information on control variables and system parameters, we carry out
two types of sensitivity analysis using the results from step 2 (efﬁcient control variables
conﬁgurations C∗(S)) and step 3 (array of performance tables O({C}, S(S)) with C ∈C∗(S)):
type 1 Sensitivity of control variables over C∗(S),
type 2 Sensitivity of system parameters over S(S) in an aggregated form over C∗(S).
Since—apart from the aggregation for type 2—sensitivity analysis is carried out in the
same fashion for types 1 and 2, from now on we commonly refer to a factor which can
be either a control variable or a system parameter (cf. Sect. 3.1). Considering the output
variability of simulation models, the goal of the sensitivity analysis is to distinguish between
inﬂuential and non-inﬂuential factors as well as to identify interactions between them.
Algorithm 3.5 sensitivityAnalysis
Input: current system parameters conﬁguration S, set of efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations C∗(S),
array of performance tables O(C, S(S)) with C ∈C∗(S), sensitivity measure R
1: for i := 1 to no do
2:
for all control variables c varied in C∗(S) do {type 1 sensitivity analysis}
3:
compute Ri(c) over C∗(S)
4:
end for
5:
for all system parameters s varied in S(S) do {type 2 sensitivity analysis}
6:
for C ∈C∗(S) do
7:
compute RC
i (s) over S(S)
8:
end for
9:
aggregate RC
i (s) in Ri(s), e.g., by averaging over C∗(S), i.e., Ri(s) :=

C∈C∗(S) RC
i (s)
|C∗(S)|
10:
end for
11: end for
Output: sensitivity measures (R(c))i=1,...,no for control variables c varied over C∗(S) and (R(s))i=1,...,no
for system parameters s varied over S(S)
We analyze the sensitivity of a factors conﬁguration F over a set of factors conﬁgurations
F. For the sensitivity analysis of type 1, F consists of pairs F = (C, S) with varying
C ∈C∗(S) and ﬁxed S; for the sensitivity analysis of type 2, we ﬁrst proceed for each
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
78

C ∈C∗(S) individually and afterward aggregate the results. Before aggregation, F consists
of pairs F = (C, S′) with ﬁxed C ∈C∗(S) and varying S′ ∈S(S).
The decision maker is free to deﬁne a sensitivity measure deemed most suitable to convey
the sensitivity of O(C, S) upon variation of C and/or S as prescribed in F. A speciﬁc
sensitivity measure instantiation will be given below in the form of Sobol’ sensitivity indices.
Subsequently, we will denote the sensitivity measure of factor f by R( f ). The sensitivity
analysis is then carried out according to Algorithm 3.5 to capture sensitivities for control
variables as found over C∗(S) and for system parameters as found over S(S). Sensitivities
are analyzed for each of the no objectives on an individual basis. If only a subset of system
parameters, control variables, or objectives is of interest, then clearly the computation of
sensitivity measures can be restricted accordingly. Resulting sensitivity measures are the
basis for deciding upon changes in S, C and the guiding analysis question of the next iteration:
When a factor f is rather sensitive, then it may be worthwhile to consider a change in f ;
vice versa, when a rather insensitive factor f is identiﬁed, then the value of f can be ﬁxed.
We now instantiate step 4 for the case where the sensitivity measure R( f ) amounts to the
Sobol’ sensitivity indices. These indices result from the Sobol’ method as a quantitative global
sensitivity analysis method allowing for simultaneous changes in factors (Saltelli et al. 2004;
Sobol 1993). We emphasize that this represents one option for determining the model output
sensitivity upon changes in factors. Other global sensitivity analysis methods as presented
in Iooss and Lemaître (2015); Saltelli et al. (2004) can be applied similarly. For each factor
f , we consider the ﬁrst-order Sobol’ index Sob(f) and the total-effect Sobol’ index Sobt( f ),
i.e., we have R( f ) := (R1( f ), R2( f )) with R1( f ) := Sob( f ), R2( f ) := Sobt( f ).
Let Y := O(F) = g(F) be the objectives conﬁguration obtained from running the
simulation model with factors conﬁguration F where g is a (vector-valued) function returning
the output of the simulation model under factors conﬁguration F. It is easier to understand
the following explanations by thinking of Y as being scalar-valued and recognizing that the
analysis can be adopted for each of the no objectives in the multi-criteria setting.
The Sobol’ method is based on the variance decomposition known also from the analysis
of variance in classical factorial design. The variance is decomposed into components of
increasing dimensionality with respect to the factors involved, hereby reﬂecting the 2n f −1
non-empty subsets of F = ( f1, f2, . . . , fn f ). In case of statistically independent factors,
g(F) can be written as a sum of terms gi, gi j, . . . , gi j...n f with increasing dimensionality:
g(F) = g0 +
n f

i=1
gi( fi) +
n f

i=1

j>i
gi j( fi, f j) + . . . + gi jk...n f ( fi, f j, fk, . . . , fn f ).
Let the expectation and variance of Y be denoted by E(Y) and Var(Y), respectively. By
squaring and integrating, the variance can be computed as
Var(Y) = Var(g(F)) =

K n f g2(F)dF −g2
0
where K n f is the n f -dimensional space of factors conﬁgurations. Hence, in case of mutual
independence between factors, Var(Y) can further be decomposed into a sum of subset
variances reﬂecting interactions between factors of the respective subsets by
Var(Y) := D =
n f

i=1
Di +
n f

i=1

j>i
Di j +
n f

i=1

j>i

k> j
Di jk + . . . + Di jk...n f
with Di = Varsi (EF−{ fi}(Y | fi)), Di j = Var fi, f j (EF−{ fi, f j}(Y | fi, f j)) −Di −D j, . . .
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
79

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
Sob(f1)
Sob(f2)
Sob(f3)
Sob(f1,f2)
Sob(f1,f3)
Sob(f2,f3)
Sob(f1,f2,f3)
Fig. 3 Exemplary illustration of Sobol’ indices for N = 3 factors
The ﬁrst-order Sobol’ index of factor fi and the second-order Sobol’ index of factors
fi, f j are deﬁned as
Sob( fi) := Di
D = Var fi (EF−{ fi}(Y | fi))
D
,
Sob( fi, f j) := Di j
D =
Var fi, f j (EF−{ fi, f j}(Y | fi, f j))
D
−Sob( fi) −Sob( f j).
(1)
Sobol’ indices of higher order are deﬁned analogously. In terms of contribution to the
total variance, these Sobol’ indices indicate the importance of the ith factor, the ith and jth
factor combined, and so on. Note that through normalization by D it holds that
n f

i=1
Sob( fi) +
n f

i=1

j>i
Sob( fi, f j) + . . . + Sob( fi, f j, . . . , fn f ) = 1.
The total-effect Sobol’ index Sobt( fi) gives the overall contribution of factor fi to the total
variance over all possible interactions and it is deﬁned as
Sobt( fi) := Sob( fi) +

j>i
Sob( fi, f j) + . . . + Sob( fi, f j, . . . , fn f ) = 1 −D−i
D
= 1 −VarF−{ fi}(E fi (Y | F −{ fi}))
D
= EF−{ fi}(Var fi (Y | F −{ fi}))
D
(2)
with D−i = VarF−{ fi}(E fi (Y | F −{ fi})). Observe that the last equation is a direct conse-
quence of the law of total variance. Due to the normalization to 100 % for all Sobol’ indices,
the contribution of each factor to the output variability—either due to itself only or due to
interaction with other factors—can be illustrated graphically as shown in Fig. 3.
In applications, it is common practice to compute ﬁrst-order and total-effect Sobol’ indices
to evaluate factor sensitivity (Cosenza et al. 2014; Nossent et al. 2011, Quaglietta and Punzo
(2013), Song et al. (2012)). In particular, Sobol’ indices can also be utilized in the case of
dependent system parameters: According to Saltelli et al. (2004), these measures are still
sufﬁcient to rank factors according to importance whilst acknowledging quantitative inac-
curacies. Total-effect Sobol’ indices equal to 0 provide a sufﬁcient and necessary condition
for the non-inﬂuence of a factor. For this reason, statistical software such as IBM SPSS use
Sobol’ indices in predictor importance algorithms (IBM 2015).
We now illustrate how ﬁrst-order and total-effect Sobol’ indices can be obtained numeri-
cally. For higher-order Sobol’ indices, we refer to Homma and Saltelli (1996). The ﬁrst part of
the discussion deals with the case where Monte Carlo sampling of factors is possible. In this
case, a probabilistic model is required to reﬂect factor combination probabilities. However, in
a simulation model for predicting the behavior of a system which is yet unknown even from
a probabilistic perspective, sampling according to the distribution of factors is impossible.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
80

For this case, we introduce another option which calculates approximations of the Sobol’
indices based on a locally assumed uniform distribution over the factors conﬁgurations.
Probabilistic information available For the numerical realization through Monte Carlo sam-
pling, observe that factors conﬁgurations samples in a sufﬁcient quantity N are necessary. A
drawback of the numerical method clearly lies in the unavailability of information concerning
the suitability of a chosen number of samples and the possibility of excessive computational
effort required to execute the simulation model for all samples. In Saltelli et al. (2010), best
practices for the computation of Sob( fi) and Sobt( fi) are given relying on two matrices of
size N × n f structured as follows:
A =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
f (A,1)
1
f (A,1)
2
· · · f (A,1)
n f
...
...
...
...
f (A,N)
1
f (A,N)
2
· · · f (A,N)
n f
⎞
⎟⎟⎠,
B =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
f (B,1)
1
f (B,1)
2
· · · f (B,1)
n f
...
...
...
...
f (B,N)
1
f (B,N)
2
· · · f (B,N)
n f
⎞
⎟⎟⎠.
Eachmatrixholds N factorsconﬁgurationsbecauseeachlinecorrespondstoafactorsconﬁgu-
ration. Matrix A is the original sampling matrix holding N samples of factors conﬁgurations.
Matrix B can be understood as the basis for resampling, because with A and B, we can
construct n f additional matrices of the form
ABi =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
f (A,1)
1
f (A,1)
2
· · · f (B,1)
i
· · · f (A,1)
n f
...
...
...
...
...
...
f (A,M)
1
f (A,N)
2
· · · f (B,N)
i
· · · f (A,N)
n f
⎞
⎟⎟⎠
for i = 1, 2, . . . , n f . The simulation model is then carried out for the N · (2 + n f ) fac-
tors conﬁgurations as recorded in A, B, ABi with i = 1, 2, . . . , n f . Denote by g(A) :=

g( f (A,1)
1
, . . . , f (A,1)
n f
)

j=1,...,N the objectives vector found by the simulation model on the
N factors conﬁgurations given through the rows of A, and deﬁne g(B), g(ABi) analogously.
Then, for instance, the following estimators for Sob( fi) and Sobt( fi) can be used according
to Saltelli et al. (2010):
Sob( fi) =
1
N
N
j=1 g(A) j g(ABi) j −g2
0
Var(Y)
,
Sobt( fi) =
1
2N
N
j=1(g(A) j −g(ABi) j)2
Var(Y)
.
For g0 and Var(Y) the estimators g0 = 1
N
N
j=1 g(F j) and Var(Y) = 1
N
N
j=1 g2(F j)−g2
0
can be used from any of the matrices with rows (F j) j=1,2,...,N.
Probabilistic information not available This case occurs when the sensitivity of factors of an
unknown system is to be considered and when there is no probabilistic information available
for the factors. For control variables, this is natural as the decision maker actively sets control
variable values. Yet, the decision maker may be interested in knowing the sensitivity of
control variables. To this end, the following outline provides a natural approach to sensitivity
analysis not only for system parameters where no probabilistic information is available, but
also for control variables in general.
Given empirical data about objectives conﬁgurations achieved upon varying a factors
conﬁguration in a simulation model, empirical versions of the Sobol’ indices can be computed
with Eqs. 1 and 2. Since nothing is known about probabilities for factor realizations, the factor
whose sensitivity is to be considered represents a random variable with unknown distribution.
Yet, we can specify the support of this random variable in terms of plausible values for the
factor. As a general principle, choosing the maximum entropy distribution emulates the state
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
81

of informational nescience as this approach minimizes the amount of a-priori information in
the distribution (Jaynes 1957a,b). The uniform distribution over a set of factors conﬁgurations
F is the maximum entropy distribution among all distributions with support F (which follows
from Langrangian relaxation by the deﬁnition of the entropy together with the constraint that
the sum over all probabilities equals 1). Hence, computing approximations of Sobol’ indices
in this way represents a viable substitute concept. It is based on the absence of probabilistic
information and instead requires a speciﬁcation of the support of factor values for which
then locally a uniform distribution is imputed. Algorithm 3.6 summarizes the computation
of empirical ﬁrst-order and total-effect Sobol’ indices for a speciﬁc objective and variations
in the set of factors conﬁgurations F.
Algorithm 3.6 computeEmpricialSobolIndices
Input: set of factors conﬁgurations F, performance table O(F), objective i ∈{1, 2, . . . , no}
1: let F be the set of factors varied in F, let Y be the random variable for objective i
2: compute D := Var(Y) empirically from the values for objective i in O(F)
3: for all f ∈F do
4:
compute D( f ) := Var f (EF−{ f }(Y | f )) and D−( f ) := EF−{ f }(Var f (Y | F −{ f })) empirically from
the values for objective i in O(F)
5:
compute Sob( f ) := D( f )
D
and Sobt( f ) := D−( f )
D
6: end for
Output: ﬁrst-order Sobol’ indices Sob( f ) and total-effect Sobol’ indices Sobt( f ) with respect to objective i
for factors f varied in F
3.6 Step U: Update—Preparation of next iteration
Sensitivity measures (R(c))i=1,...,no for control variables c varied over C∗(S) and
(R(s))i=1,...,no for system parameters s varied over S(S) yield information on which control
variables and/or system parameters are especially sensitive or insensitive. This knowledge
is used interactively in the update step as a preparation to answering a new guiding analysis
question in the next iteration. This analysis question can be derived from the need of collect-
ing further information upon the system behavior when volatile system behavior has been
observed and can be attributed to speciﬁc control variables and/or system parameters.
The idea of updating the current system parameters conﬁguration S amounts to selecting a
new current system parameters conﬁguration of particular interest. It should display changed
values for those system parameters si (i ∈{1, 2, . . . , ns}) which were identiﬁed as rather
sensitive for at least one of the no objectives; system parameters si (i ∈{1, 2, . . . , ns}) which
were identiﬁed as rather insensitive for all objectives can be ﬁxed to a reasonable value and
be excluded from further consideration. The sensitivity analysis results (R(s))i=1,...,no for
system parameters s varied over S(S) can be added to an information pool representing the
decision maker’s knowledge on system parameter sensitivities.
The set of control variables conﬁgurations C can be adapted as follows: When efﬁcient
control variables conﬁgurations result only from a speciﬁc value for a control variable ci
(i ∈{1, 2, . . . , nc}) or when negligible sensitivity is found for ci, then ci can be ﬁxed to
a reasonable value or restricted to fewer options; a control variable ci (i ∈{1, 2, . . . , nc})
exhibiting a high degree of sensitivity needs further inspection as achieved by increasing the
number of potential values for ci in the updated C, e.g., in terms of a ﬁner resolution for ci.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
82

The sensitivity analysis results (R(c))i=1,...,no for control variable c varied over C∗(S) can
be added to an information pool representing the decision maker’s knowledge on control
variable sensitivities.
We emphasize that there is no standard recipe for updating the guiding analysis question,
the current system parameters conﬁguration S, and the set of control variables conﬁguration
C. Therefore, it is recommended to conduct this step interactively with the decision maker
upon inspection of sensitivity analysis results and knowledge acquired throughout previous
iterations. As a consequence, remaining gaps of knowledge are closed gradually.
4 Case study: Simulation-based multi-criteria decision making in
infectious disease epidemics
We present the results of a case study on the management of infectious disease epidemics. The
goal of the case study is to illustrate how the methodology from Sect. 3 can be used to derive
knowledge on ruling mechanisms and principles on the macro-level. Such an outline can
be consulted by decision and policy makers to base their decisions on traceable causes-and-
effects relations from the simulation-based analysis. We remark that the case study neither
claims nor intends to reproduce the real-world dynamics of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic.
The dynamic system comprises the population (80 million individuals) of a nation over the
course of an infectious disease epidemic (366 days); the goal is threefold: (1) minimize
the total number of deaths, (2) minimize the maximum number of critical cases requiring
intensive care, (3) minimize economic loss. While the ﬁrst two objectives directly refer to
the number of people reaching the respective states of the dynamic system over the course
of the epidemic, the value of the overall economic loss can be computed as the sum of the
daily economic losses. Daily economic losses result from the regimes of the economy which
are announced by the decision makers. The succession of economic regimes is assumed as
follows: (1) full activity, (2) reduced activity, (3) shutdown activity, (4) resumed activity,
(5) full activity. For each regime, the corresponding economic loss is estimated as a ﬁxed
percentage of the full economic activity which is irreplaceably lost. The system can be
controlled by the decision maker by selecting start and end dates of periods of diminished
economic activity as well as by selecting the number of intensive care units. The health state
of individuals is inﬂuenced by epidemiological and medical parameters; economic losses are
inﬂuenced by economic data. Table 1 summarizes system parameters, control variables, and
objectives.
With respect to the modeling paradigm, we take on a system dynamics perspective due
to the population size. Hence, information is processed in an aggregated form in terms
of average values of population ﬂows over time as opposed to an event- or agent-behavior-
based approach which is computationally intractable for millions of inhabitants. In particular,
rational behavior of humans cannot be prescribed as opposed to purely industrial settings
where agents are expected to obey goal-oriented processing rules (algorithms). Apart from
patient zero, each inhabitant starts in a healthy state with respect to the infectious disease.
Over the course of the epidemic, a person may become infected and sick. Once this happens,
there are three further paths for a person: Direct recovery, indirect recovery (becoming critical
ﬁrst and then recover), or death (becoming critical ﬁrst and then die). Transitions between
states in the form of person ﬂows are driven by the system parameters.
Computational experiments are performed on a computer with Intel Xeon 2.60 GHz
processor and 48 GB RAM under Microsoft Windows 10 (64-bit). The system is modeled
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
83

Table 1 System parameters, control variables, and objectives for the simulation model
System parameters
Infection rate data
• Initial infection rate under full economic activity (default value: 3 per person, cf. Table 4)
• Infection rate under reduced economic activity(default value: 1.5 per person, cf. Table 4)
• Infection rate in shutdown economy (default value: 0.7 per person, cf. Table 4)
• Infection rate under resumed economic activity (default value: 1.2 per person, cf. Table 4)
• Final infection rate under full economic activity (default value: 0.4 per person, cf. Table 4)
Medical data
• Infectious time of an infected person (default value: 5 days, cf. Table 5)
• Incubation time of the disease (default value: 6 days, cf. Table 5)
• Time between sickness and criticality (default value: 4 days, cf. Table 5)
• Time between criticality and death (default value: 3 days, cf. Table 5)
• Percentage of sick people reaching criticality (default value: 25 %, cf. Table 5)
• Percentage of critical people reaching death (default value: 25 %, cf. Table 5)
Economic data
• Economic loss under reduced economic activity (default value: 60 %, cf. Table 6)
• Economic loss in shutdown economy (default value: 90 %, cf. Table 6)
• Economic loss under resumed economic activity (default value: 50 %, cf. Table 6)
Control variables
Economic controls
• Beginning of reduced economic activity (cf. Tables 2, 3)
• Beginning of economy shutdown (cf. Tables 2, 3)
• Beginning of resumed economic activity (cf. Tables 2, 3)
• Beginning of full economic activity (cf. Tables 2, 3)
Medical controls
• Number of intensive care units (cf. Tables 2, 3)
Objectives
• Minimize total deaths (depending on infection rate data, medical data, economic controls, medical controls)
• Minimize maximum criticalities (depending on infection rate data, medical data, economic controls,
medical controls)
• Minimize total economic loss (depending on economic data, economic controls)
and executed in the simulation modeling tool AnyLogic 8.5.2 University Researcher Edition
as illustrated in Fig. 4. Variation and perturbation experiments of the simulation model are
implemented using the custom experimentation environment allowing to set control variables
and system parameters programmatically as required in each iteration. Interaction with the
decision maker is accomplished by prompting the user to enter changes upon control variables
and system parameters into the console during the update step after each iteration. Since
no optimization algorithms are carried out, runtimes of simulation replications are in the
milliseconds allowing for the evaluation of a high number of factors conﬁgurations.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
84

Fig. 4 System dynamics simulation model for an infectious disease epidemic in AnyLogic
4.1 Experimental design
According to the interactive character of the methodology, the case study incrementally
improves the decision maker’s understanding of the epidemics dynamics, leading to substan-
tial conﬁdence about decisions on timings of economic regimes and number of intensive care
units. The following designs and guiding analysis questions are chosen as a work breakdown.
1. Focus on control variables
Which control variables are most inﬂuential upon system behavior and to what extent?
2. Focus on critical control variables
How does system behavior change when inﬂuential control variables are varied?
3. Focus on system parameters
Which infection rates are most inﬂuential upon system behavior and to what extent?
4. Focus on system parameters
Which medical data are most inﬂuential upon system behavior and to what extent?
5. Focus on system parameters
Which economic data are most inﬂuential upon system behavior and to what extent?
6. Focus on critical system parameters
How does system behavior change when inﬂuential infection rates are changed?
7. Focus on critical system parameters
How does system behavior change when inﬂuential medical data is changed?
8. Focus on critical system parameters
How does system behavior change when inﬂuential economic data is changed?
Observe that this experimental design is pre-speciﬁed in advance as it generically covers
different elements of the system in the form of control variables and system parameters
groups. The interactive component then allows to decide which control variables and system
parameters speciﬁcally are to be examined in more detail according to the knowledge acquired
over previous iterations. We note that another experimental design could start with a single
analysis question only, allowing the rest of the experimental design to unfold dynamically.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
85

Table 2 Control variables options and total-effect Sobol’ indices in iteration 1
Control variables options
• Beginning of reduced economic activity
After {21, 28, 35, 42} days
• Beginning of economy shutdown
{28, 35, 42, 49} days
• Beginning of resumed economic activity
After {63, 77, 91, 105} days
• Beginning of full economic activity
After {77, 98, 119, 140} days
• Number of intensive care units
{25, 000, 30, 000, 35, 000, 40, 000} beds
Control variables sensitivities
Total-effect Sobol’ indices for maximum criticalities/total deaths/economic loss
• Beginning of reduced economic activity
0.73/0.74/0.22
• Beginning of economy shutdown
0.22/0.20/0.07
• Beginning of resumed economic activity
0.01/0.01/0.40
• Beginning of full economic activity
0.00/0.00/0.00
• Number of intensive care units
0.08/0.08/0.30
4.2 Computational results
For the country of Germany with 80 million inhabitants, initial guesses on system parameters
are gathered from public discussion and represent the base system parameters conﬁguration
as depicted by the values printed in Fig. 4.
4.2.1 Iteration 1: Inﬂuential control variables
Control variables options for step 1 are pre-speciﬁed as shown in Table 2 and executed in a
simulation model for any feasible control variables conﬁguration resulting from these values.
Step 2 then outputs 29 efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations. All of them exhibit a
beginningoffulleconomicactivityafter77days,25ofthemabeginningofresumedeconomic
activity after 63 days. Overall deaths range between 8509 (leading to the worst economic
loss) and 43 million individuals (leading to the best economic loss). Clearly, decision makers
will not take into account solutions with large death tolls. Therefore, the beginning of the
economy shutdown has to be restricted to be no later than 42 days after the beginning of
the epidemic, leading to an upper bound of 85,173 deaths. The related maximum number of
intensive care units amounts to 22,799.
Step 3 is omitted in the ﬁrst iteration which focuses on sensitivities of control variables
only. In step 4, ﬁrst-order and total-effect Sobol’ indices over the 29 efﬁcient control variables
conﬁgurations are calculated for the three objectives. Total-effect Sobol’ indices are summa-
rized in Table 2. In terms of better readability, ﬁrst-order Sobol’ indices are omitted. Since
resumed economic activity begins after 63 days for the most favorable efﬁcient solutions,
we ﬁnd that only the beginning of the reduced economic activity and the beginning of the
economy shutdown is worthwhile to be examined in further detail.
From the efﬁcient control conﬁgurations, we select the following as the incumbent solu-
tion:beginningofreducedeconomicactivity,economyshutdown,resumedeconomicactivity,
full economic activity after 21, 35, 63, 77 days, respectively; number of intensive care units
of 40,000. The objectives conﬁguration for this control variables conﬁguration amounts to a
maximum of 7439 criticalities, 32,080 deaths, and 40.6% economic loss. The same objectives
conﬁguration is found for 25,000, 30,000, 35,000 intensive care units. Nonetheless, policy
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
86

Table 3 Control variables options and total-effect Sobol’ indices in iteration 2
Control variables options
• Beginning of reduced economic activity
After {17, 19, 21, 23, 25} days
• Beginning of economy shutdown
{24, 26, 28, 30, 32} days
• Beginning of resumed economic activity
After 63 days
• Beginning of full economic activity
After 77 days
• Number of intensive care units
40 000 beds
Control variables sensitivities
Total-effect Sobol’ indices for maximum criticalities/total deaths/economic loss
• Beginning of reduced economic activity
0.79/0.81/0.78
• Beginning of economy shutdown
0.26/0.23/0.17
• Beginning of resumed economic activity
0.00/0.00/0.00
• Beginning of full economic activity
0.00/0.00/0.00
• Number of intensive care units
0.00/0.00/0.00
makers are inclined to offer as much intensive care units as possible to prevent emergencies
with respect to medical equipment. In particular, with respect to the three objectives consid-
ered, there is no inﬂuence as long as the number of maximum criticalities is below the lowest
option for the number of intensive care units.
4.2.2 Iteration 2: Degree of control variables inﬂuence
For the most inﬂuential control variables found in iteration 1 (beginning of reduced economic
activity, beginning of economy shutdown), we increase the number of options for step 1 in
both directions as shown in Table 3. Due to minor contribution to objectives variations, the
remaining control variables are ﬁxed according to the current favorable efﬁcient solution.
Step 2 ﬁnds 22 efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations with the key insight that in order
to keep the number of deaths down it is vital to set both the beginning of reduced economic
activity and the beginning of the economy shutdown as early as possible. For instance, if
beginnings of reduced economic activity and economy shutdown occur 17 and 24 days,
respectively, after the epidemics starts, then the total deaths can be reduced to 2081 with the
worst economic loss of 46.3%. Considering the trade-off of an additional economic loss of
5.7% and nearly 32,000 lives saved compared to the solution in iteration 1, decision makers
are urged to close the economy as soon as possible. Due to the focus on the control variables
conﬁgurations, step 3 is omitted. Control variables sensitivities from step 4 conﬁrm the large
inﬂuence of starting dates of economy closing as seen in Table 3.
We acknowledge that the earliest possible closing options as considered in this iteration
are unlikely to be achieved in practice alone by the novelty of the situation and the lack of
simulation models which decision makers could have been consulted employed in the midst of
a real-world setting coined by a large degree of uncertainty. Additionally, the implementation
of measures such as an economy closing takes time and it is arguable whether a full shutdown
could have been achieved only one week after the partial closing of the economy.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
87

Table 4 System parameters options and total-effect Sobol’ indices in iteration 3
System parameters options
• Initial infection rate under full economic activity
{2.5, 3, 3.5}
• Infection rate under reduced economic activity
{1.3, 1.5, 1.7}
• Infection rate in shutdown economy
{0.5, 0.7, 0.9}
• Infection rate under resumed economic activity
{1.0, 1.2, 1.4}
• Final infection rate under full economic activity
{0.3, 0.4, 0.5}
System parameters sensitivities
Total-effect Sobol’ indices for maximum criticalities/total deaths/economic loss
• Initial infection rate under full economic activity
0.79/0.79/0.00
• Infection rate under reduced economic activity
0.14/0.18/0.00
• Infection rate in shutdown economy
0.36/0.38/0.00
• Infection rate under resumed economic activity
0.12/0.08/0.00
• Final infection rate under full economic activity
0.00/0.01/0.00
4.2.3 Iteration 3: Inﬂuential infection rates
In iterations 3 to 5, system parameter sensitivities are checked group-wise starting with the
infection rates. Steps 1 and 2 are ﬁrst carried out to obtain a set of efﬁcient control variables
conﬁgurations for the current system parameters conﬁguration as shown in Fig. 4. Table 4
displays the system parameters options which are used in the perturbation experiment in step
3 resulting from perturbing the current system parameters conﬁguration.
As seen from the total-effect Sobol’ indices in Table 4 (representing averages over all
efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations), the initial infection rate under full economic activ-
ity and the infection rate in the shutdown economy have the largest impact on objectives
variability. This can be explained from the fact that the former infection rate determines the
degree of disease spread in the crucial time before economy closings and the latter deter-
mines the best case in terms of infection reductions achieved through the shutdown. We
will recur to different settings for these two system parameters in iterations 6 to 9 in order
to analyze whether previously determined efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations remain
efﬁcient upon changes in infection rates.
4.2.4 Iteration 4: Inﬂuential medical data
For the medically related system parameters, we carry out the same analysis as outlined
in iteration 3. Parameter options and sensitivities are summarized in Table 5. From these
parameters, the infectious time of an infected person and the incubation time of the disease
play a signiﬁcant role. This becomes clear as the infectious time inversely correlates with the
velocity of infection of healthy individuals. On the other hand, the incubation time prescribes
how long an infected person remains in the stock of infected individuals representing a threat
for healthy people as long as the infectious time is not over. Hence, both times set the outset
for the further course of the epidemic situation, although by different mechanisms. Times
between sickness and criticality as well as between criticality and death do not matter for
the three objectives. This is due to the fact that resulting maximum criticalities and total
deaths are not inﬂuenced by the amount of time lying between different health states once
a person has reached sickness. Trivially, both rates with respect to criticality and death have
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
88

Table 5 System parameters options and total-effect Sobol’ indices in iteration 4
System parameters options
• Infectious time of an infected person
{4, 5, 6}
• Incubation time of the disease
{5, 6, 7}
• Time between sickness and criticality
{3, 4, 5}
• Time between criticality and death
{2, 3, 4}
• Percentage of sick people reaching criticality
{0.15, 0.25, 0.35}
• Percentage of critical people reaching death
{0.15, 0.25, 0.35}
System parameters sensitivities
Total-effect Sobol’ indices for maximum criticalities/total deaths/economic loss
• Infectious time of an infected person
0.80/0.81/0.00
• Incubation time of the disease
0.54/0.52/0.00
• Time between sickness and criticality
0.00/0.00/0.00
• Time between criticality and death
0.00/0.00/0.00
• Percentage of sick people reaching criticality
0.09/0.08/0.00
• Percentage of critical people reaching death
0.06/0.06/0.00
a direct inﬂuence upon criticalities and deaths. However, inﬂuences by the infectious time
and the incubation time are much stronger in causing changes in total deaths and maximum
criticalities as these quantities are in the ﬁrst place determined by the disease outbreak. We
will recur to different settings for these two system parameters in iterations 10 to 13 in order
to analyze whether previously determined efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations remain
efﬁcient upon changes in infectious times and incubation times.
4.2.5 Iteration 5: Inﬂuential economic data
For the economically related system parameters, we carry out the same analysis as outlined
in iteration 3. Parameters options and sensitivities are summarized in Table 6. From the
linear relations between loss levels and control variables (beginning of reduced economic
activity, beginning of economy shutdown, beginning of resumed economic activity)—each
one resulting in a speciﬁc amount of days of an economic regime—each economic loss data
demonstrates a signiﬁcant inﬂuence upon the overall economic loss. Clearly, the economic
loss parameters do not affect the two medically related objectives. Because of the linear
relation, the economic loss objective is well-understood in terms of its dependency on the
economic parameters. Thus, a more detailed analysis is not necessary.
4.2.6 Iteration 6–9: Critical infection rates
In the current system parameters conﬁguration of iteration 6 and 7 (8 and 9), we vary the
initial infection rate under full economic activity (infection rate in shutdown economy) in the
set {2.5, 3.5} ({0.5, 0.9}) as opposed to iteration 1 with a value of 3 (0.7). In each iteration,
we inspect the set of efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations to check whether and how the
objectives change and whether the currently favorable efﬁcient conﬁguration (beginning of
reduced economic activity, economy shutdown, resumed economic activity, full economic
activity after 21, 35, 63, 77 days, respectively; number of intensive care units of 40000)
remains efﬁcient. Therefore, steps 1 and 2 are carried out, but steps 3 and 4 are bypassed.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
89

Table 6 System parameters options and total-effect Sobol’ indices in iteration 5
System parameters options
• Economic loss under reduced economic activity
{0.4, 0.6, 0.8}
• Economic loss in shutdown economy
{0.85, 0.9, 0.95}
• Economic loss under resumed economic activity
{0.4, 0.5, 0.6}
System parameters sensitivities
Total-effect Sobol’ indices for maximum criticalities/total deaths/economic loss
• Economic loss under reduced economic activity
0.00/0.00/0.31
• Economic loss in shutdown economy
0.00/0.00/0.42
• Economic loss under resumed economic activity
0.00/0.00/0.27
In iterations 6 and 7, efﬁciency of the incumbent solution is maintained both for infection
rates under full economic activity of 2.5 and 3.5. However, as known also from iteration 3,
sensitivity is high leading to 3939 deaths and 340,725 deaths, respectively, as opposed to the
base case setting with 32,080 deaths. We conclude that the initial infection rate is a crucial
quantity with respect to the overall outcome of the epidemic. However, it is evidently difﬁcult
to determine precise values for this parameter as it may vary from region to region and also
depend on other unknown factors. Clearly, high sensitivity to any uncertain parameter makes
decision making under uncertainty inherently difﬁcult as conﬁrmed by the fact that during
the 2020 coronavirus pandemic different models came to substantially different conclusions
with respect to expected trajectories of the total number of infections and deaths.
In iterations 8 and 9, efﬁciency of the incumbent solution is maintained both for infection
rates in the shutdown economy of 0.5 and 0.9. However, as known also from iteration 3,
sensitivity is medium to high leading to 16,944 deaths and 74,025 deaths, respectively, as
opposed to the base case setting with 32,080 deaths. Albeit the sensitivity is much smaller
than for the infection rate under full economic activity, also the infection rate in the shutdown
economy has a major impact on the objectives conﬁguration that will realize in the epidemic.
In particular, it is impossible to know the value of this system parameter in advance as its
true value realizes during the crisis which is coined by the lack of historic medical data.
4.2.7 Iteration 10–13: Critical medical data
Iterations 10 to 13 are carried out following the same outline as discussed for iterations 6 to
9, but with a focus on the two most sensitive medical system parameters (infectious time of
a person, incubation time of the disease). In the current system parameters conﬁguration of
iteration 10 and 11 (12 and 13), we vary the infectious time of an infected person (incubation
time of the disease) in the set {4, 6} ({5, 7}) as opposed to iteration 1 with a value of 5 (6).
In all iterations, we ﬁnd that the currently favorable efﬁcient conﬁguration (beginning of
reduced economic activity, economy shutdown, resumed economic activity, full economic
activity after 21, 35, 63, 77 days, respectively; number of intensive care units of 40,000)
remains efﬁcient. More interesting are the observed changes in the objective values.
We ﬁnd from iterations 10 and 11 that the infectious time of a person is the most critical
system parameter. In case of an infectious time of 4 days under a constant infection rate of 3
infections per person on average, the outbreak velocity explodes leading to 3,231,1134 deaths
as opposed to the base case setting with 32,080 deaths. Likewise, in case of an infectious
time of 6 days, the disease is under control with 1194 total deaths. The exorbitant sensitivity
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
90

with respect to the infectious time also explains why in early phases of the 2020 coronavirus
pandemic, several models projected millions of deaths. Similar results, albeit not that drastic,
are found in iterations 12 and 13 on the incubation time of the disease leading to 6286 deaths
in case of an incubation time of 5 days and 139,582 deaths in case of an incubation time of 7
days as opposed to the base case setting with 32,080 deaths. In contrast to the infection rates,
uncertainty with respect to incubation times could be reduced through data from hospitalized
patients. Similarly, medical research should be directed towards determining the infectious
time of a person to reduce uncertainty in future situations.
4.3 Conclusion from computational results
Combining the knowledge from iterations 1 to 13, we resume the following key ﬁndings with
respect to choosing a most favorable efﬁcient control variables conﬁguration:
• Iteration 1 suggests 29 efﬁcient control variables conﬁgurations. A reasonable choice
is to set the beginning of reduced economic activity, economy shutdown, resumed eco-
nomic activity, full economic activity after 21, 35, 63, 77 days, respectively, leading to
a maximum of 7439 criticalities, 32,080 deaths, 39.2% economic loss. The available
number of intensive care units is not reached. Nonetheless, to hedge against uncertain
parameters (as seen in iteration 6 to 13) it may be advisable to select the highest number
of intensive care units precautiously.
• Iteration 2 shows that the most critical control variables (beginning of reduced economic
activity, economy shutdown) should be selected as early as possible because they pre-
determine the further course of the epidemic. Closing the economy partially after 17
days and shutting it down after 24 days could decrease the number of deaths to 2081.
However, we acknowledge that quick economy closings may be unrealistic due to the
high degree of uncertainty and dynamics in a real world epidemic situation.
• Iterations 3 to 5 analyze the sensitivity of different system parameter groups and ﬁnd that
infection rates, infectious times, and incubation times are most critical. Economic data
is uncritical due to the clear effect upon economic overall loss only.
• Iterations 6 to 9 demonstrate that the initial infection rate before any reduction of eco-
nomical activity is the most sensitive infection rate parameter due to the determining
effect on infections during the initial phase of the outbreak.
• Iterations 10 to 13 emphasize the importance for good estimates of infectious times and
incubation times. Especially the average infectious time of a person directly determines
the velocity of the outbreak, thereby setting the course for the entire epidemic.
Overall, the following recommendations are given for the control variables: the beginning
of the reduced economic activity and of the economy shutdown should occur after 21 and
28 days, respectively. If possible, earlier closing actions are beneﬁcial to suppress the crucial
initial spread of the disease. Economic activity can be resumed partially after 63 and fully
after 77 days because infection events are under control such that further economic loss is
avoided due to efﬁciency considerations. Although uncritical under the system parameters
base scenario with the recommended control variables conﬁguration, the number of intensive
care units should be selected as high as possible to hedge against parameter uncertainty.
The sensitivity analysis carried out in iterations 1 to 5 and the subsequently reﬁned anal-
ysis in iteration 6 to 13 emphasize the strong dependency of the model output on infection
rates, infectious times, and incubation times. Hence, the integration of sensitivities into the
methodology is an effective way of supporting decision makers in reducing uncertainties as
typical for infectious disease epidemics. Difﬁculties in forecasting the epidemics trajectory
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
91

arise when critical system parameters are related to properties of a largely unexplored dis-
ease. Therefore, the knowledge collected over the iterations helped to gain conﬁdence in the
decisions derived over the iterations. Finally, we remark that the observed sensitivities also
explain why during the 2020 coronavirus pandemic many models came to different conclu-
sions and some of them excessively overestimated the number of deaths and infections.
5 Conclusion and outlook
In this paper, we introduced a comprehensive framework for the simulation-based analysis of
dynamic systems under multiple objectives and parameter uncertainty. The methodology is
based on a clear distinction between control variables and system parameters as inﬂuencing
system factors. As a result of the interaction possibilities, decision makers are in a position
to examine the system along with factor sensitivities according to a sequence of customized
analysis questions over several iterations. Overall, this outline aims at steadily increasing
the amount of knowledge that the decision maker possesses concerning the behavior of the
system. In a case study on an infectious disease epidemic, the methodology was successfully
instantiated in order to determine economically and medically related control variables taking
into account sensitivity information on medical and economic objectives. High sensitivity
was observed for infection rates, infection time, and incubation time. We believe that the large
degree of uncertainty with respect to these parameters plays a major role why during the 2020
coronavirus pandemic different models came to drastically different conclusions. Hence,
due to the consideration of sensitivity information, the introduced methodology becomes
a reliable tool to hedge against parameter uncertainty arising in complex dynamic systems
where causes and effects relationships are still largely unexplored. However, we note that the
goal of the case study is not to reproduce the coronavirus pandemic, but rather to give a tool
for understanding basic ruling principles of the spread of the disease and to elicit knowledge
on the inﬂuence of control variables conﬁgurations on objectives conﬁgurations.
Several directions for future research are suggested: First, integrating model validation
would increase the framework reliability, especially when it is unclear whether the simula-
tion model correctly reproduces the real world system behavior. For instance, running one
simulation model could be replaced by running a set of simulation models taking into account
several possible relations between model entities. A second line of future research regards the
use of the framework as an accompanying tool for real world decision making under uncer-
tainty. A systematic approach is needed to adaptively integrate updated corridors for future
parameter realizations and to ﬁx past parameter realizations. In this way, the framework and
simulation model can be warm-started whenever a decision is required and provide up-to-
date decisions. A third line of research represents the use of simulation metamodels as part
of the proposed methodology. In case of time-consuming simulation replications (e.g., when
operational optimization routines are embedded into the model), metamodeling techniques
such as artiﬁcial neural networks can be utilized to predict model outputs based on input
factors. Finally, apart from the concepts of Pareto optimality and Sobol’ sensitivity indices as
presented for steps 2 and 4 in Sect. 3, respectively, further methods for multi-criteria decision
making and global sensitivity analysis can be integrated in the framework and assessed in
applications to further broaden the scope of the methodology.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
92

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdelaziz, F. B., Lang, P., & Nadeau, R. (1999). Dominance and efﬁciency in multicriteria decision under
uncertainty. Theory and Decision, 47(3), 191–211.
Aickelin, U., Reps, J. M., Siebers, P.-O., & Li, P. (2018). Using simulation to incorporate dynamic criteria into
multiple criteria decision-making. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 69(7), 1021–1032.
Al-Aomar, R. (2002). A robust simulation-based multicriteria optimization methodology. In Proceedings of
the 2002 winter simulation conference (pp. 1931–1939).
Amaran, S., Sahinidis, N. V., Sharda, B., & Bury, S. J. (2016). Simulation optimization: A review of algorithms
and applications. Annals of Operations Research, 240(1), 351–380.
Anderson, P. (1999). Perspective: Complexity theory and organization science. Organization Science, 10(3),
216–232.
Archer, G., Saltelli, A., & Sobol, I. (1997). Sensitivity measures, ANOVA-like techniques and the use of
bootstrap. Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation, 58(2), 99–120.
Banks, J. (Ed.). (2010). Discrete-event system simulation (5th ed.). Pearson.
Barton, R., & Meckesheimer, M. (2006). Metamodel-based simulation optimization. Handbooks in Operations
Research and Management. Science, 13(C), 535–574.
Borgonovo, E., & Plischke, E. (2016). Sensitivity analysis: A review of recent advances. European Journal of
Operational Research, 248(3), 869–887.
Brailsford, S. C., Desai, S. M., & Viana, J. (2010). Towards the holy grail: Combining system dynamics and
discrete-event simulation in healthcare. In Proceedings of the 2010 winter simulation conference (pp.
2293–2303).
Brauer, F., van den Driessche, P., & Wu, J. (2008). Mathematical Epidemiology. Springer.
Broekhuizen, H., Groothuis-Oudshoorn, C. G., van Til, J. A., Hummel, J. M., & IJzerman, M. J. (2015). A
review and classiﬁcation of approaches for dealing with uncertainty in multi-criteria decision analysis
for healthcare decisions. Pharmacoeconomics,33(5), 445–455.
Butler, J., Jia, J., & Dyer, J. (1997). Simulation techniques for the sensitivity analysis of multi-criteria decision
models. European Journal of Operational Research, 103(3), 531–546.
Carson, Y., & Maria, A. (1997). Simulation optimization: Methods and applications. In Proceedings of the
1997 winter simulation conference (pp. 118–126).
Cassandras, C. G., & Lafortune, S. (2010). Introduction to Discrete Event Systems (3rd ed.). Springer.
Chan, K., Saltelli, A., & Tarantola, S. (1997). Sensitivity analysis of model output: Variance-based methods
make the difference. In Proceedings of the 1997 winter simulation conference (pp. 261–268).
Chatha, K., & Weston, R. (2006). Combined discrete event simulation and systems thinking-based framework
formanagementdecisionsupport.ProceedingsoftheInstitutionofMechanicalEngineers,PartB:Journal
of Engineering, 220(12), 1969–1981.
Chen, L.-C., Carley, K. M., Fridsma, D., Kaminsky, B., & Yahja, A. (2006). Model alignment of anthrax attack
simulations. Decision Support Systems, 41(3), 654–668.
Chen, W., Jin, R., & Sudjianto, A. (2005). Analytical variance-based global sensitivity analysis in simulation-
based design under uncertainty. Journal of Mechanical Design, 127(5), 875–886.
Cosenza, A., Mannina, G., Vanrolleghem, P. A., & Neumann, M. B. (2014). Variance-based sensitivity analysis
for wastewater treatment plant modelling. Science of the Total Environment, 470, 1068–1077.
Delen, D., & Sharda, R. (2008). Artiﬁcial neural networks in decision support systems. In Handbook on
decision support systems 1 (pp. 557–580). Springer.
Dellino, G., & Meloni, C. (2015). Uncertainty management in simulation-optimization of complex systems.
Springer.
Djanatliev, A., & German, R. (2013). Prospective healthcare decision-making by combined system dynamics,
discrete-event and agent-based simulation. In Proceedings of the 2013 winter simulation conference (pp.
270–281).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
93

Durbach, I. N. (2014). Outranking under uncertainty using scenarios. European Journal of Operational
Research, 232(1), 98–108.
Ehrgott, M. (2005). Multicriteria optimization (2nd ed.). Springer.
Everett, J. E. (2002). A decision support simulation model for the management of an elective surgery waiting
system. Health Care Management Science, 5(2), 89–95.
Fajdek, B., Pytlak, R., Stachura, M., & Tarnawski, T. (2019). An approach to modelling and simulation
of epidemics of diseases from pathogens spreading over water distribution systems. Canadian Water
Resources Journal, 44(2), 174–192.
Fanti, M. P., Iacobellis, G., Ukovich, W., Boschian, V., Georgoulas, G., & Stylios, C. (2015). A simulation
based decision support system for logistics management. Journal of Computer Science, 10, 86–96.
Fu, M. C. (1994). Optimization via simulation: A review. Annals of Operations Research, 53(1), 199–247.
Gosavi, A. (2015). Simulation-based optimization: Parametric optimization techniques and reinforcement
learning (2nd ed.). Springer.
Greco, S., Figueira, J., & Ehrgott, M. (2016). Multiple criteria decision analysis: State of the art surveys.
Springer.
Grösser, S. N. (2017). Complexity management and system dynamics thinking. In S. N. Grösser, A. Reyes-
Lecuona, & G. Granholm (Eds.), Dynamics of long-life assets: From technology adaptation to upgrading
the business model (pp. 69–92). Springer.
Guariso, G., Hitz, M., & Werthner, H. (1996). An integrated simulation and optimization modelling environ-
ment for decision support. Decision Support Systems, 16(2), 103–117.
Gunal, M. M. (2012). A guide for building hospital simulation models. Health Systems, 1(1), 17–25.
Gutenschwager, K., Wenzel, S., & Sven Spieckermann, S. (2017). Simulation in Produktion und Logistik:
Grundlagen und Anwendungen. Springer.
Heilala, J., Montonen, J., Järvinen, P., Kivikunnas, S., Maantila, M., Sillanpää, J., & Jokinen, T. (2010).
Developing simulation-based decision support systems for customer-driven manufacturing operation
planning. In Proceedings of the 2010 winter simulation conference (pp. 3363–3375).
Homma, T., & Saltelli, A. (1996). Importance measures in global sensitivity analysis of nonlinear models.
Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 52(1), 1–17.
Hopfe, C. J. (2009). Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis in building performance simulation for decision
support and design optimization (p. 215). Eindhoven University of Technology.
Huang, C.-Y., Tsai, Y.-S., & Wen, T.-H. (2010). A network-based simulation architecture for studying epidemic
dynamics. Simulation, 86(5–6), 351–368.
IBM. (2015). IBM SPSS Modeler 17 Algorithms Guide. Software documentation available at ftp://public.
dhe.ibm.com/software/analytics/spss/documentation/modeler/17.0/en/AlgorithmsGuide.pdf (visitedon
October 2nd, 2020).
Iooss, B., & Lemaître, P. (2015). A review on global sensitivity analysis methods. Uncertainty management
in simulation-optimization of complex systems (pp. 101–122). Springer.
Ivanov, D. (2020). Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on global supply chains: A simulation-based
analysis on the coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2) case. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review, 136, 101922.
Jaynes, E. (1957a). Information theory and statistical mechanics. Physical Review, 106(4), 620–630.
Jaynes, E. (1957b). Information theory and statistical mechanics II. Physical Review, 108(2), 171–190.
Jun, J., Jacobson, S. H., & Swisher, J. R. (1999). Application of discrete-event simulation in health care clinics:
A survey. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 50(2), 109–123.
Kadri, F., Chaabane, S., & Tahon, C. (2014a). A simulation-based decision support system to prevent and
predict strain situations in emergency department systems. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory,
42, 32–52.
Kadri, F., Chaabane, S., & Tahon, C. (2014b). A simulation-based decision support system to prevent and
predict strain situations in emergency department systems. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory,
42, 32–52.
Kelso, J. K., Milne, G. J., & Kelly, H. (2009). Simulation suggests that rapid activation of social distancing
can arrest epidemic development due to a novel strain of inﬂuenza. BMC Public Health, 9(1), 117.
Kleijnen,J.P.C.(2007).Experimentaldesignforsensitivityanalysis,optimization,andvalidationofsimulation
models. Handbook of Simulation (pp. 173–223). Wiley.
Kopman, S., Akba¸s, M. I., & Turgut, D. (2012). Epidemicsim: Epidemic simulation system with realistic
mobility. In Proceedings of the 37th annual IEEE conference on local computer networks (pp. 659–665).
Korhonen, P., Moskowitz, H., & Wallenius, J. (1992). Multiple criteria decision support: A review. European
Journal of Operational Research, 63(3), 361–375.
Law, A. M., & Kelton, W. D. (2000). Simulation modeling and analysis (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
94

Legrand, J., Grais, R. F., Boelle, P.-Y., Valleron, A.-J., & Flahault, A. (2007). Understanding the dynamics of
Ebola epidemics. Epidemiology and Infection, 135(4), 610–621.
Li, Y., Ng, S., Xie, M., & Goh, T. (2010). A systematic comparison of metamodeling techniques for simulation
optimization in decision support systems. Applied Soft Computing, 10(4), 1257–1273.
Ma, J. Z., & Ackerman, E. (1993). Parameter sensitivity of a model of viral epidemics simulated with Monte
Carlo techniques. II. Durations and peaks. International Journal of Bio-Medical Computing, 32(3–4),
255–268.
Ma, J. Z., Ackerman, E., & Yang, J.-J. (1993). Parameter sensitivity of a model of viral epidemics simulated
with Monte Carlo techniques. I. Illness attack rates. International Journal of Bio-Medical Computing,
32(3–4), 237–253.
Ma, Y., Bisset, K., Chen, J., Deodhar, S., & Marathe, M. (2011). Efﬁcient implementation of complex inter-
ventions in large scale epidemic simulations. In Proceedings of the 2011 winter simulation conference
(pp. 1349–1361).
Macal, C. M. (2010). To agent-based simulation from system dynamics. In Proceedings of the 2010 winter
simulation conference (pp. 371–382).
Mahdavi, I., Shirazi, B., & Solimanpur, M. (2010). Development of a simulation-based decision support system
for controlling stochastic ﬂexible job shop manufacturing systems. Simulation Modelling Practice and
Theory, 18(6), 768–786.
Malmir, B., & Zobel, C. (2021). An applied approach to multi-criteria humanitarian supply chain planning for
pandemic response. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management.
Mareschal, B. (1986). Stochastic multicriteria decision making and uncertainty. European Journal of Opera-
tional Research, 26(1), 58–64.
Marsh, K., Lanitis, T., Neasham, D., Orfanos, P., & Caro, J. (2014). Assessing the value of healthcare inter-
ventions using multi-criteria decision analysis: A review of the literature. PharmacoEconomics, 32(4),
345–365.
Montevechi, J. A. B., de Almeida Filho, R. G., Paiva, A., Costa, R., & Medeiros, A. L. (2010). Sensitivity
analysis in discrete-event simulation using fractional factorial designs. Journal of Simulation, 4(2), 128–
142.
Morgan, J. S., Howick, S., & Belton, V. (2017). A toolkit of designs for mixing discrete event simulation and
system dynamics. European Journal of Operational Research, 257(3), 907–918.
Mustafee, N., Katsaliaki, K., Gunasekaran, A., Williams, M. D., Chahal, K., Eldabi, T., & Young, T. (2013). A
conceptual framework for hybrid system dynamics and discrete event simulation for healthcare. Journal
of Enterprise Information Management, 26(1), 50–74.
Mykoniatis, K. (2015). A generic framework for multi-method modeling and simulation of complex systems
using discrete event, system dynamics and agent based approaches. Ph.D. thesis, University of Central
Florida.
Nikakhtar, A., & Hsiang, S. M. (2014). Incorporating the dynamics of epidemics in simulation models of
healthcare systems. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, 43, 67–78.
Nossent, J., Elsen, P., & Bauwens, W. (2011). Sobol’ sensitivity analysis of a complex environmental model.
Environmental Modelling & Software, 26(12), 1515–1525.
Nsoesie, E. O., Beckman, R. J., & Marathe, M. V. (2012). Sensitivity analysis of an individual-based model
for simulation of inﬂuenza epidemics. PLoS ONE, 7(10), 1–16.
Orbann, C., Sattenspiel, L., Miller, E., & Dimka, J. (2017). Deﬁning epidemics in computer simulation models:
How do deﬁnitions inﬂuence conclusions? Epidemics, 19, 24–32.
Özmen, Ö., Nutaro, J. J., Pullum, L. L., & Ramanathan, A. (2016). Analyzing the impact of modeling choices
and assumptions in compartmental epidemiological models. Simulation, 92(5), 459–472.
Page, E. H. (1994). Simulation modeling methodology: Principles and etiology of decision support. Ph.D.
thesis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.
Pamuˇcar, D., Žižovi´c, M., Marinkovi´c, D., Doljanica, D., Jovanovi´c, S., & Brzakovi´c, P. (2020). Development
of a multi-criteria model for sustainable reorganization of a healthcare system in an emergency situation
caused by the covid-19 pandemic. Sustainability, 12(18), 7504.
Pianosi, F., Beven, K., Freer, J., Hall, J. W., Rougier, J., Stephenson, D. B., & Wagener, T. (2016). Sensi-
tivity analysis of environmental models: A systematic review with practical workﬂow. Environmental
Modelling & Software, 79, 214–232.
Podinovski, V. V. (1999). A DSS for multiple criteria decision analysis with imprecisely speciﬁed trade-offs.
European Journal of Operational Research, 113(2), 261–270.
Power, D., & Sharda, R. (2007). Model-driven decision support systems: Concepts and research directions.
Decision Support Systems, 43(3), 1044–1061.
Power, D. J. (2008). Decision support systems: A historical overview. In Handbook on decision support systems
1, (pp. 121–140). Springer.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
95

Prieur, C., & Tarantola, S. (2016). Variance-based sensitivity analysis: Theory and estimation algorithms. In R.
Ghanem, D. Higdon, & H. Owhadi (Eds.), Handbook of uncertainty quantiﬁcation (pp. 1–23). Springer.
Quaglietta, E., & Punzo, V. (2013). Supporting the design of railway systems by means of a Sobol variance-
based sensitivity analysis. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 34, 38–54.
Raboisson, D., & Lhermie, G. (2020). Living with covid-19: A systemic and multi-criteria approach to enact
evidence-based health policy. Front. Public Health, 8, 294.
Rao, D. M., Chernyakhovsky, A., & Rao, V. (2009). Modeling and analysis of global epidemiology of avian
inﬂuenza. Environmental Modelling & Software, 24(1), 124–134.
Saltelli, A., Annoni, P., Azzini, I., Campolongo, F., Ratto, M., & Tarantola, S. (2010). Variance based sensi-
tivity analysis of model output. Design and estimator for the total sensitivity index. Computer Physics
Communications, 181(2), 259–270.
Saltelli, A., Tarantola, S., Campolongo, F., & Ratto, M. (2004). Sensitivity analysis in practice: A guide to
assessing scientiﬁc models. Wiley.
Siebers, P.-O., Macal, C. M., Garnett, J., Buxton, D., & Pidd, M. (2010). Discrete-event simulation is dead,
long live agent-based simulation! Journal of Simulation, 4(3), 204–210.
Siskos, Y., & Spyridakos, A. (1999). Intelligent multicriteria decision support: Overview and perspectives.
European Journal of Operational Research, 113(2), 236–246.
Sobol, I. M. (1993). Sensitivity estimates for nonlinear mathematical models. Mathematical Modeling and
Computational Experiment, 1(4), 407–414.
Song, X., Bryan, B. A., Paul, K. I., & Zhao, G. (2012). Variance-based sensitivity analysis of a forest growth
model. Ecological Modelling, 247, 135–143.
Sumari, S., Ibrahim, R., Zakaria, N. H., & Ab Hamid, A. H. (2013). Comparing three simulation model
using taxonomy: System dynamic simulation, discrete event simulation and agent based simulation.
International Journal of Simulation Modelling, 1(3), 54–59.
Tako, A. A., & Robinson, S. (2018). Comparing discrete-event simulation and system dynamics: Users’
perceptions. In System dynamics (pp. 261–299). Springer.
Tekin, E., & Sabuncuoglu, I. (2004). Simulation optimization: A comprehensive review on theory and appli-
cations. IIE Transactions, 36(11), 1067–1081.
Thokala, P., & Duenas, A. (2012). Multiple criteria decision analysis for health technology assessment. Value
Health, 15(8), 1172–1181.
Viana, J., Brailsford, S. C., Harindra, V., & Harper, P. R. (2014). Combining discrete-event simulation and
system dynamics in a healthcare setting: A composite model for chlamydia infection. European Journal
of Operational Research, 237(1), 196–206.
Vu, K. K., D’Ambrosio, C., Hamadi, Y., & Liberti, L. (2016). Surrogate-based methods for black-box opti-
mization. International Transactions in Operational Research, 24(3), 393–424.
Yang, J. (2011). Convergence and uncertainty analyses in Monte-Carlo based sensitivity analysis. Environ-
mental Modelling & Software, 26(4), 444–457.
Zakerifar, M., Biles, W. E., & Evans, G. W. (2011). Kriging metamodeling in multiple-objective simulation
optimization. Simulation, 87(10), 843–856.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:67–96
96