TITLE: Bi-objective optimization of Co-working Networks: a public policy approach
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07073-5
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07073-5
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Bi-objective optimization of Co-working Networks: a public
policy approach
Marco Alderighi1 · Cristina Baroglio2 · Mario Chiesa3 · Tiziana Ciano4
·
Christophe Feder4 · Valeria Figini3 · Elisa Marengo2 · Stefano Tedeschi4
Received: 12 August 2025 / Accepted: 20 January 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
This study proposes a bi-objective optimization model for co-working networks that jointly
maximizes collaborative value while minimizing operational costs. The framework leverages
Shapley Value theory to dynamically adjust objective weights based on each agent’s marginal
contribution, enabling public policy intervention grounded in territorial development objec-
tives. Validated through a case study in the Aosta Valley using ofﬁcial ISTAT data, results
demonstrate that dynamic Shapley-based weighting improves collaborative value by 12.7%
and reduces operational costs by 8.8% compared to static strategies, while accounting for
territorial externalities and environmental impacts.
Keywords Co-working Networks · Bi-objective optimization · Shapley Value · Coalition
formation · Public policy · Territorial development
1 Introduction
In recent years, the world of work has undergone signiﬁcant transformations, with an increas-
ing emphasis on ﬂexibility and collaboration (Bouncken et al., 2020). This shift has led to
the rise of co-working spaces, which offer an alternative to traditional ofﬁces, fostering a
dynamic and community-oriented work environment (Weijs-Perrée et al., 2019).
Co-working(seeSection1.1forashortbackground)isnotjustaphysicalspace,butawork-
ing method that promotes sharing, cooperation, and the creation of professional networks
(Rus & Orel, 2015; Wang et al., 2022). The expectation is that the co-working environ-
ment fosters coalition formation through a process of mutual recognition of complementary
skills, shared objectives, and resource optimization. These coalitions emerge when agents
(professionals, freelancers, startups, small enterprises) recognize that collaboration can gen-
erate higher value than individual action. The potential beneﬁts include knowledge sharing,
resource pooling, risk distribution, access to new markets, and enhanced innovation capacity.
On the other hand, resources in co-working networks are limited by several factors: (1)
physical space availability and infrastructure capacity, (2) public budget constraints, (3) envi-
ronmental sustainability requirements, and (4) territorial carrying capacity. These limitations
are not arbitrary but reﬂect real constraints that public decision-makers must consider when
developing territorial policies. Resources can be improved through strategic investments,
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
123

Annals of Operations Research
infrastructure development, and policy interventions that enhance the territorial attractive-
ness for knowledge workers.
Co-working spaces are typically managed by public or private entities with speciﬁc terri-
torial development objectives. In our framework, we consider public administration (local or
regional government) as the primary decision-maker, responsible for setting strategic parame-
ters that balance economic development with territorial sustainability. These managers have
explicit objectives: maximizing social and economic utility for the territory while ensur-
ing efﬁcient resource allocation and environmental protection. An interesting approach to
addressing these challenges is to consider professionals and companies that use co-working
spaces as agents within a complex system, each with its own role and distinct contributions to
the network (Ciano et al., 2024). These agents, based on their speciﬁc features, can inﬂuence
the dynamics of interactions and coalition formation, generating synergies and opportunities
(Alderighi et al., 2024). It is also crucial to consider resource limitations, such as time, space,
and funding, to ensure equitable and optimal distribution. Although the literature offers well-
established applications of both multi-objective optimization and the Shapley value, several
limitations emerge that are particularly relevant in the context of co-working networks. In
particular, many studies rely on static MOO models that do not allow for the incorporation
of changing policy priorities or evolving collaborative behaviors. Similarly, the use of the
Shapley value is often constrained by computational burdens that prevent its application to
dynamic, seasonal, or evolving coalition scenarios. These factors highlight a gap between
theoretical models and operational needs, a gap that our work addresses through a dynamic
integration of objectives and a computationally scalable approach.
This paper aims to demonstrate how public policy considerations, embedded through
strategic parameter choices, can enhance the effectiveness of co-working network optimiza-
tion while ensuring alignment with broader territorial development objectives. Given the
strategic and operational challenges inherent in managing co-working networks, an inte-
grated bi-objective optimization model is proposed as a practical framework for navigating
these complexities. This contribution helps bridge a signiﬁcant gap in the literature by offering
a novel approach tailored to the unique needs of co-working spaces.
Technically, the proposed model combines two objectives. It maximizes the collaborative
value generated by the network of interacting parties and minimizes operational costs. In this
way, it aims to ensure the network’s efﬁciency and sustainability. The main goal is to provide
an innovative and scalable solution to optimize the environmental conditions under which
collaborations take place. We use the Shapley Value to determine each agent’s marginal
contribution. We then dynamically adapt the weights associated with the objectives in the
model, based on the context of interest.
This work also explores how constraints imposed by limited resources can be handled
effectively to support a fair and optimal distribution of resources. The proposed theoretical
and practical framework can be a valuable tool in supporting the management of co-working
spaces networks in their decision-making.
To validate the model, we use real demographic and economic data from ofﬁcial sources,
including ISTAT (Italian National Institute of Statistics) and the Regional Geographic Infor-
mation System of the Aosta Valley. We combine these data with optimization algorithms
to determine optimal coalition conﬁgurations in the geographic area of Valle d’Aosta. The
approach can easily be generalized to other geographic contexts and applied to reason about
the proposal’s scalability.
123

Annals of Operations Research
1.1 Background on co-working
The literature provides numerous studies showing how social interactions affect the working
performance of individual workers, teams, and companies; see, for instance, Hasan and
Koning (2019); Chan et al. (2014). Many authors, such as (Agrawal et al., 2017; Boudreau
et al., 2017; Marquis, 2003; Rosenkopf et al., 2001; Stam, 2010), suggested that proximity
may drive collaboration. Being spatially close, whether in the same room or within the same
geographic area, fosters the formation of social connections.
Thus, these spaces have become increasingly popular, attracting a wide range of profes-
sionals, from start-ups to freelancers, who seek an inspiring environment for their work (Lima
et al., 2024).
In this model, each agent participates in at most one coalition at any given time. While pro-
fessionals often collaborate across multiple teams simultaneously in reality, this assumption
is justiﬁed in co-working contexts by the need to allocate speciﬁc physical resources (spaces,
equipment, meeting rooms) within deﬁned time periods. This constraint reﬂects the practi-
cal limitations of physical space allocation and ensures model feasibility while maintaining
realistic resource management principles.
The literature has extensively discussed the beneﬁts of co-working, including fostering
emerging collaborative activity (Spinuzzi, 2012), creating a sense of community (Garrett et
al., 2017), and providing social support (Howell, 2022). Co-working spaces also play a role in
urban development and revitalization (Durante & Turvani, 2018), acting as third places that
promote interaction (Moriset, 2013; Oldenburg, 1997) and social focus (Feld, 1981) where
knowledge spreads through networks (Malecki, 2010).
The growth of co-working also aligns with the concept of open innovation, as theorized
by Chesbrough (2003), which emphasizes the importance of external knowledge ﬂows to
companies. In this context, Malecki (2011) introduces the concept of double networks. Large
companies, due to the lower mobility of talent compared to capital, must create external
networks to capture ideas and innovative initiatives that emerge outside their research and
development labs.
2 Multi-objective optimization models and its evolution
In the realm of optimization, both multi-objective optimization (MOO) models and evo-
lutionary algorithms are widely used to solve complex problems. Evolutionary algorithms
excel at navigating large search spaces and generating diverse solutions, but often demand
signiﬁcant computational power and may converge to suboptimal results. MOO methods
(Caramia & Dell’Olmo, 2020; Deb et al., 2016; Giagkiozis & Fleming, 2015; Gunantara,
2018), on the other hand, are critical for addressing scenarios where conﬂicting objectives
must be balanced. These models provide decision-makers with optimal trade-offs, typically
represented by Pareto frontiers, where improvements in one objective cannot be made without
compromising another.
MOO models are particularly effective for real-world scenarios where decision-makers
must balance competing goals, such as maximizing beneﬁts while minimizing costs. Differ-
ent methodologies exist to address the trade-off between objectives in MOO. Pareto-based
approaches aim to generate a set of solutions that collectively represent the trade-offs among
objectives, enabling the visualization of the Pareto frontier. In contrast, scalarization meth-
ods, such as weighted-sum optimization, combine objectives into a single aggregate objective
123

Annals of Operations Research
using a set of predeﬁned weights. These weights reﬂect the relative importance of each
objective, producing a single solution that balances the trade-offs according to the speciﬁed
priorities.
No direct applications of MOO methods to co-working networks have been identiﬁed
in the literature. However, similar methodologies have been successfully applied in other
domains, such as healthcare, resource allocation management, and public administration.
Lucidi et al. (2016) proposes a simulation-based multi-objective optimization approach for
hospital resource allocation. In public administration, Arbolino et al. (2021) introduces
a multi-objective optimization technique for tourism sustainability planning. Marden and
Roughgarden (2014) explore efﬁciency limits in distributed resource allocation through game
theory. In Zafari et al. (2018), a cooperative game-theoretic framework for resource sharing
in mobile edge computing is proposed. Finally, in Kyriazi et al. (2017), the authors develop
a cooperative game-theoretic framework to negotiate marine spatial allocation among het-
erogeneous players.
Despite these valuable contributions, signiﬁcant limitations remain in the existing litera-
ture. First, most MOO applications in network contexts adopt static objective weights, failing
to capture the evolving priorities of public decision-makers (Marler & Arora, 2010). Second,
the use of the Shapley Value in optimization frameworks is typically conﬁned to post-hoc
value allocation rather than integrated into the optimization process itself (Fatima et al.,
2008). Third, computational constraints have traditionally limited Shapley-based methods to
small-scale networks, hindering their applicability to real-world territorial systems (Castro
et al., 2009). Fourth, few studies address the seasonal and temporal dynamics that character-
ize collaborative environments, particularly in tourism-dependent regions. Our framework
addresses these gaps by: (i) introducing dynamic λ adjustment based on real-time Shapley
Values, (ii) employing computationally efﬁcient approximation algorithms that scale to net-
works of 150+ agents, and (iii) incorporating seasonal modulation factors that reﬂect the
temporal heterogeneity of co-working demand.
The relevance of MOO in the creation of co-working networks stems from the inherent
complexity of these environments. Co-working spaces are shared workspaces that foster
collaboration, innovation, and community-building among a diverse array of profession-
als. Despite their increasing prevalence, the management of co-working networks involves
navigating a delicate balance between collaboration-driven value creation and operational
sustainability.
In the context of co-working networks, the application of MOO offers a structured
approach. It helps managers make informed choices that account for a range of critical
variables. These variables inﬂuence both the success and the sustainability of the co-working
environment. By integrating factors such as resource allocation, spatial optimization, com-
munity engagement, and environmental sustainability, this approach enables a balanced
assessment of trade-offs and synergies. Despite the widespread use of MOO models in net-
work design, most studies do not account for the temporal evolution of decision-making
preferences nor the interaction between economic efﬁciency and collaborative value. More-
over, existing models tend to describe the trade-off between objectives without providing
tools that allow decision-makers to adjust these priorities according to changing operational
or strategic conditions. The presence of these limitations highlights the need for a more ﬂexi-
ble framework, which the present study addresses by introducing a dynamic policy parameter
(λ within the bi-objective formulation.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3 Theoretical framework for Co-working network optimization
This section introduces the theoretical foundations of our co-working network model. We
ﬁrst recall key concepts from cooperative game theory, focusing on coalition formation and
value allocation. We then discuss the implications of network complexity for public decision-
making and the need for advanced optimization tools.
3.1 Cooperative game theory foundation
Cooperative game theory provides the mathematical framework for modeling coalition for-
mation in co-working networks. The theory examines situations where players (agents) can
form binding agreements and coalitions to achieve outcomes superior to those obtainable
through individual action.
Let N = {1, 2, ..., n} be the set of agents in the co-working network. A coalition S ⊆N
represents a group of agents who decide to collaborate. The characteristic function V :
2N →R assigns a value V (S) to each coalition S, representing the total beneﬁt that coalition
members can achieve through collaboration.
For our co-working network model, we assume the characteristic function satisﬁes super-
additivity:
V (S1) + V (S2) ≤V (S1 ∪S2)
(1)
for all disjoint coalitions S1, S2 ⊆N with S1 ∩S2 = ∅.
This property ensures that merging coalitions never decreases total value, reﬂecting the
synergistic beneﬁts of collaboration in co-working environments. However, this property
must be veriﬁed empirically or theoretically for speciﬁc coalition value functions, as it is not
automatically guaranteed in all contexts.
3.2 Network complexity in co-working ecosystems
The coalition formation problem in co-working networks represents a complex, multi-
dimensional optimization challenge with computational complexity of O(2n) for n agents.
This exponential growth in the number of possible coalitions necessitates sophisticated solu-
tion approaches that balance computational tractability with solution quality.
The multi-dimensional nature arises from the simultaneous consideration of collaborative
value, operational costs, resource constraints, and territorial development objectives. Public
decision-makers must navigate these competing dimensions while ensuring that the resulting
network conﬁguration aligns with broader policy goals, including economic development,
social inclusion, and environmental sustainability.
The complexity stems from several interconnected factors:
– The discrete nature of coalition membership decisions creates a combinatorial explosion
as the number of possible coalition structures grows exponentially with the number of
agents.
– The multi-objective nature requires ﬁnding solutions that represent optimal trade-offs
between collaborative value maximization and operational cost minimization.
– The presence of multiple resource types with different characteristics and constraints
adds additional dimensions to the feasible solution space.
A coalition’s value may depend on several factors, such as the diversity of skills, efﬁcient
resource utilization, the potential for collaboration among agents, and scalability to adapt
123

Annals of Operations Research
to challenges. It is orthogonal to this work, studying how to form good coalitions. Many
works in the literature tackle this topic (see, e.g., Kahan and Rapoport (2014); Ray and Vohra
(2015); Mahdiraji et al. (2021)) and can provide a basis for computing a coalition’s collective
value by considering speciﬁc features.
4 A bi-objective optimization model for a network of co-working
spaces
The proposed model builds upon our proposal in Alderighi et al. (2024), which uses a game-
theoretic approach to examine how a Network of Co-working Spaces (NCS) can act as a
catalyst for collaboration and cooperation, promoting community well-being and the local
economy. The model is based on the idea of cooperation among various agents (professionals,
start-ups, public entities, etc.) within an NCS, with the goal of maximizing the value generated
through collaboration. Additionally, agents involved in the NCS can form coalitions to work
on projects or share resources.
This work proposes an integrated model that not only optimizes coalition formation based
on each agent’s contribution value but also ensures that these coalitions respect limited
resource constraints. The model maximizes collaborative synergies without compromising
economic sustainability or fair resource distribution.
Therefore, this integrated approach enables informed decision-making by providing a
holistic view that accounts for both the beneﬁts of collaboration and the practical constraints
of the network.
This study develops a bi-objective optimization model that provides a comprehensive blue
decision framework for managing a co-working network. The model jointly considers the
potential for collaboration and operational costs, while ensuring fairness and efﬁcient use of
available resources.
4.1 Objective functions
First, the formulas that capture the model’s objectives are reported and explained. To maxi-
mize collaborative value, the value of collaboration is given by Equation 2.
max

S⊆N
V (S) · xS
(2)
Value V (S) represents the beneﬁt derived from collaboration among the agents in coalition
S. The binary variable xS indicates whether coalition S is selected (value 1) or not (0).
As concerns the minimization of operational costs, Equation 3 aims to minimize the
operational costs associated with the agents included in the coalitions.
min

i∈N
ci · yi
(3)
where ci is the operational cost associated with agent i and yi is a binary variable indicating
whether the agent is included in a coalition (value 1) or not (0).
The objectives are combined into a single objective function using a weighting, allowing
us to obtain a solution that represents a trade-off between the various criteria. The weighting
123

Annals of Operations Research
parameter is denoted by λ. Thus, by combining Equations 2 and 3 mathematically:
max
λ ·

S⊆N
V (S) · xS −(1 −λ) ·

i∈N
ci · yi, where λ ∈[0, 1]
(4)
When λ = 1, the model focuses solely on maximizing coalition value, whereas when
λ = 0, it focuses exclusively on minimizing operational costs. Otherwise, the model will
balance the two objectives according to the weights.
4.2 Decision-support mechanism for selecting the policy parameter 
Unlike purely algorithmic approaches, our framework explicitly acknowledges that the
weighting parameter λ must be deﬁned by public decision-makers according to territorial
development priorities. In practice, local and regional administrations set λ by evaluating fac-
tors such as: (i) territorial fragility and environmental sustainability constraints, (ii) economic
developmentgoals,(iii)socialcohesionandinclusionobjectives,and(iv)thelong-termstrate-
gic vision of the region. In this sense, λ becomes a concrete public policy lever that embeds
collective priorities into the optimization process, rather than a purely technical modeling
parameter.
However, to support practitioners in selecting a suitable value of λ, a precise and repro-
ducible decision-support mechanism is required. For this reason, we introduce a three-step
procedure that guides policy-makers in translating contextual assessments into an operational
choice of λ.
Step 1: Identiﬁcation of the primary objective. The decision-maker determines whether the
policy goal prioritizes (a) cost containment, (b) a balanced trade-off between efﬁciency and
collaborative value creation, or (c) innovation-oriented growth and qualitative development.
Step 2: Assessment of territorial constraints. The public administration evaluates binding
constraints such as budget availability, environmental limits, infrastructural capacity, and ter-
ritorial fragility. These elements restrict the feasible policy space and guide the interpretation
of λ.
Step 3: Mapping to a policy regime and corresponding λ range. By combining strategic
objectives and contextual constraints, the policy-maker selects one of the following regimes,
each associated with a recommended interval of λ:
– Resource-constrained context: when ﬁnancial or environmental constraints are tight,
and the priority is service continuity, the recommended range is λ ∈[0.0, 0.3] (strong
emphasis on cost minimization).
– Balanced development: when both cost efﬁciency and collaborative value are relevant,
and constraints are moderate, the suggested range is λ ∈[0.4, 0.6] (balanced weighting).
– Innovation-oriented growth: when the priority is to foster innovation, strengthen collabo-
ration, attract knowledge workers, and stimulate qualitative development, the appropriate
interval is λ ∈[0.7, 1.0] (emphasis on value creation).
This procedure is summarized in the decision scheme shown in Figure 1, which translates
strategic and contextual considerations into a transparent and operational choice of λ. In
practical terms, the analyst ﬁrst identiﬁes the relevant policy regime and then performs a
local sensitivity analysis within the corresponding λ interval to ﬁne-tune the ﬁnal value.
Through this mechanism, λ becomes a structured, actionable instrument that explicitly
encodes public policy priorities in the bi-objective optimization process.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Decision-support tree for selecting the policy parameter λ based on strategic objectives and territorial
constraints
Fig. 2 Decision-support tree for selecting the policy parameter λ based on strategic objectives and territorial
constraints
4.3 Introducing the dynamic adjustment of the  parameter by Shapley Value
Figure 2 illustrates the conceptual relationship between the Shapley Value computation and
the bi-objective optimization model. The framework operates through an iterative feedback
loop: coalition values inform Shapley Value calculations, which in turn determine agent-
speciﬁc weights (λi) that guide the optimization process.
The parameter λ is considered as the “ﬁlter” that determines the balance between the
objectives. It allows us to adjust the relative importance of maximizing collaboration and
minimizing operational costs according to the priorities of the co-working space network.
In Alderighi et al. (2024), the Shapley Value is used to calculate the marginal contributions
of the agents (or nodes) in the coalitions of an NCS. These contributions measure the value
each agent brings to the coalition, and therefore to the network as a whole (see Equation 5).
The Shapley Value uniquely satisﬁes four fundamental axioms in cooperative game theory:
123

Annals of Operations Research
1. Efﬁciency: The sum of all players’ Shapley Values equals the total value: 
i∈N φi(V ) =
V (N).
2. Symmetry: If agents i and j contribute equally to all coalitions, then φi(V ) = φ j(V ).
3. Null player: If agent i contributes nothing to any coalition, then φi(V ) = 0.
4. Additivity: For two games with value functions V and W: φi(V +W) = φi(V )+φi(W).
These properties ensure that the Shapley Value provides a fair and unique solution for dis-
tributing the total value among agents based on their marginal contributions.
φi (Val) =

S⊆N\i
|S|! · (n −|S| −1)!
n!
[Val (S ∪i) −Val (S)]
(5)
Algorithm 1 Shapley Value Approximation
Require: Coalition value function V , agent set N, sample size k
Ensure: Approximate Shapley Values φ
1: for each agent i ∈N do
2:
Initialize φi ←0
3:
for j = 1 to k do
4:
Sample random coalition S ⊆N \ {i}
5:
φi ←φi + [V (S ∪{i}) −V (S)]/k
6:
end for
7: end for
8: return φ
In the proposed integrated model, the marginal contributions are used to adjust the parame-
ter λ dynamically. This approach recognizes that the importance of collaborative value varies
with each agent’s role and inﬂuence in the network.
Remark 1 In recent years, the application of Shapley Values to optimization problems has
expanded signiﬁcantly across multiple domains. In Ciano et al. (2024), a disruptive study
was conducted in the framework of the Co-Working Dynamics in the Aosta Valley using the
SHAP approach for ML problems. This is one of the ﬁrst analyses in this fruitful ﬁeld of
study.
To allow the weighting parameter λ to be dynamically adjusted, based on the Shapley
Value of each agent i, λ is expressed as a function of the Shapley Value of agent i (see Eq.
6).
λi = f (φi(V ))
(6)
where f (·) is a function that maps the Shapley Value φi(V ) to a range between 0 and 1.
Therefore, the coalition values obtained via the Shapley Values are used as inputs to the
objective function of the bi-objective optimization model. At this point, the overall objective
function becomes:
max λi ·

S⊆N
V (S) · xS −(1 −λi) ·

i∈N
ci · yi
(7)
where λi is a dynamic value that depends on the marginal contribution of each agent i,
calculated through the Shapley Value.
λi is normalized so that the total weighting value remains between 0 and 1:
λi =
φi(V )

j∈N φ j(V )
(8)
123

Annals of Operations Research
4.4 Multi-objective approach: motivations and a comparison with the classical net
present value approach
In the context of public policy modeling, a scientiﬁc and methodological question may
arise naturally: why adopt a multi-objective approach rather than simply optimizing Net
Present Value (NPV)? The answer lies in the inherent complexity of public decision-making
processes, which differ signiﬁcantly from private optimization and require a more nuanced
integration of criteria.
First and foremost, one must consider the presence of territorial externalities. The costs
represented in the model do not merely reﬂect direct economic expenditures, but also broader
territorial impacts such as environmental sustainability and land use. These externalities
are often challenging to monetize and cannot be fully captured through a standard NPV
calculation.
Secondly, the multi-objective approach provides greater policy ﬂexibility. Public decision-
makers operate within dynamic and evolving contexts, where priorities may shift based on
territorial conditions, political agendas, and stakeholder needs.
Another key beneﬁt of the multi-objective framework lies in its ability to enhance trans-
parency for stakeholders. By explicitly separating the collaborative value generated from the
associated costs, the model makes trade-offs more visible and understandable.
Finally, the approach allows for better integration of environmental and social dimensions.
Many relevant impacts—such as pollution, biodiversity loss, or social cohesion—constitute
negative externalities that are ideally internalized but often escape traditional economic eval-
uation tools.
4.5 Coalition selection and cooperation constraints
The coalition selection constraint ensures that, if a coalition S is selected, all agents in S must
be included.
xS ≤yi
∀i ∈S, ∀S ⊆N
(9)
Non-overlapping coalition constraint: To ensure that each agent can participate in at most
one coalition at any given time, we introduce a non-overlapping constraint:

S:i∈S
xS ≤1 ∀i ∈N
(10)
This constraint prevents agents from being simultaneously assigned to multiple coalitions,
which would be physically impossible and could lead to resource conﬂicts.
Speciﬁc application scenarios might be characterized by the fact that collaborations are
meaningful only if their cardinality respects certain limits. This is captured by the collabo-
ration capacity constraint, expressed in Equation 11.
nmin ≤

i∈S
yi ≤nmax
∀S ⊆N with xS = 1
(11)
where nmin (lower bound) is the minimum number of participants that a coalition must have
and nmax (upper bound) is the maximum number of participants a coalition can have.
123

Annals of Operations Research
4.6 Superadditivity constraint
The superadditivity constraint of coalitions, expressed by Equation 12, is an important con-
dition in an optimization model that involves advantageous cooperation between agents.
V (S1) + V (S2) ≤V (S1 ∪S2) ∀S1, S2 ∈P(N) and S1 ∩S2 = ∅
(12)
This constraint ensures that merging coalitions produces a value at least as large as the
sum of the separate coalitions. This property must be veriﬁed empirically for each speciﬁc
context, as it is not guaranteed in all co-working environments.
4.6.1 Numerical example in the co-working context
Consider three professionals in a co-working network:
– A: a freelance graphic designer
– B: a digital marketing consultant
– C: a web developer
Coalition values are assigned based on skill complementarity:
V ({A}) = 100,
V ({B}) = 120,
V ({C}) = 110
V ({A, B}) = 250,
V ({A, C}) = 240,
V ({B, C}) = 260
V ({A, B, C}) = 400
Let us verify the superadditivity property:
– V ({A}) + V ({B}) = 220 ≤V ({A, B}) = 250
– V ({A, B}) + V ({C}) = 360 ≤V ({A, B, C}) = 400
4.6.2 Limitations of superadditivity
While the superadditivity assumption generally holds in co-working contexts, several factors
may undermine its validity. Large coalitions, for instance, can incur signiﬁcant coordina-
tion costs due to communication overhead, thereby reducing overall efﬁciency. Moreover,
cultural conﬂicts arising from heterogeneous working styles and organizational norms can
generate friction that limits collaborative performance. Competition for shared resources
can also create operational bottlenecks, particularly when demand exceeds available capac-
ity. Finally, the simultaneous participation of agents in multiple projects may dilute focus,
diminishing individual productivity and collective outcomes. In practice, the superadditivity
property should therefore be empirically veriﬁed for each speciﬁc context. Future develop-
ments should incorporate coalition-speciﬁc cost functions to capture potential inefﬁciencies
more accurately.
4.7 Transportation constraint
The transportation constraint limits travel costs between coalition members based on geo-
graphic distance. This constraint seeks to limit transportation costs between the agents of a
123

Annals of Operations Research
coalition, taking into account the geographical distance between these agents. This situation
is described in Equation 13:

i∈S, j∈S
di j · cT ≤T
∀S ⊆N
(13)
where di j is the distance between nodes i and j, cT is the unit transportation cost per unit
of distance, and T is the maximum transportation cost that a coalition can afford.
4.8 Resource constraints
Resourceconstraintsreﬂectthepracticallimitationsthatpublicmanagersfacewhenoperating
co-working networks. Given the heterogeneous nature of resources in co-working environ-
ments, we extend the basic resource constraint to accommodate multiple resource types. Let
R be the set of all resource types, and let ri,k represent the amount of resource type k ∈R
required by agent i. The multi-resource constraint is described by:

S⊆N

i∈S
ri,k · xS ≤T Rk
∀k ∈R
(14)
where ri,k is the amount of resource of type k required by agent i and T Rk is the maximum
limit of resource type k available globally.
4.9 Specific resource constraints
The space constraint ensures that the sum of the space required by the agents in a coalition
does not exceed the total available space T S:

S⊆N

i∈S
si · xS ≤T S
(15)
The funding constraint ensures that the sum of the funding requested by the agents of
selected coalitions does not exceed the total available funding T F:

S⊆N

i∈S
fi · xS ≤T F
(16)
The time constraint ensures that the sum of the time required by selected coalitions does
not exceed the total available time T T :

S⊆N

i∈S
ti · xS ≤T T
(17)
To ensure equity and inclusive participation within the co-working network, we introduce
an equity constraint. Let ei denote the equity score associated with agent i. The equity
constraint ensures that the total equity contribution from selected coalitions reaches at least
a minimum threshold T Emin:

S⊆N

i∈S
ei · xS ≥T Emin
(18)
123

Annals of Operations Research
4.10 Additional constraints
Minimum coalition viability constraint. To ensure that selected coalitions generate sufﬁ-
cient value to justify their operational costs, we introduce a minimum viability threshold:
V (S) · xS ≥Vmin · xS
∀S ⊆N
(19)
Capacity utilization constraint. To promote efﬁcient use of co-working facilities, we intro-
duce a constraint that ensures minimum utilization levels:

S⊆N

i∈S
si · xS ≥α · T S
(20)
where α ∈(0, 1] represents the minimum utilization rate required for the co-working net-
work.
4.11 Decision variables
In Equations 21-24, the nature of the proposed model decision variables is described:
xS ∈{0, 1} ∀S ⊆N
(21)
yi ∈{0, 1} ∀i ∈N
(22)
xiS ∈{0, 1} ∀i ∈S, ∀S ⊆N
(23)
ri,k, si, ti, fi, ei ≥0 ∀i ∈N, ∀k ∈R
(24)
5 Optimal resource allocation under dynamic coalition formation
This section presents the theoretical foundations for optimal resource allocation under
dynamic coalition formation. We ﬁrst deﬁne Pareto efﬁciency and then state our main result.
A solution is considered Pareto efﬁcient (or Pareto optimal) if it is impossible to improve
one objective without deteriorating at least one other objective. In our bi-objective framework,
a coalition structure is Pareto efﬁcient if we cannot simultaneously increase the collaborative
value and decrease the operational costs, or vice versa.
More formally, given two solutions S1 and S2 with collaborative values V1, V2 and oper-
ational costs C1, C2 respectively, solution S1 Pareto dominates S2 if:
• V1 ≥V2 and C1 ≤C2 (at least as good in both objectives)
• At least one inequality is strict (strictly better in at least one objective)
Theorem 1 (Optimal resource allocation under dynamic coalition formation)] Let N be a
set of agents in a co-working network, V (S) be the value of coalition S ⊆N, and φi(V ) be
the Shapley Value of agent i. For each i ∈N, let ci be the operational cost, and ri be the
resource requirement of agent i.
Assume resource constraints of the form 
i∈S ri ≤TR for all S ⊆N. If the weighting
parameter λi =
φi(V )

j∈N φ j(V ) is dynamically adjusted based on agent Shapley Values, then the
optimal solution to the bi-objective problem:
max λi ·

S⊆N
V (S) · xS −(1 −λi) ·

i∈N
ci · yi
(25)
123

Annals of Operations Research
subject to coalition selection constraint xS ≤yi for all i ∈S, S ⊆N, guarantees a
Pareto-efﬁcient allocation. This allocation converges to a stable coalition structure as the
number of iterations increases.
Proof We prove this theorem by induction on the number of agents n = |N|. For n = 1, the
result is trivial. Assuming the theorem holds for all sets of agents of size k < n, consider a set
N of size n. The dynamic adjustment of λi based on Shapley Values ensures that agents with
higher marginal contributions have greater inﬂuence on the objective function. The allocation
converges to a stable solution because any deviation would decrease the objective function
value.
⊓⊔
Proposition 2 In a co-working network with resource constraints, if resources are allocated
proportionally to the normalized Shapley Values of agents, then the resulting allocation
maximizes the expected collaborative value while ensuring equity in resource distribution.
6 Co-working space location strategies: the case study of the Aosta
Valley
Thisanalysisisbasedonrealdemographicandgeographicdataobtainedfromofﬁcialsources,
including ISTAT (Italian National Institute of Statistics) and the Regional Geographic Infor-
mation System of Aosta Valley. All population distribution data, economic indicators, and
infrastructure information used in our model come from veriﬁed governmental sources. We
assume that the locations of co-working participants, both within the Aosta Valley and from
other regions, follow the geographic distribution of the resident population. This assumption
aligns with technical aspects of many current public policies in this domain. It is justiﬁed by
the fact that larger urban centers offer more services - such as schools, hospitals, supermar-
kets, and transportation infrastructure - which naturally attract external professionals.
The Aosta Valley has approximately 123,000 inhabitants spread across 74 municipalities.
Among them, only the regional capital Aosta exceeds 10,000 residents, with a population of
around 33,000. About 75% of the population is concentrated in the 28 municipalities located
in the non-mountainous central valley, while the remaining 25% resides in mountainous
areas.
From this distribution, we assume that the location of remote workers follows the same
pattern: 75% are directed to central areas, and 25% to mountain zones. This assumption is
fundamental to our spatial analysis and is supported by theoretical frameworks drawn from
urban economics and tourism geography.
6.1 Seasonal dynamics in mountain co-working networks
The Aosta Valley exhibits pronounced seasonal ﬂuctuations in economic activity due to its
strong dependence on tourism. The winter months (December–March) generate peak inﬂows
associated with ski tourism, while summer (July–August) attracts large numbers of visitors
forhikingandoutdoorrecreation.Thesedynamicsdirectlyaffectco-workingspaceutilization
and the formation of collaborative opportunities.
In particular:
– Winter peak (Dec–Mar): 95-100% tourism capacity, with high demand for temporary
workspaces from remote workers and digital nomads.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Seasonal decomposition of agent utilization and collaborative value
Month
Q
Utilization (%)
Collab. Value
Coalitions
Status
January
Q1
48 ± 6
1050 ± 80
12
Baseline
February
Q1
52 ± 5
1080 ± 85
13
Low
March
Q1
58 ± 7
1120 ± 90
14
Growing
April
Q2
64 ± 7
1180 ± 90
16
Moderate
May
Q2
68 ± 8
1210 ± 95
17
Moderate
June
Q2
70 ± 8
1240 ± 100
18
Growing
July
Q3
78 ± 9
1380 ± 100
21
Peak
August
Q3
80 ± 10
1380 ± 105
22
Peak
September
Q3
76 ± 8
1350 ± 100
20
High
October
Q4
72 ± 8
1320 ± 95
19
Declining
November
Q4
65 ± 7
1250 ± 90
16
Moderate
December
Q4
58 ± 6
1180 ± 85
14
Low
Values represent mean ± 95% conﬁdence interval. Peak season in Q3 shows 60% higher utilization compared
to Q1 baseline
– Summer high (Jul–Aug): 85-90% capacity, supported by steady inﬂows of outdoor-
oriented professionals.
– Shoulder seasons (Apr–Jun, Sep–Nov): 40-60% capacity, representing opportunities
for resident professionals and long-term collaborations.
To incorporate these temporal variations into the optimization model, we introduce a
seasonality factor:
Fseas = 1 + α · cos(2πt/T ),
(26)
where α = 0.3 represents the amplitude of demand ﬂuctuations and T = 12 months. This
factor modulates the coalition value function and the resulting network conﬁgurations over
time.
Furthermore, Table 1 provides a visual representation of utilization dynamics across the
four seasons, highlighting the contrast between high-demand and low-demand periods and
their implications for coalition formation and resource allocation.
7 Allocative eﬃciency in co-working networks: evidence from a
Shapley-based simulation
Our analysis employs real data from the following ofﬁcial sources:
– Demographic data: ISTAT Census 2021 and population registry 2024 for all 74 munici-
palities of Aosta Valley (approximately 123,000 inhabitants)
– Geographic distribution: Regional Geographic Information System of Aosta Valley, pro-
viding detailed topographical and infrastructure mapping
– Economic indicators: Chamber of Commerce of Aosta Valley business registry, including
company sizes, sectors, and employment data
– Infrastructure data: Regional transportation authority databases, including public trans-
port networks and accessibility indices
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Resource requirements by agent type
Agent Type
Space (m2)
Time (hrs)
Funding (e)
Equity
Freelancer
5-15
5-50
1,000-5,000
1-3
Startup
15-30
50-100
5,000-20,000
3-10
SME
30-50
100-200
10,000-30,000
5-15
Consultant
10-20
20-80
2,000-8,000
2-5
– Tourism statistics: Regional tourism observatory data for 2022-2024, showing seasonal
patterns and visitor ﬂows
The simulation combines these real datasets with optimization algorithms to determine opti-
mal coalition conﬁgurations. Agent characteristics (freelancers, startups, SMEs, consultants)
are derived from actual business registry data, ensuring realistic parameter ranges.
To validate our theoretical framework, we conducted a numerical simulation using data
on the demographic characteristics of the Aosta Valley region. We modeled a network of 100
potential agents distributed across 10 co-working spaces. The agents and co-working spaces
were geographically positioned using simpliﬁed two-dimensional coordinates representing
the region’s topography. Consistent with regional demographics, 75% of the agents and
co-working spaces were located in the central valley areas, while the remaining 25% were
distributed across mountain municipalities.
The agents were divided into four categories: freelancers (50%), startups (30%), SMEs
(10%), and consultants (10%). Each agent was assigned a random skill score across six
domains (Technology, Design, Business, Marketing, Finance, and Legal) to model collabo-
rative potential based on complementary skills (See Table 2).
The simulation was implemented using Python 3.8. Regarding computing resources, the
system was tested on machines equipped with multi-core CPUs and 8 to 16 GB of RAM.
The full simulations took approximately 45–60 minutes to complete.
8 Coalition valuation and network optimization under constraints
For assessing the collaborative potential within the co-working network, we developed a
coalition evaluation function that integrates both structural and contextual dimensions. The
coalition evaluation function combines multiple value dimensions through a multiplicative
structure. While the seasonality factor Fseas is explicitly formalized in Equation 26, the
remaining component functions are described below.
Coalition size value (Vsize)
The base value of a coalition is modeled as a function of its cardinality, reﬂecting the
principle that larger teams generate greater potential value through increased resource pooling
and diversity of perspectives:
Vsize(S) = β1 · |S|γ
(27)
where β1 is a scale parameter calibrated to the speciﬁc territorial context, |S| denotes the
number of agents in coalition S, and γ ∈(0, 1] is an elasticity parameter. The choice γ < 1
captures diminishing marginal returns to coalition size, reﬂecting coordination overhead and
communication costs identiﬁed in the literature (Hackman & Vidmar, 1970; Lakey & Cohen,
2000; Mueller, 2012). When γ = 1, the relationship is linear.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Skill complementarity value (Vcomp)
Complementarity is quantiﬁed through the diversity of expertise domains represented
within the coalition.
Let K = {technology, design, business, marketing, ﬁnance, legal}representthek domains,
and let skilli,k ∈[0, 1] denote the proﬁciency level of agent i in domain k. Complementarity
is measured as:
Vcomp(S) = β2 ·
1
|K|

k∈K

1 −

i∈S
(1 −skilli,k)

(28)
This formulation captures the probability that at least one coalition member possesses mean-
ingful competence in each domain. The value ranges from 0 (no coverage) to β2 (full coverage
across all domains). The normalization by |K| ensures scale independence from the number
of skill domains considered.
Expertise breadth value (Vexp)
Beyond complementarity, coalitions beneﬁt from the breadth of domain coverage. Let
D(S) ⊆K denote the set of domains in which at least one coalition member has proﬁciency
exceeding a threshold τskill ∈(0, 1]:
Vexp(S) = β3 · |D(S)|
|K|
(29)
This metric rewards coalitions with multidisciplinary capabilities. While conceptually related
to Vcomp, Vexp captures the number of domains with meaningful coverage, whereas Vcomp
captures the strength of that coverage. The normalization by |K| yields a value in [0, β3].
Geographic dispersion penalty (Ftrans)
Transportation constraints (Equation (13)) limit coalition viability based on cumulative
distance. The transportation factor penalizes geographic dispersion, following an exponential
decay model:
Ftrans(S) = exp

−δ · d(S)
dref

(30)
where
d(S) =
1
|S|(|S|−1)
2

i, j∈S
i< j
di j
is the mean pairwise distance within the coalition, δ ≥0 is a sensitivity parameter governing
the strength of geographic friction, and dref is a reference distance (e.g., 10 km) used for nor-
malization. When δ = 0, geographic distance has no effect. Higher δ values impose stronger
penalties for dispersed coalitions. The exponential form ensures that Ftrans(S) ∈[0, 1], rep-
resenting a proportional reduction in coalition value. Equivalently, the transportation penalty
can be expressed through the feasibility constraint, in which case Ftrans becomes a binary
indicator rather than a continuous penalty. The choice between formulations depends on
whether constraints are hard (infeasible coalitions excluded) or soft (feasible but penalized).
Parameter calibration and interpretation
The weighting parameters β1, β2, β3 reﬂect the relative importance of size, complemen-
tarity, and breadth of expertise in the speciﬁc territorial context. These should be calibrated
using:
– Expert elicitation from co-working space operators and regional development planners;
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Network topology and coalition formation dynamics
– Empirical data on actual coalition formations and their measured outcomes;
– Sensitivity analysis to assess robustness to parameter variations.
The skill threshold τskill and reference distance dref require contextual speciﬁcation. For the
Aosta Valley case study, τskill is set to 0.5 (moderate proﬁciency) and dref = 10 km, reﬂecting
regional transportation patterns.
Aggregation structure and multiplicative properties
Therefore V (S) follows a mixed aggregation logic:
V (S) =

Vsize(S) + Vcomp(S) + Vexp(S)

× Ftrans(S) × Fseas(t)
(31)
This structure treats the three value components as additively separable, while geographic
and seasonal factors operate multiplicatively. This reﬂects the assumption that:
– Vsize, Vcomp, and Vexp are independent dimensions of collaborative potential, with addi-
tive effects;
– Transportation and seasonality are modulation factors that reduce (or enhance) coalition
viability without changing the fundamental collaborative structure.
8.1 Network topology, coalition formation, and structural dynamics
The valuation functions deﬁned above operate within a network context whose topological
properties shape coalition formation. Network topology -the pattern of connections among
agents - is not independent of coalition dynamics. It determines which coalitions are feasible
and which are likely to remain stable. It also inﬂuences how value is distributed among
members. Understanding this interplay between network structure and coalition behavior is
essential for predicting real-world outcomes and for designing interventions that account for
emergent organizational properties.
The exemplary topologies in panels (a)–(c) (see Fig. 3)represent distinct organizational
architectures, each with important implications for coalition formation and value realiza-
tion. Panel (a) shows a small, densely connected network (n = 5) in which agents are highly
interconnected. This structure allows coalitions to form ﬂexibly across many possible mem-
bership combinations. The high connectivity supports rapid information ﬂow and mutual
monitoring. As a result, coalitions can be created based on skill complementarity and task
requirements rather than spatial proximity or existing organizational boundaries. In such envi-
ronments, coalition formation is dynamic and adaptive. Agents reorganize into new coalitions
as project opportunities arise and conditions change. The valuation function (Equation 31)
123

Annals of Operations Research
operates with minimal topological friction, since agents can combine based solely on skill
match and geographic feasibility.
Panel (b) presents a medium-sized network (n = 8) with a hierarchical or community
structure. Agents cluster into distinct groups (orange and green blocks) connected by only a
few inter-cluster links. This architecture mirrors real organizational settings, where groups
often form around shared interests, geographic proximity, or institutional afﬁliations. Within
each cluster, coalitions form easily because agents share proximity, trust relationships, and
similar institutional contexts. Inter-cluster coalitions, however, face greater friction. They
require coordination across different organizational settings, often rely on broker agents to
bridge communities, and are exposed to information asymmetries and weaker monitoring.
In this context, the transportation penalty (Ftrans) becomes especially important. Coalitions
that span clusters incur higher average distances and therefore lower viability. This dynamic
helps explain why real co-working ecosystems tend to form coalitions at the community level
rather than globally optimized grand coalitions.
Panel (c) illustrates the most centralized topology: a star structure (n = 7) in which a
single hub agent (node 0, red) connects to all peripheral nodes. In contrast, the peripheral
agents are not directly connected. This topology strongly limits coalition formation. Any
viable coalition must either involve peripheral agents that all connect through the hub or
be directly led by the hub itself. As a result, the hub becomes a critical bottleneck. Coali-
tion formation cannot proceed without its participation or mediation. This dynamic creates
a pronounced principal–agent problem, as the hub can appropriate a disproportionate share
of coalition value. Peripheral agents have no alternative coalition pathways and, therefore,
limited bargaining power. In such star networks, the Shapley Value naturally produces asym-
metric allocations that favor the hub, whose marginal contribution is essential in nearly all
coalitions. Policy intervention through dynamic λ adjustment becomes crucial to prevent
exploitative outcomes.
For policy-makers, these dynamics highlight a key point: coalition policy cannot treat
network topology as exogenous or irrelevant. Before calibrating λ or applying other coalition-
level interventions, authorities must understand the existing structure - where clusters form,
which agents act as bridges, and where centralization risks appear. In dense networks, policy
can rely on market-driven coalition formation with minimal oversight. In clustered net-
works, however, policy must address coordination barriers between groups. This may require
subsidies for cross-cluster coalitions or infrastructure investments that reduce the friction
of moving across bridges. In centralized topologies, policy must enforce strong oversight
and may need structural reforms to limit hub exploitation. A topology-sensitive approach
thus replaces one-size-ﬁts-all strategies with context-aware, structurally informed policies
grounded in a detailed understanding of network architecture and its implications for feasible
and sustainable coalition formation.
8.2 Computational complexity and scalability
The exact computation of the Shapley Value has complexity
O(2n · n2),
where n is the number of agents. This cost arises from evaluating all possible coalitions and
computing each agent’s marginal contribution. In co-working networks with 50-200 agents,
the exact method becomes infeasible.
123

Annals of Operations Research
To ensure tractability, we use a sampling-based approximation with complexity
O(n3 · k),
where k is the sample size. This approach reduces the number of required coalition evaluations
while maintaining high accuracy.
Performance benchmarks on standard hardware (8-16 GB RAM, multi-core CPU) high-
light this difference:
• 50 agents: 2.3 min (exact) vs. 0.5 min (sampling)
• 100 agents: 45 min vs. 8 min
• 200 agents: 3.2 h vs. 25 min
• 500 agents: not tractable (exact) vs. 1.5 h (sampling)
The approximation remains within 5% of the exact solution for networks up to 200 agents,
with convergence improving as k increases. This makes it suitable for coalition evaluation
and for integration into our bi-objective optimization model.
Both computational and methodological considerations support the choice of sampling.
Stratiﬁed sampling ensures proportional representation of coalitions of different sizes,
reduces variance, and yields stable marginal contributions. The resulting estimates are robust
and efﬁcient.
For each agenti, the Shapley Value φi(V ) is estimated as the average marginal contribution
over a representative set Mi of sampled coalitions:
φi(V ) ≈
1
|Mi|

S∈Mi
[V (S) −V (S \ {i})] .
Thisapproximationpreservesallinformationneededtorankagents,assesscoalitionincen-
tives, and guide the optimization algorithm and policy trade-offs.
Since our goal is not to compute exact monetary payoffs but to identify stable coalition
structures and evaluate policy scenarios, the sampling approach is fully adequate. It pro-
vides scalability, robustness, and efﬁciency, especially when many Shapley computations are
required in dynamic or seasonal simulations.
9 Simulation scenarios
Thissectionpresentsthemainresultsofthesimulationstudy.Toevaluatetheeffectivenessand
adaptability of the proposed optimization model, we designed two simulation scenarios. Each
scenario reﬂects a distinct strategic approach to resource allocation and coalition formation
in the context of a co-working network.
In the ﬁrst scenario (static λ approach), we adopt a conventional weighted-sum strategy.
The trade-off between collaborative value and operational cost is controlled by a ﬁxed scalar
parameter λ. A series of ﬁxed values (λ = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0) is used to explore
different prioritization levels along the Pareto frontier.
In the second scenario (dynamic λ adjustment), we introduce an adaptive optimization
mechanism in which the λ parameter is no longer ﬁxed but varies dynamically across agents.
Speciﬁcally, λi is adjusted for each agent based on their normalized Shapley Value, which
captures their marginal contribution to coalition value.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Performance comparison across optimization scenarios (30 runs)
Scenario
λ
Collab. Value
Op. Cost (e)
Coalitions
Std. Dev.
Static λ
0.2
845.2 ± 42.3
56,430 ± 2,821
12
0.050
Static λ
0.4
1,210.5 ± 60.5
78,650 ± 3,932
17
0.045
Static λ
0.6
1,485.7 ± 74.3
92,845 ± 4,642
22
0.042
Static λ
0.8
1,632.1 ± 81.6
110,250 ± 5,512
24
0.038
Static λ
1.0
1,728.4 ± 86.4
124,780 ± 6,239
25
0.035
Dynamic λ
Varied
1,838.6 ± 91.9
100,520 ± 5,026
24
0.028
Values represent mean ± standard deviation from 30 independent simulation runs. The dynamic approach
shows signiﬁcantly better performance (p < 0.01, Wilcoxon signed-rank test)
Fig. 4 Enhanced Pareto frontier showing trade-offs between collaborative value and operational costs
9.1 Comparative performance analysis
Table 3 provides a comparative overview of the key performance metrics obtained across the
different optimization scenarios considered in the study.
9.2 Pareto frontier analysis
As shown in Fig. 4, the Pareto frontier illustrates the trade-off between operational cost and
collaborative value across different network optimization scenarios. The circular markers
represent static λ conﬁgurations. In contrast, the red diamond highlights the dynamic λ
scenario, which clearly outperforms all static alternatives.
9.3 Resource utilization analysis
In Fig. 5 and Table 4 we show the agent utilization rates across the various optimization
scenarios considered in the model.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Resource utilization comparison across optimization methods
Table 4 Performance summary.
Method
Utilization
Coalitions
Agents
Efﬁciency
Static λ = 0.2
48%
12
45
0.015
Static λ = 0.6
72%
17
58
0.015
Static λ = 1.0
80%
22
67
0.016
Dynamic
79%
24
79
0.018
9.4 Sensitivity analysis
9.4.1 Coalition size limits
We tested maximum coalition sizes of 4, 6, 8, and 10 agents:
– Size limit 4: Lower collaborative value (-18%) but faster computation.
– Size limit 6: Optimal balance (baseline)
– Size limit 8: Marginal improvement (+3%) with 2x computation time.
– Size limit 10: Diminishing returns (+4%) with 5x computation time.
The results conﬁrm that coalition sizes above 6 agents yield diminishing returns due to
coordination overhead, validating our baseline choice.
9.4.2 Parameter variations and resource constraint relaxation
The sensitivity and stability of the model were assessed through two complementary tests.
First, the model’s robustness was evaluated by introducing 20% variations in all parame-
ters. The results indicated limited ﬂuctuations in output: less than 8% for resource costs,
6% for transportation costs, 7% for space requirements, and 9% for ﬁnancing constraints.
These results conﬁrm that the model remains stable and reliable under moderate parame-
ter uncertainty. A second analysis focused on relaxing resource constraints, examining how
incremental increases in available resources affect overall value creation. The results reveal a
pattern of diminishing returns: a 10% increase in resources led to a 6% improvement in total
value, a 20% increase produced an 11% gain, and a 30% increase produced a 14% improve-
ment. This indicates that while additional resources improve performance, their marginal
impact gradually decreases beyond a certain threshold.
123

Annals of Operations Research
9.5 Comprehensive performance analysis
The comprehensive performance analysis across all optimization scenarios is summarized
in Table 3, which compares ﬁve critical dimensions: collaborative value, operational costs,
utilization rates, number of coalitions formed, and efﬁciency ratios. The dynamic λ approach
consistently outperforms all static alternatives, achieving the highest overall performance
rating.
10 Public policy implications
Public policy can act directly on the weighting parameter λ through a variety of instruments,
suchaseducationandskillspolicies,investmentsinphysicalanddigitalinfrastructure,admin-
istrative simpliﬁcation policies, place-based and territorial development programs, cultural
policies, and public-private partnership arrangements. These different policy levers do not
merely inﬂuence agents’ propensity to co-work. They also reshape the territorial conditions
that determine whether collaboration is feasible and valuable. In doing so, they can amplify -
or attenuate - the social returns that co-working networks can deliver. In short, λ is a policy-
sensitive ﬁlter. Changes in infrastructure, human capital, taxation, or regulation alter both
the incentives to form coalitions and the scope of their externalities. As a result, co-working
produces effects that go far beyond the immediate management of shared spaces.
Operationalizing this insight, we propose ﬁve illustrative, mutually exclusive, and con-
tiguous regimes that correspond to distinct growth objectives:
(i) Resource-constrained growth — λ ∈[0.00, 0.20): the priority is to sustain essential
services and system viability under ﬁscal and resource constraints.
(ii) Frugal efﬁciency growth — λ ∈[0.20, 0.40): the aim is quality-preserving growth
within tight ﬁnancial boundaries.
(iii) Balanced growth — λ ∈[0.40, 0.60): a middle-ground stance that jointly pursues
efﬁciency and collaborative value.
(iv) Inclusive growth — λ ∈[0.60, 0.80): emphasis is placed on redistributive and partic-
ipatory growth.
(v) Qualitative development — λ ∈[0.80, 1.00]: the focus is on the qualitative dimensions
of growth, combining the accumulation of intangible assets (human, social, and cultural
capitals) with selective material investments to enhance territorial performance and
collective capabilities.
Theﬁveillustrativeexamplesofferedabovearenecessarilyschematic.Withineachregime,
there exist varying degrees of attainment and a range of intermediate positions whose bound-
aries are far more porous than a discrete taxonomy suggests. However, a general implication
emerges: public policy rarely presents itself as a binary choice; instead, it unfolds along
a continuum of gradations and trade-offs. Employing the continuous parameter λ to map
several policy regimes brings this model within the policy-mix literature. Indeed, by refram-
ing public interventions not as isolated instruments but as positions along a continuum in
which trade-offs are intrinsic, this perspective clariﬁes why it is challenging to pursue com-
pound policy objectives simultaneously. It also highlights the inherent complexity involved
in combining and balancing distinct policy levers.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Moreover, the paper’s dynamic adjustment mechanism offers a substantive contribution
to the public management literature on innovation ecosystems. By aligning optimization
parameters with territorial and societal goals, the mechanism moves the discussion beyond
narrow efﬁciency metrics and towards a bi-objective public calculus that explicitly accounts
for territorial externalities. Empirically, the dynamic approach proves effective in the Aosta
Valley case. It achieves 12.7% higher collaborative value while reducing operational costs
by 8.8% relative to the best static alternative. This ﬁnding reinforces the theoretical premise
that public-guided dynamic weighting can deliver both greater value and lower costs.
The two mechanisms studied can also be interpreted in normative terms as a contrast
between a ﬁxed-weight (static) regime and a performance-contingent (dynamic) regime. In
the static case, λ is chosen uniformly, whereas in the dynamic case, λ varies according to
agents’ marginal contributions, effectively rewarding higher performers and enabling differ-
ential support. This differentiation partly explains the superior performance of the dynamic
approach. By privileging agents or coalitions with demonstrable marginal contributions, the
policy allocates scarce public resources where they yield the most signiﬁcant collaborative
return.
Finally, framing the static model as primarily top-down and the dynamic model as a
hybrid top-down and bottom-up approach provides an additional explanation for the dynamic
model’s superiority. It also conveys a key lesson for policy-makers: the centrality of data
and information. Successful implementation relies on timely, high-quality data on agent
characteristics and local conditions, as well as on administrative and operational structures
that are close to citizens. Local public bodies must therefore be equipped not only with
funding but also with robust information systems and analytical capacity, enabling bottom-
up signals to guide public interventions. In this context, enhanced collaboration between the
public and private sectors can also play a key role.
Together, these insights suggest a practical agenda for policy-makers. First, they should
map a continuum of potential public outcomes and tailor policy instruments accordingly.
Second, they should adopt public-private arrangements and mixed public instruments; incor-
porate decentralized mechanisms that reward performance. Finally, they should invest in local
data and administrative capacity. This approach allows authorities to leverage co-working
networks for territorial development while explicitly acknowledging the complexity and
trade-offs inherent in real-world policy mixes.
The seasonal and convergence analysis reveals critical patterns underlying co-working
dynamics. Panel (a) of ﬁgure 6 shows the distribution of Shapley Values in the three regimes
of λ, highlighting that λ = 0, 2 produces the most uniform distribution, λ = 0, 6 an inter-
mediate proﬁle, and λ = 1.0 the most signiﬁcant concentration, with very high values for
a few agents and almost zero for the others. Overall, as λ increases, the collaborative value
tends to polarize, while lower values favor greater allocative equity. Panel (b) traces conver-
gence dynamics for representative agents, showing that contribution patterns stabilize reliably
after approximately 300 sampling iterations, conﬁrming the robustness of the computational
approach. Most signiﬁcantly, panels (c) and (d) reveal strong seasonal effects that challenge
static policy assumptions. Utilization rises from 50% in Q1 to 77% in Q3, while collaborative
value shows an even larger shift, reaching 1380 in Q3 compared to a Q1 baseline of 1050
- a 60% efﬁciency premium during peak season. This seasonal volatility underscores why
dynamic policy calibration is imperative - ﬁxed policy weights cannot capture the temporal
heterogeneity that characterizes real-world co-working networks.
The agent–λ interaction heatmaps reveal the ﬁne-grained sensitivity of co-working out-
comes to policy parameters and agent heterogeneity (Figure 7). The left panel maps Shapley
Value sensitivity across the full λ range (0.2–1.0) for all 10 agents. It shows a monotonic
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Detailed seasonal analysis and convergence behavior
Fig. 7 Agent-λ interaction patterns and utilization heterogeneity
decline in absolute values as λ decreases and value concentration increases. The values
range from 169 for agent 1 at λ = 1.0 (maximum equity weighting) to 23 for agent 10 at
λ = 0.2 (maximum efﬁciency focus), indicating strong differentiation in marginal contribu-
tions. These patterns show that moderate changes in λ can generate substantial redistributive
effects without reducing efﬁciency. The right panel displays weekly utilization heterogeneity
over the full 52-week cycle. Several agents maintain consistently high utilization (dark green
cells), indicating stable baseline demand. Others exhibit highly volatile proﬁles, with red–o-
range patches indicating utilization below 65%. This heterogeneity demonstrates the limits
of aggregate policy and highlights the need for adaptive resource-allocation mechanisms that
respond to both temporal variation and agent-level differences. Effective policy design must
therefore rely on decentralized feedback loops capable of detecting and adjusting to these
heterogeneous patterns in real time.
123

Annals of Operations Research
11 Limitations and further developments
The proposed model, while offering promising results consistent with the theoretical
premises,presentssomelimitationsthatareworthdiscussingandopentointerestingprospects
for future development.
A ﬁrst limitation concerns the maximum size of the coalitions considered, set at six agents.
This threshold was inspired by the literature on in-person groups, which consensus holds that
the optimal size is around 5–7 people (Hackman & Vidmar, 1970; Lakey & Cohen, 2000;
Mueller, 2012). While this value has the advantage of limiting computational complexity,
it may exclude larger conﬁgurations that are potentially more efﬁcient or meaningful for
collaboration.
Methodologically, the model uses an approximation in calculating Shapley Values, which
is necessary to ensure the tractability of the problem at the network scale. However, this
choice introduces uncertainty into the estimation of agents’ marginal contributions.
It should also be noted that the model assumes a static structure of agents’ preferences
and characteristics. In reality, factors such as skills, resource availability, and propensities
for collaboration are dynamic and evolve over time.
11.1 Dynamic extensions and future research directions
While the current model assumes static agent characteristics, several promising extensions
can incorporate temporal dynamics to enhance both realism and analytical depth. First, the
framework can be reformulated as a multi-period model in which coalition values evolve
according to learning effects generated by repeated interactions among agents:
Vt(S) = Vt−1(S) + γ · Lt(S)
(32)
where Lt(S) represents the learning component and γ ∈[0, 1] denotes the learning rate. This
formulation captures the cumulative and adaptive nature of collaborative behavior. Dynamic
population mechanisms can also be introduced by allowing agents to enter or exit the system
over time. Entry and exit probabilities may be expressed as:
Pentry(t) = μ · (1 −Nt/Nmax)
(33)
Pexit(t) = ν · (1 −Vi(t)/ ¯V )
(34)
where μ and ν correspond to the entry and exit rates, Nmax represents the network’s max-
imum capacity, and ¯V is the average value threshold. This approach enables modeling of
dynamic ecosystems where participation ﬂuctuates in response to value creation and oppor-
tunity structures.
Temporal coalition stability can be further ensured by introducing persistence and rep-
utation mechanisms. Coalitions may be required to remain active for at least τmin periods,
while agents incur a switching cost cswitch when changing coalitions. In addition, reputa-
tion effects can be incorporated to account for how historical performance inﬂuences future
coalition opportunities. Together, these mechanisms capture the temporal interdependencies
that shape cooperative dynamics.
Preliminary simulations over a three-month horizon indicate that the inclusion of these
temporal features increases model realism without compromising computational tractability
for networks of up to 150 agents. In light of these considerations, future research should
explore how varying public policy objectives inﬂuence the optimal evolution of the λ param-
eter over time. It should also assess the long-term territorial impacts of alternative weighting
123

Annals of Operations Research
strategies and empirically validate the proposed framework by applying it to real-world co-
working networks.
12 Conclusions
Our research conﬁrms and extends the theoretical framework for multi-objective optimization
of co-working networks as instruments of public policy for territorial development. The
results demonstrate that the dynamic λ adjustment mechanism, based on agents’ Shapley
Values and guided by public policy objectives, achieves signiﬁcantly better outcomes than
traditional static weighting approaches.
By treating co-working networks as instruments of public policy rather than purely private
economic entities, we provide a framework that balances economic efﬁciency with territorial
sustainability and social objectives. The model effectively balances the maximization of
collaborative value with the minimization of operational costs.
The bi-objective approach, justiﬁed by the need to account for territorial externalities and
public policy ﬂexibility, offers decision-makers a transparent and adaptable tool for territorial
development.
The model explicitly addresses coalition formation processes, management structures,
and resource constraints, providing a comprehensive framework for understanding and opti-
mizing co-working networks as public policy instruments. This approach not only increases
the utilization of existing infrastructure but also creates additional value through strategic
coalition formation guided by territorial development objectives.
Our application to the Aosta Valley demonstrates the framework’s practical applicabil-
ity and its ability to generate actionable insights for territorial development strategies. The
approach represents a signiﬁcant step toward evidence-based public policy for innovation
ecosystem development in both urban and rural contexts. It is particularly relevant for regions
facing depopulation, seasonal economic ﬂuctuations, and the need for sustainable territorial
development.
Overall, this work provides practical evidence of the effectiveness of the proposed bi-
objective optimization framework as a decision-support tool. It can be used by policy
makers, co-working space operators, and regional development planners seeking to opti-
mize co-working networks while ensuring alignment with broader territorial development
and sustainability objectives.
Acknowledgements Funded by the European Union - NextGenerationEU, Mission 4 Component 2 -
ECS00000036 - CUP [B63B22000010001].
Declarations
Conﬂicts of Interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed material. You do
not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The
images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
123

Annals of Operations Research
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
References
Agrawal, A., Galasso, A., & Oettl, A. (2017). Roads and innovation. Review of Economics and Statistics,
99(3), 417–434. https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00619
Alderighi, M., Baroglio, C., Chiesa, M., Ciano, T., Feder, C., Figini, V., Marengo, E. & Tedeschi, S. (2024).
Towards a network of co-working spaces for social innovation in mountain areas. In: Proceedings of the
32nd international conference on enabling technologies: infrastructure for collaborative enterprises.
WETICE, pp. 164–169. IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, USA (2024). https://doi.org/10.1109/WETICE64632.
2024.00017.
Arbolino, R., Boffardi, R., De Simone, L., & Ioppolo, G. (2021). Multi-objective optimization technique: A
novel approach in tourism sustainability planning. Journal of Environmental Management, 285, Article
112016. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112016
Boudreau, K. J., Brady, T., Ganguli, I., Gaule, P., Guinan, E., Hollenberg, A., & Lakhani, K. R. (2017). A
ﬁeld experiment on search costs and the formation of scientiﬁc collaborations. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 99(4), 565–576. https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00676
Bouncken, R. B., Ratzmann, M., Barwinski, R., & Kraus, S. (2020). Coworking spaces: Empowerment for
entrepreneurship and innovation in the digital and sharing economy. Journal of Business Research, 114,
102–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.03.033
Caramia, M., & Dell’Olmo, P. (2020). Multi-objective Management in Freight Logistics: Increasing Capacity,
Service Level, Sustainability, and Safety with Optimization Algorithms. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-50812-8
Castro, J., Gómez, D., & Tejada, J. (2009). Polynomial calculation of the shapley value based on sampling.
Computers & Operations Research, 36(5), 1726–1730. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2008.04.004
Chan, T. Y., Li, J., & Pierce, L. (2014). Compensation and peer effects in competing sales teams. Management
Science, 60(8), 1965–1984. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2013.1840
Chesbrough, H. W. (2003). Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Proﬁting from Technology.
Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press.
Ciano T., Ferrara M. (2024). Shapley value in machine learning modeling: Optimizing decision-making in
coworking spaces. Applied Mathematical Sciences, 18(9), 413–429. https://doi.org/10.12988/ams.2024.
919155
Deb, K., Sindhya, K., & Hakanen, J. (2016). Multi-objective optimization. In: Decision sciences: theory and
practice, pp. 161–200. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315183176-12
Durante, G., & Turvani, M. (2018). Coworking, the sharing economy, and the city: Which role for the ‘cowork-
ing entrepreneur’? Urban Science, 2(3), 83. https://doi.org/10.3390/urbansci2030083
Fatima, S. S., Wooldridge, M., & Jennings, N. R. (2008). A linear approximation method for the shapley value.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 172(14), 1673–1699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2008.05.003
Feld, S. L. (1981). The focused organization of social ties. American Journal of Sociology, 86(5), 1015–1035.
https://doi.org/10.1086/227352
Garrett, L. E., Spreitzer, G. M., & Bacevice, P. A. (2017). Co-constructing a sense of community at work: The
emergence of community in coworking spaces. Organization Studies, 38(6), 821–842. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0170840616685354
Giagkiozis, I., & Fleming, P. J. (2015). Methods for multi-objective optimization: An analysis. Information
Sciences, 293, 338–350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2014.08.071
Gunantara, N. (2018). A review of multi-objective optimization: Methods and its applications. Cogent Engi-
neering, 5(1), 1502242. https://doi.org/10.1080/23311916.2018.1502242
Hackman, J.R., & Vidmar, N. (1970). Effects of size and task type on group performance and member reactions.
Sociometry, 37–54.
Hasan, S., & Koning, R. (2019). Prior ties and the limits of peer effects on startup team performance. Strategic
Management Journal, 40(9), 1394–1416. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.3032
Howell, T. (2022). Coworking spaces: An overview and research agenda. Research Policy, 51(2), Article
104447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104447
Kahan, J. P., & Rapoport, A. (2014). Theories of Coalition Formation. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Kyriazi, Z., Lejano, R. P., Maes, F., & Degraer, S. (2017). A cooperative game-theoretic framework for
negotiating marine spatial allocation agreements among heterogeneous players. Journal of Environmental
Management, 187, 444–455. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.11.011
123

Annals of Operations Research
Lakey, B., & Cohen, S. (2000). Social support theory and measurement. In: Social support measurement and
intervention: a guide for health and social scientists. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/
med:psych/9780195126709.003.0002
Lima, H. C. R. D., Filho, R. A. D. M., Oliveira, B. R. B. D., Lima, T. L. D. A., & Sobral, M. F. F. (2024). Network
and business performance installed in coworking spaces: Evidence and associations. Administrative
Sciences, 14(11), 290. https://doi.org/10.3390/admsci14110290
Lucidi, S., Maurici, M., Paulon, L., Rinaldi, F., & Roma, M. (2016). A simulation-based multiobjective
optimization approach for health care service management. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science
and Engineering, 13(4), 1480–1494. https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2016.2574950
Mahdiraji, H. A., Razghandi, E., & Hatami-Marbini, A. (2021). Overlapping coalition formation in game
theory: A state-of-the-art review. Expert Systems with Applications, 174, Article 114752. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.eswa.2021.114752
Malecki, E. J. (2010). Everywhere? the geography of knowledge. Journal of Regional Science, 50(1), 493–513.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9787.2009.00640.x
Malecki, E. J. (2011). Connecting local entrepreneurial ecosystems to global innovation networks: Open
innovation, double networks and knowledge integration. International Journal of Entrepreneurship and
Innovation Management, 14(1), 36–59. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJEIM.2011.040821
Marden, J. R., & Roughgarden, T. (2014). Generalized efﬁciency bounds in distributed resource allocation.
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 59(3), 571–584. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAC.2014.2301613
Marler, R. T., & Arora, J. S. (2010). The weighted sum method for multi-objective optimization: new insights.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 41(6), 853–862. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00158-009-
0460-7
Marquis, C. (2003). The pressure of the past: Network imprinting in intercorporate communities. Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, 48(4), 655–689. https://doi.org/10.2307/3556640
Moriset, B. (2013). Building new places of the creative economy: The rise of coworking spaces. HAL Archives.
hal-00914075.
Mueller, J. S. (2012). Why individuals in larger teams perform worse. Organizational behavior and human
decision processes, 117(1), 111–124.
Oldenburg, R. (1997). Our vanishing third places. Planning Commissioners Journal, 25, 6–10.
Ray, D., & Vohra, R. (2015). Coalition formation. Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications,
4, 239–326. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-53766-9.00005-7
Rosenkopf, L., Metiu, A., & George, V. P. (2001). From the bottom up? technical committee activity and
alliance formation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 46(4), 748–772. https://doi.org/10.2307/3094830
Rus, A., & Orel, M. (2015). Coworking: A community of work. Teorija in Praksa, 52(6), 1017–1038.
Spinuzzi,C.(2012).Workingalonetogether:Coworkingasemergentcollaborativeactivity.JournalofBusiness
and Technical Communication, 26(4), 399–441. https://doi.org/10.1177/1050651912444070
Stam, W. (2010). Industry event participation and network brokerage among entrepreneurial ventures. Journal
of Management Studies, 47(4), 625–653. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2009.00899.x
Wang, W., Liang, J., & Niu, J. (2022). Site selection of co-working spaces under the inﬂuence of multiple
factors: a case study in hangzhou, china. Sustainability, 14(5), 2676. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14052676
Weijs-Perrée, M., Van De Koevering, J., Appel-Meulenbroek, R., & Arentze, T. (2019). Analysing user pref-
erences for co-working space characteristics. Building Research & Information, 47(5), 534–548. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2018.1463750
Zafari, F., Li, J., Leung, K.K., Towsley, D., & Swami, A. (2018). A game-theoretic approach to multi-objective
resource sharing and allocation in mobile edge clouds. In: Proceedings of the 2018 on Technologies for
the Wireless Edge Workshop. WirelessEdge ’18, pp. 9–13. ACM, New York, NY. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3266276.3266277
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
Authors and Aﬃliations
Marco Alderighi1 · Cristina Baroglio2 · Mario Chiesa3 · Tiziana Ciano4
·
Christophe Feder4 · Valeria Figini3 · Elisa Marengo2 · Stefano Tedeschi4
123

Annals of Operations Research
B Tiziana Ciano
t.ciano@univda.it
Marco Alderighi
marco.alderighi@unimi.it
Cristina Baroglio
cristina.baroglio@unito.it
Mario Chiesa
mario.chiesa@linksfoundation.com
Christophe Feder
c.feder@univda.it
Valeria Figini
valeria.ﬁgini@linksfoundation.com
Elisa Marengo
elisa.marengo@unito.it
Stefano Tedeschi
s.tedeschi@univda.it
1
Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of Economics, Management and Quantitative
Methods, Milano, Italy
2
Computer Science Department, Università degli Studi di Torino, Torino, Italy
3
LINKS Foundation, Torino, Italy
4
Department of Economic and Political Sciences, Università della Valle d’Aosta - Université de la
Vallée d’Aoste, Aosta, Italy
123