TITLE: The concept of an intelligent mobile application with elements of augmented reality and PLM software for value stream mapping
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06006-4
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06006-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The concept of an intelligent mobile application
with elements of augmented reality and PLM software
for value stream mapping
S. Hrehova1
· J. Husár1
· P. Lazorík1
· P. Trojanowski2
Received: 30 October 2023 / Accepted: 16 April 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Growing demands for variability, reducing losses and increasing production efﬁciency bring
difﬁcult tasks for business management. In order to cope with increasingly demanding tasks,
a good knowledge of effective management methods is required, as well as orientation in a
wide range of application programs. One of the approaches dealing with reducing losses and
streamlining selected processes is the introduction of the Lean philosophy. This philosophy
is ﬁrmly embedded in the concept of Industry 4.0 and its principles are proving to be highly
effective. In the presented contribution, we will focus on the possibilities of reducing losses
by implementing selected Lean principles in conjunction with selected program resources
and elements of mixed reality. The goal is to create an intelligent mobile application that,
based on a simulation model, would enable an in-depth analysis of selected processes from
the aspect of material value stream mapping analysis. The model created in this way could
serve as a relevant basis for top management in the search for solutions to optimize processes.
In the article, we evaluate selected Lean methods, create a workplace simulation model using
the PLM simulation tool Tecnomatix Plant Simulation, and the obtained data are presented
in an intelligent mobile application based on augmented reality. After the online update, the
created application conveys all required relevant information to managers and simpliﬁes their
decision-making process.
Keywords Intelligent mobile AR application · Simulation software · VSM · Gemba walk
B J. Husár
jozef.husar@tuke.sk
S. Hrehova
stella.hrehova@tuke.sk
P. Lazorík
peter.lazorik@tuke.sk
P. Trojanowski
piotr.trojanowski@zut.edu.pl
1
Faculty of Manufacturing Technologies, The Technical University of Košice, Prešov, Slovakia
2
West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, 17, Piastów Ave., 70-310 Szczecin, Poland
123

Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
Management in every organization should be active and visible at every level, and ideally it
should work through all levels of the organization. Such a procedure should ensure manage-
ment’s deep knowledge of all business and production activities, which subsequently enables
them to manage effectively (Soltysova et al., 2020; Gola et al., 2021). One of the main tasks
of management is the detection and reduction of losses arising in any process. This was
also a challenge within the Industry 4.0 philosophy to apply more intensive methods and
approaches to reduce any losses. These activities are very demanding and require the use
of different approaches and methods. However, even the identiﬁcation of losses does not
necessarily mean solving the problem. It is necessary to approach the given problem more
comprehensively. An effective tool for detecting, analyzing and eliminating losses appears to
be the introduction of techniques and methods of the lean production philosophy, referred to
as Lean. This philosophy is ﬁrmly embedded in the concept of Industry 4.0 and its principles
are proving to be highly effective. Lean can be described as a set of several methods and
tools for reducing or eliminating waste (Leksic et al., 2020). There are many articles in the
literature describing the implementation of these tools, not only in manufacturing industries
such as engineering, remanufacturing (Golinska-Dowson et al.,2021), metalworking, con-
struction (Suresh et al.„ 2023). maintenance (Antosz et al., 2021) but also in other sectors
such as health services (Foley et al., 2022) the ﬁnancial sector (Hameed et al., 2020) and
education (Kakouris et al., 2022).”. Each area has its speciﬁcs and individual standard tools
which are adapted to their needs. The main tasks of management in the area of introducing
Lean techniques are represented by three pillars (Kerri; 2002) (Fig. 1).
As the ﬁgure shows, one of the important tasks is eliminating waste. In this area, thanks to
the constantly developing information technologies and their connection with software appli-
cations, many more opportunities are offered for the identiﬁcation and analysis of potential
problem areas. The solution is the use of various simulation techniques and tools (Vagaská
et al., 2022). Simulation is a very versatile technique that enables the implementation of var-
ious methods and tools that can be easily adapted to the speciﬁc needs of individual systems
(Mikušová et al., 2021; Schmidt et al., 2020). It can be used to plan solutions in production
environments, optimize business processes, as well as to plan and manage production (Varela
et al., 2022). The simulations and models created in this way bring new possibilities for exper-
imentation in the virtual environment of individual systems without directly disrupting the
functioning system (Pekarcikova et al., 2021). However, the creation of a simulation model
alone is not enough for a full understanding and analysis of the investigated problem. A key
aspect is also the creation of a team of workers who would be able to assess the selected
Fig. 1 Three pillars of Lean
management
123

Annals of Operations Research
process from different points of view, which would lead to successful operation management
(Swarz et al., 2023). In the presented contribution, we will demonstrate the possible use of
various techniques, application programs and tools to create a more complex model of the
selected process. The goal is to show the possibilities of using different approaches and tools
to create a digital twin with a focus on the analysis of the value stream mapping—that is,
the search for problem areas where losses occur (Antosz et al., 2022). The model created
in this way can then serve as a basis for a team of experts at a higher level, who will thus
obtain a more realistic idea of the monitored process. We will use techniques from the Lean
philosophy, namely Value Stream Mapping (VSM), Gemba Walk (GW), and the Tecnomatix
plant simulation tools will be used to create a digital twin, also using its built-in tools such as
identiﬁcation of bottlenecks, activity statistics of individual workplaces, as well as tools of
the VSM library to create a diagram of the current state. Since the creation of the proposed
application requires experience and knowledge from various ﬁelds, a team of authors was
created who are able to connect these individual technologies. For the correct application
of the principles of the VSM method, it is important that the real values of the necessary
parameters are accurately recorded. As a rule, it is carried out in such a way that individual
managers “go through” the examined operation in person. In order not to be forced top man-
agers to personally verify the selected process, augmented reality technology will be used,
where based on a “marker” it will be possible to go through the operation through a 3D Tour.
The described tools will be connected by elements of mixed reality so that they form a single,
integrated application (Antosz et al., 2020).
When creating the application, we will proceed according to the following points:
• Gemba Walk—creating a 3D Tour
• Creation of a digital twin in the Tecnomatix Plant Simulation environment
– the setting of individual operations
– creation of statistics—identiﬁcation of bottlenecks
– creating a Value Stream Map model
• Creating an application design in the Unity environment
– design of the layout and functionality of the buttons
– creation of markers in the Vuforia environment
– testing and debugging the application
• Export the application to a mobile device
2 Materials and methods
We were based on the knowledge of the analyzed theory and when designing the application,
we chose a comprehensive procedure for the creation of an intelligent application based on
the principles of augmented reality presenting data from a simulation tool. Individual tools
will be brieﬂy described with a focus on their usability for the proposed application.
2.1 Value stream mapping
The goal of VSM is to identify losses and evaluate selected processes as a whole. This method
allows the expert to visualize the entire operational ﬂow from a broad perspective in a unique
way. It is thus possible to detect operational activities that are less efﬁcient and ineffective
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 The scheme for using VSM
(Rosmaini et al., 2022). This method directly implements several Lean principles such as
“optimize the whole”, “eliminate waste” and contributes to the fulﬁllment of many others
such as “continuous improvement”, “ﬂow” and “pull-based” development. Using VSM to
identify value-added and non-value-added activities (such as defects, lead time, bottlenecks,
etc.) together with other Lean techniques can signiﬁcantly increase the efﬁciency of selected
processes. The principle is used for optimization by adopting several arrangements when the
entire process is considered and several interested parties responsible for various activities
in the process are involved (Hertle et al., 2015). These tools then recommend ways to elimi-
nate/minimize waste (Bin et al., 2015) using visualization and analysis of the current value
stream. As a result, when integrating this method with tools for implementing lean production
management, we receive a critical analysis of the process, evaluation and identiﬁcation of
existing losses in operation, and other important outputs. The following ﬁgure (Huang et al.,
2022) (Fig. 2) presents the individual basic steps in the implementation of VSM.
The next step after the analysis will be the recommended suggestions or strategies for
improvement (Rosmaini et al., 2022). Success in applying this method is strongly dependent
on real data in the investigated process (operation). The data should not be obtained through
a computer, plans, supply cards, etc., but it is necessary to actually go through the entire
operation and record the real situation directly on the spot. When using simulation tools, this
will ensure a real situation and the results of the analyses will be reliable. All subsequent
steps will then be based on this data. The advantage of this method is that it can be used for the
entire organization or only for a certain segment (process), using a process map (Schoeman
et al., 2021). Following the analysis will be the recommended suggestions or strategies for
improvement (Rosmaini et al., 2022). Success in applying this method is strongly dependent
on real data in the investigated process (operation). The data should not be obtained through
a computer, plans, supply cards, etc., but it is necessary to go through the entire operation
and record the real situation directly in the place.
2.2 Gemba walk
As mentioned in the previous text, it is very important to observe the process. Another
technique known as Gemba Walk serves this purpose. It is a powerful lean approach technique
123

Annals of Operations Research
for observing, interacting, gathering information and understanding how work or joint work
is performed by humans and/or machines (Materna et al., 2019; Romero et al., 2020). It is
characterized by four characteristic elements (Womack, 2019):
• Place—observing operator, machine or team at the “real place” where the work is being
done;
• Observation—watching an operator, machine or team perform their work “in person;
• Teaming—“interaction” with the operator, machine or team doing the work by respectfully
asking questions where appropriate
• Thinking – after “seeing and hearing” what actions are needed to support innovation and
continuous improvement.
For small establishments, the best way to get the necessary data is to “personally” walk
around the given establishment and write down what is real. However, such a method is not
always possible, and therefore other methods using modern information technologies have
started to be used (Romero et al., 2020):
• Simpliﬁed Virtual Gemba Walks—where lean managers can use handheld cameras in a
remote location to record or live stream their walk for others
• Augmented Gemba Walks—when lean managers “walk Gemba” through the power of
wearable technologies such as Augmented Reality (AR) smart glasses. In this new form
of GembaWalk, lean managers’ senses are “augmented”, allowing them to “see and hear”
in real-time with IIoT support (e.g. real-time performance data).
• Advanced Virtual Gemba Walks—when lean managers use digital technologies to “re-
motely interact” with intelligent, social machines and IIoT-enabled operators via digital
twins, in a virtual environment (VR).
• Automated Guided Gemba Walks—when Gemba Walks are “automated and guided” by
trend predictions based on data provided by IIoT (Industrial Internet of Things), social
machines and operators in digital lean factories
2.3 Augmented reality
Virtual simulation is a representation of the real environment obtained using a computer
system that allows the user to interact with simulated objects (Khan et al., 2022) (Fig. 3).
In recent years, this technology has found application in many areas of social life, whether
in medicine, education, industry or in more speciﬁc areas, such as to optimize critical internal
processes, support production and training (Marino et al., 2021). In mixed reality (MR), the
virtual and real worlds are combined, and both the user and the real content can interact with
the virtual environment (Husár j et al. 2023). In AR, the real world is augmented with virtual
content displayed by devices such as tablets, smartphones or smart glasses. The user has the
opportunity to interact with the real world as well as with the virtual world and manipulate
virtual content. MR can be deﬁned as an immersive connection of the virtual and real world,
in which both the user and the real content can interact with the virtual environment (Bu´n
et al., 2022). Several platforms are already used to develop such applications. Unity is one
of them. It is a fully integrated, feature-rich development environment that provides out-
of-the-box functionality for creating interactive 3D content and is fully compatible with
VR and AR technologies. One of the most important features of this software is that it
provides live changes; any change in the code can be displayed one by one on the graphical
interface. The Unity script can be developed in C# or Javascript (Behun et al., 2020). In
addition, the biggest advantage of Unity is that it allows develop cross-platform applications
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 The possibility of using VR/AR/MR in industry (Industrial, 2022)
so that one application can be implemented for multiple devices or systems (Android, iOS,
Windows). This allows more people to use and interact with the application. The Vuforia
is another used platform. It belongs to one of the most popular systems used in augmented
reality applications. This platform is supported by all major platforms and software, it offers
many services for free (image target, object scanner, QR code scanner, etc.). Vuforia thus
represents a suitable tool for AR development, it supports iOS, Android and UWP. Combined
with Unity, it represents one of the best solutions for cross-platform solutions. Vuforia Target
Manager also performs image enhancement, which in the meantime leads to the optimization
of application performance. It also recognizes and tracks user-deﬁned images that enable
interaction in an AR environment (Zappia, 2022).
2.4 Tecnomatix plant simulation
The simulation program Tecnomatix Plant Simulation is one of the most used software for
modeling, simulating and optimizing the production and logistics processes of contempo-
rary companies and enterprises. It is an effective tool for dynamic simulation and allows
create digital models of production and logistics systems, as well as investigating system
properties and optimizing their efﬁciency. The potential of Tecnomatix Plant Simulation lies
in its dynamics and hierarchical structure, which allows working with an already created
model, modifying it and creating simulation models of selected processes. Thanks to modu-
lar libraries, the process of creating simulation models is very efﬁcient for various industries.
In these modular libraries, objects can be modiﬁed to suit the requirements of a speciﬁc
simulation goal. With its analytical tools, such as obstacle analysis, statistics and graphs, the
program makes it possible to very quickly simulate and evaluate the system without interfer-
ing with the real process. This makes it possible to try more variants of solving the problem
(Mikušová et al., 2021).
Another potential improvement of simulation processes is the connection of the model
with virtual and augmented reality, which makes it possible to increase the accuracy of
123

Annals of Operations Research
individual parameters of the desired project goals (Kašˇcak et al., 2022; Pekarcikova et al.,
2021).
All these attributes, especially the ability to create a value stream map, give this application
an advantage over other similar applications.
3 Methodology
The aim of the presented application proposal is to point out the possibilities of connecting
several information technologies and software programs for the purpose of more effective
monitoring and optimization of processes by management staff. In the application, illustrative
outputs, created diagrams, simulation models and statistical results are used in order to present
the possibilities of applying the application. The proposed application should use the buttons
to perform the following activities:
1. 3D Tour—Gemba walk simulation.
2. Model—display of the created workplace model (lines, entire process using Tecnomatix
Plant Simulation tools).
3. Statistics- display of statistics from the model.
4. VSM—display of the current state of the workplace for the purpose of assessing the value
ﬂow of the material.
3D Tour—we apply gemba walk. We will use virtual tour technology, where a speciﬁc
workplace will be displayed in the form of a video based on the relevant marker. When
creating a virtual tour, individual monitored workplaces will be described according to the
requirements of the VSM “object” (Fig. 4.) so that the manager has all the necessary infor-
mation for the analysis.
The result is a video of the workplace, where all its components will provide relevant
information through descriptions. The video will be played based on the appropriate marker.
The following picture (Fig. 5) represents the workplace and the marker, based on which the
virtual tour will be started.
Fig. 4 A sample of the possible format of the description of individual workplaces for the needs of VSM when
preparing a virtual tour
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Real form of workplace (a), selected marker (b)
Type
Racing
Status
Target Name
vsmmarker
p1
Image
Image
Active
Active
Oct07, 2022 14:40
Aug 30, 2022 09:09
Date Modified
Fig. 6 Markers in the Vuforia environment
The given scene was created in the Unity environment using the Vuforia platform tools,
where it is possible to create a database of markers representing different parts of operations,
or the entire ﬂow—from order to export. The selected marker will subsequently ensure the
playback of the corresponding video (Fig. 6).
We can also realize that the created video can be further edited (adding descriptions,
tags, and comments) using available application programs. In this way, we can increase
its informative value and it will allow managers to better understand the activities of the
workplace.
Model—using the tools of the Tecnomatix plant Simulation environment, we will create
a digital twin of the workplace (lines, operations). This simulation environment allows us
to set all the necessary attributes for individual inputs, workstations, conveyors and other
elements of the workplace. The following ﬁgure (Fig. 7) represents the possibility of setting
all necessary parameters for workstations (machines, robots, manipulators).
Statistics—in the current state of analysis, the simulation software allows the use of
various statistics. The results are displayed either graphically or through a table. Based on
correctly set parameters, we can deﬁne where problems arise. The following ﬁgure (Fig. 8)
shows the results of the basic statistics and also the use of the bottleneck analyzer.
Every single output from the simulation model can be part of the application. It only
depends on the assessment of the suitability of this information in the analysis of the value
stream mapping.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Setting the necessary parameters for the workstation (a) and for the conveyor (b)
VSM—will present a simulation model created by VSM tools in the Tecnomatix Plant
Simulation environment. The submitted paper will use a value stream mapping library that
focuses on optimized throughput times, minimal work in progress, and the ability to deliver
the product to the customer on time. The individual tools of this library are shown in the
following image (Fig. 9).
Using the Timeline tool, it is possible to view the static throughput times of the value
stream objects below the objects in the frame. This is made possible by a dialog box directly
in the simulation environment, which offers different calculation approaches (Fig. 10).
The following ﬁgure illustrates, in a general example, the creation of a current state map
with the required parameters for individual processes (Value Stream Mapping 2021).
3.1 Creation of application
In order to demonstrate the possibilities of connecting the mentioned technologies and pro-
cedures, the presented application was created for a research laboratory at the authors’
workplace (Fig. 11). The laboratory serves as a background area for the application (Fig. 12).
The workplace model was created in the Tecnomatic Plant Simulation environment and pro-
duction operations were simulated for the needs of material ﬂow creation and subsequent
demonstration of the use of the VSM superstructure in this environment.
The proposed application will be intended for external devices with the Android oper-
ating system. The demos are shown using a Samsung Galaxy Tab A7 tablet. The opening
screen—the virtual scene was generated in the Unity 3D environment. The background for
the proposed scene used an image from a workplace model. The basic screen contains four
command buttons that perform the described actions. The following image shows the basic
menu of the opening scene of the application in the Unity environment.
Each button opens the corresponding scene, which again allows the addition of other
activities or other scenes. Individual scenes contain a “Back” button, which allows you to
return to the initial screen. The functionality of the buttons is provided by a simple script
created in the Visual Studio environment using Scene Management. We then assign the given
script to individual buttons via the OnClick property (Fig. 13.). One script was created for
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 Display of statistics using the Chart tool (a) and BottleAnalyzer (b)
Fig. 9 Basic environment of Tecnomatix Plant Simulation with VSM library tools
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 10 Setting up the tool for calculating the necessary times
Weekly order
Monthly order
Processing time=585 sec
Production lead time=14 days
Weekly
Monthly
Fig. 11 Current state map
the entire operation of the application, which was subsequently used for individual scenes.
As part of the creation and testing of the proposed application, it is possible to use the
simulator mode in the Unity environment. We will select the relevant devices (or similar)
from the menu, which will be used for real use of the application. We connect the given device
via a USB cable and select the option to install additional devices in the corresponding menu.
The following image shows the screen in this mode (Fig. 14).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 12 Basic menu in the Unity environment
Fig. 13 Assigning the appropriate button sequence
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 14 Application design in the Simulator window
After debugging and verifying the operation of the application’s individual parts, we will
export the application in the form of.apk to the device that will be used for this activity. Since
it is a standalone ﬁle, it can be installed on other Android devices as well. The following
image (Fig. 15) shows the app running from a real device with all scenes.
4 Results and discussion
For industry, management is a key issue and should also be performed with respect to produc-
tion factors, directly or indirectly, in order to improve their performance (Tecnomatic;2022).
Advanced simulation together with other managerial approaches and systems, advanced and
integrated optimization approaches, are currently of great importance for effective business
management (Materna et al., 2019). The current industrial revolution, thanks to the devel-
opment of intelligent interfaces and the use of augmented reality, is changing the way of
cooperation between people and the production system (Saniuk et al., 2021). We see the
beneﬁts of the proposed application in the following points:
• The designed and created application represents the integration of several simulation and
software products that can be used for analysis and optimization of selected processes in
production.
• The application in its mutations can be a suitable tool for management teams whose job
is to eliminate waste.
• The created application combined some proven Lean approach methods—mainly the VSM
method, together with a suitable simulation tool
Although the combination of these new technologies represents a higher level for decision-
making processes, there are also certain limits to the creation and use of the application:
• the time required to create the application,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 15 Application view in the real device
• the necessity of controlling and connecting several software technologies,
• orientation of the management in the given area of management
• higher usability is assumed in larger companies when solving problems directly on the
spot is not possible.
Another speciﬁc application feature is that teamwork is assumed. This is because sev-
eral software resources are connected here, and a programmatic connection with augmented
reality tools is also necessary. Creation is therefore time-consuming. However, as soon as an
acceptable concept is created, the time required is considerably reduced. The speed of imple-
mentation of new technologies will help companies not only to save costs but also to remain
competitive. The connection of technologies with physical elements brings new possibilities
in production, transport, storage, maintenance and in general they are an opportunity for
society (Pekarcikova et al., 2021).
5 Conclusion
Currently, new and more effective software tools are being created, the goal of which is to
make work easier and more efﬁcient. AR technology can facilitate the implementation of
new, innovative processes in industry and improve the efﬁciency of existing ones. It allows
access to resources and knowledge bases, especially in large companies and organizations.
In the submitted paper, the possibilities of connecting several already implemented soft-
ware tools into one unit were pointed out. Selected Lean methods, the creation of a computer
123

Annals of Operations Research
model of the workplace using the simulation tools of the Tecnomatix Plant Simulation envi-
ronment and the procedures used to connect the tools of augmented reality—the Unity
software environment in conjunction with the Vuforia tools are described here. The applica-
tion created in this way makes it possible to tackle increasingly demanding management tasks.
It provides them with a direct view of problem-solving in the presented area by being able to
convey all the necessary information using augmented reality tools. Mobile AR technologies
can give managers easier access to resources and knowledge. They support remote work with
experts even in geographically distant locations and enable more effective communication
between team members.
The implementation of Lean approaches and methods requires interdisciplinary knowl-
edge and a combination of technical, organizational and social competencies and qualiﬁca-
tions. Augmented reality has tools that enable the connection of several independent software
resources and are thus suitable for designing models.
In the future, the authors would like to focus on improving the quality of the application
based on testing and investigating the transfer of the application to mixed reality.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the projects VEGA 1/0268/22, KEGA 038TUKE-4/2022,
granted by the Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the Slovak Republic and APVV-19-0590
granted by Slovak Research and Development Agency.
Funding Open access funding provided by The Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the
Slovak Republic in cooperation with Centre for Scientiﬁc and Technical Information of the Slovak Republic.
The Funding was provided by Ministerstvo školstva, vedy,výskumu a športu Slovenskej republiky, 038TUKE-
4/2022, Jozef Husár.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest All authors certify that they have no afﬁliations with or involvement in any organization
or entity with any ﬁnancial interest or non-ﬁnancial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this
manuscript.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ahmad, R., Amin, R. F. M., & Mustafa, S. A. (2022). Value stream mapping with lean thinking model for
effective non-value added identiﬁcation, evaluation and solution processes. Operations Management
Research, 15(3), 1490–1509.
Antosz, K., Jasiulewicz-Kaczmarek, M., Pa´sko, Ł, Zhang, C., & Wang, S. (2021). Application of machine
learning and rough set theory in lean maintenance decision support system development. Eksploatacja i
Niezawodno´s´c, 23(4), 695–708.
Antosz, K., Jasiulewicz-Kaczmarek, M., Pa´sko, Ł, Zhang, C., & Wang, S. (2021). Application of machine
learning and rough set theory in lean maintenance decision support system development. Eksploatacja i
Niezawodnosc-Maintenance and Reliability, 23(4), 695–708.
Antosz, K., Pasko, L., & Gola, A. (2020). The use of artiﬁcial intelligence methods to assess the effectiveness
of lean maintenance concept implementation in manufacturing enterprises. Applied Sciences., 10(21),
7922. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10217922
123

Annals of Operations Research
Behun, M., Kascak, P., Hrabcak, M., Behunova, A., Knapcikova, L., & Sofranko, M. (2020). Investigation
of sustainable geopolymer composite using automatic identiﬁcation technology. Sustainability., 12(16),
6377. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12166377
Bin Ali, N., Petersen, K., & Nicolau de Franca, B. B. (2015). Evaluation of simulation-assisted value stream
mapping for software product development: Two industrial cases. Information and Software Technology,
68, 45–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2015.08.005
Bu´n, P., Gapsa, J., Husár, J., & Kašˇcak, J. (2022). Mixed reality training in electrical equipment operating
procedures. In International Scientiﬁc-Technical Conference MANUFACTURING (pp. 306-316). Cham:
Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99310-8_24
Foley, I., McDermott, O., Rosa, A., & Kharub, M. (2022). Implementation of a lean 4.0 project to reduce
non-value add waste in a medical device company. Machines, 10(12), 1119. https://doi.org/10.3390/
machines10121119
Gola, A. (2021). Design and management of manufacturing systems. Applied Sciences., 11(5), 2216. https://
doi.org/10.3390/app11052216
Golinska-Dawson, P., Werner-Lewandowska, K., & Kosacka-Olejnik, M. (2021). Responsible resource
management in remanufacturing—framework for qualitative assessment in small and medium-sized
enterprises. Resources, 10, 19. https://doi.org/10.3390/resources10020019
Hameed, Waseem Ul, Hummaira Qudsia Yousaf, Saeed Ahmad Sabir, and Shazia Kousar (2020) International
Journal of Management Research and Emerging Sciences, https://doi.org/10.56536/ijmres.v10i3.110.
Hertle, Ch., Siedelhofer, Ch., Metternich, J. & Abele, E. (2015). The next generation shop ﬂoor managemen-
t–how to continuously develop competencies in manufacturing environments, The 23rd International
Conference on Production Research, Manila, Philippines
Huang, C. Y., Lee, D., Chen, S. C., & Tang, W. (2022). A lean manufacturing progress model and implementa-
tion for SMEs in the metal products industry. Processes, 10(5), 835. https://doi.org/10.3390/pr10050835
Husár, J., & Knapˇcíková, L. (2023). Implementation of augmented reality in smart engineering manufacturing:
literature review. Mobile Network Appl. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11036-023-02121-x
Industrial augmented reality isometric ﬂowchart (2022, October 30). https://www.freepik.com/free-vector/
industrial-augmented-reality-isometric-ﬂowchart_6883522.htm
Kakouris, A., Sfakianaki, E., & Tsiouﬁs, M. (2022). Lean thinking in lean times for education. Annals of
Operations Research, 316, 657–697. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04055-7
Kašˇcak, J., Husár, J., Knapˇcíková, L., Trojanowska, J., & Ivanov, V. (2022, March). Conceptual use of
augmented reality in the maintenance of manufacturing facilities. In International Scientiﬁc-Technical
Conference MANUFACTURING (pp. 241-252). Cham: Springer International Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-99310-8_19
Kerri, S. What is Lean management? https://www.isixsigma.com/methodology/lean-methodology/what-is-
lean-manufacturing. Accesses 28 october 2022
Khan, L., Choi, Y. J., & Hong, M. (2022). Cutting simulation in unity 3D using position based dynamics with
various reﬁnement levels. Electronics, 11, 2139. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics11142139
Leksic, I., Stefanic, N., & Veza, I. (2020). The impact of using different lean manufacturing tools on waste
reductio. Advances in Production Engineering & Management, 15(1), 81–92.
Marino, E., Barbieri, L., Colacino, B., Fleri, A. K., & Bruno, F. (2021). An augmented reality inspection tool
to support workers in industry 4.0 environments. Computers in Industry, 127, 103412. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.compind.2021.103412
Materna, L., Hinrichsen, S., Adrian, B. & Schulz, A. (2019). How to Improve Shop Floor Management, In 9th
International Conference Production Engineering and Management At: Trieste
Mikušová, N., Petrovi´c, M., Mitrik, V., & Šarišský, R. (2021). Solution of a production process with the
application of simulation: A case study. Open Engineering, 11(1), 1015–1024. https://doi.org/10.1515/
eng-2021-0102
Pekarcikova, M., Trebuna, P., Kliment, M., & Dic, M. (2021). Solution of bottlenecks in the logistics ﬂow
by applying the kanban module in the tecnomatix plant simulation software. Sustainability, 13, 7989.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13147989
Perakovi´c, D., Behúnová, A., & Knapˇcíková, L. (2020). Analysis of product conﬁgurators used in the mass
customization production. Acta Logistica, 7(3), 195–200.
Romero, D., Gaiardelli, P., Wuest, T., Powell, D. & Thurer, M. (2020). New Forms of Gemba Walks and Their
Digital Tools in the Digital Lean Manufacturing World. In IFIP WG 57 International Conference on
Advances in Production Management Systems (APMS), Novi Sad, Serbia, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-030-57997-5_50
Saniuk, S., Caganova, D., & Saniuk, A. (2023). Knowledge and skills of industrial employees and managerial
staff for the industry 4.0 implementation. Mobile Networks and Applications, 28(1), 220–230.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Schmidt, D., Villalba, D. J., Ordieres-Meré, J., Gevers, R., Schwiep, J., & Molina, M. (2020). Industry 4.0
lean shopﬂoor management characterization using EEG sensors and deep learning. Sensors, 20, 2860.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s20102860
Schoeman, Y., Oberholster, P., & Somerset, V. (2021). Value stream mapping as a supporting management
tool to identify the ﬂow of industrial waste: a case study. Sustainability., 13(1), 91. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su13010091
Tecnomatix Plant Simulation - Value Stream Mapping Library, (2022, November 6) https://www.plant-
simulation.de/wp-content/uploads/Plant_Simulation_Value_Stream_ Mapping.pdf
Soltysova, Z., & Modrak, V. (2020). Challenges of the sharing economy for SMEs: A literature review.
Sustainability., 12(16), 6504. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12166504
Suresh, M., Antony, J., Nair, G., & Garza-Reyes, J. A. (2023). Lean-sustainability assessment framework
development: Evidence from the construction industry. Total Quality Management & Business Excel-
lence, 34(15–16), 2046. https://doi.org/10.1080/14783363.2023.2222088
Szwarc, E., Bocewicz, G., Goli´nska-Dawson, P., & Banaszak, Z. (1949). Proactive operations management:
Staff allocation with competence maintenance constraints. Sustainability, 2023, 15. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su15031949
Vagaská, A., Gombár, M., & Straka, ˇL. (2022). Selected mathematical optimization methods for solving
problems of engineering practice. Energies, 15, 2205. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15062205
Value Stream Mapping: The Search for Adding Value and Eliminating Waste, blog Purdue University, (2021,
November 2). https://www.purdue.edu/leansixsigmaonline/blog/value-stream-mapping/
Varela, L., Ávila, P., Castro, H., Putnik, G. D., Fonseca, L. M. C., & Ferreira, L. (2022). Manufacturing and
management paradigms, methods and tools for sustainable industry 4.0-oriented manufacturing systems.
Sustainability, 14, 1574. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14031574
Womack, J. (2019). Gemba Walks. Lean Enterprise Institute Inc., Expanded 2nd Edition
Zappia, D. An Augmented Reality Application to Perform a Virtual Tourist Guide. https://webthesis.biblio.
polito.it/6596/1/tesi.pdf Accessed 30 october 2022
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123