TITLE: A matheuristic for customized multi-level multi-criteria university timetabling
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05325-2
---

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05325-2
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A matheuristic for customized multi-level multi-criteria
university timetabling
Fabian Dunke1
· Stefan Nickel1
Accepted: 21 March 2023 / Published online: 7 April 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Course timetables are the organizational foundation of a university’s educational program.
While students and lecturers perceive timetable quality individually according to their pref-
erences, there are also collective criteria derived normatively such as balanced workloads
or idle time avoidance. A recent challenge and opportunity in curriculum-based timetabling
consists of customizing timetables with respect to individual student preferences and with
respect to integrating online courses as part of modern course programs or in reaction to
ﬂexibility requirements as posed in pandemic situations. Curricula consisting of (large) lec-
tures and (small) tutorials further open the possibility for optimizing not only the lecture and
tutorial plan for all students but also the assignments of individual students to tutorial slots.
In this paper, we develop a multi-level planning process for university timetabling: On the
tactical level, a lecture and tutorial plan is determined for a set of study programs; on the oper-
ational level, individual timetables are generated for each student interlacing the lecture plan
through a selection of tutorials from the tutorial plan favoring individual preferences. We uti-
lize this mathematical-programming-based planning process as part of a matheuristic which
implements a genetic algorithm in order to improve lecture plans, tutorial plans, and indi-
vidual timetables so as to ﬁnd an overall university program with well-balanced timetable
performance criteria. Since the evaluation of the ﬁtness function amounts to invoking the
entire planning process, we additionally provide a proxy in the form of an artiﬁcial neural
network metamodel. Computational results exhibit the procedure’s capability of generating
high quality schedules.
Keywords University timetabling · Matheuristic · Student scheduling · Multi-criteria
decision making · Artiﬁcial neural network meta-model
1 Introduction
In view of a steadily increasing number of student enrollments in universities over the past
decades, the efﬁcient utilization of existing university resources such as rooms, time avail-
B Fabian Dunke
fabian.dunke@kit.edu
1
Institute for Operations Research, Discrete Optimization and Logistics, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology, Kaiserstr. 12, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
123

1314
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
abilities, and capacities has become a sine qua non for the successful scheduling of university
course programs (Daskalaki et al., 2004; Bettinelli et al., 2015). The importance of an efﬁ-
cient resource utilization is further catalyzed by aging effects and related renovation needs of
university facilities (Shiue et al., 2019). In Germany, a large share of the buildings has been
erected during the 1960s to 1980s. Most recently, the coronavirus pandemic has brought forth
additional requirements on course scheduling such as the necessity to integrate on-site and
online teaching into the schedule or to change the structure schedule (Barnhart et al., 2022).
From a complexity perspective, the discipline of university scheduling hosts numerous dif-
ﬁcult combinatorial problems from the class of NP-hard optimization problems (Bettinelli
et al., 2015; Goh et al., 2017) making university scheduling computationally hard.
In practice, university timetabling is mainly deployed on the tactical and operational
planning level (Daskalaki & Birbas, 2005; Babaei et al., 2015; Lindahl et al., 2017). Base
schedules are generated several weeks ahead of the semester with opportunities for last-
minute changes in individual student schedules. Regarding the academic practice, there are
notable differences on which problem setting is considered and which solution methodology
is to be deployed. This results in a diverse organization of the ﬁeld and the unavailability of
standard solution procedures (Burke et al., 1997; Jat & Yang, 2011; Bettinelli et al., 2015;
Teoh et al., 2015). However, it also becomes obvious that several archetypical types of class
appointments exist which can be distinguished from each other. This particularly holds for
lectures and tutorials where the former appointment is to be visited by all students of a study
program, whereas the latter appointment is visited by smaller student groups but offered in
larger frequency (Carter & Laporte, 1997; Schaerf, 1999; Müller & Murray, 2010; Bowman,
2021).
In this paper, we extend the classical scope of university scheduling mainly directed
at tactical lecture planning to the operational level by generating ad-hoc individual student
schedulesoncetheyspecifytheirtimepreferencesinthebeginningofthesemester.Tohavethe
possibility of ﬁnding promising lecture and tutorial schedules already in the tactical phase—
which serves as an input to the operational phase—we simulate student time preferences in
the tactical phase to obtain an estimate for the anticipated schedule quality on the individual
student level. Figure1 summarizes the multi-level character of this process. Observe that the
third level (operational planning of individual student schedules) is executed at two points
in time: First, during the planning phase several weeks ahead of the semester using sampled
preference data; second, immediately at the semester start using real student preference data
to produce the actual individual schedules for the students.
To tackle the task of multi-level university timetabling methodologically, we employ
an advanced matheuristic approach. The overarching solution process is organized by a
genetic algorithm (GA) controlling the search for a favorable university schedule. The GA
exhibits integrated calls to solving integer programming (IP) formulations of the lecture
scheduling, tutorial scheduling, and individual student scheduling problem. Since there are
several objectives (e.g., perceived schedule quality, number of gaps in schedules, number
of lectures per day) with differing relevance to different stakeholders (students, lecturers,
didactic quality control) encountered at different levels of the planning process, there is no
straight-forward way of deﬁning a single objective function. Rather, practical experience
of timetable planners is necessary to calibrate resulting schedules to student and lecturer
needs. Therefore, solution proposals in the form of schedules are evaluated by a multi-
dimensional vector of performance criterion values. To extend the search range this outline
is enhanced with a metamodel serving as a predictor for schedule performance. The use
of such a metamodel (e.g., in the form of an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)) provides a
computational cheap way of determining schedule performance on an approximative basis.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1315
Fig. 1 Multi-level university timetabling
This functionality is exploited algorithmically in the course of the GA to check solution
proposals and include them only when sufﬁciently good performance can be expected.
The paper contributes a framework for multi-level multi-criteria university timetabling
well-suited for contemporary needs of academic personnel and students. Due to its matheuris-
tic character, the framework is adaptable to additional requirements which might emerge
under changing circumstances, e.g., in case of sudden pandemic activity. The proposed
approach to university scheduling represents a major advancement in terms of exploiting
existing optimization potential. Practically, this leads to a heightened level of service quality
for students in the form of customized timetables considering individual preferences as well
as an efﬁcient utilization of available resources needed to comply with didactic standards
and best practices. As shown by the numerical experiments for the case of a faculty-wide
scheduling of four study programs with 1950 students, the developed outline yields immense
practical beneﬁt to timetable planners reducing manual planning efforts substantially.
The paper remainder is organized as follows: Sect.2 reviews literature on topics related
to multi-level university timetabling. Section3 develops a metamodel-enhanced matheuris-
tic in the form of a GA for multi-level multi-criteria university timetabling. In Sect.4, we
demonstrate the applicability of the method based on real world and synthesized data. To
foster best practices in the ﬁeld of multi-level university timetabling, Sect.5 summarizes key
ﬁndings derived throughout the development and application of the methodology. Finally,
Sect.6 closes with a discussion of remaining challenges.
2 Literature review
University timetabling problems arise in many different variants. Nonetheless, over the past
two decades the ﬁeld has received structuring due to regular international timetabling com-
petitions [ITC, cf. Di Gaspero et al. (2007); Bettinelli et al. (2015)]. The ﬁrst two editions
(ITC 2003/2007) also aimed at promoting and organizing the overall ﬁeld of educational
123

1316
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
timetabling, whereas the third edition (ITC 2011) paid attention to high school timetabling.
It was then the fourth edition (ITC 2019) which speciﬁcally focused on a more complex uni-
versity timetabling problem so as to bring the discipline closer to reality (Müller et al., 2018,
2022). In particular, the 2019 setting combined elements of classical room-time assignments
with student sectioning under a given hierarchy of course relations accommodating different
class types (such as lectures, recitations, laboratories). Further, it allowed for weekly sched-
ule changes within a ﬁne-grained time resolution of ﬁve minute periods. Despite several
similarities with this paper (such as the integration of different class types and student sec-
tioning), there are also substantial differences (such as the multi-level approach with several
planning stages, base schedules for large study programs, consideration of multiple objec-
tives, methodological treatment as an ANN-enhanced matheuristic, stakeholder participation
through consideration of lecturer and student preference data). Nonetheless, the most suc-
cessful solution methods are in line with those selected in our research. More speciﬁcally,
the winners connect graph theory and mathematical programming (Holm et al., 2022) to
build a matheuristic based on initial solution construction, ﬁx-and-optimize enhancements,
and bounding procedures (Mikkelsen & Holm, 2022). Likewise, the second place winners
utilize integer programming with reduction procedures (Rappos et al., 2022). Runners-up
then employ a MaxSAT solver (Lemos et al., 2022) and a simulated annealing metaheuristic
(Sylejmani et al., 2022). Overall, concerning solution techniques, integer programming (IP)
and metaheuristics form the largest share, followed by constraint logic programming (CLP),
graph coloring, and case-based reasoning. The subsequent literature review accounts for
these developments. We recall that a matheuristic is a solution method employing IP models
within a heuristic framework. Since this notion is in frequent use only since the 2010s, many
prior works exist without explicitly referencing this notion.
2.1 Overviews on educational and university timetabling
An early introduction and categorization of educational timetabling is given by de Werra
(1985). Differences between problem types and their relation to each other as well as to solu-
tion approaches like IP and graph theory are ﬁgured out and anticipate the ﬁeld’s upcoming
evolution resulting from improving computational capabilities. Carter and Laporte (1997)
organize the ﬁeld into course timetabling, class-teacher assignment, student scheduling,
teacher assignment, and classroom assignment. Concerning course timetabling, they dis-
tinguish between master scheduling and demand-driven scheduling. The former is coined by
a prior determination of all course schedules, whereas the latter is driven by initial student
choices of courses and sections. Motivated by study program modularity and competing
stakeholder interests (administrators, students, departments), Burke et al. (1997) identify
the need for standardization. They classify constraints both with respect to their meaning
(capacities,assignments,timing,coherence)anddegreeofallowedviolation(hard,soft).Con-
cerning solution methods, they identify metaheuristic methods and CLP as most promising
for automation. Schaerf (1999) contribute an extensive survey on automated timetabling for
university, school, and examination timetabling. Each class is discussed in terms of complex-
ity, formulations, extensions, and solution methods. Since all problems are computationally
difﬁcult, different solution techniques (IP, graph theory, tailored (meta-) heuristics) are con-
sidered. Standardization, devoted analysis of speciﬁc solution methods, and combination of
solution methods are suggested for further research. Burke and Petrovic (2002) focus on solu-
tion methods distinguishing between sequential, cluster, constraint-based, and metaheuristic
methods. An in-depth analysis is carried out for combined heuristics and meta-heuristics
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1317
which had proven successful in practice. Multi-criteria optimization methods are suggested
to account for hard and soft constraints systematically. The authors also indicate the need for
standardized automated approaches to propel further development. The ultimate goal then
consists in a generalized framework for the automated selection of algorithms depending
on problem characteristics, i.e., a framework tailored for timetabling derived from case-
based selection heuristics and hyper-heuristics. McCollum et al. (2010) then introduce for
the timetabling competition ITC 2007 the division into curriculum-based course timetabling
(CBCT), post-enrollment course timetabling (PECT), and examination timetabling. For the
paper at hand, the former two are of interest. In CBCT, schedules are determined based
on student curricula without prior consultation of students, whereas in PECT, students upon
enrollment ﬁrst issue their demands for courses and course sections. The ITC was further held
in 2002, 2011, and 2019 and contributed deﬁnitions and distinctions between problem vari-
ants. Information on the 2019 edition focusing on complex university scheduling are found
in Müller et al. (2018). MirHassani and Habibi (2013) continue the work from Burke and
Petrovic (2002) and re-enter IP as a viable solution methodology due to signiﬁcant progress
in computational capabilities. They conclude that GAs and memetic algorithms on the one
hand, and IP on the other hand form the two current main branches of solution methodologies.
Babaei et al. (2015) differentiate between operations research methods (IP, graph coloring,
constraint satisfaction) and metaheuristics (including GA, tabu search (TS), (variable) neigh-
borhood search, ant colony optimization) and emphasize the necessity for advanced methods
such as method combinations or (distributed) multi-agent approaches where the allocation
of room and time slots is managed through communication, collaboration and negotiation
between departments to constructively deal with the complexity of timetabling.
2.2 IP methods for course timetabling
An early IP approach to course scheduling is conducted by Ferland and Roy (1985) who
decompose the problem into two sequential phases (class period scheduling, classroom
assignment). Due to their identical mathematical structure, both problems are treated as
quadratic assignment problems with penalties for conﬂicting scheduling decisions. The paper
provides a ﬁrst hint at how IP can be utilized as part of decomposition schemes. Motivated
by increased computational power, Daskalaki et al. (2004) present an IP model with general
and speciﬁc features occurring in the authors’ home institution. Solution retrieval is required
to be effective (i.e., complying with the institution’s timetabling rules) as well as satisfactory
(i.e., favoring timetables of high perceived quality). To ensure acceptable computing times
regardless of problem size, Daskalaki and Birbas (2005) introduce an IP-based two-phase
relaxation procedure where in the ﬁrst step constraints on consecutiveness between lectures
are omitted, but re-introduced in the second stage. Hence, only local optima with respect to
this second stage can be identiﬁed rendering the method a matheuristic. Schimmelpfeng and
Helber (2007) devise an IP model to realize a centralized planning approach for a medium-
sized business school. Contrasting most other publications, schedule quality is evaluated
upon implementation in practice and found to be superior to prior schedules. An IP-based
decomposition scheme for CBCT is devised by Lach and Lübbecke (2012). In the ﬁrst stage,
lectures and time slots are matched, whereas in the second stage rooms are assigned. Since
the ﬁrst stage takes implicit care of successive room assignments, the approach is exact and
leads to computing time reductions compared to a simultaneous method. Burke et al. (2010)
develop a two-stage solution procedure with a coupling between IP and an associated con-
trol strategy. In the ﬁrst stage, a relaxation disregarding room-assignment issues is solved.
123

1318
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Violations are then ﬁxed in the second stage to produce locally optimal solutions. Objectives
comprise room suitabilities, event spread over the day, desirability of timetabling patterns,
and distance between rooms. Van den Broek and Hurkens (2012) develop a matheuristic for
PECT based on solving the linear programming relaxation of an IP model through column
generation. To correct for infeasibility, the procedure is enhanced by a ﬁxing heuristic. In
addition, an improvement heuristic based on an IP formulation accounting for soft constraints
is employed to obtain practically competitive schedules. Méndez-Díaz et al. (2016) consider
a generalized PECT version. They ﬁrst formulate an IP model, but since the model is huge
in terms of variables and constraints, a two-stage relax-and-ﬁx heuristic building upon this
model, i.e., a matheuristic, is proposed. Hoshino and Fabris (2020) present a timetabling
problem variant suited to creating timetables satisfying both lecturers’ and students’ quality
requirements. They devise a two-stage procedure employing graph coloring in the ﬁrst stage
as a pre-processing to bundle one-section courses, to be followed by solving an IP formulation
whose running time is reduced drastically while solution quality only deteriorates marginally
using the ﬁrst stage input.
2.3 Metaheuristic methods for course timetabling
Areviewclassifyinguniversitytimetablingmetaheuristicsaccordingtotheirstructureisgiven
by Lewis (2008). One-stage algorithms consider hard and soft constraints simultaneously,
two-stage algorithms deal with hard constraints in the ﬁrst stage before opting for soft con-
straints in the second stage. Moreover, relaxation algorithms ﬁrst permit violations of hard
constraints which are repaired successively. Another review on metaheuristic approaches
to academic scheduling is provided by Teoh et al. (2015). It organizes different classes of
metaheuristics (TS, GA, simulated annealing (SA), particle swarm optimization, fuzzy logic
algorithms, ant colony optimization) and hyper-heuristics. The different methods are deemed
capable of delivering promising solutions; however, sensitivities to method-speciﬁc param-
eter settings differ signiﬁcantly. To advance timetabling towards automation, Pillay (2016)
surveys the discipline of hyper-heuristics where a heuristic is to be devised to choose a suit-
able heuristic for a problem. Both selection and generation hyper-heuristics are organized
into constructive and perturbation (i.e., improvement) hyper-heuristics. Selection algorithms
make use of existing heuristics, whereas generation algorithms automatically create new pro-
cedures. Pongcharoen et al. (2008) present a framework for metaheuristic university course
scheduling involving stochastic elements as encountered in GAs, SA, and random search.
The authors recognize the need for including multiple objectives at least via soft constraints
to account for interests of several stakeholders. In the presented metaheuristic framework,
hard constraints are explicitly ensured through a repair scheme, while multiple objectives are
addressed by including them in the objective functions (e.g., ﬁtness evaluation) used by the
method.
There is a vast variety of metaheuristics not only in their pure forms, but increasingly
also in hybrid approaches. SA is involved in a large share of them. Ceschia et al. (2012)
comprehensively explore SA for PECT. They devise an outline which is embedded into
several performance-enhancing measures such as preprocessing and constraint reformula-
tion. It makes use of a composite neighborhood structure allowing for event swaps and
re-schedulings. Experimentation shows that parameterization can be tuned so as to obtain
excelling performance on any instance. Lewis (2012) addresses PECT in a three-stage outline
through a rule-based construction process in the ﬁrst step disregarding one class of hard con-
straints to be followed by two SA improvement phases with the ﬁrst one integrating missing
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1319
hard constraints and the second one considering remaining soft constraints. Goh et al. (2017)
combine local search (LS), TS, and SA. Through sampling and perturbation, they develop
enhanced TS versions to generate feasible solutions in the ﬁrst stage. These are then improved
in terms of reducing soft constraint violations by SA with reheating and alternative neigh-
borhood exploration. The outline is reﬁned in (Goh et al., 2019) by reinforcement learning
aiming at ﬁnding a balanced composition of neighborhood structures. Extensive numerical
experiments are conducted in Goh et al. (2020). Search strategies form another focus in
metaheuristic university timetabling. For a real-world university timetabling problem, De
Causmaecker et al. (2009) establish a multi-stage solution procedure where in each stage an
additional constraint is fulﬁlled. The procedure builds upon a LS scheme which employs TS
and operates under varying neighborhood types. Suyanto (2010) considers university course
timetabling in a two-stage process employing a GA at both stages. In the ﬁrst stage, student
sectioning is omitted such that only the generation of the timetable is considered, whereas
in the second stage including student sectioning allows to reduce course conﬂict violations
encountered by individual students. For CBCT, Lü and Hao (2010) introduce an adaptive
TS algorithm consisting of initialization, diversiﬁcation and intensiﬁcation phases whereof
the latter two are combined adaptively to reduce soft constraint violations. The analysis is
generalized in Lü et al. (2011) by examining different neighborhood structures based on
LS. Criteria according to which neighborhood suitability is assessed comprise percentage of
improving neighbors, improvement strength, and search steps. The evaluation of neighbor-
hood capabilities is carried out when these neighborhoods are employed as part of a steepest
descent, TS, variable neighborhood search, and iterated LS. Jat and Yang (2011) develop a
hybrid metaheuristic approach combining GA with TS. Hybridization results in two algorith-
mic phases: A guided search GA ﬁrst delivers a PECT solution which is further improved by
TS. The GA is guided through a data structure which memorizes promising solution charac-
teristics encountered in feasible solutions. Cambazard et al. (2012) consider both LS and CLP
to ﬁnd feasible PECT schedules. They ﬁrst cast the problem as list coloring in an event con-
ﬂict graph from which an event-to-room matching subproblem is derived for every time slot.
The LS then builds upon a coloring strategy. Likewise, alternate colorings and matchings are
utilized in the CLP approach. Integrating LS and CLP in an overarching large neighborhood
search is most promising in terms of computational requirements. An extensive analysis of
different scatter search variants applied to university course timetabling is given by Jaradat
et al. (2014). Approaches differ in search strategies and subroutines. Finally, we mention ant
colony optimization for PECT by Nothegger et al. (2012). The pheromone information is
composed of probabilities for assigning events to time slots and probabilities for assigning
events to rooms. The algorithm is enhanced through LS and pheromone ampliﬁcation.
2.4 Multi-level university timetabling
In contrast to the multi-stage methods discussed above, multi-level university timetabling
refers to different organizational levels involved in educational timetabling. The interrelated
problems of master timetabling and student section assignment (grouping) are discussed
in Aubin and Ferland (1989). They derive an iterative heuristic oscillating between master
timetable modiﬁcation and student section assignment until no further improvement is pos-
sible. In doing so, they ﬁrst deﬁne an IP model and then approach it through an iterative
heuristic for the timetabling and assignment subproblems. A two-level setting consisting of
master timetabling and student sectioning is tackled by Banks et al. (1998) through constraint
satisfaction where the problem is modeled heuristically (i.e., not considering all constraints),
123

1320
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
but solving arising auxiliary problems exactly. The proposed method follows an iterative
constraint-adding approach until a master timetable containing multiple course sections is
constructed; this is followed by a greedy section assignment to obtain individual student
schedules. The complexity of the overall timetabling process is illustrated by Carter (2000)
in a comprehensive demand-driven course timetabling and student scheduling system. The
setting is decomposed into several subproblems comprising assignment of course sections to
times, classroom assignment, and automated student scheduling via section assignments. It
is explained how administrative personnel can engage in the system interactively to resolve
conﬂicts and contribute to high quality student schedules. Rudová and Murray (2002) and
Rudová et al. (2011) present a practical outline for complex university timetabling at Purdue
University. The setting is coined by many institution-speciﬁc requirements illustrating the
political dimension of timetabling. The approach encompasses all practically necessary steps
such as establishing the course structure, translating it into classes upon which constraints are
imposed, and application of algorithms from constraint satisfaction and CLP allowing for par-
tialsatisfactionofsoftconstraints.Further,themethodhostsastructuretoincorporatechanges
interactively. The authors conclude that the method contains several elements amenable to
generalization. A holistic approach to student sectioning is taken by Müller and Murray
(2010) who consider three different problem variants, namely in parallel to establishing the
master course timetable (initial sectioning), after establishing the master course timetable
(batch sectioning), and as an online method to correct conﬂicts or incorporate changes into
student schedules (online sectioning). These problems can be addressed successively as part
of the planning cycle. Devised algorithms build upon constraint satisfaction and optimization
with the online algorithm incorporating rule-based decision making. A comprehensive view
on problems related to timetabling on the strategic, tactical, and operational level is given
by Lindahl et al. (2017) who provide a broadened perspective including course assignment,
room planning, teaching periods, and quality recovering. In particular, input–output relations
between different problems and hence the interplay of decisions on an organizational level are
derived. Developed methods are based on IP leading to ﬁx-and-optimize matheuristics and
a Pareto efﬁciency approach to quality recovering under disruptions induced by operational
changes. To analyze the availability of different resources and thereby to assess the impact
of strategic decisions onto the operational level, an ϵ-method algorithm for bi-objective opti-
mization is invoked.
2.5 Multi-objective university timetabling
Apart from addressing multiple objectives by minimization of a single substitute objective
or in a two-stage approach with soft constraints handled in the second stage as discussed
previously (Burke et al., 2010; Lewis, 2012; Goh et al., 2017, 2019, 2020), research focusing
on multi-criteria concepts is scarce which could be due to the large number of interests and
stakeholders involved in educational institutions. Burke et al. (2005) give an overview on
multi-objective metaheuristics for scheduling and timetabling. For educational timetabling,
they ﬁnd that multi-objective metaheuristics, in particular evolutionary approaches, are used
scarcely. Carrasco and Pato (2000) ﬁrst employ an evolutionary multi-objective algorithm,
namely a version of the non-dominated sorting GA (NSGA) for educational timetabling
with two objectives concerning class- and teacher-oriented violations caused by a schedule.
Using tailored deﬁnitions of evolutionary operators, they conclude that NSGA successfully
yields Pareto schedules outperforming manual schedules. As an advancement, Datta et al.
(2007) invoke NSGA-II (which improves NSGA by fast non-dominated sorting, increased
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1321
elitism, and parameterless diversiﬁcation) for university timetabling with the two objectives
of minimizing the number of free intermediate time slots for students and consecutive lectures
for lecturers. The algorithm yields high quality schedules for a real world case in India such
that the authors recommend its use due to the aptness for complex settings. The authors further
augment the evolutionary outline of forming problem-speciﬁc versions of NSGA-II to the
general ﬁeld of resource allocation problems (Datta et al., 2008). Jat et al. (2011) enhance
NSGA-II through hybridization in the form of two LS procedures which aim at exploring the
trade-off space through a guided search for the offspring generation. This is accomplished
by storing solution components of previously found promising schedules to be re-utilized.
Another hybridized variant of NSGA-II is established for PECT by Lohpetch and Jaengchuea
(2016). Hybridization is achieved by integrating LS and TS into the overarching NSGA-II.
Soft constraints address the number of violations of requirements on the minimum number
of events, consecutive events, and end-of-day events of students. Likewise, in Abdullah et al.
(2010), a multi-objective version of PECT is tackled through a speciﬁcally tailored NSGA-II
variant. The objective considered affects the minimization of the soft constraints including
the avoidance of gaps in individual student schedules and the avoidance of days with only
a single course. Akkan and Gülcü (2018) and Akkan et al. (2022) consider robustness as
a second dimension besides schedule quality. Robustness measures—also inspired by the
general idea of slack—are deﬁned to account for input data changes. The resulting bi-criteria
problem is tackled by a GA combined with hill climbing and SA. A different solution concept
is formed by multi-objective hyper-heuristics (Silva et al., 2004). The outline intends to
compose a heuristic by selecting in each step a neighborhood search heuristic and organizing
the procedure in an overarching TS so as to exclude neighborhoods temporarily. The approach
shows promising results for university course timetabling.
3 Methodology
Multi-levelmulti-criteriauniversitytimetablingaimsatdeterminingweeklyindividualsched-
ules for all students of considered study programs. We develop a matheuristic by combining
IP, metaheuristics, and metamodels in a tailored solution outline accounting both for multi-
ple planning levels (lecture schedules, tutorial schedules, student schedules) as well as for
multiple objectives (lecture schedule quality perceived by lecturers/students, ideal number
of lectures per day and study program, avoidance of gaps between scheduled courses, avoid-
ance of days with one or none class). Speciﬁcally, we use IP models for determining concrete
lecture schedules, tutorial schedules, and student schedules. However, since there are several
objectives relevant to several stakeholders (lecturers, students, study program instructors), the
different objectives yielded by solving the IP formulations must be taken into account collec-
tively. This is achieved within a GA outline which repeatedly generates populations of lecture
conﬁgurations to be optimized into university schedules. To this end, we deﬁne a lecture con-
ﬁguration (LC) as a speciﬁcation of the number of lectures per study program and week day
(cf. also Sect.3.1). Hence, the GA serves as a means to ensure diversiﬁcation of schedules
with regards to the objectives. The input–output data collected in this process occurs in the
form of pairs consisting of a lecture conﬁguration and corresponding objective values. This
data can be used to train a metamodel—for instance an ANN—allowing to directly provide
estimates of prospective schedule objective values without having to determine all schedules
through solving the IP models. This facilitates a computationally attractive pre-selection of
123

1322
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Fig. 2 Matheuristic in the form of a metamodel-enhanced GA
lecture conﬁgurations from which only promising candidates are further considered in larger
detail. This solution outline is summarized in Fig.2.
3.1 Nomenclature and terminology
We ﬁrst present the nomenclature to ensure a common understanding of all used terms and
entities. This is also necessary since the setting differs from classical university timetabling
through the multi-level aspect. The presentation requires data on the following three aspects:
study programs, resources (rooms, time availabilities), student preferences.
study program, curriculum, student A study program consists of a set of courses,
called curriculum, and has a speciﬁc number of enrolled students. A student is enrolled
in a speciﬁc study program and has to visit all of its courses.
course, lecture, tutorial, class A course consists of at least one lecture and can have
several tutorials. Lectures are for large student groups, tutorials are for smaller student
groups such that there must be several tutorials for a course with tutorials. Class is the
collective term for lectures and tutorials. A lecture can be held either on-site (i.e., in
personal attendance) or online; for tutorials we assume only on-site classes. Every class
takes place weekly.
time slot, room-time slot, day A time slot corresponds to a speciﬁc two-hour period
and can be on each day from 08–10, 10–12, 12–14, 14–16, 16–18, or 18–20 o’clock.
A room-time slot is a pair of a speciﬁc room and a speciﬁc time slot. A room has a
maximum capacity. Online lectures take place in a virtual room with inﬁnite capacity. A
day is Mon, Tue, Wed, Thu, Fri, i.e., only week days are considered.
appointment, schedule An appointment is the booking of a class to a room-time slot.
A schedule is a set of appointments. Since every class takes place weekly, schedules are
repeated weekly.
score A score is an assessment of a time slot with a value from {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and can be
given by a student or a lecturer. Higher scores are considered better than lower scores.
(valued) lecture conﬁguration A lecture conﬁguration (LC) gives for each day and study
program the number of lectures to be attended by the students of the study program on
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1323
this day. Hence, a lecture conﬁguration deﬁnes the per-day lecture workload of a study
program on a coarse level without mentioning which lectures take place at exactly which
time slots. A valued lecture conﬁguration (VLC) is a pair consisting of an LC and its
associated objective value vector for the multiple schedule criteria.
The notion of a room-time slot is introduced for two reasons: First, it allows to specify
explicitly when a room is available which is relevant whenever a room exhibits limited
availability as is typical for large lecture halls. Second, it simpliﬁes notation in terms of
storing information about which class takes place at which time in which room. This is
useful when formulating models in later stages of the planning process using data input from
earlier stages. We remark that for tutorials we only consider on-site tutorials as—due to the
enormous number of tutorial appointments—it is neither possible nor reasonable to ensure
commuting reductions for small fractions of each study program’s students as these student
fractions are composed differently for each tutorial appointment.
3.2 IP models for lecture, tutorial, and student schedule planning
We ﬁrst explain the sequential approach to the generation of lecture schedules, tutorial sched-
ules, and individual student schedules via IP. The outline generates feasible schedules which
address the different schedule performance criteria. Due to the lack of a crisp solution con-
cept for the multi-criteria setting in the face of a large number of heterogeneous performance
criteria, we utilize the set of generated schedules as part of the population in the GA later
on described in Sect.3.3. The sequential approach of solving the IP models not only results
from the practical procedure of university timetabling, but also from several other reasons:
First, lecture appointments apply to all students and they are subject to the tightest resource
limitation in terms of available lecture halls. Secondly, there is a different granularity in
terms of modeling elements in the different models; together with different objective func-
tions coming into effect at different stages of planning this makes a combined perspective
both prohibitive and erroneous. Finally, computational efforts can be reduced substantially.
Therefore, we next present the mathematical models for the three planning steps: The lecture
schedules of study programs represent the skeleton of the university schedule and are deter-
mined ﬁrst. Tutorial plans are then generated in accordance with the previously determined
lecture schedules. Finally, individual student schedules assign each student individual tutorial
appointments.
3.2.1 Lecture schedule planning
In the ﬁrst step, lecture schedules are generated for all study programs such that there are no
lecture conﬂicts for any student. The notation for the lecture schedule planning problem LPP
is summarized in Fig.3. Depending on whether the LCs nSD = (nsd)s∈S,d∈D are passed
as parameters to the IP model in Fig.4, either model LPP with nSD = (nsd)s∈S,d∈D as
decision variables or model LPP(nSD) with nSD = (nsd)s∈S,d∈D as parameters is solved.
Three objectives are considered as performance measures for lecture schedules. First, ψl
val
gives the sum of the realized lecturer scores indicating the lecturers’ satisfaction with the
generated schedule. The second objective ψl
num serves as a normative didactic measure in
order to track that there are no workload overloads in the study programs’ curricula. Thirdly,
ψl
gap deﬁnes a performance measure penalizing empty gaps (i.e., time slots without lectures)
in the lecture schedules since such gaps unavoidably imply discontentment for all those
students for which such a hole cannot be ﬁlled with a tutorial appointment. Hence, the third
123

1324
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Fig. 3 Notation for the IP formulation of the lecture planning problem
objective indirectly measures the students’ satisfaction with the generated schedule. We use
a weighted sum of these three objectives as the objective function for solving the IP model.
The weight factors are determined through numerical experimentation such that promising
objective values are attained for all objectives. There is no further meaning of the weighting
due to the heterogeneity of the objectives involved.
Objective (1) gives the total lecturer score. Objective (2) measures the total deviation from
the ideal number of lectures per day. Observe that the absolute value function in objective
(2) is automatically converted to a linear expression in contemporary IP solvers. Objective
(3) yields the total penalty for empty time slots of speciﬁc lengths between two consecutive
lectures. Constraints (4), (5), and (6) ensure that each on-site and online lecture receives
exactly one on-site or online room-time slot, respectively. For each on-site room-time slot,
constraint (7) only allows at most one lecture to be assigned to it. Constraint (8) delimits
the capacity utilized by the students which have to attend the on-site lectures to the room’s
seating capacity. Constraint (9) prescribes that for each course at most one of its lectures takes
place on a single day. Constraints (10) and (11) deﬁne the class indicators, i.e., the occurrence
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1325
Fig. 4 IP formulation of the lecture planning problem
of an on-site lecture or online lecture for a speciﬁc study program on a speciﬁc time slot,
respectively. The class indicators are used in constraint (12) to prohibit simultaneous on-
site and online lectures for a study program. Constraint (13) deﬁnes lecture counts, i.e., the
number of lectures of a study program on a speciﬁc day. It is forbidden to exceed a maximum
allowable number of lectures per day through constraint (14). Constraint (15) (explained in
more detail below) forces the indicating variable for the series of empty slots to 1 whenever
a series of empty slots occurs. Together with objective (3) the variable is set to 0 when such a
series of empty slots does not occur. Constraint (16) (explained in more detail below) ensures
that students do not have to go twice to the campus on a day by prohibiting that an online
lecture takes place between two on-site lectures on a day.
123

1326
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
We explain constraints (15) and (16) in detail as their validity is not seen obviously.
Constraint (15) has to ensure that for each study program a block of m empty time slots in
between two on-site lectures is recognized and indicated in the z-variable such that it can
be penalized by the objective function. For simpler notation, we omit the index of the study
program and the sufﬁx indicating on-site lectures. Since zm
i is minimized in the objective
function, the constraint only has to ensure that in case of y p
i = y p
i+m+1 = 1, y p
i+1 = y p
i+m = 0
it follows that zm
i = 1, i.e., in this situation zm
i = 1 is enforced whereas in any other situation
zm
i
∈{0, 1} such that the objective will avoid zm
i =1. With y = 1 ⇔y and y = 0 ⇔¬y,
we transform this implication to disjunctive normal form using the material conditional
(y ⇒z ⇔¬y ∨z) and De Morgan’s second rule (¬(y ∧z) ⇔¬y ∨¬z):
yi ∧yi+m+1 ∧¬yi+1 ∧· · · ∧¬yi+m ⇒zm
i
⇔¬(yi ∧yi+m+1 ∧¬yi+1 ∧· · · ∧¬yi+m) ∨zm
i
⇔¬yi ∨¬yi+m+1 ∨yi+1 ∨· · · ∨yi+m ∨zm
i
⇔(1 −yi) + (1 −yi+m+1) + yi+1 + . . . + yi+m + zm
i ≥1
⇔
−1 + yi + yi+m+1 −
m

j=1
yi+ j ≤zm
i
Constraint (16) schedules an online lecture such that for each study program containing
this lecture it is the ﬁrst or last lecture of the day. This constraint is due to the requirement
that students should not have to go twice to the university campus on a day. For simpler
notation, we omit the index of the study program. Hence, the situation which is infeasible on
day d ∈D can be described as having an online lecture on time slot i ∈Id, an on-site lecture
at some earlier time slot i′ ∈Id of the same day, and another on-site lecture at some later
time slot i′′ ∈Id of the same day. Thus, for i′ < i < i′′, we have to ensure that yo
i = 1 does
not come with y p
i′ = 1 and y p
i′′ = 1. With y = 1 ⇔y and y = 0 ⇔¬y, we transform this
implication to disjunctive normal form using the material conditional (y ⇒z ⇔¬y ∨z)
and De Morgan’s second rule (¬(y ∧z) ⇔¬y ∨¬z):
yo
i ⇒¬(yp
i′ ∧yp
i′′)
⇔yo
i ⇒¬yp
i′ ∨¬yp
i′′
⇔¬yo
i ∨(¬yp
i′ ∨¬yp
i′′)
⇔¬yo
i ∨¬yp
i′ ∨¬yp
i′′
⇔(1 −yo
i ) + (1 −y p
i′ ) + (1 −y p
i′′) ≥1
We preserve the values of the lecture occurrence indicators to indicate that all students
of a study program are occupied when a lecture is scheduled for this study program. To this
end, we denote with sp′ ∈S the study program attended by student p′ ∈P with P being the
set of all students, and we set the student occupation indicator as
occp′i =

1 if y p
sp′i = 1 ∨yo
sp′i = 1 for p′ ∈P, i ∈I
0 else.
In LPP/LPP(nSD), it is tacitly assumed that a lecturer is allocated to exactly one course
such that as a result of constraint (9), it is impossible that there will be a time slot clash for
any lecturer. This is due to the practical assumption that lecture schedules are required for
large study programs in the ﬁrst place. Therefore, there is agreement that a lecturer should
not be assigned to more than one course with such large participant numbers; contrarily, the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1327
Fig. 5 Notation for the IP formulation of the tutorial planning problem
workload shall be fairly distributed among the teaching personnel. Nonetheless, the model
can be easily adapted to permit lecturers being assigned two or more courses. To this end, let
L be the set of all lecturers and let lecv ∈L be the lecturer assigned to lecture v ∈V. Then
the constraint

v∈V:
lecv=l

t∈T :
indt=i
xvt ≤1
l ∈L, i ∈I
ensures that a lecturer is not prescribed more than one lecture appointment in each time slot,
i.e., time slot clashes for lecturers are ruled out.
3.2.2 Tutorial schedule planning
Based on the student occupation indicators (occpi)p∈P,i∈I, tutorials for each course are
distributed to the available room-time slots in the step of tutorial schedule planning. The
notation for the tutorial schedule planning problem TPP is summarized in Fig.5.
Tutorials are conducted by student tutors from different semesters and different study
programs. Therefore, it can neither be anticipated nor estimated what the tutor time prefer-
ences will be. The same holds true for the individual student assessments of the different
time slots. These will also be revealed at semester weeks later. As a result, only the average
overall student satisfaction is used as a performance criterion in objective ψt
val. It utilizes
the historical average of student evaluations for tutorial appointments at the respective time
slots of the week. To this end, parameter valpi holds the historical average score of a student
p ∈P enrolled in study program sp ∈S for time slot i ∈I.
Even though tutorial appointment participants will be assigned operationally at semester
start, the planning process for tutorial appointments which is carried out tactically several
weeks before semester start must incorporate individual student enrollments to ensure feasi-
bility of the established tutorial appointments. As a result, we do not only establish a packing
of students into tutorials, but also respect the temporal aspect to ensure that no student receives
two appointments in a time slot. The IP model in Fig.6 considers in the objective (1) the
123

1328
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Fig. 6 IP formulation of the tutorial planning problem
historical average student score for the respective time slots and gives the schedule’s total
score of the students. Constraint (2) ensures that each student is assigned a tutorial time
slot for each course with tutorials. Constraint (3) states that a student can have at most one
appointment (either lecture or tutorial) in every time slot. Constraint (4) delimits the number
of participants in each tutorial appointment as required by the tutorial character of smaller
groups. Constraint (5) asserts that the number of tutorials in a speciﬁc time slot does not
exceed the number of available rooms at this time slot. Constraint (6) prescribes that the
demanded number of tutorials of each course is realized.
We assign tutorial room-time slots ¯T in accordance with the optimal solution of
TPP(occSI) as shown by the pseudo-code in Algorithm 1:
Algorithm 1 bookTutorialRoomTimeSlots
Require: values of decision variables (nci)c∈C,i∈I, set of available tutorial room-time slots T
1: ¯T = ∅
2: for all c ∈C do
3:
for all i ∈I do
4:
for j := 1 to nci do
5:
randomly select a free room-time slot t f ree ∈T \ ¯T , ¯T := ¯T ∪{t f ree}
6:
end for
7:
end for
8: end for
Ensure: set ¯T of room-time slots booked for a tutorial
The teaching personnel for the tutorials is typically composed of senior students who are
hired exclusively for the tutorials. In particular, these teaching assistants are not known at
the tactical planning stage, and they can only be assigned to the available room-time slots
operationally at the start of the semester. This can be accomplished, for instance, by solving
an assignment problem based on individual scores speciﬁed by each student assistant for
each booked tutorial room-time slot.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1329
Fig. 7 Notation for the IP formulation of the student scheduling problem
3.2.3 Student schedule planning
Finally, individual schedules are generated for all students of all study programs simultane-
ously. For planning purposes, this step is carried out several weeks in advance with simulated
student time preferences to check whether the previously determined lecture and tutorial
schedules also will allow for satisfactory performance at semester start. In practice, this step
is additionally carried out for determining actual student schedules at semester start once
students have speciﬁed their time slot preferences. The notation for the student schedule
planning problem SSP is summarized in Fig.7. The IP model in Fig.8 then determines all
individual student schedules according to speciﬁed time preferences.
The entirety of all student schedules is evaluated by three objectives. First, ψs
val gives the
total realized satisfaction of all students according to their time slot preferences. Secondly,
ψs
gap measures the total penalty incurred by empty slots. Hence, under the assumption that
empty slots are undesirable this objective serves as an indirect measure for the students’
123

1330
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Fig. 8 IP formulation of the student scheduling problem
satisfaction. Finally, ψs
idle yields the penalty for days in student schedules which exhibit one
or none classes. Hence, this objective serves as a normative didactic measure aiming at a well-
balanced distribution of classes over each day. Underutilized days are eliminated such that no
student can generate class-free days at the expense of the balance of other students’ schedules.
We use a weighted sum of these three objectives as the objective function for solving the
IP model. The weight factors are determined through numerical experimentation such that
promising objective values are attained for all objectives. There is no further meaning of the
weighting due to the heterogeneity of the objectives involved.
Objective (1) gives the total score of the individual student schedules. Objective (2) yields
the total penalty for empty time slots of speciﬁc lengths between two consecutive appoint-
ments. Objective (3) provides the total penalty for underutilized days. Constraint (4) assigns
exactly one of the available room-time slots for tutorials to a student for every course with a
tutorial. Constraint (5) deﬁnes the appointment indicator, i.e., the occurrence of a lecture or
tutorial appointment for a speciﬁc student on a speciﬁc time slot. Constraint (6) delimits the
number of participants in each tutorial appointment to the minimum of the available room
capacity and the maximum number of allowed participants. Constraint (7) deﬁnes the class
count, i.e., the number of lectures and tutorials of a student on a speciﬁc day. Constraint
(8) provides a lower bound on the class count. Together with objective (3) the lower bound
depends on whether one or none class is scheduled for a student on a speciﬁc day in which
case the lower bound would be diminished. Constraint (9) forces the indicating variable for
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1331
the series of empty slots to 1 whenever a series of empty slots occurs. Together with objective
(3) the variable is set to 0 when such a series of empty slots does not occur.
The three-step procedure for sequentially determining lecture schedules, tutorial sched-
ules, and individual student schedules is subsequently used as part of the GA outline. Hence,
the models are utilized as part of a matheuristic.
3.3 GA for university schedule optimization
To cope with the heterogeneity in the objectives resulting from the heterogeneity of stake-
holders involved in multi-level university timetabling, we develop a GA solution outline
which builds upon the IP formulations derived in Sect.3.2 and hence represents a matheuris-
tic. Further, we enhance the GA with a metamodel-based search phase. However, for a better
understanding, the integration of the metamodel into the GA will be explained afterward in
Sect.3.4.
3.3.1 Chromosome design
While a solution to multi-level university timetabling ultimately consists of a (large) set
of schedules on every planning level (lectures, tutorials, individual schedules), representing
it in such detail would render it useless in terms of processing it in a GA. Hence, due to
the computationally intractable representation of a solution of to model SSP, we employ a
chromosome representation which addresses the foundational solution of model LPP as it
lays the ground for both the results attainable from TPP and SSP. We choose an encoding
scheme based on the LCs nSD := (nsd)s∈S,d∈D holding the number of lectures of study
program s ∈S on day d ∈D. Hence, we employ value encoding with nsd ∈N0 for
s ∈S, d ∈D. Together with the attractive computational times for solving the models LPP
and TPP, this coarse level of detail of this chromosome representation complies with the
practical goal of obtaining a diverse selection of university timetables. This is due to the fact
that timetables are developed not out of an existing detailed solution, but rather out of a coarse
timetable frame only speciﬁed by nSD without prescribing course assignments prematurely.
For a given LC, the concrete lecture, tutorial, and student schedules can then be constructed
by solving the corresponding IP formulations from Sect.3.2.
3.3.2 Fitness evaluation
Recalling the seven objective functions (lecturer score ψl
val, ideal lecture number ψl
num,
gap-freeness ψl
gap, average student score ψt
val, student score ψs
val, gap-freeness ψs
gap, idle-
freeness ψl
idle), we recognize that we can get rid of ψl
gap (because we have ψs
gap) and of ψt
val
(because we have ψs
val). Hence,  = (ψl
val, ψl
num, ψs
val, ψs
gap, ψl
idle) must be organized
by a ﬁtness consideration for evaluating the quality of the associated LC nSD. We proceed
according to the non-dominated sorting algorithm NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002). In particular,
we do not compute an individual ﬁtness value for each individual, but we compare individuals
with each other. Comparison is based on the concepts of the nondomination rank (N DR)
and the crowding distance (C D). The N DR tells us the level of nondominatedness of the
objective vector . It is deﬁned recursively: We have N DR() = 0 if there is no other
objective vector ′ ̸=  which dominates ; we have N DR() = 1 if there is no other
objective vector ′ ̸=  which dominates  apart from those with N DR(′) = 0; we
have N DR() = 2 if there is no other objective vector ′ ̸=  which dominates 
123

1332
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
apart from those with N DR(′) ∈{0, 1}. To distinguish between two objective vectors
, ′ with N DR() = N DR(′), the crowding distances C D() and C D(′) serve
as a diversiﬁcation-fostering tie-breaker telling us how crowded the regions of  and ′
are, respectively. A smaller crowding distance means that the region is more crowded as
neighboring individuals are closer. For the purpose of ensuring diversiﬁcation, hence, a larger
crowding distance is preferred. C D() is computed as the sum of the objective-speciﬁc C Ds.
The objective-speciﬁc C D is ∞if  exhibits the smallest or largest value for the considered
objective; otherwise, the objective-speciﬁc C D amounts to the absolute distance between the
two adjacent objective values divided by the absolute difference between smallest and largest
value of the considered objective (for the purpose of normalization). The pseudo-code can
be found in the paper introducing NSGA-II (Deb et al., 2002).
3.3.3 Initial population
We ﬁnd the ﬁrst LC by solving problem LPP from Sect.3.2.1 with nSD as decision variables.
To obtain a large pool of LCs exhibiting a high degree of diversity we then impose a random
drawing of the elements of nSD for a sufﬁcient number of times. Since there are six time
slots per day and no day shall have no lecture, every element nsd for s ∈S, d ∈D is a
random integer in {1, . . . , 6} such that 
d∈D nsd equals to total number of lectures in the
curriculum of study program s ∈S. The initial population is then sent out as the initial mating
pool out of which a parent generation is transferred to an offspring generation. Observe that
each LC nSD is turned into a VLC by determining the objective values which result from
successively solving the models LPP(nSD), TPP(occSI), and SSP(valPI, occPI) and
associating them with nSD in a pair (nSD, ψ).
3.3.4 Genetic operators
Using the current population as a mating pool, solution selection is carried out to determine
out of which LCs an offspring chromosome can be generated through recombination and
mutation. We generate a ﬁxed number of both recombined and mutated individuals. The new
population then corresponds to the offspring generated from the parent generation.
selection Due to the large number of performance measures and different stakeholders,
there is a lack of a natural notion of optimality. Hence, survival is possible for all kinds
of VLCs and there is low selection pressure within the practical context. Nonetheless, we
explicitly take into account all objectives simultaneously as suggested by the NSGA-II
algorithm (Deb et al., 2002) and explained in Sect.3.3.2. To this end, we ﬁrst induce
a sorting of all individuals of the current population using the N DR. To distinguish
between individuals with equal N DR, we utilize the C D. Individuals admissible for
recombination and mutation are then determined as winners of a binary tournament
selection: Individuals with lower N DR win against individuals with higher N DR; in
case of a tie, the individual with larger C D is selected. Clearly, various alternatives to
this selection strategy are available such as rank selection, or canonical selection.
recombination Two parents are recombined into a single offspring by randomly choosing
two individuals n1
SD, n2
SD from the mating pool and randomly choosing for each study
program s ∈S whether the corresponding LC components for all d ∈D come from n1
SD
or from n2
SD. This corresponds to an inter-LC move as shown in the upper part of Fig.9.
mutation An individual from the parent generation is mutated by randomly selecting over
all study programs a ﬁxed number of pairing days to be slightly changed in their number
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1333
Fig. 9 Illustration of recombination and mutation operators
of lectures taking place on these days. For each pairing then the number of lectures on
the ﬁrst day is increased by one, whereas it is decreased by one for the second day. The
resulting mutated individual is considered for further consideration only if the number
of lectures per day is not zero. This corresponds to an intra-LC move as shown in the
lower part of Fig.9.
The GA is summarized in Algorithm 2. The matheuristic foundation of the algorithm
is embodied through subroutine determineSchedules in Algorithm 3 for determin-
ing lecture, tutorial and student schedules using the IP models from Sect.3.2. The use of
the metamodel subroutine employMetamodel from Algorithm 4 is explained next. We
ﬁnally remark that for the determination of the (non-) dominance property of an LC nSD in
line 19 of Algorithm 2, we consider  = (ψl
val, ψs
val, ψl
num, ψs
gap, ψs
idle) as the vector of
relevant performance measures. This is due to ψt
val and ψl
gap both representing only interim
performance measures as already explained in Sect.3.3.2.
3.4 ANN for estimating university schedule performance
The subroutine employMetamodel from Algorithm 4 enhances the GA in Algorithm 2
by the possibility to pre-examine a large number of additional LCs in an approximate fashion
so as to remove those LCs exhibiting poor approximate performance. Hence, we employ the
ANN as a metamodel for the purpose of functional regression in order to eliminate LCs from
further consideration when they are expected to yield poor performance as suggested by the
ANN metamodel at an early stage. Figure10 illustrates the role of such a metamodel in terms
of bypassing the necessity of directly solving the IP formulations to obtain exact values of
the performance measures. To this end, we utilize the ANN as a metamodel for estimating the
performance measures resulting from a randomly drawn LC nSD. For a large number of such
LCs, approximate schedule performance is obtained by evaluating the metamodel function.
When inferior approximate schedule quality is identiﬁed for an LC from the computation-
ally cheap ANN function evaluation, then this LC is excluded from further consideration.
Otherwise the LC is turned into a VLC by running the computationally expensive subroutine
determineSchedules (nSD).
We next explain for a LC how to decide upon its acceptance for further consideration
or its rejection due to estimated inferiority To this end, recall that ψl
val and ψs
val are to be
maximized, whereas ψl
num, ψs
gap, and ψl
idle are to be minimized. Moreover, let vall, vals,
numl, gaps, and idlel be the individually best objective values encountered so far.
123

1334
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Algorithm 2 metamodelEnhancedGeneticAlgorithm
Require: number of iterations itmax, population size pop, parent generation population size sel, number of
individuals rec/mut created by recombination/mutation, number of LCs batch evaluated via metamodel
1: (nSD, ψ) :=determineSchedules(null), N := {nSD}, N val := {(nSD, ψ)}
2: for i := 1 to pop −1 do
3:
draw sample nSD
4:
(nSD, ψ) :=determineSchedules(nSD), N := N ∪{nSD}, N val := N val ∪{(nSD, ψ)}
5: end for
6: N pop := N
7: while it ≤itmax do
8:
select sel individuals from N pop and store them in N sel
9:
create rec individuals through recombination from N sel and store them in N rec
10:
create mut individuals through mutation from N sel and store them in N mut
11:
N pop := N rec ∪N mut
12:
for all nSD ∈N pop do
13:
(nSD, ψ) :=determineSchedules(nSD), N := N ∪{nSD}, N val := N val∪{(nSD, ψ)}
14:
end for
15:
(N meta, N, N val) :=employMetamodel(batch, N, N val), N pop := N pop ∪N meta
16:
select max{pop −|N pop|, 0} individuals from N and append them to N pop
17:
it := it + 1
18: end while
19: select n∗
SD ∈N ∗
SD := {nSD ∈N | nSD is non-dominated in N} with most favorable vector of
objective values and determine schedules π∗using determineSchedules(n∗
SD)
Ensure: most favorable university schedule π∗
Algorithm 3 determineSchedules
Require: LC nSD = (nsd)s∈S,d∈D
1: if nSD =null then
2:
determine lecture plan πl and performance ψl by solving LPP
3:
nSD := values of decision variables (nsd)s∈S,d∈D
4: else
5:
determine lecture plan πl and performance ψl by solving LPP(nSD)
6: end if
7: calculate occSI = (occsi)s∈S,i∈I for s ∈S, i ∈I from πl
8: determine tutorial plan πt(occSI) and performance ψt by solving TPP(occSI)
9: calculate occPI = (occpi)p∈P,i∈I for p ∈P, i ∈I from πt
10: draw sample valPI = (valpi)p∈P,i∈I for p ∈P, i ∈I of student time preferences
11: determine
students
scheduling
plan
πs(occPI, valPI)
and
performance
ψs
by
solving
SSP(valPI, occPI)
Ensure: VLC (nSD, ψ) with university schedule performance ψ = (ψl, ψt, ψs)
We ﬁrst deﬁne the number of objective quality violations due to exceeding a 50 % safety
margin as
nviol( ˆ) =1[−∞,0.5vall]( ˆψl
val) + 1[−∞,0.5vals]( ˆψs
val)+
1[1.5numl,∞]( ˆψl
num) + 1[1.5gaps,∞]( ˆψs
gap) + 1[1.5idles,∞]( ˆψs
idle).
Then the indicator for acceptance is deﬁned as follows:
accept( ˆ) :=

1 nviol( ˆ) ≤violmax
0 else
(F1)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1335
Algorithm 4 employMetamodel
Require: number of LCs batch to be retrieved via metamodel, set of LCs N, set of VLCs N val, maximum
number max It of candidate examinations
1: train AN N with N val
2: N meta := ∅, ct = 0
3: while |N meta| < batch and ct < max It do
4:
draw sample nSD, ct = ct + 1
5:
if accept(AN N(nSD):= ˆψ = ( ˆψl, ˆψt, ˆψs))) ̸= 0 then
6:
N meta := N meta ∪{nSD}
7:
(nSD, ψ) :=determineSchedules(nSD), N := N ∪{nSD}, N val := N val ∪{(nSD, ψ)}
8:
end if
9: end while
Ensure: triple (N meta, N, N val) of LCs N meta, LCs N, related VLCs N val
Fig. 10 University timetabling workﬂow a without and b with metamodel use for determining the estimated
quality of a lecture conﬁguration schedule
Hence, after valuation with the estimated objective function outcomes, a LC is only further
considered when all but at most violmax objective estimates are within a 50 % margin relative
to the best found individual objectives so far. Since we have ﬁve objectives, violmax ∈{2, 3}
is reasonable. Observe that the relatively large safety margin of 50 % for each objective in
the ﬁtness function deﬁnition also intends to limit the risk for falsely excluding LCs which
would be worthwhile for future consideration.
We next describe the elements comprising the ANN as used in the GA for university
timetabling. The network function of the ANN is updated through updating its weights with
every call of employMetamodel. The ANN structure is schematically depicted in Fig.11.
inputs (independent variables) components of LC nSD = (nsd)s∈S,d∈D, i.e., the num-
ber of input neurons is |S| · |D| = 5 · |S|
123

1336
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Fig. 11 ANN as a metamodel for functional regression in university timetabling
outputs (target variables) predictions ˆ = ( ˆψl
val, ˆψs
val, ˆψl
num, ˆψs
gap, ˆψs
idle) for objec-
tive values used in the ﬁtness function evaluation, i.e., the number of output neurons is
5.
data basis VLCs stored in N val
We conclude that the developed solution procedure is a matheuristic building upon an
overarching GA which represents solutions in the form of LCs. It repeatedly solves IP mod-
els to obtain lecture schedules, tutorial schedules, and individual student schedules, and
to transform the LCs into VLCs. The GA is augmented by the possibility to repetitively
train and utilize an ANN as a metamodel for estimating schedule performance at low com-
putational costs extending the range of LCs to be investigated. The method outputs a set
of non-dominated LCs which can be further processed by the administrative personnel for
selecting the most suitable LC according to the institution’s policy on assessing schedule
quality.
4 Computational experiments
We conduct a series of experiments to evaluate the developed outline in terms of tracing
the contributions of its constituent elements towards providing university schedules on all
three planning levels (lectures, tutorials, individual student schedules). To ensure that the
method can be utilized in practice by administrative timetabling personnel, we do not impose
advanced computing requirements: Computational experiments are performed on a personal
computer with Intel Core 3.2 GHz processor and 16 GB RAM under Microsoft Windows
10 (64-bit). Algorithms are coded in Python 3.8; IP models are coded in Python using the
docplex modeling library and solved using the IBM ILOG CPLEX 20.1.0 solver; ANNs
are implemented as multi-layer perceptron regressors using Python’s scikit-learn library for
machine learning.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1337
4.1 Instances
Computational tests are performed over 21 instances whereof one instance is a real-world
instance and the remaining 20 instances are generated artiﬁcially to examine the applicability
and limitations for different instance sizes.
4.1.1 Real-world instance
Originating from the practical task of timetabling arising at the Department of Economics and
Management at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology in Germany, we consider the following
real-world instance as a base case:
• 4 study programs with 452, 122, 413, 102 students, respectively, i.e., 1089 students
• study program curricula are composed of 22 courses requiring 41 lecture classes
• 9 courses offer tutorials requiring 170 tutorial classes
• 30 time slots are available with 6 time slots on each of the 5 week days
• 106 room-time slots for lectures are available with capacities between 105 and 734 seats;
only 30 room-time slots can accommodate more than 450 students, i.e., rooms with
enough capacity represent a bottleneck resource
• 279 room-time slots for tutorials are available with capacities between 24 and 30 seats;
the upper bound of 30 is a requirement on the maximum tutorial class size
• lecturers and students provide preferences for each time slot as a score from {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
historical records on student preferences for each time slot are used for tutorial planning
4.1.2 Generated instances
To solidify the computational analysis, we develop an instance generator producing randomly
drawn data instances upon providing the generator with the number |S| ∈{2, 4, 6, 8} of study
programs and the average number avgstuds ∈{50, 100, 200, 400, 800} of students in each
study program as constituting instance data components. These quantities allow us to generate
4 · 5 = 20 diverse and realistic instances of varying size under the following assumptions
ensuring schedule feasibility on all planning levels:
• student scores for time slots follow a normal distribution with mean 2.5 and standard
deviation 0.25; ﬁrst and last time slots of a day exhibit a mean of 2.0
• the number of students in a study program is drawn from a normal distribution with mean
avgstuds and standard deviation 0.25 · avgstuds and rounded to the next integer
• the number of lecture rooms is 2·|S|; the number of time slots per room is randomly drawn
from {10, 11, . . . , 15}; the capacity of each room is drawn as a uniformly distributed value
in the range of the minimum of the number of students in a study program and the sum
of the two largest number of students in a study program
• the number of tutorial rooms is 8 · |S| · avgstuds
50
; the number of time slots per room is
randomly drawn from {12, 13, . . . , 18}; the capacity of each room is 30
• the number of courses is ⌈4.5 · |S|⌉; the number of online courses is randomly drawn
from {1, 2, . . . , |S|}; all courses have 2 lectures per week except for ⌈|S|
2 ⌉courses having
1 lecture per week and ⌈|S|
2 ⌉courses having 3 lectures per week
• each study program receives six randomly drawn courses; re-distributions are executed
in case that a course initially receives no study program; in the latter case study programs
are shifted to empty courses from courses with more than two study programs
123

1338
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
• each study program offers tutorials in 3 courses; the number of tutorials offered for each
course c is 15 · |Sc| · avgstuds
50
4.2 Algorithmic settings
Following the multi-objective selection strategy prescribed by NSGA-II, we employ the GA
in Algorithm 2 from Sect.3.3 with itmax = 10 iterations, initial population size pop = 25,
parent generation population size sel = 10, rec = 5 and mut = 5 individuals created by
recombination and mutation, respectively, and batch = 10 LCs evaluated via ANN meta-
model. For ANN-related probing of LCs, we use violmax = 2 in the acceptance indicator
function accept( ˆ) (cf. Equation (F1) in Sect.3.3.2) as the maximum number of objec-
tives allowed to lie outside the 50 % performance guarantee. For solving the IP models
LPP/LPP(nSD), TPP(occSI), and SSP(valPI, occPI), we employ the default relative
MIP gap tolerance of the IBM ILOG CPLEX 20.1.0 solver amounting to 0.0001.
4.3 Results
We subsequently present the computational results by addressing the following topics of
evaluation: schedule quality, number of non-dominated LCs and their accrual over the course
of the algorithm, and computational times. Results are discussed jointly for the real world
instance and the randomly generated instances, i.e., there is no need to differentiate the
ﬁndings based on the instances’ origins. Hence, we ﬁnd that the hypothetical instances exhibit
realistic behavior and contribute to a comprehensive view required for the overall analysis
of the methodology’s performance.
4.3.1 Schedule quality
We ﬁrst evaluate the schedule quality related to the schedules of non-dominated LCs with
respect to both score-related and curriculum-related statistics. Figure12 illustrates the score-
related statistics for lecturers (top) and students (bottom), respectively. With a maximum score
of 5, both lecturer and student scores are highly satisfying. In particular, we see that in the real
world instance score values consistently larger than 4 are obtained, whereas in the artiﬁcial
instances the value is between 3 and 4. This points to the fact that in practice both lecturers
and students exhibit ﬂexibility in terms of a rather generous rating of time slots. We do not
observe a substantial difference or tendency in terms of an additional beneﬁt of enhancing
the GA through ANN metamodels. However, as will be seen in Sect.4.3.2, the number of
non-dominated LCs is increased signiﬁcantly through employing ANN metamodels.
Figure13 illustrates the curriculum-related statistics for the deviation from the ideal num-
ber of lectures (top), empty time slots (bottom), and idle days (bottom), respectively. Observe
that these values are normalized to a per study program and per student perspective, respec-
tively. Concerning the number of deviations from the ideal number of 2 lectures per day, we
remark that for a study program with an uneven number of lectures per week an unavoidable
contribution of 1 to the objective value occurs. Hence, the results seen at the top of the ﬁg-
ure are consistently very satisfying in terms of scheduling the desirable amount of lectures
on nearly every day. In case of high number of students per study program, the number of
deviations from the ideal number rises slightly due to limited availability of large lecture
halls of sufﬁcient capacity. Also the number of empty slots hovering around the value of 2 is
very tolerable in terms of schedule quality as perceived individually. Finally, the number of
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1339
Fig. 12 Statistics for lecturer score (top), student score (bottom) for non-dominated LCs
days with at most one class is consistently below 0.5 per student. Thus, workload is balanced
homogeneously over the week for the overwhelming majority of students.
From the evaluation of the individual performance measures for obtained schedules on
the lecture, tutorial, and individual student level, we conclude that schedule quality related
to non-dominated LCs is very high and points towards a large degree of reliability in terms
of serving both individual as well as normative requirements on university schedules. We
also remark that the threshold requirement criterion of eliminating all VLCs with inferior
performance in more than violmax objectives successfully leads to relatively narrow boxplots
indicating that non-dominated LCs which may have an unacceptable objective in one of the
objectives are safely eliminated from further consideration.
4.3.2 Number of non-dominated LCs and their accrual over the course of the algorithm
As shown by the blue bars in comparison to the red bars in the top of Fig.14, both with
and without the use of an ANN metamodel, the number of obtained non-dominated LCs
is sufﬁciently high to allow administrative personnel to ﬁnd a suitable set of lecture and
tutorial schedules which will serve as the basis for the student schedules at semester start.
With an average of 27 % of non-dominated LCs, on average the ratio between dominated
and non-dominated LCs is approximately 3:1. In addition to the non-dominated schedules
123

1340
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Fig. 13 Statistics for deviation from ideal number of lectures per study program (top), number of empty time
slots per student (middle), number of days with at most one class per student (bottom) for non-dominated LCs
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1341
generatedovertheGAiterations,theutilizationoftheANNmetamodelgeneratesasigniﬁcant
number of additional non-dominated LCs which may serve as candidates for the university
schedule as displayed in the middle of Fig.14. A third place of origin lies in the initial
population generation of the GA albeit to a much smaller extent. Finally, from the bottom
of Fig.14, we see that non-dominated LCs are found consistently over all iterations. When
no ANN metamodel is employed, the share of non-dominated LCs emanating from the
initial population is larger than in case of the ANN metamodel utilization. Therefore, it is
an advantage of the ANN metamodel approach to produce non-dominated LCs at a rather
constant rate over the iterations depending on the number batch of promising LCs to be
retrieved. As a consequence, once data from the GA is available, an ANN can be trained
and subsequently used as the basis for generating LCs. The advantage of ANNs is that their
(computationally cheap) evaluation gives a ﬁrst hint towards an LC’s potential with respect
to prospectively creating high quality schedules. Overall, once enough data on the relation
between LCs and their respective valuations is learned by the ANN, this grants the option
for a signiﬁcant reduction of computational times required for suggesting promising LC
candidates as compared to the rather random proposals suggested via GA recombination.
4.3.3 Computational times
SolvingmodelLPP/LPP(nSD)takeslessthantwosecondsevenforthemostdifﬁcultcaseof
8 study programs with 800 students per study program. Therefore, we restrict our attention
to the computational times required for solving TPP(occSI) and SSP(valPI, occPI),
respectively. We recall that models are solved several hundreds of times during GA execution
andduringLCvaluationwhenanLChasbeenidentiﬁedaspromisingbytheANNmetamodel.
The top of Fig.15 demonstrates that solution times required for solving a single IP model
instance are fully acceptable for up to 200 students enrolled per study program irrespective of
the number of study programs. However, results for 400 and especially 800 students in a study
program then clearly demonstrate the computational limitations of the matheuristic outline.
WhileeveryinstanceofTPP(occSI)caneasilybesolvedinseveralsecondsandinallcasesin
less than 45s on average, the time required to solve SSP(valPI, occPI) climbs dramatically
for too large number of students. The limitation of the matheuristic for large problem sizes
follows from the bottleneck component of having to solve SSP(valPI, occPI) to obtain
hundreds of individual student schedules. This is conﬁrmed by the related cumulated runtime
at the bottom of Fig.15. For 8 study programs and 800 students, i.e., the largest setting,
computational time amounts to approximately 17 hours when averaged over the runs with
and without ANN support, respectively, due to nearly 400s on average required for solving
one instance of SSP(valPI, occPI). While this can be considered acceptable for a problem
tobesolvedonceineverysemester,italsosuggeststhatcomputationaltimesformorethan800
students will be prohibitive. We conclude that for student numbers in these regions, (tailored)
heuristic or metaheuristic approaches are needed in order to obtain solutions especially for
problem SSP(valPI, occPI) more efﬁciently.
5 Key ﬁndings for best practices
The process of developing the metamodel-enhanced multi-level university timetabling
approach in Sect.3 and applying it to a range of settings in the computational experiments
in Sect.4 has yielded several insights of both technical and practical nature. We gather these
123

1342
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Fig. 14 Number of non-dominated and dominated LCs (top), accrual of non-dominated LCs over algorithm
parts (middle), accrual of non-dominated LCs over iterations (bottom)
learnings to promote the establishment of best practices for multi-level university timetabling.
The ﬁndings may help both university timetabling personnel when confronted with speciﬁc
issues arising at the juncture between lecture, tutorial, and student schedule planning as well
as academic researchers when seeking for advice on existing research directions and infor-
mation on methodological approaches along with their beneﬁts, burdens, and performances.
Nomenclature and terminology are crucial to all communications between stakeholders
and represent a fundamental precondition for devising models and solution methods for
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1343
Fig. 15 Average solution times per IP model instance (top) and over all IP model instances (bottom) in seconds
required by CPLEX solver
university timetabling. Likewise, high schedule quality can only be reached when schedule
performance criteria and mandatory normative didactic schedule properties are precisely
speciﬁed.
The structured approach of solving problems at different planning levels allows to accu-
mulate improvements in schedule quality consistently over these levels. The multi-level
approach also yields insight into more detailed causes and effects relations as they can be
traced to separate planning stages. Nonetheless, each one of the models LPP, TPP, SSP
can also be used as a standalone model serving a speciﬁc purpose, e.g., LPP establishes
skeleton schedules whereas SSP provides customized individual schedules. From an opti-
mization perspective, the schedules obtained by the matheuristic realize the potential intrinsic
to the combinatorial nature prevalent at each level. Clearly deﬁning the interfaces between
the models then paves the way for an overall architecture of university scheduling. Such an
architecture bears the advantage that it can be tailored towards needs and requirements of the
institution’s scheduling process. Hence, it fosters a profound comprehension of the overall
task and the interconnectedness of subtasks within a seamless outline.
The main function of the GA lies in the generation of a sufﬁcient number of non-dominated
schedule candidates to be handed over to the scheduling personnel’s discretion. Hence, the
GA-based determination of schedules within a pool of solution candidates allows to maintain
a selection of diverse schedules with respect to the different performance measures resulting
from the heterogeneity of stakeholders. In particular, this results in a GA implementation
exhibiting low selection pressure favoring a balance between objectives. Utilizing the ANN
123

1344
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
is strongly supportive to the function of gathering non-dominated schedules as it steadily
produces them over the course of the GA iterations.
As seen from the development process of the models, keeping them open and adaptable to
changes in circumstances (e.g., different classroom formats) or requirements (e.g., additional
performancecriteria)islikelytobebeneﬁcialinthefuture.Aslearnedduringmodelevolution,
a systematic way to incorporate additional constraints lies in translating them into logical
expressions and transforming these into disjunctive normal form. Careful attention should be
given to the modeling of real world bottleneck resources. In our institution, this concerned
the scarcity of large lecture rooms; in other cases it may be another factor (e.g., lecturer
availability) which must be speciﬁcally addressed in modeling.
NP-hardness becomes an issue for model SSP in case of more than 500 students.
Research on relieving this computational burden is needed: Developing and maintaining
ANN metamodels represents a promising direction, but requires a more systematic analysis
and maintenance of a larger data basis to be used reliably. Nonetheless, even if predicting
performance criteria received upon solving SSP could be approximated by an ANN with
high precision, SSP still must be solved for the ﬁnal student schedules. Hence, also tailored
(meta-) heuristic methods are required. Overall, employing model SSP leads to high accep-
tance of the overall approach, since students actively participate in the schedule generation
process by submitting their preferences for tutorial appointments.
Results obtained for the real world instance are consistently competitive with results from
hypothetical instances. From the convincing quality of the objective values, we conclude
that in comparison to manually planned schedules, there is wide room for improvement
through customization of individual schedules. Clearly, these improvements are assembled
from improvements on all levels of the planning process and ultimately evoked by the use
combinatorial optimization methods.
6 Conclusion and outlook
With the goal of providing a practically viable methodology for university timetabling, we
have devised a matheuristic allowing for a multi-criteria consideration in the multi-level
generation of schedules for lectures, tutorials, and individual students. The matheuristic is
enhanced by an ANN metamodel such that exact analysis efforts—as encountered when solv-
ing IP models—can be reduced while still facilitating the analysis of wide portions of the
LC search space. The developed methodology is capable of keeping up with contemporary
needs of academic institutions such as offering digital courses or using large lecture halls
efﬁciently as well as granting individual high-quality schedules to students on a customized
basis. The outline is designed hierarchically and segregates the planning process into lec-
ture planning, schedule planning, and individual student schedule planning. The division
of planning onto several levels yields the opportunity to include different schedule perfor-
mance measures relevant to the different stakeholders involved in university timetabling,
namely students, lecturers, and administrative personnel responsible for didactic adequacy
of established schedules. Hence, we comprehensively account for both score-related and
curriculum-related objectives in multi-level multi-criteria university scheduling. Moreover,
tackling a multi-criteria setting through a GA which carries out the selection of individuals
according to different objectives represents a way of ensuring diversiﬁcation in terms of
viewing schedule performance from several perspectives. Nonetheless, the complexity of the
problem setting requires a hierarchical outline which leaves several degrees of freedom to
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1345
the decision maker, i.e., the ﬁnal adoption of the university schedule to be realized remains
in the hands of the decision maker’s assessment of the resulting vector of objective values.
Several avenues for future research are identiﬁed: First, like for all GA implementations,
the method’s sensitivity to prescribed deﬁnitions (e.g., numerical parameters, ﬁtness function,
or genetic operators) is of interest when this would lead to qualitatively different solutions.
Therefore, further experimentation is required. Second, enhancing the approximation quality
of the ANN metamodel over time with restricted effort for incorporating training and testing
data represents another issue worthwhile of investigation. This could be achieved through
integrating the method into the practical planning environment such that the data basis auto-
matically grows from semester to semester. Third, the dependency on solution times for the
IP models currently represents a computational bottleneck and hence may serve a starting
point for extending the proposed methodology by metaheuristic solution methods for the
IP model SSP(valPI, occPI). This would be needed to facilitate a more efﬁcient scan of
broader search regions. Finally, with respect to practical applicability, a resolution must be
made on how to cope with multiple performance criteria. In this respect, being able to pro-
cess multi-criteria information in a practically meaningful way poses another challenge for
which different solution concepts from multi-criteria optimization must be compared to each
other in the setting of university scheduling. In particular, resolving the trade-offs between
several schedule criteria certainly poses a challenge which must be addressed in very close
collaboration with experienced university timetabling personnel.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest which is relevant to the content
of this article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdullah, S. , Turabieh, H. , McCollum, B. , & McMullan, P. (2010). A multi-objective post enrolment course
timetabling problem: A new case study. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE congress on evolutionary
computation (pp. 1–7).
Akkan, C. , & Gülcü, A. (2018). A bi-criteria hybrid genetic algorithm with robustness objective for the course
timetabling problem. Computers and Operations Research, 9022–9032.
Akkan, C., Gülcü, A., & Ku¸s, Z. (2022). Bi-criteria simulated annealing for the curriculum-based course
timetabling problem with robustness approximation. Journal of Scheduling, 25(4), 477–501.
Aubin, J., & Ferland, J. A. (1989). A large scale timetabling problem. Computers and Operations Research,
16(1), 67–77.
Babaei, H. , Karimpour, J. , & Hadidi, A. (2015). A survey of approaches for university course timetabling
problem. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 8643–8659.
Banks, D. , Beek, P. V. , & Meisels, A. (1998). A heuristic incremental modeling approach to course timetabling,
pp. 16–29.
123

1346
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Barnhart, C., Bertsimas, D., Delarue, A., & Yan, J. (2022). Course scheduling under sudden scarcity: Appli-
cations to pandemic planning. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 24(2), 727–745.
Bettinelli, A. , Cacchiani, V. , Roberti, R. , & Toth, P. (2015). An overview of curriculum-based course
timetabling. TOP, 23(2), 313–349.
Bowman, R. A. (2021). Developing optimal student plans of study. INFORMS Journal on Applied Analytics,
51(6), 409–421.
Burke, E. K., Jackson, K., Kingston, J. H., & Weare, R. (1997). Automated university timetabling: The state
of the art. The Computer Journal, 40(9), 565–571.
Burke, E. K., Mareˇcek, J., Parkes, A. J., & Rudová, H. (2010). Decomposition, reformulation, and diving in
university course timetabling. Computers and Operations Research, 37(3), 582–597.
Burke, E. K., & Petrovic, S. (2002). Recent research directions in automated timetabling. European Journal
of Operational Research, 140(2), 266–280.
Burke, E. K. , Silva, J. , & Soubeiga, E. (2005). Multi-objective hyper-heuristic approaches for space allocation
and timetabling. In Metaheuristics: Progress as real problem solvers (pp. 129–158). Springer.
Cambazard, H., Hebrard, E., O’Sullivan, B., & Papadopoulos, A. (2012). Local search and constraint program-
ming for the post enrolment-based course timetabling problem. Annals of Operations Research, 194(1),
111–135.
Carrasco, M. P. , & Pato, M. V. (2000). A multiobjective genetic algorithm for the class/teacher timetabling
problem. In Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on the practice and theory of automated
timetabling, pp. 3–17.
Carter, M. W. (2000). A comprehensive course timetabling and student scheduling system at the University of
Waterloo. In International conference on the practice and theory of automated timetabling, pp. 64–82.
Carter, M. W. , & Laporte, G. (1997). Recent developments in practical course timetabling. In Proceedings of
the 2nd international conference on the practice and theory of automated timetabling, pp. 3–19.
Ceschia, S., Di Gaspero, L., & Schaerf, A. (2012). Design, engineering, and experimental analysis of a simu-
lated annealing approach to the post-enrolment course timetabling problem. Computers and Operations
Research, 39(7), 1615–1624.
Daskalaki, S., & Birbas, T. (2005). Efﬁcient solutions for a university timetabling problem through integer
programming. European Journal of Operational Research, 160(1), 106–120.
Daskalaki, S., Birbas, T., & Housos, E. (2004). An integer programming formulation for a case study in
university timetabling. European Journal of Operational Research, 153(1), 117–135.
Datta, D. , Deb, K. , & Fonseca, C. M. (2007). Multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for university class
timetabling problem. In Evolutionary scheduling (pp. 197–236). Springer.
Datta, D., Fonseca, C. M., & Deb, K. (2008). A multi-objective evolutionary algorithm to exploit the similarities
of resource allocation problems. Journal of Scheduling, 11(6), 405–419.
Deb, K., Pratap, A., Agarwal, S., & Meyarivan, T. (2002). A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm:
Nsga-II. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 6(2), 182–197.
De Causmaecker, P., Demeester, P., & Berghe, G. V. (2009). A decomposed metaheuristic approach for a real-
world university timetabling problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 195(1), 307–318.
de Werra, D. (1985). An introduction to timetabling. European Journal of Operational Research, 19(2), 151–
162.
Di Gaspero, L. , McCollum, B. , & Schaerf, A. (2007). The second International Timetabling Competition (ITC-
2007): Curriculum-based course timetabling (track 3) (Tech. Rep.). Udine, Italy: DIEGM, University of
Udine.
Ferland, J. A., & Roy, S. (1985). Timetabling problem for university as assignment of activities to resources.
Computers and Operations Research, 12(2), 207–218.
Goh, S. L., Kendall, G., & Sabar, N. R. (2017). Improved local search approaches to solve the post-enrolment
course timetabling problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 261(1), 17–29.
Goh, S. L., Kendall, G., & Sabar, N. R. (2019). Simulated annealing with improved reheating and learning
for the post enrolment course timetabling problem. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 70(6),
873–888.
Goh, S. L., Kendall, G., Sabar, N. R., & Abdullah, S. (2020). An effective hybrid local search approach for
the post-enrolment course timetabling problem. Opsearch, 57(4), 1131–1163.
Holm, D., Mikkelsen, R., Sørensen, M., & Stidsen, T. (2022). A graph-based MIP formulation of the Interna-
tional Timetabling Competition 2019. Journal of Scheduling, 25(4), 405–428.
Hoshino, R. , & Fabris, I. (2020). Optimizing student course preferences in school timetabling. In Proceedings
of the 17th international conference on integration of constraint programming, artiﬁcial intelligence,
and operations research, pp. 283–299.
Jaradat, G., Ayob, M., & Ahmad, Z. (2014). On the performance of scatter search for post-enrolment course
timetabling problems. Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 27(3), 417–439.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
1347
Jat, S. N., & Yang, S. (2011). A hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search approach for post enrolment course
timetabling. Journal of Scheduling, 14(6), 617–637.
Jat, S. N. , & Yang, S. (2011). A guided search non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm for the multi-objective
university course timetabling problem. In Proceedings of the 11th European conference on evolutionary
computation in combinatorial optimization (pp. 1–13). Springer.
Lach, G., & Lübbecke, M. E. (2012). Curriculum-based course timetabling: New solutions to Udine benchmark
instances. Annals of Operations Research, 194(1), 255–272.
Lemos, A., Monteiro, P., & Lynce, I. (2022). Introducing UniCorT: An iterative university course timetabling
tool with MaxSAT. Journal of Scheduling, 25(4), 371–390.
Lewis, R. (2008). A survey of metaheuristic-based techniques for university timetabling problems. OR Spec-
trum, 30(1), 167–190.
Lewis, R. (2012). A time-dependent metaheuristic algorithm for post enrolment-based course timetabling.
Annals of Operations Research, 194(1), 273–289.
Lindahl, M., Stidsen, T., Sørensen, M. (2017). Strategic, tactical and operational university timetabling. DTU
Management. Retreived from: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/strategic-tactical-and-operational-
university-timetabling.
Lohpetch, D. , & Jaengchuea, S. (2016). A hybrid multi-objective genetic algorithm with a new local search
approach for solving the post enrolment based course timetabling problem. In Recent advances in infor-
mation and communication technology 2016 (pp. 195–206). Springer.
Lü, Z., & Hao, J.-K. (2010). Adaptive tabu search for course timetabling. European Journal of Operational
Research, 200(1), 235–244.
Lü, Z., Hao, J.-K., & Glover, F. (2011). Neighborhood analysis: A case study on curriculum-based course
timetabling. Journal of Heuristics, 17(2), 97–118.
McCollum, B., Schaerf, A., Paechter, B., McMullan, P., Lewis, R., Parkes, A. J., Burke, & E. K. (2010).
Setting the research agenda in automated timetabling: The second International Timetabling Competition.
INFORMS Journal on Computing, 22(1), 120–130.
Méndez-Díaz, I. , Zabala, P. , & Miranda-Bront, J. J. (2016). An ILP based heuristic for a generalization of
the post-enrollment course timetabling problem. Computers and Operations Research, 76195–76207.
Mikkelsen, R., & Holm, D. (2022). A parallelized matheuristic for the International Timetabling Competition
2019. Journal of Scheduling, 25(4), 429–452.
MirHassani, S. A., & Habibi, F. (2013). Solution approaches to the course timetabling problem. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Review, 39(2), 133–149.
Müller, T., & Murray, K. (2010). Comprehensive approach to student sectioning. Annals of Operations
Research, 181(1), 249–269.
Müller, T. , Rudová, H. , & Müllerová, Z. (2018). University course timetabling and International Timetabling
Competition 2019. In Proceedings of the 12th international conference on the practice and theory of
automated timetabling (vol. 1, pp. 5–31).
Müller, T. , Rudová, H. , & Müllerová, Z. (2022). Real-world university course timetabling at the International
Timetabling Competition 2019. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on the practice and
theory of automated timetabling, (vol. 3, pp. 234–238).
Nothegger, C., Mayer, A., Chwatal, A., & Raidl, G. R. (2012). Solving the post enrolment course timetabling
problem by ant colony optimization. Annals of Operations Research, 194(1), 325–339.
Pillay, N. (2016). A review of hyper-heuristics for educational timetabling. Annals of Operations Research,
239(1), 3–38.
Pongcharoen, P., Promtet, W., Yenradee, P., & Hicks, C. (2008). Stochastic optimisation timetabling tool for
university course scheduling. International Journal of Production Economics, 112(2), 903–918.
Rappos, E., Thiémard, E., Robert, S., & Hêche, J.-F. (2022). A mixed-integer programming approach for
solving university course timetabling problems. Journal of Scheduling, 25(4), 391–404.
Rudová, H., Müller, T., & Murray, K. (2011). Complex university course timetabling. Journal of Scheduling,
14(2), 187–207.
Rudová, H. , & Murray, K. (2002). University course timetabling with soft constraints. In Proceedings of the
4th international conference on the practice and theory of automated timetabling, pp. 310–328.
Schaerf, A. (1999). A survey of automated timetabling. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, 13(2), 87–127.
Schimmelpfeng, K., & Helber, S. (2007). Application of a real-world university-course timetabling model
solved by integer programming. OR Spectrum, 29(4), 783–803.
Shiue, F.-J. , Zheng, M.-C. , Lee, H.-Y. , Khitam, A. F. , & Li, P.-Y. (2019). Renovation construction process
scheduling for long-term performance of buildings: An application case of university campus. Sustain-
ability, 11(19), 5542.
Silva, J. , Burke, E. K. , & Petrovic, S. (2004). An introduction to multiobjective metaheuristics for scheduling
and timetabling. In Metaheuristics for multiobjective optimisation (pp. 91–129). Springer.
123

1348
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 328:1313–1348
Suyanto, S. (2010). An informed genetic algorithm for university course and student timetabling problems.
In Proceedings of the 10th international conference on artiﬁcal intelligence and soft computing: Part II
(pp. 229–236).
Sylejmani, K. , Gashi, E. , & Ymeri, A. (2022). Simulated annealing with penalization for university course
timetabling. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on the practice and theory of automated
timetabling, (vol. 2, pp. 2361–366).
Teoh, C. K., Wibowo, A., & Ngadiman, M. S. (2015). Review of state of the art for metaheuristic techniques
in academic scheduling problems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, 44(1), 1–21.
Van den Broek, J., & Hurkens, C. A. (2012). An IP-based heuristic for the post enrolment course timetabling
problem of the ITC2007. Annals of Operations Research, 194(1), 439–454.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123