TITLE: Schedule risk analysis for project control with risk interactions
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06668-8
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 24 May 2024 / Accepted: 13 May 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Schedule risk analysis for project control with risk 
interactions
Yuxuan Song1
 · Mario Vanhoucke1,2,3
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06668-8
Abstract
Due to the uncertainty and risks in projects, Schedule Risk Analysis (SRA) has been de­
veloped to measure the activity sensitivity for taking corrective actions during project con­
trol. With the growing complexity of projects, the interaction between risks has received 
increasing research attention in project management, conceptualized as a risk interaction 
network. In such a network, the risk can affect the project objective not only through its 
occurrence but also by triggering interrelated risks. However, previous studies on SRA 
were mostly dedicated to designing activity sensitivity metrics using the project network, 
ignoring the source of activity risks, which may result in inaccurate activity sensitivity 
information and invalid corrective actions. In this paper, we integrate the risk interaction 
network with the project network for schedule risk analysis and project control under risk 
interactions. Subsequently, a novel interaction-oriented sensitivity metric is proposed and 
a simulation-based control model is developed to facilitate corrective action decisions. 
Finally, a computational experiment is conducted to investigate the ability of the proposed 
metric in identifying sensitive activities under risk interaction. In addition, the experi­
ment also tests the performance of three activity selection strategies, namely preventive 
strategy, interventive strategy, and hybrid strategy. The results show the proposed activity 
sensitivity metric not only enhances the control effectiveness but also exhibits remarkable 
reliability across both serial projects and parallel projects. The results also indicate that a 
mix of strategies is preferred depending on the project network structure and the timing 
of control action taking.
Keywords  Project management · Schedule risk analysis · Project control · Risk 
interaction · Simulation
1  Introduction
During the project progress, the inherent risks and uncertainties of the project activities 
inevitably lead to deviations from the predefined project objectives. Integrating project 
scheduling with risk analysis has been recognized as an effective approach to monitoring 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
progress and bringing projects in danger back on track. Baseline scheduling, risk analysis, 
and project control are three crucial elements to that purpose and are integrated into a so-
called integrated project management and control framework (Vanhoucke et al., 2014). The 
construction of a baseline schedule entails using the project network (PN) to depict the proj­
ect activities and their precedence relations, generating an initial timetable with start and 
finish times for each activity. The baseline schedule will act as a point of reference for risk 
analysis and project control. Subsequently, schedule risk analysis is a methodology used 
to assess the uncertainty and potential risks in a project schedule. It requires the calcula­
tion of so-called activity sensitivity metrics by analyzing the impact of activity uncertainty, 
delays or cost overruns, on the total project duration and cost. These metrics help identify 
which activities are most likely to be impacted by the uncertainty in the activities, and have 
been used widely in the project scheduling literature. It enables project managers to steer 
their attention toward a subset of activities that are most influential for the whole project, 
improving the efficiency and reliability of responses during project control. Finally, the goal 
of project control is to identify problems or opportunities due to risks and uncertainties by 
comparing the actual project progress to the baseline schedule, such that corrective actions 
will be taken in case of problems.
In the literature, a schedule risk analysis comprises three steps. In a first step, the uncer­
tainty (or risk) of an activity duration has to be defined. Most studies estimate this prob­
ability distribution under the assumption that the activity delays are independent of each 
other, as shown in studies of Vanhoucke (2010), Vanhoucke (2011), Martens and Vanhoucke 
(2019), Ballesteros-Pérez et al. (2019), Song et al. (2021), Vaseghi and Vanhoucke (2023) 
and Vaseghi et al. (2024). 0nly a few studies have considered risk correlations between 
activities, such as Van Dorp and Duffey (1999) and Creemers et al. (2014). Secondly, with 
the defined distributions, the project schedule is put subject to Monte Carlo simulations to 
imitate the real project progress, and for each simulation run, a lot of progress data are gen­
erated. These data are ultimately be used in the third and last step in which various activity 
sensitivity metrics are calculated that express the sensitivity of each individual activity to 
the overall project objectives.
Unlike the literature on schedule risk analysis, the literature on project risk management 
has pointed out much more clearly that there exists interactions between the various projects 
risks, i.e. that a given risk may be caused by multiple risks and can even trigger other risk 
events (Fang & Marle, 2013; Fang et al., 2012; Tsetlin & Winkler, 2005). The literature 
models this phenomenon as a Risk Interaction Network (RIN) with nodes and edges cor­
responding to the risks and causal relationships between risks, respectively. Such networks 
are used in many studies such as Fang and Marle (2012), Wang et al. (2020b), Guan et 
al. (2021), Wang et al. (2022a), and Qian et al. (2024). Moreover, these studies also have 
proven that the RIN non-linearly affects the likelihood of risk occurrence and the impact of 
risk on the project objectives, and therefore pointed out the importance of introducing the 
RIN into risk analysis.
Despite these insights in both fields, none of the studies in the literature has integrated 
the RIN methodology into the schedule risk analysis method. Therefore, this paper aims at 
integrating the RIN with the PN to construct a double-layer network model (further abbre­
viated as PN–RIN model) for schedule risk analysis and project control. The RIN will be 
used to model the project risks with their causal relationships, while the PN will consist of 
the activities of the project and their precedence relations. These two networks, RIN and 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
PN, will be linked to each other to model the possible impact of risks on the durations of 
the activities. Subsequently, we will extend this double-layer model with the schedule risk 
analysis to assess the impact of risk on the project and propose a new SRA metric tailored 
to the risk interactions of our study. Furthermore, a simulation-based control model will 
be established to take corrective actions during the project execution. Finally, extensive 
computational experiments will be conducted using artificial project data to compare the 
proposed metric with the traditional SRA metrics for identifying sensitive activities. The 
effectiveness of our approach will be tested for different types of corrective actions.
The structure of this paper is described as follows. In Sect. 2, an overview of relevant 
literature is presented. In Sect. 3, the construction and schedule risk analysis of the PN–RIN 
model are described and illustrated using an example project. Section 4 presents the proce­
dure of the control model. In Sect. 5, the design and computation results of experiments are 
discussed in detail. Finally, Sect. 6 provides the general conclusions along with perspectives 
on future work.
2  Literature summary
Since our work integrates the project risk management methodology into the integrated 
project management and control methodology, this section reviews studies from both fields. 
However, both fields use different terminology to refer to the inherent variability in the 
estimated activity durations or costs. Specifically, in the field of integrated project manage­
ment and control, the word ‘uncertainty’ is often used to describe the lack of certainty, while 
the word ‘risk’ is mostly used in the field of project risk management. To avoid confusion, 
Sect. 2.1 clearly outlines the distinction between these two concepts (uncertainty and risk) 
and clearly defines how they are used in the current study. Subsequently, the various studies 
presented in both fields, using either the PN approach or the RIN approach, are reviewed in 
Sects. 2.2 and 2.3, respectively. Finally, the contributions of the current study are discussed 
in Sect. 2.4. The literature review is supported by a summary given in Table 1.
2.1  Uncertainty and risk
In the field of integrated project management and control, the term ‘uncertainty’ is widely 
employed and generally refers to the lack of certainty regarding the duration or cost of project 
activities (Cho & Yum, 1997; Hu et al., 2016; Song et al., 2022; Vanhoucke, 2011; Williams, 
1992). Activity durations are typically represented as a probability distribution function, 
where the uncertainty is measured as the standard deviation (Song et al., 2021; Vanhoucke, 
2010; Vaseghi et al., 2024). However, some studies refer to this uncertainty concept with­
out explicitly mentioning that it consists of two dimensions, for example, in Madadi and 
Iranmanesh (2012), Martens and Vanhoucke (2019), and Vaseghi and Vanhoucke (2023). 
One dimension is called ‘activity risk’ or ‘variability’ to refer to the uncertainty that can be 
reduced after taking corrective actions during project control. These studies also argue that 
some portion of the activity uncertainty is inherent to any project, and cannot be controlled 
by any actions taken. This implicitly assumes that, whatever action is taken, the uncertainty 
of an activity cannot be reduced completely.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
References
Risk analysis
Control action
Risk 
interaction
Improtance metrics
Corrective 
action
Risk response action
Yes
No
SRA 
metrics
RC 
metrics
AC
VR
FT
Prevention
Pro­
tection
PN
Williams 
(1992)
✓
✓
Vanhoucke 
(2010)
✓
✓
✓
Vanhoucke 
(2011)
✓
✓
✓
Madadi and 
Iranmanesh 
(2012)
✓
✓
✓
Ballesteros-
Pérez et al. 
(2019)
✓
✓
Song et al. 
(2021)
✓
✓
✓
Martens and 
Vanhoucke 
(2019)
✓
✓
✓
Hu et al. 
(2016)
✓
✓
✓
Vaseghi et al. 
(2024)
✓
✓
✓
✓
Krishnan et al. 
(1997)
✓
✓
Vanhoucke 
and Debels 
(2008)
✓
✓
Creemers et al. 
(2014)
✓
✓
✓
RIN
Fang et al. 
(2012)
✓
✓
✓
Fang and 
Marle (2012)
✓
✓
✓
Fang et al. 
(2013)
✓
✓
✓
Wang et al. 
(2019)
✓
✓
✓
Wang et al. 
(2020b)
✓
✓
✓
Wang et al. 
(2022a)
✓
✓
✓
Guan et al. 
(2021)
✓
✓
✓
Chen et al. 
(2020)
✓
✓
✓
Zuo and Zhang 
(2018)
✓
✓
✓
Glickman and 
Khamooshi 
(2005)
✓
✓
✓
Table 1  Literature review
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
In the field of project risk management, the term ‘risk’ is used to refer to an uncertain 
event that may have a positive or negative impact on the project objectives (Chapman, 2001; 
PMI, 2013; Zuo & Zhang, 2018), typically measured using the probability of occurrence 
and the impact on the objectives. Therefore, these studies define risk response actions to 
reduce both the probability and the impact of the risk events. Moreover, in the context of 
risk interactions, the majority of the studies focus solely on risks with negative impact (Fang 
& Marle, 2012; Liu et al., 2024; Qian et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2019, 2020b), while only 
a few incorporate both positive and negative risks into risk analysis (Zhang et al., 2020).
In the current study, we also make the distinction between these two types of uncertainty, 
but define them from this point on in an unambiguous way. More specifically, the term ‘risk’ 
will be used as controllable variability in the activity duration caused by events in the RIN. 
To that purpose, both probabilities and impact variables will be defined in the RIN to link its 
risk events to the activity durations of the PN. Additionally, the uncontrollable uncertainty 
of the activity durations will be called ‘latent uncertainty’ (Cleden, 2017) and will be mod­
elled by probability distributions on the activity durations, as normally done in the project 
management literature. When corrective actions are proposed, they will aim at reducing the 
probability and impact of the risk events (RIN), eventually reducing the activity durations 
(and resulting project duration), while nothing can be done to reduce the latent uncertainty 
in the activity durations in the PN.
2.2  Research with the PN
In the research with project networks, a schedule risk analysis determines the uncertainty 
for each activity of the project network and measures the sensitivity of activities using 
various SRA metrics. Most studies employ a predefined probability distribution to define 
uncertainty, such as beta distributions (Chen et al., 2023; Vanhoucke, 2010, 2011) and log­
normal distributions (Ballesteros-Pérez et al., 2019; Song et al., 2021; Trietsch et al., 2012), 
assuming the duration of activities is independent. To analyze the relationship between vari­
ability in activity duration and the total project duration, the SRA study introduces a set of 
sensitivity metrics that, while differing slightly, assess activity sensitivity from various per­
spectives. These metrics can generally be classified into two categories: simulation-based 
and analytical metrics (Vaseghi & Vanhoucke, 2023), as discussed in the following section.
The simulation-based SRA metrics are calculated based on defining the distribution of 
activity duration and then performing the Monte Carlo simulation runs (Ballesteros-Pérez et 
References
Risk analysis
Control action
Risk 
interaction
Improtance metrics
Corrective 
action
Risk response action
Yes
No
SRA 
metrics
RC 
metrics
AC
VR
FT
Prevention
Pro­
tection
PN–
RIN
Chen et al. 
(2023)
✓
✓
✓
#Current study
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
PN project network, RIN risk interaction network, PN–RIN the double-layer network consisting of project 
network and risk interaction network, SRA metrics common abbreviation for activity sensitivity metrics, 
RC metrics risk criticality metrics, AC activity crashing action, VR variability reduction action, FT fast 
tracking action
Table 1  (continued)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
al., 2019; Creemers et al., 2014; Madadi & Iranmanesh, 2012; Song et al., 2021; Vanhoucke, 
2010; Williams, 1992). The Critical Index (CI), introduced by Martin (1965), measures 
the probability that an activity lies on the critical path. Williams (1992) posed two flaws of 
CI in identifying sensitive activities, and thus proposed to use the Significance Index (SI) 
and Cruciality Index (CRI). The SI measures the impact of activity uncertainty on project 
duration, which can be used to reflect the relative importance between activities. The CRI 
measures the correlations of activity duration and project duration, in three different ways: 
Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient (CRI(r)), Kendall’s tau rank correlation 
coefficient (CRI(τ)), and Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (CRI(ρ)). Considering 
both the probability of activity criticality and the impact of activity uncertainty, Vanhoucke 
(2010) proposed the Schedule Sensitivity Index (SSI) to combine these two criteria. Fur­
ther, Madadi and Iranmanesh (2012) incorporated the network topological structure into the 
design of SRA metrics and proposed the Management-Oriented Index (MOI). In addition to 
the simulation-based metrics, some studies also have proposed SRA metrics based on ana­
lytical or approximation methodologies (Cho & Yum, 1997; Elmaghraby, 2000; Vaseghi et 
al., 2024). Cho and Yum (1997) proposed the Uncertainty Importance Measure to measure 
the impact of activity variability on the project variability. Vaseghi et al. (2024) designed an 
analytical procedure to rank the activities by measuring their expected impact on the project 
duration distribution when subjected to corrective action.
In the aforementioned studies, only Creemers et al. (2014) deviated from the assump­
tion of independent activity duration by incorporating risk correlations into a schedule risk 
analysis. In their approach, uncertainty in activity duration was modelled using specific 
risks characterized by probability and impact separately, rather than using general prob­
ability distributions. They began by identifying project risks and clustered activities in PN 
into groups based on their exposure to similar risks. They argued that the occurrence of a 
risk affects the activities in the same group in a correlated manner. Risk correlations were 
then modelled by a random correlation factor drawn from a continuous uniform distribu­
tion. This study proposed a sensitivity metric for activities and a criticality metric for risks 
under risk correlation. While this study modelled dependencies between activity durations 
during a schedule risk analysis, it still completely ignored the interactions between the dif­
ferent activity risks, which is clearly a gap in the existing studies that will be solved in our 
current study.
While some studies only focus on the identification of sensitive activities and do not use 
them to control the projects and take action, other studies go further and integrate these SRA 
metrics in a corrective action decision-making framework. In the literature, there are three 
main types of corrective actions investigated, namely activity crashing, variability reduc­
tion, and fast tracking. Activity crashing reduces the duration of certain activities (Song et 
al., 2021; Vanhoucke, 2010; Vaseghi & Vanhoucke, 2023). Vanhoucke (2010) argued that 
the effort the project manager puts in project control is limited. Thus, this study defined the 
concept of control effort to determine the optimal number of sensitive activities that might 
be subject to corrective actions, and then implemented activity crashing to reduce their 
delay to half of the baseline activity duration. Vaseghi and Vanhoucke (2023) compared the 
performance of the analytical and the simulation-based SRA metrics to implement activity 
crashing by modifying the mean of the activity duration distribution. They made use of an 
action set concept, which is quite similar to the selection of only the optimal number of sen­
sitive activities, to restrict the number of activities that can be subject to corrective actions. 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Variability reduction entails reducing activity variability (risks) by decreasing the standard 
deviation of the distribution of activity duration (Madadi & Iranmanesh, 2012; Martens & 
Vanhoucke, 2019; Vaseghi & Vanhoucke, 2023). Martens and Vanhoucke (2019) proposed 
three control strategies to take variability reduction actions under the budget constraint, i.e., 
an interventive strategy (which focuses on ongoing activities), a preventive strategy (which 
focus on future activities) and a hybrid strategy (which focus on both ongoing activities and 
future activities). Since the uncertainty in activity duration cannot be entirely eliminated due 
to potential external risks, variability reduction actions can only reduce it to a minimal stan­
dard deviation. Fast tracking overrules the original project network structure and executes 
partially precedence-related activities in parallel to reduce the total project duration (Krish­
nan et al., 1997; Vanhoucke & Debels, 2008). Creemers et al. (2014) used the SRA metrics 
to take actions in a different way to reduce the activity risks. As mentioned before, specific 
risks characterized by probability and impact are employed to define uncertainty in activity 
duration. Therefore, they mitigated the impact of risks in the selected most sensitive activi­
ties by risk protection action, which will be detailed in the next section.
2.3  Research with the RIN
Studies utilizing the risk interaction network (RIN) approach aim to identify critical risks 
and develop risk response strategies. This is achieved through a three-phase process: RIN 
modeling, RIN analysis, and RIN response. (Wang et al., 2022a). RIN modeling mainly 
exploits different tools for RIN identification and RIN assessment. Several methods have 
been proposed to identify project risks and their interactions, such as checklists (Allan & 
Yin, 2011), questionnaires (Liu et al., 2024; Qian et al., 2024), Delphi (Fang & Marle, 2013; 
Wang et al., 2022a), and risk breakdown structure (Liu et al., 2024). In the RIN assessment, 
Fang and Marle (2012) suggested that not only the risk characteristics (i.e., probability and 
impact) but also the strength of risk interactions should be evaluated. The strength of risk 
interaction is represented by the transition probability between risks, indicating the likeli­
hood that one risk will trigger another. Additionally, a risk in the RIN can also be activated 
by external events with a certain probability, referred to as spontaneous probability. Both 
qualitative (Chen et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024) and quantitative (Fang & Marle, 2012, 2013; 
Liu et al., 2024; Qian et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2019, 2020b, 2022, 2022a) methods have 
been developed to evaluate the attributes of the RIN. To depict the complex risk interac­
tions, numerous sophisticated methods based on the network structure have been applied, 
such as adjacency matrix (Li et al., 2016), structural equation modeling (Ahmadabadi & 
Heravi, 2019), interpretive structural modeling (Guan, Abbasi, and Ryan, 2021), Bayesian 
belief network (Chen et al., 2023), design structure matrix (Fang & Marle, 2012; Liu et al., 
2024; Qian et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2019, 2020b, 2022a).
Just as schedule risk analysis (SRA) in a PN introduces various sensitivity metrics, RIN 
analysis proposes multiple risk criticality (RC) metrics to evaluate risk importance and pri­
oritize risk response actions. Some studies made use of network theory to propose analytical 
RC metrics, such as degree (Chen et al., 2020), betweenness (Wang et al., 2020b), reachabil­
ity (Fang et al., 2012). However, some authors argued that the dynamic trait of risk propaga­
tion in RIN significantly impacts risk analysis. As a result, numerous simulation-based RC 
metrics have been designed (Fang & Marle, 2012; Guan et al., 2021; Qian et al., 2024; Wang 
et al., 2022a). The classic simulation-based RC metrics consist of both local and global 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
criticality of risks. Local criticality is estimated by multiplying the simulated occurrence 
probability of the individual risk and its impact. In contrast, global criticality represents the 
cumulative impact of all risks triggered by the given risk.
The research on controlling risk boils down to proposing risk response actions, which 
can be divided into two categories, namely risk prevention and risk protection. Risk preven­
tion averts the occurrence of potential critical risks, and eliminates the spontaneous prob­
ability of the risk and the transition probability of risk interactions that direct to the target 
critical risk (Chen et al., 2020; Fang & Marle, 2012; Wang et al., 2022a). Risk protection 
mitigates the consequences of project risk occurrences. Zuo and Zhang (2018) adopted the 
risk protection action to eliminate activity delay and cost overrun caused by risks during the 
project execution. Glickman and Khamooshi (2005) employed two types of risk response 
actions simultaneously.
2.4  Current study
Not much work has been done in the integration of the two separate risk research lines. 
In the studies with PN, Creemers et al. (2014) incorporated dependencies among activity 
durations into schedule risk analysis by introducing a risk correlation factor, but they still 
neglected the causal relations between risks, which may lead to invalid SRA metrics and RC 
metrics. To address the problem, Chen et al. (2023) identified the causal relations between 
risks and integrated the RIN with the PN for risk analysis. They presented a simulation study 
to identify critical risks with significant impacts on project duration under risk interaction, 
enabling project managers to develop an effective risk management plan before the start of 
the project. However, they didn’t identify sensitive activities and provide control strategies 
during the project execution. In addition, in the network simulation model, they only con­
sidered specific risks and risk interactions and ignored the impact of the latent uncertainty 
on activity duration. Therefore, there is still a lack of research to integrate schedule risk 
analysis and project control with the risk interaction network, which is clearly shown in the 
last row of Table 1.
We believe that the contribution of this study is three-fold: First, we are the first to fully 
integrate the risk interaction network with the project network for schedule risk analysis. 
To that purpose, we propose a novel simulation-based SRA metric to measure activity sen­
sitivity, as traditionally done for the PN literature, taking the risk interactions from the RIN 
into account. Second, we propose a simulation-based control model specifically designed 
for the context of risk interaction, to explore the effect of the new SRA metric and correc­
tive actions during the project execution. Both risk prevention actions, which reduce the 
probability of risks, and risk protection actions, which reduce the impact of risks on activity 
duration, are considered simultaneously. Finally, to validate whether the newly proposed 
SRA metric identifies the sensitive activities more accurately under risk interactions, an 
extensive computational experiment is conducted to evaluate the following aspects of the 
corrective action taken process. The first experiment is designed to validate whether the 
proposed SRA metric is capable of distinguishing between sensitive and insensitive activi­
ties. The second experiment is designed to evaluate the performance of three strategies for 
selecting activities subject to control (similar to the action set concept discussed earlier). 
In the third experiment, the impact of the periodicity and intensity of corrective actions is 
compared. In all previous experiments, the SRA metrics are calculated only once at the start 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
of the project. However, in the fourth experiment, the impact of recalculating the proposed 
SRA metrics during project progress, using a series of new simulations, is investigated.
3  Risk model
This section proposes a new risk model that builds on the classic schedule risk analysis and 
risk interaction analysis often used in project risk management. Since this study links a 
project network and a risk interaction network, a formal presentation of our risk model will 
be given in Sect. 3.1. The different steps of our extended risk model will be discussed in 
detail in Sect. 3.2, in which both existing and new activity sensitivity metrics are presented. 
Table 2 provides a summary of all symbols used in this section as a guideline for the reader.
Table 2  Symbols and abbreviations used
Abbreviations
Explanations
Abbreviations
Explanations
Section 3.1 Model
Defining risk and uncertainty
Project network layer
OR = [ogh]m×m
Risk occurrence matrix (0/1) (Variable)
N
Set of the project activities 
(index i, j)
O·g
Total occurrence of risk g (0/1) (Variable)
n
Number of activities in 
project (n = |N|)
Igi
Simulated impact of risk g on activity i 
(Variable)
AP = [aij]n×n Activity precedence 
matrix (0/1)
λi
Coefficient for total risk impact of activity 
i
Risk interaction network layer
TRIi
Total risk impact on activity i (Variable)
M
Set of the project risks 
(index g, h)
dU
i
Duration of activity i exclusively under the 
latent uncertainty (Variable)
m
Number of risks in project 
(m = |M|)
di
Duration of activity i in the PN–RIN 
(Variable)
EI = [egh]m×mRisk event interaction 
matrix (0/1)
Sensitivity 
metrics
RP = [pgh]m×mRisk probability matrix 
(percentages)
S
Number of Monte Carlo simulation runs 
(index s)
Links between two layers
tfi,s
Total float of activity i in the sth simulation
AR = [rgi]m×nActivity risk matrix (0/1)
Ds
Project duration in the sth simulation
RI = [ugi]m×nRisk impact matrix (inte­
ger time units)
tfU
i,s
Total float of activity i exclusively under 
the latent uncertainty in the sth simulation
Section 3.2 Schedule risk analysis
UDs
Project duration exclusively under the 
latent uncertainty in the sth simulation
Project schedule
Ri
The set of risks occurring in activity i
dP
i
Planned duration of 
activity i
PRi
The set of risks triggered by the risks in 
Ri
esP
i
Earliest start time of activ­
ity i in project schedule
PAi
The set of activities delayed by risks in 
PRi
tfP
i
Total float of activity i in 
project schedule
PD
Planned project duration
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
3.1  Model
The risk model presented in this section will link a project network (PN) and a risk interac­
tion network (RIN) presented as a double-layer network (PN–RIN) to model the interac­
tion between the risks and the activities of a project. Both networks have already been 
extensively studied in the literature (cf. Sect. 2) but the integration has, to the best of our 
knowledge, never been investigated from a project control point-of-view. In the following 
paragraphs, both networks are formally defined, and they are then used in the schedule risk 
analysis of Sect. 3.2, which in turn serves as input for the control model of Sect. 4. A sum­
mary of the different components of the PN–RIN model is visualized in Fig. 1 using the 
terminology of Table 2.
Project network (PN) Since the primary goal of this study is to examine the impact of risk 
interactions on schedule risk analysis, only projects without resource constraints are consid­
ered. This is not only because most SRA studies in the literature overlook project resources 
but also because resource constraints add complexity without offering clear insights into the 
pure impact of integrating PN and RIN on project control effectiveness. Therefore, a project 
is represented by an activity-on-the-node network consisting of activities between finish-
to-start precedence relations with a time-lag of zero. The number of nodes in the network, 
representing the activities, is equal to n + 2, numbered from a dummy start node 0 to a 
dummy end node n + 1. The start and end nodes are dummy activities with a zero duration 
representing the beginning and end of the project while the remaining N nodes represent real 
activities. The precedence relations between every pair of activities are given by a binary 
matrix AP = [aij]n×n, where ∀(i, j): aij = 1 denoting that the activity j can only start after 
the finish of activity i.
Risk interaction network (RIN) During the risk identification phase, a list of potential 
risk events that negatively impact the duration of project activities must be defined, lead­
ing to a RIN consisting of a number of risk events between which interactions exist. These 
risk events are represented by nodes in the network (similar to the project network), and it 
is assumed that there are m = |M| risk events. These events are not always independent of 
each other, and therefore, the risk interactions must be defined, whereby the occurrence of 
risk event g can give rise to the occurrence of risk event h (cause-effect relations). These 
Fig. 1  The PN–RIN model
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
interactions are represented by a binary matrix EI = [egh]m×m and are represented by arcs 
between the risk events in the risk interaction network. The value of egh is equal to one only 
if the risk h is likely to be caused by the occurrence of risk g.
The probability of risk occurrence, whether due to external events or internal correlated 
risks, must be estimated too. The likelihood of a risk event caused by external factors out­
side the system is called spontaneous probability, while the probability of a risk being trig­
gered by another risk within the RIN is known as transition probability (Fang & Marle, 
2012). Both probabilities are represented by a risk probability matrix RP = [pgh]m×m, 
where pgg denotes the spontaneous probability of risk g and pgh denotes the transition prob­
ability from risk g to risk h. Hence, the diagonal elements of RP represent the spontaneous 
probability of risks while all other elements represent the transition probabilities from risk 
g to risk h when egh = 1, and are 0 otherwise.
Linking two networks (PN–RIN) The risk events from the risk interaction network should 
be linked to the activities of the project network, and not every event has a potential impact 
on every activity. Therefore, the relationships between these two networks are defined by 
a binary activity risk matrix AR = [rgi]m×n that connects the risk events to the activities, 
where rgi = 1 if risk event g might have an impact on activity i, represented by an arc 
from the risk event g in the risk interaction network to activity i in the project network. We 
assume, without loss of generality, that each activity can be affected by multiple risks but 
each risk event can have an impact on only one activity. In order to evaluate the (unfavor­
able) impact of each risk occurrence on the duration of the activity, a numerical risk impact 
matrix RI = [ugi]m×n is used, where ugi signifies the number of time units the activity i 
will be delayed when risk g has occurred (only applicable when rgi = 1).
3.2  Schedule risk analysis
A schedule risk analysis is a well-known and simple method that adds uncertainty to the 
activity durations of the deterministic project schedule. Through static simulation runs, the 
project schedule is placed under this uncertainty and after sufficient runs, a value is calcu­
lated for the sensitivity metrics per activity, which expresses the probability and/or impact 
that uncertainty in the activity duration has on the total project duration. In the description 
in the following sections, the method will be explained in three steps, which consist of 
constructing a deterministic project schedule, defining the risk and uncertainty for activity 
durations, and finally calculating the sensitivity metrics of each activity.
3.2.1  Project schedule
In any schedule risk analysis, the construction of a project schedule is the first necessary 
step. In this schedule, the durations of the activities are considered deterministic and there is 
therefore no uncertainty assumed. However, this schedule is only used as a reference point 
during the different runs of the statistical simulation that is discussed in detail in Sect. 3.2.3.
In the current study, the schedule for the project will use the project network AP and 
use known critical path calculations to build the earliest start schedule. If the earliest start 
time of activity j in the project schedule is represented by esP
j and the planned duration of 
activity j by dP
j , then the esP
j values for each activity can be calculated as shown in Eq. (1):
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
esP
j =
{
0, j = 0
max{esP
i + dP
i |AP(i, j) = 1}, j ̸= 0

(1)
The total planned project duration (PD) is then equal to esP
n+1.
3.2.2  Defining risk and uncertainty
We argued before that in traditional schedule risk analysis studies, activity durations are 
subject to uncertainty by defining probability distributions with known values for the mean 
and standard deviation, and the SRA metrics are calculated based on Monte Carlo simula­
tions that imitate the real project progress using sampled values for the activity durations. 
However, in this study, the project network PN is linked to the risk interaction network RIN 
(cf. Fig. 1) and the uncertainty in the activity durations is now specified as possible risks in 
the RIN and the latent uncertainty (discussed in Sect. 2.1). Risks within the RIN can arise 
from external events or internal correlated risks, ultimately affecting the duration of associ­
ated activities. This dynamic risk process is defined using three key concepts, known as risk 
spontaneous occurrence, risk propagation, and risk impact on activity delays, and will be 
discussed in the next paragraphs. Additionally, the latent uncertainty in activity duration, 
which cannot be attributed to specific risk occurrences, is measured using a probability 
distribution and is discussed at the end of this section.
Risk events In the RIN, the occurrence of a risk h can be attributed to two sources: exter­
nal events characterized by the spontaneous probability phh( risk spontaneous occurrence) 
and internal risk events characterized by the transition probability pgh( risk propagation) 
(Fang & Marle, 2012, 2013). Both can have an impact on the associated activities, causing 
delays in activities (risk impact on activity delays). To model the occurrence of these risks 
and measure their impact, Monte Carlo simulations are used to receptively observe in each 
run whether a risk occurs in the associated activity or not. A binary risk occurrence matrix 
OR = [ogh]m×m is thus established, where ogh = 1 if risk g is activated by external events 
(g = h) or internal correlated risks (g ̸= h), and ogh = 0 otherwise. In each simulation run, 
the risk occurrence matrix is updated with the newly generated data to obtain final values at 
the end of the simulation.
Risk spontaneous occurrence
If the appearance of a risk h is caused by external events outside the PN–RIN, an 
approach similar to the risk probability matrix is used. Specifically, the spontaneous occur­
rence of this risk event is represented by the diagonal elements in the OR matrix (i.e., ohh 
elements). During the Monte Carlo simulations, the rand(0,1) function is used to generate 
random numbers uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. If phh exceeds the generated ran­
dom number, the risk occurs spontaneously, and otherwise, it does not (Wang et al., 2019, 
2020b), as shown in Eq. (2).
 
ohh =
{ 1
if rand(0, 1) ≤phh
0
if rand(0, 1) > phh 
(2)
Risk propagation As risk events are interconnected in the RIN, risk event h can still 
occur through risk propagation, even if it has not occurred spontaneously (ohh = 0). The 
occurrence of risk caused by associated risks is represented by ogh in the OR matrix (with 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
g ̸= h). More specifically, risk event h is triggered by risk event g with the transition proba­
bility of pgh only in case where risk event g has occurred in the previous simulation process. 
Since risk event g can occur spontaneously (ogg = 1) or through risk propagation (okg = 1 
with k ̸= g), the formula O·g is used to denote the total occurrence of risk event g, where 
O·g equals to 1 when ∑m
k=1 okg ≥1, and zero otherwise. In doing so, the propagated risk 
value of ogh can be obtained using the Monte Carlo simulation as shown in Eq. (3).
 
ogh =
{ 1
if rand(0, 1) ≤pgh and O·g = 1
0
if rand(0, 1) > pgh or O·g = 0

(3)
Since the occurrence of a risk event can only have an impact on the activity while it is in 
progress, a time window for risk occurrence is defined during the project progress that 
depends on the start time of the associated activity (Cagno, Caron, and Mancini, 2008). 
Consequently, in our simulated project control model of Sect.  4, both the spontaneous 
occurrence and risk propagation of risk g will be simulated when the project execution time 
reaches the start time of associated activity i. Upon occurrence, it might have a possible 
impact on the activity only when rgi = 1, as discussed next.
Risk impact (activity delays) The spontaneous occurrence and risk propagation determine 
only the occurrence of each risk in the RIN, but do not provide information about the impact 
of these events on the activities to which they are linked. This impact is measured by the 
risk impact matrix RI = [ugi]m×n in which ugi is expressed in the number of time units 
representing the delays in activity i when risk event g has occurred. If the risk event g has 
occurred, either spontaneously or via risk propagation (i.e. O·g = 1), the associated activity 
i will be delayed by ugi time units, possible causing a total project delay when no actions 
are taken. The actual impact of risk g on activity i (Igi) is therefore calculated as shown in 
Eq. (4).
 
Igi =
{ugi,
if O·g = 1,
0,
if O·g = 0
(4)
Since an activity can be delayed by more than one risk event, the total impact from the risk 
interaction network must be measured as a total delay of activity i caused by the occurrence 
of all connected risk events, which results in the total risk impact TRIi. Since the occur­
rence of each risk event can have a different impact on the activity, the total impact TRIi 
can be calculated in various ways. In this study, three possible scenarios will be investigated 
using a parameter λi ∈[0, 1] as explained in the following paragraphs.
 
●
Additive scenario The so-called additive scenario is mostly used in the literature, and 
simply adds the impact of each risk occurrence to obtain the total impact on the activ­
ity (Tsetlin & Winkler, 2005). The TRIi is calculated as the sum of risk impacts on the 
activity i, i.e., TRIi = ∑m
g=1 Igi.
 
●
Reducing scenario In the reduction scenario, the total impact of risks occurring simulta­
neously is less than the impact of each occurring individually (Nasir et al., 2003). Such 
a scenario can happen, for instance, when extreme weather and a labor strike result 
in a 1-day shutdown regardless of whether they occur individually or in combination. 
As such, this scenario will be added to our experiments using a TRIi value defined as 
TRIi = (1 −λi) ∑m
g=1 Igi, where λi represents an adjustment coefficient for calculat­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ing TRIi within the interval [0,1].
 
●
Increasing scenario In contrast to the reducing scenario, the overall risk impact can also 
result in a greater than the sum of the impact of individual risks (Hillson, 2009). For 
example, the impact of unexpected subsurface conditions in a construction project could 
be amplified by the heavy rain (extreme weather). Consequently, the increasing scenario 
computes the total risk impact of activity as TRIi = (1 + λi) ∑m
g=1 Igi.
In practice, a project manager should be able to subjectively determine the specific scenario 
for each activity based on the risk occurrences of previous projects. However, as this study 
does not have enough information to specifically assign these activities risk into one of these 
three classes, the Monte Carlo simulation randomly assigned each activity to one of these 
three classes with three probability boundaries (PiR, PiA and PiI, as shown in Eq. (5)). 
Given these boundary probabilities, the total risk impact of activity i is computed as follows:
 
TRIi =























(1 −λi)
m
∑
g=1
Igi
if rand(0, 1) ∈[0, PiR]
m
∑
g=1
Igi
if rand(0, 1) ∈(PiR, PiR + PiA]
(1 + λi)
m
∑
g=1
Igi
if rand(0, 1) ∈(PiR + PiA, PiR + PiA + PiI]

(5)
where PiR, PiA, and PiI are the probability boundaries for determining whether the reduc­
ing, additive or increasing scenario is used, respectively, with PiR + PiA + PiI = 1.
Latent uncertainty In addition to the presence of risk in activities using the risk events, 
the model also considers the latent uncertainty in activity durations, as suggested by Cleden 
(2017). This latent uncertainty is often the only uncertainty used in the schedule risk analy­
sis models and is modelled using various probability distributions for the activity durations. 
Due to the empirical validation of lognormal distributions for activity durations, both theo­
retically (Trietsch et al., 2012) and empirically (Colin & Vanhoucke, 2016), we decided to 
use this right-skewed distribution to model the latent uncertainty of the activity durations. 
Therefore, the activity duration of an activity within the presence of only latent uncertainty, 
but not risk, is denoted by dU
i . Consequently, the relative duration dU
i /dP
i is assumed to be 
lognormally distributed with µ′ and σ′, where µ′ and σ′ represent the geometric mean and 
standard deviation of activity duration distribution under latent uncertainty. In doing so, the 
duration of activity i (denoted as di) is expressed as Eq. (6). Notably, unlike dP
i , which is 
a deterministic value, dU
i and di are random variables. The former is influenced by latent 
uncertainty, while the latter is affected by both risk occurrences and latent uncertainty.
 
di = dU
i + TRIi
(6)
3.2.3  Sensitivity metrics
With the definition of the occurrence and propagation of risks and the different ways in 
which delays in the activity are caused, the project can be carried out virtually to measure 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
the sensitivity of the activities. These virtual project executions are simulated with so-called 
static simulation runs to indicate that these are not real project executions, but simulated 
executions that take place before the actual start of the project. During these simulations, 
the project schedule is changed by the various simulated risk disruptions, and after sufficient 
simulations, the simulated data can be used to calculate various metrics that, depending on 
the calculation, reflect the sensitivity of the activities in different ways.
In our study, we will make use of six different simulation-based metrics to measure activ­
ity sensitivity. Five of these metrics (CI, SI, CRI, SSI, and MOI) are derived from previous 
research discussed in Sect. 2.2. The sixth metric, introduced in this study, explicitly consid­
ers the link between the PN and the RIN, setting it apart from the others. This new metric, 
termed the risk contribution index (RCI), is explained in detail below, while the formulas for 
the existing metrics are provided in Appendix A.
A new risk contribution index (linking the project and risk interaction networks) The 
previously discussed sensitivity metrics all measure the sensitivity of a project activity by 
considering risk as variability in the activity durations, without explicitly taking any risk 
network into account. Since a risk interaction network consists of a connected of risk events 
(represented by the EI matrix) that could potentially have an impact on the activities of the 
project (AR matrix), an extension of these metrics by incorporating the relation between 
the risk and activity network is a logical choice. In order to identify the sensitive activity 
under risk interaction, a new so-called risk contribution index (RCI) is designed to measure 
the impact of risks of individual activity on the overall project duration. The impact of risk 
on the project duration is derived from the occurrence of the risk events, leading to direct 
delays in the connected activity, but also triggering other risk events due to risk propaga­
tion. Therefore, the occurrence of risk events of an activity might have a direct impact on 
the activity duration, and hence on the project, as well as an indirect impact, as illustrated 
in Fig. 2. Risk events g and risk l are directly linked to activity i, and their occurrences will 
have an impact on its duration, possibly resulting in a project delay (direct impact). In addi­
tion, due to risk propagation, risk g and risk l are likely to trigger risk events h and risk k 
respectively, possibly leading to delays in activities j and m, further increasing the project 
delay indirectly. Therefore, to calculate the RCI for activity i, both the direct impact of the 
risk events of activity i and their indirect impact owing to risk propagation are taken into 
account. A three-phased calculation approach is proposed, which will be discussed in detail 
along the following lines.
Phase 1 To characterize the direct risk contribution of an activity, both the direct risk 
impact of the activity on project delay and the activity’s position in the project network are 
taken into account. As discussed earlier, both risks and latent uncertainty have the potential 
to cause project delays. Risks associated with an activity can be mitigated, whereas the 
Fig. 2  Illustration of direct risk impact 
and indirect risk impact
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
latent uncertainty of an activity is beyond control. Therefore, in each simulation run, the 
project delay caused by risks (denoted as DelayR
s ) is calculated as the difference between 
the project duration (Ds) and the project duration considering only the latent uncertainty 
(UDs), i.e., DelayR
s = Ds −UDs. Notably, the project duration Ds can be obtained 
through simulating both the proposed dynamic processes in the RIN and the impact of 
the latent uncertainty on activities, while the project duration exclusively under the latent 
uncertainty UDs is calculated by excluding the influence of the RIN and focusing solely 
on the impact of the latent uncertainty. Since the total float (slack) of an activity provides 
flexibility in the project schedule, risks affecting activity i will directly contribute to project 
delays only if the total risk impact on activity i exceeds its slack in the schedule, considering 
only latent uncertainty. Consequently, the direct risk impact of activity i (DIi,s) in the sth 
simulation is expressed as the difference between the total risk impact of activity i and the 
total float of activity i considering only latent uncertainty (TRIi,s −tf U
i,s) compared to the 
project delay caused by risks (DelayR
s ), as shown in Eq. (7).
 
DIi,s =
TRIi,s −tf U
i,s
DelayR
s

(7)
where tf U
i,s denotes the total float of activity i exclusively under the latent uncertainty in the 
sth simulation run and is calculated similarly to the UDs by considering only the impact of 
the latent uncertainty while excluding the impact of the RIN.
Furthermore, from a control perspective, the direct risk impact of activity i should be 
weighted by the position of activity i in the PN after each static simulation run, which is 
determined by whether the activity lies on the critical path or not in that particular run. Con­
sidering two activities, i and j, with the same direct risk impact, if activity i is on the critical 
path after static simulation (tfi,s = 0), while activity j is on a non-critical path (tfj,s ̸= 0), 
managing the risks of activity i will be more effective in reducing project delay compared 
to activity j. Therefore, the direct risk contribution of activity i in the sth simulation (DCi,s) 
is described as follows:
 
DCi,s =



DIi,s ·
1
1 + tf i,s
,
if TRIi,s > tf U
i,s,
0,
if TRIi,s ≤tf U
i,s.

(8)
where tfi,s is obtained similar to the Ds by considering the impact of both the RIN and the 
latent uncertainty.
Phase 2 The occurrence of risk events linked to an activity i can also increase the project 
duration indirectly by triggering the interrelated risks and causing delays in other activities. 
Similar to the computation of direct risk contribution (DC), the indirect risk contribution of 
activity i (IC) should integrate the indirect risk impact and the network position of activities 
that are indirectly delayed by the occurrence of the risk events of activity i.
The set of risk events that can trigger delays in activity i are denoted by the set 
Ri = {g| ARgi = 1, O·g = 1}. Due to risk propagation, the risk events in Ri 
can trigger the occurrence of another set of risk events, which are put in the set 
PRi = {h| ∃g ∈Ri, EIgh = 1, ORgh = 1}( set of propagated risks). These risk events in 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
set PRi can cause delays in different activities, and the set of these activities is denoted by 
PAi = {j| ∃h ∈PRi, ARhj = 1}.
The indirect risk impact of activity i on the project delay (IIi) is defined as the frac­
tion of the direct risk impact of the activities in PAi on project delay (DI). This fraction is 
calculated as the impact of risks in PRi on the activities in PAi divided by the total risk 
impact on these activities. This fraction measures the contribution of risks caused by risk 
propagation from Ri of activity i. The indirect risk impact of activity i (IIi) aggregates the 
contribution of PRi to all activities in PAi, as shown in Eq. (9).
 
IIi,s =
∑
j∈P Ai,s
∑
h∈P Ri,s Ihj
∑m
k=1 Ikj
· DIj,s
(9)
Similar to the direct risk contribution, the indirect risk contribution should also take the 
network position of the activities in set PAi into account to assure that activities with less 
slack show a higher indirect risk contribution. Consequently, the indirect risk contribution 
of activity i in the sth simulation (ICi,s) is equal to the indirect risk impact of activity i cor­
rected by the network position of activities in PAi, as shown in Eq. (10).
 
ICi,s =
∑
j∈P Ai,s
(∑
h∈P Ri,s Ihj
∑m
k=1 Ikj
· DIj,s ·
1
1 + tfj,s
)
=
∑
j∈P Ai,s
∑
h∈P Ri,s Ihj
∑m
k=1 Ikj
· DCj,s (10)
Phase 3 The risk contribution of an activity to the project delay is finalized as the sum of 
its direct risk contribution (DC) and indirect risk contribution (IC). Due to the stochastic 
nature of risk occurrence, the computation of RCI requires multiple simulation runs. The 
weight assigned to each simulation run is equal to the project delay caused by risks in that 
simulation run divided by the average project delay caused by risks across all simulation 
runs. Consequently, the formulation of the risk contribution index (RCIi) is illustrated in 
Eq. (11). An illustrative example is provided in Appendix B to show the specific calculation 
of RCI.
 
RCIi = 1
Sr
Sr
∑
s=1
(DCi,s + ICi,s) ·
DelayR
s
E(DelayR)
(11)
where Sr denotes the number of simulation runs for calculating sensitivity metrics in the 
risk model.
4  Control model
This section describes the general methodology to simulate the project progress and how the 
sensitivity metrics will be used to take corrective actions when the project is in danger of 
slowing down, resulting in delays and a possible project failure. Figure 3 shows a schematic 
summary of the methodology used, distinguishing three separate phases. In the first phase, 
the static simulation runs are performed to calculate the sensitivity metrics from Sect. 3.2.2. 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Afterwards, the project will be started in Phase 2 in which the performance of the project 
will be measured at regular tracking periods. At the start of the project, the tracking period is 
TP = 0 and it is subsequently increased (TP = TP + 1) until the project is completely finished. 
During each tracking period, the impact of the occurrence of the risk is analyzed, and if this 
is likely to cause severe delays, corrective actions are taken based on the activity sensitivity 
information provided by the SRA metric. The occurrence of these risk events, their impact 
on the project activities, and the implementation of corrective action are simulated using a 
second dynamic simulation run on the PN–RIN. Corrective actions are taken on the activi­
ties with the highest values for the sensitivity metrics, and the selection of the number of 
activities that are eligible for actions is done in three different ways, as will be discussed 
in Sect. 4.1.1. Ultimately, at the end of the dynamic simulation runs, many possible proj­
ect executions have been simulated (with corrective actions), and the performance of the 
project control system will then be measured in Phase 3 using a number of project output 
performance metrics discussed in Sect. 4.2.
It is important to clearly show the difference between the two simulation runs as they 
each have their own different purpose. Phase 1 of the control model consists of calculat­
ing the sensitivity metrics from Sect. 3.2.2, using a so-called static simulation model. This 
Fig. 3  Simulation procedure of control model
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
simulation is called static because it is performed before the project was started. The values 
of these sensitivity metrics are important in Phase 2 to take corrective actions. During the 
execution of the project (Phase 2), the risk will of course arise, and this execution is imi­
tated by the second dynamic simulation run, which therefore takes place during the project 
progress (instead of before the project start). This distinction between static and dynamic 
simulation studies is not new, and is inherent to every project control study. It is worth not­
ing that in a real project implementation, risks and activity progress can be tracked directly 
without requiring a dynamic simulation run, whereas a static simulation remains necessary 
to obtain sensitivity metric values. The dynamic simulation module is included in this study 
solely because it aims to simulate real project progress, allowing for the analysis of correc­
tive actions’ impact on activity and project duration. In the remainder of this section, Phase 
1 will of course not be repeated, but the various components of Phase 2 (activity selection 
strategies, corrective actions, and re-simulation approach) will be discussed in more detail 
in Sect. 4.1 as well as in the details how the project output performance of Phase 3 will be 
measured in Sect. 4.2
4.1  Project progress (Phase 2)
In this section, three major components of the dynamic simulation run will be discussed. 
The activity selection strategy determines which activities can be selected for corrective 
actions using the sensitivity metrics (Sect. 4.1.1). The different possibilities of the corrective 
actions that are then taken can be described in Sect. 4.1.2. Finally, the option to rerun the 
static simulation during the dynamic simulation is discussed in Sect. 4.1.3.
4.1.1  Activity selection strategies
During each tracking period of the project progress, it may be necessary to adjust the project 
if the observed risks endanger the project. The sensitivity metrics of activities are used as 
threshold values to determine whether actions are actually necessary or not. This approach 
is known in the literature as bottom-up project control (Vanhoucke, 2011) and selects only 
those activities that have a sensitivity metric value greater than a certain value. The general 
idea of this approach is that it is assumed that delays in these highly-sensitive activities are 
most likely to cause real project delays, and therefore, that actions on these activities will 
have the most positive impact to bring the project back on track.
The choice of the threshold values is of course an important parameter in the dynamic 
simulation and determines the so-called control effort of the project manager (Vanhoucke, 
2010). If the values are set very low, almost every activity will be selected, and actions will 
be taken constantly. This provides sufficient opportunities to solve every problem in a timely 
manner, but it will make the control effort very high for the project manager. However, if the 
values are set very high, actions will only be taken sporadically, and even though this will 
make the effort of control for the project manager very low, the risk that the actions will have 
little or no result increases, possibly resulting in a project failure. Therefore, the trade-off 
between the lowest possible control effort and the greatest possible result of the actions will 
be investigated in the computational experiments of Sect. 5 by using different values for the 
sensitivity metric thresholds.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
In our study, the thresholds of the sensitivity metrics to define the control effort will be 
used in three different ways at each tracking period, further narrowing the selection of which 
activities to take action. These strategies are briefly summarized below:
 
●
Interventive strategy In this strategy, action can only be taken for activities that are in 
progress at the current tracking period moment. Obviously, no further actions can be 
taken for the past activities, but no action is also possible for the activities that have yet 
to start. This approach is therefore considered a strategy in which pressing problems that 
emerge are solved without looking much further in the future.
 
●
Preventive strategy In this strategy, actions can only be taken for future activities that 
have yet to start, while nothing is possible for past and ongoing activities. In this strat­
egy, actions are seen as preventive measures to solve future problems rather than urgent 
interventions to solve current problems.
 
●
Hybrid strategy In this strategy, both ongoing and future problems can be solved through 
actions, and is therefore a combination of the previous strategies.
4.1.2  Corrective actions
When the set of activities for which action must be taken has been determined, the actions 
must actually be executed, which involves three choices that were also included in our simu­
lation model. These decision include the type of action to solve the problem, the periodicity 
of the actions during the complete progress of the project as well as the intensity of actions 
taken. These three decisions are briefly explained along the following paragraphs.
Type of actions In most project control studies with corrective actions, two types are 
taken into account, known as activity crashing and variability reduction. Activity crashing is 
the most widely used action as it originates from the critical path method and has later been 
applied in many control studies. This action aims to reduce activity delays by shortening the 
duration of the activity, which entails higher costs. Variability reduction, the action used in 
the current study, works differently and typically involves altering the standard deviation of 
the activity duration distribution to reduce the activity risk (Martens & Vanhoucke, 2019; 
Vaseghi & Vanhoucke, 2023; Vaseghi et al., 2024), but such an approach is not straightfor­
ward in our model. As outlined in Sect. 2.1, traditional studies split, implicitly or explicitly, 
the uncertainty in activity durations into two components: activity risks (or variability) are 
the part of the uncertainty that can be controlled by actions, while the remaining portion is 
the uncertainty that cannot be reduced by any action at all. Since these controllable activ­
ity risks are in the current study modelled as the specific risks in the RIN, we propose an 
alternative approach for variability reduction using the concepts of risk prevention and risk 
protection. It is known that risk protection actions aim to diminish the consequence caused 
by risk occurrence, while risk prevention actions aim to reduce the occurrence probability 
of potential risks. In our implementation, the risk protection action is applied to ongoing 
activities to mitigate delays caused by occurring risks and also reduces the risk propagation 
from the occurring risks. The risk prevention action is directed towards future activities to 
lower the occurrence probability of risks, including both spontaneous probability and transi­
tion probability. While not always straightforward, such actions can be envisioned in practi­
cal settings. For example, the risk of improper basement waterproofing may lead to water 
seepage during interior decoration. A preventive action, such as conducting a water storage 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
test after completing the waterproof layer, can effectively reduce the transition probability 
between these risks. Similarly, to mitigate the impact of a supply chain disruption, a protec­
tive action, such as airlifting goods from an alternative supplier and expediting production, 
can help minimize delays and lower the likelihood of triggering additional risks.
Periodicity of the actions The periodicity of the corrective actions defines how many 
times it is possible to take corrective actions during the project’s progress. These so-called 
tracking periods (TP) can vary and can be applied very often (e.g., a control moment every 
week) or rather sporadically. In line with existing literature (Song et al., 2021), the track­
ing periods were set at different points in time according to the percentage of completion, 
which is measured by dividing the earned value at a given point in time with the total project 
budget (known as budget as completion). Four different scenarios of control points in time 
have been implemented for our computational experiments to explore the impact of the 
periodicity of the corrective actions in the early, middle or late stages, as shown in Table 3.
 
●
Scenario 1 Only one tracking period is set at the very beginning of the project. More 
specifically, when the project is 20% completed, the project manager must identify all 
eligible activities subject to the control effort, and take corrective actions on them, leav­
ing no room anymore for further control in the future. This scenario is mainly focused 
on the preventive character of control, as all actions must be determined very early in 
the project execution.
 
●
Scenario 2 Two tracking periods are set at the 20% and 40% completion of the project. 
In this case, the corrective actions can be split up between two early phases of the pro­
ject (within a predefined control effort), but nothing can be corrected in the second half 
of the project.
 
●
Scenario 3 This scenario is the mirror image of the previous scenario where no action 
can be taken in the first half of the project, but where in the second half two moments are 
possible to resolve delays (at the 60% and 80% completion of the project).
 
●
Scenario 4 This scenario is mostly used in the project control studies, and distributes the 
corrective action possibilities over the complete project horizon. Four tracking periods 
are set at 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% completion of projects, allowing the project manager 
to equally spread the control effort over these four tracking periods. For instance, when 
the control effort level is set at 27% for a project with 30 activities, the 8 activities can 
be subject to actions, which means that the two most sensitive activities, obtained from 
the schedule risk analysis, can be selected at each tracking period.Intensity of the actions 
When it is decided to take an action, a decision must be made to what extent the dura­
tion of the activity is reduced or to what extent the risks of the activity are mitigated. 
It is important to mention here that the action intensity differs from the control effort, 
even though in reality, that distinction may not always be easily made. The control ef­
fort is a general approach to controlling the number of activities that may be subject to 
actions, and it is set as threshold values on the activity sensitivity metrics. As mentioned 
Project completion(%)
20%
40%
60%
80%
Scenario 1
1st TP
Scenario 2
1st TP
2nd TP
Scenario 3
1st TP
2nd TP
Scenario 4
1st TP
2nd TP
3rd TP
4th TP
Table 3  Four scenarios of control 
points in time
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
earlier, recent studies refer to these as the action set. Such a limit may originate from the 
way the project manager operates, taking into account various constraints that must be 
considered across the entire project. The intensity of actions, on the other hand, deter­
mines the magnitude of the action taken on a particular activity, and is thus much more 
directly linked to the type of action, the nature of the activity, and the associated budget 
or technical limitations. For instance, in the case of a machine failure risk in a equip­
ment, a high-intensity risk prevention action could involve replacing the entire piece 
of equipment to reduce the risk probability to zero, while a low-intensity action might 
involve replacing only key components, reducing the risk probability but not eliminat­
ing it entirely. Similarly, in the event of a supply chain disruption risk, a high-intensity 
protection action could include airlifting goods from an alternative supplier and expe­
diting production to minimize delays and the probability of triggering further risks. In 
contrast, a low-intensity action might involve re-routing shipments to reduce the risk 
impact, though activity delays and risk propagation may still occur.
To capture a wide range of possibilities in our model, we varied the action intensity from 0% 
(no action) to 100% (maximum action). When x=50%, the risk prevention action reduces the 
occurrence probability of all future risks by 50%, while the risk protection action decreases 
half of the remaining delays in the ongoing activity and reduces the transition probability of 
all risk interactions by 50%.
4.1.3  Static re-simulation
The sensitivity metric values for the activities were calculated from the static simulation 
runs of Phase 1, and are used throughout the dynamic project progress at each tracking 
period to select the activities, as if these values were never subject to change. However, 
the reality is often different, and with each tracking period, the accuracy of the sensitivity 
metrics decreases because part of the project has been executed (with possible delays and 
actions) which obviously has an impact on future activities. Therefore, it may be desirable to 
periodically repeat the static simulation run of Phase 1, so that the current values of the sen­
sitivity metrics are updated, something that has already been proposed in previous studies 
(Song, Martens, and Vanhoucke, 2021; Wang, Song, Ding, and Goh, 2022a). In the current 
study, we study both the one-time static simulation run and the periodic static simulation 
run. With the latter, the completed activities are considered deterministic (because no new 
risk can arise) and the remaining risk of the activities to be started is re-simulated to obtain 
an update of the sensitivity metrics.
4.2  Project output performance (Phase 3)
In this study, corrective actions using risk protection and prevention are investigated by 
measuring their impact on the ultimate project duration, and we therefore decided to use the 
time effectiveness originally proposed by Martens and Vanhoucke (2019) and two total con­
tribution metrics originally proposed by Vaseghi et al. (2024) to evaluate the performance 
of sensitivity metrics and corrective actions. More precisely, the time effectiveness (TE) 
compares the project duration with and without corrective actions, calculated as the ratio 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
between the average delay reduction due to actions (Delayno −Delayyes) and the average 
delay without actions (Delayno) (Eq. (12)).
 
TE = Delayno −Delayyes
Delayno

(12)
In this formula, the average delays are measured as Delayno =
1
Sc
∑Sc
s=1(ADno
s −PD), 
and Delayyes =
1
Sc
∑Sc
s=1(ADyes
s
−PD), where PD is the planned project duration, s is 
the index of the simulation run, Sc is the total number of simulation runs in the control 
model, and AD denotes the project durations (as a result of the dynamic simulation runs) 
with (superscript yes) and without (superscript no) actions.
The total contribution metrics measure the relative contribution of actions taken on the 
selected activities on the mean and standard deviation of project duration. The equations 
of the total contribution on mean (TCm) and the total contribution on standard deviation 
(TCs) are given by Eqs. (13) and (14), respectively.
 
TCm =µno −µyes
µno

(13)
 
TCs =σno −σyes
σno

(14)
where µno and µyes represent the mean of the project duration with and without actions, and 
σno and σyes denote the standard deviation of the project duration with and without actions.
5  Computational experiments
This section displays results for testing the reliability of the sensitive metrics (risk model) 
and the impact on the project progress (control model) using a number of experiments. Sec­
tion 5.1 provides the characteristics of the risk model and parameters of the control model, 
which serve as the input data. In Sect. 5.2, the validity of sensitivity metrics is compared 
in the absence and presence of corrective actions. Subsequently, we investigate the impact 
on the project progress (control model), i.e., the comparison of activity selection strategies 
(Sect. 5.3), the impact of the corrective actions (Sect. 5.4), and the importance of static re-
simulation (Sect. 5.5).
5.1  Simulation settings
In order to test the performance of both our risk and control models, we used a set of various 
artificial projects from the literature and we linked them to different types of generated risk 
interaction networks. We have used a number of (existing or new) parameters to maximally 
vary the structure of these two networks of the risk model, and have also diversified the 
parameters of the control model. A summary is given in Table 4 and details are provided 
along the following lines.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Risk model parameters The parameters to generate the double-layer PN–RIN networks 
can be classified into five categories, as discussed along the following lines:
Project network: The structure of the activity network for the project is controlled using 
the serial/parallel (SP) network indicator proposed by Vanhoucke et al. (2008). This indi­
cator varies between 0% and 100% indicating a completely parallel or serial network, 
respectively, and is known as a reliable indicator for predicting the forecasting accuracy and 
control performance in various studies. Vanhoucke (2011) investigated that the SP values of 
construction projects always range from 0.12 to 0.78, and proved that the SP significantly 
influences the time efficiency using SRA techniques. Consequently, two existing datasets 
of Vanhoucke et al. (2008) are employed to select project instances. Specifically, we have 
selected 400 project instances from the RG30 set, which consists of projects with n = 30 
activities, and SP values ranging from 20% to 80%, in steps of 20%. In addition, we have 
also selected 360 project instances with n = 50 activities from the DC1 set, where the SP 
values range between [0.2, 0.8]. These projects can be downloaded from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​p​r​
o​j​e​c​t​m​a​n​a​g​e​m​e​n​t​.​u​g​e​n​t​.​b​e​/​r​e​s​e​a​r​c​h​/​d​a​t​a​. Since activity cost data are required for project 
tracking in the control model, the fixed cost (FC) and variable cost (VC) for each activity 
are determined by two uniform distributions fF and fV with lower and upper values as 
indicated in Table 4 and also used in the study of Song et al. (2020). Since this study does 
not take renewable resources into account, only the network data and activity durations are 
kept in the study.
Risk interaction network The quantity of risks (RQ) and the network density (ND) are 
used to construct a risk interaction network, which determines the size and complexity of 
the RIN respectively (Fang et la., 2012; Li et al., 2016; Yuan et al., 2018). The quantity of 
risks determines the number of risk events (nodes) in RIN and is set to two to eight times 
the number of activities n of the PN. The network density is defined as the ratio of the actual 
Parameters
Classification
Values
Risk model
Project network
n
30, 50
SP
0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8
FC
fF (10, 90)
VC
fV (100, 900)
Risk interaction network
RQ (m)
2n, 4n, 8n
ND
0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8
Links between two networks
RU
0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8
Activity delays
λi
0.5
PiR, PiA, PiI
0.3, 0.4, 0.3
Risk
RP = [pgh]
f1(0.1, 0.7)
RI = [ugi]
f2(0.5, 1, 4.5)
Minimum number of 
simulations
Smin
r
3000
Control model
Control effort
CE%
13%, 27%, 40%
Periodicity of the actions
PA
4
Intensity of the actions
IA%
25%, 50%, 
75%, 100%
Minimum number of 
simulations
Smin
c
3000
Table 4  Simulation settings
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
edges (K) in the RIN to the maximum number of potential edges, as shown in Eq. (15) (Fang 
et al., 2012; Wasserman & Faust, 1994). The higher the network density is, the more risk 
interactions are present in the risk interaction network.
 
ND =
K
RQ(RQ −1)
(15)
Links between two networks The total risk impact of an activity is correlated with the 
number of potential risks that are linked to the activity, and not all activities should be sub­
ject to the same number of possible risk events. A risk uniformity (RU) metric is defined as 
a measure of the evenness of risk events among activities, as shown in Eq. (16). When RU is 
equal to 1, each activity owns the same number of risks. The value of RU equal to 0 means 
all risks happen in one activity.
 
RU = 1 −rmax −rmin
m

(16)
where m denotes the risk quantity in the RIN, and rmax and rmin signify the maximum and 
minimum risk quantity of activities within the project, respectively.
Activity delays In order to select one of the three scenarios, the reducing, additive or 
increasing scenario, for each activity, values for the probability boundaries are set to PiR, 
PiA, and PiI) to 0.3, 0.4, and 0.3, respectively, and λi is set equal to 0.5. In addition, the 
latent uncertainty in activity duration is modelled using the lognormal distribution with 
µ′ = 0.0594 and σ′ = 0.2679, which has been applied in previous research study (Mar­
tens & Vanhoucke, 2019; Vaseghi & Vanhoucke, 2023) to model uncertainty in activity 
durations.
Risk The risk probability (RP) and the risk impact (RI) values are set based on values 
found in the literature (Creemers et al., 2014). The continuous uniform distribution is mostly 
used to generate the spontaneous probability (pgg) of risks and the transition probability 
(pgh) between risk interactions (Creemers et al., 2014; Garvey et al., 2015; Guan et al., 
2021; Ren, 1994; Wang et al., 2020b, 2022a), which is indicated by the f1(a, b) abbreviation 
in Table 4 with a = 0.1 and b = 0.7 the minimum and maximum value. The risk impact is 
modelled by triangular distribution, as done in several studies (Chapman, 2001; Creemers 
et al., 2014; Hulett, 1996; Xu et al., 2018). It assumes that the project manager is able to 
estimate the worst (e), the best (c) and the most likely (d) impact of risk on activity dura­
tions and is denoted as f2(c, d, e) in the table with each parameter showing the difference, 
expressed as a time unit. Since the selected distributions align with the risk study conducted 
by Creemers et al. (2014), we follow their specified distribution parameter settings as shown 
in Table 4.
Based on the parameters of the risk model, a network generator is developed to gener­
ate the double-layer network (PN–RIN) with a diverse structure, which is detailed by a 
pseudo-code in Appendix C for further clarification. Each generated PN–RIN instance is 
stored in an MS Excel file, containing the network structure parameters (SP, ND, RU, RQ) 
and the basic data of the PN–RIN, which can be downloaded from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​p​r​o​j​e​c​t​m​a​n​
a​g​e​m​e​n​t​.​u​g​e​n​t​.​b​e​/​r​e​s​e​a​r​c​h​/​p​r​o​j​e​c​t​_​r​i​s​k​/​r​r​s. With four values for the SP indicator (0.2, 0.4, 
0.6, 0.8), three values for the RQ parameter (low, medium, high), four values for ND (0.2, 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
0.4, 0.6, 0.8), and four values for RU (0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8), along with the generation of 100 
projects with 30 activities for each combination, a PN–RIN dataset with 19,200 instances 
(4 × 3 × 4 × 4 × 100) is produced based on the RG30 set. Additionally, based on the DC1 
set, which consists of 360 projects with 50 activities and SP values ranging from 0.2 to 0.8, a 
PN–RIN dataset with 17,280 instances (360 × 3 × 4 × 4) is generated for each combination 
of RQ, ND, and RU parameters.
Control model parameters To broaden the scope of the control model, three parameters 
were set at different values, as mentioned in Sect. 3. For the selection of activities subject to 
control, the control effort is set of three values equal to 13%, 27%, 40% corresponding to the 
selection of 4, 8, and 12 highly sensitive activities (out of 30). Such an approach means that 
only a subset of the project is monitored, keeping the control effort reasonably low. Actions 
can only be taken on these monitored activities, while the others, although still exposed to 
potential risks, are completely ignored. Second, the periodicity of the actions is tested under 
four scenarios using the four tracking periods discussed earlier. Likewise, the intensity of 
the actions is set to 25%, 50%, 75%, or 100%.
For both the static and the dynamic simulations, a reasonable number of simulation runs 
(Sr and Sc) is required to ensure the reliability of the simulation output. However, deter­
mining this number is challenging, as it varies with the project characteristics. For this, we 
adopt the approach proposed by Wang et al. (2019, 2020b) to automatically terminate the 
simulation procedure by combining a warming-up process and a stability criterion. Since 
the average project duration stabilizes as the number of simulation runs increases, the stabil­
ity criterion is defined as the difference in average project duration between two consecu­
tive simulations being less than 0.1. In addition, to avoid the extreme case where the stop 
criterion is met but stability is not achieved when the number of simulation runs is small, a 
minimum number of simulation runs Smin
r
 and Smin
c
 should be set for the warm-up process. 
Figure 4 illustrates that the average duration of a project with 50 activities and high ND 
tends to stabilize after 3000 simulation runs. Consequently, Smin
r
 and Smin
c
 are set to 3000.
Fig. 4  Convergence of average project duration with increasing simulation runs
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
In the following experiments, a number of parameters will be tested while keeping other 
parameter values constant. After each experiment, the best parameter value that outperforms 
all others will be selected, and thus, will be used in subsequent experiments.
5.2  Experiment 1: comparison of sensitivity metrics
In this section, the effectiveness of the sensitive metrics to select activities for actions is 
tested using two sub-experiments. In the first sub-experiment (Sect. 5.2.1), the performance 
of the sensitivity metrics is compared without taking any actions. The second sub-experi­
ment (Sect. 5.2.2) investigates which sensitivity metric performs best in facilitating project 
control with corrective actions.
5.2.1  Sensitivity metrics without actions
The selection of activities for corrective actions is a crucial component of this study and is 
done using the control effort concept to set thresholds on the values of the sensitivity met­
rics. The various sensitivity metrics mentioned in Sect. 3.2.3 calculate different values for 
each activity, resulting in different rankings. Only the top x% of activities will be selected 
for further control. In this experiment, control effort values of 13%, 27%, and 40% will be 
used, corresponding to the selection of the 4, 8, and 12 most sensitive activities (out of 30) 
and the 6, 13, and 20 most sensitive activities (out of 50), which might be subject to actions. 
It is tested which of the sensitivity metrics provides the most reliable ranking and activity 
selection method.
The test is done by running the dynamic simulation runs to imitate the project progress 
twice, without taking any actions. In the first run, the project progress is simulated with all 
the risk of the sensitive activities removed, and the risk events for the insensitive activities 
(the ones that do not pass the threshold) is kept in the model. In a second run, the reverse 
is true, removing all risks of the insensitive activities but keeping the risk of the sensitive 
activities. Each time, the average project duration (µmetric) and the standard deviation of 
project duration (σmetric) is measured for each sensitivity metric, and the results for proj­
ects with 30 activities and 50 activities are displayed in Tables 5 and 6, respectively.
The results show that both the mean and the standard deviation of project duration due to 
the risk elimination of sensitive activities are significantly lower for each sensitivity metric 
than those for which the risk is eliminated for the insensitive activities. This indicates that 
all the sensitivity metrics are able in identifying the sensitive activities.
Comparing the outcomes across different metrics, the differences between the mean and 
the standard deviation values are marginal. Thus, a Mann–Whitney U-test is performed to 
determine whether the proposed RCI differs significantly from the existing SRA metrics. 
Tables 7 and 8 present the p-value results for projects with 30 and 50 activities, respectively. 
The tests are performed with a significance level α = 0.05. This means that if the p-value 
is less than 0.05, then the difference between the proposed RCI and the existing metrics in 
identifying highly sensitive activities is statistically significant. The results show that CI and 
SI exhibit inferior performance in terms of identifying highly sensitive activities. The poor 
performance of CI and SI aligns with previous studies that argue that only considering one 
side of risk, either probability or impact, but not both, provides inadequate information for 
activity sensitivity. However, due to the comparable performance of other sensitivity met­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Table 5  Validity of metrics without actions for projects with 30 activities
CI
SI
SSI
CRI(r)
CRI(ρ)
CRI(τ)
MOI
RCI
µCI
σCI
µSI
σSI
µSSI
σSSI
µCRI(r)
σCRI(r) µCRI(ρ) σCRI(ρ) µCRI(τ) σCRI(τ) µMOI
σMOI
µRCI
σRCI
HS
13%
204.61
31.18
203.69
30.86
156.62
16.08
159.88
17.10
156.93
16.10
155.92
16.04
156.71
16.08
156.02
16.21
27%
169.51
23.97
168.67
23.77
139.15
15.05
143.63
16.21
140.36
15.19
138.58
15.10
139.38
15.07
139.04
15.12
40%
143.18
19.28
142.33
19.10
124.96
14.27
130.38
15.50
125.17
14.52
125.01
14.42
125.19
14.25
124.70
14.25
HI
13%
281.47
54.08
282.06
54.27
281.47
54.08
282.72
54.90
284.34
55.08
284.55
55.06
282.67
54.50
285.54
55.15
27%
274.04
52.78
274.70
52.97
276.73
53.23
278.06
54.39
280.66
54.91
281.47
54.87
277.82
53.68
283.53
55.12
40%
260.83
50.56
261.77
50.84
268.70
52.20
269.33
53.39
273.47
54.48
275.10
54.52
269.74
52.71
278.43
54.99
a HS highly sensitive activity, HI highly insensitive activity
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
rics in identifying highly sensitive activities, the results of this experiment cannot be used to 
determine which sensitivity metric is used best. Therefore, they have to be used in a project 
control framework where actions are taken, which is discussed next.
5.2.2  Sensitivity metrics with actions
This section reports the time effectiveness of the project control model using the different 
sensitivity metrics for taking actions. Figures 5 and  6 graphically display the average time 
effectiveness of each metric using the variability reduction strategy for projects with 30 
and 50 activities under different combinations of control effort and action intensity. The 
results show that, on average, the RCI performs better than the existing metrics in select­
ing the most sensitive activities, regardless of the percentage of control effort and intensity 
of actions. This suggests that the RCI provides more valuable information for identifying 
activities whose risks have the most significant impact on project delays during progress. In 
cases of high control effort (40%) with very intense actions (100%), the RCI demonstrates 
only a slight advantage over the SSI and MOI metrics, but these are extreme situations, as 
these corrective actions eliminate all risks associated with a large set of sensitive activities.
Figure  7 illustrates the performance of the sensitivity metrics across various project 
network structures (i.e., SP values) for projects with 30 activities. Given the inferior per­
formance of CI and SI in the previous experiments, we compared the RCI only with the 
competitive metrics. The results consistently demonstrate that the time effectiveness of 
actions using the RCI surpasses that achieved with other sensitivity metrics, irrespective 
of the activity network structure. The sensitivity metrics prove more beneficial for paral­
lel projects, as it is known that such bottom-up control approach excels in such scenarios 
(Vanhoucke, 2011; Vaseghi & Vanhoucke, 2023), and it is a trend that is also observed in 
our study. However, the RCI shows only a marginal decrease in performance, contrasting 
sharply with the steep declines seen of other metrics. Consequently, the disparity between 
RCI and the top-performing existing metric increases with rising SP values, as depicted in 
the grey area. This suggests that the RCI is more reliable than other metrics in identifying 
sensitive activities across different project network structures under risk interaction.
The performance of the sensitivity metrics is tested under different risk interaction net­
works (i.e., ND and RQ) for the projects with 30 and 50 activities, as depicted in Figs. 8 
and 9. The results consistently demonstrate that the RCI also outperforms the other metrics 
regardless of the combination of ND and RQ values. Specifically, the superiority of RCI 
becomes more pronounced as the density of risk interactions increases (ND), as depicted 
in the grey area. This underscores the importance of considering the indirect risk impact of 
activities on project delays. The SSI, traditionally known as one of the best performing sen­
sitivity metric, only calculates the product of the probability that the activity lies on the criti­
cal path and the impact of its variability on project duration, and neglects the indirect risk 
impact. The MOI introduces the number of successor activities for each individual activity 
(potentially serving as an indirect impact measure), but still falls short of characterizing the 
indirect risk impact completely.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Table 6  Validity of metrics without actions for projects with 50 activities
CI
SI
SSI
CRI(r)
CRI(ρ)
CRI(τ)
MOI
RCI
µCI
σCI
µSI
σSI
µSSI
σSSI
µCRI(r) σCRI(r) µCRI(ρ) σCRI(ρ) µCRI(τ) σCRI(τ) µMOI
σMOI
µRCI
σRCI
HS
13%
356.51
183.03
333.92
186.24
248.03
97.92
250.50
98.81
247.41
97.20
247.27
97.73
247.57
97.24
248.94
98.85
27%
252.42
156.81
250.23
161.71
228.87
84.82
230.03
86.37
229.21
83.37
227.92
84.77
229.24
86.84
228.36
85.71
40%
236.04
121.07
233.46
122.15
209.43
72.21
212.41
74.25
211.63
72.97
210.03
72.51
209.39
72.20
210.71
73.62
HI
13%
401.61
196.41
403.16
197.10
406.16
198.40
406.88
198.44
407.07
199.54
405.50
197.78
406.38
198.83
405.16
197.73
27%
397.06
194.98
399.13
195.39
401.20
196.54
402.23
196.81
405.41
197.99
403.87
196.46
402.50
196.87
404.66
197.39
40%
382.73
185.25
383.03
185.33
389.04
187.61
389.89
188.20
397.89
194.73
394.39
191.71
389.33
187.88
399.56
195.38
a HS Highly Sensitive Activity, HI Highly Insensitive Activity
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
5.3  Experiment 2: comparison of activity selection strategies
In this experiment, the performance of three activity selection strategies (interventive, pre­
ventive and hybrid strategies) is compared to explore the impact of different ways of select­
ing and controlling sensitive activities. Figure 10 displays the results under different project 
network structures (SP).
The overall results show that the hybrid strategy performs best, followed by the preven­
tive strategy and the interventive strategy, which is in line with the results of Martens and 
Vanhoucke (2019). For very parallel projects (SP=0.2), the differences between the inter­
ventive strategy and the preventive strategy in terms of TE and TCm are marginal, and the 
preventive strategy exhibits inferior performance in TCs. This can be explained by the fact 
that many activities are executed at the same time in parallel networks, which leaves not 
much room for taking actions on future activities (as is done in the preventive strategy). Fur­
ther, for increasing SP-values, the performance of both the interventive and the hybrid strat­
egies gradually decreases, while the preventive strategy displays improved performance, 
particularly in terms of TCs, indicating its stability and superiority in variability reduction 
for more serial projects. For serial projects, the preventive and hybrid strategies can be con­
sidered as alternative strategies, which aligns with the conclusion drawn from Martens and 
Vanhoucke (2019). These results confirm the common knowledge that the structure of the 
network is one of the main drivers for the performance of project control actions.
5.4  Experiment 3: Impact of corrective actions
This section discusses the impact of timing and extent of corrective actions on time effec­
tiveness. Section  5.4.1 demonstrates the impact of periodicity of corrective actions and 
Sect. 5.4.2 shows the impact of intensity of corrective actions.
5.4.1  Impact of periodicity of corrective actions
This section explores the effect of four different scenarios of the action periodicity under 
each activity selection strategy. Figures 11, 12 and 13 depict boxplots for time effectiveness 
(TE) as well as the total contribution metrics TCm and TCs.
In the interventive strategy, the experiment shows that both the timing of control and the 
number of control periods have a significant impact on TE, TCm, and TCs. This can be seen 
by Scenario 4 that exhibits the best performance across all metrics, followed by Scenario 
2, Scenario 3, and Scenario 1. Since Scenarios 2 and 3 have the same number of control 
periods but differ in timing, the comparison result indicates that reducing the impact of risks 
in highly sensitive activities during earlier project stages has a greater impact on project 
duration than addressing them later. Furthermore, performance improves as the number 
of control periods increases, with Scenario 4 outperforming all others. This suggests that 
increasing the frequency of project tracking can effectively reduce project duration under 
the interventive strategy.
Conversely, for the preventive strategy, the performance of Scenario 4 is similar to that 
of Scenarios 1 and 2, suggesting that the number of tracking periods has a negligible impact. 
This is because the risks associated with the most highly sensitive activities are eliminated 
early, effectively preventing risk propagation and reducing the probability of subsequent 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
risks. Additionally, under the same number of control periods, Scenario 2 demonstrates sub­
stantially better time effectiveness and total contribution metrics compared to Scenario 3. 
This implies that control timing plays a critical role in the effectiveness of corrective actions 
when project managers proactively address project risks.
In the hybrid strategy, Scenario 4 performs the best, followed by Scenario 2, Scenario 1, 
and Scenario 3, mirroring the trend observed in the preventive strategy. The time effective­
Table 7  Results of Mann–Whitney U-test for projects with 30 activities
CI
SI
SSI
CRI(r)
CRI(ρ)
CRI(τ)
MOI
13%
< 0.05
< 0.05
0.53
< 0.05
0.41
0.62
0.46
27%
< 0.05
< 0.05
0.25
< 0.05
0.10
0.42
0.12
40%
< 0.05
< 0.05
0.20
< 0.05
0.09
0.38
0.09
Table 8  Results of Mann–Whitney U-test for projects with 50 activities
CI
SI
SSI
CRI(r)
CRI(ρ)
CRI(τ)
MOI
13%
< 0.05
< 0.05
0.54
0.45
0.45
0.44
0.49
27%
< 0.05
< 0.05
0.30
0.22
0.26
0.33
0.26
40%
< 0.05
< 0.05
0.23
0.12
0.23
0.30
0.22
Fig. 5  Performance of sensitivity metrics for the projects with 30 activities under different actions
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7  Comparison of sensitivity metrics under different SP values
 
Fig. 6  Performance of sensitivity metrics for the projects with 50 activities under different actions
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 10  Comparison of activity selection strategies under different SP values
 
Fig. 9  Comparison of sensitivity metrics under various combinations of ND and RQ for the projects with 
50 activities
 
Fig. 8  Comparison of sensitivity metrics under various combinations of ND and RQ for the projects with 
30 activities
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 13  Comparison of four dif­
ferent scenarios in TCs
 
Fig. 12  Comparison of four dif­
ferent scenarios in TCm
 
Fig. 11  Comparison of four dif­
ferent scenarios in TE
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ness of the hybrid strategy surpasses that of both the interventive and preventive strategies 
in each respective scenario, reinforcing the earlier findings in Sect. 5.3.
5.4.2  Impact of intensity of corrective actions
Figure 14 displays the relative improvement in time effectiveness achieved by actions with 
intensity values 50%, 75%, and 100% compared to values of 25% intensity for different 
levels of control effort. The graph displays that the performance of actions improves with 
the increase of the action intensity, which is an obvious results, irrespective of control effort, 
illustrating that the growing degree of mitigated risks leads to better results. The graph 
also shows that the improvement resulting from an increased intensity is more pronounced 
under low control effort compared to high control effort. In particular, it shows a marginal 
improvement as the intensity increases from 75% to 100% under a 40% control effort. This 
is due to the fact that in scenarios with high control effort, a larger set of sensitive activities 
is already under control, meaning that even with low intensity, a substantial number of risks 
can be mitigated, reducing the overall impact of risk propagation. Consequently, when the 
risk events of more sensitive activities are mitigated, the additional improvement in time 
effectiveness bacomes limited. It implies that, for a relatively large set of activities under 
control (high control effort), applying low-intensity corrective actions can still yield com­
mendable performance.
Figure 15 displays the time effectiveness of actions with varying combinations of action 
intensity and control effort under different RU values. The results show that the difference 
between high and low control effort is the least pronounced in projects with low RU value, 
as depicted in grey area. This is due to the fact that risk events in projects with low RU 
tend to cluster together in several activities, resulting in a marginal improvement in time 
effectiveness when implementing actions on additional activities. This clearly illustrates the 
importance of having a good understanding of how the risk network looks like, and how it 
is linked to the project network.
Fig. 14  Relative improvement due to the 
increase of intensity of actions
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
5.5  Experiment 4: importance of static re-simulation
Recall that the sensitivity metrics for the activities are obtained through a static simulation 
run, conducted prior to the project’s start. However, as argued in Sect. 4.1.3, the accuracy of 
these sensitivity metric values decreases as the project progresses, due to delays and actions 
impacting future activities. Therefore, it is necessary to regularly update the calculations 
of sensitivity metrics to obtain new and updated values. This could potentially improve 
the accuracy of sensitivity metrics, leading to better activity selection in later stages of the 
project. This experiment examines the extent to which such re-simulation is necessary and 
whether it depends on the network structure. Without loss of generality, the hybrid strategy 
with a 27% control effort and 75% intensity of actions is used to discuss the results of this 
experiment. We tested four possible re-simulation approaches in this experiment, which 
can be executed at the four possible tracking periods (20%, 40%, 60%, and 80%). The first 
experiment re-simulates the project only at 20% completion, and no further re-simulation is 
done. The second scenario re-simulates at 20% and 40% (and no further simulations), the 
third at the first three tracking moments, and the last scenario at all tracking periods. The 
results are compared with the static simulation approach, in which only one simulation is 
performed at 0% of the project (i.e., before the project starts).
Table 9 displays the average time effectiveness of using static simulation along with the 
relative improvement in this time effectiveness due to the re-simulations. The table shows 
the results for different network structures, ranging from very parallel networks (SP = 0.2) to 
Fig. 15  Performance of action intensity under different control efforts and RU values
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
very serial networks (SP = 0.8). First, the results indicate that re-simulation adds value to the 
time effectiveness of control actions regardless of network structure. This implies that re-
calculating the sensitivity metric in the periodic monitoring process facilitates the effect of 
control actions. Second, the relative improvement in time effectiveness presents an increas­
ing trend when more tracking periods are used for re-simulation. This is easy to explain, as 
with the completion of some activities during the project execution, the occurrence of risks 
of these activities become clear. Since the corresponding uncertainty is then eliminated, 
increasing the frequency of sensitivity metric recalculations improves the accuracy of sensi­
tive activity identification.
Finally, the results display that the improvements decrease when more activities are 
scheduled serially. It was already known that sensitivity metrics can better distinguish 
between high and low sensitivity of activities in studies without risk networks (Vanhoucke, 
2010). In Song et al. (2021), it has been shown that re-simulation works better for parallel 
networks than for serial ones. The same logic holds in the current study, as for highly serial 
projects, the sequence of activities in the schedule is not significantly altered due to uncer­
tainty. Therefore, the RCI is capable of effectively capturing both the direct and indirect risk 
impacts of activities, and there is no urgent need for re-simulation.
6  Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a double-layer network consisting of the risk interaction network 
and the project network for schedule risk analysis and project control under risk interaction. 
First, a risk model abstracts the dynamic processes between activities and risks, i.e., risk 
spontaneous occurrence in activity, dynamic risk propagation, and activity delay by risks. 
In order to provide accurate activity sensitivity information, a novel interaction-oriented 
metric (RCI) is designed as the output of the risk model. Subsequently, a simulation-based 
control model is established to support the corrective action decision-making. Since the 
variability reduction in the literature is impractical to implement, risk prevention action 
and risk protection action are introduced as an alternative and refinement of the variability 
reduction strategy. In addition, three activity selection strategies are considered to take cor­
rective actions, labeled as preventive strategy, interventive strategy, and hybrid strategy. 
Finally, an extensive computational experiment has been run on a large set of fictitious 
Static Relative improvement of re-simulation
TP1 (%)
TP1,2 (%)
TP1,2,3 (%)
TP1,2,3,4 (%)
SP = 0.2
0.68
1.77
2.81
3.99
7.27
SP = 0.4
0.62
1.31
2.29
3.23
6.38
SP = 0.6
0.57
0.89
1.41
2.25
5.29
SP = 0.8
0.54
0.52
0.93
1.67
4.63
Table 9  Impact of re-simulation 
on time effectiveness
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
projects to investigate the validation of the sensitivity metric and the performance of com­
parison of different actions and strategies.
The main results of the computation experiment can be summarized as follows. First, the 
results show that the proposed index (RCI) performs best for selecting the most sensitive 
activity to mitigate their risks. More precisely, the RCI exhibits reliability across both serial 
projects and parallel projects, compared to other sensitivity metrics that are known to per­
form well on parallel networks, but are not so good for serial projects. In addition, the supe­
riority of RCI becomes more significant with the increasing density of RIN. Consequently, 
the indirect risk impact of activity owing to risk interaction can not be ignored in schedule 
risk analysis. Second, the overall results show that the hybrid strategy outperforms the inter­
ventive strategy and preventive strategy in terms of the time effectiveness and the variability 
reduction, highlighting the importance of designing actions not only for solving current 
problems but also future expected problem. Furthermore, the time effectiveness of using 
interventive strategy depends on both the timing and the quantity of control periods, while 
the time effectiveness of using preventive strategy and hybrid strategy primarily depend on 
the timing of control periods. More specifically, for the interventive strategy, their efficacy 
increases with a growing number of control periods. For the preventive and hybrid strategy, 
taking action on the sensitive activities in the earlier stage of projects is more effective, since 
preventing the risks of the activity that starts in the early stage can effectively reduce risk 
propagation into the subsequent stages. Moreover, low control effort requires more intensity 
of actions. A limited control effort is suggested for projects with low RU values. Finally, 
the experiments illustrate that re-simulation significantly improves the accuracy of taking 
corrective actions and the extent of improvement differs from the frequency of re-simulation 
and the network structure.
In the future, our research could be expanded as follows: First and foremost, our study 
could be extended to resource-constrained projects. As this study is dedicated to exploring 
the impact of risk interaction on schedule risk analysis and project control using project 
with unlimited resources, the classic activity sensitivity metrics could be used. However, 
when these projects are subject to limited resources, studies have shown that these sensitiv­
ity metrics should be updated and modified, which makes the static simulation run process 
much more complex (Song, Martens, and Vanhoucke, 2021). Secondly, the models of this 
study could and should be extended by taking more specific limitations into account. In the 
current study, the control model has been tested under strict limitations on the control effort, 
without making a practical link to what this could mean in practice. In future research, we 
could consider strict limits on the total control budget and the cost of actions, using the con­
cept of the action set of Vaseghi et al. (2024) more explicitly. By doing so, an optimization 
method could be introduced to develop an automatic support system for budget allocation 
and corrective action decision-making. Such an extension could provide better guidelines 
for project managers to determine more effective corrective actions.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Appendix 1: Five existing sensitivity metrics
In this section, five existing sensitivity metrics adopted in this studies are briefly reviewed. 
Table 10 lists the reference and the formula of each metric, which are explained along the 
following lines. The calculations of these metrics are based on S simulation runs and an 
index s is used to indicate a specific run (with s = 1, . . . , S). After all simulation runs have 
ended, the data generated for each simulation run is processed into a number of simple for­
mulas, which then returns a value of the sensitivity metric for each activity i.
The CI is the most well-known metric and simply measures the probability that an activ­
ity lies on the critical path. The calculation is simple, and counts the number of times an 
activity lies on the critical path in each simulation, and then expresses that number as a 
percentage of the total number of simulations (S). Activity i is critical in the simulation run 
s if the total float tf s
i of activity i is zero. A simulation-based estimator of CI is given by
 
ˆ
CIi = 1
S
S
∑
s=1
1(tf s
i = 0)
(17)
where the indicator function 1(·) equals one if the element is true and zero otherwise.
Table 10  Summary of existing SRA metrics
Reference Metrics
Generic expression
Martin 
(1965)
CI
CIi = Pr(i is critical) = Pr(tfi = 0) where Pr {x} denotes the probability 
function
Williams 
(1992)
SI
SIi = E(
di
di+tfi ·
D
E(D) ) where E(x) denotes the expected value of x
Van­
houcke 
(2010)
SSI
SSIi = CIi · σi
σ
Williams 
(1992)
CRI
CRI(r)i = corr(di, D) = Cov(di, D)
σ2
i σ2
CRI(ρ)i = corr(rank(di), rank(D))
CRI(τ)i = Pr {
(dl
i −ds
i )(Dl −Ds) > 0}
−Pr {
(dl
i −ds
i )(Dl −Ds) < 0}
 
where corr(x, y) represents the linear correlation between x and y, the Cov(x, y) 
signifies the covariance between x and y, and l is an auxiliary index defined as 
l = s + 1, . . . , S.
Madadi 
and Iran­
manesh 
(2012)
MOI
MOIi =
σ2
i
σ2max ·
1
1+E(tfi)−#Si
n
 where σ2
max is the maximum variance of the 
project activities and #Si is the total number of activities that are placed after activ­
ity i in the project network.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The SI reflects the relative importance between project activities. The total float of activ­
ity is used in a completely different way. The formula puts the float in the denominator of the 
formula to ensure that activities with a larger float get a lower SI value (because they are less 
sensitive to delays). In addition, the calculation also compares the total simulated duration 
of the project for each simulation run s (Ds) with the expected simulated project duration 
E(D) (over all simulation runs) to make sure that the impact of the variability in the activity 
duration on the total project duration is also taken into account. Williams (1992) argued that 
this metric should perform better than the probability calculations of the CI formula because 
of the inclusion of the impact calculations. A simulation-based estimator of SI is expressed 
as shown in Eq. (A2).
 
ˆ
SIi = 1
S
S
∑
s=1
(
ds
i
ds
i + tf s
i
)
·
( Ds
E(D)
)

(18)
The SSI combines the probability and impact calculations by multiplying the CI metric 
(which measures only probability) by the ratio of the standard deviation of the activity dura­
tion (σi) and the standard deviation of the project duration (σ). This ratio actually measures 
the impact of the variability of the activity on the project duration, which high values denot­
ing that this activity has a lot of impact, while low values actually mean that the uncertainty 
in this activity has hardly any effect on the project duration. By including both the probabil­
ity and the impact very explicitly in this index, the sensitivity metric is considered as a true 
risk metric (risk = probability x impact) and it has been shown in various simulation studies 
that this metric performs best for monitoring the project progress. A simulation-based esti­
mator of SSI is calculated as follows:
 
ˆ
SSIi = ˆσi
ˆσ · ˆ
CIi
(19)
where ˆσi and ˆσ are the sample standard deviations of σi and σ, given by
 
ˆσi =
√∑S
s=1(ds
i −E(di))2
S −1
and ˆσ =
√∑S
s=1(Ds −E(D))2
S −1

(20)
There are three versions of the CRI because correlations can be calculated in different ways, 
and they are known as Pearson’s product-moment correlation (CRI(r)), Kendall’s tau rank 
correlation (CRI(τ)) and Spearman’s rank correlation (CRI(ρ)).
More precisely, the cruciality index based on Pearson’s product-moment correlation 
(CRI(r)) measures the degree of linear relationship between activity duration and project 
duration. A simulation estimator of CRI(r) is given by
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
ˆ
CRI(r)i =
∑S
s=1(ds
i −E(di))(Ds −E(D))
(S −1) ˆσiˆσ

(21)
Considering the non-linear relation, the cruciality index based on Kendall’s tau rank cor­
relation (CRI(τ)) measures the sensitivity of activity i by counting the proportion of con­
cordant and discordant pairs of the same two variables (di and AD). A simulation estimator 
of CRI(τ) is given by
 
ˆ
CRI(τ)i =
[
4
S(S −1)
S−1
∑
s=1
S
∑
l=s+1
1{(dl
i −ds
i)(Dl −Ds) > 0}
]
−1
(22)
The Spearman’s rank correlation calculates the difference between the ranks of each obser­
vation on the two variables. Hence, CRI(ρ) actually measures the ranking differences 
between the activity duration and project duration. A simulation estimator of CRI(ρ) is cal­
culated as follows:
 
ˆ
CRI(ρ)i = 1 −
6 ∑S
s=1 δ2
i,s
S(S2 −1)

(23)
where δi,s is the difference between the ranking values of di and D during simulation run s.
Last but not least, the MOI includes both the topological structure of the project network 
(using the so-called post density), the variability reduction (measured by the standard devia­
tion in the activity duration) and the impact of possible activity delays on the project mean 
duration (using the activity float). The post density of an activity i is calculated as the ratio 
between the total number of successor activities of activity i (#Si) and the total number of 
activities in the project network (n) and is used in the formula to express that higher values 
(i.e., more dense networks) result in higher MOI values for this activity (since more succes­
sors increase the likelihood for delays). Likewise, the expected activity total float (E(tfi)) 
is also added to the formula to make sure that higher float values lead to lower MOI values. 
Finally, the MOI formula also includes the ratio of the activity variance (σ2
i ) to the maxi­
mum variance for all activities to measure the relative activity risk, with higher values lead­
ing to higher MOI values. A simulation estimator of MOI is given by
 
ˆ
MOIi =
ˆσi
2
ˆσ2max
·
1
1 + E(tfi) −#Si
n

(24)
Madadi and Iranmanesh (2012) has experimentally proven the superiority of MOI for deter­
mining the amount of effort which should be allocated to project activities to control them 
and reduce their variability.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Appendix 2: Illustrative example
This section provides an example to illustrate the calculation of the proposed metric RCIi. 
The PN–RIN model, the baseline schedule and the risk impact matrix (RI) are shown in 
Fig. 16. To compute the value of RCI, the risk occurrence matrix (OR), the actual impact of 
each risk on each activity (Igi), and other simulation results for five simulation iterations are 
displayed in Fig. 17. Note that obtaining a reliable value of SRA metrics requires numerous 
simulation runs. However, for the purpose of demonstrating the specific calculation process, 
we only compute the metric based on the results of five simulation iterations in this section. 
Table 11 tabulates the calculation process of five existing SRA metrics for activity 3. The 
three-phased calculation process of RCI for activity 3 is detailed along the following lines.
Fig. 16  Illustrative example
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 17  Simulation data (λi = 0.5)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Phase 1 Table 12 presents the specific step involved in calculating the direct risk con­
tribution of activity 3 (DC3). In the first two simulation runs, although the occurrence of 
risk R4 causes a 2-time-unit delay for activity 3, the direct risk contribution of activity 3 to 
project delay is zero. This is attributed to the total float of activity 3, which provides some 
flexibility to resist risk impact (e.g., tf U
3,1 = TRI3,1, tf U
3,2 = TRI3,2) . In the third simula­
tion run, the occurrences of risks R4 and R5 totally delay activity 3 by 2.5 time units. The 
direct risk impact of activity 3 is equal to 0.50 (=
T RI3,3−tf U
3,3
DelayR
3
= 2.5−1.5
13−11 ). Since activity 3 
resides in the critical path in the actual schedule, the value of the direct risk contribution of 
activity 3 (DC3,3) is identical to the direct risk impact of activity 3. However, in the fourth 
simulation run, since activity 3 is on the non-critical path (tf3,4 = 2), its direct risk impact 
is weighted by a ratio less than 1 when computing DC3,4.
Phase 2 The specific calculation of IC for activity 3 is displayed in Table 13. In the first 
and third simulation runs, the risks occurring in activity 3 (R4, R5) do not trigger other activ­
ity risks through risk propagation. Therefore, the indirect risk contribution of activity 3 in 
these two simulation runs is zero. In the other simulation runs, the occurrence of R4 in activ­
ity 3 gives rise to the occurrence of risk R7, causing delay in activity 7. Thus, the set PR3 
Table 11  Illustrative example of the calculation of the five existing metrics
Existing SRA metrics of activity 3
σ3 = 0.837   σ = 1.517   σmax = 1.673   E(d3) = 8.8   E(D) = 14.4   E(tf3) = 1.2
δ3,1 = −1.5      δ3,2 = −1.5      δ3,3 = 2.5      δ3,4 = 0      δ3,5 = 0.5
CI3 = 1
5 × (0 + 0 + 1 + 0 + 1) = 0.4
SI3 = 1
5 × (
8
8+2 ×
14
14.4 +
8
8+2 ×
14
14.4 +
9
9+0 ×
13
14.4 +
10
10+2 ×
17
14.4 +
9
9+0 ×
14
14.4
)
= 0.88
SSI3 = 0.837
1.517 × 0.4 = 0.22
CRI(r)3 = 0.32+0.32−0.28+3.12−0.08
4×0.837×1.517
= 0.67
CRI(ρ)3 = 1 −
6×((−1.5)2+(−1.5)2+(2.5)2+02+(0.5)2)
5×(5−1)
= 0.45
CRI(τ)3 =
4
5×(5−1) × 4 −1 = 0.25
MOI3 = 0.8372
1.6732 ×
1
1+1.2+ 1
4
= 0.085
Direct risk contribution of activity 3
DC3,1 = 0
DC3,2 = 0
DC3,3 =
TRI3,3 −tfU
3,3
DelayR
3
·
1
1 + tf3,3
= 2.5 −1.5
13 −11 ·
1
1 + 0 = 0.50
DC3,4 =
TRI3,4 −tfU
3,4
DelayR
4
·
1
1 + tf3,4
= 2.5 −0
17 −9.5 ·
1
1 + 2 = 0.11
DC3,5 =
TRI3,5 −tfU
3,5
DelayR
5
·
1
1 + tf3,5
= 2.5 −0.5
14 −9
·
1
1 + 0 = 0.40
Table 12  Illustrative example 
of DC calculation
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
comprises one element R7, and the set of PA3 contains one element A4. The indirect risk 
contribution of activity 3 is correlated with the direct risk contribution of activity 4 (DC4), 
as shown in Table 13. For a more clearer illustration, we also give the specific calculation of 
IC for activity 1 in the fourth simulation (IC1,4). Risk R2 arises in activity 1, and thus, the 
set R1,4 consists of one element R2. Then, due to risk propagation from risk R2 in activity 1 
to risk R3 in activity 2 and risk R4 in activity 3, the set PR1,4 contains risk R3 and R4 and 
the set PA1,4 comprises activity 2 and activity 3. The indirect risk contribution of activity 1 
is equal to 0.24 (=
I32
I32+I62 · DC2,4 +
I43
I43+I53 · DC3,4 =
1
1+2 · 0.6 +
2
2+3 · 0.11).
Phase 3 The RCI is equal to the combination of direct risk contribution, the indi­
rect risk contribution and the weight of each simulation run (Eq. 11). Table  14 
tabulates the final phase of the calculation of RCI3, which is equal to 0.44 
(= 1
S
∑S
s=1(DC3,s + IC3,s) ·
DelayR
s
E(DelayR) = 1
5 · (0 + 0.5 ·
4
4.5 + 0.5 ·
2
4.5 + 0.38 · 7.5
4.5 + 0.8 ·
5
4.5). 
Table 13  Illustrative example of IC calculation
Indirect risk contribution of activity 3
R3,1 = {R4}
PR3,1 = {∅}
PA3,1 = {∅}
R3,2 = {R4}
PR3,2 = {R7}
PA3,2 = {A4}
R3,3 = {R4, R5}
PR3,3 = {∅}
PA3,3 = {∅}
R3,4 = {R4, R5}
PR3,4 = {R7}
PA3,4 = {A4}
R3,5 = {R4, R5}
PR3,5 = {R7}
PA3,5 = {A4}
IC3,1 = 0
IC3,2 = I74
I74 · DC4,2 = 2
2 · 0.50 = 0.50
IC3,3 = 0
IC3,4 = I74
I74 · DC4,4 = 2
2 · 0.27 = 0.27
IC3,5 = I74
I74 · DC4,5 = 2
2 · 0.40 = 0.40
Table 14  Illustrative example of RCI calculation
DC3
IC3
DelayR
Simulation 1
0
0
4
Simulation 2
0
0.50
4
Simulation 3
0.50
0
2
Simulation 4
0.11
0.27
7.5
Simulation 5
0.40
0.40
5
RCI3
0.44
E(DelayR) = 4.5
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Appendix 3: Network generator
Algorithm 1 shows the pseudo-code of the proposed PN–RIN network generator, which is 
explained as follows. Since we obtain the data of the project network from the existing data­
set, this algorithm aims to generate the risk interaction network and link the project network 
with the risk interaction network. The inputs of the algorithm comprise the existing dataset 
of project networks with different SP values (i.e., N, AP, and dP
i ), the network structure 
parameters (i.e., RQ, ND, and RU) and the distributions associated risk (i.e., f1 and f2).
In the beginning, the total number of project risks is determined by the parameter RQ 
(line 1). Given that the number of risks varies for each activity, the algorithm determines the 
maximum and minimum number of risks across all project activities using the parameter 
RU (line 2–3). Within this constraint, the number of risks for each activity (activity_risk) 
is determined (line 4–23) and each risk is randomly linked with one activity to form the 
activity risk matrix (AR) (line 24–33).
To construct the risk interaction network, the number of edges (K) in the RIN is calcu­
lated using the parameter ND (line 34). Note that Kmax denotes the maximum number of 
links between project risks. Then, the interactions between risks are established randomly, 
generating the risk event matrix (EI) (line 35-50). Finally, the spontaneous probability of 
each risk and the transition probability of each risk interaction are determined using the 
probability distribution f1, and the impact of risk on the corresponding activity is gener­
ated using the risk impact distribution f2. Ultimately, risk probability matrix (RP) and risk 
impact matrix are computed (line 51-64).
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Algorithm 1  The PN–RIN network generatorAppendix 4: Case study
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
In this section, we illustrate the application of the activity sensitivity metrics and corrective 
actions to a real office finishing project, including the interior joinery and the placement of 
plaster walls, partition walls and suspended ceilings. The PN data of this parallel project 
are obtained from the DSLIB dataset (C2013-15), which is available on the website ​h​t​t​p​
s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​p​r​o​j​e​c​t​m​a​n​a​g​e​m​e​n​t​.​u​g​e​n​t​.​b​e​/​r​e​s​e​a​r​c​h​/​d​a​t​a​, as shown in Table 15. Based on the 
project network, the risks of each activity are first identified by the project manager, and 
then the relationships between risks are established through the experience of experts and 
the project manager. Thus, the binary matrices AP, AR and EI are formed. Next, the 
AHP-based assessment method proposed by (Fang & Marle, 2012) is employed to estimate 
the spontaneous probability and the transition probability in the RIN, which forms the risk 
probability matrix RP. Finally, the time delay of each activity caused by its associated risks 
is estimated by the project manager, forming the risk impact matrix RI. Table 16 lists the 
project risks and their impact on the activity duration. Figure 18 depicts the RIN of this 
Table 15  Project data
ID
Activity
Precessors
Opti­
mistic 
dura­
tion (h)
Most 
likely 
duration 
(h)
Pes­
simistic 
dura­
tion (h)
Cost (€)
A1
Fixed ceiling installation 
(Phase 1)
211.2
264
316.8
28,195.20
A2
Metal ceiling installation 
(3rd layer)
1FS;6FS
224
280
336
58,592.80
A3
Acoustic barrier installation 
(Phase 1)
25.6
32
38.4
3,396.48
A4
Movable partition wall 
installation (Phase 1)
9FS;11FS;2FS;13FS;12FS
76.8
96
115.2
58,503.36
A5
Movable partition wall 
installation (Phase 2)
9FS;11FS;2FS;13FS;12FS
76.8
96
115.2
49,887.36
A6
Plasterboard wall 
installation
204.8
256
307.2
15,569.92
A7
Door installation
4FS;14FS;5FS
57.6
72
86.4
29,190.96
A8
Various indoor woodwork 
installation
3FS
57.6
72
86.4
13,694.40
A9
Ceiling + Acoustic Ceiling 
System (AKD)
403.2
504
604.8
2,182.32
A10
Delivery remarks
16FS
416
520
624
58,765.20
A11
Fixed ceilings installation 
(Phase 2)
1FS;6FS
192
240
288
2,956.80
A12
Acoustic baffles installation 
(Phase 2)
8FS
32
40
48
391.20
A13
Additional team for metal 
suspended ceilings (2nd 
floor)
1FS;6FS
57.6
72
86.4
8,742.24
A14
System partition wall 
installation
9FS;11FS;2FS;13FS;12FS
76.8
96
115.2
7,656.00
A15
Indoor woodwork 
engineering
4FS;14FS;5FS
57.6
72
86.4
1,939.68
A16
Miscellaneous
627.2
784
940.8
1,803.20
A17
Additional construction / 
Extra work
0.8
1
1.2
1.00
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Ac­
tiv­
ity 
ID
Risk code Risk 
ID
Risk name
Optimistic 
impact 
(h)
Most 
likely 
impact 
(h)
Pessi­
mistic 
impact 
(h)
A1
A1–R1
R1
Insufficient load-bearing capacity of the hangers
3
6
12
A1–R2
R2
Improper fixation of the hangers
6
12
24
A1–R3
R3
Ceiling deformation
12
18
26
A1–R4
R4
Pipe conflict
8
12
18
A1–R5
R5
Deviation in the reserved maintenance opening
2
4
8
A2
A2–R1
R6
Confusion in ceiling module coding
12
24
28
A2–R2
R7
Material scratches
0
2
4
A2–R3
R8
Unstable support
8
16
24
A2–R4
R9
Splicing errors
6
12
18
A2–R5
R10
Detachment of fasteners
4
8
12
A3
A3–R1
R11
Detachment of sound-absorbing panels
1
2
3
A3–R2
R12
Expired damping adhesive
3
6
9
A3–R3
R13
Poor sealing of wall sleeves
2
4
6
A3–R4
R14
Wall resonance
6
12
16
A4
A4–R1
R15
Excessive resistance to partition movement
4
8
9
A4–R2
R16
Detachment of soundproof seals
2
4
6
A4–R3
R17
Deformation of the track
6
12
18
A4–R4
R18
Pulley damage
3
6
9
A5
A5–R1
R19
Excessive resistance to partition movement
3
6
9
A5–R2
R20
Detachment of soundproof seals
2
4
6
A5–R3
R21
Deformation of the track
4
8
12
A5–R4
R22
Pulley damage
2
4
6
A6
A6–R1
R23
Excessive moisture content in plasterboard
12
18
25
A6–R2
R24
Inadequate filling of soundproof cotton
8
12
18
A6–R3
R25
Conflict with embedded pipelines
12
18
25
A7
A7–R1
R26
Deviation in the horizontal alignment of the track
2
4
7
A7–R2
R27
Uneven door gaps
1
2
3
A7–R3
R28
Deformation of the door frame
3
6
10
A8
A8–R1
R29
Inadequate moisture protection of the base layer
4
8
12
A8–R2
R30
Excessive gap in joints
3
6
9
A8–R3
R31
Woodwork expansion
6
12
18
A9
A9–R1
R32
Excessive gap in acoustic module splicing
24
36
50
A9–R2
R33
Insufficient sound absorption coefficient
36
48
50
A9–R3
R34
Structural damage due to light fixture holes
12
18
24
A9–R4
R35
Failure of vibration damping hangers
12
18
24
A10
A10–R1
R36
Material specifications do not match
24
36
48
A10–R2
R37
Supplier delivery error
12
18
24
A11
A11–R1
R38
Structural deformation
12
18
24
A11–R2
R39
Conflict with reserved pipes
8
12
18
A11–R3
R40
Excessive ceiling error
6
12
18
A12
A12–R1
R41
Secondary pollution of sound-absorbing cotton
2
4
6
A12–R2
R42
Insufficient low-frequency sound insulation
12
18
24
A12–R3
R43
Risk of structural detachment
4
8
12
Table 16  Activity risks
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Ac­
tiv­
ity 
ID
Risk code Risk 
ID
Risk name
Optimistic 
impact 
(h)
Most 
likely 
impact 
(h)
Pessi­
mistic 
impact 
(h)
A13
A13–R1
R44
Confusion in multi-team interface management
4
8
12
A13–R2
R45
Overload of vertical transport equipment
3
6
9
A13–R3
R46
Overload of temporary power lines
2
4
6
A13–R4
R47
Missing handover records of procedures
3
6
9
A14
A14–R1
R48
Deviation in the position of embedded parts
6
12
18
A14–R2
R49
Excessive gaps in modular assembly
4
8
12
A14–R3
R50
Sound leakage at partition wall and ceiling joints
8
12
18
A15
A15–R1
R51
Excessive moisture content in wood
4
8
12
A15–R2
R52
Insufficient paint adhesion
3
6
9
A16
A16–R1
R53
Vague scope of tasks
24
36
48
A16–R2
R54
Sudden design changes
36
48
72
Table 16  (continued)
 
Fig. 18  The risk interaction network
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
project, where the size of the nodes depends on the spontaneous probability of risks and the 
thickness of the edges is determined by the transition probability of risk interactions.
Schedule risk analysis aims to identify sensitive activities using the SRA metrics for 
project control as mentioned in Sect. 3.2.3. Using the so-called static simulation run, the 
values of six SRA metrics for each activity are computed, and thus the activities are priori­
tized by different metrics, as shown in Table 17. There is no doubt that activity A16 is the 
most significant activity as it holds the top rank across all metrics. This implies that the proj­
ect manager should focus their efforts on this activity and take corrective actions to prevent 
its risk occurrence and reduce its deviation from the planned schedule during the project 
execution. For instance, to prevent the occurrence of risk R53 in activity A16 (Vague scope 
of tasks), the project manager should engage all stakeholders to ensure that they have a clear 
understanding of the project goals and objectives at the initial stage of the project. Addition­
ally, a structured process for managing scope changes should be established.
Table 17  Ranking of sensitive activities under different SRA metrics
ID
CI
SI
SSI
CRI(r)
CRI(ρ)
CRI(τ)
MOI
RCI
A1
4
4
4
3
3
3
4
5
A2
5
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
A3
15
16
16
15
15
16
16
12
A4
8
10
7
16
16
15
9
8
A5
9
11
9
8
9
12
11
10
A6
11
8
11
11
10
7
8
9
A7
7
12
8
6
6
6
12
11
A8
14
14
15
10
8
11
15
14
A9
6
3
3
4
5
4
2
2
A10
12
9
14
13
14
8
5
16
A11
10
6
10
17
17
13
7
13
A12
13
15
13
14
13
14
14
15
A13
16
13
12
9
12
9
13
6
A14
3
5
5
5
4
5
6
4
A15
2
7
6
7
7
10
10
7
A16
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
A17
17
17
17
12
11
17
17
17
Table 18  Comparison of different SRA metrics
CI
SI
SSI
CRI(r)
CRI(ρ) CRI(τ) MOI
RCI
Interventive
Scenario1
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.46
0.46
0.46
0.46
Scenario2
0.51
0.58
0.51
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.60
0.51
Scenario3
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.56
Scenario4
0.59
0.49
0.50
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.53
0.53
Preventive
Scenario1
0.08
0.18
0.08
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.18
0.22
Scenario2
0.08
0.18
0.08
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.18
0.22
Scenario3
0.10
0.12
0.13
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.13
0.20
Scenario4
0.10
0.12
0.12
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.10
0.22
Hybrid
Scenario1
0.58
0.56
0.59
0.51
0.56
0.55
0.53
0.58
Scenario2
0.54
0.57
0.57
0.62
0.58
0.58
0.55
0.57
Scenario3
0.53
0.51
0.46
0.49
0.57
0.49
0.54
0.58
Scenario4
0.50
0.59
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.55
0.59
0.51
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
However, the ranking of other activities differs from the chosen SRA metric. Conse­
quently, the control model is applied to imitate the process of taking corrective actions based 
on different SRA metrics during the project execution. Table 18 displays the performance of 
these SRA metrics in the combinations of three control strategies and four action periodicity, 
with six sensitive activities controlled at the intensity of 80%.
The results show that the CRI(r) performs the best in terms of time effectiveness under 
the hybrid strategy in Scenario 2. Consequently, for this parallel project, it is suggested 
that the project manager focus on the sensitive activities with high CRI(r) values during 
the project execution, i.e., A16, A2, A1, A9, A14, A7. Since activities A16, A1 and A9 start 
at the beginning of the project, the risks of these activities are prioritized for prevention or 
protection when these risks occur. For example, to prevent Risk R3 in activity A1, proj­
ect members can select high-quality ceiling materials and emphasize installation training. 
Proper installation training ensures that workers are familiar with the correct procedures and 
guidelines to avoid ceiling deformation. If the R3 occurs during activity A1, to avert the risk 
propagation from R3 to R32 in sensitive activity A9, project members can adjust the acous­
tic module splicing techniques or use compensation structures to maintain the integrity of 
the acoustic system.
As the project progresses, the activity sensitivity information may change due to risk 
occurrences and the implementation of corrective actions. It requires the project team to 
monitor risk occurrences and the activity progress, and to constantly update the state of 
the PN–RIN. When a control point is reached, the value of each SRA metric can be re-
calculated and the sensitive activities can be identified for project control.
Acknowledgements  This work is supported in part by the scholarship from China Scholarship Council 
(CSC) under the Grant CSC No.202206220031.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ahmadabadi, A. A., & Heravi, G. (2019). Risk assessment framework of PPP-megaprojects focusing on risk 
interaction and project success. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice,124, 169–188.
Allan, N., & Yin, Y. (2011). Development of a methodology for understanding the potency of risk connectiv­
ity. Journal of Management in Engineering,27(2), 75–79.
Ballesteros-Pérez, P., Cerezo-Narvaez, A., Otero-Mateo, M., Pastor-Fernandez, A., & Vanhoucke, M. (2019). 
Performance comparison of activity sensitivity metrics in schedule risk analysis. Automation in Con­
struction,106, 102906.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Cagno, E., Caron, F., & Mancini, M. (2008). Dynamic analysis of project risk. International Journal of Risk 
Assessment and Management,10(1–2), 70–87.
Chapman, R. J. (2001). The controlling influences on effective risk identification and assessment for con­
struction design management. International Journal of Project Management,19(3), 147–160.
Chen, L., Lu, Q., & Han, D. (2023). A Bayesian-driven Monte Carlo approach for managing construction 
schedule risks of infrastructures under uncertainty. Expert Systems with Applications,212, 118810.
Chen, F., Wang, H., Xu, G., Ji, H., Ding, S., & Wei, Y. (2020). Data-driven safety enhancing strategies for risk 
networks in construction engineering. Reliability Engineering & System Safety,197, 106806.
Cho, J. G., & Yum, B. J. (1997). An uncertainty importance measure of activities in pert networks. Interna­
tional Journal of Production Research,35(10), 2737–2758.
Cleden, D. (2017). Managing project uncertainty. Routledge.
Colin, J., & Vanhoucke, M. (2016). Empirical perspective on activity durations for project-management 
simulation studies. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management,142(1), 04015047.
Creemers, S., Demeulemeester, E., & Van de Vonder, S. (2014). A new approach for quantitative risk analy­
sis. Annals of Operations Research,213, 27–65.
Elmaghraby, S. E. (2000). On criticality and sensitivity in activity networks. European Journal of Opera­
tional Research,127(2), 220–238.
Fang, C., & Marle, F. (2012). A simulation-based risk network model for decision support in project risk 
management. Decision Support Systems,52(3), 635–644.
Fang, C., & Marle, F. (2013). Dealing with project complexity by matrix-based propagation modelling for 
project risk analysis. Journal of Engineering Design,24(4), 239–256.
Fang, C., Marle, F., Xie, M., & Zio, E. (2013). An integrated framework for risk response planning under 
resource constraints in large engineering projects. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage­
ment,60(3), 627–639.
Fang, C., Marle, F., Zio, E., & Bocquet, J. C. (2012). Network theory-based analysis of risk interactions in 
large engineering projects. Reliability Engineering & System Safety,106, 1–10.
Garvey, M. D., Carnovale, S., & Yeniyurt, S. (2015). An analytical framework for supply network risk propa­
gation: A Bayesian network approach. European Journal of Operational Research,243(2), 618–627.
Glickman, T. S., & Khamooshi, H. (2005). Using hazard networks to determine risk reduction strategies. 
Journal of the Operational Research Society,56(11), 1265–1272.
Guan, L., Abbasi, A., & Ryan, M. J. (2021). A simulation-based risk interdependency network model for 
project risk assessment. Decision Support Systems,148, 113602.
Hillson, D. (2009). Managing risk in projects. Gower Publishing Ltd.
Hu, X., Cui, N., Demeulemeester, E., & Bie, L. (2016). Incorporation of activity sensitivity measures into 
buffer management to manage project schedule risk. European Journal of Operational Research,249(2), 
717–727.
Hulett, D. T. (1996). Schedule risk analysis simplified. PM Network,10, 23–30.
Krishnan, V., Eppinger, S. D., & Whitney, D. E. (1997). A model-based framework to overlap product devel­
opment activities. Management Science,43(4), 437–451.
Li, C. Z., Hong, J., Xue, F., Shen, G. Q., Xu, X., & Mok, M. K. (2016). Schedule risks in prefabrication hous­
ing production in Hong Kong: A social network analysis. Journal of Cleaner Production,134, 482–494.
Liu, S., Ding, R., & Wang, L. (2024). An adaptive simulation based decision support approach to respond risk 
propagation in new product development projects. Decision Support Systems,183, 114270.
Madadi, M., & Iranmanesh, H. (2012). A management oriented approach to reduce a project duration and its 
risk (variability). European Journal of Operational Research,219(3), 751–761.
Martens, A., & Vanhoucke, M. (2019). The impact of applying effort to reduce activity variability on the 
project time and cost performance. European Journal of Operational Research,277(2), 442–453.
Martin, J. (1965). Distribution of the time through a directed, acyclic network. Operations Research,13(1), 
46–66.
Nasir, D., McCabe, B., & Hartono, L. (2003). Evaluating risk in construction–schedule model (ERIC-S): 
Construction schedule risk model. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management,129(5), 
518–527.
PMI. (2013). A guide to the project management body of knowledge: (PMBOK® guide) (5th ed.). Project 
Management Institute.
Qian, C., Wang, L., Song, Y., Du, W., & Goh, M. (2024). A simulation-based risk interaction network model 
for risk management in international construction projects. Journal of the Operational Research Soci­
ety,76, 1–11.
Ren, H. (1994). Risk lifecycle and risk relationships on construction projects. International Journal of Proj­
ect Management,12(2), 68–74.
Song, J., Martens, A., & Vanhoucke, M. (2020). The impact of a limited budget on the corrective action tak­
ing process. European Journal of Operational Research,286(3), 1070–1086.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Song, J., Martens, A., & Vanhoucke, M. (2021). Using schedule risk analysis with resource constraints for 
project control. European Journal of Operational Research,288(3), 736–752.
Song, J., Martens, A., & Vanhoucke, M. (2022). Using earned value management and schedule risk analy­
sis with resource constraints for project control. European Journal of Operational Research,297(2), 
451–466.
Trietsch, D., Mazmanyan, L., Gevorgyan, L., & Baker, K. R. (2012). Modeling activity times by the Par­
kinson distribution with a lognormal core: theory and validation. European Journal of Operational 
Research,216(2), 386–396.
Tsetlin, I., & Winkler, R. L. (2005). Risky choices and correlated background risk. Management Sci­
ence,51(9), 1336–1345.
Van Dorp, J. R., & Duffey, M. (1999). Statistical dependence in risk analysis for project networks using 
monte Carlo methods. International Journal of Production Economics,58(1), 17–29.
Vanhoucke, M. (2010). Using activity sensitivity and network topology information to monitor project time 
performance. Omega,38(5), 359–370.
Vanhoucke, M. (2011). On the dynamic use of project performance and schedule risk information during 
projecttracking. Omega,39(4), 416–426.
Vanhoucke, M. (2014). Integrated project management and control. Berlin: Springer.
Vanhoucke, M., Coelho, J., Debels, D., Maenhout, B., & Tavares, L. V. (2008). An evaluation of the adequacy 
of project network generators with systematically sampled networks. European Journal of Operational 
Research,187(2), 511–524.
Vanhoucke, M., & Debels, D. (2008). The impact of various activity assumptions on the lead time and 
resource utilization of resource-constrained projects. Computers & Industrial Engineering,54(1), 
140–154.
Vaseghi, F., Martens, A., & Vanhoucke, M. (2024). Analysis of the impact of corrective actions for stochastic 
project networks. European Journal of Operational Research,316, 503–518.
Vaseghi, F., & Vanhoucke, M. (2023). A comparison of activity ranking methods for taking corrective actions 
during project control. Computers & Industrial Engineering,183, 109505.
Wang, L., Goh, M., Ding, R., & Pretorius, L. (2019). Improved simulated annealing based risk interaction 
network model for project risk response decisions. Decision Support Systems,122, 113062.
Wang, L., Qian, C., & Goh, M. (2022). Integrated approach for project risk assessment and evaluation under 
risk interactions. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management,71, 2418–2429.
Wang, L., Song, Y., Ding, R., & Goh, M. (2022). Delay-oriented risk network model for project risk response 
decisions. Computers & Industrial Engineering,171, 108370.
Wang, L., Sun, T., Qian, C., Goh, M., & Mishra, V. K. (2020). Applying social network analysis to genetic 
algorithm in optimizing project risk response decisions. Information Sciences,512, 1024–1042.
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and applications. Cambridge Univer­
sity Press.
Williams, T. M. (1992). Criticality in stochastic networks. Journal of the Operational Research Society,43(4), 
353–357.
Xu, X., Wang, J., Li, C. Z., Huang, W., & Xia, N. (2018). Schedule risk analysis of infrastructure projects: 
A hybrid dynamic approach. Automation in Construction,95, 20–34. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​a​u​t​c​o​n​.​2​
0​1​8​.​0​7​.​0​2​6​
Yuan, J., Chen, K., Li, W., Ji, C., Wang, Z., & Skibniewski, M. J. (2018). Social network analysis for social 
risks of construction projects in high-density urban areas in china. Journal of cleaner production,198, 
940–961.
Zhang, Y., Sun, M., & Guan, X. (2020). Method of selecting project risk response strategies considering total 
risk interdependence. Chinese Journal of Management Science,28(1), 32–44.
Zuo, F., & Zhang, K. (2018). Selection of risk response actions with consideration of secondary risks. Inter­
national Journal of Project Management,36(2), 241–254.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Yuxuan Song1
 · Mario Vanhoucke1,2,3
 
 Mario Vanhoucke
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Mario.Vanhoucke@UGent.be
Yuxuan Song
Yuxuan.Song@UGent.be
1 
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Ghent University, Tweekerkenstraat 2, 
9000 Gent, Belgium
2 
Operations and Technology Management Centre, Vlerick Business School, Reep 1, 
9000 Gent, Belgium
3 
UCL School of Management, University College London, 1 Canada Square, 
London E14 5AA, UK
1 3