TITLE: A copula regression approach for dynamic policyholder behavior
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07056-6
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07056-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A copula regression approach for dynamic policyholder
behavior
F. Baione 1 · D. Biancalana1
· A. Santoro 1
Received: 6 June 2024 / Accepted: 9 January 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
The evolution of the regulatory framework and the increasing relevance of an accurate esti-
mate of the cash ﬂows suggest a detailed analysis of dynamic policyholder behavior for
insurance companies. In actuarial academic literature and industrial practice, it is usual to
model lapse rates with a two-stage approach. In the ﬁrst stage, base lapse rates are identiﬁed
to estimate the "static" component, whereas in the second stage a correction factor, usually
based on the dependency between lapses and one or more economic factors, is estimated to
model the "dynamic" component. In this paper, we focus on the second stage considering
as an economic factor the spread between a market benchmark yield and the policy cred-
ited rate. Therefore, we investigate the dependency structure between lapse rate and market
spread via a copula regression model and a copula quantile regression. Those models provide
the estimate of the expected and quantile lapse rates conditioned to market spread; the joint
use of such two statistical tools allows a complete study of dynamic policyholder behavior,
allowing to model the entire dependency structure more ﬂexibly. Moreover, we compare these
approaches with nonlinear double-sigmoid regression and we show that copula regression
and copula quantile regression can have proper goodness of ﬁt and deﬁne prediction intervals
that represent the tail behavior of policyholders.
Keywords Dynamic Policyholder Behavior · Copula Regression · Lapse rate · Copula
Quantile Regression
1 Introduction
The ﬁnancial crises are raising the weight of risk analysis and management. Such issues gain
signiﬁcance in the insurance context, as stated by EIOPA (see (EIOPA: Solvency II , 2014)).
Pricing and risk management for most life insurance products are strictly dependent on
policyholders’ behavior.
In general, the study of customer behavior has long been examined through various models
in sectors such as in mortgages and life insurance. In insurance, examples are surrendering,
premiums paid-up, withdrawing, or transferring funds. Actuarial models must accurately
describe policyholders’ future actions, as deviations pose signiﬁcant risks. Among these
risks, surrender (lapse) behavior is crucial for insurance companies.
B D. Biancalana
davide.biancalana@uniroma1.it
1
Sapienza University of Rome: Universita degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza, Rome, Italy
123

Annals of Operations Research
Lapses1 , if not properly managed, can imply possible damage to the insurance business,
and the subsequent risks have great economic value for several reasons.
In the context of life insurance, characterized by medium-long term contracts, it is usual to
distinguish the lapse behavior assumed by the policyholders’ behavior assumption structures,
following (Bacinello , 2015) and (Eling & Kochanski , 2013), into the following components:
• endogenous: it is considered a "baseline" component linked to the individual’s internal
decision-making processes. Therefore, it does not change throughout a model projection
period, regardless of changes in external factors, such as the performance of the ﬁnancial
market. In this sense, it is also deﬁned as scenario-independent.
• exogenous: it distinguishes the dynamic model from the static one and connects the
lapse rate to the policyholder’s scenario-speciﬁc behavior and the assumption changes
as external factors change.
In actuarial standard of practice, two commonly used approaches have been developed to
model combined lapse rates, which can be summarized as:
• one-stage model: the lapse rate is represented considering the presence of static and
dynamic components as a whole;
• two-stage model: ﬁrst, the basic component is modeled considering the features of policy
and policyholder; second, a correction factor is taken into account to model the depen-
dency of lapse rate on a set of external (e.g. ﬁnancial market) variables. This correction
factor is deﬁned as "Dynamic Lapse Multiplier" (henceforth DLM).
For further details, the reader can refer to Eling & Kochanski (2013).
Considering the relevance of this topic, the lapse rate models are extensively treated in the
literature, both in speciﬁc cases and in more general conditions. Kim et al. (2007) investigates
policyholder behavior on lapsing his/her insurance policy by a one-stage model; in particular,
it is observed that the policyholder lapse behavior is dependent not only on interest rates but
also on other exogenous factors such as unemployment rates, economic growth rates, seasonal
effects, and policy age. The estimation of lapse rates is carried out using a logistic regression
model.
In Milhaud, Loisel and Maume-Deschamps (2011), discriminating product and poli-
cyholder features are sought in terms of lapses. The authors, by a one-stage model, have
highlighted how older people and policyholders who pay a periodic premium tend to have
a greater lapse rate; moreover, for different reasons, very poor and very rich individuals are
not interested in lapsing. In Nolte and Schneider (2017) the decision to lapse a participating
life insurance product is analyzed from the policyholder’s point of view, by random effects
logistic panel regressions. In particular, as explained by the authors, this is the ﬁrst paper that
empirically establishes a link between policy surrender, ﬁnancial literacy, ﬁnancial advice,
and heuristic decision-making. In Chunli et al. (2018) the risk-neutral valuation of partici-
pating life insurance policies with surrender guarantees when an early default mechanism is
studied. Results show that the equity holder prefers to adopt a less risky investment strategy
if policyholders can surrender their contract optimally.
Focusing on the two-stage model and, in particular, on the dynamic part (i.e. the second
stage), several approaches are proposed by the industry (American Academy of Actuaries
(2005), American Academy of Actuaries (2023)) and by the European regulator (EIOPA:
Technical Speciﬁcation, 2014) . The majority of these studies model dynamic lapses using
1 It is speciﬁed that the deﬁnition of "lapses" is not univocal, it assumes different connotations in the literature
according to the authors, in this context "lapse" and "surrender" are considered equivalent.
123

Annals of Operations Research
either the spread between the market interest rate and the policy rate, or the moneyness of
the surrender option—deﬁned as the ratio of the policy’s surrender value to its continuation
value—as key explanatory variables. These two factors are widely regarded, both in academic
literature and industry practice, as the primary drivers of dynamic lapse behavior. However,
since lapse rates can be inﬂuenced by a range of factors, other potential drivers have also been
incorporated into dynamic lapse models to capture more complex policyholder behavior.
Baione et al. (2018) deal with the problem of estimating dynamic lapse rates by a two-
stage model focusing on the estimate of the DLM, to be used in the second stage, to model
dependency between lapse rate and the market spread between a benchmark market yield
and the policy credited rate. The latter is the return of the life participating insurance product.
Currently, the most widespread model in actuarial practice for the analysis of the DPHB is a
two-part model with a double linear function, which, however, has some limitations such as
non-differentiability. Extending their previous work (Baione et al., 2021) propose a double
sigmoid (henceforth DS) approach to model DLM. Parameter estimates of DS are obtained
by a nonlinear regression approach. The application shows that DS can be considered a
valid tool for the description of dynamic lapses because can model the rational behavior of
policyholders having several relevant properties (the ﬂexibility and mathematical robustness
given that this function is continuous and differentiable) compared to other models proposed
by the industrial ﬁeld, such as double linear (or double step) shape (see Autoritè de Control
Prudentiel (2019), Edwards (2016)).
The aim of this work is to introduce in the two-stage model analysis an alternative approach
to model the DLM with respect to the framework introduced by Baione et al. (2021). The
proposed approach is based on the adoption of a bivariate copula to deﬁne the relationship
between DLM and the market spread. Even though copulas are frequently used in order
to estimate the joint distribution of two or more random variables (by way of example,
an actuarial application of copulas is shown in XiaoBing (2010)), they are also proper to
estimate conditional distributions, providing a similar output to the ones of regressive models
(see (Sungur , 2005)).
Copula regression (henceforth CR) (see (Frees et al., 1998)) can be used to estimate
conditional means, similarly to linear, nonlinear, or generalized linear models. Its main
advantage lies in its ﬂexibility: the dependent variable does not need to follow a Gaussian or
exponential-family distribution. Moreover, CR can naturally capture nonlinearrelationships
between variables.
Furthermore, the estimate of conditional distributions by copulas is appropriate to obtain
an estimate of conditional quantiles (like quantile regression (QR), see (Koenker , 2005))
deﬁning estimates for prediction intervals. Indeed, in Kraus and Czado (2017), a semi-
parametric quantile regression approach based on sequentially ﬁtting a likelihood optimal
D-vine copula (henceforth CQR) is introduced. Results show that the algorithm works fast
and accurately even in high dimensions and incorporates an automatic variable selection.
CR and CQR have been scarcely applied in the actuarial context: in Frees et al. (1998)
copulas are ﬁrst introduced in the actuarial context. The authors show some practical appli-
cations, including estimation of joint life mortality, multi-decrement models, or combined
estimate of losses and expenses. Finally, the authors show how copulas can be used to estimate
regression functions and are well suited to the concept of quantile regression.
In Krämer et al. (2013), a copula is used to model insurance claims and sizes. The authors
implement a regression model by combining a marginal generalized linear model with a
copula. In the case study, there is a comparison between the estimate of total loss using CR
and assuming independence between claim size and number of claims; results show that in
the second case, the total loss is strongly understimated implying an important mispricing.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In Shi (2014), a claims reserving model for dependent lines of business with the accom-
modation of association among triangles by a copula function is introduced.
The lapse right typically shows an exercise rate greater than zero, like a basic portfolio
trend. Endogenous factors (contractual or policyholder-speciﬁc) and exogenous ones (market
conditions) can inﬂuence it. These ﬂuctuations alter cash ﬂows asymmetrically, requiring
careful modelling of the distribution’s tails.2.
The proposed model overcomes some of the disadvantages of the formulas proposed in
the empirical literature by the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
(see (EIOPA: Technical Speciﬁcation, 2014)). Furthermore, it can be incorporated into a
broader lapse rate model that considers a larger number of variables, including both static
and dynamic factors. To do this, in this paper we apply CR and CQR to get a central estimate
and a prediction interval of DLM (and consequently of lapse rate) conditioned on market
spread. Furthermore, a comparison with the nonlinear DS regression approach (henceforth
NLDS), by Baione et al. (2021) is carried on.
To summarize, the adoption of CR and CQR implies the following advantages:
• it deﬁnes a robust dependency structure, by identifying the most appropriate copula
function;
• it allows us to estimate the distribution of the DLM conditional on market spread. Having
the whole distribution, it is possible to calculate all the conditional statistics (mean,
median, quantiles);
• it provides the same outputs (but different estimates) of linear regression, non-linear
regression, GLM, or quantile regression, removing some important constraints imposed
by these models such as linear dependency or assumptions on the distribution of the
dependent variable (normality for linear and non-linear models and exponential family
for GLM);
• it provides all the conditional statistics using the same parameters (a unique set of param-
eters is used to estimate conditional mean and conditional quantiles). If we used NLDS,
GLM, or QR, it would be necessary to use two models (and estimate two sets of param-
eters) in order to get an accurate estimate of conditional mean and conditional quantiles
simultaneously. As an alternative, it would be possible to use a single model (it is possi-
ble to get conditional quantiles with GLM by estimating dispersion parameter), but the
estimates of conditional mean and quantiles would not be simultaneously accurate.
• focusing on the estimate of conditional quantiles (prediction intervals), it provides
estimates that seem more appropriate than the ones given by NLDS if data shows het-
eroscedasticity or asymmetry, as will be shown in the Numerical Application Section.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sect. 2 introduces the estimate of lapse rate
by the two-stage models, with a brief overview of the NLDS approach. Sect. 3 introduces
bivariate copulas and the related CR and CQR methodologies. Sect. 4 explains the framework
used to model DPHB by CR and QCR. Sect. 5 discusses a numerical application carried out
on a life insurance portfolio and in which the method of estimating the copula is used on
different families of insurance products.Sect. 6 summarizes.
2 Furthermore, a change in the surrender rate is frequently accompanied by the exercise of another "mirror"
insurance right, i.e. the additional payments.
123

Annals of Operations Research
2 Two-stage models for lapse rates
The two-stage modeling framework is a methodology largely adopted in actuarial academia
and industry. It is indeed common to separate lapses into a "base" lapse rate and a “dynamic”
adjustment for economic conditions (American Academy of Actuaries (2005), American
Academy of Actuaries (2023)). The base lapse represents the scenario-independent, idiosyn-
cratic component (often attributed to personal reasons, policyholder demographics, etc.),
while the dynamic component captures systematic variation due to environmental factors,
such as unemployment rate, GDP, interest rate, etc. Following (Eling & Kochanski , 2013),
thesetwocomponentswillbereferredtoasdeterministic(irrationalorstructural)anddynamic
(rational or temporary) lapses. This two-stage modeling approach is standard in many insur-
ance applications and was the premise for our analysis. By treating the idiosyncratic lapse
rate as "static", we followed industry practice of using a ﬁxed baseline (not varying by policy
market scenarios) which is then adjusted by a factor depending on external environmental
factors. In this case, the lapse rate r per unit of time can be factorized as ((Baione et al.,
2021)):
r (Z, βB, Y, βD) = r Base(Z, βB) · ψ(Y; βD)
(1)
where:
• r Base is a basic lapse rate depending on a set of parameters βB and a set Z of technical
risk factors (e.g., product type and policyholder’s features);
• ψ is the DLM function used to introduce a correction factor for the dynamic behavior.
It is dependent on a set of parameters βD and on a set Y of environmental factors (e.g.,
economic and/or ﬁnancial).
This decomposition allows us to isolate and analyze the purely scenario-dependent compo-
nent.
Lapse rate in Eq. (1) assumes values between 0 and 1. Then, there must be limits for
ψ(Y; βD), that is:
r (Z, βB, Y, βD) ∈[0, 1]
⇒
ψ(Y; βD) ∈

0,
1
r Base(Z, βB)

The two-stage approach implies independence and a separate estimate for the two compo-
nents:
• Stage 1: a basic lapse rate r Base is calculated, using regressive models (e.g., logit or
probit).
• Stage 2: the scenario-speciﬁc adjustment factor ψ(mkt; βD), or DLM, can be mod-
eled using different analytical approaches (for further details see American Academy of
Actuaries (2005))
2.1 Economically rational lapse behavior basic theory
Actuarial research on life insurance lapse behavior mainly draws on two theories: the "interest
rate hypothesis" (IRH) and the "emergency fund hypothesis" (EFH). IRH views policyhold-
ers as rational optimizers who surrender policies to reinvest when interest rates (or market
yields) exceed credited rate of the policy. Instead, EFH links lapses to liquidity needs or
ﬁnancial distress (e.g., job loss, unexpected expenses), forcing them to withdraw savings
from insurance policies.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Although both hypotheses have been examined in several empirical studies (see (Eling
& Kochanski , 2013)), the empirical ﬁndings remain inconclusive, with the IRH generally
receiving stronger empirical support than the emergency fund hypothesis. Indeed, (Kuo ,
2003) afﬁrms that ’In other words, the interest rate hypothesis is favored against the emer-
gency fund hypothesis in the sense that the interest rate is more economically signiﬁcant than
the unemployment rate in explaining the lapse rate dynamics.’
The lapse problem is closely analogous to mortgage prepayment behavior in the ﬁxed-
income literature. Indeed, a life insurance policy with a surrender option is akin to a mortgage
loan with a prepayment option. In both cases, the holder (policyholder or borrower) has the
right to “terminate” the contract early, usually when it is ﬁnancially favorable to do so (or for
personal needs). The rational trigger for lapse or prepayment is similar exercise the option
when the immediate surrender/prepay value exceeds the continuation value of staying in the
contract.
While the analogy with mortgage prepayments helps to frame lapses as rational option-
like decisions, important differences exist in the insurance context. Life insurance contracts
typically have longer maturities and include surrender penalties or market value adjust-
ments that discourage early termination, whereas mortgage prepayments are generally less
constrained—especially in markets where prepayment penalties have been reduced or abol-
ished. Furthermore, policy surrenders involve the withdrawal of accumulated reserves rather
than the repayment of debt, implying different cash-ﬂow structures and behavioral triggers.
From a regulatory perspective, insurers operate under the Solvency II framework, which
requires capital to be held explicitly against lapse risk and mandates market-consistent val-
uation of liabilities. While prepayment behavior also affects banks’ solvency through its
impact on asset duration and interest rate risk, in the insurance context lapse risk constitutes
a distinct regulatory capital component, making its accurate modeling particularly relevant
for solvency assessment and risk management. However, as previously mentioned, in life
insurance, the interest rate hypothesis (IRH) suggests that lapse rates are negatively related
to internal policy returns (such as the crediting rate) and positively related to external rates
of return (such as market interest rates or stock returns) (see Dar and Dodds (1989) and
Kuo (2003) for more details). This is the basic assumption that justiﬁes the use of S-shaped
curves to describe lapse Dynamic Policyholder behavior in life insurance participating con-
tracts. In contrast, in mortgage markets, prepayment rates are typically negatively related to
interest rates. This relationship is well established in the mortgage literature (Schwartz and
Torous , 1989; Stanton , 1995), and aligns with the rational policyholder behavior assumed
in Bacinello (2015). As a consequence, mortgage prepayment rates may be modelled by a
linear increasing function driven, at least, by interest rates, with a ﬂoor set equal to a turnover
rate (Chernov et al. (2017)). Turnover rate reﬂects prepayments occurring for reasons unre-
lated to interest rates, but possibly correlated with macroeconomic ﬂuctuations. Moreover,
in both mortgage and insurance contexts, models often incorporate unobserved heterogene-
ity to account for behavioral differences not captured in the data, such as risk aversion or
ﬁnancial literacy. Burnout is one manifestation of this hidden diversity: over time, individ-
uals most likely to act—by prepaying a loan or lapsing a policy—do so, leaving behind a
population less responsive to incentives. Failing to account for this heterogeneity can lead
to biased model estimates. In the insurance context, (Rosner , 2025) considers the burnout
phenomenon a kind of "shock (mass) lapse" effect. However, due to limited data, it has not
yet been empirically validated. The author notes that modeling burnout in insurance presents
signiﬁcant methodological challenges. While it is technically feasible to approximate burnout
within a Generalized Linear Model (GLM) framework, this approach risks overﬁtting and
lacks robustness in the absence of adequate historical data. As market conditions evolve and
123

Annals of Operations Research
longer time series become available, the inclusion of burnout effects may become more feasi-
ble, potentially through alternative modeling techniques better suited to capturing behavioral
heterogeneity and temporal dynamics.
In the following, we will consider Y = mkt, where mkt is the spread between a
"benchmark" market yield and the policy credit rate. Market spread is widely regarded as the
primary driver for dynamic lapse assumptions. Intuitively, it measures the opportunity cost
of keeping money in the policy.
The reduction of the dynamic model to a single ﬁnancial factor—the market spread—can
be justiﬁed by the following considerations:
• The market spread is widely recognized in both industry practice and EU regulatory -
EIOPA - as the key driver of lapse dynamic policyholder behavior (EIOPA: Technical
Speciﬁcation (2014), American Academy of Actuaries (2005), American Academy of
Actuaries (2023)).
• It is also widely used in academic literature to explain rational lapse behavior (Kim et al.
(2007); Milliman (2013)).
• It is readily implementable in actuarial software, as it can be simulated through economic
scenario generators (ESGs) using interest rate curves, credit spreads, or other market
variables.
Other factors (e.g., unemployment, income shocks) are known to partially inﬂuence lapses
(Eling & Kochanski (2013)) but are beyond the scope of our single-factor copula model.
A future extension, could include additional covariates, such as unemployment rate or a
consumer sentiment index, to capture different aspects of policyholder behavior. Altough a
multivariate copula approach was not attempted in our paper (to keep the analysis tractable),
our approach could be extended to multiple economic factors in principle using, for exam-
ple, a multidimensional copula. In our approach, the base (static) lapse reﬂects structural or
idiosyncratic terminations present even in a stable environment, while the dynamic compo-
nent captures variations driven by ﬁnancial market changes. This modeling approach assumes
that policyholders’ idiosyncratic lapse behavior —deﬁned as policyholder-speciﬁc and diver-
siﬁable— is independent of market conditions, and therefore treated as a static background
rate. Equivalently, this implies that idiosyncratic lapse shocks are perfectly synchronized (i.e.,
comonotonic) across the portfolios, as all variation in total lapse rates is attributed solely to
the common dynamic (systematic) factor: the market spread.
While convenient, this simpliﬁcation can introduce bias. For example, if idiosyncratic
lapses rise during economic downturns — due to unemployment or liquidity needs — our
model may incorrectly attribute the full increase in lapse rates to the market spread, which
is also likely elevated in such periods, thus overstating tail dependence. Conversely, when
policyholdersretainpoliciesbecauseexternalinvestmentoptionsarerisky(asmighthavehap-
pened during the 2011–2012 sovereign crisis), the model could under-predict lapses. In our
framework, scenario-driven variation in lapse rates is captured exclusively through the mar-
ket spread. However, certain non-market factors, such as unemployment or macroeconomic
stress, can drive coordinated lapse behavior across a large portion of the portfolio. Although
these decisions are made individually, they may affect a large portion of the portfolio, thus
becoming effectively systematic and not truly idiosyncratic. Even seemingly idiosyncratic
factors, like individual job loss, can be driven by systematic factors (like an economic crisis).
If a model doesn’t explicitly account for these, it would incorrectly categorize scenario-driven
lapses as unforeseen, limiting its ability to capture true lapse dynamics. However, as previ-
ously stated, empirical research hasn’t yielded a conclusive answer, but the IRH generally
has stronger support to describe lapses than the EFH. In this sense, our assumption of a static
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 An example of DS function to model DLM for lapse behavior
idiosyncratic lapse rate may simplify reality. A more comprehensive model could incorpo-
rate additional risk factors—such as unemployment rates or income shocks—or explicitly
account for policyholder heterogeneity, as proposed by Hall (2000) in the mortgage literature.
While this would improve completeness, our current approach reﬂects a deliberate trade-off
between parsimony and realism, and remains aligned with standard industry practice.
2.2 The NLDS approach for dynamic lapse modelling
Once, it was assumed the market spread mkt as the main dynamic-driven factor. focusing
on the second stage, recent developments in actuarial practice and literature, use double
unsmoothed (Edwards (2016)) or smoothed (Baione et al. (2021)) double S-shaped models
to estimate dependence between lapse rate and market spread. These approaches are based on
theeconomicassumptionthatpolicyholdersdonotchangetheirbehaviorforsmalldifferences
between the market rate and policy crediting rate, whereas as the market spread mkt value
increases (decreases), the lapse rate should increase (decrease) more or less rapidly.
In Baione et al. (2021), the function used to model DPHB is represented by the following
DS function (see Figure 1).
ψ(Y, βD) = q DS (mkt, βD) = qmin +
qmid −qmin
1 + e−a1·(mkt−c1) +
qmax −qmid
1 + e−a2·(mkt−c2)
(2)
noindent with βD := {qmin, qmid, qmax, a1, a2, c1, c2}. Parameters qmin, qmid and qmax
are the initial (minimum), middle, and ﬁnal (maximum) values of DLM, with qmin < qmid <
qmax. The parameters a1 > 0 and a2 > 0 are related to the slopes of the two growth phases,
whereas c1 and c2 are the corresponding middle points, with c1 ≤c2. Such conditions
guarantee the existence of two growing phases. It is noteworthy, that if a1 = a2 and c1 = c2
DS function collapses in a sigmoid. Thus, DS is deﬁned in q DS (mkt) : R →[qmin, qmax]
and it is characterized by seven parameters.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In Figure 1, an example of the DS function to estimate DLM conditional to spread
is reported. As one can see, the function is equal to 1 (then r (Z, βB, mkt = 0, βD) =
r Base(Z, βB)) when mkt is equal to 0. This is due to the economic assumption previously
introduced. If the policyholder has to keep his basic behavior r Base when the market spread
is equal to 0, it means that the DS function must be equal to 1 in the point 0. This is obtained
introducing the mathematical constraints q DS (0) = qmid and qmid = 1. Hence, when the
DS function is used to model DPHB the number of parameters to estimate is reduced to 5,
introducing a sub-optimal problem.
It is important to note that usually other constraints are assumed in the parameter estimate
process. Indeed particular attention is given to the estimate of qmin and qmax parameters. Such
parameters represent a minimum and a maximum value that are obtained for extreme values of
market spread. Such parameters are linked to an asymptotic behavior of policyholders where
usually the sample is very poor, making difﬁcult a proper estimate. It is very common, in
actuarial practice to ﬁx these parameters by “expert judgment”, introducing new constraints.
Following Baione et al. (2021), the parameters of the DS function are estimated by a
non-linear regression. Considering a I-sample of the r.v. DLM and mkt the non-linear
regression (see (Gallant , 1975)) based on DS (NLDS approach) can be represented by the
following equation:
DLMt = q DS 
mkti , βD

+ ϵi, 1 ≤i ≤I
(3)
where ϵt is an error term usually assumed as normally distributed with mean equal to 0 and
constant variance σ 2. This approach allows to calculation of expected DLM conditioned
to market spread and DLM prediction intervals (i.e. conditional quantiles), based on the
assumption of normal distribution for DLM.
Anyway, the prediction intervals obtained are symmetric even if the data show an asym-
metric distribution. To overcome this issue, it is possible to obtain asymmetric estimates of
prediction intervals by Monte Carlo simulation applied to the augmented covariance matrix
(Tellinghuisen (2001)).
The use of statistical copulas as a regression tool allows us to overcome some of the con-
straints and limits present in the DS. In particular, the DS is linked to a speciﬁc shape, which
can eventually collapse into a sigmoid. As seen, it is a model built for speciﬁc phenomena
which, by imposing constraints on the parameters, can be subject to expert judgment for the
deﬁnition, for example, of inﬂection points or asymptotes - in compliance with some con-
solidated dynamics (insurance, economic, ﬁnancial,...). On the other hand, CR and CQR are
tools without constraints and structure which, by capturing the marginal distributions and the
dependence structure, manage to describe the phenomenon more freely, while renouncing
the possibility of external expert intervention. The ﬂexibility of the CR allows you to obtain
any functional form for the estimate, including a DS if it is the most suitable to describe the
data, obtaining the additional advantage of estimating the prediction intervals (CQR) with
the same parametric set estimated for the CR. Last but not least, using copulas as a regression
tool allows you to model quantiles by modeling any asymmetric tail dependencies between
the variables.
To lighten the notation of formulas, we will set in the following ψ(mkt; βD) = ψ.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3 Regressions using copulas
Copula theory is widely covered in the literature, some of the main texts are Nelsen (2006),
Joe (2014), and Schmidt (2007). As well known, Sklar’s theorem (Sklar (1959)) provides
the theoretical foundation for the application of copulas.
Theorem 3.1 Let F be a joint distribution function of r.v. X1 and X2 with marginals G1 and
G2, then there exists a copula C such that
F(x1, x2) = C(G1(x1), G2(x2))
∀x1, x2 ∈¯R
(4)
where ¯R indicates the extended system of real numbers, i.e. the system obtained by adding
the terms +∞and −∞to R treating them as real numbers.
In particular, since G1 and G2 are continuous, the C function is unique.
Furthermore, in the continuous case, it is well known that the density function of the
copula is
c(u1, u2) = ∂2C(u1, u2)
∂u1∂u2
=
f (x1, x2)
g1(x1)g2(x2)
and therefore the density function f is related to the copula density by the following
f (x1, x2) = c(u1, u2)g1(x1)g2(x2).
(5)
Hence, the conditional distribution of U1 given U2 = u2 also also called h-function (see
(Czado , 2019)), is:
Prob[U1 ≤u1|U2 = u2] = Cu2(u1) = h1|2(u1|u2) = ∂C(u1, u2)
∂u2
(6)
Furthermore, the conditional distribution of X1 given X2 = x2 is:
Prob[X1 ≤x1|X2 = x2] = Cu2(u1)|u1=G1(x1),u2=G2(x2)
(7)
In a nutshell, copulas allow the analysis of both the joint dynamics and the behavior of at
least one variable conditioned to the others.
3.1 A brief introduction to copula regression
In order to deﬁne the CR function in the bivariate context, it is possible to use the deﬁnition
and observations given in Sungur (2005).
Deﬁnition 3.1 Let (U1, U2) be a bivariate random variable with uniform marginal distribu-
tions in [0,1] and copula C. The CR function of U1 with respect to U2 is deﬁned as
zC(u2) = EC[U1|U2 = u2] = 1 −
 1
0
Cu2(u1)du1
(8)
Proof
EC[U1|U2 = u2] =
1

0
u1dG1|U2=u2(u1) =
1

0
u1d
∂C(u1, u2)
∂u2

=
1

0
u1
∂2C(u1, u2)
∂u2∂u1
du1
123

Annals of Operations Research
=

u1
∂C(u1, u2)
∂u2
1
0
−
1

0
∂C(u1, u2)
∂u2
= 1 −
 1
0
Cu2(u1)du1
Moreover, for the last step, the following copula property was used: C(1, u2) = u2.
⊓⊔
Observation 3.1 It is worth noting that when the random variable (r.v.), U1 and U2 have per-
fect positive dependence, the value of zC(u2) is u2, in the case of perfect negative dependence
is 1 −u1 and in the case of independence is 1
2. Furthermore, the CR function can be used to
obtain the Pearson linear correlation coefﬁcient, for further details see (Sungur , 2005).
The transition from the copula scale to the real data scale, however, is not immediate. In
fact, even if we have
E[X1|X2 = x2] = E[X1|G2(X2) = G2(x2)]
= E[X1|U2 = G2(x2)]
= E[G−1
1 (U1)|U2 = G2(x2)]
(9)
Using the (5) and the deﬁnition of the expected value of a conditional random variable,
we have
E[X1|X2 = x2] =
 +∞
−∞
x1g1|2(x1|x2)dx1
=
 +∞
−∞
x1g1(x1) ∂
∂u1
∂C(u1, u2)
∂u2

(u1,u2)=(G1(x1),G2(x2))

dx1
=
 +∞
−∞
x1g1(x1)c1,2(G1(x1), G2(x2))dx1
(10)
Observation 3.2 In case the function zC(u2) of (8) is linear, it is possible to obtain the CR
function of X1 with respect to X2
E[X1|X2 = x2]
= G−1
1

1 −
 1
0
Cu2(u1)du1

u2=G2(x2)
 
= G−1
1 (zC(G2(x2)))
(11)
The result in (11) can be obtained applying integration by parts as in proof 3.1.
3.2 Copula Quantile Regression - CQR
Given the bivariate random variable (X1, X2) it is possible to estimate the conditional quantile
of the dependent variable following (Sungur , 2005). The conditional distribution of X1 given
X2 is:
G1|2(x1|x2) = P[X1 ≤x1|X2 = x2]
= P[U1 ≤G1(x1)|U2 = G2(x2)]
= ∂C(u1, u2)
∂u2

u1=G1(x1),u2=G2(x2)
= Cu2(u1)

u1=G1(x1),u2=G2(x2)
(12)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Therefore, the conditional quantile is deﬁned as
G−1
1|2(α|x2) = inf {x1 ∈R|G1|2(x1|x2) ≥α}
and it can be calculated using the following expression proposed in Kraus and Czado (2017):
qα(x2) = G−1
1|2(α|x2) = G−1
1 (C−1
u2 (α))
(13)
where α ∈(0, 1) corresponds to the probability level.
It is very important to note that the marginal distribution of the dependent variable plays
a predominant role in the estimation of the conditional quantile as it determines its possible
realizations. This importance of the marginal distribution becomes more and more funda-
mental the more we move towards large and small α values.
For this reason, in CQR a slightly more accurate choice of this distribution can signiﬁcantly
reduce estimation error.
Particularly interesting is the form assumed by the prediction intervals deﬁned with this
approach: the trajectories of the upper and lower extremes of the interval are not a simple
translation due to an additive shift of the point estimates, but have their own form due to
the probabilistic and dependence structure estimated by the observed data, as will be better
appreciated in the next section. By the way of example, this is particularly relevant when
variables have an asymmetric distribution or have a strong tail dependency.
4 Modeling dynamic policyholder behavior with copula regression and
copula quantile regression
Having the goal to estimate the relationship between DLM and mkt we adopt a bivariate
copula regression approach as an alternative to the NLDS proposed in Baione et al. (2021); in
a nutshell, CR and CQR can overcome some issues introduced by the NLDS for the following
reasons
• NDLS is a very ﬂexible tool to model DPHB, but is strictly dependent on the Gaussian
distribution assumption of the dependent variable, on the DS functional assumption, and
introduces many constraints in order to be compliant with the economic assumption
introduced in section 2.
• In order to estimate the conditional quantiles, NLDS provides, as output, symmetric
prediction intervals; this implies the estimate of an additional parameter: the standard
deviation. As stated in Section 2, the augmented covariance matrix technique permits the
estimate of asymmetric prediction intervals in NLDS case-making Monte Carlo simu-
lation. We will show in the Numerical Application section that this procedure does not
give a signiﬁcant improvement in the estimates of the prediction intervals.
• CR and CQR allow for average and prediction interval estimates that depend on the best
copula ﬁtting the data. The estimate of prediction intervals by CQR also allows modeling
the asymptotic behavior of policyholder without introducing an "expert judgment" for
asymptotic behavior as in the NLDS case.
Following Eq. (1) the estimate of lapse rate by a Two-Stage approach based on bivariate
CR and CQR can be summarized in the next steps:
• First stage:
i. estimate the ˆr Base. By way of example, it can be estimated by unconditional logistic
regressions, where the dependent variable is the observed lapse rate as proposed in
123

Annals of Operations Research
Baione et al. (2021). It is worth noting that more complex models can be used for
this estimate introducing covariates in the regression model. As this paper is focused
on the second stage, we select the simplest way to estimate r Base.
• Second stage:
ii. determine a sample for DLM by dividing the observed (raw) lapse rates to their
estimate ˆr Base obtained in the ﬁrst stage;
iii. ﬁt the best marginal distribution (G1(mkt)) for market spread and (G2(ψ)) for
DLM;
iv. select the best-ﬁt copula C(G1(mkt), G2(ψ)) to model the joint distribution
between market spread and DLM and estimate the related parameters;
v. estimate the expected DLM conditioned to market spread using CR approach by Eq.
(10);
vi. estimate the prediction intervals of DLM conditioned to market spread using the
CQR approach by Eq. (13).
As stated in Section 1, conditional mean and conditional quantiles can be calculated by
estimating a single set of parameters. By way of example, one can select two-parameter
distributions for the marginals (G1(mkt), G2(ψ)) and a bi-parametric copula having a six
parameters model. Furthermore, if the sample for the estimates is populated, CR and CQR
can be applied without ﬁtting marginals, selecting copulas on the observed data reducing the
number of parameters.
It is important to underline that in this analysis we restrict attention to continuous copula
families: in this way, we use only copulas which possess a density. We note, however, that
copula theory permits modeling without this restriction. An example can be the use of singular
copulas to represent perfectly correlated outcomes in extreme scenarios, that in the lapse
context might correspond to a scenario of systemic crisis where all policyholders lapse
together (i.e. mass lapse or burnout). While such an approach is not the primary focus of this
analysis and, given limited data, lacks empirical validity, a possible extension could involve
combining a continuous copula with a point mass to capture extreme co-movement. For
completeness, although it is not the case in our application, we highlight that another beneﬁt
of copula-based modeling is that it operates on the level of distribution functions, rather than
densities: this means that it is possible to handle cases of deterministic dependence or discrete
outcomes, which classical regression might have difﬁculty with.
5 Application on real data
5.1 Description of the dataset and estimate of rBase
The portfolio is composed of life-participating policies with the following types of contracts:
Pure Endowment (PE), Capitalisation (Cap), Endowment (End), and Deferred Annuity (DA).
Let j = 1, . . . , 4 index the type of product. For each type of product, the dataset contains the
observed monthly lapse rates r j,i in the period between January 2010 and December 2020,
therefore we set I = 132. In addition, market spread values mkt, j,i for each type of product
and month are reported. Market spread is calculated as the difference between the monthly
average yield of a 10Y term Italian Treasury bullet bond (BTP) and the monthly average
yield credited to the policies.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Estimates of
deterministic component
Type of product
j
ˆrBase
j
%
Pure Endowment
1
0.45
Capitalisation
2
0.60
Endowment
3
0.37
Deferred Annuity
4
0.33
The choice of a ten-year BTP, and in general a 10-year yield, is a market "good practice" for
different types of analyses, both in literature (Albertazzi et al. (2014); Arnould et al. (2022))
and in the current practice of the Italian life insurance market (IVASS , 2025), where it is still
commonly used as a proxy for the market yield both in internal models and in the assessments
of the embedded value. In Italy, it is in fact considered a good indicator for describing the
conditions and performance of the bond market, consistently representing the expectations
that stakeholders have on interest rates. Its low-risk structure makes it a suitable competitor for
the performance of the products analyzed below, characterized by low risk.3 Moreover, from
a regulatory perspective, selecting an appropriate benchmark rate necessitates a correlation
analysis between lapse rates and the spread between policy-credited returns and returns from
alternative investments.In our analysis, we evaluated several potential benchmarks, including
the yields of Italian Treasury bonds across differing maturities and the EuroSwap Interest
Rate Swap (IRS) curve. We observed no signiﬁcant differences in the resulting correlations.
ThebaselapseratesinEq.(1)(r Base
j
, j = 1, . . . , 4)areestimatedbyunconditionallogistic
regressions (see point (i) in Section 4), where the dependent variables are the observed lapse
rates. This means that the model has just an intercept parameter and no covariates, as the
estimate of the base rate in our application is not differentiated in terms of policyholder and/or
policy features.
Indeed ˆr Base
j
=
exp( ˆβB, j)
1+exp( ˆβB, j), j = 1, 2, 3, 4.
In Table 1 the estimated ˆr Base
j
, j = 1, . . . , 4 are reported.
Regarding the ﬁrst stage, while the estimation of the basic lapse rate ˆrBase
j
commonly incor-
porates various policy-speciﬁc covariates (e.g., policyholder age, policy duration), empirical
evidence (see (Baione et al., 2019)) suggests that the calibration of DPHB functions is not sig-
niﬁcantly distorted whether based on the original lapse data or on the residuals derived from
this ﬁrst stage. The choice to apply a simpliﬁed approach for the calculation of ˆrBase
j
has the
aim of bringing the attention entirely to the second phase of the two-stage models presented
in the Sect. 2. In constructing DPHB models, calculating the two components separately
implicitly assumes their independence. Consequently, the dynamic component analyzes how
lapses depend on market spread trends, irrespective of the methodology used for the basic
component. While a link might exist between insured characteristics and their behavior as the
market evolves, if the analysis focuses on more speciﬁc risk classes and employs advanced
methodologies for the basic component, a copula-based approach will consistently enable
the analysis of dependence for each risk class as mkt varies.
3 If riskier products had been chosen for the comparison, the analysis would have been affected by the different
ﬂuctuations in returns. Within the scope of the same BTPs, the choice of a shorter duration for the security
could have been "contaminated" by lower returns linked to more stable market expectations over a shorter
time interval, while for BTP securities with a longer duration there are typically higher returns to absorb the
risk of monetary policy, geopolitical phenomena or other occasional events that drastically inﬂuence the trend
of interest rates.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Descriptive statistics of
the DLM in the 4 samples
Type of product
j
Min
Max
Mean
Dev. std.
Pure Endowment
1
0.29
2.13
1.00
0.34
Capitalisation
2
0.00
4.81
1.00
0.75
Endowment
3
0.30
2.41
1.00
0.43
Deferred Annuity
4
0.00
2.85
1.00
0.57
Table 3 Selected marginal
distributions
Type of product
j
DLM
Market Spread
Pure Endowment
1
Gamma
Normal
Capitalisation
2
Weibull
Normal
Endowment
3
LogNormal
Normal
Deferred Annuity
4
Weibull
Normal
Then, a set of I = 132 observations of the DLM is deﬁned by dividing the observed
monthly lapse rate r j,i with the estimate ˆr Base
j
, deﬁning a 4 × 132 sample of DLM (ψ j,i)
for each type of product and month, as stated in point (ii) of Section 4. In Table 2 descriptive
statistics of the DLM sample are reported.
It is not surprising that mean values are all equal to one; this is due to the "only intercept"
logistic regression model used for the base rate estimate which output is equivalent to the
unconditional mean, by deﬁnition.
In order to apply CR and CQR for each j, following the notation introduced in Section
3.1 and Section 3.2, we set X1, j = ψ j and X2, j = mkt, j. For the sake of simplicity, we
will not consider the index j in the following notation.
5.2 Marginal distributions and copula selection
Following the steps described in Section 4, step (iii) concerns the selection of the marginal
distributions (G1 and G2) and the estimate of their parameters.
The estimation of the marginal distributions is made by the MASS package of R. Each
distribution is chosen selecting the one with the highest likelihood. According to this criterion,
the most suitable distributions to describe the variables of interest are reported in Table 3
for each type of product. It is emphasized that if there is not a perfect ﬁt of the theoretical
distributions on the observed data, it is not an issue. In fact, as demonstrated in Kim et al.
(2007) using a simulation approach, the error made by choosing wrong marginal distributions
is a problem only if the choice is deeply wrong.
It is worth noting that DLM is not compliant with the normality assumption and in the case
of j = 2, 3, 4 the selected distribution does not belong to the exponential family. Therefore,
in this case study, it is very important to use an alternative approach to linear regression,
GLM, or non-linear regression.
Once the marginal distributions have been selected and ﬁtted, step (iv) consists of the
estimate of the dependency structure, by selecting the best bivariate copula. In Figure 2, the
scatter plots of the two variables are reported for each type of product. It is important to note
that the observed values are often inﬂuenced by the scale used. Then, it may be useful to
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Scatterplots of normalized data
Fig. 3 Comparison between the kernel estimates (upper row) and the theoretical contour plots (lower row) of
the copulas
study the normalized values (see (Kraus & Czado , 2017)).

Z1 = −1(U1) ~N(0, 1)
Z2 = −1(U2) ~N(0, 1)
(14)
The selection of the best copula is performed using the R package VineCopula, which
allows to estimate, select and perform an exploratory data analysis for bivariate copula mod-
els. It compares a wide range of bivariate copulas. In particular, it allows for selecting copulas
via the log-likelihood criterion and also provides a maximum likelihood estimate of the
parameters. The set of copulas available in the package is large. It includes all the main Ellip-
tic, Archimedean, and Extreme-Value parametric families used in practice (such as Gaussian,
t, Clayton, Gumbel, BB8, etc.), with one and two parameters. Some particular copulas, such
as those with a singular component, are excluded from the package. However, also based
on the arguments in Section 4, the package was considered suitable for our purposes since
the included copulas already allow for tail dependencies, excluding the possibility of a mass
lapsation event.
In Figure 3, it is possible to compare the contour plots of the Kernel distributions of the
copulas and the theoretical structures identiﬁed. Although there are slight discrepancies, the
dependency structure highlighted by the theoretical copula is similar to the one in pseudo-
copula data.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Main outputs of the copula estimation phase
Type of product
j
Copula
θ1
θ2
τK
ˆτK
p-value
Pure Endowment
1
Tawn Type 1
1.31
0.36
0.13
0.16
7.28e-03**
Capitalisation
2
BB8
1.73
0.93
0.22
0.19
1.40e-03**
Endowment
3
BB8
2.54
0.94
0.39
0.39
3.07e-11***
Deferred Annuity
4
BB8
2.16
0.89
0.29
0.34
9.27e-09***
The selected copulas and their parameters are reported in Table 4 for each type of product
j as well as the values assumed by the observed Kendall’s Tau (τK ) and its estimate (ˆτK ).
Furthermore, in the last column, the p-values of the bivariate asymptotic independence
tests based on Kendall’s Tau (for further details see Genest et al. (2007)) are reported. As one
can see, the p-values are very lower than 5% showing that the policyholders are sensitive to
changes in economic-ﬁnancial scenarios.
The copula structures selected are bi-parametric – BB8 and Tawn 1 type 1 (see Appendix
A)- this means that the total number of parameters estimated for each type of product is equal
to six (two parameters for each marginal distribution and two for the copula).
The Tawn family is divided into two types according to the estimated parameters δ1 and
δ2, which can be interpreted as asymmetry parameters. Indeed, by setting one of the two
equal to 1, these parameters allow us to deﬁne the two bi-parametric Tawn Copulas (Tawn
type 1 and Tawn type 2), which differ in the direction of the asymmetry – δ1 = 1 for an
asymmetry on the left and δ2 = 1 for an asymmetry to the right.
The Copula function is deﬁned as:
C(u1, u2; θ, δ1, δ2) = (1 −δ1) log(u2)
log(u1u2) −(1 −δ2)

1 −
log(u2)
log(u1u2)
 
+

δ1

1 −
log(u2)
log(u1u2)
 θ
+

δ2
log(u2)
log(u1u2)
 θ 1
θ
(15)
with δ1, δ2 ∈[0, 1] e θ ∈[1, +∞).
The Extended Joe BB8 family is a family of symmetric copulas whose C function is
deﬁned as:
C(u1, u2; θ1, θ2) = θ−1
2 [1 −{1 −[1 −(1 −θ2)θ1]−1
· [1 −(1 −θ2u1)θ1][1 −(1 −θ2u2)θ1]}
1
θ1 ]
=
1 −
θ1

1 −[1−(1−θ2u1)θ1][1−(1−θ2u2)θ1]
1−(1−θ2)θ1
θ2
(16)
In Figure 4, the estimated joint density functions for BB8 and Tawn type 1 are shown.
5.3 Regression analysis with copulas
Once the copula structure has been deﬁned, we move on to the construction of the regression
model using Eq. (10) and Eq.(13), according to steps (v) and (vi) deﬁned in Section 4. In order
to get an estimate of the conditional mean and conditional quantile of DLM, it is important to
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Selected density functions
calculate the h-function of each copula according to Eq. (6). The selected copulas are Tawn
Type 1 and BB8; in the following, we report the h-functions of the two selected copulas.
• The Tawn Type 1 h-function is:
h1|2(u1|u2) = Cu2(u1) =
= 1
θ

θδ1

log(u2)
u2log2(u2u1) −
1
u2log(u2u1)


δ1(1 −
log(u2)
log(u2u1))
θ−1 + θ

δ2
u2log(u2u1)
−
δ2log(u2)
u2log2(u2u1)
 δ2log(u2)
log(u2u1)
θ−1


δ1(1 −
log(u2)
log(u2u1))
θ +
 δ2log(u2)
log(u2u1)
θ
 1
θ −1
−(1 −δ1)log(u2)
u2log2(u2u1)
+
1 −δ1
u2log(u2u1) −(1 −δ2)

log(u2)
u2log2(u2u1) −
1
u2log(u2u1)

(17)
• The BB8 h-function is:
h1|2(u1|u2) = Cu2(u1) =
= (1 −θ2u2)θ1−1[1 −(1 −θ2u1)θ1]
1 −(1 −θ2)θ1

1 −[1 −(1 −θ2u2)θ1][1 −(1 −θ2u1)θ1]
1 −(1 −θ2)θ1
 1
θ1 −1
(18)
The calculation of the h-function (cfr. Eq.(6)) for the two selected copulas is reported in
Appendix A. As in our cases a closed-form solution for the integral in Eq. (10) cannot be
found, it is necessary to use numerical methods such as Monte Carlo simulation. In Figure
5, the ﬁtted CR and CQR are shown.
All the contractual forms analyzed have a non-decreasing trend demonstrating a dynamic
behavior in the decision-making process of the policyholder. Moreover, the S-shaped form
assumed by the central and interval estimates conﬁrm, in our example, the existence of a
rational economic behavior similar, but not identical, to the one assumed with the DS model
proposed by Baione et al. (2021). Within our approach, even in the absence of a predeﬁned
economic behavior assumption, policyholders show an increase (decrease) lapsetion when
the benchmark market yield is higher (lower) than the policy credited rate.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 CR (solid line) and CQR (dashed line) estimates. The dashed lines correspond to 2.5% and 97.5%
quantiles. Points represent observed values
Table 5 NSE values for CRs
Type of product
j
NSE%
Pure Endowment
1
4.65
Capitalisation
2
17.71
Endowment
3
43.91
Deferred Annuity
4
15.02
These empirical ﬁndings are consistent with the Interest Rate Hypothesis (IRH), as they
conﬁrm that policyholders tend to lapse more frequently when the market yield exceeds
the credited rate, reﬂecting a rational reaction to ﬁnancial incentives. The Emergency Fund
Hypothesis (EFH), on the other hand, is not explicitly modeled in our framework, since
liquidity-driven factors such as income shocks or unemployment are beyond the scope of this
single-factor speciﬁcation. Nevertheless, the observed relationship between lapse rates and
marketspread highlights the centralrole of interestrate dynamics in explaining policyholders’
behavior.
In order to check the goodness of ﬁt for CR, we have calculated the Nash–Sutcliffe
efﬁciency (NSE) measure. The NSE is a statistical measure that allows you to evaluate the
goodness of ﬁt of a model to the data, it ranges from −∞to 1 and the reference estimator
is the simple average: if NSE = 1, there is a perfect match of the mean of the observed
data, if NSE = 0, the model predictions are as accurate as the mean of the observed data, if
−∞≤N SE ≤0, the observed mean is a better predictor than the model. This means that
0 is a critical value to accept or reject the model. In Table 5, the NSE values are reported for
each model by varying the type of product and all values are greater than 0 showing that the
model has a good ﬁtting.
It is worth noting the shape of the prediction intervals obtained with CQR (Eq. (13)). Such
intervals, as previously stated, are not symmetric. Indeed, being linked to the underlying
copula and to the marginal distributions selected, they allow us to obtain a speciﬁc trend
according to the prediction level used.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Comparison between CR estimates and NLDS estimates
Furthermore, the dispersion of data tends to increase as the spread increases, and this is
well captured by the increasing width of the prediction intervals estimated by CQR.
The reason for this widening of the prediction bands at higher and lower values of the
spreads is both statistical and practical. First, the condition that these observations are sparse
and the rarity of large market spreads in our sample increase model uncertainty, resulting
in naturally wider CQR prediction intervals. Second, the product type heterogeneity could
causedifferentreactionsacrosspolicyholders.Furthermore,althoughonemightexpectnearly
uniform lapse behavior at high levels of the market spread, this is not observed in practice,
as lapse rates vary widely depending on the product type and policyholder characteristics.
Finally, restricting our analysis to endowment policy, we observe (see Fig. 5,that only three
points exceed the 300 bps market spread threshold; all fall within the sovereign-debt crisis
window from November 2011 to January 2012. The highest surrender spikes occurred in
November and December 2011, while the January 2012 observation shows a contraction in
lapses despite an equally elevated spread. This pattern may be consistent with a potential
“burn-out” effect. Because only three high-spread points are available, we cannot provide
formal statistical conﬁrmation.
To have a comparison with prediction intervals calculated by the NLDS model, we focus
on the endowment case for the sake of simplicity. In Fig. 6, a comparison between CR-CQR
and NLDS estimates is reported.
The central lines represent the central estimates, and it is possible to observe that they are
not so different; whereas prediction intervals are signiﬁcantly different. It is worth noting
that the NLDS estimate does not provide a DS shape, indeed the curve collapses in a simple
sigmoid. The external dotted lines represent the prediction intervals (symmetric) estimated
by NLDS (for further details see Baione et al. (2021)). As one can see, in Figure 6 the width
of the NLDS prediction interval is approximately constant and this is not suitable for our
data which shows an increasing dispersion. Having the goal of testing the prediction interval
obtained, we calculate the frequency of observations out of the interval. The idea is that a
prediction interval at 95% should contain approximately 95% of the sample. The number of
observations not contained in the prediction interval is 5 for both the methodologies deﬁning
an estimated frequency of observations out of the interval at 3.79%, which is appropriate for a
95% prediction interval. However, if we focus our analysis on the sub-sample of observations
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Comparison between CR estimates and NLDSMC estimates
with a market spread greater than 2% (where we have the maximum dispersion), the sample
has 13 observations, 2 of them out of the interval for the NLDS case, and 0 for the CQR
case. As the sample is poorly populated, we use the "rule of succession" to estimate the
frequency of observations out of the interval. The rule of succession is a particular case of
additive smoothing (see Manning (2008)). The latter allows for the estimation of underlying
probabilities when there are few observations or events that have not been observed to occur
at all in the sample. Following additive smoothing, the estimate of the probability that the
observation is out of the prediction interval ( ˆρ) can be obtained by the following equation:
ˆρ =
η + ν
N + 2ν ,
(19)
where η is the number of observations out of the interval, N is the number of observations
and ν is a smoothing parameter. If we assume ν = 1, we are considering a particular case
of additive smoothing known as "the rule of succession", introduced by Laplace in the 18th
century. Then, we get an estimate of ˆρ =
2+1
13+2·1 = 20% by NLDS and ˆρ =
0+1
13+2·1 =
6.66% by CQR. The latter seems to be a better result for a 95% prediction interval. Finally,
we have calculated prediction intervals for the NLDS case using Monte Carlo simulation
(100,000 simulations) applied to the augmented covariance matrix (henceforth NLDSMC),
as suggested in Tellinghuisen (2001), in order to get asymmetric prediction intervals. The
outcomes are shown in Fig. 7.
Even though the prediction intervals are asymmetric in this case, the width of the interval
appears approximately constant, showing problems in adapting to heteroskedasticity. Apply-
ing again the rule of succession to get the estimate of probability to be out of the interval
conditioned to values of spread greater than 2% the result is again 20% for NLDSCM, which
is not a good result for a prediction interval at 95%.
6 Conclusions and further research
The last developments in actuarial literature and practice model lapse DPHB by two-stage
models. In this paper, we focus on the second stage, having the goal of estimating the DLM
distribution conditional to market spread by copulas. In the numerical application, we also
123

Annals of Operations Research
show a comparison with NLDS; such an approach has been introduced recently in actuarial lit-
erature. Numerical application shows that regression by copulas can be a valid statistical tool
to model DPHB and allows to overcome some weaknesses of the NLDS procedure. NLDS
procedure is made to estimate conditional DLM in order to be compliant with an economical
assumption; furthermore, the non-linear regression used for parameter estimate also requests
to satisfy some statistical assumptions such as the normality of the dependent variable. Hence,
having the goal to be compliant with economic and statistical assumptions, NLDS imposes
several constraints that deﬁne a suboptimal problem in the parameter estimates procedure.
Furthermore, the NLDS procedure provides an estimate of prediction intervals that do not
seem to be accurate when the data shows heteroscedasticity and asymmetry. Using copulas
it is possible to estimate the distribution of DLM conditional to market spread and conse-
quently all the conditional statistics such as conditional mean(CR) and conditional quantiles
(CQR). The estimate is obtained by ﬁxing fewer constraints than the NLDS case because is
carried on by selecting the best copula to model the dependence structure between the two
random variables. The selection is made by comparing log-likelihood values. As shown in
the numerical application, the NSE goodness of ﬁt indicator shows that CR is a proper model
to estimate expected conditional DLM (N SE ≥0). In addition, we show that prediction
intervals estimated by CQR seem more appropriate than the ones provided by NLDS.
The proposed single-factor model consistently captures the dynamic behavior of policy-
holders. Future extensions of the model may consider additional sources of heterogeneity,
such as the aforementioned unemployment rates or income shocks. The integration of these
dimensions would further enhance the model’s predictive power and its applicability to
increasingly speciﬁc risk management contexts, allowing for greater precision in estimating
the dependency structure.
Behavior in the presence of mass lapses could also be of interest. Although it describes
a different portfolio movement, the copula-based approach would still be applicable and
would allow for the study of the dependency structure among the factors that lead to this
phenomenon, once again demonstrating the ﬂexibility of copulas, even as a regressive tool.
A Appendix
A.1 Kendall Tau
In dealing with the copulas, the introduction of a measure of dependence which allows
to describe the relationship, not necessarily linear, between the variables is of particular
importance. In this regard, Kendall’s Tau is a measure of concordance for which, given two
pairs of independent and identically distributed random variables (X1, X2) and (X′
1, X′
2)
τK (X1, X2) = P[(X1 −X′
1)(X2 −X′
2) > 0] −P[(X1 −X′
1)(X2 −X′
2) > 0]
and the representation for random variables takes the form described in the Eq.(20)
τK (X1, X2) = 4
 ∞
−∞
 ∞
−∞
F(x1, x2)dF(x1, x2)

−1
= 4
 1
0
 1
0
C(u1, u2)dC(u1, u2)

−1
(20)
ItresultsτK ∈[−1, 1],wherethevalue-1isreachedincaseofperfectnegativedependence
and the value 1 in case of perfect positive dependence.
123

Annals of Operations Research
A.2 Calculation of the h-function
A.2.1 BB8 Copula
Limited to this calculation, let:

y = [1 −θ2u2]θ1d = [1−(1−θ2u1)θ1]
1−(1−θ2)θ1
z = [1−(1−θ2u1)θ1][1−(1−θ2u2)θ1]
1−(1−θ2)θ1
= d(1 −y)
Following Eq. (16), we have:
h1|2(u1|u2) =
∂
∂u2
C(u1, u2)
= −1
θ2
∂
∂u2
θ1

1 −[1 −(1 −θ2u1)θ1][1 −(1 −θ2u2)θ1]
1 −(1 −θ2)θ1
= −1
θ2
∂
∂u2
θ1√
1 −z = −1
θ2
 1
θ1
(1 −z)
1
θ1 −1 ∂
∂u2
[1 −z]

= 1
θ2
 1
θ1
(1 −z)
1
θ1 −1 ∂
∂u2
[d −dy]

= −d
θ2
 1
θ1
(1 −z)
1
θ1 −1 ∂
∂u2
[1 −θ2u2]θ1

= −d
θ2
 1
θ1
(1 −z)
1
θ1 −1θ1[1 −θ2u2]θ1−1(−θ2)

= d

(1 −z)
1
θ1 −1[1 −θ2u2]θ1−1

By replacing the previously deﬁned values, the Eq. (18) is obtained.
A.2.2 Tawn Type 1 Copula
Let

z =
log(u2)
log(u1u2)z′ =
∂
∂u2 z =
1
u2 [log(u1u2)−log(u2)]
[log(u1u2)]2
Following Eq. (15) we have:
h1|2(u1|u2) =
∂
∂u2
C(u1, u2)
= (1 −δ1) ∂
∂u2
log(u2)
log(u1u2) −(1 −δ2) ∂
∂u2

1 −
log(u2)
log(u1u2)
 
+ ∂
∂u2

δ1

1 −
log(u2)
log(u1u2)
 θ
+

δ2
log(u2)
log(u1u2)
 θ 1
θ
= (1 −δ1)
 1
u2 log(u1u2) −log(u2) u1
u1u2
[log(u1u2)]2

−(1 −δ2)

−
1
u2 log(u1u2) −log(u2) u1
u1u2
[log(u1u2)]2

123

Annals of Operations Research
+ ∂
∂u2
{[δ1(1 −z)]θ + [δ2z]θ}
1
θ = (1 −δ1)z′ −(1 −δ2)(−z′) + 1
θ {[δ1(1 −z)]θ
+[δ2z]θ}
1
θ −1θ{[δ1(1 −z)]θ−1δ1(−z′) + [δ2z]θ−1δ2z′}
Simplifying and substituting the values gives the Eq. (17)
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza within the CRUI-
CARE Agreement.
Declarations
conﬂict of interests Fabio Baione declares he has no conﬂict of interests, Davide Biancalana declares he has
no conﬂict of interests, Andrea Santoro declares he has no conﬂict of interests. This article does not contain
any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Albertazzi, U., Ropele, T., Sene, G., & Signoretti, F. M. (2014). The impact of the sovereign debt crisis on the
activity of Italian banks. Journal of Banking & Finance, 46, 387–402.
American Academy of Actuaries. (2005). Recommended approach for setting regulatory risk-based capital
requirements for variable annuities and similar products. American Academy of Actuaries, Boston, MA:
Report.
American Academy of Actuaries, (2023). Considerations Regarding Dynamic Lapses in Actuarial Modeling,
Issue Paper, American Academy of Actuaries, Washington D.C. https://actuary.org/wp-content/uploads/
2023/12/life-paper-dynamic-lapses_0.pdf
Arnould, G., Avignone, G., Pancaro, C., & ˙Zochowski, D. (2022). Bank funding costs and solvency. The
European Journal of Finance, 28(10), 931–963.
Autorité de Controlé Prudentiel https://acpr.banque-france.fr/sites/default/ﬁles/20130527-onc-2013_0.pdf
Accessed 20 Sep 2019
Bacinello, A. R., (2005). Endogenous model of surrender conditions in equity-linked life insurance. Insurance:
Mathematics and Economics 37(2), 270–296
Baione, F., Biancalana, D., Angelis, P. D.,& Granito, I. (2018). Dynamic policyholder behavior and surrender
option evaluation for life insurance. In Mathematical and Statistical Methods for Actuarial Sciences and
Finance (pp. 81-85). Springer, Cham.
Baione, F., Biancalana, D., Angelis, P. D.,& Granito, I. (2019). A Double-Sigmoid approach for dynamic pol-
icyholder behavior. In AFIR/ERM Colloquium (Ed. SIA S.r.l.). Florence, Italy, 21-24 May 2019. https://
ordineattuari.it/media/1rvpjhqt/3-_baione_aﬁr_erm_colloquium_baione.pdf Accessed 12 Jul (2025)
Baione, F., Biancalana, D., & De Angelis, P. (2021). An application of Sigmoid and Double-Sigmoid functions
for dynamic policyholder behaviour. Decisions in Economics and Finance, 44(1), 5–22.
Banca d’Italia, (2012). Financial Stability Report, No. 4 Rome. https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/
rapporto-stabilita/2012-4/Financial-Stability-Report-4.pdf
Bernard, C., & Czado, C. (2015). Conditional quantiles and tail dependence. Journal of Multivariate Analysis,
138, 104–126.
Chernov, M., Dunn, B. R., & Longstaff, F. A. (2017). Macroeconomic-Driven Prepayment Risk and the
Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities. The Review of Financial Studies, 31(3), 1132–1183.
Chunli, C., & Jing, L. (2018). Early default risk and surrender risk: Impacts on participating life insurance
policies. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 78, 30-43.
Czado, C. (2019). Analyzing dependent data with vine copulas. Lecture Notes in Statistics, Springer.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Dar, A.,& Dodds, C., (1989). Interest rates, the emergency fund hypothesis and saving through endowment
policies:Some empirical evidence for the U.K. Journal of Risk and Insurance 56(3), 415–433
Edwards M., (2016). Dynamic Policyholder Behaviourhttps://www.actuaries.org.uk/system/ﬁles/ﬁeld/
document/Dynamic%20policyholder%20behaviour%20Edwards%205October2016%20v3%20
%5BCompatibility%20Mode%5D.pdf Accessed 20 sep 2019, Institute and Faculty of Actuaries,
London.
EIOPA, (2014). Directive 2009/138/EC of the European parliament and of the council 25 November 2009
on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of Insurance and Reinsurance (Solvency II)- https://eiopa.
europa.eu
EIOPA: Technical speciﬁcation for the preparatory phase (Part I) (2014) https://register.eiopa.europa.eu/
Publications/Standards/A_-_Technical_Speciﬁcation_for_the_Preparatory_Phase__Part_I_disclaimer.
pdf Accessed 12 Jul (2025)
Eling, M., & Kochanski, M. (2013). Research on lapse in life insurance: what has been done and what needs
to be done?. The Journal of Risk Finance.
Frees, E., & Valdez, E. (1998). Understanding Relationships Using Copulas. North American Actuarial Jour-
nal, 2(1), 1–25.
Gallant, A. R. (1975). Nonlinear Regression. The American Statistician, vol. 29, no. 2, 1975, pp. 73–81.
JSTOR.
Genest, C., & Favre, A. C. (2007). Everything you always wanted to know about copula modeling but were
afraid to ask. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, 12(4), 347–368.
Hall, A. (2000). Controlling for Burnout in Estimating Mortgage Prepayment Models. Journal of Housing
Economics, 9(4), 215–232.
IVASS, (2025). Relazione sull’attività svolta dall’Istituto nell’anno 2024. https://www.ivass.it/pubblicazioni-
e-statistiche/pubblicazioni/relazione-annuale/2025/Relazione_annuale_2024_EN.pdf?language_id=3
Joe, H. (2014). Dependence modeling with copulas. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Kim, C. (2005). Modeling surrender and lapse rates with economic variables. North American Actuarial
Journal, 9(4), 56–70.
Kim, G., Silvapulle, M. J., & Silvapulle, P. (2007). Comparison of semiparametric and parametric methods
for estimating copulas. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 51(6), 2836–2850.
Kuo, W., Tsai, C., & Chen, W.-K. (2003). An empirical study on the lapse rate: The cointegration approach.
Journal of Risk and Insurance, 70(3), 489–508.
Koenker, R. (2005). Quantile regression (No. 38). Cambridge university press.
Krämer, N., & Brechmann, E., & Silvestrini, D.& Czado, C. (2013). Total loss estimation using copula-based
regression models, Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 53(3), 829-839.
Kraus, D., & Czado, C. (2017). D-vine copula based quantile regression. Computational Statistics & Data
Analysis, 110, 1–18.
Manning, C.D., Raghavan, P., & Schütze H. (2008). Introduction to Information Retrieval. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, p. 260.
Milhaud, X., Loisel, S., & Maume-Deschamps, V. (2011). Surrender triggers in life insurance: what main
features affect the surrender behavior in a classical economic context? Bulletin Français d’Actuariat,
11(22), 5–48.
Milliman, (2013). Dynamic lapse risk in an era of quantitative easing, Milliman Research Report https://www.
milliman.com/en/insight/dynamic-lapse-risk-in-an-era-of-quantitative-easing Accessed 12 Jul (2025)
Nelsen, R.B. (2006). An Introduction to Copulas. Springer-Verlag New York (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/
0-387-28678-0
Nolte, S., & Schneider, J. C. (2017). Don’t lapse into temptation: A behavioral explanation for policy surrender.
Journal of Banking & Finance, 79, 12–27.
Rosner, B., (2025). The Policyholder Puzzle: Cracking the code of dynamic lapses, The Actuary 2025, Society
of Actuaries. https://www.theactuarymagazine.org/the-policyholder-puzzle/ Accessed 12 Jul (2025)
Schmidt, T. (2007). Coping with copulas. Copulas-From theory to application in ﬁnance, 3-34.
Shi, P. (2014). A COPULA REGRESSION FOR MODELING MULTIVARIATE LOSS TRIANGLES AND
QUANTIFYING RESERVING VARIABILITY. ASTIN Bulletin: The Journal of the IAA, 44(1), 85–102.
Sklar, M. (1959). Fonctions de repartition an dimensions et leurs marges. Publ. inst. statist. univ. Paris, 8,
229–231.
Schwartz, E. S., & Torous, W. N. (1989). Prepayment and the valuation of mortgage backed securities. The
Journal of Finance, 44(2), 375–392.
Sungur, E. A. (2005). Some observations on copula regression functions. Communications in Statistics—
Theory and Methods, 34(9-10), 1967-1978.
Stanton, R. (1995). Rational Prepayment and the Valuation of Mortgage-Backed Securities. The Review of
Financial Studies, 8(3), 677–708.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Propagation, S. E., & Tellinghuisen, J. (2001). J. Phys. Chem. A, 47, 3917–3921.
XiaoBing Z., Xian Z. (2010). Applying copula models to individual claim loss reserving methods. Insurance:
Mathematics and Economics, 46, 2, 290-299.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123