TITLE: The mathematical contributions of Isaac M. Sonin: a narrative review in seven models
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07244-4
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07244-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The mathematical contributions of Isaac M. Sonin: a narrative
review in seven models
S. Schreider1
Received: 29 May 2025 / Accepted: 23 April 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
This paper has reviewed a selection of Sonin’s models, each of which offers a perspective
on the development of applied mathematics and decision-making tools. His research, cen-
tered around seven key models, illustrates a consistent effort to frame complex problems in
ways that are both theoretically grounded and practically relevant. These contributions serve
as examples of how mathematical modeling can inform and support real-world decision
processes. The models discussed here form the core of the present paper.
1 Introduction
Overthepastﬁftyplusyears,IsaacSonin(IS)publishedmorethanhundredpapersondifferent
topics in Probability, Operations Research, Economics and Finance, and a book (joint with
E. Presman): Sequential Control with Incomplete Information: The Bayesian Approach to
Multi-Armed Bandit Problems, Academic Press, New York, 1990; (Russian edition 1982). In
his opinion, in retrospect, almost all of them were centered around seven basic models. The
author should acknowledge that the material in this paper is based on a series of professional
interviews with IS, and that the structuring of his major works into seven models is his original
concept. All have one main feature: easy to formulate, difﬁcult to solve. Many of them, but
not all, connected by a common tread: their solutions are represented by the algorithms based
on the concept of censored (embedded) MCs. After short bio we will brieﬂy describe these
models and related results.
Isaac Sonin was born in 1942, and after graduation from high school he was accepted in
1959 to the dept. of Mechanics and Mathematics of Moscow State University (Mech-Mat),
obtained his M.S. degree Summa Cum Laude and was graduate student there in 1966-1968.
His PhD advisor was Mark Freidlin, a Name Professor at Maryland University. Isaac’s PhD
thesis title was: On some classes of degenerating diffusion processes and parabolic equations.
Three papers were published on the basis of his PhD.
His studies at Mech-Mat fell on a period that later was described in a book titled Golden
years of Moscow mathematics (1993, 2007-2nd ed.) published by Amer. Math. Society. It
was a time when there was work and teaching, mentioning only people in probability: A.
Kolmogorov, E. Dynkin, M. Freidlin, R. Dobrushin, Y. Sinai, A. Shiryaev, A. Wentzell, R.
Khasminski, I. Girsanov, N. Krylov, V. Tutubalin, S. Molchanov and many other. IS was one
B S. Schreider
Sergei.Schreider@rutgers.edu
1
Rutgers Business School, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, USA
123

Annals of Operations Research
of the ﬁrst graduate students of Mark Freidlin, a notable probabilist, one of the pioneers and
creators of Theory of Large Deviations. IS was working on diffusion processes and related
PDE, defended his PhD in 1971 and started to work in a remarkable and unique research
Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS)-the Central Economics and Mathematics
Institute (CEMI). At that time Eugene Dynkin was expelled from Moscow University and
started to work at CEMI and organized a seminar on Markov Decision Processes (MDP),
a natural and general frame for most applied models. He also published a book on MDP
joint with Alex Yushkevich, with whom much later IS worked almost 30 years together at
UNC at Charlotte. Another important seminar attended by IS at that time was N. Krylov - A.
Shiryaev seminar on stochastic control at Steklov Mathematical Institute of RAS. Since then
MDP, Operations Research, applied models in Economics and Finance become IS passion
and main topic of his research. After his arrival to USA in 1991, IS worked all these years
as a Full Professor at UNC Charlotte at the Dept. of Mathematics and Statistics with such
colleagues from Russia, to name a few, as A. Yushkevich, B. Vainberg, S. Molchanov and
American Professors J. Quinn, R. Andersen, M. Grabchak and many others.
The current paper represents an interweaving of IS voice, the author’s own interpretation,
and independent scholarly assessments. In addition, I would like to explicitly include the
perspective of the issue’s guest editor, whose input has been valuable in shaping the dis-
cussion. At present, it is challenging to disentangle these various sources and viewpoints
from the intricate nexus in which they are embedded. Nevertheless, the author accepts full
responsibility for the ﬁnal form and content of the manuscript.
2 Optimal stopping of MCs (Model 1)
The optimal stopping problem (OSP) is one of the most developed and extensively studied
ﬁelds in the general theory of stochastic control. There are also tens of books and monographs
with chapters or sections on OSP (see, e.g., classical (Chow et al., 1971; Shiryayev, 1969),
and more modern (Puterman, 1994)), Peskir and Shiryaev (2006) and a few thousand papers
on this topic. There are two different approaches to OSP, usually called “the martingale theory
of OSP of general stochastic sequences (processes)” (formulated by J. Snell) and “the OSP of
Markov chains”. These two approaches basically represent nonstationary and stationary or
nonhomogeneous versus homogeneous situations, and although formally they are equivalent,
the second approach is more transparent for study and discussion. Following the words of T.
Ferguson: ”Most problems of optimal stopping without some form of Markovian structure
are essentially untractable...” IS was working only on OS of MCs.
In 1970 IS and Ernst Presman, his colleague at CEMI and main coauthor for many years,
started to work on the generalization of Classical Secretary problem to a problem with
random number of candidates. This problem can be reduced to an OS of an MC with a
speciﬁc structure. In their paper “The Best Choice Problem for a Random Number of Objects”
(Presman & Sonin, 1972) they obtained the exact asymptotic for optimal strategies and values
of the game for such distributions as Uniform, Poisson and Geometric. This paper started a
long collaboration of IS with Ernst Presman and has harvested a large number of citations and
references. In retrospect, the authors did not realize the importance and role of this problem
as a prototype of a much general problem of OS and stochastic control on an inﬁnite time
interval, where the backward induction is not applicable.
This OS problem continued in an interesting way. Many years later IS was teaching a
course on applied probability models, and decided to prepare a written home assignment
123

Annals of Operations Research
with a simple MC and given reward function. He found that despite a substantial literature on
OS of stochastic processes and classical books mentioned above, the only known solutions
were either possibly using long iterations starting from ﬁnite time interval, or using linear
programming (LP). It seemed strange to use LP for a MC with 3 states, so he thought that it
should be a simpler solution. IS found such solution: State Elimination algorithm that solves
problem with 3 states in no more than 3 steps and with n states in no more than n. The
idea behind this algorithm is transparent. It is difﬁcult to ﬁnd points where you have to stop,
because we do not know future optimal actions, but it is easy to ﬁnd points where you have
to continue because if in one step you obtain more that if you stop then this state is not in the
optimal stopping set. This means that this state can be “eliminated". A simple observation
probably credited to W. Doeblin and A. Kolmogorov can be formulated as follows: A MC
observed only on a subset of a state space is again a MC with a new transition matrix. Then
we can continue this process until the remaining states give the optimal stopping set sought.
The similar idea, so called GTH/S (Grassman, Taksar, Heyman/Sheskin) algorithm was used
earlier (1985) to calculate the invariant distribution of ergodic MC. Later IS modiﬁed the
idea of elimination to calculate the Classical Gittins Index and its generalization that clariﬁes
the meaning of this index, and to many other problems.
One more paper IS based on the idea of state elimination is Sonin (1999a). Much later
IS and Ernst Presman started to work on very important model with a simple formulation
and nontrivial solutions: Multi-Armed Bandit Problems and published one of the two earliest
books on the subject in 1982 in the Russian and English editions in 1990 (Presman & Sonin,
1990). The other earlier is the book of Berry and Fristedt (1985). Among the important
papers on MAB, mainly from a statistical point of view, we mention (Lai & Robbins, 1985;
Katehakis & Robbins, 1995). The current state in this area is well represented in a book
(Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020).
3 Multi-armed bandit problems (model 2)
The fundamental reason for the popularity of Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problems is that
they represent the embodiment of the “Earning versus Learning” conﬂict. And this feature
makes the general problem extremely difﬁcult even in simplest cases. The most important
area of applications traditionally was clinical trials, which have been extensively studied by
Donald A. Berry and his collaborators. Recurrent interest in these problems is related to cloud
computing. The approach to solving bandit problems with independent arms and discounted
rewards was developed by Denardo et al. (2007), and Denardo et al. (2013). According to this
approach, optimal policies are computed by pairwise comparisons of policies. Computations
of the Gittins index are not required in this approach, but it can also be used for computing
the Gittins index.
The huge body of literature on MAB problems, counted by thousands of papers, can
be divided into two unequal streams depending on an interpretation of independence of
arms. In all publications it is assumed that arms are action-independent, i.e. observations
obtained from the same arm or different arms at different moments are independent, and
depend only on their parameters. The point of division of two streams is an assumption
on the independence or dependence of the information obtained after each observation. This
dependence/independence may be called statistical or informational. Formally independence
heremeansthatthejointdistributionofobservationsistheproductofdistributionsforseparate
arms. The terms uncorrelated and correlated arms can also be used. Nowadays about 90%
123

Annals of Operations Research
of all publications are devoted to the ﬁrst stream mainly because it has a well-known and
elegant solution due to J. Gittins and later extended in many publications, see (Gittins &
Jones, 1974) and Glazebrook et al. (2011). It seems that some authors are not even aware
that the classical MAB problem, at least how they were called in pioneering works (Bradt
et al., 1956; Blackwell, 1945) and Feldman (1962) have info (informationally) dependent
arms. These two versions of MAB problems are substantially different.
The striking and most difﬁcult example of informational dependence is a problem of two
symmetrical arms, by words of D. Berry “deceptively difﬁcult". In this problem there are
two Bernoullian arms with two known parameters λ1 and λ2 and two alternative hypotheses
about which of the two arms goes with the highest value. A decision maker (DM using one
arm obtains information about both arms. This problem was solved in Feldman (1962) by a
statistician Dorian Feldman (1931 - 2015), who showed that the myopic strategy is optimal -
at each stage one selects the arm with higher posterior probability of being the strongest. In
this paper Feldman also proved the remarkable result that, following this strategy when the
time horizon tends to inﬁnity, the limit of the expected number of times when the weakest arm
will be used is ﬁnite. In other words, the limit of regret, sometimes called the expected value
of perfect information, i.e., the loss associated with the best decision that could have been
made if the true hypothesis was known, is ﬁnite. This property is a much stronger statement
than is rather usual about convergence of some optimization procedure with probability one.
The reason why the proof of D. Feldman is far from trivial lies in the following fact, explained
in the book (Presman & Sonin, 1990). If under a similar model the goal of a DM at the ﬁnal
moment is to maximize the probability to specify which of two hypotheses is true, then the
optimal strategy is the opposite Feldman strategy - use each time the weakest arm. Thus in D.
Feldman case Earning is more valuable than Learning, but generally they act in the opposite
direction.
Nevertheless, the case of info-dependent arms is very important, has many applications,
and there are many publications treating this topic. The brief description of relevant results
from the monograph (Presman & Sonin, 1990), (initially published in Russian in 1982) is
provided in the paragraph below. The main result deals with the following general model.
There are m Bernoulli arms and N hypotheses about the probability of success for each arm.
Thus, the corresponding matrix {λ j
i } and the initial prior distribution (x1, ..., xN) on the set
of hypotheses is given. The goal is to maximize the total expected reward on interval (0, T );
0 ≤T ≤∞. Finding an optimal strategy for ﬁnite or inﬁnite T is still an open problem.
One of the main results of Presman and Sonin (1990) is the theorem that all matrices can be
divided into two groups, F and B, (after D. Feldman and R. Bellman), for the former the
limit of regret is ﬁnite and for the latter is inﬁnite, as in the case analyzed by Bellman when
one of arms is known (Bellman, 1956). More than that, the full description of these matrices
was given. For example, if all the entries in the main matrix {λ j
i } are distinct, then the regret
is ﬁnite. To prove this theorem, the authors used some non-trivial properties of martingales
with drift and limit theorems. The other contribution in this book was the introduction of the
MAB problem in continuous time. Instead of m arms, exactly one selected at each moment
in discrete time, the authors introduced a unit resource that can be divided between arms
in continuous time. In other words, they introduced the Poissonian Bandits. Not all of the
hundreds of publications on this topic mention the original source of this deﬁnition.
123

Annals of Operations Research
4 Classical Gittins Index (GI), generalized GI and beyond (model 3)
As we mentioned earlier, the popularity of informationally independent version of MAB
is due to the distinguished result of J. Gittins: In the case of an inﬁnite time interval and
geometric discount the optimal strategy is each time to use an arm with the highest value of
the so-called Gittins index which can be calculated separately for each arm. This index has a
few interesting and different interpretations due to J. Gittins and his coauthors (Glazebrook
et al., 2011; Whittle, 1980; Katehakis & Veinott, 1987; Denardo et al., 2004), and some
others. In two short papers (Sonin, 2008) and Sonin (2011) IS described the generalization
and clariﬁcation of this index. Brieﬂy, his results can be summarized as follows.
Given a reward model M and point x ∈S, the classical Gittins index, γ (x), see (Glaze-
brook et al., 2011), as well as, e.g., Sonin (2008), is deﬁned as the maximum of the expected
discounted total reward during the interval [0, τ) per unit of expected discounted time for
the Markov chain starting from x,, that is,
γ (x) = sup
τ>0
Ex
τ−1
n=0 βnc(Zn)
Ex
τ−1
n=0 βn
= (1 −β) sup
τ>0
Ex
τ−1
n=0 βnc(Zn)
1 −Exβτ
,
(1)
where 0 < β < 1, τ is a stopping time, τ > 0, and a trivial equality (1 −β) k−1
n=0 βn = 1−
βk is used to obtain the second equality in (1).
An important interpretation of the GI, the so-called Restart in State interpretation, was
giveninKatehakisandVeinott(1987).Thecorrespondingindexwasdenotedas h(x).Another
important interpretation of the GI, the so called Retirement Process formulation was provided
in Whittle (1980). The corresponding index was denoted as w(x). First IS just proved that
the three indices deﬁned for a reward model M = (S, P, c(x), β), 0 < β < 1, coincide,
i.e., h(x) = w(x) = γ (x)/(1 −β), x ∈X. But the main goal of Sonin (2008) was to
present a simple and transparent algorithm to calculate this common index. This algorithm
is based on a general so-called State Elimination (SE) algorithm developed by IS for the
problem of OS of MC mentioned before. To apply this algorithm, it is necessary to replace
a constant discount factor β by a variable “survival” probability β(x) because after the ﬁrst
recursive step a discount factor is no longer a constant. So, by necessity, a more general
model was considered and the classical GI γ (x) was replaced by a generalized Gittins
Index (GGI) α(x) using the well-known fact that optimization problems, with an explicit
discount factor β are equivalent to problems where a state space is complemented by an
absorbing point e and the initial transition probabilities are modiﬁed. So IS considered the
reward model with termination M = (S, P, c(x), β(x)), where the state space S contains
an absorbing point e, p(e, e) = 1, the function β(x) is the probability of “survival” at point
x, so 1 −β(x) = p(x, e) is the probability of termination. The function β(x) can be a
constant or a variable. The numerator in (1), in the presence of an absorbing state e, equals
Ex
τ−1
n=0 c(Zn), where now, given a subset G ⊂X, x /∈G, τ = min(n : Zn ∈G ∪e).
This equality holds independently of whether β(x) is a constant or variable. Let us denote
this numerator by Rτ(x). The denominator in the last expression in (1), in the presence of
an absorbing state e, when β = const, equals to Px(Zτ = e). In general case, when β(x)
can be variable, IS denoted Px(Zτ = e by Qτ(x) the probability of termination on [0, τ),
and deﬁned the Generalized GI (GGI), α(x) for a model with termination as
α(x) = sup
τ>0
Rτ(x)
Qτ(x),
(2)
i.e., α(x) is the maximum discounted total reward per chance of termination.
123

Annals of Operations Research
If β(x) = const = β then the second equality in (1) obviously implies that γ (x) =
(1−β)α(x). The crucial point however is that, if β(x) is not a constant, then the latter equality,
or some kind of proportionality, can not be preserved anymore, even if the deﬁnition of Rτ(x)
in γ (x) is correspondingly modiﬁed, i.e., Ex
τ−1
n=0 βnc(Zn) is replaced by Ex
τ−1
n=0 C(Zn).
In other words, the expected time of survival till termination is proportional to the probability
of termination only if β(x) = const. Thus, in the general case, the proportionality of the
two indices γ (x) and α(x) as functions of x completely disappears. At the same time, for a
reward model with termination a (generalized) KV index h(x), and a (generalized) Whitlle
index w(x) can be deﬁned in an absolutely similar way as above and IS proved that the
equality α(x) = w(x) = h(x) is preserved This means that the “true meaning” of the
Gittins index is given by the expression in (2) and not in (1).
As a result of this theorem, any of the three problems can be used as a basis to calculate
α(x), but the most convenient is the Whittle family of OS models M(k), because the calcu-
lation problem v(x, k) for a particular k can be reduced to solving stopping problems using
the State Elimination algorithm. The corresponding algorithm described in Sonin (2008),
sequentially calculates the index α(x) for all points x ∈S in an order which is not known in
advance. If the goal is to ﬁnd α(s) for a particular s, and X is a ﬁnite set, then the only known
is that α(s) will be obtained at some stage. This algorithm can also be applied to some cases
of countable S (the Gittins index was also used in an earlier IS paper on the replacement
model (Sonin, 1996a)).
This paper had two interesting continuations: in Sonin (2011) the equality of these three
generalized indices was proved as a much more general fact, where three "Abstract Opti-
mization" problems were analyzed. The term abstract optimization problem means a problem
with maximization over an abstract set of indices U without any speciﬁcs about this set.
The second continuation was a model of evolution of random graphs and Gittins’ theorem
in general form. In Presman et al. (2006) the problem of evolution of a random graph, studied
earlier in a few papers, e.g. Granot and Zuckerman (1991) and Denardo et al. (2004), was
analyzed. In a more general form, this problem can be described as follows. The states of a
controlled MC are “pages” (arms, buttons). A decision maker (DM) at every discrete time
moment selects one page. This selection results in a reward and replacement of this page by
some new set of pages. This set can be empty or have 1,2,.. pages, or have a page “exit".
The probabilities of these outcomes and the value of reward depend on a selected page. At
the next moment, a DM can select a page from all available, and so on. The goal of a DM is
to ﬁnd a page selection strategy that maximizes the total expected reward before “exit" and
the value function. All rewards and probabilities are known. All pages are independent. The
answer is in the spirit of a celebrated Gittins theorem, i.e., each time it is optimal to select
a page with the maximum value of the Generalized Gittins Index, a number which can be
calculated for each page independently of other pages in a special recursive way.
Many results in previous sections are based on the concept of censored MC (CMC)
mentioned earlier. Using again this powerful idea IS published two papers with his graduate
student C. Steinberg studied the models where a Decision Maker has three options: continue,
quit, or restart to some speciﬁed point. This led to a necessity to introduce a new operation
for MCs - an insertion, when a state removed earlier can be restored in one iteration, see
(Sonin & Steinberg, 2012) and (Sonin & Steinberg, 2015).
The applications of CMCs were also used in the “Islands" and “Ports" (IP) MC model
published in Basnet and Sonin (2017). One of the main approaches to studying Markov
models with large and “very large" state spaces is based on the idea of selecting “clusters"
- groups of states with many strong connections inside the cluster and weak connections
123

Annals of Operations Research
between clusters. In this paper it was assumed that the state space consists of a ﬁnite number
of “islands" and “ports”. An island is a group of states with many connections within the
island and a relatively small number of connections between islands that are concentrated on
states called “ports". All nonzero transitions are possible only between the states of the same
island or between ports. The total number of ports is of the order of the size of the biggest
island. This model has a few natural interpretations. The authors developed an algorithm to
calculate the limiting distribution π for this model in such a way that the main volume of
calculations is performed in parallel. This is not what was expected initially, since even in the
case of weak connections, the value π at each point depends on transitions on every island.
5 Markov chain tree theorem (model 4)
There is a unique theorem in the theory of ﬁnite MCs - MC Tree theorem (MCTT), where the
limiting distribution for an ergodic MC is expressed as a deterministic statement, in terms
of directed spanning trees. This theorem was initially stated by Terrell L. Hill, a physical
chemist and molecular biologist, who worked on equilibrium thermodynamics for steady
states. This theorem is closely related to Kirchhoff’s theorem on counting the spanning trees
of a graph, from which it can be derived. Later, it was proved in a book (Freidlin & Wentzell,
1979) and in the paper (Leighton & Rivest, 1986). This theorem serves as a "bridge" between
MCs and Graph Theory. The formulation of MCTT is as follows. Let S be a ﬁnite state
space, P a stochastic matrix and π the stationary (limit) distribution . Let y ∈S and T be
a spanning, i.e. covering all vertices, tree directed to y. Denote G(y) the set of all spanning
trees on S directed to y. Let q(y) = 
T ∈G(y) r(T ), where r(T ) = 
(u,v)∈T p(u, v).
Then π(x) =
q(x)

y∈S q(y). The quantities r(T ) and q(y) have a natural interpretation. The
applications of MCTT are limited by the fact that the number of trees directed to a point
is n(n−2), i.e., it grows exponentially. In paper (Sonin, 1999b) it was noted and proved that
there is a polynomial algorithm to calculate q(y) having a simple probabilistic interpretation.
This algorithm was based on the GTH/S algorithm mentioned above. Recently in Gursoy
et al. (2015) this algorithm and corresponding theorem was generalized into the case of the
so-called idempotent (tropical) calculus.
6 Decomposition-separation (DS) theorem (model 5)
The most fundamental result of IS among all topics is without any doubt the Decomposition-
Separation (DS) theorem. The path that led to this theorem was originated in the study of
sufﬁcient classes of strategies in Markov Decision Processes conducted by IS jointly with
Eugene Feinberg. In their joint work (Feinberg & Sonin, 1982), proved an important theorem
on the existence of uniformly nearly optimal stationary strategies for discrete-time stochastic
dynamic programming problems with a countable state space and with one-step rewards
taking any numerical values.
Earlier, Blackwell (1967) studied positive dynamic programming problems with nonneg-
ative one-step rewards, and Strauch (1966) studied negative dynamic programming problems
with nonpositive one-step rewards. Each of these two problem formulations is more general
than discounted dynamic programming problems with bounded one-step rewards studied by
Blackwell (1965).
123

Annals of Operations Research
One of the reasons why positive and negative dynamic programming problems were
deﬁned and studied separately was that these two assumptions lead to principally different
results. For positive dynamic programming, for each constant ε > 0 there exist uniformly
multiplicative ε-optimal stationary strategies φ satisfying vφ(x) ≥(1−ε)v∗(x) for all x ∈X,
where X is the state space, vφ(x) is the expected total reward, and v∗(x) is the value function;
(Ornstein, 1969). For negative dynamic programming it is possible that vφ(x) ≤v∗(x) −K
for some x ∈X, for some constant K > 0, and for all stationary strategies φ. However, for
negative programming, for every ε > 0 there exists a uniformly ε-optimal Markov strategy φ
satisfying vφ(x) ≥v∗(x)−ε for all x ∈X. Feinberg and Sonin (1982) proved that for general
dynamic programming problems, for each ε > 0 there exists a set of stationary strategies
satisfying vφ(x) ≥s∗(x) −εl(x) for all x ∈X, for some class of nonnegative functions
l on X, where s∗is the value function for the class of randomized stationary strategies. In
particular, it is possible to set l = v∗for positive dynamic programming and l = 1 for
negative dynamic programming.
This was a principally new result even for the case of negative dynamic programming.
It generalized and united many apparently different facts known at that time, including the
results on positive and negative dynamic programming mentioned above, and the existence
of uniformly ε-optimal strategies for deterministic positive dynamic programming problems
proved by Bertsekas and Shreve (1979).
The study by Feinberg, E.A., and Sonin, I.M. (1982) was continued in Feinberg and Sonin
(1985). Feinberg (1986, 1987) described the structure of uniformly optimal strategies for
dynamic programming problems. A summary of these results by Feinberg and Sonin was
published in Feinberg and Sonin (1984) in the Proceedings of the USSR Academy of Sciences.
Publications of this journal required recommendations by a Member of the Academy, and
this paper was recommended by Andrey Kolmogorov.
Feinberg and Sonin (1996) constructed examples showing that for undiscounted Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs), the sets of occupancy measures for arbitrary strategies can be
broader than the sets of occupancy measures for randomized stationary strategies. These sets
are equal for discounted MDPs, and this fact is central in the theory of constrained MDPs;
(Altman, 1999). For controlled diffusion processes, Krylov (1985) provided a formula for
a randomized strategy whose occupancy measure is equal to the occupancy measure for a
given arbitrary strategy. Borkar (1988) provided a similar formula for discrete time. The
question of whether similar facts hold for other objective criteria motivated IS to study the
DS theorems.
Let S be a ﬁnite set, P be a stochastic matrix, and U = {(Zn)} be the family of all
ﬁnite MCs (Zn) deﬁned by S, P, and all possible initial distributions. The behavior of a MC
(Zn) is a classical result of Probability Theory derived in the 30’s by A. Kolmogorov and W.
Doeblin. If a stochastic matrix P is replaced by a sequence of stochastic matrices (Pn) and the
transitions at the moment n are deﬁned by Pn, then U becomes a family of nonhomogeneous
MCs with initial distributions now deﬁned for all possible moments k = 1, 2.... Is it possible
to say something about the behavior of the family U if there are no assumptions about
the sequence (Pn)? At ﬁrst sight, the answer seems to be negative. Especially, if we take
into account that this question is equivalent to the question of how the products of matrices
P1P2...Pn behave when n tends to inﬁnity, if the only information available about these
matrices is that they are stochastic? Surprisingly the answer to this question is afﬁrmative:
there is a fundamental theorem which describes such behavior. In particular, this theorem
generalizes the above-mentioned results of Kolmogorov-Doeblin on homogeneous MCs. The
starting point for this question and the DS theorem was stated by Kolmogorov himself in a
small paper (Kolmogoroff, 1936). Later, it was formulated and proved in several stages in a
123

Annals of Operations Research
series of papers, including: (Blackwell, 1945; Cohn, 1976) and Cohn (1989), (Decomposition
part) and Sonin (1987, 1991a, 1996a, 2008)), (Separation part). Brieﬂy, this theorem states
that a decomposition with properties similar to that of homogeneous MCs does exist but
now it is not a decomposition of the state space S, but a decomposition of the space-time
representation of S, that is, of the sequence (Sn) = M × N into ﬁnite number of disjoint
“jets". A sequence J = (Jn), Jn ⊂Sn, n ≤0 for brevity is called a jet. The only assumption
is that the set S is ﬁnite, |M| = N < ∞. The last step in the proof of the DS theorem was
made by the IS in a series of papers (Sonin, 1987, 1988, 1991b,a, 1996a), where it was
proved that among the Blackwell-Cohn partitions there are partitions into jets having the
additional property that the expected number of transitions of trajectories of any MC (Zn)
between jets is ﬁnite on the inﬁnite time interval. This additional separation property was
not obvious and its existence was not noted or mentioned before. At the same time, it played
a crucial role in the initial problem that led the author to the formulation of the separation
property, the problem of sufﬁciency of Markov strategies for the Dubins-Savage functional.
An example of such a functional is the probability of visiting a given subset of a state space
inﬁnitely often. The study of the problem of sufﬁciency of Markov strategies led to the study
of equivalent random sequences and to the proof of the so-called Feinberg inequality (see
(Sonin, 1991a)). In this paper, the initial proof of sufﬁciency given for the ﬁnite case by Hill
(1979) was substantially simpliﬁed. Note also that the problem of sufﬁciency of Markov
strategies is still an open problem for the countable case.
Note immediately that the name stochastic applied to matrices with nonnegative elements
and sum of elements in every row equal to one is not well deserved. These two properties
represent a much older and more general property of mass preservation. In other words, there
is a deterministic interpretation of Markov chains used for example in demography. The entry
of such matrix p(i, j) can be interpreted as a proportion of a mass at state i transferred at
the next moment to state j.
The DS theorem also has a simple deterministic interpretation in terms of the behavior of
the simplest model of an irreversible process represented by a system of N cups ﬁlled with a
liquid with initial concentration of a second substance and mixed at discrete moments of time
in some proportions deﬁned at each moment n by stochastic matrix Pn. The irreversibility of
this process manifests itself in the martingale property of some bounded random sequences
deﬁned by the family of MCs U. Since the state space S is ﬁnite, |S| = N < ∞, these
(sub)(super)martingalestakenomorethan N valuesateachmomentoftime.Suchmartingales
have extra properties that do not follow from the well-known Doob’s upcrossing lemma. The
generalization of Doob’s Lemma for these martingales, the theorem about the existence of
“barriers”, published in Sonin (1987) played a crucial role in the proof of the separation
property. A survey of corresponding results and their interrelationship was given in Sonin
(1996a) and Sonin (2008). An additional insight into the structure of such martingales was
provided in the paper (Gordon & Sonin, 2009).
Recently, the DS theorem was found to be useful in the interdisciplinary ﬁeld of study
called consensus algorithms. Numerous studies of the last 20-30 years have demonstrated that
many particle (agents) systems exhibit cooperative behavior that can lead to a consensus, or
to multiple consensuses. Examples of this kind can be found in: biology - birds, ﬁsh with such
effects as clustering, migrations, murmuration, insects, and even some bacteria. In robotics
and control, consensus problems arise in relation to coordination objectives and cooperation
of mobile agents, e.g., robots and sensors. They are also studied in sociology, in physics
(coupled oscillators), in mechanics (ﬂow of granular material), and in computer science
(interaction in sensor networks). Consensus algorithms are algorithms leading to consensus.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The most studied of these algorithms are linear (averaging) deﬁned by stochastic matrix
transformation. This led to a study of nonhomogeneous Markov chains in reverse time.
According to Bolouki and Malhame (2013), “DS Theorem relates to and generalizes
most of the existing results in the literature on convergence properties of linear consensus
algorithms”.
As a by-product of the DS theorem, we mention a more recent paper (Grabchak & Sonin,
2022).Theyprovedananalogueoftheclassical(Kolmogorov’s)01lawforbothhomogeneous
and nonhomogeneous Markov chains (MC). Initially, its formulation and incomplete proof
were given in Sonin (1991b). Its almost precise formulation is simple: given any event A
from the tail σ-algebra of MC Zn, for large n, with probability near one, the trajectories of the
MC are in states i, where P(A|Zn = i) is either near 0 or near 1. A similar statement holds
for the entrance σ-algebra when n tends to −∞. The authors also gave detailed results on
the existence of nonhomogeneous Markov chains indexed by n in both ﬁnite and countable
cases. This extends a well-known result due to A. Kolmogorov given in a small ﬁve-page
paper in 1936 (Kolmogoroff, 1936). In this paper Kolmogorov was interested in behaviour
of MC in backward (reversed) time, introduced the concept of reversibility, and asked a few
important questions. In their paper (Grabchak & Sonin, 2022) also observed an interesting
dichotomy between two commonly used deﬁnitions of MC. It tells us that the question "What
is MC?" is not as trivial as may seem.
7 Games (model 6)
7.1 Duels
In 1975 E. Presman and IS published a paper titled “Equilibrium Points in a Game related to
the best-choice problem” (Presman & Sonin, 1975): In this problem, there are ﬁnite number
of players, each of them observing the same candidates in a random order, and the winner
is the player who is the ﬁrst to select the best candidate. Many years later, they substantially
generalized this result in Presman and Sonin (2006). In this paper, the following “silent duel”
of m players with a possible economic interpretation was considered. Each player has one
“bullet”, which she can shoot at any time during the time interval [0, 1]. The probability that
the i th player hits the “target” at moment t is given by an increasing accuracy function fi(t).
The winner is the player who hits the target ﬁrst. Under natural assumptions on the functions
fi(t), the existence and uniqueness of a Nash equilibrium point in this game were proved,
and an explicit construction of this equilibrium was provided. This construction allows also
to obtain exact solutions for many speciﬁc examples.
7.2 Locks, bombs and testing (LBT) model
In the last six years IS started a new topic - Locks, Bombs and Testing (LBT) Model. This is a
Defense/Attack resource allocation model, where the Defender has some number of “locks”
to protect n vulnerable boxes (sites), and the Attacker is trying to destroy these boxes, having
some number of “bombs” which can be placed into the boxes. Similar models were studied in
game theory, e.g., the (Colonel) Blotto game, but this model has a feature that was absent in
the previous literature. Here, the Attacker tests the vulnerability of all sites before allocating
her resources. However, these tests are not perfect; that is, a test can give a positive result for
a box without a lock and a negative result for a box with a lock. Initially, IS with his Ph.D.
123

Annals of Operations Research
student Li Liu published a paper (Liu & Sonin, 2021) where the number of locks is a random
variable obtained when a lock appears in site i, with probability λi, independent of other
boxes. Later in Sonin (2024) a full solution was obtained for some important special cases
of the general Locks-Bombs-Testing (G-LBT) model, where sites have different values.
8 Economics and ﬁnance (model 7)
8.1 Growth rate models. Internal rates of return
The most important IS paper in this area is Sonin (1995). The main aim of this paper is
to look from a new angle at the relations between three important characteristics of the
investment models: the growth rate of system described by the model, the set of the internal
rates of return of the projects deﬁning the investment possibilities in the model, and the set
of vectors ensuring balanced (stationary) development of the system - turnpikes. Thus, the
content of this paper lies on the boundary of two powerful streams in theoretical economics:
the theory of economic growth, with such key words resources, von Neumann-Gale model,
balanced growth equilibrium, the turnpikes theorems, and the theory of optimal (sequential)
investments with key words: investment program (project), capital, proﬁt, internal rates of
return, the equilibrium rate of interest, and selection criteria. The starting point for the analysis
was the work of Cantor and Lippman (1983), where the case of two projects was analyzed.
The main results of Sonin (1995) was consideration of k projects and geometric interpretation
of all results through the turnpike vectors (the vectors of balanced growth) in the spirit of a
well-known von Neuman-Gale model. An explicit description of quasioptimal strategies and
turnpikes was given. Later these results were generalized in Presman et al. (2006).
8.2 The reliability of a machine
IS published a few small papers in this ﬁeld which should be mentioned. One of them
published in J. Appl. Probab. Sonin (1996a) is called “Increasing the reliability of a machine
reduces the period of its work”. It would be useful to provide here the extended quotation
form its Abstract: “The comparison of optimal strategies in a simple stochastic replacement
model for two types of machines with identical cost characteristics when one of them is more
reliable than the other is conducted. It is proven that the scheduled replacement period for
the more reliable type is always less than for the less reliable one. An example is presented
when even the expected period of use of a more reliable machine is less than the expected
period for the less reliable one.”
8.3 The oldest formula on earth
The concept of compound interest is arguably the oldest and most enduring ﬁnancial principle
known to humankind. Its use can be traced back more than four thousand years to ancient
Sumer, where merchants and lenders recorded transactions on clay tablets and calculated
interest that was added to the principal so future interest would be charged on the increased
amount. This idea, simple in concept yet profound in impact, spread throughout the ancient
world, shaping economic systems from Egypt to Greece and Rome.
Over the centuries, compound interest has been called “one of the engines driving the
wheels of civilization,” for it enabled long-term investment, accumulation of capital, and
123

Annals of Operations Research
the expansion of trade networks. By allowing wealth to grow not just in proportion to the
original sum but in proportion to itself over time, it became a fundamental tool for building
economies, ﬁnancing exploration, and supporting infrastructure.
Although the calculation itself is elementary and familiar to anyone who has ever opened
a savings account or taken a loan, the underlying structure still holds surprises. In a 2020
note entitled Some Nontrivial Properties of a Formula for Compound Interest, IS and Mark
Whitmeyer (Sonin & Whitmeyer, 2020) examined two closely related measures: one that
reﬂects the growth factor when interest is compounded a ﬁxed number of times in a year,
and another that describes the idealized case of continuous compounding.
Their analysis revealed several previously undocumented features. They identiﬁed pre-
cisely how the growth factor changes as the compounding frequency increases, showing
that the approach to the continuous compounding value follows a predictable pattern and
is consistently in one direction under reasonable conditions. They also explored how these
growth measures respond to changes in the interest rate, demonstrating a smooth but not
linear relationship, and they established new bounds that more accurately describe the gap
between discrete and continuous compounding.
These ﬁndings highlight that even the most familiar formulas can yield fresh insights
when examined carefully. The work of Sonin and Whitmeyer shows that a principle known
for millennia is still capable of surprising us, illustrating the enduring depth and richness of
mathematical ideas embedded in everyday life.
9 The meaning of independence (beyond 7 models)
One of the topics that IS has been working (and of course not only him) was the meaning
of independence. In the paper published in the ANOR volume dedicated to 70th anniversary
of Prof. Michael Katehakis, Sonin (2025) IS wrote: According to A. N. Kolmogorov (1933,
Foundations of the Theory of Probability): "The concept of mutual independence of two or
more experiments holds, in a certain sense, a central position in the theory of Probability."
However, although the deﬁnition of independence is straightforward, it seems that even for
a simple sample space, it is not quite clear what the “sources” of independence are and how
to describe them. The starting point for this note was the analysis of the following simple
experiment: we ﬂip a fair coin and toss a fair die. Thus, we obtain the sample space with
twelve equally likely points. Elementary combinatorics shows that the number of pairs of
independent events is a rather strange number 888, 888. But if we ﬂip a biased coin and
a biased die, the number of such pairs in most cases is reduced to a more normal looking
124 = (4 −2) × (64 −2). In contrast to most pairs in the “fair” case, these pairs are
stable, i.e. they are not changed if the “bias” is changed. The next step was the analysis of
the famous example of S. Bernstein, or any other equivalent example, about three events
A, B, and C, such that they are dependent but pairwise independent. It was easy to show
that these independent pairs are unstable. A more general statement is that all examples of
this kind are unstable, that is, in the real world there is no partial independence. This is
a conﬁrmation of the words of W. Feller in his famous textbook: “There are no practical
cases of independent events which are pairwise independent but not independent." In fact,
when we think about independent events, we have in mind two different concepts covered
by the same deﬁnition. The ﬁrst is a “physical" one: independent events are those which
are produced by two or more independent sources of randomness, i.e. independent "random
generators". The second is the well-known textbook deﬁnition, P(AB) = P(A)P(B). The
123

Annals of Operations Research
distinction between them can perhaps be explained by stability/instabiliy properties. The
last natural question in regards to ﬁnite sample spaces, which was analyzed in this note,
is the following. Every ﬁnite sample space is either indecomposable or can be represented
as the direct product of indecomposable sample spaces. Is such a decomposition unique?
In contrast to an initial guess, the answer is No. The sample space with six points with
probabilities (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32)/63 has two different decompositions into a coin and a die
with three sides. The description of a general structure of decompositions of any ﬁnite sample
space into direct and “skew” products of indecomposable with a possibly algorithmic solution
is an Open Problem. IS’s interest in the concept of independence ranged from elementary
coin-and-die examples to more structural decompositions of ﬁnite probability spaces. He
drew a distinction between purely formal constructions, such as events that are pairwise but
not mutually independent, and the “physical” independence encountered in real processes,
noting that many theoretical examples are unstable in practical settings. While modest in
scope compared to his major models, this line of work reveals a deeper curiosity about
the conceptual foundations of probability. A more philosophical reﬂection on this theme is
presented in the concluding section.
10 Conclusion remark
While this paper inevitably carries a celebratory tone (being written in honor of Professor
Isaac M. Sonin’s 80th birthday) it also seeks to present a forward-looking synthesis of the
overarching themes that deﬁne his body of work. Across his seven key models, two unifying
threads stand out. First is the power of censored Markov Chains – not only as a theoretical
construct, but as a versatile framework for developing efﬁcient algorithms with signiﬁcant
practical reach. Second is the interplay between theory and application, reﬂected in his ability
to translate deep probabilistic insights into solutions for complex, real-world problems in
stochastic control, optimal stopping, resource allocation, and economic decision-making.
The breadth of his collaborations, spanning multiple countries and disciplines, underscores
his role in fostering cross-pollination between ﬁelds. His legacy is measured not just in
the elegance of his results, but in the methodological clarity, adaptability, and problem-
solving mindset he has imparted to colleagues, students, and the broader research community.
These contributions will continue to inform and inspire future work, ensuring that the ideas
developed in his models remain relevant as new challenges and applications emerge.
I dare to add a philosophical reﬂection of this concept I found in Sonin’s works – namely,
the meaning of independence. Independence, as A. N. Kolmogorov famously observed,
occupies a central position in probability theory. Yet even with a precise formal deﬁnition, its
“meaning” can be subtle. Sonin’s work explored both the formal and the “physical” dimen-
sions of independence, showing that many contrived examples of partial independence are
unstable in realistic settings. This mirrors his broader approach: probing the foundations of
concepts, seeking structural properties that endure, and always grounding theory in phenom-
ena that can be observed or meaningfully modeled. In this light, independence is not just
a topic among others, but a guiding principle woven through much of his work – shaping
how problems are framed, how algorithms are built, and how results are interpreted. By inte-
grating this philosophical dimension with the technical achievements discussed earlier, we
gain a fuller sense of the intellectual coherence that runs through Sonin’s career: a blend of
rigorous mathematics, practical applicability, and reﬂective inquiry into the very nature of
the concepts that form the foundations of our ﬁeld.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Acknowledgements The author thanks the students of Rutgers Business School Mr. Sharath Rigvedi Mohan
Kumar and Ms. Anamta Rizvi for their valuable help in technical preparation of the manuscript.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Altman, E. (1999). Constrained Markov Decision Processes. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Basnet, A. & Sonin, I. M. (2017). Parallel computation of characteristics of Markov chain with islands and
ports. Annals of Operations Research, 317(1–2).
Bellman, R. (1956). A problem in the sequential design of experiments. Sankhy¯a: The Indian Journal of
Statistics, 16(3/4):221–229.
Berry, D. A., & Fristedt, B. (1985). Bandit Problems: Sequential Allocation of Experiments. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Bertsekas, D. P. & Shreve, S. E. (1979). Stochastic Optimal Control: The Discrete-Time Case. Academic Press.
Blackwell, D. (1945). Finite non-homogeneous chains. Annals of Mathematics, 46(4), 594–599.
Blackwell, D. (1965). Discounted dynamic programming. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 36(1), 226–235.
Blackwell, D. (1967). Positive dynamic programming. Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Math-
ematical Statistics and Probability, 1, 415–418.
Bolouki, S. & Malhame, R. P. (2013). Ergodicity and class-ergodicity of balanced asymmetric stochastic
chains. In Proceedings of the European Control Conference. 221–226.
Borkar, V. S. (1988). On occupation measures for controlled Markov chains. Advances in Applied Probability,
20(3), 575–590.
Bradt, R. N., Johnson, S. M., & Karlin, S. (1956). On sequential designs for maximizing the sum of n
observations. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 27(4), 1060–1074.
Cantor, D. G. & Lippman, S. A. (1983). Investment selection with imperfect capital markets. Econometrica.
1121–1144.
Chow, Y. S., Robbins, H., & Sigmund, D. (1971). Great Expectations: The Theory of Optimal Stopping. New
York: Houghton Mifﬂin Co.
Cohn, H. (1976). Finite nonhomogeneous Markov chains: asymptotic behavior. Advances in Applied Proba-
bility, 8, 502–516.
Cohn, H. (1989). Products of stochastic matrices and applications. International Journal of Mathematics and
Mathematical Sciences, 12(2), 209–233.
Denardo, E., Feinberg, E., & Rothblum, U. (2013). The multi-armed bandit, with constraints. Annals of
Operations Research, 208, 37–62.
Denardo, E. V., Park, H., & Rothblum, U. G. (2007). Risk-sensitive and risk-neutral multi-armed bandits.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 32(2), 374–394.
Denardo, E., Rothblum, U., & Van der Heyden, L. (2004). Index policies for stochastic search in a forest with
an application to randd project management. Mathematics of Operations Research, 29(1), 162–181.
Feinberg, E. A. (1986). Sufﬁcient classes of strategies in discrete dynamic programming. I: Decomposition of
randomized strategies and embedded models. Theory of Probability and its Applications, 31(4):658–668.
Feinberg, E. A. (1987). Sufﬁcient classes of strategies in discrete dynamic programming. II: Locally stationary
strategies. Theory of Probability and its Applications, 32(3):478–493.
Feinberg, E. A., & Sonin, I. M. (1982). Stationary and Markov policies in countable state dynamic program-
ming. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1021, 111–129.
Feinberg, E. A., & Sonin, I. M. (1984). Sufﬁcient classes of strategies in controllable Markov chains with total
criterion. Soviet Math. Dokl., 29(2), 308–311.
Feinberg, E. A., & Sonin, I. M. (1985). Persistently nearly optimal strategies in stochastic dynamic pro-
gramming. In N. V. Krylov, R. S. Lipster, & A. A. Novikov (Eds.), Statistics and Control of Stochastic
Processes. New York: Steklov Seminar. Optimization Software.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Feinberg, E. A., & Sonin, I. M. (1996). Notes on equivalent stationary policies in Markov decision processes
with total rewards. Mathematical Methods of Operations Research, 44, 205–221.
Feldman, D. (1962). Contributions to the two-armed bandit problem. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 33(3),
847–856.
Freidlin, M. I. & Wentzell, A. D. (1984). Perturbations of Stochastic Dynamic Systems. Springer-Verlag.
Translated from the Russian ed., Nauka, Moscow, 1979.
Gittins, J. C., & Jones, D. M. (1974). A dynamic allocation for the sequential design of experiments. In J.
Gani, K. Savkadi, & I. Vincze (Eds.), Progress in Statistics (pp. 241–266). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Glazebrook, K., Weber, R., & Gittins, R. (2011). Multi-Armed Bandit Allocation Indices. John Wiley and
Sons.
Gordon, A., & Sonin, I. M. (2009). The expected number of intersections of a four valued bounded martingale
with any level may be inﬁnite. In F. Delbaen, M. Rasonyi, & C. Stricker (Eds.), Optimality and Risk -
Modern Trends in Mathematical Finance (pp. 87–98). Springer.
Grabchak, M., & Sonin, I. M. (2022). A zero-one law for Markov chains. Stochastics, 94(5), 680–697.
Granot, D., & Zuckerman, D. (1991). Optimal sequencing and resource allocation in research and development
projects. Management Science, 37, 140–156.
Gursoy, B., Kirkland, S., Mason, O., & Sergeev, S. (2015). The Markov chain tree theorem in commutative
semirings and the state reduction algorithm in commutative semiﬁelds. Linear Algebra and its Applica-
tions, 468(1), 184–196.
Hill, T. P. (1979). On the existence of good Markov strategies. Transactions of the American Mathematical
Society, 247, 157–176.
Katehakis, M. N., & Robbins, H. (1995). Sequential choice from several populations. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 92(19), 8584–8585.
Katehakis, M. N., & Veinott, A. F. (1987). The multi-armed bandit problem: decomposition and computation.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 12, 262–268.
Kolmogoroff, A. (1936). Zur theorie der markoffschen ketten. Mathematische Annalen, 112(1):155–160.
Reprinted in A.N. Shiryayev (Ed.), Selected Works of A.N. Kolmogorov: Volume II, Springer, 1992.
Krylov, N. V. (1985). Controlled Diffusion Processes. Springer.
Lai, T. L., & Robbins, H. (1985). Asymptotically efﬁcient adaptive allocation rules. Advances in Applied
Mathematics, 6(1), 4–22.
Lattimore, T., & Szepesvári, C. (2020). Bandit Algorithms. Cambridge University Press.
Leighton, F., & Rivest, R. (1986). Estimating a probability using ﬁnite memory. IEEE Transactions on Infor-
mation Theory, 32(6), 733–742.
Liu, L. & Sonin, I. M. (2021). Locks, bombs and testing: the case of independent locks. In Piunovskiy, A.
and Zhang, Y., editor, Modern Trends in Controlled Stochastic Processes, volume 41 of ECC. Springer.
248–265.
Ornstein, D. S. (1969). On the existence of stationary optimal strategies. Proceedings of the American Math-
ematical Society, 20(3), 563–569.
Peskir, G., & Shiryaev, A. N. (2006). Optimal Stopping and Free-Boundary Problems (p. 500). Basel:
Birkhäuser.
Presman, E. & Sonin, I. M. (1990). Sequential control with incomplete information. The Bayesian approach
to multi-armed bandit problems. Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, CA. xxviii+266 pp.
Presman, E. & Sonin, I. M. (2000). Growth rate, internal rates of return, and ﬁnancial bubbles. Preprint N
WP/2000/103, CEMI RAS, page 33.
Presman, E. & Sonin, I. M. (2006b). Gittins type index theorem for randomly evolving graphs. In Kabanov, Y.,
Lipster, R., and Stoyanov, J., editors, From Stochastic Calculus to Mathematical Finance. The Shiryaev
Festschrift, volume XXXVIII. Springer. 567–588.
Presman, E. (2011). A new approach to the solution of optimal stopping problem in a discrete time. Stochastics,
83(4–6), 467–475.
Presman, E., & Sonin, I. M. (1972). The problem of best choice in the case of a random number of objects.
Theory of Probability and its Applications, 17, 695–706.
Presman, E., & Sonin, I. M. (1975). Equilibrium points in a game related to the best choice problem. Theory
of Probability and its Applications, 20(4), 770–781.
Presman, E., & Sonin, I. M. (2006). The existence and uniqueness of Nash equilibrium point in an m-player
game Shoot later, Shoot ﬁrst! International Journal of Game Theory, 34, 185–205.
Presman, E., & Sonin, I. M. (2010). On optimal stopping of random sequences modulated by Markov chain.
Theory of Probability and its Applications, 54(3), 375–551.
Puterman, M. L. (1994). Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. New York:
Wiley.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Robbins, H. (1952). Some aspects of the sequential design of experiments. Bulletin of the American Mathe-
matical Society, 58(5), 527–535.
Shiryayev, A. N. (1978). Optimal Stopping Rules. Springer-Verlag, New York. Translation of the Russian
edition, Nauka, Moscow, 1976, 1969.
Shiryayev, A. N. (1984). Probability. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Sonin, I. M. & Steinberg, C. (2015). Elimination and insertion operations for ﬁnite Markov chains. In
Piunovskiy, A., editor, Modern trends in controlled stochastic processes: theory and applications, Theory
and Applications, Volume II. Luniver Press.
Sonin, I. M. (1988). The separation of jets and some asymptotic properties of random sequences. In Discrete
Event Systems: Models and Applications, volume 103 of Lecture Notes in Control and Information
Sciences. Springer. 275–282.
Sonin, I. M. (1989). Separation of jets and generalization to the nonhomogeneous case of the theorem on
the decomposition of a ﬁnite homogeneous Markov chain into ergodic components. Soviet Mathematics
Doklady, 39(1):27–31. Originally published in Russian: Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 304 (1989), no. 1,
36–40.
Sonin, I. M. (2006). The optimal stopping of Markov chain and recursive solution of poisson and bellman equa-
tions. In Kabanov, Y. and Lipster, R. and Stoyanov, J., editor, From Stochastic Calculus to Mathematical
Finance: The Shiryaev Festschrift, volume XXXVIII. Springer. 609–621.
Sonin, I. M. (2008a). The decomposition-separation theorem for ﬁnite nonhomogeneous Markov chains and
related problems. In Ethier, S. N., Feng, J., and Stockbridge, R. H., editors, Markov Processes and Related
Topics: A Festschrift for Thomas G. Kurtz, volume 4 of Institute of Mathematical Statistics Collections,
pages 1–15. Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Sonin, I. M. (2014). Optimal stopping of seasonal observations and projection of a Markov chain. In Inspired
by Finance: The Musiela Festschrift (pp. 535-543). Cham: Springer International Publishing. 535–543.
Sonin, I. M. (2024). Blotto game with testing (the locks, bombs and testing model). Stochastics. 1–28.
Sonin, I. M. (2025). Independent events in a simple random experiment and the meaning of independence.
Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06659-9.
Sonin, I. M. (1987). Theorem on separation of jets and some properties of random sequences. Stochastics, 21,
231–250.
Sonin, I. M. (1991). An arbitrary nonhomogeneous Markov chain with bounded number of states may be
decomposed into asymptotically noncommunicating components having the mixing property. Theory of
Probability and its Applications, 36, 74–85.
Sonin, I. M. (1991). On an extremal property of Markov chains and sufﬁciency of Markov strategies in Markov
decision processes with the Dubins-Savage criterion. Annals of Operations Research, 29, 417–426.
Sonin, I. M. (1995). Growth rate, internal rates of return and turnpikes in an investment model. Economic
Theory, 5, 383–400.
Sonin, I. M. (1996). The asymptotic behaviour of a general ﬁnite nonhomogeneous Markov chain (the
decomposition-separation theorem). In T. S. Ferguson, L. S. Shapley, & J. B. MacQueen (Eds.), Statistics,
Probability and Game Theory: Papers in Honor of David Blackwell, volume 30 of IMS Lecture Notes -
Monograph Series (pp. 337–346). Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Sonin, I. M. (1996). Increasing the reliability of a machine reduces the period of its work. Journal of Applied
Probability, 33(1), 217–223.
Sonin, I. M. (1997). On some asymptotic properties of nonhomogeneous Markov chains and random sequences
with countable number of values. In A. Shiryaev, Y. Kabanov, & B. Rozovskii (Eds.), Statistics and
Control of Stochastic Processes (pp. 297–313). World Scientiﬁc, River Edge, NJ: The Liptser Festschrift.
Sonin, I. M. (1999). The elimination algorithm for the problem of optimal stopping. Mathematical Methods
of Operations Research, 4(1), 111–123.
Sonin, I. M. (1999). The state reduction and related algorithms and their applications to the study of Markov
chains, graph theory and the optimal stopping problem. Advances in Mathematics, 145, 159–188.
Sonin, I. M. (2008). A generalized gittins index for a Markov chain and its recursive calculation. Statistics
and Probability Letters, 78(12), 1526–1533.
Sonin, I. M. (2011). Optimal stopping of Markov chains and three abstract optimization problems. Stochastics,
83(4–6), 405–414.
Sonin, I. M., & Presman, E. (2010). Theory of probability and its applications. Theory of Probability and its
Applications, 54(3), 375–551.
Sonin, I. M., & Steinberg, C. (2012). Continue, quit, restart probability model. Annals of Operations Research,
241(1), 295–318.
Sonin, I. M., & Thornton, J. (2001). Recursive algorithm for the fundamental/group inverse matrix of a Markov
chain from an explicit formula. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 23(1), 209–224.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Sonin, I. M., & Whitmeyer, M. (2020). Some nontrivial properties of a formula for compound interest. Finance
Research Letters, 33, 101–217.
Strauch, R. E. (1966). Negative dynamic programming. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 37(4), 871–890.
Thompson, W. R. (1933). On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the
evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3/4), 285–294.
Whittle, P. (1980). Multi-armed bandits and the gittins index. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series
B (Methodological), 42(2):143–149.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123