TITLE: The importance of dynamic risk constraints for limited liability operators
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05295-5
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05295-5
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The importance of dynamic risk constraints for limited
liability operators
John Armstrong1 · Damiano Brigo2
· Alex S. L. Tse3
Accepted: 13 March 2023 / Published online: 4 April 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Previous literature shows that prevalent risk measures such as value at risk or expected
shortfall are ineffective to curb excessive risk-taking by a tail-risk-seeking trader with S-
shaped utility function in the context of portfolio optimisation. However, these conclusions
hold only when the constraints are static in the sense that the risk measure is just applied to the
terminal portfolio value. In this paper, we consider a portfolio optimisation problem featuring
S-shaped utility and a dynamic risk constraint which is imposed throughout the entire trading
horizon. Provided that the risk control policy is sufﬁciently strict relative to the Sharpe ratio
of the asset, the trader’s portfolio strategies and the resulting maximal expected utility can
be effectively constrained by a dynamic risk measure. Finally, we argue that dynamic risk
constraints might still be ineffective if the trader has access to a derivatives market.
Keywords Dynamic risk constraints · Limited liability operators · S-shaped utility ·
Portfolio optimisation
JEL classiﬁcation D81 · G11 · G13
1 Introduction
This paper deals with the use of risk measures as a trade risk limit tool in ﬁnance. Risk
constraints based on risk measures are fundamental to limit the potential losses of a ﬁnancial
institution. This has been particularly important after the defaults of several major ﬁnancial
institutions in 2008 (examples include Lehman Brothers, Washington Mutual, Fannie Mae,
B Damiano Brigo
damiano.brigo@imperial.ac.uk
John Armstrong
john.armstrong@kcl.ac.uk
Alex S. L. Tse
alex.tse@ucl.ac.uk
1
Department of Mathematics, King’s College London, London WC2R 2LS, UK
2
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK
3
Department of Mathematics, University College London, London WC1H 0AY, UK
123

862
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
Freddie Mac, the three Icelandic banks and Merril Lynch that was forced to merge with Bank
of America). Previous works show that even mainstream coherent risk measures that have
been endorsed by the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision are ineffective in containing
tail-risk seeking or limited liability market operators, which raises an urgent need to critically
review the suggestions made by the regulators. In this paper, we show that when the risk
constraints are used in a dynamic rather than static setting, the coherent risk measures can
work and there is less reason to be alarmed by the current market practices. Besides restoring
conﬁdence in the mainstream risk measures, this paper shows that the dynamic aspect of
the use of risk measures for setting trade limits is fundamental, as the difference between
the static and dynamic risk constraints shows fully in transforming a risk measure such as
Expected Shortfall from an ineffective to a fully effective tool.
Portfolio optimisations are typically formulated as an expected utility maximisation prob-
lem faced by a risk averse agent with concave utility function. However, a simple concave
function may not be sufﬁcient to model agents’ preferences in an actual trading environ-
ment. For example, the limited liability feature of a ﬁnancial institution as well as standard
remuneration scheme tend to create incentive distortion where a successful trader can share
the proﬁts via bonuses but a failed trader can simply walk away without punishment. Thus
gains and losses can be perceived very differently by an agent leading to deviation from a
concave utility function. See for example (Carpenter, 2000) and (Bichuch & Sturm, 2014).
At a psychological level, the seminal work of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and many of
the other follow-up studies reveal that individuals are risk averse over positive outcomes but
risk seeking over negative outcomes. These stylised preferences can be better captured by an
S-shaped utility function which is concave on gains and convex on losses. Here we focus on
“limited liability operators” and “tail-risk-seeking traders” who do not care about extreme
losses, but the results in this paper can be generalised to other contexts where the underlying
economic agents have an S-shaped utility function.
It is of great regulatory interests to understand how the trading activities of those limited
liability operators can be controlled by standard risk measures. A surprising result has been
reported in a recent paper of Armstrong and Brigo (2019) that Value at Risk (VaR) and
Expected Shortfall (ES) are totally ineffective to curb the risk-taking behaviours of those
operators. They consider a portfolio optimisation problem under tail-risk-seeking preference
and ﬁnd that the value function of the agent remains the same upon imposing a static VaR/ES
constraint on the terminal portfolio value. In other words, neither VaR nor ES can alter the
maximal expected utility attained by a limited liability operator compared to the bench-
mark case without any risk constraint. This casts doubt over the usefulness of prevalent risk
management protocols to combat excessive risk-taking by traders with more realistic pref-
erences. An earlier restricted version of the same result, focusing only on a Black-Scholes
option market, is in Armstrong and Brigo (2018). A further related result in Armstrong and
Brigo (2022) introduces the notion of ρ-arbitrage for a coherent risk measure ρ. Positive
homogeneity of the measure ρ is the key property that is used to reach the result. A risk
measure ρ is deﬁned to be ineffective if a static risk constraint based on that measure cannot
lower the expected utility of a limited liability operator. A ρ–arbitrage is deﬁned as a portfolio
payoff with non-positive price, non-positive risk as measured by ρ but with strictly positive
probability of being strictly positive. The ineffectiveness of static risk constraints based on
the coherent risk measure ρ is shown to be equivalent to the existence of a ρ–arbitrage.1
1 In a one-period mean-ES portfolio selection problem, Herdegen and Khan (2021) derive the condition of
the existence of ρ–arbitrage which depends on the conﬁdence level of the ES measure. Their setup is different
from ours as they focus on expected return rather than expected utility as a performance criteria and their
problem is static while we focus on dynamic optimisation.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
863
Again, the emphasis for us, in this paper, is that also in Armstrong and Brigo (2018) and
Armstrong and Brigo (2022) the risk constraints are static and that the situation becomes
very different with dynamic risk constraints.
Indeed, in view of the above negative result, we explore a simple remedy which resur-
rects VaR/ES as a tool to risk manage tail-risk-seeking traders: the risk measure is imposed
dynamically throughout the entire trading horizon. At each point of time given the current
assets holding in place, the portfolio risk exposure is computed by projecting the distribution
of the portfolio return over an evaluation window under the assumption that the assets hold-
ing remains unchanged. There are several advantages with such a dynamic risk constraint.
First, this risk management approach is more consistent with the industrial practice where
the risk exposure of the trader’s positions is typically reported and monitored at least daily.
Second, imposing a static risk constraint on the terminal portfolio value only usually leads
to a time-inconsistent optimisation problem where the optimal strategy solved at a future
time point may not be consistent with the one derived in the past. This results in difﬁculty
with interpreting the notion of optimality, and one has to make further assumptions (such
as whether the agent can pre-commit to the optimal strategy derived at time-zero) to pin
down a unique prediction of the trader’s action. The idea of time-inconsistency in dynamic
optimisation problems can be dated back to Strotz (1955).
Our main contribution is to show that a dynamic VaR or ES constraint can indeed constrain
a tail-risk-seeking trader, in the sense that the maximal expected utility attained can be
reduced provided that the risk control policy is sufﬁciently strict relative to the Sharpe ratio
of the risky asset. The difference between a static and a dynamic risk constraint is drastic
both mathematically and economically. In a complete market, any arbitrary payoff can be
synthesised by dynamic replication. As a result, the problem of solving for the optimal
trading strategy is equivalent to ﬁnding a utility-maximising payoff whose no-arbitrage price
is equal to the initial wealth available. This duality principle which converts a dynamic
stochasticcontrolproblemintoastaticoptimisationhasbeenwidelyadoptedtosolveportfolio
optimisation problems. A static risk measure applied to the terminal portfolio value only
restricts the class of the admissible payoffs. Armstrong and Brigo (2019) show that one can
construct a sequence of digital options which pay a small positive amount most of the time
but incur an extreme loss with a tiny probability, and that these payoffs can be carefully
engineered to satisfy any given VaR/ES limit. The resulting expected utilities will converge
to the same utility level associated with an unconstrained problem.
The conclusion changes signiﬁcantly when the risk constraint is applied dynamically
instead. To comply with the given risk limit at each time point, the notional invested in the
underlying assets has to be capped if the risk policy is sufﬁciently strict. Thus a dynamic
risk constraint now has ﬁrst-order impact on the admissible trading strategies. The usual
duality approach no longer works because the restriction on the trading strategies from the
outset precludes dynamic replication of a claim. We therefore have to resort to the primal
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation approach to solve the portfolio optimisation prob-
lem. Although a close-form solution is not available in general, we can nonetheless deduce
the analytical conditions on the model parameters under which a dynamic VaR/ES constraint
becomes effective. In a special case where the excess return of the asset is zero, we can
provide a ﬁner characterisation of the optimal trading strategy.
Our results show that a dynamic risk constraint can be effective against a “delta-one
trader” who can only invest in the underlying risky assets. What will happen if the trader
can access derivatives trading as well? In the context of utility maximisation under market
completeness, there is no economic difference between delta-one and derivatives trading
since any payoff can be replicated by dynamic trading in the underlying assets. We argue,
123

864
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
however, that a dynamic risk constraint such as ES will become ineffective again if derivatives
trading is allowed. The key idea is that a derivatives trader can exploit dynamic rebalancing
to continuously roll-over some risky digital options to ensure the risk constraint is satisﬁed
at all time while generating an arbitrarily high level of utility.
We conclude the introduction by discussing some related work. A vast literature on
continuous-time portfolio optimisation has emerged since Merton (1969, 1971). One natural
extension of the original Merton model is to incorporate additional constraints in form of
a risk functional applied to the terminal portfolio value. Examples of the extra constraints
include VaR (Basak & Shapiro, 2001), expected loss and other similar shortfall-style mea-
sures (Gabih et al., 2005), probability of outperforming a given benchmark (Boyle & Tian,
2007) and utility-based shortfall risk (Gundel & Weber, 2008). In these papers, the com-
bination of concave utility function and static risk constraint facilitates the use of the dual
approach to solve the underlying optimisation problems.
There has been a recent strand of literature focusing on dynamic risk constraints. Yiu
(2004), Cuoco et al. (2008) and Akume et al. (2010) consider similar portfolio optimisation
problems with VaR/ES constraints under different modelling setups. The optimal trading
strategy behaves very differently when a static constraint is replaced by a dynamic one. For
example, Basak and Shapiro (2001) show that a static VaR constraint may induce the trader
to take more risk (relative to the unconstrained case) in the bad state of the world, whereas
Cuoco et al. (2008) show that if the VaR constraint is applied dynamically then the optimal
risk exposure can be unanimously reduced. HJB equation formulation has to be used when
solving the problem with dynamic risk constraints. All the papers cited above work with a
concave utility function, and thus the problem is still relatively standard to yield analytical
and numerical progress.
S-shaped utility maximisation has received a lot of attention in the context of behavioural
economics and convex incentive scheme. Despite the non-standard shape of the underlying
utility function, duality method can still be suitably adapted to solve the optimisation prob-
lems. See for example (Berkelaar et al., 2004; Reichlin, 2013; Bichuch & Sturm, 2014) and
the references therein. Papers on dynamic portfolio optimisation which simultaneously fea-
ture S-shaped utility as well as VaR/ES constraint include (Armstrong & Brigo, 2019; Guan
& Liang, 2016) and (Dong & Zheng, 2020). But again, the constraints are static in nature
which are only imposed on the terminal portfolio value. Our work ﬁlls the gap in the literature
by considering S-shaped utility function and dynamic risk constraint in conjunction. In the
same spirit that (Cuoco et al., 2008) is the dynamic version of (Basak & Shapiro, 2001) under
concave utility function, our work can be viewed as the dynamic version of (Armstrong &
Brigo, 2019) under S-shaped utility to give insights on the new economic phenomena when
a more realistic risk management approach is adopted.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section2 gives an overview of the modelling
framework. The main results of the paper are stated in Sect.3 with some numerical illus-
trations. A special case that the excess return of the asset being zero is analysed in details
in Sect.4. We brieﬂy discuss in Sect.5 how the results will change if the trader can access
a derivatives market. Section6 concludes. Miscellaneous technical materials are deferred to
the appendix.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
865
2 Modelling setup
2.1 The economy
For simplicity of exposition, in the main body of this paper we consider a standard Black-
Scholes economy with a riskfree bond and one risky asset only. Extension to the multi-asset
setup is discussed in Appendix C.
Fix a terminal horizon T > 0. Let (, F, {Ft}0≤t≤T , P) be a ﬁltered probability space
satisfying the usual conditions which supports a one-dimensional Brownian motion B =
(Bt)t≥0. The risky asset has price process S = (St)t≥0 following a geometric Brownian
motion
dSt
St
= μdt + σd Bt
with drift μ and volatility σ > 0, and the riskfree bond has a constant interest rate of r. A
trader invests in the two assets dynamically where an amount of t is invested in the risky
asset at time t. The portfolio strategy  = (t)t≥0 is said to be admissible if it is adapted
and
 T
0 2
t dt < ∞almost surely. The set of admissible portfolio strategies is denoted by
A0. The portfolio value process X = (Xt)t≥0 then evolves as
d Xt = t
St
dSt + r(Xt −t)dt = r Xtdt + t[(μ −r)dt + σd Bt],
X0 = x0,
(1)
where x0 is an exogenously given initial capital of the trader.
2.2 Dynamic risk constraints
Suppose r ̸= 0 for the moment. The dynamics (1) can be rewritten as
d Xt = κ(θt −Xt)dt + σtd Bt
with κ := −r and θt := −(μ−r)t
r
. This is somewhat similar to an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process except that the “mean-reversion level” θt is stochastic which depends on t. The
stochastic differential equation admits a solution in form of
Xt+ = e−κXt + κ
 t+
t
e−κ(t+−s)θsds + σ
 t+
t
e−κ(t+−s)sd Bs
for any t and  > 0. We then deduce
Xt+ −erXt = (μ −r)
 t+
t
er(t+−s)sds + σ
 t+
t
er(t+−s)sd Bs
(2)
which could be interpreted as the (time value-adjusted) portfolio gain/loss over the time
horizon [t, t + ].
At each instant of time t, a risk manager assesses the risk associated with the portfolio
return given by (2). Since the risk manager typically does not have the knowledge of the
trader’s portfolio strategy beyond the current time t, one needs to assume the portfolio strategy
 will be held ﬁxed over the risk evaluation window [t, t + ]. Then the time-t estimated
random variable of portfolio loss over [t, t + ], denoted by Lt, is given by
123

866
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
−Lt := (μ −r)t
 t+
t
er(t+−s)ds + σt
 t+
t
er(t+−s)d Bs
= (μ −r)(er −1)
r
t + σt
 t+
t
er(t+−s)d Bs
(3)
and as such Lt is normally distributed with mean and variance of
E[Lt] = −(μ −r)(er −1)
r
t,
Var(Lt) = (e2r −1)σ 2
2r
2
t .
(4)
The special case of r = 0 can be recovered by considering the appropriate limits in (4).
Remark 1 In the literature, there are multiple ways to estimate the projected distribution of
portfolio gain/loss. Our approach is based on Yiu (2004) where the notional invested in the
risky asset t is assumed to be ﬁxed by the risk manager. Alternatively, the risk manager
can also assume the proportion of capital invested in the risky asset t/Xt is ﬁxed - this
assumption is adopted for example by Cuoco et al. (2008). The latter approach leads to a
more difﬁcult mathematical problem in general because the projected distribution will then
also depend on the current portfolio value Xt. The question about which approach is more
superior depends on the risk management practice adopted at a particular institution. Another
very plausible approach is to assume the quantity of the assets nt := t/St to be ﬁxed (this
could be more relevant in the context of equity trading where stock and future positions are
typically recorded in terms of quantity rather than notional). Then starting from (2) we can
deduce that
−Lt := (μ −r)nt
 t+
t
er(t+−s)Sudu + σnt
 t+
t
er(t+−u)Sud Bu
= nt
 t+
t
er(t+−u) ((μ −r)Sudu + σ Sud Bu)
= nter(t+)
 t+
t
e−ru(dSu −r Sudu)
= nter(t+)
 t+
t
d(e−ruSu)
= nt(St+ −erSt)
= t

e

μ−σ2
2

(t+)+σ(Bt+−Bt) −er

which only depends on the current state via t = nt St. This is qualitatively very similar to
the approach used by Yiu (2004) and us, except that Lt is now linked to some log-normal
random variable.
A dynamic risk constraint is imposed such that ρ(Lt) ≤R for all t ∈[0, T ). Here
ρ(·) is some risk measure and R > 0 is an exogenously given level of risk limit. For
example, if the risk measure is taken as VaR with conﬁdence level α (with α < 0.5) such
that ρ(Lt) = VaRα(Lt) := sup{x ∈R : P(Lt ≥x) > α}, then using the Gaussian property
of Lt and (4) the constraint can be specialised to
−(μ −r)(er −1)
r
t −σ

e2r −1
2r

−1(α)|t| ≤R
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
867
where 
 denotes the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of a N(0, 1) random variable.
We deﬁne the set
KVaR :=
⎧
⎨
⎩π ∈R : −(μ −r)(er −1)
r
π −σ

e2r −1
2r

−1(α)|π| ≤R
⎫
⎬
⎭
(5)
such that compliance with the dynamic VaR constraint at time t is equivalent to t ∈KVaR.
Similarly, if the risk measure is taken as ES with conﬁdence level α such that ρ(Lt) =
E[Lt|Lt ≥VaRα(Lt)], then the constraint becomes
−(μ −r)(er −1)
r
t + σ

e2r −1
2r
φ(
−1(α))
α
|t| ≤R
with φ(·) being the probability density function (pdf) of a N(0, 1) random variable. We then
deﬁne the set
KES :=
⎧
⎨
⎩π ∈R : −(μ −r)(er −1)
r
π + σ

e2r −1
2r
φ(
−1(α))
α
|π| ≤R
⎫
⎬
⎭
(6)
where we require t ∈KES for all t in order to satisfy the dynamic ES constraint.
Remark 2 The exposition in this section exclusively will focus on VaR and ES as the underly-
ing risk measures but our analysis can indeed be extended to cover more general risk measures
which satisfy positive homogeneity. See Appendix D.
It turns out that the nature of the sets KVaR and KES crucially depends on the Sharpe ratio
of the risky asset μ−r
σ , as the following lemma shows.
Lemma 1 Deﬁne the constants
MVaR := −

e2r −1
2r
r
er −1
−1(α) > 0,
MES :=

e2r −1
2r
r
er −1
φ(
−1(α))
α
> 0.
(7)
Then for i ∈{VaR, ES}, the sets Ki deﬁned in (5) and (6) have the following properties:
1. If μ−r
σ
≥Mi, there exists −∞< ki
1 < 0 such that Ki = [ki
1, ∞);
2. If | μ−r
σ | < Mi, there exists −∞< ki
1 < 0 < ki
2 < ∞such that Ki = [ki
1, ki
2];
3. If μ−r
σ
≤−Mi, there exists 0 < ki
2 < ∞such that Ki = (−∞, ki
2].
Moreover,
kVaR
1
= −
R
−σ

e2r−1
2r

−1(α) + (μ−r)(er−1)
r
,
kVaR
2
=
R
−σ

e2r−1
2r

−1(α) −(μ−r)(er−1)
r
;
kES
1
= −
R
σ

e2r−1
2r
φ(
−1(α))
α
+ (μ−r)(er−1)
r
,
kES
2
=
R
σ

e2r−1
2r
φ(
−1(α))
α
−(μ−r)(er−1)
r
.
Proof This is a simple exercise of analysing the piecewise linear function arising in the
deﬁnition of KVaR and KES.
⊓⊔
123

868
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
The constants Mi deﬁned in (7) encapsulate the risk management parameters α and .
Unless the quality of the investment asset is very good (measured by the magnitude of its
Sharpe ratio) relative to Mi, a dynamic VaR or ES constraint will result in a restriction that
t needs to take value in a bounded set, i.e. a delta limit restriction where both the long and
short position in the underlying asset cannot exceed certain notional levels given by ki
1 and
ki
2. It is also not hard to see that Mi is decreasing in both α and . Hence a small conﬁdence
level of the VaR/ES constraint or a tight risk evaluation window will more likely lead to a
bounded investment set Ki. Provided that ki
1 and ki
2 exist, one can also easily check that |ki
1|
and ki
2 are both decreasing in σ and increasing in R and α. Hence a high asset volatility, low
risk limit or tight conﬁdence level of the VaR/ES measure will result in small absolute delta
notional limit.
2.3 Trader’s utility function and optimisation problem
We assume that the trading decision is made by a “tail-risk-seeking trader” who is insensitive
towards extreme losses. Their utility function U(·) is S-shaped and their goal is to maximise
the expected utility of the terminal portfolio value. The only assumption required over U is
the following.
Assumption 1 The utility function U : R →R is a continuous, increasing and concave
(resp. convex) function on x > 0 (resp. x < 0) with U(0) = 0 and limx→−∞U(x)
x
= 0.
In particular, the trader is locally risk averse over the domain of gains but locally risk seeking
over the domain of losses. Moreover, the assumption on the left-tail behaviour of the utility
function further suggests that the trader is tail-risk-seeking in that the “dis-utility” due to
extreme losses has a sub-linear growth. This is a very general speciﬁcation which covers for
example many standard behavioural S-shaped utility functions, or a class of utility functions
in form of U(x) = f (x)1(x≥0) where f is a concave function and as such U can describe the
preference of a risk-averse trader with limited liability. Note that we do not require U to be
differentiable. This allows us to consider for example the piecewise power utility function of
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) which is not differentiable at the origin, or an option payoff
function which may contain kinks.
Mathematically, the underlying optimisation problem is
V (t, x) :=
sup
∈A(K)
E(t,x)[U(X
T )]
(8)
where X = X has dynamics described by (1), and A(K) is the admissible set of the portfolio
strategies under a given dynamic risk constraint in form of
A(K) := { ∈A0 : (t, ω) ∈K
L ⊗P-a.e. (t, ω)}
with K ⊆R being some given set and L is Lebesgue measure. For example, if the risk
constraint is absent we simply take K = K0 := R and then A(K0) = A0. If a dynamic VaR
constraint is in place, we set K = KVaR as deﬁned in (5). Likewise a choice of K = KES
given by (6) corresponds to a dynamic ES constraint.
Remark 3 Portfolio optimisation problem in form of (8) with U being a strictly concave,
twice-differentiable function is studied by Cvitani´c and Karatzas (1992). Their results cannot
be applied to our setup because our utility function is not concave. Dong and Zheng (2019)
consider a version of the problem with S-shaped utility and short-selling restrictions. Their
solution method is based a concaviﬁcation argument in conjunction with the results by Bian
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
869
et al. (2011) which cover non-smooth utility function but only under the assumption that the
set K is in form of a convex cone. For our model, Lemma 1 suggests that the set K under
VaR/ES constraint cannot be a convex cone. Thus we cannot apply their approaches to solve
our problem.
Let Vi(t, x) be the value function of problem (8) under K = Ki with i ∈{0, VaR, ES}
denoting the label identifying which dynamic risk measure is being adopted (i.e no risk
constraint at all, Value at Risk and Expected Shortfall). We ﬁrst state a benchmark result
based on Theorem 4.1 of Armstrong and Brigo (2019).
Proposition 1 The value function of the unconstrained portfolio optimisation problem is
V0(t, x) = sups U(s).
Without any risk constraint in place, the tail-risk-seeking trader can attain any arbitrarily high
utility by replicating a sequence of digital options which pay a positive amount with a large
probability but incur an extremely disastrous loss with very small probability. Armstrong
and Brigo (2019) show that this result does not change even if a static VaR/ES constraint
is imposed on the terminal portfolio value, in the sense that the trader can still manipulate
the digital structure to attain an arbitrarily high utility level while satisfying the additional
constraints.
We are interested in studying whether such conclusion will change if we adopt a dynamic
risk constraint instead. With the unconstrained optimisation problem as our benchmark, we
ﬁrst give below a formal deﬁnition of the effectiveness of a dynamic risk constraint.
Deﬁnition 1 A dynamic risk constraint i ∈{VaR, ES} is said to be effective if for each t < T
there exists x such that Vi(t, x) < V0(t, x) = sups U(s).
An effective risk constraint has a meaningful economic impact on the trader in form of
reduction in the maximal expected utility from dynamic trading. The notion of effectiveness
in Deﬁnition 1 may appear to be somewhat weak as we do not insist that the trader’s expected
utility have to be strictly reduced for all states (t, x). Indeed for a general utility function, we
cannot expect Vi(t, x) < sups U(s) for all (t, x). For example, consider a call spread payoff
U(x) = (x +1)+ −(x −1)+ −1 which is S-shaped, then for as long as t = 0 for all t is an
admissible strategy under a given dynamic risk constraint i and interest rate is non-negative,
we always have Vi(t, x) = 1 = sups U(s) for all t < T and x ≥1.
3 Main results
We ﬁrst give a useful proposition which is the building block of the main results in this paper.
Proposition 2 For the optimisation problem (8), if the set K is bounded then for every t < T
there exists x such that V (t, x) < sups U(s).
The implication of Proposition 2 is that a delta notional limit on the risky asset alone is
sufﬁcient to constrain a tail-risk-seeking trader. For an unconstrained problem, the argument
of Armstrong and Brigo (2019) is that one can attain an arbitrarily high utility level by
replicating some digital options. But it is known that the delta of a digital option can be
unboundedly large when the time to maturity becomes short and the underlying stock price
is near the strike. Hence a trader cannot replicate a digital option and hold the position until
maturity while complying the dynamic risk constraint with certainty. In practice, a trading
123

870
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
desk with a substantial at-the-money digital option position with short maturity will often be
requested to wind-down the trade to reduce the pin risk.
Next we state the main theorem of this paper which provides a precise condition under
which a dynamic VaR/ES constraint can effectively restrict a trader with limited-liability.
Theorem 1 Recall the constants MVaR and MES introduced in (7). A dynamic Value at Risk
constraint is effective if and only if | μ−r
σ | < MVaR. A dynamic Expected Shortfall constraint
is effective if and only if | μ−r
σ | < MES.
A dynamic risk constraint i ∈{VaR, ES} restricts a tail-risk-seeking trader if and only
if the (magnitude of) Sharpe ratio is smaller than the constant Mi. Surprisingly, from the
deﬁnition of Mi in (7) we see that it does not depend on the risk limit level R at all but only
the evaluation horizon , conﬁdence level α and interest rate r. In other words, increasing the
risk limit alone is not sufﬁcient to guarantee the effectiveness of a dynamic risk measure. The
risk manager must impose a short evaluation horizon window (small ) and emphasise on the
extreme tail of the loss distribution (small α) to ensure the necessary and sufﬁcient condition
of dynamic risk measure effectiveness | μ−r
σ | < Mi is satisﬁed. But given a dynamic risk
constraint is effective, the risk limit R will play a role in controlling the implied delta notional
limit as per the expressions of ki
1 and ki
2 in Lemma 1.
The main driver behind the effectiveness of a dynamic risk measure is that the risk con-
straint implies a hard bound on the delta notional to be taken by the trader. Indeed, there is
no economic difference between imposing a delta limit and a more complicated risk measure
such as VaR or ES, as the following corollary shows.
Corollary 1 An effective dynamic risk constraint i ∈{VaR, ES} is equivalent to imposing a
delta notional limit on the underlying risky asset. i.e. if a dynamic constraint i is effective,
then there exists a bounded set D ⊆R such that
Vi(t, x) = Vd(t, x) :=
sup
∈A(D)
E(t,x)[U(XT )].
Proof This follows immediately from Lemma 1 where the set D is given by [ki
1, ki
2].
⊓⊔
Corollary 1 suggests an economically equivalent way to implement a dynamic VaR or ES
constraint via limiting the trader’s maximal notional exposure to the risky asset. One possible
weakness of a dynamic risk constraint is that continuous monitoring and computation of
risk measures can be difﬁcult in practice.2 In contrast, imposing a trading notional limit
continuously is much easier since it can be implemented at the level of internal trading
platform (e.g. the trading system will disallow submission of further buy orders once the
notional on the trading book exceeds a certain threshold).
We now numerically explore the conditions | μ−r
σ | < MVaR and | μ−r
σ | < MES. In Table 1,
we show several values MVaR and MES under different practically relevant combinations of
 and α.3 Each number in the table can be interpreted as the critical value of Sharpe ratio (in
2 Indeed, if the dynamic risk constraint ρ(Lt) ≤R is only imposed at countable number of time points say
at t ∈{τ0, τ1, ..., τn}, then the optimisation problem is ill-posed because in any time interval t ∈(τk, τk+1)
where the risk is not monitored, the trader can achieve any arbitrarily high utility by replicating some digital
options (as per Proposition 1) with maturity T ′ < τk+1 which payoff is then rolled over at the riskfree rate
until the terminal date T . This highlights that the continuous monitoring nature of a dynamic risk constraint
is crucial to rule out degenerate risk-taking behaviours.
3 The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2019) advocates the computation of ES at 97.5th percentile
and the horizon depends on the risk factor category which can be up to 120 days.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
871
Table
1 Numerical
values
of
MVaR
and
MES
under
different
combinations
of

∈
{1/365, 30/365, 60/365, 120/365} and α ∈{0.05, 0.025, 0.01}. The baseline interest rate is taken as
r = 1%
α
MVaR
MES
0.05
0.025
0.01
0.05
0.025
0.01

1/365
31.42
37.45
44.44
39.41
44.66
50.92
30/365
5.74
6.84
8.11
7.19
8.15
9.30
60/365
4.06
4.83
5.74
5.09
5.77
6.57
120/365
2.87
3.42
4.06
3.60
4.08
4.65
magnitude) below which a dynamic risk constraint is effective. For example, if the dynamic
risk constraint is the 30-day 99%-VaR, then this constraint is effective if and only if the
asset’s Sharpe ratio is smaller than 8.11 in magnitude. In general, the numbers in Table 1 are
large relative to the empirical Sharpe ratio of a typical asset. For example, Bai and Zhang
(2022) report the average excess return and standard deviation of U.S. equities as 7.15% and
16.83%, representing a Sharpe ratio of 0.42, over the time period from 1950 to 2015. The
underlying asset has to exhibit an abnormally good (or bad) risk-return ratio for a dynamic
risk measure to fail. Finally, the values of MES is larger than MVaR under the same (α, ). It
is not surprising since ES ≥VaR under the same α by construction and hence ES is a stricter
risk constraint which is effective under a larger range of Sharpe ratio.
Remark 4 We focus on S-shaped utility function to describe the preference of a tail-risk-
seeking trader, and we show in Theorem 1 that a dynamic risk constraint is effective (at least
under a wide range of reasonable market parameters) where in contrast a static risk constraint
does not work as per (Armstrong & Brigo, 2019). There is an analogue to this result when
the trader’s preference is described by a simple concave utility function. Under a static VaR
constraint, Basak and Shapiro (2001) ﬁnd that the optimal portfolio chosen by a trader with
CRRA preference has a large exposure to the downside risk (relative to the case without any
risk constraint). But if the VaR constraint is imposed dynamically, Cuoco et al. (2008) show
that the CRRA trader’s optimal exposure to the risky asset can be uniformly reduced which
is more desirable from a regulatory point of view. Our result somewhat echoes the ﬁndings of
Cuoco et al. (2008), where we illustrate that the dynamic nature of a risk constraint is (even
more) crucial to restrict the risk-taking behaviours of a trader with S-shaped utility.
The next proposition gives a theoretical characterisation of the value function.
Proposition 3 Suppose the model parameters are such that | μ−r
σ | < Mi. Then the value
function of the optimisation problem (8) under dynamic risk constrainti is the unique viscosity
solution to the HJB equation
−Vt −Hi(x, Vx, Vxx) = 0,
t < T ,
(9)
subject to terminal condition V (T , x) = U(x) and linear growth condition V (t, x) ≤
c(1 + |x|) for some c > 0. Here Hi is the Hamiltonian deﬁned as
Hi(x, p, M) := sup
π∈Ki

[(μ −r)π + rx]p + σ 2
2 Mπ2

.
(10)
Proposition 3 provides a characterisation of the value function in terms of viscosity solu-
tion, which serves as a useful basis for implementation of numerical methods to solve the HJB
123

872
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
equation. In general, it is difﬁcult to make further analytical progress to extract meaningful
economic intuitions from the solution structure. Nonetheless, in Sect.4 we will show that
further characterisation of the optimal portfolio strategy is indeed possible under a special
case of μ = r.
For now, we numerically solve the portfolio optimisation problem for the more general
case of μ ̸= r. Two speciﬁcations of utility function are considered: the Kahneman and
Tversky (1979) piecewise power form of
U(x) =

xβ1,
x ≥0
−k|x|β2,
x < 0
with 0 < β1, β2 < 1 and k > 0, and the piecewise exponential form of
U(x) =

φ1(1 −e−γ1x),
x ≥0
φ2(eγ2x −1),
x < 0
with φ1, φ2, γ1, γ2 > 0.
A fully implicit discretisation scheme with Newton-type policy iteration is used to solve
the HJB equation (9). See (Forsyth & Labahn, 2007) for a description of the algorithm and
the relevant conditions for convergence. The implementation of numerical methods is quite
straightforward and we brieﬂy discuss two practical issues relevant to our speciﬁc problem:
First, the value function of our portfolio optimisation problem is deﬁned on an unbounded
domain [0, T ] × R. As an approximation, we only solve for the numerical solutions on a
bounded domain [0, T )×[−xmin, xmax] for some large xmin > 0 and xmax > 0. An artiﬁcial
boundary condition V (t, x) = U(x) is imposed along [0, T ) × {−xmin, xmax} and then we
focus on the solution behaviours on a narrow range away from the boundary points. We
observe that the numerical results are not sensitive to the choice of xmin and xmax provided
that their values are sufﬁciently large. Second, we focus on a parameter choice of r = 0 to
ensure that the “positive coefﬁcient condition” of the ﬁnite difference scheme (Condition 4.1
of Forsyth and Labahn (2007)) is satisﬁed when the step size along the x-axis is sufﬁciently
small. But the more general case of non-zero interest rate can be recovered by change of
numeraire.
Figure 1 shows the value functions and the corresponding optimal investment levels at
severaldifferenttimepoints.Ingeneral,theagentswilladoptthelargestpossibleriskexposure
when the portfolio value is negative due to risk-seeking over losses induced by the convex
segment of the utility function. Investment level is the lowest when the portfolio value is at
a small positive level. It is perhaps not too surprising because local risk-aversion is typically
the highest for small positive wealth level. Meanwhile, the investment behaviours for larger
positivewealthdependonthepreciseutilityfunctionoftheagents.Inthepiecewisepower(i.e.
constantrelativeriskaversionalike)speciﬁcation,investmentlevelincreaseswithwealthuntil
it hits the delta limit implied by the dynamic risk constraint. For the piecewise exponential
(i.e. constant absolute risk aversion alike) speciﬁcation, the investment level will ﬂat out at
a constant level as wealth increases.
Figure 2 shows how the optimal investment level changes with the Expected Shortfall
signiﬁcance level. The results are intuitive: tighter the risk limit, more conservative the
portfolio strategy.
We can measure in monetary terms the impact of a dynamic risk constraint on both the
tail-risk-seeking trader and a risk averse manager who derives utility from the terminal value
of the portfolio managed by the trader. Under a given set of model parameters, the maximal
expected utility of the trader V (t, x) and the optimal trading strategy ∗can be computed
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
873
Fig. 1 Value function and optimal investment level at different selected time points under S-shaped power
and exponential utility function. Parameters used are μ = 0.15, σ = 0.25, r = 0, T = 1, α = 0.01, R = 1,
 = 30/250, β1 = β2 = 0.5, k = 2, γ1 = γ2 = 0.55, φ1 = 1 and φ2 = 2
Fig. 2 Optimal investment level at t = 0 under S-shaped power and exponential utility function for different
values of Expected Shortfall conﬁdence level α. Based parameters used are μ = 0.15, σ = 0.25, r = 0,
T = 1, α = 0.01, R = 1,  = 30/250, β1 = β2 = 0.5, k = 2, γ1 = γ2 = 0.55, φ1 = 1 and φ2 = 2
numerically. The certainty equivalent (CE) of the trader (with capital x at time t) is deﬁned
as the value C such that V (t, x) = U(C). Economically, it is the ﬁxed amount of wealth to
be endowed by the trader who is indifferent between this endowment and the opportunity
to trade under a dynamic risk constraint. Likewise, the CE of the manager is deﬁned as the
123

874
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
Fig. 3 The time-zero certainty
equivalent of the trader (with
piecewise power utility function)
and the risk averse manager (with
exponential utility function)
against the risk limit of a dynamic
ES constraint. Parameters used
are μ = 0.15, σ = 0.25, r = 0,
T = 1, α = 0.01,  = 30/250,
k = 2, α1 = α2 = 0.5, η = 1 and
x0 = 1
value of C solving E(t,x)[Um(X∗
T )] = Um(C) where Um(·) is the concave utility function
of the manager.
As an example, consider a tail-risk-seeking trader with a unit of initial capital x0 = 1
and their utility function has a piecewise power form. The risk averse manager has a utility
function of Um(x) = −e−ηx and a dynamic ES constraint is imposed to risk-control the
trader. Figure3 shows the time-zero CE of both the trader and the manager as a function of
the risk limit R.
When R is very close to zero, the CE of the trader and the risk manager are both around
unity which is the initial trading capital. This is not surprising because under a very tight
risk limit the trader essentially cannot purchase any risky asset. The portfolio under an
admissible strategy is then almost riskless and the CE simply becomes the initial capital
available (multiplied by the interest rate factor).
As R increases, the CE of the trader gradually increases because a larger value of R means
the trader becomes less risk-constrained and therefore must be better off economically. On
the other hand, the CE of the manager ﬁrst increases slightly but then drops signiﬁcantly.
The CE of the manager improves at the beginning because a small but non-zero risk limit
encourages the trader to invest conservatively in the risky asset which in turn creates value for
the risk averse manager. However, when the risk limit is further relaxed, the trader takes more
and more risk which starts becoming detrimental to the risk averse manager. Once R goes
above around 130% of the initial capital, the CE of the manager goes below unity meaning
that the trading activity now causes value destruction from the perspective of the manager.
Indeed, when R becomes arbitrarily large, Proposition 1 implies that the trader’s CE will go
to positive inﬁnity while Theorem 5.4 of Armstrong and Brigo (2019) suggests the CE of the
risk averse manager will become negative inﬁnity. Figure3 highlights the conﬂict of interests
between a tail-risk-seeking trader and a risk averse manager, and a slack risk management
policy could easily result in drastic economic losses faced by the bank.
4 A special case of zero excess return
Proposition 3 provides a theoretical characterisation of the value function. However, it does
not tell us much about the behaviours of the optimal portfolio strategy. In this section, we
focus on a setup with μ = r = 0 (the assumption of r = 0 is imposed for convenience
only. The slightly more general case of μ = r can be handled by a change of numeraire
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
875
technique.) The key idea is that in this special case we can exploit an equivalence between
the risk-constrained portfolio optimisation problem and an optimal stopping problem. We
show that the optimal trading strategy can be characterised in terms of a stopping time. As
we will see soon, the state-space [0, T ] × R of the problem can be split into two regions: a
trading region where the maximum possible amount is invested in the risky asset (∗= k
for some constant k) and a no-trade region where the agent opts to hold a pure cash position
(∗= 0).
As a preliminary discussion, investment motive vanishes in the case of μ = r = 0. Then
whether the trader would participate in a fair gamble is purely driven by their risk appetite.
Due to the S-shaped utility function, the trader is risk seeking over the domain of losses
but risk averse over the domain of gains. Simple economic intuitions suggest that the trader
prefers to gambling when the portfolio value is low, and prefers to taking all the risk off
when the portfolio value is high. We therefore postulate that the optimal portfolio strategy
has a “bang-bang” feature where the agent invests the maximum possible amount in the risky
asset when the portfolio value is low. Once the portfolio value becomes sufﬁciently high, the
trader’s risk aversion dominates and the entire holding in the risky asset will be immediately
liquidated. The postulated strategy can be stated in terms of a stopping time: the portfolio
value evolves as a Brownian motion with maximum volatility (under the most aggressive
admissible strategy) and stops when the agent decides to sell their entire risky asset holding
and the portfolio value will remain unchanged thereafter. This inspires us to consider a simple
optimal stopping problem introduced in the following subsection.
4.1 An optimal stopping problem
Before proceeding, we need to impose some slightly stronger assumptions on the utility
function U throughout this section.
Assumption 2 The utility function U : R →R is a continuous, strictly increasing and
strictly concave (resp. convex) C2 function on x > 0 (resp. x < 0) with U(0) = 0 and
limx→+∞U ′(x) = 0.
We now introduce below an optimal stopping problem and verify some properties of its
solution structure. Towards the end of this subsection, we will show that this optimal stopping
problem and the risk-constrained portfolio optimisation problem (8) are indeed equivalent.
Proposition 4 Suppose X = (Xt)t≥0 has the dynamics of d Xt = νd Bt where ν > 0 is a
constant. Deﬁne an optimal stopping problem
W(t, x) := sup
τ∈Tt,T
E(t,x)[U(Xτ)]
(11)
where U satisﬁes Assumption 2 and Tt,T is the set of Ft-stopping times valued in [t, T ].
The value function of problem (11) is the unique viscosity solution to the HJB variational
inequality

min

−Wt −ν2
2 Wxx, W −U

= 0, t < T ;
W(T , x) = U(x),
t = T .
(12)
Deﬁne the continuation set C and the stopping set S as
C := {(t, x) ∈[0, T ) × R : W(t, x) > U(x)},
S := {(t, x) ∈[0, T ] × R : W(t, x) = U(x)}.
(13)
123

876
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
The optimal stopping time is given by τ ∗= inf{u ≥t : (u, Xu) ∈S}.
The below important result characterises the optimal stopping region in a more econom-
ically intuitive manner. In particular, the optimal stopping rule is a simple time-varying
threshold strategy where the agent stops the process when its value is sufﬁciently high.
Proposition 5 There exists a continuous and decreasing function b : [0, T ) →(0, ∞) with
limt↑T b(t) = 0 such that the stopping set in (13) admits a representation of
S = {(t, x) ∈[0, T ) × R : x ≥b(t)} ∪{{T } × R} .
(14)
Finally, we verify the equivalence of the portfolio optimisation problem (8) and the optimal
stopping problem (11) under μ = r = 0.
Proposition 6 Suppose μ = r = 0 and Assumption 2 holds. For i ∈{VaR, ES}, let Vi be the
value function of the portfolio optimisation problem (8) under K = Ki. Then
Vi(t, x) = W(t, x; ki)
(15)
where
kVaR = −
R

−1(α)
√

> 0,
kES =
Rα
φ(
−1(α))
√

> 0,
(16)
and W(t, x; ν) is the value function of the optimal stopping problem (11) with diffusion
constant ν. Moreover, an optimal portfolio strategy is
∗
t = ki
σ 1(Xt<b(t))
(17)
with b(·) being the optimal stopping boundary function of the stopping set introduced in (14)
associated with problem (11) (under the diffusion parameter ν = ki).
Figure 4 gives a stylised plot of the optimal portfolio strategy. When the portfolio value is
low, the agent invests the maximum possible amount in the risky asset by taking ∗
t = ki/σ,
whereas when the portfolio value is high the agent takes all the risk off and sets ∗
t = 0. Such
trading pattern is consistent with the property of the S-shaped utility function. The agent is risk
seeking and hence takes the largest possible risk exposure when the portfolio is performing
poorly because any further losses are not heavily penalised due to the limited liability nature
or tail-risk-seeking preference, but when the portfolio is performing sufﬁciently well then the
concavity of the utility function dominates which encourages the agent to ofﬂoad the risk.
The critical boundary between the two regimes is given by some non-negative, continuous
and decreasing function b(t).
4.2 Comparative statics
Some comparative statics can be established to shed light on the policy implications of the
dynamic risk constraint. This is summarised by the following proposition.
Proposition 7 In the special case of μ = r = 0, denote by b(t; θ) the trading boundary
associated with the optimal strategy of the VaR/ES-constrained problem (8) introduced in
Proposition 6 under a particular model parameter θ. For t being ﬁxed, we have the following:
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
877
Fig. 4 A graphical illustration of
the optimal portfolio strategy
under the special case μ = r = 0
1. b(t; T ) is increasing in the trading horizon T ;
2. b(t; R) is increasing in the risk limit level R;
3. b(t; α) is increasing in the signiﬁcance level of the VaR/ES measure α;
4. b(t; ) is decreasing in the risk evaluation window ;
5. b(t; σ) does not depend on σ.
Recall the optimal strategy is in form of ∗
t = ki
σ 1(Xt<b(t)). Hence ki governs the amount
of investment given that the trader is in the trading region, and the location of b(t) reﬂects
how frequent the trader will be trading. Higher the value of b(t), larger the regime of portfolio
value under which the trader takes the most extreme risk exposure. Imposing dynamic risk
constrains can curb such behaviours. As a ﬁrst order effect, a strict risk limit (low R or α)
reduces ki which limits the position value of risky asset investment. This restricts the volatility
of the portfolio return and thus the trader might ﬁnd it less attractive to gamble despite the
non-concavity of their utility function. As a result, it also leads to a shrunk region of trading,
i.e. b(t) is lowered. Alternatively, the trader will trade less often if the trading horizon T
is reduced. This could potentially be achieved in practice by shortening the performance
evaluation horizon adopted by the risk management committee.
Our analysis in this section relies on a very restrictive assumption that μ = r = 0.
Theoretical treatment of the more realistic case of μ ̸= r appears to be rather difﬁcult.
Heuristically, the maximiser to the Hamiltonian in (10) can be written as
π∗=
⎧
⎨
⎩
max

min

−(μ−r)p
σ 2M , ki
2

, ki
1

,
M < 0;
argmaxπ∈{ki
1,ki
2}

[(μ −r)π + rx]p + σ 2π2
2
M

,
M > 0.
This is a complicated state-dependent function which behaviour depends on the precise form
of the underlying utility and value function (see Fig.2 in Sect.3). Without a proper prior
conjecture of the concavity/convexity properties of V , it is unclear how the structure of H
can be studied which is crucial in the HJB approach.
The speciﬁcation of μ = r = 0 greatly simpliﬁes the Hamiltonian as the optimiser can
then only take values on either some constant k satisfying |k| = |ki
2| = |ki
1| (maximal risk-
taking) or zero (no trading). This facilitates the use of optimal stopping techniques to analyse
the regimes that distinguish the two possible trading patterns as presented in this section.
The optimal stopping characterisation also allows us to derive strong comparative statics
in Proposition 7 to deliver insights over how a trader’s “risk-on risk-off” behaviours will
response to change in the market and risk management parameters.
123

878
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
Full generalisation of the analysis beyond μ = r will be an interesting topic for future
research.
5 Derivatives trading under dynamic risk constraints
In the context of portfolio optimisation under a complete market, it is typically not important
to distinguish a “delta-one” trader (who is constrained to trade only in the underlying stock
and a risk-free account) and a derivatives trader (who can purchase any payoff structure
contingent on the underlying stock price). It is because market completeness implies that
perfect replication of any arbitrary claim is feasible and hence derivatives securities are
redundant. This insight is exploited heavily to facilitate the martingale duality method where
a dynamic portfolio selection problem is converted into a static problem of optimal payoff
design.
Our main results in Sect.3 and 4 apply to a delta-one trader, in which case the ES of
the portfolio is determined by the delta of the portfolio and this is a key ingredient in our
calculation.
However, the results will change drastically if the trader has access to the derivatives mar-
ket. A trader with limited liability who is allowed to purchase arbitrary derivative securities
at the Black-Scholes price will be able to achieve arbitrarily high expected utilities under
any ES constraint by pursuing a martingale type strategy. The essential idea is to use The-
orem 4.1 of Armstrong and Brigo (2019) to ﬁnd a derivative which comfortably meets the
ES constraint and provides the desired utility. If at some future point the market moves so
that the ES constraint hits the limit, then the trader may apply Theorem 4.1 Armstrong and
Brigo (2019) to ﬁnd a new derivative which still yields the desired expected utility and which
ensures that the constraint again comfortably met. It is possible to construct a strategy so that
with probability 1, the trader will only need to rebalance their portfolio in this way a ﬁnite
number of times. We give a proof of this in Appendix B.
Why is a dynamic risk constraint effective against a delta-one trader but not a derivatives
trader? It is because the replication of large quantities of out-of-money digital options will
involve trading a massive notional of the underling stock in the bad state of the world, which
the delta-one trader understands ex-ante will not be feasible under a given dynamic risk
constraint. In contrast, the feasibility of a derivative position only depends on the current
statistical proﬁle of the payoff. The derivatives trader can therefore exploit the blindspot of a
risk measure to ensure the massive tail-risk is not detected. Finally, the possibility to roll-over
a derivative position allows the risk constraint to be satisﬁed throughout the entire trading
horizon.
One might ask what alternative types of risk limits would be effective against such a
trader. Expected utility constraints give one possible answer. For example, one can choose
a concave increasing function Um of the form Um(x) = −(−x)γ 1x≤0 for γ ∈(1, ∞) and
require that at each time E[Um(X(t)
t+)] ≥R where X(t)
s
is the time-s value of the derivatives
portfolio held by the trader at time t and R ∈(−∞, 0) is a chosen risk limit. To see that
such a constraint would be effective, ﬁrst note that there would be a minimum wealth at time
T needed to achieve such a utility constraint. This would implies that the trading strategy
must achieve a minimum expected uM at time T and one may then apply Theorem 5.3 of
Armstrong and Brigo (2019).
Alternatively, restricting the class of accessible derivatives could help if the risk constraint
is sufﬁciently strict. This in conjunction with other more fundamental constraints such as
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
879
leverage or delta notional limit can be fully effective against a tail-risk-seeking derivatives
trader. See the discussion in Appendix B.
6 Concluding remarks
While VaR and ES are widely adopted by practitioners, the impact of such risk constraints
on traders’ behaviours are not necessarily well understood. This paper addresses the negative
result of Armstrong and Brigo (2019) that a static VaR/ES measure does not work at all on
a tail-risk-seeking trader. Our key result highlights that dynamic monitoring of the trading
positionsiscrucial.Continuousre-evaluationofportfolioexposuredemandstraderstorespect
a delta notional limit at all time. This alone is sufﬁcient to discourage excessive risk taking
during market distress which is naturally attractive to a tail-risk-seeking trader.
However, the dangerous combination of tail-risk-seeking preference and derivatives trad-
ing can pose challenges to risk management. Even though we have shown that dynamic VaR
and ES measures in general are effective against a delta-one trader, the jury is still out on
their effectiveness in the more sophisticated setup of derivatives trading. Our preliminary
analysis reports some negative results in this aspect, where the possibility to rebalance a
derivative position allows trading losses and risk limit breaches to be indeﬁnitely deferred.
As the possible alternatives to statistical-based measures like VaR or ES, utility-based risk
measures, scenario-based and sensitivity-based assessments such as stress testing or even the
very elementary option delta notional limit might be the superior tools for risk managing
derivatives traders. It will be of both theoretical and practical interests to further explore
the desirable features of an effective risk control mechanism which performs well beyond
delta-one trading. In the meantime, however, our sentiment is that one perhaps should not be
over-reliant on statistical-based risk measures despite their popularity.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix A: Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1 Without loss of generality we just need to prove the result at t = 0. By
standard duality argument (see for example Karatzas et al. (1987)), the portfolio optimisation
problem (8) without any additional risk constraint is equivalent to solving
⎧
⎨
⎩
V0(0, x0) =
sup
XT ∈FT
E[U(XT )]
E[ξT XT ] ≤x0
where
ξT := exp

−μ −r
σ

BT −

r + 1
2
μ −r
σ
2
T

123

880
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
is the pricing kernel in the Black-Scholes economy. Now consider a digital payoff in form of
XT = −
b
P(ξT > k)1(ξT >k) + b1(ξT ≤k)
(A.1)
for b > 0 and k > 0. The budget constraint can be written as
−
b
P(ξT > k)E[ξT 1(ξT >k)] + bE[ξT 1(ξT ≤k)] ≤x0
⇐⇒−b ≤
P(ξT > k)
E[ξT 1(ξT >k)]

x0 −bE[ξT 1(ξT ≤k)]

.
If ξT is unbounded from the above (which is the case in the Black-Scholes model), then
limk→∞
P(ξT >k)
E[ξT 1(ξT >k)] = 0. In turn for any b > 0 ﬁxed one can always ﬁnd a sufﬁciently large
k such that the budget constraint is satisﬁed. The value function must be no less than the
expected utility attained by this payoff structure, i.e.
V0(0, x0) ≥U

−
b
P(ξT > k)

P(ξT > k) + U(b)P(ξT < k).
Under Assumption 1, limx→−∞U(x)
x
= 0. Thus on sending k →∞we deduce V0(0, x0) ≥
U(b). The result follows since b > 0 is arbitrary.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 2 Since U(x) ≤0 for x ≤0 and U(x) is concave on x > 0, for any
constant C > 0 there always exists m > 0 such that U(x) ≤¯U(x) := mx+ + C for all x.
Then
J(t, x; ) := E(t,x)[U(X
T )] ≤E(t,x)[ ¯U(X
T )].
Since K is bounded, there exits b ∈(0, ∞) such that K ⊆[−b, b] =: ¯K. Then
V (t, x) =
sup
t∈A(K)
J(t, x; ) ≤
sup
t∈A(K)
E(t,x)[ ¯U(X
T )]
≤
sup
t∈A( ¯K)
E(t,x)[ ¯U(X
T )] =: ¯V (t, x).
(A.2)
We can now derive the expression of ¯V (t, x) as the value function of a stochastic control
problem with payoff function ¯U which is increasing and convex. Formally, we expect ¯V (t, x)
to be the (viscosity) solution of the HJB equation
⎧
⎨
⎩
−Vt −
sup
π∈[−b,b]

[(μ −r)π + rx]Vx + σ 2
2 Vxxπ2
= 0, t < T ;
V (t, x) = ¯U(x),
t = T .
(A.3)
Suppose μ ≥r and recall that ¯U is convex. Since the dynamics of the portfolio process
is d Xt = [r Xt + (μ −r)t]dt + σtd Bt where its drift and volatility are both increasing
in t, we expect the optimal strategy is to choose the largest possible value of t within the
bounded set ¯K. Hence the candidate optimal control for problem (A.2) is ∗
t = b < ∞. The
corresponding candidate value function is thus
w(t, x) := E(t,x)[U2(X∗
T )]
and the wealth process under the candidate optimal control is
d X∗
t = r X∗
t dt + b [(μ −r)dt + σd Bt] .
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
881
Then
X∗
s = xer(s−t) + b(μ −r)
r
(er(s−t) −1) + bσ
 s
t
er(s−u)d Bu
for s ≥t and X∗
t = x,
such that X∗
T is normally distributed with mean xer(T −t) + b(μ−r)
r
(er(T −t) −1) and variance
b2σ 2
2r (e2r(T −t) −1). Upon evaluating the expectation, we obtain
w(t, x) = E[C + m(X∗
T )+]
= C + m

xer(T −t) + b(μ −r)
r
(er(T −t) −1)


⎛
⎝xer(T −t) + b(μ−r)
r
(er(T−t) −1)
bσ

e2r(T −t)−1
2r
⎞
⎠
+ mbσ

e2r(T −t) −1
2r
φ
⎛
⎝xer(T −t) + b(μ−r)
r
(er(T−t) −1)
bσ

e2r(T −t)−1
2r
⎞
⎠
(A.4)
where 
 and φ are the cdf and pdf of a standard N(0, 1) random variable respectively. w(t, x)
is indeed C1×2 on [0, T ) × R, and is increasing convex in x. It can be easily shown that w
is a solution to the HJB equation (A.3). Standard veriﬁcation arguments then lead to the
conclusion that ¯V (t, x) = w(t, x). Finally, for each ﬁxed t we have ¯V (t, x) = w(t, x) →C
as x ↓−∞. But the constant C > 0 can be arbitrarily chosen. Using the fact that V (t, x) ≤
¯V (t, x), the desired result follows if we choose C ∈(0, sups U(s)). The case of μ < r can
be handled similarly except that the optimal control will become ∗
t = −b instead.
⊓⊔
Proof of Theorem 1 In view of Lemma 1 and Proposition 2 we only need to prove the “only
if” part of the theorem.
In the proof of Proposition 1, a utility level of sups U(s) can be attained by replicating a
sequence of payoffs in form of
XT = a1(ξT >k) + b1(ξT ≤k)
with a < 0 < b where ξT is the pricing kernel in the Black-Scholes economy. But
ξT = exp

−μ −r
σ
BT −

r + 1
2λ2

T

∝S
−μ−r
σ2
T
.
Hence XT is increasing (resp. decreasing) in ST if μ > r (resp. μ < r).
Suppose μ−r
σ
≥Mi > 0 where i ∈{VaR, ES}. Then by Lemma 1 the admissible set
is in form of [ki
1, ∞) where ki
1 ∈(−∞, 0). In other words, there is no restriction on the
investment level for as long as only long position is taken. But since μ > r, if we view XT
as a contingent claim written on the risky asset, the payoff XT = X(ST ) is an increasing
function and thus the option must have non-negative delta for all (t, x). Hence only long
position is ever required to replicate this claim. The sequence of strategies replicating the
digital options which yield a utility level of sups U(s) must also belong to A(Ki) as well. In
this case, the dynamic risk i constraint is not effective. Similar results hold for the case of
μ−r
σ
≤−Mi < 0.
Proof of Proposition 3 Provided that | μ−r
σ | < Mi, the set Ki is bounded and hence by (A.4)
we can deduce that V (t, x) ≤α1 + β1x for some constant α1 > 0 and β1 > 0. On the other
hand, the utility function U is a negative convex increasing function on x < 0. Hence there
exists α2 > 0 and β2 > 0 such that U(x) > −α2 −β2x−=: G(x) for all x. Then since
˜t = 0 for all t is an admissible strategy in A(Ki), we have
Vi(t, x) =
sup
∈A(Ki)
E(t,x) 
U(X
T )

≥E(t,x) 
G(X ˜
T )

= −α2 −β2er(T −t)x−
123

882
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
for all (t, x). Thus we conclude Vi(t, x) ≤c(1 + |x|) for some c > 0, i.e. the value function
has at most a linear growth.
Now we show that the value function Vi is a viscosity solution to the HJB equation (9)
where the proof is based on Pham (2009). We drop the subscript i everywhere for brevity.
Since the function V is of linear growth, it is locally bounded and its upper- and lower-
semicontinuous envelop,
V ∗(x) := lim sup
y→x
V (y)
and
V∗(x) := lim inf
y→x V (y),
are well-deﬁned. Write D := {(t, x) : t ∈[0, T ) × R}.
We ﬁrst show that V is a supersolution to (9). For an arbitrarily given (¯t, ¯x) ∈D, let
ϕ(t, x) be a twice-differentiable test function on D such that
0 = V∗(¯t, ¯x) −ϕ(¯t, ¯x) =
min
(t,x)∈D(V∗(t, x) −ϕ(t, x)).
By construction, there exists a sequence (tn, xn) ∈D such that (tn, xn) →(¯t, ¯x) and
V (tn, xn) →V∗(¯t, ¯x) when n ↑∞. Now deﬁne
βn := V (tn, xn) −ϕ(tn, xn)
and
hn := |βn|α1(βn̸=0) + 1
n 1(βn=0)
(A.5)
for some ﬁxed α ∈(0, 1). Then we have βn →0, hn →0 and βn/hn →0 as n ↑∞.
Next, ﬁx a constant π ∈K and let Xn := Xtn,xn,π be the controlled process under the
constant control policy t = π with initial value Xn
tn = xn. Deﬁne a sequence of stopping
times τn := inf{s > tn, |Xn
s −xn| ≥ϵ} for some ϵ > 0. Dynamic programming principle
over [tn, θn] with θn := min(tn + hn, τn) now implies
V (tn, xn) ≥E

V (θn, Xn
θn)

.
Using the facts that V (tn, xn) = βn + ϕ(tn, xn) and V ≥V∗≥ϕ, the above inequality
implies
ϕ(tn, xn) + βn ≥E

ϕ(θn, Xn
θn)

.
Since ϕ is smooth, we can apply Ito’s lemma to deduce
0 ≤βn −E
 θn
tn
#
ϕt(u, Xn
u) + Lπϕ(u, Xn
u)
$
du +
 θn
tn
σπϕx(u, Xn
u)d Bu

= βn −E
 θn
tn
#
ϕt(u, Xn
u) + Lπϕ(u, Xn
u)
$
du

,
where L≈f := [rx + (μ −r)π] fx + σ 2
2 π2 fxx is the inﬁnitesimal generator of X, and we
have used the fact that the stochastic integral is a true martingale as its integrand is bounded
over [tn, θn]. After dividing both sides by hn, we have
0 ≤βn
hn
−E
 1
hn
 θn
tn
#
ϕt(u, Xn
u) + Lπϕ(u, Xn
u)
$
du

.
On noticing that θn = tn + hn almost surely for large n and the expression inside the
expectation is bounded and converging almost surely to ϕt(¯t, ¯x) + Lπϕ(¯t, ¯x), we deduce
0 ≤−ϕt(¯t, ¯x) −Lπϕ(¯t, ¯x).
Thus V is a viscosity supersolution to (9) as (¯t, ¯x) and π are arbitrary.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
883
It remains to show that V is a viscosity subsolution to (9). Fix an arbitrary point (¯t, ¯x) ∈D
and a twice-differentiable test function ϕ on D such that
0 = V ∗(¯t, ¯x) −ϕ(¯t, ¯x) = max
(t,x)∈D(V ∗(t, x) −ϕ(t, x))
and V ∗(t, x) −ϕ(t, x) < 0 for all (t, x) ̸= (¯t, ¯x). We will proceed by establishing a contra-
diction, where we suppose instead that (¯t, ¯x) and ϕ are such that
−ϕt(¯t, ¯x) −H(¯x, ϕx(¯t, ¯x), ϕxx(¯t, ¯x)) > 0.
Since the admissible control set K is bounded, the Hamiltonian H = H(x, p, M) is the
supremum of some continuous function over a compact set. Thus H is continuous by Maxi-
mum Theorem and is ﬁnite. Using the C2 smoothness of ϕ and continuity of H, there exists
η > 0 such that
−ϕt(t, x) −H(x, ϕx(t, x), ϕxx(t, x)) > 0
(A.6)
for all (t, x) ∈B((¯t, ¯x), η) := {(t, x) : ||(t, x) −(¯t, ¯x)|| < η}. Let (tn, xn) ∈B((¯t, ¯x), η) be
a sequence such that (tn, xn) →(¯t, ¯x) and V (tn, xn) →V ∗(¯t, ¯x) as n ↑∞. Moreover, as
V (tn, xn) −ϕ(tn, xn) →0, this sequence can be chosen such that |V (tn, xn) −ϕ(tn, xn)| <
ϵ/2 for all n, where ϵ > 0 is deﬁned as
ϵ := −

max
(t,x)∈∂B((¯t,¯x),η)(V ∗(t, x) −ϕ(t, x))

> 0.
For an arbitrary control  ∈A(K), we deﬁne Xn := Xtn,xn, as the corresponding
controlled process with initial condition Xn
tn = xn. Deﬁne the sequence of stopping times
θn := inf{s > tn, Xn
s /∈B((¯t, ¯x), η)}. Using Ito’s lemma on ϕ, (A.6), the construction of θn
and ϕ and the fact that (θn, Xn
θn) ∈∂B((¯t, ¯x), η),
V (tn, xn) > −ϵ/2 + ϕ(tn, xn)
= −ϵ/2 + E

ϕ(θn, Xn
θn) −
 θn
tn
#
ϕt(u, Xn
u) + Luϕ(u, Xn
u)
$
du

≥−ϵ/2 + E

ϕ(θn, Xn
θn) −
 θn
tn
#
ϕt(u, Xn
u) + H(Xn
u, ϕx(u, Xn
u), ϕxx(u, Xn
u))
$
du

> −ϵ/2 + E

ϕ(θn, Xn
θn)

≥ϵ/2 + E

V ∗(θn, Xn
θn)

≥ϵ/2 + E

V (θn, Xn
θn)

.
But this contradicts the dynamic programming principle as  ∈A(K) is arbitrary which
does not depend on ϵ. Hence we conclude V is a viscosity subsolution to (9).
Finally, the solution is indeed unique in the class of viscosity solutions with linear growth
due to strong comparison principle. See Theorem 4.4.5 of Pham (2009).
⊓⊔
We ﬁrst provide some prior properties of the value function (11) in the following lemma.
Lemma 2 The value function (11) has the following properties:
1. W(t, x) is continuous in t and x.
2. W(t, x) is decreasing in t and is increasing in x;
3. W(t, x) ∈C1,2(C) with Wxx(t, x) ≥0 for all (t, x) ∈C where C is deﬁned in (13).
123

884
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
Proof Property 1 is due to the standard comparison principle of viscosity solution. Property
2 can be easily inferred from the structure of the optimal stopping problem. Here we will
prove Property 3.
Fix a bounded open domain O in C and consider a boundary value problem

G f := −ft −ν2
2 fxx = 0, (t, x) ∈O
f = W,
(t, x) ∈∂O
(A.7)
Since the operator G is linear, standard PDE theory suggests that there exists a unique smooth
solution f ∈C1,2 to (A.7) on O. But this f also solves (12) on O. By uniqueness of the
viscosity solution, we deduce W = f on O such that W ∈C1,2(O). Finally, C is an open
set and thus by the arbitrariness of O the smoothness property of W can be extended to the
entire C.
Thanks to the C1,2(O) property, (12) can be interpreted in the classical sense such that on
C we have ν2
2 Wxx = −Wt ≥0 as W is decreasing in t.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 4 The relationship between the solution of an optimal stopping problem
and the viscosity solution of the corresponding HJB variational inequality as well as the
characterisation of the optimal stopping rule are standard - see for example (Øksendal &
Reikvam, 1998). Note that the techniques used in the proofs of Proposition 2 and 3 can be
adopted here to show that the value function W(t, x) has at most a linear growth in x, which
in turn conﬁrms the uniqueness of the viscosity solution.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 5 We ﬁrst prove a preliminary result that [0, T ) × (−∞, 0) ⊆C, i.e.
it is always suboptimal to stop on the negative regime before the terminal time. Suppose
on contrary there exists (t′, x′) with 0 ≤t′ < T and x′ < 0 such that (t′, x′) ∈S. Then
W(t′, x′) = U(x′). Now consider an alternative stopping rule
τϵ := inf{s ≥t′ : Xs /∈(x′ −ϵ, x′ + ϵ)} ∧T
for some 0 < ϵ < −x′. Let pϵ := P(τϵ < T ). Then
W(t′, x′) ≥E(t′,x′)[U(Xτϵ)]
= P(τϵ < T , Xτϵ = x′ −ϵ)U(x′ −ϵ) + P(τϵ < T , Xτϵ = x′ + ϵ)U(x′ + ϵ)
+ P(τϵ = T )E[U(XT )|τϵ = T ]
= 1
2U(x′ −ϵ) + 1
2U(x′ + ϵ)
+ (1 −pϵ)

E[U(XT )|τϵ = T ] −1
2U(x′ −ϵ) −1
2U(x′ + ϵ)

> U(x′) + (1 −pϵ)

U(x′ −ϵ) −1
2U(x′ −ϵ) −1
2U(x′ + ϵ)

.
using the strict convexity of U on x < 0 and the martingale property of the process X. It is
not hard to observe that pϵ ↑1 as ϵ ↓0. We immediately obtain the required contradiction
W(t′, x′) > U(x′) = W(t′, x′).
The rest of the proof goes as follows:
(i) Existence and non-negativity of b:
We ﬁrst show that W(t, x) −U(x) is decreasing in x over x ≥0 and t ∈[0, T ). Fix
an arbitrary β > 0 and deﬁne F(t, x) := W(t, x + β). By the linear structure of the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
885
underlying Brownian motion, it can be easily seen that F(t, x) = supτ∈Tt,T E[U(Xτ +
β)] and hence F is the (unique) viscosity solution to

min {GF, F −U(x + β)} = 0, t < T ;
F(t, x) = U(x + β),
t = T ,
(A.8)
where G f := −ft −ν2
2 fxx = 0. Let G(t, x) := W(t, x) + U(x + β) −U(x). Then
whenever GW = 0, we have
GG = GW + GU(x + β) −GU(x) = ν2
2 (U ′′(x) −U ′′(x + β)) ≥0
as U is concave on x ≥0, and whenever W(t, x) = U(x) we have G(t, x) = U(x +β).
Moreover, G(T , x) = U(x + β). Hence G is a supersolution to (A.8). By maximum
principle (in a viscosity sense), we deduce G ≥F leading to
W(t, x) −U(x) ≥W(x + β) −U(x + β),
(A.9)
i.e. W(t, x) −U(x) is decreasing on x ≥0.
Now we show that that for each ﬁxed t ∈[0, T ) there always exists x0 such that
W(t, x0) = U(x0). Such x0, if exists, must be strictly positive since it is suboptimal
to stop in the negative regime. Then together with the fact that W(t, x) −U(x) is
decreasing in x on x ≥0, we conclude there exists a unique b(t) ∈(0, ∞) such that
W(t, x) = U(x) ⇐⇒x ≥b(t). This will be sufﬁcient to justify the existence of a
positive boundary function b which characterises the stopping set (14).
To complete the proof, suppose on contrary that W(t, x) > U(x) for all x. Then
{t}×R ∈C on which W is a C2 increasing convex function in x. W(t, x)−U(x) being
decreasing in x now implies Wx(t, x) ≤U ′(x) for all x. In turn lims→∞Wx(t, s) ≤
lims→∞U ′(s) = 0 and hence W(t, x) must be a constant independent of x. But with
W(t, x) > U(x) this must imply W(t, x) = sups U(s) for all (t, x) ∈[0, T )×R. This
can easily shown to be false based on the same ideas used in the proof for Proposition
2.
(ii) Monotonicity of b: Consider (t1, x) ∈S such that W(t1, x) = U(x). Then for any
t2 > t1, we have 0 ≤W(t2, x) −U(x) ≤W(t1, x) −U(x) = 0 since W(t, x) is
decreasing in t. Hence W(t2, x) = U(x) and (t2, x) ∈S as well such that b(t) must be
decreasing.
(iii) Continuity of b: We begin by showing that b is right-continuous. Fix t < T and con-
sider a decreasing sequence (tn)n≥1 with tn ↓t. Then for each n we have (tn, b(tn)) ∈S.
Since the set S is closed, we have (t, b(t+)) ∈S as well such that b(t+) ≥b(t). But
b(t+) ≤b(t) as b is decreasing. We hence conclude b(t) = b(t+).
Now we show that b(t) is left-continuous. Suppose on contrary that there exists t < T
such that b(t−) > b(t). Deﬁne ξ := b(t−)+b(t)
2
such that 0 ≤b(t) < ξ < b(t−).
Choose s ∈(0, t) and then 0 ≤b(t) < b(t−) ≤b(s). By deﬁnition of b(·) and
the smooth-pasting property, we have W(s, b(s)) = U(b(s)) and Wx(s, b(s)) =
U ′(b(s)).4 Then
W(s, ξ) −U(ξ) =
 ξ
b(s)
(Wx(s, y) −U ′(y))dy =
 ξ
b(s)
 y
b(s)
(Wxx(s, z) −U ′′(z))dzdy
4 Smooth-pasting must hold at b(s) because b(s) > 0 and U′(x) exists for any x > 0. See (Peskir & Shiryaev,
2006).
123

886
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
=
 b(s)
ξ
 b(s)
y
(Wxx(s, z) −U ′′(z))dzdy
≥
 b(s)
ξ
 b(s)
y
Cdzdy = C
2 (ξ −b(s))2
for some constant C > 0 independent of s where we have used Lemma 2 that Wxx ≥0
on C and U is a strictly concave C2 function on the positive domain. Since W(s, x) is
continuous in s, if we let s ↑t we deduce
W(t, ξ) −U(ξ) ≥C
2 (ξ −b(t−))2 > 0.
But b(t) < ξ and hence (t, ξ) ∈S which implies W(t, ξ) = U(ξ). We arrive at the
required contradiction.
(iv) Limiting behaviour of b: Suppose b(T ) := limt↑T b(t) > 0. Then let ξ := b(T )
2
> 0
and with the same argument as in part (iii) of the proof we can deduce W(s, ξ)−U(ξ) >
C
2 (ξ −b(s))2 for some constant C > 0 and s < T . Contradiction can be obtained again
by letting s ↑T on recalling the terminal condition that W(T , x) = U(x) for all x.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 6 When μ = r = 0, Lemma 1 implies that the set Ki simpliﬁes to
Ki = [−ki
σ , ki
σ ] where the ki’s are deﬁned in (16). Moreover, the Hamiltonian in (9) becomes
Hi(p, M) = Hi(M) =
sup
π∈[−ki
σ , ki
σ ]
σ 2
2 Mπ2 =

(ki)2
2 M,
M ≥0;
0,
M < 0.
To verify (15), it is sufﬁcient to show that W(t, x; ν), the solution to (11), is also a solution
to (9) under the choice of ν = ki. For (t, x) ∈C, we have Wxx ≥0 by Lemma 2. Then
Wt + H(Wxx) = Wt + (ki)2
2 W = Wt + ν2
2 W = 0. For (t, x) ∈S, we have W(t, x) =
U(x) and Wt + (ki)2
2 Wxx = Wt + ν2
2 Wxx ≤0 which gives Wt = 0 and Wxx ≤0. Then
Wt + H(Wxx) = 0 + 0 = 0. Hence W solves (9).
The candidate strategy ∗deﬁned by (17) is clearly in the admissible set A(Ki). To verify
its optimality, one can compute E(t,x)[U(X∗
T )] and show that it attains the same value as
W(t, x). But it is clear since
X
T =Xt +
 T
t
σ∗
s d Bs = Xt +
 T
t
ki1(Xs<b(s))d Bs
=Xt +
 T
t
ki1(τ ∗>s)d Bs = Xt + ν
 τ ∗
t
d Bs
=Xt + ν(Bτ ∗−Bt)X
T = Xt +
 T
t
σ∗
s d Bs
=Xt +
 T
t
ki1(Xs<b(s))d Bs = Xt +
 T
t
ki1(τ ∗>s)d Bs
=Xt + ν
 τ ∗
t
d Bs = Xt + ν(Bτ ∗−Bt)
where the portfolio process coincides (in distribution) with the optimally stopped process in
problem (11).
⊓⊔
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
887
Proof of Proposition 7 Considerproblem(11)andletb(t; ν)betheoptimalstoppingboundary
deﬁned in (14) under a ﬁxed diffusion constant ν. We ﬁrst show that b(t; ν) is increasing in
ν.
Let W ( j) bethevaluefunctionandb j(t) := b(t; ν j)bethecorrespondingoptimalstopping
boundary associated with problem (11) under parameter ν j. Similarly, deﬁne
G j f := −ft −
ν2
j
2 fxx.
Fix ν2 > ν1 and deﬁne ¯W := W (2) −W (1).
On x ≥b1(t), we have ¯W(t, x) = W (2)(t, x) −W (1)(t, x) = W (2)(t, x) −U(x) ≥0.
On x < b1(t), we have G1W (1) = 0 and G2W (2) ≥0 (note that the latter might need to be
understood in a viscosity sense). Hence
0 ≤G2W (2) −G1W (1) = −W (2)
t
+ W (1)
t
−ν2
2
2 W (1)
xx + ν2
1
2 W (1)
xx
= −∂
∂t (W (2) −W (1)) −ν2
2
2
∂2
∂x2 (W (2) −W (1)) −ν2
2 −ν2
1
2
W (1)
xx
= G2 ¯W −ν2
2 −ν2
1
2
W (1)
xx
and therefore
G2 ¯W ≥ν2
2 −ν2
1
2
W (1)
xx ≥0
for all x < b1(t) since W (1)
xx ≥0 on its continuation region by Lemma 2. Moreover, ¯W(t, x) ≥
0 on x ≥b1(t) and ¯W(T , x) = U(x) −U(x) = 0, it follows from maximum principle that
W (2) −W (1) =
¯W ≥0 for all x < b1(t). Hence W (2)(t, x) ≥W (1)(t, x) > U(x) on
x < b1(t) from which we can conclude b2(t) ≥b1(t), i.e. b(t; ν) is increasing in ν.
From Proposition 6, the trading boundary of the optimal strategy is given by b(t; ki) which
canbecharacterisedbytheoptimalstoppingboundaryofproblem(11)withparameterν = ki.
Property 1 can simply be inferred from the fact that b(t) is decreasing in t, and Property 2
to 5 immediately follow from that fact that b(t; ν) is increasing in ν upon observing that
both kVaR = −
R

−1(α)
√
 and kES =
Rα
φ(
−1(α))
√
 are increasing in R and α (for α < 0.5),
decreasing in , and does not depend on σ.
⊓⊔
Appendix B: Ineﬀectiveness of dynamic expected shortfall constraint on
a derivative trader
We will assume that U(x) satisﬁes the conditions in Assumption 1. We will consider a
Black–Scholes market with μ > r.
Consider a derivatives trader who has a given budget and who wishes to purchase a
sequence of European options all with maturity T to maximize their expected utility. We
suppose that this trader is subject only to a self-ﬁnancing constraint and that at all times
t ∈[0, T ) they must meet an ES constraint at conﬁdence level α with time interval T −t.
We will show that such a trader can achieve an expected utility greater than or equal to u for
any u < sup U.
Let f : (0, ∞) →R be the payoff function of a European derivative with maturity T . We
will write P( f , S, t), U( f , S, t) and ESα( f , S, t) for the price, expected U utility and ES
123

888
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
of this derivative at time t given that St = S (the time horizon for the ES calculation being
the remaining time to maturity, T −t).
Given constants k, h, ℓ∈R with ℓ< 0 < h and we deﬁne a digital payoff function f k,h,ℓ
by
f k,h,ℓ(ST ) =

h
ST ≥ek
ℓ
otherwise.
We will write D for the set of all such digital options.
The proof of Theorem 4.1 in Armstrong and Brigo (2019) shows that we may ﬁnd f k,h,ℓ∈
D satisfying
P( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) ≤−1
ESα( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) ≤−1
U( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) ≥u
(B.1)
for any u < sup U. Moreover, we may take k to be arbitrarily small and one may also require
|ℓ| > h. We prove an extension of this result in the lemma below.
Lemma 3 Givenanyconstantsλ1, λ2 withλ1 > 0 andλ2 ∈(0, μ−r),thereexists f k,h,ℓ∈D
such that
P( f k,h,ℓ, Seλ1(T −t), t) ≥1
P( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) = −1
ESα( f k,h,ℓ, Se−λ2(T −t), t) ≤−1
U( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) ≥u
(B.2)
for any u < sup U. The k can be arbitrarily small.
Proof Calculating the price, ES and expected utility explicitly one ﬁnds that
P( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) = e−r(T −t)

ℓ
k −ln S −ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

+h

1 −
k −ln S −ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

ESα( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) = −1
α

ℓ
k −ln S −˜ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

+h

α −
k −ln S −˜ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

U( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) = U(h)

1 −
k −ln S −˜ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

+ U(ℓ)
k −ln S −˜ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

(B.3)
for k < ln S + ˜ν(T −t) + σ√T −t
−1(α), where ν := r −1
2σ 2 and ˜ν := μ −1
2σ 2. Fix
h > 0. The budget constraint P( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) = −1 allows us to express ℓin terms of k and
h via
ℓ= h −
h + er(T −t)


k−ln S−ν(T −t)
σ√T −t
.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
889
Then P( f k,h,ℓ, Seλ1(T −t), t) and ESα( f k,h,ℓ, Se−λ2(T −t), t) can be written as
P( f k,h,ℓ, Seλ1(T −t), t) = e−r(T −t)
⎛
⎝h −(h + er(T −t))


k−ln S−λ1(T −t)−ν(T −t)
σ√T −t



k−ln S−ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

⎞
⎠,
ESα( f k,h,ℓ, Se−λ2(T −t), t) = −h + h + er(T −t)
α


k−ln S+λ2(T −t)−˜ν(T −t)
σ√T −t



k−ln S−ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

.
For as long as λ1 > 0 and λ2 ∈(0, μ −r), we have
lim
k→−∞P( f k,h,ℓ, Seλ1(T −t), t) = e−r(T −t)h,
lim
k→−∞ESα( f k,h,ℓ, Se−λ2(T −t), t) = −h,
lim
k→−∞U( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) = U(h),
where the last equality is due to the assumption that limx→−∞U(x)/x = 0 and as such
U(ℓ)
k −ln S −˜ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

= U(ℓ)
ℓ

h
k −ln S −˜ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

−
(h + er(T −t))

k−ln S−˜ν(T −t)
σ√T −t



k−ln S−ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

⎤
⎦
→0 × 0 = 0
as k →−∞. The result immediately follows since h is arbitrary.
⊓⊔
Let us write dν(S, k, ξ) := σ −1(ξ−1(k −ln S) −νξ). This will have a positive partial
derivative with respect to ξ whenever k < ln S −νξ2. Hence if choose k such that k <
ln S −|ν|T = ln S −|μ −1
2σ 2|T then dν(S, k, ξ) will be an increasing function of ξ in the
range ξ ∈(0,
√
T ]. Since
ESα( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) = −1
α

ℓ
(dν(S, k,
√
T −t)) + h(α −
(dν(S, k,
√
T −t)))

we see that for sufﬁciently small k, when |ℓ| > |h|, ESα( f k, j,ℓ, S, t) will be decreasing in
t for t ∈[0, T ) (consider S and f k,h,ℓas ﬁxed). Similarly, we can deduce P( f k,h,ℓ, S, t)
is increasing in t for t ∈[0, T ) for sufﬁciently small k. It now follows from Lemma 3 that
given St = S ∈R≥0 and t ∈[0, T ) we may ﬁnd f k,h,ℓ∈D satisfying
P( f k,h,ℓ, Seλ1(T −t), s) ≥1
P( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) ≤−1
ESα( f k,h,ℓ, Se−λ2(T −t), s) ≤−1
U( f k,h,ℓ, S, t) ≥u.
(B.4)
for all s ∈[t, T ), λ1 > 0, λ2 ∈(0, μ −r) and u < sup U.
Suppose that at a given time t the stock price is St. By purchasing an arbitrarily large
quantity of the option with payoff f k,h,ℓsatisfying (B.4) we can meetany costor ES constraint
at time t. By choosing k sufﬁciently small we may ensure that the probability this option has
a negative payoff is as small as we like. Thus we may ﬁnd an option that meets our current
budget, meets a given ES and ensures that the expected utility for the trader is greater than or
123

890
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
equal to u < sup U. Furthermore, when the stock price rises to Steλ1(T −t) the option position
can be liquidated for an arbitrarily high positive value. On the other hand, this option will
continue to meet the ES constraint until the stock price falls to Ste−λ2(T −t). When this occurs,
the trader can opt to rebalance the option position. Let π be the probability that a rebalancing
occurs, which is the probability that the stock price level visits Ste−λ2(T −t) before Steλ1(T −t)
in the time interval [t, T ]. By the scaling properties of geometric Brownian motion, one can
show that if μ ≥σ 2/2 then π is bounded above by the constant λ1/(λ1 + λ2).5
We deﬁne a sequence of stopping times (ti)i∈N inductively as follows. We deﬁne t0 = 0
and construct f0 ∈D such that Eq. (B.4) holds. Let t1 be the smaller of T and the ﬁrst time
t′ > t0 satisfying St′ = St0e−λ2(T −t0) or St′ = St0eλ1(T −t0). If St1 = St0eλ1(T −t0), the option
is liquidated at a positive value. Then the trader deposits the proceed in the riskfree account
and no further action is taken until the maturity time t = T (equivalent to purchasing a
claim with constant payoff equal to the future value of the trader’s current wealth). Else if
St1 = St0e−λ2(T −t0), the trader roll into a new position f1 ∈D satisfying Eq. (B.4) using the
current market value of f0 at t = t1 as the new initial budget.
Once ti has been deﬁned and the position is not yet liquidated, we choose fi ∈D such
that Eq. (B.4) holds again for S = Sti and t = ti. We deﬁne ti+1 to be the smaller of T
and the ﬁrst time t′ > ti satisfying St′ = Sti e−λ2(T −ti) or St′ = Sti eλ1(T −ti). At each time
ti < T where the option is not liquidated, the trader may rebalance by purchasing α > 0
units of a derivative with payoff fi to guarantee that ui := U(α fi, St, t) ≥u, to meet the
budget constraint and to ensure that ES constraint will hold until the stopping time ti+1. If
the option is liquidated at t = ti, the resulting proceed is arbitrarily large by construction
of fi−1 and hence depositing this amount of wealth in the riskfree account can deliver any
(riskfree) utility level u at maturity.
The probability that the trader needs to rebalance the portfolio n or more times is πn.
So with probability 1, the trader will only need to rebalance ﬁnitely often. The expected
utility conditioned on the stock price at time t will be an increasing function of St. Hence
the expected utility conditioned on rebalancing the portfolio exactly n times will be greater
than or equal to un, since rebalancing only occurs if the stock price drops. Hence the overall
expected utility of the strategy will be greater than or equal to u.
This shows that a derivatives trader subject only to an expected shortfall constraint with
the ES always calculated at time T is able to achieve any expected utility less than sup U.
We now consider instead a trader who invests on a time interval [0, T ] subject to to ES
constraints with a ﬁxed time interval  ≤T used to calculate the ES. This trader may choose
any acceptable strategy until T −. Over the time interval [T −, T ) they may pursue an
essentially identical strategy to the one given above except using derivatives whose payoff at
time t +  is given by a function f k,h,ℓ(ST ) for some f k,h,ℓ∈D. Hence such a trader can
also achieve a utility greater than or equal to u.
Does the same conclusion hold if the trader only has access to a restricted class of deriva-
tives payoffs? As an illustration, suppose now the only available trading instruments are a
riskfree cash account and a European call option with strike K and maturity T . Any any time
t, the trader can decide optimally the number of call options n and the cash amount C to be
held, subject to a budget constraint and an ES constraint. In what follows we assume zero
interest rate such that r = 0 to simplify some expressions. The trader’s optimisation problem
5 For the case of μ < σ 2/2, an upper bound can be derived by using the fact that the probability of a drifting
Brownian motion Xt := ηt + σ Bt hitting level −a before b over an inﬁnite horizon is
1−exp(−2η
σ2 b)
exp( 2η
σ2 a)−exp(−2η
σ2 b) .
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
891
at time t is
sup
(n,C)∈R2 E(t,S) [U (nf (ST ) + C)] ,
with constraints
nP( f , S, t) + C ≤w
and
ESα(nf + C, S, t) ≤R.
Here f : S →(S −K)+ is the call option payoff, P( f , S, t) is the Black-Scholes price of
each call option and ESα(nf + C, S, t) is the ES of the derivatives portfolio (options plus
cash) when the current time is t and the spot price is S, w is some available budget and R > 0
is the risk limit. Using the translational invariance and positive homogeneity properties of
ES, the second constraint can be written as
n1(n>0)ESα( f , S, t) −n1(n<0)ESα(−f , S, t) −C ≤R.
In particular, the constraints are piecewise-linear such that

nP( f , S, t) + C −w ≤0;
n1(n>0)ESα( f , S, t) −n1(n<0)ESα(−f , S, t) −C −R ≤0.
(B.5)
From the form of (B.5), if
−ESα( f , S, t) < P( f , S, t) < ESα(−f , S, t),
(B.6)
then the feasible set of (n, C) will be bounded and in turn the maximal expected utility
attained must be bounded as well.
We now argue that (B.6) indeed can hold for any spot price at almost any time if the ES
constraint is sufﬁciently strict.
Lemma 4 For any ϵ ∈(0, T ), there exists an arbitrarily small ˆαϵ ∈(0, 1) independent of S
and t such that
−ESˆαϵ( f , S, t) < P( f , S, t) < ESˆαϵ(−f , S, t)
for all S > 0 and t ∈[0, T −ϵ].
Proof Throughout this proof, we will use ES(t,S)
α
(L) to denote the ES evaluation of a loss
variable L conditional that the current time is t and the current spot price is S. Notice that
under this convention we have ESα( f , S, t) = ES(t,S)
α
(−f (ST )).
For any α ∈(0, 1) and t ∈[0, T ),
ESα(−f , S, t) ≥ESα=1(−f , S, t) = ES(t,S)
α=1 [(ST −K)+]
= E(t,S)
P
[(ST −K)+] > E(t,S)
Q
[(ST −K)+] = P( f , S, t),
where P is the physical probability measure under which the underlying stock has drift μ > 0
and Q is the risk-neural probability measure under which the underlying stock has zero drift.
Meanwhile, for any α ∈(0, 1),
ESα( f , S, t) = ES(t,S)
α
(−(ST −K)+) = ESα

−

S exp

˜ν(T −t) + σ
√
T −t Z

−K
+
123

892
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
where ˜ν := μ −σ 2
2 and Z ∼N(0, 1). But since (ST −K)+ = 0 on ST ≤K, we have
ESα( f , S, t) = 0 if
α < P

S exp

˜ν(T −t) + σ
√
T −t Z

≤K

= 

ln K
S −˜ν(T −t)
σ√T −t

.
Hence if we choose α < α1
ϵ where
α1
ϵ :=
inf
τ∈[ϵ,T ] 

ln 1
2 −˜ντ
σ√τ

∈(0, 1),
this ensures P( f , S, t) > 0 = −ESα( f , S, t) on t ∈[0, T −ϵ] and S < 2K.
Now, we can choose another constant α2
ϵ ∈(0, 1), independent of S and τ, such that
1
2 > −ESα
#
−exp
#
˜ντ + σ√τ Z
$$
for all α < α2
ϵ and τ ∈[ϵ, T ] since for each ﬁxed τ > 0
we have −ESα
#
−exp
#
˜ντ + σ√τ Z
$$
↓0 when α ↓0. Then for any α < α2
ϵ, S ≥2K, and
t ∈[0, T −ϵ],
P( f , S, t) ≥(S −K)+ = S −K ≥S
2 > −ESα

−S exp

˜ν(T −t) + σ
√
T −t Z

≥−ESα

−

S exp

˜ν(T −t) + σ
√
T −t Z

−K
+
= −ESα( f , S, t),
where we have used the no-arbitrage lower bound of call option price, the positive homogene-
ity as well as the monotonicity properties of ES. Hence under a choice of ˆαϵ < min(α1
ϵ, α2
ϵ),
the stated inequality holds for all S > 0 and t ∈[0, T −ϵ].
⊓⊔
The implication of Lemma 4 is that a dynamic ES constraint can be chosen such that the
derivatives trader (with access to cash instrument and call options at a ﬁxed strike and maturity
only) will have their positions limited which will result in bounded expected utilities almost at
all time. In contrast, those with access to all derivatives payoffs can always ﬁnd a degenerate
payoff to achieve arbitrarily high expected utility in any state of the world regardless of the
ES constraint. This result suggests restricting the underlying trading instruments could be
an important consideration to ensure the effectiveness of a dynamic risk constraint against a
tail-risk-seeking derivatives trader.
Lemma 4 may appear to be somewhat weak since it only covers an arbitrarily large
portion of the investment horizon, and as such it is not clear what will happen when t
approaches T under a ﬁxed small value of α. Moreover, the statement is “non-constructive”
and it does not say how tight α should be for the results to hold. In Fig.5, we show that the
ﬁrst inequality6 in (B.6) indeed holds under important benchmark values of α (in range of
1% to 5%) over different state variables (S, t). The numerical evidence supports the idea
that a derivatives trader with limited access to payoffs can be constrained by typical risk
management protocols.7
Aninterestingquestioniswhatwillhappenif(B.6)doesnotholdsuchthat−ESα( f , S, t) ≥
P( f , S, t). Using the terminology of Armstrong and Brigo (2022), the call option in this case
exhibits the so-called “ρ-arbitrage” which refers to the existence of a payoff with non-positive
6 As in the proof of Lemma 4, the second inequality in (B.6), P( f , S, t) < ESα(−f , S, t), always holds for
all α ∈(0, 1) when the excess return of the stock is positive.
7 We conjecture Lemma 4 can be strengthened to conclude that there exists arbitrarily small ˆα (independent
of S and t) under which P( f , S, t) > −ESˆα( f , S, t) for all S > 0 and t ∈[0, T ).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
893
Fig. 5 The values of P( f , S, t) and −ESα( f , S, t) for f being the call option payoff with strike K. The
parameters used are μ = 0.15, σ = 0.25, r = 0 and K = 1. The numerical results suggest P( f , S, t) >
−ESα( f , S, t) tends to occur (and consequentially (B.6) holds) under various reasonable values of α, S and
T −t. This observation appears to be robust to the choice of parameters
cost and non-positive risk but with a strictly positive probability of realising a positive payout.
The strategy of purchasing one unit of call option and borrow a cash amount of P( f , S, t)
(i.e. the payoff is in form of ˜f := f −P( f , S, t)) now has the properties that
P( ˜f , S, t) = P( f −P( f , S, t), S, t) = P( f , S, t) −P( f , S, t) = 0
and
ESα( ˜f , S, t) = ESα( f −P( f , S, t), S, t) = ESα( f , S, t) + P( f , S, t) ≤0.
In other words, this portfolio costs zero, satisﬁes any ES constraint with positive risk limit and
has a positive probability to deliver a positive payout. The strategy can be scaled up arbitrarily
by a factor of θ while respecting any non-negative cost and ES constraint. The corresponding
expected utility E(t,S)[U(θ ˜f (ST ))] in general will diverge to +∞when θ ↑∞for many
utility functions that describe limited liability operator such as any U with U(x) = 0 on
x ≤0 and U(+∞) = +∞.
The exposition of ρ-arbitrage in Armstrong and Brigo (2022) is entirely static where
the arbitrage conditions are only checked once at the inception of the trade. In our case
above, whether the call option exhibits ρ-arbitrage depends on the state variables (t, S) as
the risk constraint is now applied dynamically. The full analysis of ρ-arbitrage in presence
of a dynamic risk constraint will be an interesting follow-up study that is beyond the scope
of this paper.
123

894
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
Finally, in view that (B.6) may not always be satisﬁed under all combination of (α, S, t),
what else could be done to ensure the derivatives trader’s positions are limited? One way is
to impose a leverage constraint such that the amount of cash holding C has to be bounded
from below by some constant. Alternatively, one can impose a delta notional constraint (c.f.
Corollary 1) in form of SD(nf + C, S, t) ≤b where D(·, S, t) is the delta operator for
a derivative payoff and b is some constant representing the delta notional limit. Using the
linearity of D, the delta constraint can be written as nSD( f , S, t) ≤b where D( f , S, t) is
now simply the Black-Scholes delta of a call option. After imposing either of the leverage or
the delta notional limit in conjunction with the original constraint set (B.5), the feasible set
of (n, C) is now guaranteed to be bounded for each t ∈[0, T ) and S > 0.
Appendix C: Extension to multiple risky assets
We discuss how several key results in this paper will change when there are multiple risky
asset. Suppose there are n risky assets in the Black-Scholes economy and the price process
vector St := (S(1)
t
, S(1)
t
, . . . , S(n)
t
)′ has the dynamics
dSt = Diag(St)μdt + σd Bt
where Diag(St) := Diag(S(1)
t
, S(2)
t
, . . . , S(n)
t
) is a n × n diagonal matrix, μ is a n × 1
constant vector, σ is a n × m constant matrix and B is a m-dimensional Brownian motion.
The portfolio strategy  is now valued in Rn and the portfolio value process X has dynamics
of
d Xt = [r Xt + ′
t(μ −re)]dt + ′
tσd Bt
(C.1)
with e being a vector of unity. Following a similar derivation as in Sect.2, if the risk manager
assumes the risky assets holding  is held ﬁxed over the risk evaluation horizon then the
projected portfolio loss on [t, t + ] is a normal random variable Lt with
E[Lt] = −er −1
r
′
t(μ −re),
Var(Lt) = e2r −1
2r
′
tt
where  := σσ ′ is the variance-covariance matrix of the risky assets return.
It is now straightforward to write down the new admissible sets under the VaR and ES
constraint as
KVaR :=
⎧
⎨
⎩π ∈Rn : −er −1
r
π′(μ −re) −
−1(α)

e2r −1
2r
π′π ≤R
⎫
⎬
⎭
(C.2)
and
KES :=
⎧
⎨
⎩π ∈Rn : −er −1
r
π′(μ −re) + φ(
−1(α))
α

e2r −1
2r
π′π ≤R
⎫
⎬
⎭(C.3)
respectively. The portfolio optimisation problem is to solve
V (t, x) :=
sup
∈A(K)
E(t,x)[U(XT )]
(C.4)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
895
where A(K) := { :
 T
0 |t|2dt < ∞P −a.s,
(t, ω) ∈K
L ⊗P-a.e. (t, ω)} subject
to the dynamics (C.1). A dynamic VaR and ES constraint can be incorporated by the choice
of K = KVaR and KES.
Now we show that Proposition 2 can be extended to the multi-asset setup.
Proposition 8 For the optimisation problem (C.4), if the set K is bounded then for every
t < T there exists x such that V (t, x) < sups U(s)
Proof Based on the same ideas in the proof of Proposition 2, for any S-shaped U there exists
some m > 0 and C > 0 such that U(x) ≤C + mx+ =: ¯U(x). For as long as K is bounded,
there exists b > 0 such that
K ⊆
'
(π1, π2, . . . , πn)′ ∈Rn : −b ≤πi ≤b ∀i = 1, 2, . . . , n
(
=: ¯K.
Let ¯μ := b )n
i=1 |μi −r|. Given Xt = x, for any  ∈A( ¯K) we have
X
T = xer(T −t) +
 T
t
er(T −s)′
t(μ −re)ds +
 T
t
er(T −s)′
sσd Bs
≤xer(T −t) + ¯μ
 T
t
er(T −s)ds +
 T
t
er(T −s)′
sσd Bs =: ¯X
T
almost surely. Hence
V (t, x) ≤
sup
t∈A( ¯K)
E(t,x)[ ¯U(X
T )] ≤
sup
∈A( ¯K)
E(t,x)[ ¯U( ¯X
T )] =: ¯V (t, x)
(C.5)
where ¯X has dynamics of
d ¯Xt = (r ¯Xt + ¯μ)dt + ′
tσd Bt,
¯Xt = x.
Since ¯U is convex, based on the same augment in the proof of Proposition 2 we expect the
optimal control for problem (C.5) is a constant process given by
∗
t =
sup
π:πi∈{−K,K}
π′π
for all t. i.e. one should make the volatility of the process to be as large as possible. Moreover,
the optimally controlled process ¯X∗is simply a drifting Brownian motion. Hence we can
show that the corresponding value function ¯V has the same form as in (A.4) and in turn the
same result follows immediately.
⊓⊔
In the single-asset case, whether the set Ki is bounded is solely determined by the Sharpe
ratio of the asset relative to the risk management parameter Mi as shown in Lemma 1. We
illustrate that a similar sufﬁcient condition holds in the case with two risky assets.
Lemma 5 Consider a two-asset economy where the mean return vector is μ = (μ1, μ2)′
and the variance-covariance matrix is  = (σ 2
1 , σ1σ2ρ; σ1σ2ρ, σ 2
2 ). Recall the deﬁnitions
of Mi for i ∈{VaR, ES} as per (7). If
*
+
+
,

μ1−r
σ1
2
+

μ2−r
σ2
2
−2

μ1−r
σ1
 
μ2−r
σ2

ρ
1 −ρ2
< Mi,
(C.6)
then the set Ki deﬁned by (C.2) or (C.3) is bounded.
123

896
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
Proof We prove the result for the case of ES constraint i = ES. The result under VaR
constraint can be obtained similarly.
If (π1, π2)′ ∈KES then
−er −1
r
[(μ1 −r)π1 + (μ2 −r)π2] + φ(
−1(α))
α

(e2r −1)
2r
(σ 2
1 π2
1 + σ 2
2 π2
2 + 2σ1σ2ρπ1π2) ≤R
⇐⇒φ(
−1(α))
α

(e2r −1)
2r
(σ 2
1 π2
1 + σ 2
2 π2
2 + 2σ1σ2ρπ1π2)
≤R + er −1
r
[(μ1 −r)π1 + (μ2 −r)π2]
⇒
⎡
⎣φ(
−1(α))
α

(e2r −1)
2r
(σ 2
1 π2
1 + σ 2
2 π2
2 + 2σ1σ2ρπ1π2)
⎤
⎦
2
≤

R + er −1
r
[(μ1 −r)π1 + (μ2 −r)π2]
2
.
On rearranging, the last inequality becomes f (π1, π2) := Aπ2
1 + Bπ1π2 + Cπ2
2 + Dπ1 +
Eπ2 ≤R2 where
A :=
φ(
−1(α))
α
2 e2r −1
2r
2
σ 2
1 −2
er −1
r
2
(μ1 −r)2,
B := 2
φ(
−1(α))
α
2 e2r −1
2r

σ1σ2ρ −2
er −1
r
2
(μ1 −r)(μ2 −r),
C :=
φ(
−1(α))
α
2 e2r −1
2r
2
σ 2
2 −
er −1
r
2
(μ2 −r)2,
D := −2R
er −1
r

(μ1 −r),
E := −2R
er −1
r

(μ2 −r).
The set ˜K := {(π1, π2)′ ∈R2 : f (π1, π2) ≤R2} is bounded if and only if the conic
section f (π1, π2) = R2 is an ellipse, or equivalently B2 −4AC < 0. This condition can
be explicitly written in terms of the model parameters as in (C.6). The result immediately
follows on noticing that KES is a subset of ˜K.
⊓⊔
Corollary 2 A dynamic risk constraint i ∈{VaR, ES} is effective in a two-asset economy if
condition (C.6) holds.
Proof This immediately follows from Lemma 5 and Proposition 8.
⊓⊔
Comparing the results in Lemma 5 to the single-asset case in Lemma 1, we can see that a
dynamic risk constraint will translate into a bound on the trading strategy provided that the
same risk management parameter Mi is sufﬁciently strict relative to the quality of the assets.
But the criteria of assets quality will now take the correlation ρ into account to reﬂect the
beneﬁts of diversiﬁcation.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
897
Appendix D: Extension to general risk measures
In this section, we brieﬂy discuss how the main results in Sect.3 can be generalised to risk
measuresbeyondVaRandES.Considerariskmeasureρ(·)whichispositivehomogenousand
law-invariant,8 i.e. for any constant c ≥0 and random variable X we have ρ(cX) = cρ(X),
and ρ(X) = ρ(Y) if X and Y are random variables with identical distribution. Recall the
deﬁnition of Lt the random variable of the projected loss over [t, t + ] in (3), we have
Lt = tℓt where
ℓt := −(μ −r)(er −1)
r
−σ
 t+
t
er(t+−s)d Bs
(D.1)
is a normal random variable which law does not depend on t nor t. Then using the positive
homogeneity property of ρ(·), we deduce
ρ(Lt) = ρ(tℓt) = 1(t≥0)tρ(ℓt) −1(t<0)tρ(−ℓt)
= 1(t≥0)tm+ + 1(t<0)tm−
with m+ := ρ(ℓt) and m−:= −ρ(−ℓt) being some constants independent of t due to the
law-invariance property of ρ(·). Hence ρ(Lt) is a piecewise-linear function of t. It is then
straightforward to conclude that for any given R > 0 the set
K :=
'
π ∈R : 1(π≥0)πm+ + 1(π<0)πm−≤R
(
is bounded if and only if
m−< 0 < m+.
(D.2)
Using Proposition 2, we can deduce ρ(·) is effective if (D.2) holds and the set K is then
equivalent to K =

R
m−,
R
m+

. Thus Corollary 1 is also valid where an effective risk measure
is equivalent to a delta notional constraint.
References
Akume, D., Luderer, B., & Wunderlich, R. (2010). Dynamic shortfall constraints for optimal portfolios. Surveys
in Mathematics and its Applications, 5, 135–149.
Armstrong, J., & Brigo, D. (2018). Rogue traders versus value-at-risk and expected shortfall. Risk Magazine.
Armstrong, J., & Brigo, D. (2019). Risk managing tail-risk seekers: Var and expected shortfall vs s-shaped
utility. Journal of Banking & Finance, 101, 122–135.
Armstrong, J., & Brigo, D. (2022). Coherent risk measures alone are ineffective in constraining portfolio
losses. Journal of Banking & Finance, 140, 106315.
Bai, H., & Zhang, L. (2022). Searching for the equity premium. Journal of Financial Economics, 143(2),
897–926.
Basak, S., & Shapiro, A. (2001). Value-at-risk-based risk management: Optimal policies and asset prices. The
Review of Financial Studies, 14(2), 371–405.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2019). Minimum capital requirements for market risk. Available
at https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d457.pdf.
Berkelaar, A. B., Kouwenberg, R., & Post, T. (2004). Optimal portfolio choice under loss aversion. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 86(4), 973–987.
Bian, B., Miao, S., & Zheng, H. (2011). Smooth value functions for a class of nonsmooth utility maximization
problems. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 2(1), 727–747.
Bichuch, M., & Sturm, S. (2014). Portfolio optimization under convex incentive schemes.Finance and Stochas-
tics, 18(4), 873–915.
8 Law-invariance is not strictly required, but it can guarantee the constraint set to be time-homogeneous.
123

898
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 336:861–898
Boyle, P., & Tian, W. (2007). Portfolio management with constraints. Mathematical Finance, 17(3), 319–343.
Carpenter, J. N. (2000). Does option compensation increase managerial risk appetite? The Journal of Finance,
55(5), 2311–2331.
Cuoco, D., He, H., & Isaenko, S. (2008). Optimal dynamic trading strategies with risk limits. Operations
Research, 56(2), 358–368.
Cvitani´c, J., Karatzas, I. (1992). Convex duality in constrained portfolio optimization. The Annals of Applied
Probability, 767–818.
Dong, Y., & Zheng, H. (2019). Optimal investment of dc pension plan under short-selling constraints and
portfolio insurance. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 85, 47–59.
Dong,Y.,&Zheng,H.(2020).Optimalinvestmentwiths-shapedutilityandtradingandvalueatriskconstraints:
An application to deﬁned contribution pension plan. European Journal of Operational Research, 281(2),
341–356.
Forsyth, P. A., & Labahn, G. (2007). Numerical methods for controlled Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman PDEs in
ﬁnance. Journal of Computational Finance, 11(2), 1–43.
Gabih, A., Grecksch, W., & Wunderlich, R. (2005). Dynamic portfolio optimization with bounded shortfall
risks. Stochastic Analysis and Applications, 23(3), 579–594.
Guan, G., & Liang, Z. (2016). Optimal management of dc pension plan under loss aversion and value-at-risk
constraints. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 69, 224–237.
Gundel, A., & Weber, S. (2008). Utility maximization under a shortfall risk constraint. Journal of Mathematical
Economics, 44(11), 1126–1151.
Herdegen, M. & Khan, N. (2021). Mean-ρ portfolio selection and ρ-arbitrage for coherent risk measures.
SSRN 3691027.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica,
47(2), 363–391.
Karatzas, I., Lehoczky, J. P., & Shreve, S. E. (1987). Optimal portfolio and consumption decisions for a small
investor on a ﬁnite horizon. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 25(6), 1557–1586.
Merton, R. C. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: the continuous-time case. The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 51(3), 247–257.
Merton, R. C. (1971). Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model. Journal of
Economic Theory, 3(4), 373–413.
Øksendal, B., & Reikvam, K. (1998). Viscosity solutions of optimal stopping problems. Stochastics and
Stochastic Reports, 62(3–4), 285–301.
Peskir, G., & Shiryaev, A. (2006). Optimal stopping and free-boundary problems. Springer.
Pham, H. (2009). Continuous-time stochastic control and optimization with ﬁnancial applications (Vol. 61).
Springer.
Reichlin, C. (2013). Utility maximization with a given pricing measure when the utility is not necessarily
concave. Mathematics and Financial Economics, 7(4), 531–556.
Strotz, R. H. (1955). Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization. The Review of Economic
Studies, 23(3), 165–180.
Yiu, K. F. C. (2004). Optimal portfolios under a value-at-risk constraint. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 28(7), 1317–1334.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123