TITLE: Mathematical programming-based methodology for the evaluation of supply chain collaborative planning scenarios
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05917-6
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05917-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Mathematical programming-based methodology
for the evaluation of supply chain collaborative planning
scenarios
D. Pérez-Perales1
· A. Boza1 · F. Alarcón1 · P. Gómez-Gasquet1
Received: 9 November 2022 / Accepted: 20 February 2024 / Published online: 21 March 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Nowadays, supply chain (SC) decentralised decision making is the most usual situation
in SC operations planning. In this context, different companies can collaboratively plan to
achieve a certain level of individual and SC performance. However in many cases, there is
reluctance to collaborate because it is not known a priori which beneﬁts will be reported.
This paper aims to develop a mathematical programming-based methodology for the evalua-
tion of different supply chain collaborative planning scenarios (MPM-SC-CP). It is assumed
that different SC decision centres (DCs) make decisions based on mixed and integer lin-
ear programming models. Two main inputs feed the proposed MPM-SC-CP, a framework
and associated methodology that support the integrated conceptual and analytical modeling
of the SC-CP process in which several DCs make decisions according to spatio-temporal
integration. Finally, an application to a real ceramic SC was conducted.
Keywords Collaborative planning · Methodology · Mathematical models · Scenarios
evaluation · Ceramic sector
1 Introduction
The relevance of supply chain (SC) management (SCM) for the ﬁrms in our globalised world
has been introduced and described at length in the literature (Lambert & Cooper, 2000; Min
& Zhou, 2002). This relevance is highlighted when disruptions occur, such as port strikes,
natural disasters, product safety problems, supplier bankruptcy, terrorist attacks or today’s
B D. Pérez-Perales
dapepe@omp.upv.es
A. Boza
aboza@omp.upv.es
F. Alarcón
faualva@omp.upv.es
P. Gómez-Gasquet
pgomez@omp.upv.es
1
Research Centre on Production Management and Engineering (CIGIP), Universitat Politècnica de
València (UPV), Camino de Vera, s/n, 46022 Valencia, Spain
123

262
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
pandemic situation. This reveals the critical importance of SCM nowadays (Craighead et al.,
2020).
SCM includes strategic, tactical and operational decisions, all of which are relevant for the
organisations that participate in the chain and, consequently, for their ﬁnal customers. These
SCM decisions comprise many business processes (from the purchase of raw materials to
the ﬁnal consumption of products) that deal with diverse and complex contexts for different
purposes. The Supply Chain Council proposed a reference model that includes six distinct
major processes (plan, source, make, deliver, return, enable) in the Supply Chain Operations
Reference (SCOR) model (ASCM, 2022).
This paper focuses on the major process ‘plan’, and speciﬁcally on the collaborative
perspective in operations planning. A new scenario has arisen in this century in which the
processes, particularly SC operations planning, traditionally undertaken in an enterprise are
being adapted to be collaboratively designed and executed by different ﬁrms operating in
the same network or SC (Lejeune & Yakova, 2005). Collaborative planning can be deﬁned
as a joint decision-making process for aligning individual SC members’ plans to achieve a
certain degree of coordination (Stadler, 2009).
This collaborative process has been studied in the last two decades as a consequence of an
increasing need to adapt operations planning processes to collaborative contexts, in which dif-
ferent geographically dispersed entities with their own characteristics and objectives, which
are sometimes reluctant to share certain information, are willing to collaboratively plan to
make more proﬁts.
Many works have addressed the importance of its modelling by highlighting its decision
ﬂows and shared information (Alarcón et al., 2007; de Freitas, de Oliveira and Alcantara 2019;
Hernández et al., 2014b; Stadler, 2009). Of these models, analytical ones based on mathe-
matical programming have been especially relevant as a tool to optimise the performance of
not only each individual entity, but also of the whole collaborative process.
Although it is true that mathematical programming models have been used mainly for
centralised decision making in the SC operations planning context (Bernin et al. 2002; Timpe
& Kallrath, 2000; Bajgiran et al., 2016a, 2016b), more research works about decentralized
models have been published in the last decade. Nowadays, SC decentralised decision making,
where different decision units have to be tactically and operationally coordinated to achieve
a desired SC performance level, is the most common situation (Acar & Atadeniz, 2015;
Ouhimmoua et al. 2008; Rius-Sorolla et al., 2020; Thomas, et al., 2015a, 2015b; Zoghlami
et al., 2016).
Nevertheless, the literature review shows that works addressing methodologies to facili-
tate the integrated modeling of the SC-CP process are lacking, particularly when based on
mathematical programming. In most cases, only isolated monolithic models with centralised
approaches are applied to cover a wide range of SC conﬁgurations but, as no methodology
justiﬁes this centralised modelling, they are often far-removed from reality. The SC organi-
sational structure, made up of different entities where decisions and information are difﬁcult
to centralise, is ignored. In other cases, more realistic decentralised models are used and
address the coordination mechanisms between different SC decision entities, but mostly lack
the complexity that the business reality requires. Studies that address spatio-temporal inte-
gration for any decision scenario (centralised or decentralised/distributed) are lacking, and
the few existing ones are valid only for speciﬁc situations, and do not cover the necessary
and simultaneous integration that may emerge during the SC-CP process.
As detailed in below, three shortcomings derive from above and justify this paper.
Firstly, works that precisely link the coordination mechanisms of the SC collaborative
process with its mathematical-based programming modeling are lacking. This means that
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
263
these mathematical models do not fully capture the real complexity. In the majority of quan-
titative papers, the analysis process prior to model formulation is omitted, which makes the
understanding of these models difﬁcult.
Secondly, but closely linked, the spatio-temporal interactions of these mechanisms are not
clearly identiﬁed and are not simultaneously addressed in most cases.
Finally, the ﬂexibility of these coordination mechanisms required to deal with changes
in the collaborative scheme is not sufﬁciently approached because the way mathematical
models are constructed makes their transferability difﬁcult to other collaborative schemes if
some changes occur. Hence their evaluation is not anf easy task.
The above, plus many companies’ reluctance to collaboratively plan due to the uncertain
beneﬁts (i.e., collaboration) that they will gain and how these beneﬁts will be shared all justify
this paper, which proposes a mathematical programming-based methodology to evaluate SC
collaborative planning scenarios (MPM-SC-CP).
The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows. The literature review is presented in
Sect. 2. Section 3 proposes an MPM-SC-CP and describes its main inputs. Section 4 presents
an MPM-SC-CP application to a real case of a ceramic SC. Section 5 includes the discussion
of the results. Finally, Sect. 6 draws some conclusions and offers future research lines.
2 Literature review
Nowadays, SC collaboration: (i) is applied to different industrial sectors (i.e., ceramic SC
(Alemany et al., 2011), soft drinks SC (Ramanathan, 2012) Petrolium, (Fernandes 2016),
agribusiness SC (Bo et al., 2020), mining (Shi and Erh, 2019) or construction (Elmughrabi,
2020); (ii) comprises various approaches (i.e., QR—Quick Response- (Choi & Sethi, 2010),
VMI – Vendor-Managed Inventory (Nimmy et al., 2019), CPFR—Collaborative Planning,
Forecasting and Replenishment (Hollman et al. 2015; Panahifar, 2015), or is based on math-
ematical models with shared information (Pibernik, 2011; Nimmy et al., 2019); (iii) focuses
on one or more speciﬁc business processes in the set of processes developed in the SC (i.e.,
sales forecast (Önkal et al., 2012), lot-sizing problems (Eslikizi et al., 2015; Taghipour &
Frayret, 2013), transportation (Fernandes et al., 2016) or for the I4.0 context (Ivanov et al.,
2021).
Some of the beneﬁts of SC collaboration are: effective resources allocation due to the
improved visibility of global capacity (Acar & Atadeniz, 2015), beneﬁts sharing (Pibernik
et al., 2011), the fairness of revenue sharing (Taghipour & Frayret, 2013), more proﬁts
compared to those made from a non-collaborative perspective (Hernandez et al., 2014c), a
higher end-customer service level (Hernandez et al., 2014a; Acar & Atadeniz, 2015) or a
minimised bullwhip effect (Nimmy et al., 2019).
But SC collaboration implies the deﬁnition of some coordination mechanisms which not
only include joint decision making, but also information sharing, information technology
and contracts (Kanda & Deshmukh, 2008).
Collaboration is achieved by exchanging relevant information (Almeida et al., 2012).
Sharing this information among SC members is the key issue in the collaborative planning
process (Hernandez, 2014a) which is, in turn, collected in a centralised repository (centralised
decision models) to store and extract knowledge information to facilitate the decision-making
process (Kuik & Diong, 2019), or each node manages its own information repository from a
decentralised perspective (Hernandez, 2104b).
123

264
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
The role of information technology is fundamental for collaborative planning. Ivanov et al.
(2021) presents interactions of production planning and control with technologies classiﬁed
as infrastructure, engineering technology, data technology and communication technology.
Here consolidated technologies are used, such as EDI, ERP or RFID (Choi & Sethi, 2010),
as well as emerging information technologies, such as the Internet of Things (IoT), cloud
computing, web services, big data, artiﬁcial intelligence, or sensor and tabs for I4.0 contexts,
that offer real-time information to gain practical insights and to assist in decision making
(Bueno et al., 2020; Kuik & Diong, 2019).
SC members also coordinate by using contracts to better manage supplier–buyer rela-
tionships and risk management. Contracts specify the parameters of relationships, such as
price, quantity, time and quality (Kanda & Deshmukh, 2008), but also a framework for col-
laborative decision consequences like revenue-sharing contracts (Yang et al., 2011). These
SC contracts do not entail complicated contracting mechanisms according to Belavina and
Girotra (2012), but some proposals consider the contract to be an essential element for other
coordination mechanisms; for example, transfer information of contracts to decision models
(Bajgiran et al., 2016a, 2016b; Wenzel et al., 2016a). This latter approach is not widely used,
and very few papers in the ﬁeld of mathematical programming for collaborative SCs include
such contracts as a remarkable element.
However, the components of coordination mechanisms are not coincident in the different
proposals. Parahifar et al. (2015) deﬁnes implementation enablers for successful collabora-
tion schemes and includes a high level of trust and the importance of information. Hollman
et al. (2015) identiﬁes four propositions: trust, information sharing, ICT (information and
communication technologies) and contextual variables. Alemany et al. (2010) deﬁnes the
structural elements to characterise coordination mechanisms in a collaborative process. These
elements are the number of decision makers, the collaboration level, interdependence rela-
tionships’ nature, interdependence relationships’ type, number of coordination mechanisms,
exchanged information, information processing, decision sequence characteristics and the
stopping criteria of the coordination mechanism. Lehoux et al. (2014) focuses on informa-
tion sharing, collaborative approaches and negotiation processes as a means to synchronise
activities between partners.
The coordination mechanisms in the collaborative planning process include the previously
indicated components. However, implementing these mechanisms is not trivial and many fac-
tors must be taken into account by all the collaborative SC members. Cuenca et al. (2013)
proposes a maturity model as a tool to gain a better understanding of organisations’ situation
by helping them to ﬁnd the best way for change toward a collaborative context. Hernandez
et al. (2009) and Pérez-Perales et al. (2016) present a methodology that supports a collabo-
rative planning process, although it is limited to a multi-agent system and the decision view,
respectively.
An extense literature about coordination mechanisms using mathematical programming
exist. A brief summary is given based on the works of Alemany et al. (2011) and Rius et al.
(2020).
Twotypesofcoordinationmaybedistinguished.First,thatonewhichimpliesthecoordina-
tion of decisions across different decision-making levels (strategic, tactical and operational),
also known as temporal integration. Secondly, that one regarding the coordination of decision
making across the company’s various functions (e.g., purchasing, manufacturing, distribution
and sales), or across various geographically distributed organisations (e.g., suppliers, plants
and retailers), also known as spatial integration.
Two different visions for temporal integration are used: the hierarchical planning of the
levels and their simultaneous planning.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
265
The hierarchical vision splits the problem into two subproblems (e.g., tactical and oper-
ational). One of the main advantages concerns to the compatibility with the organizational
structure of the company and consistency among various planning activities in the different
levels of organization’s hierarchy. Infeasibility and suboptimality among the decisions made
at the different hierarchical levels are among the main obstacles.
Although there is a large number of research works that report single company hierarchical
applications (Hax & Meal, 2009; Bitran et al., 1981; Erscheler et al. 1986) not many report
the hierarchical approach in supply chain contexts (Ozdamar & Yazgac, 1999; Vicens et al.,
2001).
On the other hand planning models that deal with all decisions simultaneously. They
use to be complex models whose optimality is just guaranteed in a few practical cases and
with excessively high computational times. Besides, these models do not respond to the
hierarchical structure of many companies, since their monolithic approach does not allow
the interactions between those responsibles of each level of the hierarchy (Bitran & Tirupati,
1993; Gupta & Magnusson, 2005; Kovacs et al. 2009).
Regarding the spatial integration, two different visions are also used: the centralized and
the decentralised (distributed).
Centralised mathematical programming models have extensively been proposed in the
literature for coordinating the materials ﬂow at both the tactical (planning) and the operational
levels (scheduling). Special relevance to those models based on mixed and integer linear
programming (MILP) applied to different SC physical conﬁgurations, ranging from two-
stages (Lavoie & Abdul-Nour, 2003; Timpe & Kallrath, 2000) to multi-stage (Kreipl &
Pinedo, 2004; Lin & Chen, 2004; Spitter et al., 2005). At the same time, most of them
include production and distribution functions and consider various members in one or all the
stages.
The decentralized/distributed approach focuses on how to ensure the coordination or
alignment of different entities in a supply chain that are not fully controlled under a single
authority. Each independent entity has its own objective function which is subject to its
constraints and is not willing to reveal its own conﬁdential information to others. To manage
these interdependence relationships, it is necessary to deﬁne mechanisms that are capable of
coordinating the decisions made about the production, inventory and transport as well as the
exchanged information.
Although literature about decentralised/distributed decision-making is less extensive com-
pared with the centralized, different problem scenarios with speciﬁc assumptions have been
addressed as well as mathematical programming models and solution techniques.
According to Rius et al. (2020), some main characteristics determine the type of decen-
tralized/distributed scenario:
First, the type of mathematical programming model used to coordinate. A signiﬁcant
quantity of models are based on MILP (Walter et al. 2008; Thomas et al., 2015a, 2015b;
Zoghlami et al., 2016). Other types of models, such as linear programming (Lu et al., 2012),
quadratic programming (Wenzel et al., 2016a) or non-linear programming (Zhou et al., 2022)
have not been used as much in comparison with MILP´s.
Secondly, the type of relationship and objectives of the coordination mechanism. It stab-
lishes how trustful is the relationship as well as the purpose of the coordination mechanism.
Regarding trust, in most of the works, team behaviour, where the information is not used
opportunistically, is assumed (Albretch and Stadtler, 2015; Wenzel et al., 2016b). There are
few studies on the consequences of a possible opportunistic behaviour (Pittman et al., 2007).
Regarding the purpose of the coordination, in some cases it is just sought to improve non-
coordinated scenarios by achieving a better alignment of materials ﬂows. This is typical in
123

266
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
hierarchical systems where no compensations or renegotiations exist (Reiss & Buer, 2014).
In other cases, the mechanisms seek to get closer to the optimal global results, knowing that
although some of the entities can obtain worse results they will be rewarded or compensated.
(Qu et al., 2015). Finally, some coordination mechanisms just aim to obtain a fair solution,
sometimes far from the global optimum (Tang et al., 2016).
Third, the type of exchange information. It refers to what information is shared to reach
the collaboration and which one is not disclosed.
At a tactical level, most of the studies assume that decentralized entities share insensitive
information such as order proposals jointly with internal prices (Dudek and Stadtler, 2007;
Lehoux et al., 2010; Bajgiran et al., 2016a, 2016b) as well as incentive schemes that align the
decentralized objectives with the system-wide objective. This decentralized scheme allows
the different entities to be coordinated and generate new improved proposals. On the other
hand, sensitive information, such as local costs (Homberger et al., 2015) or to a lesser extent
local capacity (Lau et al., 2011), at a detailed level, is usually hidden.
The last characteristic regards to the type of coordination mechanisms used. Many of the
works have used the Lagrange multiplier (Wenzel et al., 2016b) or some of its extensions
such as Dantzing-Wolf (Mason & Villalobos, 2015) or Benders methods (Behnamian, 2014).
These methods tend to the optimal solution of the system.
Others coordination mechanisms are based on meta-heuristics, such as variable neigh-
bourhood search (Homberger et al., 2015), ant colony, or simulated annealing (Eslikizi et al.,
2015) that achieve better coordination according to some pre-deﬁned rules but generating
suboptimal solutions in most of the cases.
Hierarchical based coordination mechanisms are also extensively reported in the literature.
This simple method gives better results than non-coordination, where suppliers must make
forecasts of demand according to historical or other data. The hierarchical coordination mech-
anism can be initiated by upstream or downstream proposals (Simpson & Erenguc, 2001),
with counter-proposals (Gaudreault et al., 2010), and with negotiations (Barbarosoglu &
Ozgur, 1999). Anticipated information plays in important role in all these cases (Schneeweiss
et al., 2004) as well as the consideration of compensations or discounts between the different
entities (Kovács et al., 2013) in order to reach better global solutions.
Finally it is important to remark that many of the studies assume the presence of a central
independent authority or mediator, specially in those contexts where the coordinated entities
do not belong to the same organization and are not willing to disclose relevant information
(Zaman et al., 2017). This mediator will collect the necessary information from the individual
entities to ensure some synchronization through the supply chain previous to the negotiation
phases.
From the above review, it can be said that the conditions and justiﬁcation for using the
centralised approach is not explicitly described in most of these works. It is taken for granted
that several independent organizations agree in reaching a global objective and are willing
to disclose their own conﬁdential information with others.
Although decentralizated/distributed approaches cope with this previous assumption, the
SCs addressed in the majority of the works do not represent the complexity of the business
reality.Mostofthereviewedmodelsaredevelopedataspeciﬁcplanninglevel(tacticaloroper-
ational) where the different entities aim to reach a global common goal (in the majority of the
cases looking for a near global optimal solution) and where no oportunistic behaviour exists.
Additionally, the vast majority has used mechanisms with the requirement of a mediator and
have not been applied in rolling horizons. Besides, only a few SC mathematical program-
ming models have simultaneously considered temporal and spatial integrations (Ozdamar &
Yazgac, 1999; Schneeweiss et al., 2004).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
267
In light of all this, a mathematical programming-based methodology for the evaluation of
SC collaborative planning scenarios (MPM-SC-CP) is proposed.
Firstly, the MPM-SC-CP aims to facilitate and guide ﬁnal users to develop the integrated
mathematicalprogrammingmodellingofthecurrentSC-CPprocessinwhichseveraldecision
centers (DCs) make decisions under temporal and spatial integration. Secondly, it indicates
how to execute it to evaluate its performance. Finally, and highly linked with the previous
steps, MPM-SC-CP can be used for the evaluation of supply chain collaborative planning
scenarios that will affect more or less profoundly the SC-CP process and hence the possibility
of knowing in advance the proﬁts or costs that can be derived.
At this point, it must be highlighted that although different mathematical modelling
approaches could be used, mixed integer linear programming (MILP) has been chosen to
assist the DCs in making their decisions. As described in this section, coordination within
MILP models has been widely used in the literature for system analysis and optimization
(Timpe & Kallrath, 2000; Lavoie & Abdul-Nour, 2003; Kreipl & Pinedo, 2004; Lin & Chen,
2004; Spitter et al., 2005; Walter et al. 2008; Thomas et al., 2015a, 2015b; Zoghlami et al.,
2016) as it presents a ﬂexible and powerful method for solving large, complex problems
such as those derived from SC contexts, where linearity may be assumed. Likewise MILP
models have been used in the last two decades in the industry in the form of Advance Plan-
ning Systems (APSs) incorporated to Enterprise Resources Planning (ERPs) systems. APSs
have become essential to provide adequate coordination in SC where temporal and spatial
hierarchies exist (Stadler, 2009).
Moreover these MILP models have proved to be relatively easy to be formulated and
ﬂexible to be adapted to the analytical reference model addressed in the next section, which
is one of the main pillars of the proposed MPM-SC-CP.
In the next section, the steps of the proposed MPM-SC-CP are described after brieﬂy
reviewing the main inputs that feed it.
3 Mathematical programming-based methodology for the evaluation
of supply chain collaborative planning scenarios
3.1 Baseline
The framework for the analytical modelling of the SC-CP-Process (Pérez-Perales & Alemany,
2015; Pérez-Perales, et al., 2012), and the methodology for the (conceptual) modelling of
the SC-CP-Process (Pérez-Perales, Lario & Alemany, 2008; Pérez-Perales, et al., 2016), are
the basis of this proposal.
The main objective of the framework is to help to facilitate and guide those responsible for
the SC-CP process in the task of modelling speciﬁc situations. It provides the corresponding
(conceptual and analytical) concepts in an organised manner so that all the important aspects
that inﬂuence the planning process are taken into account during the modelling procedure.
This framework integrates four different modelling views: physical, organisation, decision
and information, as well as the relations among them. This facilitates the development of
integrated models of the SC CP process, and leads to more realistic and versatile models
that can be applied to any complex SC. It also addresses the deﬁnition of different decision
centres (DCs) at two decision levels: tactical and operational. At each level, decision making
may be centralised (one DC) or distributed (several DCs). These DCs are subject to two
123

268
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Fig. 1 Framework for the analytical modelling of the SC-CP-Process (adapted from Pérez-Perales et al., 2012)
interdependence relation types: temporal (between the DCs belonging to different decision
levels) and spatial (between the DCs belonging to the same decision level).
Figure 1 shows the joint decision process (temporal or spatial) between two DCs where
some interdependence interactions take place. DCT, that is, the top DC that initialises the
joint decision process, obtains a tactical or operational plan (XkT) and transmits an instruction
(INk) to the bottom DC, that is, DCB. This INk includes global variables (XkTB) and global
information (IkTB). Then DCB also obtains a tactical or operational plan (XkB) and transmits
a reaction (Rk) to DCT. In the most general case, several cycles (k) between DCT and DCB
can occur until a plan is agreed. It is noteworthy that both DCT and DCB in collaborative
planning scenarios can respectively anticipate (ANT) some relevant aspects of DCB and DCT
to improve this joint decision process.
This framework leads to the deﬁnition of a reference analytical model (Fig. 2) for CP
contexts for a generic DCM. This ZkM model includes not only local aspects, but also interde-
pendence ones due to its relationships with other DCs. Hence this reference model comprises:
• A support structure composed of decision variables (XkM) and input information (Iik.M)
• A main structure composed of the criterion (CkM) and a decision ﬁeld (Ak.M)
The solution of ZkM aims to assign a value to XkM that provides a certain accepted value
of the CkM subject to the different constraints expressed in AkM. Finally, after solving ZkM,
some output information IokM is generated.
Fig. 2 Reference Analytical Model (adapted from Pérez-Perales et al., 2012)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
269
Fig. 3 SC physical view
The methodology for the (conceptual) modelling of the SC-CP-Process aims to indicate
all the steps to follow to obtain an integrated model of the SC CP process in which all the
decision activities (DA), execution order and exchanged information due to their relations
are described.
This methodology comprises three blocks:
Firstly, the SC is characterised from a physical point of view by addressing the resources
and items about which the collaborative planning process is undertaken, as well as their
relations (Fig. 3).
SC resources include the nodes that belong to different stages: suppliers (SUP),
suppliers-logistics: (SUP-Log), manufacturing/assembly (MAN/ASSE) and distribution
(DIS). Moreover, some transformation activities are performed in the SC, with some in
nodes (production-P and storage-S) and others in arches (transport). Finally, some points of
sale (circles) are allocated. SC items include ﬁnal products, whose demand is allocated to
points of sale, and intermediate products that form part of its bill of materials (components,
raw materials, etc.).
As pointed out later, the physical view (resources and items) is considered at a lesser or
higher degree of aggregation depending on the decision level (tactical or operational).
Secondly, the organisation view is deﬁned as an intermediate step between the physical
and decision views. Resources may belong to different entrepreneurial organisations, and
can strongly inﬂuence the decision view. Figure 4 depicts the decision view (at a macrolevel)
and includes two decision levels (tactical and operational), where the different DCs that are
responsible for the decision making of one transformation activity or several (production,
storage, transport) are allocated.
Thirdly, and from the macrodecision view, an SC-CP model is obtained from the interde-
pendent relations between the different DCs and a series of rules (Fig. 5). This SC-CP model
is composed of a set of DA with a certain execution sequence, along with the information
exchanged between them. DA are executed by the speciﬁc DCs placed at the tactical (TDL)
and operational decision levels (ODL).
Finally, the information view (at a macrolevel) that integrates the other views and collects
the necessary information to support the CP process is deﬁned.
123

270
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Fig. 4 SC decision view (at a macrolevel)
Fig. 5 Obtaining the SC-CP process
3.2 Methodology proposal
The MPM-SC-CP scenarios comprise two main blocks (Fig. 6):
1. MPM-SC-CP_Block 1: MILP Modelling the SC-CP process
2. MPM-SC-CP_Block 2: MILP Solution and Evaluation of the SC-CP process
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
271
Fig. 6 A mathematical programming-based methodology for the evaluation of supply chain collaborative plan-
ning scenarios (MPM-SC-CP)
3.2.1 MPM-SC-CP_Block 1: MILP modelling the SC-CP process
Block 1 describes the steps to be followed by any generic DC associated with any of the DA
previously identiﬁed in the modelling of the SC-CP Process to develop an MILP model.
The formulation of these MILP models relies on all the aspects addressed within the
frameworkfortheanalyticalmodellingoftheSC-CPprocess(physical,organisation,decision
and information views) and, more particularly, the analytical reference model.
The top of Fig. 7 shows the analytical reference model of a generic DCM subject to
interdependence interactions with different DCs belonging to its decision environment. In
the most general case, a generic DC can interact with top (T) or bottom (B) DCs due to
temporal (t) or spatial (e) relationships (DCTt, DCTe, DCBt and DCBe). Its main structure,
that is, model ZkM itself, is composed of CkM and AkM, and comprises either local (CkMM
and AkMM) or interdependence components (CkMTt, CkMTe, CkMBt, CkMBe, AkMTt, AkMTe,
AkMBt, AkMBe). The same occurs with the support structure; that is, XkM and IikM. For exam-
ple, IikM encompasses the local (IilkM) and interdependence (IiikM) components, where the
origin of the latter differs and comes from either DCT (Iik™) or DCB (IikBM) and, therefore,
the types of interdependence interactions to be considered (IN, R or ANT). Analogously,
some of the generated IokM, that is, the ﬁnal decisions (tactical or operational plan), are
locally implemented and others are transmitted to DCB or DCT by an IN or R, respectively.
At the bottom of Fig. 7 a mathematical programming model (based on MILP) is developed
for each DC that is, in turn, responsible for executing each decision activity identiﬁed in
the SC-CP process. All the aspects collected in the different framework views, and more
particularly the above analytical reference model, will determine this MILP model.
The following premises are assumed in Block 1:
• The analytical models deﬁned for each DC are deterministic and based on MILP
123

272
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Fig. 7 MPM-SC-CP_block 1: MILP modelling of the SC-CP
• An organisational context is assumed; that is, the collaborative decision process aims to
reach a global common goal between the different DCs via coordination mechanisms. No
oportunistic behaviour exists
• A hierarchical context (temporal or/and spatial) is considered with only one cycle instruc-
tion (IN)—reaction (R). Thus, henceforth, the MILP model is represented by ZM (CM,
A.M)
Block 1 is made up of two steps:
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
273
In the ﬁrst step, the qualitative characterisation of each individual DC and the information
exchanged between them must be performed. This is done based on the subsequent MILP
modelling. Thus all the information is structured according to the aforementioned decision
reference model within the framework. This fact can lead to suggest some changes as to how
DCs perform their tactical and/or perational plans.
So for each T/O DL – DCno (DC placed at the tactical-T or operational-O decision level-
DL and with an assigned number, no.), the characteristics identiﬁed in the microdecision
view of the framework must be addressed. These local characteristics encompass the horizon,
planning and replanning periods of the tactical/operational plans, type of decisions (decision
variables), objectives (criterion), constraints (decision ﬁeld) and input information (input
parameters).
Theselocalcharacteristicsmustbecomplementedwiththeotherscollectedinthemacrode-
cision view in relation to the interdependence relationships between the different DCs which,
in our case, are due to (ANTs) and instructions (IN). Although both are addressed in the pro-
cess modelling, they must be explicitly deﬁned at this point.
Firstly, only the interdependence component due to ANT (made by DCM in relation to
DCB) is considered for the qualitative characterisation of each DCM because it regards all the
aspects that are known independently of executing DCT. Therefore, the local deﬁnitions of
decision variables, criterion and decision ﬁeld are extended by taking into account the ANT
information of other DCs with which some interdependencies exist (Table 1).
Secondly, the interdependence component due to IN (transmitted from DCT to DCM) is
also considered. As previously mentioned, in the most general case this IN entails global
variables (decisions made by DCT and transmitted to DCM) and global information (param-
eters that may improve the joint decision process). For example, a DCT (DC of origin) can
exchange some information at the operational decision level (temporal interdependence type)
in the form of an IN, which comprises a global decision (purchasing quantities) and some
global information (cost deviations on these purchasing quantities and lower/higher bounds
of these deviations) to a DCB (DC of destination). Finally, both the global decision or the
global information results in input interdependence parameters from the DCB side (Table 2).
Once the DC qualitative characterisation and the information exchanged between DCs are
performed, the MILP models for each individual DC are developed in the second step.
Table 1 Qualitative
characterisation of each DC
T/O DL – DCno: Qualitative Characterisation
Temporal characteristics (local)
Horizon / Planning
Period / Replanning
Period
Decision
Variables
Local
Interdependence (due to
ANT)
Temporal
Spatial
Criterion
Local
Interdependence (due to
ANT)
Temporal
Spatial
Decision Field
Local
Interdependence (due to
ANT)
Temporal
Spatial
123

274
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 2 Information exchanged between DC
Information exchanged between DCs
DC of
Origin
(DCT)
Interdependence
Type
Instructions
(IN)
DC of
Destination
(DCB)
Input Information
(Interdependence
Parameters—IN)
Global
Decisions
Global
Information
The algebraic formulation of the MILP models comprises the deﬁnition and modeling
parts. These parts use the reference analytical model described within the framework for the
analytical modelling of the SC-CP process (Sect. 3.1).
The deﬁnition part is the equivalent to the support structure described in the reference
analytical model, which includes two components: decision variables (XM) and input infor-
mation IiM (input parameters). In addition, two more components collected from the different
views from the framework must be previously deﬁned because they are indices and sets.
The modelling part is the equivalent to the main structure described in the reference
analytical model: the criterion and a decision ﬁeld.
Let ZM be the decision model of DCM so that ZM  ZM (CM, AM), where CM is the
criterion and AM is the decision ﬁeld of DCM. The solution of ZM aims to assign a value to
XM, which provides the best value of CM and is subject to the different constraints expressed
in AM.
The MILP formulation of XM, CM and AM is explicitly described below.
Decision Variables: XM represents an unknown characteristic of an index or set, whose
value is determined once the ZM corresponding to a generic DCM is solved. Collaborative
contexts lead to deﬁne different types of XM: local decision variables XlM (or local variables)
and interdependence variables XiM (or interdependence variables).
The XM MILP formulation encompasses two stages:
• Stage 1: XM are formulated in each transformation activity (TA: production-P, storage-S
and transport), that belong to the scope of DCM and in each interconnection activity (IA:
purchase-PU and sales-SA) that belong to the border of DCM. The scope may extend
to different SC stages/substages depending on how centralised or decentralised decision
making is. The speciﬁc decisions variables (SDV) concerning these TA and IA are made
at a tactical and/or operational decision level. In general, the decisions linked with the
capacity and the execution planning of the different TA will be local for those DCs placed
at the tactical and operational decision levels, respectively (Fig. 8).
• Stage 2: all the SDV deﬁned at any TA make sense because they respond to ‘what’, ‘where’
and ‘when’. Similarly, those deﬁned in any of the IA respond to ‘what’, ‘where’, ‘whom’
and ‘when’. For this purpose, some basic indices previously addressed in the deﬁnition
are considered. These indices correspond to the categories ‘general items’, ‘resources’ and
‘planning periods’ respectively.
Tables 3 and 4 describe the formulation of decision variables XM. These XM belong to
the scope of DCM. Different SDV can be formulated in each TA performed in the different
SC stages. These SDV regard either capacity or execution planning issues. Besides, the
aggregation level of these SDV (expressed by the aforementioned categories/indices) varies
depending on the decision level ( tactical or operational). These XM belong to the border
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
275
Fig. 8 Local Variables deﬁnition
Table 3 Formulation of the
decision variables belonging to
the DC Scope
DC scope
AGGREGATION – Basic Indices
SC-Stage (TA –
SDV)
What?
Where?
When?
General Items
Resources
Planning
Period
Production (P)
Items Groups
of Items
Alternative
Daily
Storage (S)
Stage
(intranode)
Weekly
Transport ()
Node
Monthly
Points of sale
– -
Groups of
Nodes/Arches
– -
Groups of
Selling Points
– -
Decision
Centres
Annual
of DCM. Similarly, different SDV can be formulated in each IA with different aggregation
levels. A glossary with these SDV is found in the baseline (Section 3.1).
Once XM are formulated, interdependence variables XiM are identiﬁed. These XiM depend
on the temporal and spatial interdependences between DCM and those belonging to its deci-
sion environment (DCMTt, DCMTe, DCMBt and DCMBe).
In practice, XiM correspond to those that connect with the global variables transmitted by
an instruction from DCMT and, if this were the case, also with the possible deviations. Another
type is deﬁned if DCM anticipates some local variables XlB from DCMB. The remaining ones
are identiﬁed as local variables XlM.
123

276
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 4 Formulation of the decision variables belonging to the DC Border
DC BORDER
SC-Stage (IA – SDV)
AGGREGATION – Basic indices
What?
Where?
To Whom?
When?
General items
Resources (I)
Resources (II)
Planning
Period
Purchase (PU)
Items
Groups of Items
Stage (intranode)
Node
Groups of Nodes
Points of sale
Groups of Selling Points
Decision Centres
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
– -
– -
– -
Annual
Sales (SA)
It is noteworthy that for those DCM placed at the tactical level, the ANT XlB regarding
DCMB corresponds to the execution planning issues of the different TA.
Figure 9 summarises the different types of XM to formulate an MILP model of a generic
DCM.
Criterion: ClM is composed of the incomes and/or costs related to the different decision
variables XM. Two parts are distinguished in CM: the local criterion (ClM or CMM) and the
interdependence criterion (CiM).
The formulation of each income or cost in ClM implies a local parameter clMi„r,t multiplied
by a local variable XlM i„r,t. This multiplication takes place according to a summation that
makes sense only for the different values taken by the local indices with which clMi„r,t and
XlM i„r,t are deﬁned (Fig. 10 –(1)). In this summation, the local indices whose domain is linked
with the simple local set that they automatically originate and those whose domain is linked
with a relational local set are distinguished. The values of these local indices correspond to
Fig. 9 Types of XM in an MILP model of a generic DCM
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
277
Fig. 10 Types of CM in an MILP model of a generic DCM
either their entire domain, such as i e I, r e R, t e T., or the domain of the relational local
set, such as i e I(i), r e R(r), t e T(t), i e I(r), i e I(t) and r e R(t).
CiM is composed of those incomes or costs that derive from the DCM decision interac-
tions. Nevertheless, these decision interactions do not necessarily imply the existance of CiM
because they can only affect some constraints formulated in the interdependence decision
ﬁeld AiM as explained later.The formulation of each CiM issue implies an interdependence
parameter ciMi„r,t (deviation costs in relation to the global variables transmitted from DCMT
or ANT costs in relation to some local variables from DCMB), which is multiplied by an
interdependence variable XiMi„r,t. This multiplication takes place according to a summation
that makes sense only for the different values taken by the local and interdependence indices
with which ciMi„r,t and XiM i„r,t are deﬁned (Fig. 10 – (2)). In this summation, the indices
whose domain is linked with the simple local set that they automatically originate and those
whose domain is linked with an interdependence set are distinguished.
Decision Field: AM is the decision ﬁeld of DCM. AM is represented by a series of con-
straints expressed by functions that restrict the XM values. Two parts are also distinguished
in AM.
The local decision ﬁeld (AlM ó AMM) is composed of all those restrictions that are within
the scope/on the border of DCM that exist regardless of the degree of interdependence of
DCM with another DC.
The AlM restrictions are grouped into three large groups: materials limitations, resources-
based and policies. In turn, each group addresses a set of speciﬁc constraints whose
formulation depends on which TA/IA belonging to the scope/border are considered as well
as the decisional level. A glossary with these speciﬁc decisions is found in the baseline
(Sect. 3.1).
AlM is made up of the restricted functions represented by a local parameter alM multiplied
by a local variable XlM. A summation over the local indices with which alM and XlM are
deﬁned also exists, in this case over simple and relational local sets (Fig. 11 – (3)). Unlike
ClM, here the summation over the local indices is deﬁned for each ﬁxed value that the other
different indices not contemplated in this summation may take. Besides, operator ‘∀’ is used
to express with which values of the local indices it would make sense to formulate the previous
summations. In this case, simple and relational local sets are also deﬁned.
The interdependence decision ﬁeld (AiM) deals with those restrictions that reﬂect the
interdependence relationships of DCM to the other DCs that belong to its decision environ-
ment. Depending on the type of interdependence relationship, these restrictions reﬂect the
123

278
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Fig. 11 Types of AM in an MILP model of a generic DCM
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
279
coherence, consistency, synchronization and ﬂexibility given by the upper level DCMT to the
lower level DCM, as well as the way in which DCM, in turn, takes into account its lower level
DCMB by anticipating it to a greater or lesser extent. Below AiM is speciﬁed depending on
which DC is considered from its decision environment.
Regarding DCMTt:
• Some AMTt restrictions are based on the ﬁnal global variables transmitted by an IN from
DCMTt, and are considered by DCM to be interdependence parameters, and more particu-
larly those that restrict the lower (min), higher (max) or equal function deﬁned by DCM
(Fig. 11–(4.1)). The use of summations allows DCM to adjust the dimensions (indices)
with which decisions are made about DCMTt, in this case by disaggregating them. These
ﬁnal global variables deﬁnitively affect the DCM decision ﬁeld because they correspond
to the decisions previously implemented by DCMTt.
• Some AMTt restrictions are based on the non-ﬁnal global variables transmitted by an IN
from DCMTt, and are considered by DCM to be interdependence parameters, although their
value can be changed in this case (Fig. 11–(4.2)). So these non-ﬁnal global variables do
not deﬁnitively affect the DCM decision ﬁeld because they are not implemented by DCMTt
and minor variations are permitted to obtain consistent disaggregation.
Regarding DCMTe:
• Some AMTe restrictions are based on the ﬁnal global variables transmitted by an IN from
DCMTe, and are considered by DCM to be interdependence parameters, and more partic-
ularly those that restrict a lower (min), higher (max) or equal function deﬁned by DCM
(Fig. 11–(5.1)). The use of summations in not only the restricted function, but also at the
lower and higher bounds, is because DCM may have to adjust its decisions dimensions in
relation to DCMTe, although in this case, and unlike DCMTt, some aggregation might take
place. However, in most cases, no disaggregation or aggregation, and only a matching pro-
cess, exists. Finally, it is worth noting that if one of the summations uses a certain category
(index) dimension, the another must omit it and vice versa. This is because aggregated
decisions (in relation to a dimension) are always made up of one DC, and never at once.
That is why the different categories (indices) of a summation may or may not be formulated
with a prime (for example r or r’).
• Some AMTe restrictions are based on the non-ﬁnal global variables transmitted by an IN
from DCMTe, and are considered by DCM to be interdependence parameters, although their
value can be changed in this case (Fig. 11–(5.2)). So these non-ﬁnal global variables do
not deﬁnitively affect the DCM decision ﬁeld and minor variations are permitted so that
consistent disaggregation/aggregation/matching may take place.
Regarding DCMBt:
• AMBt restrictions are based on the ANT parameters of DCMBt (interdependence parame-
ters) that can affect XiM in relation to DCMBt (Fig. 11 – (6)). The use of summations for
ANT parameters (ant_minMBt and ant_maxMBt) is because DCM may have to adjust (in
advance) its decision dimensions (indices) in reltion to DCMBt by disaggregating them in
this case.
Regarding DCMBe:
• AMBe restrictions are based on the ANT parameters of DCMBe (interdependence param-
eters) that can affect XiM in respect to DCMBe (Fig. 11 – (7)). The use of summations
for not only ANT parameters (ant_minMBe and ant_maxMBe), but also for the restricted
123

280
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
function is because DCM may have to adjust (in advance) its decision dimensions (indices)
in relation to DCMBe. In this case, and unlike DCBt, by also having to aggregate or simply
match them.
Additionally to the local (AlM) and interdependence (AiM) decision ﬁelds, two more groups
of constraints must be formulated in the MILP model: logical (AloM) and technical (AteM)
decision ﬁelds. AloM restrictions represent relations, which are sometimes artiﬁcially for-
mulated, to ensure the model’s coherency (Fig. 11–(8)), while AteM restrictions reﬂect the
decision variables’ nature (Fig. 11–(9)).
3.2.2 MPM-SC-CP_ Block II: MILP solution and evaluation of the SC-CP
Block II indicates the steps for the MILP solution of the whole SC-CP process, and places
a special emphasis on how the individual DC models previously developed for each DA
‘interact’ so that the performance of such collaboration can be quantitatively evaluated from
the integrated solution of these models.
Previously, some information obtained by applying the methodology to model the SC-CP
process (Sect. 3.1) is collected, especially that regarding the sequence to execute the different
DCs and their shared information.
This Block 2 is also made up of two steps:
In the ﬁrst step, MILP models are solved according to the SC-CP process sequence. All the
input information, which may be either local or due to interdependences, is ﬁrstly collected
(Fig. 12).
Then as the MILP models are solved, the decision variables and the criterion value of each
one are obtained by distinguishing between the local and interdependence components. As
indicated in the step 1 of Block 1, each generic DCM associated with a DA generates certain
output information due to interdependencies once its MILP model is solved. This interde-
pendence output information comprises either IN or R, which is transmitted to DCB (DCBt,
DCBe) and DCT (DCTt, DCTe), respectively (Fig. 13). It is worth remarking that only IN
(global variables xMB and global information iMB) are considered because only hierarchical
contexts are addressed in the proposed MPM-SC-CP with only one cycle instruction-reaction
(IN-R). This means that although several Rs may exist, they do not affect the established exe-
cution sequence of the several DCs that form part of the SC-CP process because they are
executed just once. Only the interdependence criterion is affected if these Rs exist.
In the second step of Block 2, the integrated evaluation of the performance of the whole
SC-CP process is made (Fig. 14).
Three performance indicators are proposed to evaluate global SC performance:
1. Total criterion (Ctotal): as a measure of a global objective.
2. Total solution time (Ttotal): as a measure of the global decision-making time.
3. Total consistency (COtotal): as a measure of the degree of compliance of DCB in relation
to the global decisions transmitted from DCT.
To calculate the total criterion (Ctotal), only the local criterion and the criterion due to
the interdependencies with DCT are computed. In this case, the interdependence criterion in
respect to DCB is not considered because this value is the consequence of an ANT. So its true
value is given when these are subsequently solved by DCB. The ANT of the DCB decision
models, particularly of their individual criterion, enables the joint criterion to improve, and
can even result in the deterioration of which that anticipates them. If a criterion is due to
interdependencies with DCT, it means that some of the global variables transmitted as IN
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
281
Fig. 12 Input information of a decision activity
Fig. 13 Output information generated by a decision activity
123

282
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Fig. 14 Integrated evaluation of the performance of the SC-CP process
have altered; that is, there is an R that entails a cost. However, the process continues to
be executed/solved because the cost of ‘managing’ such alterations (with different nuances
depending on whether it is temporal or spatial interdependence) is precisely the criterion
due to the interdependencies with DCT which have, on the other hand, made it possible to
improve the joint criterion. It must be stated that, as previously mentioned, only hierarchical
contexts with just one cycle IN-R are considered.
The total solution time (Ttotal) is deﬁned as the sum of the solution time of the individual
DC models developed for each DA of the SC-CP process.
Total consistency (COtotal) is deﬁned as ‘the weight of the sum of the criterion due to
interdependences with DCT compared to the sum of the local criterion’. This performance
measure evaluates the degree of compliance in relation to the global variables transmitted
as IN from DCT or, instead, how it affects the fact that DCT admits (in order to optimise
the joint criterion) that DCB can have reactions, normally bounded by some coordination
mechanisms, as in the case of global information, which is also transmitted from DCT as the
maximum and minimum permitted deviations and a cost derives from them.
All this makes it possible to not only evaluate the current situation, but for it to also be used
as a ‘simulator’ of different collaborative planning scenarios. These changes can be more or
less profound; for example, when changing the interdependence relationships between the
DC or varying the execution sequence of different DA, by redeﬁning fewer DCs at a certain
decision level to make the centralisation in decision making greater.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
283
4 Application of MPM-SC-CP to a ceramic supply chain
The proposed MPM-SC-CP was applied to a real case in a ceramic SC, which involves a
Spanish Industrial Group (IG) that designs, manufactures, markets and distributes different
ceramic products.
Figure 15 shows the physical characterisation of this SC from the resources point of
view. In the production stage (MAN), there are several production plants (M1-M2-M3) that
belong to the IG, and manufacture a wide-ranging catalogue of ﬁnished goods, some of which
are subcontracted (lower-value ones) to an independent plant (M4). Each production plant
follows a make-to-stock strategy and can be classiﬁed as a hybrid ﬂow shop comprising
several stages, of which the presses-glazing lines and kilns are the most critical ones from the
planning point of view. These production plants are supplied with various raw materials from
different suppliers (SUP: S1-S2-S3), some of which also belong to the IG. Inthe distribution
stage, the ﬁnished goods from the production plants to end customers are distributed in
several substages by some distribution centres. The ﬂow from the central warehouses (DIS1)
is divided among the independent distributors (50% to exports, 25% to the national market),
the logistics centres (10%, only the national market), and full orders are sent directly to
constructionﬁrms(15%).Someﬂowoccursfromthecentralwarehousestotheendcustomers,
but it is minimal. Logistics centres (DIS2) supply ﬁnished goods to the shops (demand) that
have been previously assigned to them. These shops, with no storage capacity, attend to end
customers’ demands and some small orders from constructions ﬁrms. Some independent
shops are also supplied by independent distributors that are not hererin considered.
Figure 16 shows a physical characterisation of this SC from the items point of view.
Eight points of sale are allocated in the two central warehouses and the six shops where
214 ﬁnal products are marketed. These ﬁnal products are grouped into four families thatare
manufactured on each production line and in all the kilns in the plants. These product families
are, in turn, composed of six different raw materials that are grouped into three types: white
clay, red clay and glaze.
Fig. 15 Ceramic SC physical characterisation (resources)
123

284
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Fig. 16 Ceramic SC physical characterisation (items)
As stated in Sect. 3.1, the MPM-SC-CP application lies in, on the one hand, obtaining the
ceramic SC-CP process model and, on the other hand, all the aspects and concepts developed
within the framework for the analytical modelling of the SC-CP process.
To gain a better understanding of the MPM-SC-CP application, some steps to obtain the
SC-CP process model are presented.
One important intermediate step concerns the identiﬁcation of the DCs at the tactical and
operational decision levels, as depicted in Figs. 17 and 18, respectively. As these ﬁgures
depict, the decisions made throughout the SC cover three different transformation activities
(TA): production (P), transport (arches) and storage (S). A DC can make decisions in one
of these TA or more. Depending on which decision level DCs are placed (tactical or opera-
tional), these decisions will be related more to planning the capacity of or executing the TA,
respectively. Finally, points of sale are also represented by circles at both the decision levels.
Fig. 17 Identifying the DCs at the tactical decision level
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
285
Fig. 18 Identifying the DCs at the operational decision level
Once the different DCs have been identiﬁed at each decision level, the ceramic SC-CP
process is obtained based on a set of interdependence relationships and speciﬁc rules among
the DCs placed at the same (spatial) and different (temporal) decision levels. This SC-CP
process is made up of some DA with a certain sequence. The decisions in each DA are
made by a DC that, in turn, can be placed at either the tactical decision level (TDL) or the
operational decision level (ODL).
Only a subprocess of the initial ceramic SC-CP process is selected for the MPM-SC-CP
application. This subprocess comprises the following DAs (Fig. 19):
Fig. 19 Application scope of the ceramic SC-CP process
123

286
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
• DA (1) executed by TDL-DC4. Here the tactical decisions about production, transport and
storage that affect plants, warehouses and logistic centres are made
• DA (2) executed by ODL-DC6. Here the operational decisions about transport and storage
that affect logistic centres and shops are made
• DA (3) executed by ODL-DC4. Here operational decisions about the production, transport
and storage that affect plants and warehouses are made
4.1 MPM-SC-CP application_Block 1
Block I of MPM-SC-CP indicates the steps to be followed by each DC to develop an MILP
model. In this case, the selected DCs are TDL-DC4, ODL-DC6 and ODL-DC4; that is, those
DCs in charge of decision making in the selected DA of the ceramic SC-CP process (Fig. 19).
4.2 Block 1: Step 1
In the ﬁrst step, a qualitative characterisation of each DC and the information exchanged
among them must be performed.
On the one hand, a qualitative characterisation comprising the microdecision view of each
DC, complemented with those aspects anticipated from DCB (Table 5, 6 and 7), is carried
out. It must be noted that those DC with which some degree of integration exists, but are
beyond the scope of the selected ceramic SC-CP subprocess, appear as ‘italics’.
A qualitative characterisation of the information exchanged between TDL-DC4, ODL-
DC6 and ODL-DC4 must also be performed. Figure 20 and Table 8 show this information
at the macro- and microlevel, respectively.
4.3 Block 1: Step 2
This second step corresponds to the formulation of the MILP models for each DC.
Given its length and to make reading the paper easier, only the methodological MILP
formulation of ODL-DC6 (also represented as ODC6) is shown.
An MILP collaborative-model is developed to solve the planning problem of ODC6. It
provides a deterministic model and collects either temporal or spatial interdependencies with
DCTt (TDC4) and DCBe (ODC4), respectively. In this case, no interdependence exists with
either DCTe (no IN is received from the other DC regarding ‘purchase quantities’) or DCBt
(no decision level is considered below the operational one).
The indices, sets of indices, parameters, and decision variables are described in Tables 9,
10, 11 and 12 respectively. Local and interdependence components are differenciated.
The criterion (objective function) expresses the total net proﬁt over the time periods and
is calculated by substractingthe total costs from the total revenues. It is, in turn, made up of
local and interdependence components.
Regarding the local components (Table 13–(1)), some costs and revenues are considered.
Costs comprise the variable and ﬁxed transport costs of the ﬁnal products from warehouses
to logistic centres, the inventory costs in logistic centres, the variable transport costs from
logistic centres to shops, the purchase costs in warehouses and backorder costs in shops.
Revenues comprise those produced by the sales made in shops.
Regarding the interdependence components (Table 13–(2)), only the cost due to the pos-
itive deviation in relation to the target capacity already decided in TDC4 is computed.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
287
Table 5 Qualitative characterisation of TDL-DC4
TDL-DC4: Qualitative characterisation
Temporal Characteristics
Horizon:1 year; Planning Period: 1 month; Replanning Period:
1 month
Decision variables
Local
Production capacity (number of shifts on lines
and activation/deactivation of kilns), transport
capacity between warehouses and logistics
centres (number of trucks)
Interdependence
Temporal
ODL-DC4: Anticipation of the
quantity of each raw material
to be purchased from each
supplier, quantity to be
subcontracted from each family
in all the warehouses, quantity
(kg) of each raw material to be
transported from each supplier
to each plant, inventory of each
raw material in every plant,
quantity to be produced for
each family in lines and kilns,
decisions about changeovers on
lines and kilns, inventory of
each family in all the plants
(intermediate inventory
between lines and kilns),
quantity of each family to be
transported from plants to
warehouses, inventory of each
family in all the warehouses,
quantity to be sold and
backordered of each family in
each warehouse to construction
ﬁrms and independent
distributors
ODL-DC6: Anticipation of the
quantity of each family to be
transported between
warehouses and logistics
centres, inventory of each
family in all the logistic
centres, quantity to be sold and
backordered of each family in
logistics centres to the set of
shops assigned to them
Criterion
Local
Minimise Costs: Production capacity (number of
shifts on lines and activation/deactivation of
kilns), transport capacity between warehouses
and logistics centres (number of trucks)
Interdependence
Temporal
ODL-DC4: Maximise Proﬁts
(incomes—costs):
123

288
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 5 (continued)
TDL-DC4: Qualitative characterisation
Incomes: Anticipation of sales of
families in warehouses
Costs: Anticipation of purchasing
each raw material from every
supplier by subcontracting each
family in all the warehouses,
transporting each raw material
from each supplier to all the
plants, storing each raw
material in all the plants,
changeovers of families in lines
and kilns, storing each family
in all the plants (intermediate
storage between lines and
kilns), transporting each family
from plants to warehouses,
inventory of families in
warehouses, backorders of
families in warehouses to
construction ﬁrms and
independent distributors
ODL-DC6: Maximise Proﬁts
(incomes—costs):
Incomes: Anticipation of sales of
families in logistics centres to
the set of stores assigned to
them
Costs: Anticipation of
transporting each family
between warehouses and
logistics centres, inventory of
each family in all the logistic
centres, backorders of families
in logistics centres to the set of
stores assigned to them
Decision ﬁeld
Local
Restrictions of the capacity ﬂow control, the
minimum number of periods and the maximum
capacity on lines and kilns, the maximum
number of trucks available for each route
The former is subject to some restrictions that shape the decision ﬁeld, which is made up
of local (Table 14–(3–10)), interdependence (Table 15–(11–13)), logical (Table 16–(14–15))
and technical (Table 16–(16–17)) components.
Regarding the local components, the following restrictions are considered: the maximum
quantities (weight) of the ﬁnal products to be transported between warehouses and logis-
tics centres (Table 14–(3)), the conservation ﬂow of the ﬁnal products in logistics centres
(Table 14–(4)), the maximum quantities of the ﬁnal products to be stored in logistics cen-
tres (Table 14–(5)), the safety stocks in logistics centres (Table 14–(6)), the ﬁnal products
transported from a certain warehouse to each logistic centre equals the purchased quantity
(Table 14–(7)), the ﬁnal products transported to a certain shop from each logistic centre equal
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
289
Table 5 (continued)
TDL-DC4: Qualitative characterisation
Interdependence
Temporal
ODL-DC4: Restrictions of
anticipating the inventory
balance of the raw material in
plants, the maximum inventory
of the raw material in plants,
the minimum production
batches of families on lines and
kilns, the minimum and
maximum consumption
capacities of different families
(related to the efﬁcient use of
lines and kilns and their
capacity, respectively),
changeovers control of the
families on lines and in ilns,
productive performance
(different qualities and losses)
of lines and kilns, inventory
balance of the ﬁnal products in
warehouses, the maximum
inventory of the families in
warehouses, the maximum
backorders of the families in
warehouses to construction
ﬁrms and independent
distributors
ODL-DC6: Restrictions of
anticipating the maximum
quantities (weight) of each
family to be transported
between warehouses and
logistics centres,
ﬂow-conservation of the
families in logistics centres, the
maximum inventory of each
family in logistics centres, the
maximum backorders of the
families in logistics centres to
the set of stores assigned to
each one
Spatial
TDL-DC1; TDL-DC2;
TDL-DC3: Restrictions of
anticipating the lower/higher
bounds of the raw material/s to
be purchased from suppliers
TDL-DC5: Restrictions of
anticipating lower/higher
bounds of subcontracted
families
123

290
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 6 Qualitative characterisation of ODL-DC6
ODL-DC6: Qualitative characterisation
Temporal characteristics
Horizon:1 month; Planning Period: 1 week; Replanning Period:
1 week
Decision Variables
Local
Quantity to of each ﬁnal product be purchased
in each warehouse, quantity of each ﬁnal
product to be transported between warehouses
and logistics centres, inventory of each ﬁnal
product in every logistic centre, quantity of
each ﬁnal product to be transported between
logistics centres and shops, quantity of each
ﬁnal product to be sold in all the shops,
quantities of each ﬁnal product to be
backordered in all the shops
Criterion
Local
Maximizs Proﬁts (incomes—costs):
Incomes: Sales of ﬁnal products in stores
Costs: Purchase of ﬁnal products in
warehouses, transporting ﬁnal products
between warehouses and logistics centres,
ﬁxed cost of transport due to the use of lorries,
inventory of the ﬁnal products in logistics
centres, transporting the ﬁnal products
between logistics centres and shops,
backordering the ﬁnal products in shops
Decision ﬁeld
Local
Restrictions of the maximum quantities
(weight) of the ﬁnal products to be transported
between warehouses and logistics centres, the
conservation ﬂow of the ﬁnal products in
logistics centres, the maximum inventory of
the ﬁnal products in logistics centres, the
safety stocks in logistics centres, the
maximum backordering quantities of the ﬁnal
products in shops
Interdependence
Spatial
ODL-DC4: Restrictions of
anticipating lower bounds in
relation to the quantity of the
ﬁnal products to be purchased
in warehouses
the sales quantity (Table 14–(8)), the backorders that may exist in shops (Table 14–(9)), and
the maximum quantities of the ﬁnal products backordered in shops (Table 14–(10)).
Regarding the interdependence components, the following restrictions are considered:
As regards DCTt, and more particularly TDL-DC4, restrictions concern the disaggre-
gation aspects elated to the target transport capacity (conditioned by the number of hired
trucks) between warehouses and logistics centres (Table 15–(11)) and the maximum positive
deviation in relation to that target transport capacity (Table 15–(12)).
As regards DCBe, and more particularly ODL-DC4, restrictions concern anticipating
lower bounds in relation to the quantity of ﬁnal products to be purchased in warehouses
(Table 15–(13)).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
291
Table 7 Qualitative characterisation of ODL-DC4
ODL-DC4: Qualitative characterisation
Temporal characteristics
Horizon:1 month; Planning Period: 1 week; Replanning Period:
1 week
Decision variables
Local
Quantity of each raw material to be purchased
from each supplier, quantity of each ﬁnal
product to be subcontracted in each
warehouse, quantity (kg) of each raw material
to be transported from each supplier to all the
plants, inventory of each raw material in every
plant, quantity of each ﬁnal product to be
produced on each line, overtime capacity to be
assigned to each line, changeovers of the
families and ﬁnal products on lines, quantity of
each ﬁnal product to be transported from each
plant to all the warehouses, inventory of each
ﬁnal product in all the warehouses, quantity of
each ﬁnal product to be sold in each warehouse
to every logistic centre, construction ﬁrms and
independent distributors, quantity to be
backordered from each ﬁnal product in all the
warehouses to construction ﬁrms and
independent distributors
Criterion
Local
Maximise Proﬁts (incomes—costs):
Incomes: Sales of ﬁnal products to logistic
centres, construction ﬁrms and independent
distributors
Costs: Purchase of raw materials,
subcontracting ﬁnal products, transporting raw
materials from each supplier to every plant,
inventory of the raw materials in each plant,
production of the ﬁnal products on lines,
overtime capacity on lines, changeovers of the
families and ﬁnal products on lines,
transporting ﬁnal products from plants to
warehouses, inventory of the ﬁnal products in
warehouses, backorders of ﬁnal products to
construction ﬁrms and independent distributors
Decision ﬁeld
Local
Restrictions of the inventory balance of the
raw materials in plants, safety stock of raw
material, the maximum limit of the normal and
overtime capacities on lines, changeovers
control of families and products, productive
performance of lines, the minimum production
batches, inventory balance of the ﬁnal products
in warehouses, the maximum limit of
backorders of ﬁnal products to construction
ﬁrms and independent distributors
123

292
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 7 (continued)
ODL-DC4: Qualitative characterisation
Imterdependence
Spatial
TDL-DC1; TDL-DC2;
TDL-DC3: Restrictions of
anticipating the maximum
limits in respect to the quantity
of raw material to be
purchased from suppliers
TDL-DC5: Restrictions of
anticipating the maximum
limits in relation to the
quantity of ﬁnal products to be
subcontracted
Fig. 20 Information exchanged between TDL-DC6, ODL-DC6 and ODL-DC4 (macrolevel)
Additionally, some logical restrictions are contemplated; for example, if a certain ﬁnal
product in a warehouse is purchased or not (Table 16–(14)), or if any ﬁnal product is trans-
ported from a certain warehouse to a given logistic centre (Table 16–(15)). Finally, some
technical restrictions, such as the non-negativity ones (Table 16–(16)) and the deﬁnition of
binary variables (Table 16–(17)), are formulated .
4.4 MPM-SC-CP application_Block 2
In Block 2 of MPM-SC-CP, an integrated solution and the evaluation of the whole SC-CP
process are conducted (Fig. 21).
In the ﬁrst step, MILP models are individually solved and validated according to the
ceramic SC-CP process sequence. The sequence for the selected subprocess is TDL-DC4,
ODL-DC6 and ODL-DC4, which was identiﬁed. Therefore ODL-OD6 is solved after TDL-
CD4 and before ODL-DC4, as seen in Fig. 19.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
293
Table 8 Information exchanged between TDL-DC6, ODL-DC6 and ODL-DC4 (microlevel)
Information exchanged between DCs
DC of
origin
Interdependence
Type
Instructions (IN)
DC of
destination
Input Information
(Interdependence
Parameters—IN)
Global
Decisions
Global
Information
TDl-DC4
Temporal
Transport
capacity
between each
warehouse /
logistics
centre for
every month
of the annual
horizon
The
maximum
allowed
deviation
in relation
to
transport
capacity
ODL-DC6
Transport capacity
between each
warehouse /
logistics centre
for every week
of the monthly
horizon
Cost of
deviation
in relation
to
transport
capacity
The maximum
allowed
deviations and
their costs
Production
capacity on
each line for
every month
of the annual
horizon
The
maximum
and
minimum
allowed
deviations
in relation
to the
“targeted”
inventory
ODL-DC4
Production
capacity on each
line for every
week of the
monthly horizon
‘Target’
inventory of
each family in
each
warehouse for
each month of
the annual
horizon
The ‘target’
inventory of each
ﬁnal product in
all the
warehouses for
every month of
the annual
horizon
Cost of these
deviations
respect the
“targeted”
inventory
Spatial
Quantity of the
raw material
(approximate)
to be
purchased
every month
of the annual
horizon
TDL-DC1
TDL-DC2
TDL-DC3
Quantity of the
raw material
(approximate) to
be sold every
month of the
annual horizon
Firstly, all the input information (input parameters, and either local or due to interdepen-
dences) must be collected. Two types of interdependence parameters are considered: the IN
transmitted from DCT and the ANT of DCB (Fig. 22). Some interdependence parameters
exist as a result of the IN transmitted from DCT, which is temporal in this case (TDL-DC4),
as well as others related to the ANT of DCB, which is spatial in this case (ODL-DC4).
In Table 17 the interdependence information due to the instructions transmitted from CDT
is explicitly shown at the microlevel.
123

294
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 8 (continued)
Information exchanged between DCs
DC of
origin
Interdependence
Type
Instructions (IN)
DC of
destination
Input Information
(Interdependence
Parameters—IN)
Global
Decisions
Global
Information
Quantity of the
families
(approximate)
that are
intended to be
subcontracted
every month
of the annual
horizon
TDL-DC5
Quantity of the
families
(approximate) to
be subcontracted
every month of
the annual
horizon
ODL-DC6
Spatial
Quantity of the
ﬁnal products
to be
purchased
every week of
the monthly
horizon
ODL-DC4
Quantity of the
ﬁnal products to
be sold every
week of the
monthly horizon
ODL-DC4
Spatial
Quantity of the
ﬁnal products
to be
purchased
every week of
the onthly
horizon
ODL-DC1
ODL-
DC2
ODL-
DC3
Quantity of the
ﬁnal products to
be sold every
week of the
monthly horizon
Quantity of the
ﬁnal products
to be
purchased
every week of
the monthly
horizon
ODL-DC5
Quantity of the
ﬁnal products to
be sold every
week of the
monthly horizon
In this case, a single instruction is received from TDL-DC4, which includes both the
interdependence parameter corresponding to the transport capacity already established at the
tactical level between warehouses and logistics centres ºctrd1,d2,t (from the global variable
CTRd1,d2,t) and the global information (parameters) regarding an allowed positive deviation
cost (costctrd1,d2 +) and the maximum allowed deviation (maxctr d1,d2 +).
Only ﬁve ﬁnal products are considered, which approximately represent 10% of the total
transport capacity. Thus the interdependence parameter that derives from the global variable
CTRd1,d2,t is deﬁned as ºctrd1,d2,t * 0.1.
Havingcollectedalltheinputinformationduetothelocalandinterdependenceparameters,
the MILP model of ODL-DC6 is solved, and the decision variable values and the criterion
value are computed by distinguishing between local and due to interdependencies.
The decision variable values that optimise the ODL-DC6 MILP model are not shown in
this work so that this paper is not too lengthy,and because the main purpose is the integrated
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
295
Table 9 Local and interdependence indices
Local Indices
Items
fp
Final products (fp  1…fp)
Resources
d2
Nodes from distribution stage 2 (logistic centres) (d2  1… d2)
sp
Selling points (sp  1…sp)
Planiﬁcation Periods
t′
Weeks (t´  1…t´)
Interdependence Indices
Items
–
Resources
d1
Nodes from distribution stage 1 (warehouses) (d1  1… d1)
tdc
Tactical decision centres (tdc  1…tdc)
odc
Operational decision centres (odc  1…odc)
Planning periods
t
Months (t  1…t)
solution and evaluation of the ceramic SC-CP process. So only the ﬁnal criterion value of
ODL-DC6, plus TDL-DC4 and ODL-DC4, are shown.
The criterion aims to maximise the monthly beneﬁts, which are calculated from incomes
andcosts.Tables18and19showthedetailedbreakdownofboththelocalandinterdependence
costs, respectively.
The values of the local and interdepence criterion are as follows:
The value of the local criterion ClODC6 of ZODC6 is:
CODC6
l

Local BeneﬁtODC6

[Local Incomes −Local Costs]ODC6

[38220.7140 −35612.3518]  2608.3622 Euros/monthThe value of the interdependence
criterion CiODC6 of ZODC6 is:
CODC6
i
 CODC6, T
i
 CODC6, Tt
i
 CODC6, TDC4
i
 Interdependence BeneﬁtODC6, TDC4


Interdependence Incomes −Interdependence Costs
ODC6, TDC4
 [0 −102.5420]  −102.542 euros/month
Tables 20 and 21 show the total criterion value obtained for ODL-DC6 and the computating
effort, respectively. It is noteworthy that the short solution time of ODL-DC6 is due to its
simplicity compared to TDL-DC4 and ODL-DC4, which account for much more decision
variables and restrictions because production activities take place. In any case, the main
purpose of MPM-SC-CP described in this paper is covered.
Finally after solving the MILP model of ODL-DC6, a certain IN is transmitted to DCB,
which is spatial in this case (ODL-DC4). Figure 23 and Table 22 reﬂect the interdependence
output information of ODL-DC6 at the micro- and the macrolevel, respectively.
123

296
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 10 Local and interdependence sets
Local Sets
Basic local sets
Items
FP
The set of ﬁnal products
Resources
D2
The set of logistic centres
SP
The set of selling points
Planiﬁcation Periods
T′
The set of weeks (operational horizon)
Relational local sets
Items-Resources
FP(d2)
The set of ﬁnal products to transport to each logistic centre
FP(sp)
The set of ﬁnal products to transport to each selling point
Resources-Resources
SP (d2)
The set of selling points supplied by each logistic centre
D2 (sp)
The set of logistic centres that supply each selling point
Interdependence sets
Basic interdependence sets
Items
–
Resources
D1
The set of warehouses
TDC
The set of tactical decision centres
ODC
The set of operational decision centres
Planning periods
T′
The set of months (tactical horizon)
Relational interdependence sets
Items-Resources
D1 (fp)
The set of warehouses that supply each ﬁnal product
Resources-Resources
D1(d2)
The set of warehouses that supply each logistic centre
D2(d1)
The set of logistic centres supplied by each warehouse
D1(odc)
The set of warehouses that belong to the scope of each operational decision centre
Planning Periods-Planning Periods
T′(t)
The set of weeks of each month
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
297
Table 11 Local and interdependence parameters
Local Parameters
Scope stages / Processing Activities
Distribution Stage 1
Transport
vfp
The weight of each ﬁnal product
costtr fp,d1,d2
The transport cost of each ﬁnal product from warehouses to logistic centers
costftr d1,d2
The transport ﬁxed cost
Distribution Stage 2
Storage
cin d2
The storage capacity of each logistic centre
costin fp,d2
The inventory cost of each ﬁnal product in each logistic centre
ss fp,d2
The safety stock of each ﬁnal product in each logistic centre
in0 fp,d2
The initial inventory of each ﬁnal product in each logistic centre
Transport
costtr fp, d2,sp
The transport cost of each ﬁnal product from logistic centres to selling points
Border / Interconnecting Activities
Purchase
ODC
costpu fp, d1, odc
The purchase cost of each ﬁnal product in each warehouse that belongs to the scope of
each operational decision center
Sales
Selling Points (no ODC)
dem fp,sp,t´
The demand of each ﬁnal product at each selling point every week
maxsa−fp,sp
The maximum backordered quantity of each ﬁnal product at each selling point
costsa−fp,sp
The backorder cost of each ﬁnal product at each selling point
inc fp,sp
The incomes of each ﬁnal product at each selling point
Interdependence parameters
DCTt
TDC4
ºctr d1,d2,t
The ‘target’ transport capacity between each warehouse and each logistic
centres every month
ºmaxctr + d1,d2
The maximum positive deviation on the ‘target’ transport capacity
between each warehouse and each logistic centre in a week
ºcostctr + d1,d2
The cost of the positive deviation on the ‘target’ transport capacity
between each warehouse and each logistic centre in a week
DCBe
ODC
ant_lminsa fp,d1,odc
The anticipation of the minimum selling lot of each ﬁnal product in each
warehouse that belongs to the scope of each operational decision centre
123

298
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 12 Local and interdependence variables
Local variables
Scope stages / Processing Activities
Distribution Stage 1
Transport
TR fp,d1,d2,t´
The amount of each ﬁnal product to transport between each warehouse and each
logistic centre every week
YTR d1,d2,t´
The binary variable with a value of 0 if transport between warehouses and logistic
centres every week exists, and 0 otherwise
Distribution Stage 2
Storage
INfp,d2,t´
The inventory of each ﬁnal product in each logistic centre every week
Transport
TR fp,d2,sp,t´
The amount of each ﬁnal product to transport from each logistic centre to each
selling point every week
Border / Interconnecting Activities
Purchase
ODC
PU fp,d1,odc,t´
The amount of each ﬁnal product to purchase in each warehouse belonging to the
scope of each operational decision centre every week
YPU fp,d1,odc,t´
The binary variable with a value of 1 if a ﬁnal product is purchased in a warehouse
belonging to the scope of each operational decision centre every week, and 0
otherwise
Sales
Selling Points
SA fp,sp,t´
The amount of each ﬁnal product to sell at each selling point every week
SA−fp,sp,t´
The amount of each ﬁnal product to backorder at each selling point every week
Interdependence variables
DCTt
TDC4
CTR d1,d2,t´
The consumed transport capacity between warehouses and logistic centre every week
CTR+ d1d2,t´
Positive deviation on the ‘target’ transport capacity between each warehouse and each
logistic centre every week
DCBe
ODC
—
As shown, ODL-DC6 transmits an IN to ODL-DC4 (DCBe), which is made up of the
global variable corresponding to the purchase quantity target of each ﬁnal product in every
warehouse (PU pf,d1,t´). Although no global information exists in this case, previous ANT of
ODL-DC6 exists in relation to ODL-DC4.
After solving and validating the MILP models of TDL-DC4, ODL-DC6 and ODL-DC4,
an integrated evaluation of the performance of the whole ceramic SC-CP process is carried
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
299
Table 13 Local and
interdependence criterion
Local criterion
Max [Z] 
Scope stages / Processing Activities
Distribution Stage 1
Transport
−
t′

d1

d2∈D2(d1)

f p∈F P(d2)
costtr f p, d1, d2 ∗T R f p, d1, d2, t′ −

t′

d1

d2∈D2(d1)
cost f trd1, d2 ∗Y T Rd1, d2, t′
Distribution Stage 2
Storage
−
t′

d2

f p∈F P(d2)
costin f p, d2 ∗I N f p, d2, t′
Transport
−
t′

d2

sp∈SP(d2)

f p∈F P(sp)
costtr f p, d2, sp ∗T R f p, d2, sp, t′
Border / Interconnecting Activities
Purchase
ODC
−
t′

odc

d1∈D1(odc)

f p∈F P(d2)
costpu f p, d1, odc ∗PU f p, d1, odc, t′
Sales
Selling Points (no ODC)

t′

sp

f p∈F P(sp)
inc f p, sp ∗SA f p, sp, t′ −

t′

sp

f p∈F P(sp)
costsa−
f p, sp ∗SA−
f p, sp, t′(1)
Interdependence Criterion
DCTt
TDC4
−
t′

d2

d1∈D1(d2)
costctr+
d1, d2 ∗CT R+
d1, d2, t′
DCBe
ODC4
– (2)
out in the second step. As indicated in MPM-SC-CP, three performance indicators evaluate
its global performance: total criterion, solution time and consistency, as shown in Fig. 24.
On the results, it is noted that as performance indicator COtotal is below 1, it means that
while computing Ctotal a certain component due to the interdependence criterion in relation
to CDT came into play, but it does not have much weight in relation to Ctotal in this case.
So the probability of the previously calculated/predicted Ctotal is high, that is, 13,788.2934
euros/month.
123

300
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 14 Local decision ﬁeld
Local decision ﬁeld
Scope stages / Processing Activities
Distribution Stage 1
Transport

f p∈F P(d1)
(T R f p, d1, d2, t′ ∗v f p) ≤CT Rd1, d2, t′, ∀d1, d2 ∈D2(), t′(3)
Storage

d1∈D1(d2)
T R f p, d2, t′ + I N f p, d2, t′−1 

sp∈SP(d2)
T R f p, d2, sp, t + I N f p, d2, t′, ∀d2, f p ∈F P(d2), t′(4)

f p∈F P(d2)
I N f p, d2, t′ ≤cind2, ∀d2, t′(5)
I N f p, d2, t′ ≥ss f p, d2, ∀d2, f p ∈F P(d2), t′(6)
Transport
–
Border / Interconnecting Activities
Purchase
ODC
PU f p, d1, odc, t′ 

d2∈D2(d1)
T R f p, d1, d2, t′, ∀f p, d1 ∈D1( f p), t′(7)
Sales
Selling Points (no ODC)
T R f p, d2, sp, t′  SA f p, sp, t′, ∀sp, d2 ∈D2(sp), f p ∈F P(sp), t′(8)
SA f p, sp, t + SA−
f p, sp, t  dem f p, sp, t + SA−
f p, sp, t−1, ∀f p, sp, t(9).
SA−
f p, sp, t ≤maxsa−
f p, sp ∗dem f p, sp, t, ∀f p, sp, t(10)
Table 15 Interdependence decision ﬁeld
Interdependence decision ﬁeld
DCTt
TDC4
CT R+
d1, d2, t′ ≤◦maxctr+
d1, d2 ∗CT Rd1, d2, t′, ∀d1, d2, t′(12)
DCBe
ODC4
PU f p, d1, odc, t ≥ant_lminsa. f p, d1, odc4 ∗Y PU f p, d1, odc4, t′, ∀f p, d1 ∈D1( f p), t′(13)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
301
Table 16 Logical and technical decision ﬁeld
Logical decision ﬁeld
PU f p, d1, odc4, t′ ≥M1 ∗Y PU f p, d1, odc4, t′, ∀f p, d1 ∈D1( f p), t′(14)

f p∈F P(d2)
T R f p, d1, d2, t′ ≤M2 ∗Y T Rd1, d2, t, ∀d1 ∈D1( f p), d2 ∈D2(d1), t′(15)
Technical decision ﬁeld
CO f p, d1, odc, t′, T R f p, d1, d2, t′, I N f p, d2, t′, T R f p, d2, sp, t′, SA f p, sp, t′, SA−
f p, sp, t′ ≥0(16)
CO f p, d1, odc, t′, Y T Rd1, d2, t′ ≥0(binary)(17)
Fig. 21 Integrated solution and evaluation of the whole ceramic SC-CP process
Fig. 22 Interdependence input information (macrolevel) of ODL-DC6
123

302
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Table 17 Interdependence Input Information of ODL-DC6 (microlevel)
Input Information/micro DA/ODL-DC6
DA/DCTt
DA/TDL-DC4
IN
xTDL-DC4,ODL-DC6
ºctr d1,d2,t * 0.1
iTDL-DC4,ODL-DC6
costx+d1,d2,t
costctr+d1,d2
maxx+d1,d2,t
maxctr+d1,d2
others
Table 18 Solution of the ODL-DC6 MILP model: Local Costs
Local Cost of ODL-DC6
Activity type
Stage/Substage
Speciﬁc PA/IA
Cost Items
Value (m)
Transformation
Activities (TA):
DIS1
Transport
Variable transport
cost of the ﬁnal
products from
warehouses to
logistic centres
1982.2192
Fixed transport cost
from warehouses
to logistic centres
5500
DIS2
Storage
Inventory cost of the
ﬁnal products in
logistic centres
302.4275
Transport
Variable transport
cost of the ﬁnal
products from
logistic centres to
shops
452.0170
Interconnection
Activities (IA):
Purchasing
Purchase cost of the
ﬁnal products (in
warehouses)
27,248.0956
Sales
Backorder cost of
the ﬁnal products
(in shops)
127.5926
Total cost
35,612.3519
Table 19 Solution of the ODL-DC6 MILP model: Interdependence Costs
DCT Interdependence cost of ODL-DC6
DCT
T/ODL-DC no
Global variable
Deviation Cost ±
Value (m)
DCTt
TDL-DC4
Transport capacity of
each route between
warehouses and logistic
centres
Positive deviation
102.542
Total cost
102.542
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
303
Table 20 Solution of the ODL-DC6 MILP model: criterion Value
ODL-DC6 Criterion (Max. beneﬁts)
Local criterion
Interdependence criterion
Total
2608.362
−102.542
2585.8201
Table 21 Solution of the
ODL-DC6 MILP model:
computing effort
Computating effort of ODL-DC6
Iterations
396
Variables
636
Integers
64
Restrictions
676
Non-zeros
1635
Density
0.4
Solution time (in sec.)
0.08
Fig. 23 Interdependence output information of ODL-DC6 (macrolevel)
Table 22 Interdependence output information of ODL-DC6 (microlevel)
Output information/micro
DA/ODL-DC6
DA/DCBe
DA/ODL-DC4
IN
xODL-DC6,ODL-DC4
PUfp,d1,odc4,t´
iODL-DC6,ODL-DC4
costx+MB costx−MB
–
maxx+MB maxx−MB
–
others
–
Inthispaper,onlythecurrentceramicSC-CPprocessperformancewasevaluated,although
it can be used as a simulator of different collaborative planning scenarios.
Finally, a general overview of the MPM-SC-CP application to the ceramic SC is depicted
in Fig. 25.
123

304
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Fig. 24 Integrated evaluation of the performance of the ceramic SC-CP process
5 Results and discussion
As previously mentioned, given the very high magnitude of the analysed ceramic SC, only
one part of its SC-CP process was the target for the MPM-SC-CP application.
This subprocess comprises three DA, which are performed by three of the most relevant
decision centres. On the one hand, these DA give rise to a decision centre which, after some
proposed ‘improvements’, is centralised at a tactical level the operations of manufacturers,
warehouses and logistics centres (TDL-DC4); on the other hand, to two decision centres at
an operational level (ODL-DC6 and ODL-DC4) with the same actors that depend on one
another and also on the previous tactical one. Therefore, the selected subprocess includes
both the temporal and spatial integrations, which is one of the main contributions of this
paper.
The analysis of the microdecision view for the qualitative characterisation of these three
selected DCs means making changes about how to make decisions. These changes improve
the decision making in the collaborative contexts in which temporal and spatial interdepen-
denciestakeplace,andalsobecausetheymadesubsequentintegratedmathematicalmodelling
and solutions feasible.
The most relevant changes are the following:
• Modifying the temporal characteristics of TDL-DC4. Here it is advised to maintain the
1-year horizon, but with a monthly period (instead of an annual one) to allow more decision
points and a closer approximation to reality. For example, the monthly planning period
makes it possible to reﬂect more accurately on the changeovers of product families at a
tactical level and to, therefore, better estimate the necessary capacity and costs
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
305
Fig. 25 Overview of the MPM-SC-CP application to a ceramic SC
• Obtaining TDL-DC4 about manufacturing or subcontracting through a single step of tac-
tical decisions (dimensioning productive capacity). This is because these decisions are
closely linked with one another and are not simultaneously taken
• Explicitly incorporating TDL-DC4 for decisions about capacity sizing, and more specif-
ically the number of shifts and overtime per production line and decisions about the
activation/deactivation of kilns. This dimensioning was previously done implicitly with
the annual budget provided by senior management
• Adding for TDL-DC4 the decisions about the distribution stage because, at the tactical
level, they are not taken by assuming that its capacity is inﬁnite However, costs were
considered low when this stage was also contemplated. It is not difﬁcult to make this
changebecause,althoughtheplantsandlogisticscentresbelongtodifferententrepreneurial
entities, they form part of the same business group
123

306
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
• Explicitly modelling coordination mechanisms with raw material and ﬁnal product sup-
pliers through ‘interdependence’ restrictions
• Making a one-step deﬁnition of the decisions by ODL-DC4 (similarly to TDL-DC4), which
enbles the simultaneous durationation of the production capacity restrictions on different
lines imposed by TDL-DC4 and to maximise proﬁts beneﬁts
• Explicily modelling the changeovers of the ﬁnal products on lines to optimise costs and
capacity consumption
It must also be noted that for the solution/validation of the MILP models of the three
selected DCs, some simpliﬁcations are necessary. They affect ODL-DC6 and ODL-DC4
because the amount of data that they manage is substantially bigger than TDL-DC4 for being
in a lower aggregation state.
This is speciﬁcally reﬂected in the number of ﬁnal products considered for ODL-DC6 and
ODL-DC4 because they only account for approximately 10% of the total of each family. The
approximate ﬁgure of 10% is taken as representative when determining what percentage of
ﬁnal products are to be selected at the operational level (ODL-DC6 and ODL-DC4) over the
amount of ﬁnal products considered at the tactical level (TDL-DC4). This fact inﬂuences the
capacity restrictions that are considered when solving the MILP models of ODL-DC6 and
ODL-DC4 because they are calculated at the tactical level by TDL-DC4 for all the initial
214 ﬁnal products.
In any case, these simpliﬁcations are consistent with the proposed MPM-SC-CP because
the integrated solution and evaluation of the current ceramic SC’s collaborative performance
is the main objective, along with the inclusion of all the transmitted decisions between the
different DCs and their shared information.
6 Conclusions
Nowadays, SC decentralised decision making is the most usual situation in SC operations
planning. Different companies collaboratively plan to achieve a certain level of individual
and SC performance while maintaining a good customer service level.
In parallel, optimisation methods, and more particularly those based on mathematical
programming, are becoming increasingly more necessary in these collaborative contexts, in
which good SC efﬁciency must be achieved to survive in the competitive arena.
In this paper, a mathematical programming-based methodology for evaluating the per-
formance of supply chain collaborative planning scenarios is proposed (MPM-SC-CP). Two
main inputs feed the proposed MPM-SC-CP: a framework and an associated methodology.
They support the integrated conceptual and analytical modelling of the SC-CP process.
Although it is true that the use of mathematical programming for collaborative planning
has been conducted in many research works in the last decade, no explicit methodology that
capture the complexity of reality is described, which leads to sub-optimal results. Addition-
ally, reluctance to collaborate exists because potential beneﬁts are not known.
For all the above reasons, the main contributions of MPM-SC-CP are: ﬁrstly, it strongly
links the conceptual model of the SC-CP process with its mathematical-based programming
modelling by allow to fully capture the complexity of reality; secondly, the way these math-
ematical models are constructed makes their transferability to other collaborative situations
easier if some changes arise by enabling a quick evaluation of different collaborative scenar-
ios; ﬁnally, it addresses either the temporal or spatial interactions between the DCs placed at
different or the same tactical and operational decision levels, respectively.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
307
Some MPM-SC-CP assumptions are as follows: the different SC DCs make decisions
based on MILP models; an organisational context is considered; that is, the collaborative
decision process aims to fulﬁl a global common goal between the different DCs by coordi-
nation mechanisms, where no oportunistic behaviour exists; a hierarchical context with only
one cycle instruction-reaction.
Two main managerials insights can be extracted from this paper:
First, SC managers, jointly with the SC system designers, can use this methodology to
analyse in depth their current SC CP process, in a guided, structured and qualitative manner
so that the information embedded in the different views can be easily collected in order
to perform the mathematical programming (MILP)- based modelling. This initial analysis
not only helps SC managers to have a better understanding of the whole process and how
decisions are made but also can suggest them some changes, which arise because the data
are collected based on subsequent MILP modelling. These changes, agreed by all SC actors,
improve the decision making in the collaborative contexts in which temporal and spatial
interdependencies take place between the different decision centres.
Remark that this SC CP deﬁnition and integrated modelling is often the most time-
consuming phase. SC actors must reconsider some of the traditional agreed matters as well
as to qualitatively specify objectives and constraints. Regarding the input data, sometimes
are known and easily collected from the SC actors databases, sometimes have to be calcu-
lated and in other occasions have to be subjectively estimated as they represent priorities and
penalties.
Secondly, SC managers can use this methodology to trace economic consequences of
stablishing different collaborative schemes, that is, to know a priori which beneﬁts will be
reported. For that, the methodology allows to quantitatively evaluate the performance of
the current SC CP process, from the integrated execution of the MILP models as well as
potential future scenarios as the way these MILP models are constructed makes it easier
to implement any change, since they are strongly linked with the deﬁnition of the different
visions (physical, organisation, decisional and information). Basically, these scenarios affect
to the DC´s decision making sequence, the information exchanged and how this latter one is
incorporated into the models of other DC´s.
Finally, although MPM-SC-CP can be extrapolated to any industrial sector, it has been
implemented in a ceramic SC. The obtained results allowed not only the evaluation of current
ceramic SC-CP performance, but also the suggestion of some changes about decision making
and the interdependence relationships of some DCs because subsequent MILP modelling was
performed.
No different ceramic SC collaborative scenario was evaluated. Future research could eval-
uate them to see if they affect each SC view more or less profoundly: physical, organisation,
decision or informational. For example, centralising decisions at the tactical level to, thus,
lower the number of DCs or change the order in which the MILP models corresponding
to DCs are executed, or to increase disclosed information so that some DCs can be better
anticipated.
One very interesting line would be for some research works to manage the previously
mentioned assumptions.
Acknowledgements This research has been funded by the European Regional Development Fund (FEDER)
/ Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (MCI)—State Research Agency (AEI), within the framework of
the project entitled “Decision Making Integration of the Tactical-Operative Levels for Improving the Efﬁciency
of the Productive System in Industry 4.0 Environments (NIOTOME)” (Ref. RTI2018-102020-B-I00).
Funding Open Access funding provided thanks to the CRUE-CSIC agreement with Springer Nature.
123

308
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Acar, Y., & Atadeniz, S. N. (2015). Comparison of integrated and local planning approaches for the supply net-
work of a globally-dispersed enterprise. International Journal of Production Economics, 167, 204–219.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.05.028
Alarcón, Faustino, Francisco-Cruz Lario Esteban, Andrés Boza, and David Pérez Perales. 2007. “Propuesta
de Marco Conceptual Para El Modelado Del Proceso de Planiﬁcación Colaborativa de Operaciones En
Contextos de Redes de Suministro/Distribución (RdS/D).” In: Proceedings of I International Conference
on Industrial Engineering and Industrial Management, pp. 6–7.
Albrecht, M., & Stadtler, H. (2015). Coordinating decentralized linear programs by exchange of primal infor-
mation. European Journal of Operational Research, 247(3), 788–796. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2015.06.045
Alemany, M. M. E., Alarcón, F., Lario, F. C., & Boj, J. J. (2011). An application to support the temporal
and spatial distributed decision-making process in supply chain collaborative planning. Computers in
Industry, 62(5), 519–540. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2011.02.002
Alemany, M. M. E., Alarcón, F., Ortiz, A., & Lario, F. C. (2008). Order promising process for extended
collaborative selling chain. Production Planning and Control, 19(2), 105–131. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09537280801896011
Alemany, M. M. E., Alarcón, F., & Ortiz Bas, A. (2010). Impact of coordination mechanisms on the collabo-
rative planning process components. In IFIP AICT, 322, 185–192.
Almeida, R., Toscano, C., Azevedo, A. L., & Carneiro, L. M. (2012). A Collaborative Planning Approach
for Non-Hierarchical Production Networks. Intelligent Non-hierarchical Manufacturing Networks
(pp. 185–204). Ltd: John Wiley & Sons.
ASCM. 2022. “Association for Supply Chain Management.” 2022. https://www.ascm.org/corporate-transfor
mation/standards-tools/scor-ds/.
Bajgiran, O. S., Zanjani, M. K., & Nourelfath, M. (2016a). The value of integrated tactical planning optimiza-
tion in the lumber supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 171, 22–33. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.10.021
Bajgiran, S., Omid, M. K., & Zanjani, and Mustapha Nourelfath. (2016b). The Value of integrated tactical
planning optimization in the lumber supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 171,
22–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.10.021
Barbarosoglu, G., & Ozgur, D. (1999). Hierarchical design of an integrated production and 2- echelon distri-
bution system. European Journal of Operational Research, 118, 464–484.
Behnamian, J. (2014). Multi-cut Benders decomposition approach to collaborative scheduling. International
Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 28(11), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1080/0951192X.2014.
961963
Belavina, E and Karan G (2012). “The beneﬁts of decentralized decision-making in supply chains.” https://
doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2141214.
Berning, G., Brandenburg, M., Gürsoy, K., Mehta, V., & Tölle, F. J. (2002). An integrated system solution for
supply chain optimization in the chemical process industry. Or Spectrum, 24(4), 371–401. https://doi.
org/10.1007/S00291-002-0104-4
Bitran G.R and Tirupati D (1993) Hierarchical production planning, handbooks in OR&MS, In: Graves, S.C.
et al., Elsevier Science Publishers B.V
Bitran, G. R., Haas, E. A., & Hax, A. C. (1981). Hierarchical production planning—a single stage system.
Operations Research, 29, 717–774.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
309
Bueno, A., Filho, M. G., & Frank, A. G. (2020). Smart Production Planning and Control in the Industry
40 Context: A Systematic Literature Review. Computers and Industrial Engineering. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cie.2020.106774
Choi, T.-M., & Sethi, S. (2010). Int. J. production economics innovative quick response programs : A review.
Intern. Journal of Production Economics, 127(1), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2010.05.010
Craighead, C. W., Ketchen, D. J., & Darby, J. L. (2020). Pandemics and supply chain management research:
Toward a theoretical toolbox. Decision Sciences, 51(4), 838–866. https://doi.org/10.1111/DECI.12468
Cuenca, L., Andrés Boza, M. M. E., & Alemany, and Jos J.M. Trienekens. (2013). Structural elements of
coordination mechanisms in collaborative planning processes and their assessment through maturity
models: Application to a ceramic tile company. In Computers in Industry, 64, 898–911. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.compind.2013.06.019
Dudek, G., & Stadtler, H. (2007). Negotiation-based collaborative planning in divergent two-tier supply chains.
International Journal of Production Research, 45(2), 465–484.
Elmughrabi, W., Sassi, O. B., Dao, T. M., & Chabaane, A. (2020). Collaborative supply chain planning and
scheduling of construction projects. In IFAC-PapersOnLine, 53, 10761–10766. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ifacol.2020.12.2858
Erschler, J., Fontan, G., & Merce, C. (1986). Consistency of the disaggregation process in hierarchical planning.
Operations Research, 34, 464–469.
Eslikizi, S., Ziebuhr, M., Kopfer, H., & Buer, T. (2015). Shapley-based side payments and simulated annealing
for distributed lot-sizing. IFACPapersOnLine, 48(3), 1592–1597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2015.
06.313
Fernandes, L. J., Relvas, S., Alem, D., & Barbosa-Póvoa, A. P. (2016). Robust optimization for petroleum sup-
ply chain collaborative design and planning. In Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, 38, 1569–1574.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63428-3.50266-6
Freitas,D.C.D.,Oliveira,L.G.D.,&Alcântara,R.L.C.(2019).Atheoreticalframeworktoadoptcollaborative
initiatives in supply chains. Gestão & Produção. https://doi.org/10.1590/0104-530X-4194-19
Gaudreault, J., Forget, P., Frayret, J. M. J., Rousseau, A., Lemieux, S., & D’Amours, S. (2010). Distributed
operations planning in the softwood lumber supply chain: Models and coordination. International Journal
of Industrial Engineering: Theory, Applications and Practice, 17(3), 168–189.
Gupta, D., & Magnusson, T. (2005). The capacitated lot-sizing and scheduling problem with sequence-
dependent setup costs and setup times. Computers & Operations Research, 32, 727–747.
Hax, A.C. and Meal, H.C., (2009) Hierarchical integration of production planning and scheduling, http://www.
dspace.mit.edu, accessed: 15–11–2009.
Hernández, J. E., Alemany, M. M. E., Lario, F. C., & Poler, R. (2009). Scamm-Cpa: A supply chain agent-based
modelling methodology that supports a collaborative planning process. Innovar, 19(34), 99–120.
Hernández, J. E., Lyons, A. C., Mula, J., Poler, R., & Ismail, H. (2014a). Supporting the collaborative decision-
making process in an automotive supply chain with a multi-agent system. Production Planning and
Control, 25(8), 662–678. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2013.798086
Hernández, J. E., Lyons, A. C., Poler, R., Mula, J., & Goncalves, R. (2014b). A reference architecture for
the collaborative planning modelling process in multi-tier supply chain networks: A Zachman-based
approach. Production Planning and Control, 25, 1118–1134. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2013.80
8842
Hernández, J. E., Mula, J., Poler, R., & Lyons, A. C. (2014c). Collaborative planning in multi-tier supply chains
supported by a negotiation-based mechanism and multi-agent system. Group Decision and Negotiation,
23(2), 235–269. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10726-013-9358-2
Hollmann, R. L., Scavarda, L. F., & Thomé, A. M. T. (2015). Collaborative planning, forecasting and replenish-
ment: A literature review. International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management. https://
doi.org/10.1108/IJPPM-03-2014-0039
Homberger, J., Gehring, H., Buer, T. (2015). Integrating side payments into collaborative planning for the
distributed multi-level unconstrained lot sizing problem. In: T. X. Bui & R. H. Sprague (Eds.), 2015 48th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (Vol. 2015–March, pp. 1068–1077). IEEE. https://
doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2015.131
Ivanov, D., Tang, C. S., Dolgui, A., Battini, D., & Das, A. (2021). Researchers’ perspectives on industry
4.0: Multi-disciplinary analysis and opportunities for operations management. International Journal of
Production. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1798035
Kanda, A., & Deshmukh, S. G. (2008). Supply chain coordination: Perspectives, empirical studies and research
directions. International Journal of Production Economics, 115(2), 316–335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2008.05.011
123

310
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Kovács, A., Brown, K. N., & Tarim, S. A. (2009). An efﬁcient MIP model for the capacitated lot-sizing and
scheduling problem with sequence-dependent setups. International Journal of Production Economics,
118, 282–291.
Kovács, A., Egri, P., Kis, T., & Váncza, J. (2013). Inventory control in supply chains: Alternative approaches
to a two-stage lot-sizing problem. International Journal of Production Economics, 143(2), 385–394.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2012.01.001
Kreipl, S., & Pinedo, M. (2004). Planning and scheduling in supply chains: An overview of issues in practice.
Production and Operations Management, 13, 77–92.
Kuik, S., & Diong, Li. (2019). A Model-Driven Decision Approach to Collaborative Planning and Obsoles-
cence for Manufacturing Operations. Industrial Management and Data Systems, 119(9), 1926–1946.
https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-05-2019-0264
Lambert, D. M., & Cooper, M. C. (2000). Issues in supply chain management. Industrial Marketing Manage-
ment, 29(1), 65–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0019-8501(99)00113-3
Lau, H. C., Zhao, Z. J., Ge, S. S., & Lee, T. H. (2011). Allocating resources in multiagent ﬂowshops with
adaptive auctions. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 8(4), 732–743. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2011.2160536
Lavoie, C. and Abdul-Nour, (2003) SME, networking and supply chain improvement. Presented at the 32nd
International Conference on computers and Industrial Engineering.
Lehoux, N., & D´Amours, S., Langevin. A. (2014). Inter-Firm Collaborations and Supply Chain Coordination:
Review of Key Elements and Case Study. Production Planning and Control, 25(10), 858–872. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2013.771413
Lehoux, N., D’Amours, S., & Langevin, A. (2010). A win-win collaboration approach for a two-echelon
supply chain: A case study in the pulp and paper industry. European J. of Industrial Engineering, 4(4),
493. https://doi.org/10.1504/EJIE.2010.035656
Lejeune, M. A., & Yakova, N. (2005). On Characterizing the 4 C’s in Supply Chain Management. Journal of
Operations Management, 23(1), 81–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JOM.2004.09.004
Lin, J. and Chen, Y. (2004) A supply network planning problem in a multi-stage and multi-site environment.
Presented at the 35th International Conference on Computers and Industrial Engineering.
Lu, S. Y. P., Lau, H. Y. K., & Yiu, C. K. F. (2012). A hybrid solution to collaborative decision-making in a
decentralized supply-chain. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 29(1), 95–111. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jengtecman.2011.09.008
Mason, A. N., & Villalobos, J. R. (2015). Coordination of perishable crop production using auction mecha-
nisms. Agricultural Systems, 138, 18–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2015.04.008
Min, H., & Zhou, G. (2002). Supply Chain Modeling: Past, Present and Future. Computers & Industrial
Engineering, 43(1–2), 231–249. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-8352(02)00066-9
Nimmy, J. S., Chilkapure, A., & Madhusudanan Pillai, V. (2019). Literature review on supply chain collabo-
ration: Comparison of various collaborative techniques. Journal of Advances in Management Research.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JAMR-10-2018-0087
Önkal, D., Zeynep Sayim, K., & Lawrence, M. (2012). Wisdom of group forecasts: Does role-playing play a
role? Omega, 40(6), 693–702. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2011.01.010
Ouhimmou, M., D’Amours, S., Beauregard, R., Ait-Kadi, D., & Singh Chauhan, S. (2008). Furniture sup-
ply chain tactical planning optimization using a time decomposition approach. European Journal of
Operational Research, 189(3), 952–970. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2007.01.064
Ozdamar, L., & Yazgac, T. (1999). A hierarchical planning approach for a production-distribution system.
International Journal of Production Research, 37, 3759–3772.
Panahifar, F., Cathal Heavey, P. J., & Byrne, and Hamed Fazlollahtabar. (2015). A Framework for Collaborative
Planning, Forecasting and Replenishment (CPFR): State of the Art. Journal of Enterprise Information
Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-09-2014-0092
Pérez-Perales, D., & Alemany, M. M. E. (2015). Framework for the modeling of the supply chain collaborative
planning process. World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology. International Journal of
Economics and Management Engineering, 9(12). https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.1110612.
Pérez-Perales, D., Alemany, M. M. E., & Molasy, M. (2016). The Methodology of Modeling the Decision-
Making Process for Planning the Logistics Supply Chain. In Advances in Intelligent Systems and
Computing, 432, 85–96. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28567-2_8
Pérez-Perales, D., Lario F. C., & Alemany. M. M. E., (2008). “Metodología Para El Modelado Analítico
Analítico Decisional de Un Centro de Decisión Genérico En Un Contexto Jerárquico de Planiﬁcación
Colaborativa Colaborativa de Una Red de Suministro/Distribución.” In Proceedings of II Internacional
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Industrial Engineering and Industrial Management. Burgos
(Spain). http://www.adingor.es/congresos/web/articulo/detalle/a/250
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
311
Pérez-Perales, D., Lario, F. C., Alemany, M. M. E., & Hernandez, J. (2012). Framework for Modelling the
Decision: View of the Supply Chains Collaborative Planning Process. International Journal of Decision
Support System Technology, 4(2), 59–77. https://doi.org/10.4018/jdsst.2012040104
Pibernik, R., Zhang, Y., Kerschbaum, F., & Schröpfer, A. (2011). Secure collaborative supply chain planning
and inverse optimization - the JELS model. European Journal of Operational Research, 208(1), 75–85.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2010.08.018
Pittman, S. D., Bare, B. B., & Briggs, D. G. (2007). Hierarchical production planning in forestry using price-
directed decomposition. Canadian Journal of Forest, 37(10), 2010–2021. https://doi.org/10.1139/X0
7-026
Qu, T., Nie, D. X., Chen, X., Chen, X. D., Dai, Q. Y., & Huang, G. Q. (2015). Optimal conﬁguration of
cluster supply chains with augmented Lagrange coordination. Computers and Industrial Engineering,
84, 43–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2014.12.026
Ramanathan, U. (2012). Supply chain collaboration for improved forecast accuracy of promotional sales.
International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 32(6), 676–695. https://doi.org/10.
1108/01443571211230925
Reiss, F., & Buer, T. (2014). A coordination mechanism for capacitated lot-sizing in non-hierarchical n-tier
supply chains. IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Production and Logistics Systems
(cipls), 2014, 9–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/CIPLS.2014.7007155
Rius-Sorolla, G., Maheut, J., Estelles Miguel, S., & García Sabater, J. P. (2020). Coordination mechanisms
with mathematical programming models for decentralized decision-making, a literature review. Central
European Journal of Operations Research., 28(1), 61–104. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10100-018-0594-z
Schneeweiss, C., Zimmer, K., & Zimmermann, M. (2004). The design of contracts to coordinate operational
interdependencies within the supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 92, 43–59.
Shi, Q. L., & Kozan, E. (2019). Integration of mathematical models for ore mining industry. International
Journal of Systems Science: Operations & Logistics, 6(1), 55–68. https://doi.org/10.1080/23302674.
2017.1344330
Simpson, N. C., & Erenguc, S. S. (2001). Modeling the order picking function in supply chain systems:
Formulation, experimentation, and insights. IIE Transactions, 33, 119–130.
Spitter, J. M., Hurkens, C. A. J., de Kok, A. G., Lenstra, J. K., & Negenman, E. G. (2005). Linear programming
models with planned lead times for supply chain operations planning. European Journal of Operational
Research, 163, 706–720.
Stadtler, H. (2009). A Framework for Collaborative Planning and State-of-the-Art. Or Spectrum, 31(1), 5–30.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00291-007-0104-5
Taghipour,A.,&Frayret,J.M.(2013).Dynamicmutualadjustmentsearchforsupplychainoperationsplanning
co-ordination. International Journal of Production Research, 51(9), 2715–2739. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2012.737952
Tang, Z. C., & Pan, Z. (2016). Auction-based cooperation mechanism to parts scheduling for ﬂexible job shop
with inter-cells. Applied Soft Computing, 49, 590–602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2016.08.046
Thomas, A., Krishnamoorthy, M., Singh, G., & Venkateswaran, J. (2015a). Coordination in a multiple
producers-distributor supply chain and the value of information. International Journal of Production
Economics, 167, 63–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.05.020
Thomas, A., Krishnamoorthy, M., Singh, G., & Venkateswaran, J. (2015b). Coordination in a multiple
producers-distributor supply chain and the value of information. International Journal of Production
Economics, 167, 63–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.05.020
Timpe, C. H., & Kallrath, J. (2000). Optimal planning in large multi-site production networks. European
Journal of Operational Research, 126, 422–435. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(99)00301-X
Vicens, E., Alemany, M. E., Andres, C., & Guarch, J. J. (2001). A design and application methodology for hier-
archical production planning decision support systems in an enterprise integration context. International
Journal of Production Economics, 74, 5–20.
Walther, G., Schmid, E., & Spengler, T. S. (2008). Negotiation-based coordination in product recovery net-
works. International Journal of Production Economics, 111(2), 334–350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.
2006.12.069
Wenzel, S., Paulen, R., Krämer, S., Beisheim, B., Engell, S. (2016a). Shared resource allocation in an integrated
petrochemical site by pricebased coordination using quadratic approximation. In 2016 European Control
Conference, ECC 2016 (pp. 1045–1050). https://doi.org/10.1109/ECC.2016.7810427
Wenzel, S., Paulen, R., Stojanovski, G., Kraemer, S., Beisheim, B., & Engell, S. (2016b). Optimal resource
allocation in industrial complexes by distributed optimization and dynamic pricing. At - Automatisierung-
stechnik, 64(6), 428–442. https://doi.org/10.1515/auto-2016-0003
123

312
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:261–312
Yang, D., Choi, T. M., Xiao, T., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2011). Coordinating a Two-Supplier and One-Retailer
Supply Chain with Forecast Updating. Automatica, 47(7), 1317–1329. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AUTO
MATICA.2011.02.005
Zaman, F., Elsayed, S. M., Ray, T., & Sarker, R. A. (2017). Co-evolutionary approach for strategic bidding in
competitive electricity markets. Applied Soft Computing, 51, 1–22.
Zhou, X., Tian, J., Wang, Z., Yang, Ch., Huang, T., Xu, X. (2022) Nonlinear bilevel programming approach for
decentralized supply chain using a hybrid state transition algorithm. Knowledge-Based Systems, Volume
240,108119, ISSN 0950–7051, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2022.108119.
Zoghlami, N., Taghipour, A., Merlo, C., & Abed, M. (2016). Management of divergent production network
using decentralised multi-level capacitated lot-sizing models. International Journal of Shipping and
Transport Logistics, 8(5), 590–604. https://doi.org/10.1504/ijstl.2016.10000270
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123