TITLE: Sponsored search advertising and inventory replenishment: a decision support framework for an online retailer
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05643-5
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05643-5
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Sponsored search advertising and inventory replenishment:
a decision support framework for an online retailer
Vaishnavi Tunuguntla1 · Preetam Basu2
· Krishanu Rakshit3
·
Thanos Papadopoulos2
Received: 7 July 2022 / Accepted: 4 October 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Sponsored search advertising has steadily emerged as one of the most popular advertising
tools in online retail. Customers prefer search results that appear on the top to those that
appear lower and are willing to pay more for products/brands that appear higher on the search.
Sponsored search has a higher conversion efﬁciency and impacts demand more endogenously
through the ranking on the search page than traditional advertising. Online retailers (e-tailers)
invest aggressively in bidding to ensure they are ranked high on the search pages. The dynamic
nature of sponsored search entails a higher degree of inventory readiness, and e-tailers must
dovetail their sponsored search advertising strategy to drive trafﬁc with the level of inventory
to avoid consumer disappointments due to stockouts. Extant research has not delved into this
critical aspect of sponsored search advertising. We endeavor to solve this business problem
for an e-tailer in a dynamic stochastic setting and provide a multi-threshold decision support
framework based on different inventory levels. The policy identiﬁes inventory levels: (i) at
which a retailer should not place an order, (ii) her desired level of inventory, and (iii) a ceiling
up to which no bids are placed. The e-tailer can use our proposed framework to derive an
inventorybasedsponsoredsearchadvertisingcampaignthatensuressynchronizationbetween
bids and inventory and increases proﬁts. Our results show that customers’ sensitivity to the
website’s search rank and variation in reservation price impact the e-tailer’s inventory and
sponsored search bidding decisions.
B Thanos Papadopoulos
a.papadopoulos@kent.ac.uk
Vaishnavi Tunuguntla
vaishnavi.tunuguntla@hdfcbank.com
Preetam Basu
p.basu@kent.ac.uk
Krishanu Rakshit
krishanu.rakshit@icn-artem.com
1
HDFC Bank, Bangalore, India
2
Department of Analytics, Operations and Systems, Kent Business School, University of Kent,
Canterbury CT2 7FS, UK
3
Department of Marketing, ICN ARTEM Business School, 54000 Nancy, France
123

Annals of Operations Research
Keywords E-commerce · Sponsored search advertising · Inventory planning · Decision
support · Reservation price · Stochastic dynamic programming
1 Introduction
Over the last decade, sponsored search advertising has steadily increased its overall share
in the area of digital advertisement spending. Recent reports (Statista, 2022), suggest that
sponsored search advertising are expected to reach $279 bn in 2023 in worldwide spending.
The inherent popularity of search advertising compared to other modes of online advertising,
like banner advertisements or pop-up advertisements lies in the fact that they are less intrusive
and are in sync with the user’s search queries (Ghose & Yang, 2009). Sponsored search
advertising leverages the search engines’ capability to learn the users’ characteristics, thereby
facilitating a shift from “mass” advertising to “targeted” advertising (Chen, 2008; Ghose &
Yang, 2009; Moe, 2013). This results in the higher Return on Investment (ROI) for sponsored
search advertising expenditure compared to traditional ofﬂine advertising (Laffey, 2007).
Since customers are using search engines to seek product and brand information, retailers
strive to ensure that their brands show up as search results in these product/brand searches.
Several researchers, (including Ghose & Yang, 2009) suggest that leads generated by search
are directly proportional to the higher ranks of the search results; and they sharply decrease
for search results, which appear lower on the page, or in subsequent pages. Hence, advertisers
are willing to pay a premium to attain a higher rank in these searches.
While increasing advertising spend on sponsored searches can be highly beneﬁcial to a
business, it can also have an unfavorable side effect: inventory stockouts. A ﬁrm investing
heavily in keywords for sponsored search would generate more trafﬁc on its products’ listings
leadingtofastersell-outsandpotentialinventoryshortfalls.Thesestockoutscanhurttheﬁrm’s
reputation (Jing & Lewis, 2011) and impact their websites’ Click-through-Rates (CTR). For
instance, on the eve of Thanksgiving, Christmas, and Black Friday, the intensity of promotion
for various products that are offered on sale is remarkable; however, the losses incurred by
retailers during these events, in terms of stockouts, and returns amount to roughly $1.75
trillion a year (Krystina, 2015; PR NewsWire, 2012). While for a brick-and-mortar store,
running out of stocks results merely in lost sales, it has a far greater impact for an e-tailer.
Not only would running out of stock have a negative inﬂuence on a product listing, but it
might also have a detrimental effect on future sales (Jing & Lewis, 2011; Rao et al., 2011)
through adverse reviews from customers. The availability of the product is a key element for
Amazon’s search ranking algorithm, thereby, stock-out has a negative impact on the shopping
search results in Amazon (Amazon Listing service, 2019). Therefore, if there is a stock-out
for a particular product, the Amazon search engine would not detect it and the product rank
would suffer. These instances highlight the importance of coordination across the promotion
and inventory stocking decisions, more so in e-commerce. Sogomonian and Tang (1993)
corroborate these ﬁndings in their empirical study by emphasizing that the proﬁts were 12%
higher when the inventory and promotion decisions were treated as joint, rather than separate
problems. Thus, inventory and advertising are complementary forces for the success of any
e-commerce business. Proper coordination between the inventory level and the promotion
must be maintained for an e-tailer to maximize her proﬁts.
According to our knowledge, the extant models of sponsored search do not investigate the
retailer’s inventory replenishment decisions in the context of sponsored search advertising.
Operations management and marketing literature have studied the interplay of inventory and
123

Annals of Operations Research
marketing decisions (Cheng & Sethi, 1999; Zhang et al., 2008; Feng & Shanthikumar, 2022;
Mallidis, Sariannidis, Vlachos, Yakavenka, Aifadopoulou and Zopounidis, 2022; Nguyen &
Chen, 2022). However, sponsored search advertising has certain speciﬁc characteristics that
renders it unique. The number of customers attracted to a website depends on the position of
the listing on the results page. Customers have a higher preference for the top-ranked links
resulting in greater trafﬁc. In other words, a customer’s willingness to pay, also known as
reservation price, is highest for the top listings on the results page. The higher willingness
to pay is driven by a customer’s perception of a reliable product based on the top-ranked
search results (Ghose & Yang, 2009). Therefore, e-tailers can inﬂuence the reservation price
of their customers through their sponsored search bids (Ye et al., 2015). So, sponsored search
advertising impacts customers’ purchase decisions in more ways as compared to traditional
advertising, which has a temporal lag for demand conversions. This makes sponsored search
more endogenous and dynamic. And hence, inventory readiness becomes even more critical
for e-tailers.
Our study aims to increase the scope of application of sponsored search models by deter-
mining optimal bidding and inventory policies for an e-tailer employing sponsored search
advertising to promote her products. We develop a multi-period stochastic model and provide
a decision support framework based on multiple inventory thresholds that integrates inventory
replenishment with sponsored search advertising for product promotion. The multi-threshold
policy (S1, S2,S) provides inventory levels: (i) at which a retailer should not place an order
(S1) (ii) her desired level of inventory (S2), and (iii) a ceiling up to which no bids are placed
(S). Using this policy, an e-tailer can coordinate her sponsored search bids with inventory
decisions to derive an effective inventory-based advertising campaign. Our results show that
the inventory level, beyond which a retailer does not place an order and the desired inventory
level, both decrease as customers become more sensitive to the rank of the listing. The inven-
tory level, up to which the e-tailer does not bid decreases with an increase in the customers’
mean reservation price. From a managerial point of view, the result implies sponsored search
bidding at a lower inventory threshold as the customer’s mean reservation price increases.
Sponsored search bidding combined with optimal inventory decisions improves the e-tailer’s
earnings.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows; we provide a brief review of the
literature in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3, we present the model. Sections 4 and 5 discuss the results and
characterize an optimal policy for a ﬁnite period problem. In Sect. 6, we perform sensitivity
analyses to explore the strategic bidding and reordering options for the e-tailer; we also
explore the impact of possible budgetary constraints for promotional activities and draw
key managerial insights. Finally, we conclude with an overview of the ﬁndings and possible
extensions for the model.
2 Literature review
Ourpaperbroadlycontributestothestreamofliteraturethatstudiestheintegrationofadvertis-
ing and promotion decisions with inventory management (Kurata & Liu, 2006). Speciﬁcally,
we contribute to the domain of sponsored search advertising. We ﬁrst present a brief overview
of the extant literature at the interface of advertising policies and inventory replenishment,
followed by a brief overview of studies in the sponsored search advertising area.
123

Annals of Operations Research
2.1 Inventory and promotional policies
Balcer (1983) designed an optimal joint inventory and advertising strategy considering a
deterministic demand-advertising relationship. Cheng and Sethi (1999) examined the rela-
tionship between demand and advertising and derived optimal promotion and order quantity
decisions. Zhang et al. (2008) extended this model by using price as a critical variable for
enhancing sales. Urban (1992) investigated a ﬁnite replenishment inventory model in which
demand is a deterministic function of price and advertising expenditure. Sogomonian and
Tang (1993) devised a “longest-path” algorithm to suggest optimal timing for promotion, in
addition to the production and promotion plans. Avinadav et al. (2013) built on this model
by assuming the demand to be both price and time-dependent, and determined the optimal
pricing and order quantity decisions along with the optimal replenishment period. Wei &
Chen (2011) framed an (s,S,z) policy where the inventory replenishment is carried out using
the (s,S) policy and the sales effort (z) is determined based on the inventory level. Shah
et al. (2013) designed an algorithm to determine optimal inventory and promotional poli-
cies for non-instantaneous deteriorating items. Darmawan et al. (2018) developed a sales
and operations plan integrating promotion and production planning decisions. Pereira et al.
(2020) presented a comprehensive coverage of literature on articles that integrate sales pro-
motion/advertising decisions with operations planning. In all the aforementioned models of
ofﬂine advertising with inventory replenishment, an effort has been made to estimate the total
advertising budget (Lu, Xu, & Yu, 2018; Sun, 2023). Traditional advertising creates aware-
ness about a product and has a temporal lag between the advertising campaign launch and
demand conversions. On the other hand, sponsored search advertising is far more dynamic,
and impacts website trafﬁc and demand conversion in a more endogenous manner through the
search rank. Our contribution lies in analyzing an online retailer who replenishes inventory
while employing sponsored search advertising for her product promotions.
2.2 Sponsored search advertising
In today’s competitive e-commerce environment, retailers employ sponsored search adver-
tising by placing bids on relevant keywords to ensure visibility for their customers (Barbosa,
Saura, Zekan and Ribeiro-Soriano, 2023; Erdmann et al., 2022). Dinner et al. (2014) evalu-
ated the interplay of cross-channel effects of traditional, online display advertisements and
paid search advertising. Goldfarb and Tucker (2011) explored substitution patterns across
advertising platforms using real-time data and observed that the relationship between online
and ofﬂine media is mediated by the marketers’ need to target their communications. Im
et al. (2019) developed a model to predict the user’s purchase intent using the keywords
the users search for and an analysis of their browsing sessions (click-throughs). Leveraging
the consumer search behavior, Scholz et al. (2019) developed a model that automatically
generates keywords. B. Chen, Li, Wang, & Li (2022) evaluated the effect of nine channels
of online advertising and how each of the channels is impacting the customer’s potential
purchase intention. Consumer triggered advertising, such as search advertising was found to
have a positive impact compared to ﬁrm initiated communications. Yang and Ghose (2010)
analyzed the interdependence between organic listings and paid search listings and demon-
strated a positive correlation between the two listings. Several other factors affecting the
click rate have been discussed in the literature (Ghose & Yang, 2009; Johansson, 1979; Lit-
tle, 1979; Villas-Boas, 1993). Yang, Lu, & Lu (2014) analyzed the impact of competition
from incumbent players as well as future entrants on the click rate for a keyword, and value
123

Annals of Operations Research
per click. A recent work by Dayanik and Sezer (2023) explore the multiple-keyword bid-
ding strategy for an e-tailer. Extant literature suggests that RoI for advertising expenditure
demonstrates an S-Curve behavior. Initially, advertising levels have extremely low returns,
then grow signiﬁcantly with increasing marginal returns, then saturate, with returns dimin-
ishing as advertising continues to grow. All these models assume a Poisson arrival process
(Johansson, 1979; Little, 1979; Villas-Boas, 1993; Ye et al., 2015) for the customer. Using
real-time data, Ghose and Yang (2009) developed logit models for calculating click rate
probability as a function of the keyword length, brand, retailer, rank, etc. to analyze the
impact of these variables on click rates. Later, Ghose et al. (2014) incorporated the effect of
customer rating as a factor in determining the click rate. The model was built on a dataset
consisting of about 40 attributes encompassing the website attributes, user attributes, and the
search engine’s attributes Abhishek and Hosanagar (2013) considered the impact of adver-
tising spends in terms of bids for keywords, and the impact of focal brand’s position on the
search results, on resultant clicks, to derive the relationship between the bid and position,
and position and clicks. All other variables being constant, the retailers with the highest bids
are placed at the top, i.e. the position that is most likely to be clicked by the user (Varian,
2007). Chan and Park (2015) studied the effect of position on click rate at different stages of
user activity—impression, click, or terminal click (conversion). The most recent work of Ye
et al. (2015) suggests that a customer’s reservation price could be considered as a de-facto
function of the advertiser’s bid, since the customer’s likeliness of conversion is dependent
on the rank (in search results- which, in turn depends on the advertiser’s bid) of the website.
Tunuguntla et al. (2019) developed a model to determine the optimal bid and price where the
customer’s reservation price is a function of inventory on hand. Dayanik and Parlar (2013)
developed a model to suggest a dynamic optimal bidding policy for each period under a
budget constraint. However, there was no scope for inventory replenishment provided to the
retailer in any of the aforementioned sponsored search advertising models.
Anecdotal evidence advocates active coordination between inventory and promotion deci-
sions, preventing stock-out situations and improving overall proﬁtability. We analyze this
added complexity in our study and endeavor to ﬁll the research gap by providing the e-retailer
with an opportunity to replenish inventory, while employing sponsored search advertising.
Next, we present our model that integrates consumer search and purchase behavior with an
online retailer’s bidding (Cost-per-Click scheme) under sponsored search advertising and
inventory replenishment.
3 Model description
We develop a multi-period stochastic dynamic programming model in which at the start
of each time-period, the retailer observes the inventory level and decides on the sponsored
search bidding amount (b) and the inventory order quantity (q). The orders are delivered
at the beginning of the next time-period. We consider the selling price of the product to be
exogenous to the model that is determined by external market dynamics. Demand generation
using sponsored search advertising involves three steps: (i) creating awareness about the
product (generating an impression) (b) attracting customers to the site (obtaining a click),
and (iii) purchase taking place (conversion). Table 1 provides the notations used in the model.
Next, in Sects. 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 we explain the mechanism of impressions, click rate,
the factors affecting conversion probability, and the online retailer’s proﬁt maximization
problem.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Notations used in the stochastic dynamic programming model
Notation
Description
t
Number of time-periods remaining
I
Initial inventory on hand
b
Bid/Cost-per-click
q
Order quantity
h
Holding cost
p
Price of product
c
Cost of ordering one unit
π
Proﬁt of the retailer
λ(b)
Click rate at bid b
R
Customer reservation price distribution at b  0
ϑ(b)
Reservation price distribution at bid b
g(.)
PDF of distribution of R
G(.)
CDF of distribution of R
F(p|b)
Conversion rate probability
N
Number of impressions in a period
i
Number of clicks in a period
j
Demand generated in a period
d
Realized demand
L(i, j)
Probability of having ‘j’ demand given ‘i’ clicks
s
Salvage value of the product at the end of the time-horizon
3.1 Impressions
Each time an advertisement is displayed on the page, irrespective of whether it has been
clicked or not by the consumer, it is considered an impression. Every sponsored search bid
maps onto a certain number of impressions (Google AdWords). Under Google’s Cost-per-
Click (CPC) scheme, the retailer can estimate the number of impressions the bid is likely
to generate using its bid simulator (Google Adwords, 2020b). The primary step to generate
demand through sponsored search advertisements is ensuring impressions, which is driven by
therankoftheadvertisementonthesearchpage.Generally,theranksareassignedbasedonthe
Quality Score (QS) (which depends on relevance, metadata, etc.) (Google Adwords, 2020a)
and the bid placed by the advertiser. The information about Quality Score for individual
websites can be found in their AdWords account statistics. However, a Quality score gets
accumulated over time and can be effective only through long-term efforts undertaken by a
retailer such as landing page quality, brand building, and the quality of the product offerings.
In our model, while we do not explicitly model the effects of organic results, we consider the
“Quality Score”, which results in organic results. The study by Agarwal et al. (2015) suggest
that organic results (and competition) substitute sponsored search in click performance,
and critically complement conversion performance. We realize and appreciate that quality
score for a given e-tailer requires long-term effort and cannot be updated in the short term.
Therefore, in the shorter horizon, bid is the only lever that the retailer can use to inﬂuence
123

Annals of Operations Research
the ranking of the sponsored search. Through a higher bid, the retailer can achieve a better
rank leading to a higher number of impressions.
3.2 Click rate
An increase in the number of impressions in turn can possibly lead to an increase in the
attendant number of clicks. A customer’s decision to click on a link is inﬂuenced by the rank
at which it is being listed, as a higher-ranked link is intuitively considered more reliable (Ye
et al., 2015). The clicks are assumed to follow a Poisson distribution, where the click rate
function λ(b) is strictly positive, increasing, and twice differentiable in the retailer’s bid b
(Tunuguntla et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2015).
Our analysis considers the click rate with respect to bid as an S-shaped curve, which is
well established in the extant literature (Ghose & Yang, 2009; Johansson, 1979; Little, 1979;
Tan & Mookerjee, 2005; Villas-Boas, 1993). We have used an S-shaped curve deﬁned by the
maximum click rate (λ∞) that can be attained at bid b  ∞, minimum click rate (λ0) in the
absence of any bid b  0, sharpness (α), and steepness factors (β), to represent the click
rate as a function of bid (Ye et al., 2015). While making her bidding decision, the retailer can
estimate the functional relationship between the click-rate and the bids based on Eq. (1).
λ(b)  λ∞+ λ0e(β−αb)
1 + e(β−αb)
(1)
3.3 Conversion
Once a customer clicks on the link and visits the website, a conversion/purchase happens
based on his/her reservation price. If the customer’s reservation price exceeds the posted
price, a conversion takes place. As stated earlier, customers are more likely to click and
purchase from the top-ranked links (Ye et al., 2015). Hence, we model the reservation price
of the customer group as a random variable that follows a probability distribution that is
inﬂuenced by the retailer’s bid amount. Intuitively, therefore, websites with better rankings,
which are displayed at the top of the page, have a higher probability of conversion than the
websites displayed at the bottom of the page. This suggests that mean reservation price of
the customers increases as the bid amount increases. Similarly, we assume that the range
of reservation prices of customers also widens as the bid amount increases, implying the
standard deviation of the reservation price increases as the bid increases. This is explained
by the two groups of customers who are attracted by the higher ranking of the listing. The
ﬁrst group is the high-valuation customers who are less price-sensitive and are attracted by
the high rank of the listing. The second group of customers comprises “window-shoppers”
with much lower reservation prices who click on the links that appear at the top without
much intent of purchasing the product, or maybe simply gathering product information. The
interplay of this customer mix who click on the top-ranked listings lead to a higher standard
deviation of the reservation price with increasing bid amounts. μ(b) and σ(b) represent the
mean and standard deviation of the reservation price of the customers. As explained, μ(b)
increases as the bid b increases. Similarly, the standard deviation σ(b) of ϑ(b) is strictly
increasing in b. We assume the coefﬁcient of variation of ϑ(b) is decreasing in b implying
the mean increases at a faster rate compared to the standard deviation. In other words, the
downward shift that window shoppers inﬂict on the reservation price of the customer mix is
outweighed by the upward shift caused by high-value customers leading to a reduction in the
123

Annals of Operations Research
coefﬁcient of variation of the customer reservation price. Ghose and Yang (Ghose & Yang,
2009) empirically support this assumption. We formulate the reservation price distribution
in Eq. (2):
Let ϑ(b) denote a customer’s reservation price for a given bid b, ϑ(b) is given by
ϑ(b)  μ(b) + σ(b)R
where μ(0)  0, σ(0)  1
(2)
Here, R is the customer’s reservation price when the retailer bids zero and we assume
thatR 

y, y

∼(0, ∞). The minimum reservation price that any customer would have
for a given product (at zero bid), is denoted byy, and the maximum that any customer would
pay is captured by y. In other words, the distribution of reservation price of customers when
there is no impact of bid is given byR.
Let G(.) and g(.) denote the cumulative distribution function (cdf) and probability density
function (pdf) of R. We assume that G(.) has an increasing failure rate (IFR); i.e., g(.)/G(.)
is increasing. Let p denote the posted price of the product.
Then the cdf of ϑ(b),
F(p|b)  G
 p −μ(b)
σ(b)

(3)
In the context of our model, we deﬁne the conversion rate in a given time-period as the
probability that a customer who clicked the retailer’s sponsored search link purchases the
product. It follows from the deﬁnition that the conversion rate is essentially the probability
of reservation price ϑ(b) exceeding the posted price, i.e.
F(p|b)  1 −F(p|b)
(4)
We make the following technical assumptions to ensure the smoothness of the proﬁt
function.
(a) G(.) has a continuous ﬁrst-order derivative.
(b) μ(b) and σ(b) have continuous ﬁrst-order derivatives.
These assumptions are satisﬁed by many general probability distribution functions such
as Gamma distribution, Beta distribution, Weibull distribution, etc.
To capture the aggregate demand in a given time-period, we use a probability matrix
L(i, j) similar to the one used by Ghose and Yang (2009), comprising the number of clicks
and converts conditional on those clicks. Given N number of impressions, the probability of
getting i clicks and j converts are calculated using Eq. (5):
(5)
L (i, j) 

N!
j! (i −j) ! (N −i) !

∗

λ (b) ∗F (p|b) j ∗(λ (b) ∗F(p|b))(i−j) ∗(1 −λ (b))(N−i)
This is obtained by taking the product of two Binomial distributions- i clicks out of N
impressions, j conversions out of i clicks, with probabilities of successes being the click rate
probability (λ(b)) and the conversion probability (F(p|b)) respectively.
3.4 The profit maximization problem
We develop a ﬁnite-horizon stochastic dynamic programming model from the e-retailer’s
proﬁt maximization objective.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The retailer starts with I units of inventory over a T period horizon. The objective of the
retailer is to integrate his bidding decision b with the inventory ordering decision q so that the
inventory level reaches a particular desired quantity. We assume the inventory orders have a
lead time of one-time unit, i.e., the order is delivered at the start of the next time-period. The
equation for the probability of conversion is calculated as follows:
F(p|(b))  1 −F(p|(b))  1 −G
 p −μ(b)
σ(b)

The proﬁt maximization equation is given by:
π(t, I)  max
b,q>0
⎡
⎣
N

i0
i
j0
L(i, j) ∗{(p ∗d) −(b ∗i) −h ∗(I −d) −(c ∗q) + π(t −1, I −d + q)}
⎤
⎦
for I > 0, t  1, 2, . . . T
(6)
where, d  min(I, j)
π(0, I) I ∗s for I > 0
The retailer chooses the optimal bid and order quantity at the start of each time-period,
such that the expected proﬁt is maximized. The terminal condition indicates the salvage value
of the product at the last time-period.
Next, we present the theoretical results of the stochastic dynamic programming model,
and in Sect. 5, we use the theoretical results to derive a multi-threshold policy based on
different inventory levels that provide essential decision rules for inventory-based sponsored
search bidding.
4 Theoretical results
Analytically, we attempt to show the behavior of the optimal bid and order quantity as the
inventory on hand changes.
We use the monotone likelihood ratio property (Ferguson, 1967) to analyze the results. Let
Z+ be the set of non-negative integers and X be a discrete random variable with probability
mass function f (x, δ), x ∈Z+, which involves a parameter δ, let F(x, δ)  Pδ(X ≥x) 
∞
kx f (k, δ). Assume that for any x ∈Z+andeveryδ, f (x, δ)  0, i.e. f (k, δ)  0 for
every k(≥x) ∈Z+, i.e.F(x, δ)  0. Let g(.) be a non-decreasing function over Z+ such that
Eδ{g(x)}  ∞
x0 g(x) f (x, δ) exists ﬁnitely for every δ. In the application considered later,
the effective range of X is ﬁnite and hence the existence of Eδ{g(x)} is always guaranteed.
Lemma 1 The distribution of X has a monotone likelihood ratio in the sense that.
f (x2, δ2) f (x1, δ1) ≥f (x2, δ1) f (x1, δ2)
for every x1, x2 ∈Z+, x1 < x2, andeveryδ1, δ2, δ1 < δ2. Then,
(a)
For every x ∈Z+, F(x, δ) is non-decreasing in δ.
(b)
Eδ{g(x)} is non-decreasing in δ.
Proof: See Appendix B Lemma 2
If X follows the binomial distribution with parameters n and φ, then for every non-
decreasing function g(.) over Z+. E{g(x)} is non-decreasing in n as well as φ.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Proof: See Appendix B Using the above lemmas, we show that the expected demand is
non-decreasing in inventory on-hand and bid.
Proposition 1: Let 0 < φ1, φ2 < 1, and N and I be positive integers such that N > I. Then,
L

N
i0
i
j0 min(I, j)

N
0pti

φi
1(1 −φ1)N−i
i
0pt j

φ j
2(1 −φ2)i−j
is
non-
decreasing in I, N, and φ1.
Proof:SeeAppendixB N Represents the number of impressions, i.e. the number of customers
exposed to the advertisement. This increases the sample set of potential customers. The
number of impressions is directly dependent on the bid amount. The higher the bid, the
higher is the number of impressions, click rate probability φ1, and probability of conversion
φ2. From the above proposition, it can be inferred that the expected demand is non-decreasing
in inventory-on-hand and bid.
Proposition 2 For the retailer to continue maximizing his proﬁts even at higher levels of
inventory, optimal order quantity must be non-increasing with inventory for a given bid.
Proof: See Appendix B A given bid generates a speciﬁed level of demand. Based on the
inventory-on-hand, the order will be placed by considering the demand generated through
the bid. In other words, there exists a desired level of inventory to be maintained at each
time- period. If the current inventory on hand is sufﬁcient for fulﬁlling the demand in the
subsequent period as well, the retailer would not place any order. In other words, there exists
a level of inventory, beyond which no order is placed.
Proposition 3 For the retailer to continue maximizing his proﬁts even at higher levels of
inventory, the optimal bid must be non-decreasing with inventory for a ﬁxed order quantity.
Proof: See Appendix B As the inventory on hand increases, the retailer uses the bid lever to
generate sufﬁcient demand. The objective of the retailer should be to minimize the inventory
carried over to the subsequent period. As a result, with rising inventory on hand, the bid
should be raised accordingly.
5 Multi-threshold policy & decision support framework
We represent the analytical results in the form of a multi-threshold policy. The policy is
a modiﬁcation of the existing base stock policy, wherein decisions are linked to multiple
thresholds of inventory levels. The multi-threshold policy can be used as a decision support
tool to coordinate sponsored search advertising with inventory replenishment.
5.1 (S1, S2,S)Policy
(S1, S2,S) Represent the inventory levels based on which sponsored search bidding and
ordering decisions can be taken in each time-period. These inventory threshold levels provide
critical decision support in terms of ordering and bidding decisions. Whenever the inventory
level exceeds S1, no order is to be placed. S2 is the desired inventory level to be attained in
the subsequent time-period based on which an order is to be placed S is used to determine
the sponsored search bidding decisions. If the inventory is below this threshold, then it is
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Multi-threshold Inventory

S1, S2, ˆS

decision rules for bidding and ordering policies
Inventory Level at time “t”
Decision rule at time “t”
L ess than or equal to ˆS
Do not bid for sponsored search. Place order so that inventory level
reaches S2 at t + 1
ˆS < Inventory level <  S2
Bid for sponsored search. Place order so that inventory level reaches
S2 at t + 1
S2 < Inventory level <  S1
Bid for sponsored search. Place order so that inventory level reaches
S2 at t + 1
Greater than S1
Bid for sponsored search. Do not place an order
optimal for the retailer not to place any bid (See Table 21). Proposition 2 proves the existence
of S1, S2 and Proposition 3 proves the existence of S (Refer to proof in appendix). Next, we
explain the (S1, S2,S) policy by a numerical example.
5.2 A numerical example: (S1, S2,S) policy
We ﬁx the price at p  100 and vary the bid between 0 and 100 in discrete steps of 10 for
a product with cost c  40 and holding cost h  5 per time-period. For a click rate curve
with values of (α, β, λ0, λ∞)  (0.1, 4, 0.3, 1) and constants (γμ, γσ , k1, k2, K, θ) having
values (0.5, 0.3, 1, 0.2, 8, 0.1), the model yielded the following graph (Fig. 1). The bids
have been discretized for simplicity. The policy holds for continuous bids as well. The more
continuous the bid, the more drastic is the change in optimal bid with inventory. The value
of the x-intercept, the point where the order quantity line cuts the x-axis, indicates the value
of S1, beyond which the order quantity becomes zero. The value of the y-intercept, the point
where the order quantity line ﬁrst meets the y-axis, indicates the value of S2, the desired level
of inventory to be maintained in each time-period. The value of the x-intercept, the largest
coordinate where the bid line cuts the x-axis, indicates the value of S, the level of inventory
up to which the retailer does not bid.
From Fig. 1, we get the values S1  110, S2  60, andS  5. Using the (S1, S2,S)
policy, we recommend the following decision support criteria at different levels of inventory
on hand using Table 3. If the inventory on hand is less than 5 units, then it is optimal not to
bid for a sponsored search. If the inventory on hand is less than 110, then the order quantity
will be such that the inventory level is pushed up to 60 units at the start of the next time-
period. If the inventory on hand is greater than 110, then the retailer should not place any
order. The (S1, S2,S) policy provides a convenient decision support mechanism based on a
multi-threshold base stock method.
Elaborating further, it can be observed that the optimal bids are non-decreasing with the
inventory on hand, and the optimal order quantity is non-increasing with the inventory on
hand for a given bid. As stated in Proposition 2, a constant bid generates a constant demand
every period. However, as the inventory on hand increases, the retailer must adjust his order
quantity such that he can fulﬁll the demand for both the current and subsequent periods,
which is reﬂected in the order quantity decreasing with the inventory on hand at a constant
bid. Similarly, according to Proposition 3, at constant order quantity, the retailer is only left
1 A graphical representation of Table 2 using a ﬂowchart has been appended in Appendix A.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Bid and Order Quantity vs. Inventory on Hand
Table 3 Numerical example-

S1, S2, ˆS

policy
Inventory level
Bid
Order quantity
I < 5

 ˆS

0
Non −zero
5 < I < 60( S2)
Non −zero
Non −zero
60 < I < 110( S1)
Non −zero
Non −zero
I > 110
Non −zero
0
Fig. 2 a, b: High sensitivity input and output values
with the bid lever to generate sufﬁcient demand. Hence, the optimal bid is increasing with
inventory on hand at constant order quantity.
Next, we study changing demand dynamics inﬂuenced by sponsored search bidding and
how that impacts the multi-threshold inventory policy.
123

Annals of Operations Research
5.3 Stochastic dominance
We use the concept of stochastic dominance (Karlin, 1962) to model the demand behaviour in
the sponsored search bidding-inventory decision problem. A stochastic dominance relation-
ship is deﬁned as follows: Let τ1 and τ2 be two random variables with probability densities
w1 and w2, and cumulative distributions W1 and W2 respectively. τ2 dominates τ1, if
W1(x) ≥W2(x)∀x
(7)
The above condition implies that τ2 dominates τ1 when demands based on w1 have a
larger probability of taking smaller values than those based on the density w2. Further,
if τ2 dominates τ1, then EL(τ1) ≤EL(τ2) for any nondecreasing real valued function
L(Bulinskaya, 2004).
In our model, L(i, j) denotes the probability matrix of clicks and converts. In Proposition
1 we have proved that L(i, j) is non-decreasing in I, N, and φ1. The stochastic ordering
between demand states denoted by L(i, j) along with the results of Proposition 1 implies
that demand in a higher demand state is more likely to be higher than that in a lower demand
state. Further, sponsored search bidding would more likely lead to a demand state with a
stochastically higher demand and if current demand state is higher, the next period is more
likely to be in a demand state with a stochastically higher demand.
The value function (6) consists of two components: the revenue and cost incurred in the
current period and the proﬁt in the future time periods. A myopic solution can be obtained
by ignoring the future proﬁts and converting the problem to a newsboy-type model (Cheng
& Sethi, 1999). The desired inventory level of the myopic newsboy-model is given by S 
−1
p−bi−c
p+h−s

, where  denotes the distribution function of the demand based on customer’s
reservation price and the probability of clicks and converts. If demand states follow stochastic
dominance as deﬁned earlier, then ford′ > d,, St,d′ ≥St,d.
We now analyze how stochastic dominance in demand states impact the desired inventory
level of the multi-threshold inventory policy. We denote the desired inventory level S2 of the
multi-threshold policy at time t and demand state d, by S2(t,d)
Proposition 4: For demand states d′ > d and ∀t,
S2(t,d′) ≥S2(t,d)
S2(t+1,d) ≥S2(t,d)
Proof: See Appendix B The above proposition states that the desired inventory level S2
increases at a higher demand state where realized demand in the higher demand state cannot
be stochastically lower than that in the lower demand state. Also, the desired inventory level
is non-decreasing with t. In our model, the distribution of reservation price of customers
has an increasing failure rate (IFR). L(i, j) is a product of two Binomial distributions.
Binomial distribution follows the properties of increasing generalised failure rate (IGFR)
and the product of two IGFR random variables also follows IGFR properties (Lariviere,
2006). Hence, L(i, j) has an IGFR. The demand is modelled based on customer’s reservation
price and the probability matrix given by clicks and converts, L(i, j), Therefore, the demand
also follows IGFR since all IFR random variables are IGFR (Banciu & Mirchandani, 2013).
Hence, the demand in our model satisﬁes the stochastic ordering property mentioned above
(Karl-Walter Gaede, 1991).
The above results provide critical insights with regard to the desired inventory level of the
multi-threshold policy in the sponsored search-inventory decision problem under changing
demand dynamics.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In the next section, we illustrate the factors that impact S1, S2, and S and derive critical
managerial insights through extensive numerical analyses.
6 Managerial insights
We model the click rate function as an S-shaped curve as given in Eq. (1). The S-shaped
curve is deﬁned by two parameters- namely, the steepness (α) and the sharpness (β) as given
in the equation below. We model the click rate as a Poisson arrival process, a function of the
retailer’s bid.
λ(b)  λ∞+ λ0e(β−αb)
1 + e(β−αb)
Conversion takes place only when the customer’s reservation price exceeds the posted
price. A customer’s willingness to pay is contingent on the rank of the listing. Referring to
Eq. (2), reservation price is modelled as a function of bid. Bid can act as a proxy for the rank
(Ye et al., 2015). The functional forms for the mean reservation price (μ(b)) and standard
deviation (σ(b)) are given below.
μ(b)  γμbk1
(8)
σ(b)  1 + γσ bk2
(9)
where γμ, γσ , k1, k2 are constants.
These constants are used to quantify the impact of rank (bid) on a customer’s reservation
price. The constants α and β determine the sensitivity of customers to click on a link based
on the rank of the listing.
6.1 Sensitivity analysis- impact of rank of listing
To understand the impact of rank of the listings on the multi-threshold policy, we analyze
various market conditions by simulating different values of the constants γμ, γσ , k1, k2, α,
and β. The parameter values used in our sensitivity analysis study are summarized in Table
4. We ﬁx the price at p  100, and vary the bids discretely in steps of 10 between 0and100.
Table 4 Parameter values used in the numerical analyses (Sect. 6.1)
Level of sensitivity
Parameters
Values
High
{α, β, λ0, λ∞,γμ, γσ , k1, k2, K, θ, p, c, h, I}
{0.1, 6, 0.3, 1, 0.1, 1,
1.3, 0.5, 20, 0.8, 100,
40, 5, 20}
Moderate
{α, β, λ0, λ∞,γμ, γσ , k1, k2, K, θ, p, c, h, I}
{0.1, 5, 0.3, 1, 0.1, 1,
1.3, 0.5, 20, 0.8, 100,
40, 5, 20}
Low
{α, β, λ0, λ∞,γμ, γσ , k1, k2, K, θ, p, c, h, I}
{0.2, 8, 0.3, 1, 0.1, 1,
1.3, 0.5, 20, 0.8, 100,
40, 5, 20}
123

Annals of Operations Research
We consider three scenarios- (i) customers are extremely sensitive to the rank of the list-
ing, i.e. the customers click and convert only for the topmost listings, (i  1) (ii) customers
are moderately sensitive to the rank of the listing, (i  2) (iii) customers are marginally
sensitive to the rank of the listing, (i  3). Three different click rate curves that have been
used to represent the scenarios are given in Figs. 2a, 3a, and 4a. We analyze the impact of
the sensitivity of customers to the rank of the sponsored search listings onS1, S2, andS. Let
S1i, S2i, Si denote the values of S1, S2, andS in the ith scenario. The constants γμ, γσ,k1, k2
determine the impact of the bid on the customers’ mean reservation price (μ(b)) and stan-
dard deviation (σ(b)), which in turn affects the probability of conversion. The constants are
selected such that the bid acts as a proxy for the rank of the listing.
The click-rate curves represent the sensitivity of customers to the position of listing on the
results page. Now, based on these click rate curves, the (S1, S2,S) policy provides inventory
thresholds that can be used as an important decision support tool.
Fig. 3 a, b: Moderate sensitivity input and output values
Fig. 4 a, b: Low sensitivity input and output values
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 High mean reservation price
6.1.1 Effect on S1
S1 Represents the level of inventory on hand beyond which no order is placed. It is observed
that S11 < S12 < S13. In the scenario i  1, customers are likely to visit the link only at the
top positions. This implies the retailer always has to bid extremely high to generate demand.
The quantity to be ordered is directly a function of demand generated. The cost of demand
generation is highest in the ﬁrst scenario, making it quite expensive to generate a higher level
of demand. The level of inventory beyond which no order is placed, S11, hence has the least
value. Similarly, in scenario i  3, the customers are marginally sensitive to the position of
the listing, i.e. they are likely to visit the website even with a relatively lower rank of the
listing. This provides the retailer with an opportunity to generate higher demand at a lower
cost. Hence, the quantum of demand generated is higher leading to a higher threshold value
for i  3, i.e.,S13 > S11. The scenario i  2 is an intermediate case that is self-explanatory.
6.1.2 Effect on S2
S2 Represents the desired level of inventory to be maintained each period. It is observed that
S21 < S22 < S23. The difﬁculty of generating a greater quantum of demand increases with
the sensitivity of the customers to the rank of the listings (i  1, 2, 3). In other words, the
retailer has to bid/invest higher in i  1 than i  3, to generate a higher level of demand at
a given cost. Hence, the demand generated decreases with the sensitivity of customers to the
rank of the listings. It is, therefore, optimal for the retailer to maintain lower inventory levels
as the sensitivity of the customers to the rank of the listings increases.
6.1.3 Effect on S
The value of S, the inventory level up to which the retailer does not bid in sponsored search
advertising, depends on the magnitude of the retailers’ cost-per-click. The behavior of S
with respect to the customers’ sensitivity to the rank of the listing follows the ordering:
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Low mean reservation price
S1 > S2 > S3. As the likelihood of conversion increases, the retailer has a higher incentive
to generate more trafﬁc. When the customers are less sensitive to the rank of the listing, the
retailer is likely to achieve higher sales at a lower rank. This encourages the retailer to bid
even at low levels of inventory. When the customers are highly sensitive to the rank of the
listing, a purchase is likely to happen only at high bids. Therefore, the retailer does not bid
at low levels of inventory when the customers are highly sensitive to the rank of the listing.
6.2 Effect of mean reservation price
Next, we evaluate the impact of varying the mean of the distribution of the customers’
reservation price on the multi-threshold policy by keeping the variance of the distribution
constant. A click rate curve with parameters α  0.1andβ  5 is considered, to account for
customers being moderately sensitive to the rankings. The bids are varied discretely in steps
of 10 between 0 and 100. We simulate both low and high customer reservation prices and
analyze the impact on the (S1, S2,S) policy.
The parameters with their numerical values are shown in Table 5.
The graphs showing the bid, order quantity, and proﬁt in both the scenarios are provided in
Figs. 5 and 6. The retailer is expected to earn higher proﬁts when the mean reservation price
of the customers is high. We ﬁnd that S1 increases as the mean reservation price increases.
Table 5 Parameter values used in the numerical analysis (Sect. 6.2)
Level of reservation price
Parameters
Values
High
{α, β, λ0, λ∞,γμ, γσ , k1, k2, K, θ, p, c, h, I}
{0.1, 5, 0.3, 1, 0.1, 1,
1.3, 0.5, 20, 0.8, 100,
40, 5, 20}
Low
{α, β, λ0, λ∞,γμ, γσ , k1, k2, K, θ, p, c, h, I}
{0.1, 5, 0.3, 1, 0.2, 0.1,
1.3, 0.5, 10, 0.6, 100,
40, 5, 20}
123

Annals of Operations Research
As the customer’s willingness to pay increases, the retailer is more likely to sell a higher
number of units leading to a higher threshold value for S1.
As a consequence, the retailer would order a larger quantity of items, which explains
the higher value of S2 in case of a higher mean reservation price. Our results show that
with a higher customer mean reservation price, the value of S decreases, implying that the
retailer should start bidding at a lower inventory threshold as the customer’s mean reservation
price increases. As the likelihood of purchase by a customer increases with a higher mean
reservation price, the retailer’s incentive to bid and attract more trafﬁc to his website increases
resulting in a lowering of the S threshold. With an increase in the mean reservation price
of the customer base, the retailer should bid higher and use sponsored search advertising in
conjunction with higher order quantities to boost proﬁt.
Fig. 7 a and b Bid and order quantity for low and medium budgets. c and d Bid and order quantity for high
and unconstrained (Baseline) budgets
123

Annals of Operations Research
6.3 Impact of budget constraint on sponsored search and reordering decisions
The above sections demonstrate the retailer’s optimal strategies and optimal policy when
there are no constraints on promotion budgets. In this section, we show how the promotion
strategy changes in the presence of a budget constraint.
We simulated three scenarios of low (budget  3000), medium (budget  4000) and high
(budget  6000) budgets. The parameter values used for these simulations are same as in
Sect. 5.2. For the budgeted cases, only an additional constraint of budget has been added
with all other parameters remaining the same. The graphs indicating the policy decisions at
each inventory level are presented in Fig. 7a-d.
The baseline case without any inventory constraint is also presented here to enable ease
of comparison to reader on optimal policy with and without budget constraint. A comparison
across all scenarios shows that the trend remains similar in all cases where bid is non-
decreasing with inventory and the optimal order quantity is non-increasing with the inventory
on hand for a given bid. However, the difference is in the thresholds of optimal policy obtained
in each of these scenarios. All parameters S1, S2, andS are non-decreasing as the budget
increases.
The ﬁrm invests more aggressively on bids and the ﬁrm assumes a far more proactive role
in terms of inventory replenishment in order to avoid a possible stockouts in case of baseline
scenario. In other words, the lower the budget available for promotion through sponsored
search, the more conservative would be the approach towards bid related investment. This
also explains why ﬁrms with lower promotional budgets do not maintain an unusually large
inventory, or order as frequently, (or as high) as in cases when higher promotional budgets
are available.
7 Conclusion
We have modelled a problem at the interface of marketing and operations in which an online
retailer coordinates its promotion through sponsored search advertising and complements
that with the inventory decisions. We endeavor to ﬁll a critical research gap by integrating
sponsored search bidding with inventory policies. We derive a multi-threshold decision rule,
wherein the promotion and ordering decisions are determined based on different threshold
levels of the inventory on hand. This policy provides a decision support framework for
managers optimizing both sponsored search bidding and inventory ordering decisions. We
ﬁnd that the optimal bid increases as the inventory on hand increases. Consequently, the order
quantity within a particular bid value decreases as the level of inventory increases. When
higher bids positively inﬂuence the demand generated, it is optimal to stock more inventory
as described in the policy. The sensitivity of customers to the ranking of advertisements
impacts the thresholds of the (S1, S2,S) policy. The inventory level beyond which a retailer
does not place an order and the desired level of inventory both decrease as customers become
more sensitive to the rank of the listing. With customers becoming more sensitive to the rank
of the listing, clicks and converts occur only at the higher ranks. This increases the cost of
clicks and converts leading to higher costs for generating demand. Therefore, an increase in
sensitivity to the ranking of the listing implies a higher cost of generating trafﬁc. On the other
hand, when the customers are less sensitive to the rank of the listing, the retailer is likely
to get higher sales at a lower cost. This encourages the retailer to bid even at low levels of
inventory.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Next, we ran the model for different levels of customers’ mean reservation prices. We
ﬁnd that the inventory level beyond which a retailer does not place an order and the desired
level of inventory both increase with the increase in customers’ mean reservation price. Our
results also show that the inventory level up to which the retailer does not bid decreases with
an increase in the customers’ mean reservation price. These imply that the retailer should
consider bidding at a lower inventory threshold as the customer’s mean reservation price
increases. The above insight is useful for the retailer as it provides critical recommendations
in terms of the bidding pattern. To ensure the generation of sufﬁcient clicks, it is more
proﬁtable for a retailer to bid higher when the customer base has a high mean reservation
price. In this scenario, the retailer uses a higher bid to generate a higher rank in the listing,
leading to a higher number of converts. Hence, sponsored search bidding complemented
with optimal inventory decisions leads to higher proﬁts for the retailer as customers’ mean
reservation price increase.
In this model, the bidding and replenishment decisions have the same periodicities. The
model can further be enhanced by considering different periodicities for the bidding and
replenishment decisions. In future studies, incorporating the supply-side considerations,
e.g., capacity and associated resource constraints for the retailer could make for interest-
ing research problems.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest Author A (Vaishnavi Tunuguntla) declares that she has no conﬂict of interest. Author B
(Preetam Basu) declares that he has no conﬂict of interest. Author C (Krishanu Rakshit) declares that he has
no conﬂict of interest. Author D (Thanos Papadopoulos) declares that he has no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix A: Flowchart depicting the multi-threshold Inventory
(S1,S2,ˆS) decision rules for bidding and ordering
123

Annals of Operations Research
Appendix B: Analytical proof for the multi-threshold policy
Analytically, we attempt to show the behavior of the optimal bid and order quantity as the
inventory on hand changes.
We use the monotone likelihood ratio property to analyze the results. We slightly modify
the existing proof of monotone likelihood Ratio Property taking into account the subtleties
of our model.
Let Z+ be the set of non-negative integers, and X be a discrete random variable with
probability mass function f (x, δ), x ∈Z+ write.
F(x, δ)  Pδ(X ≥x)  ∞
Kx f (K, δ). Assume that for any x ∈Z+ , f (x, δ)  0 ⇒
f (K, δ)  0 for every K(≥x) ∈Z+, i.e., F(x, δ)  0…equation (a1).
Let g(.) be a non-decreasing function over Z+ such that.
Eδ{g(X)}  ∞
x0 g(x) f (x, δ) … equation (a2).
exists ﬁnitely for every δ. In the application considered later, the effective range of X is
ﬁnite and hence the existence of Eδ{g(X)} is always guaranteed.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Lemma 1 The distribution of X has monotone likelihood ratio in the sense that
f (x2, δ2) f (x1, δ1) ≥f (x2, δ1) f (x1, δ2)
for every x1, x2 ∈Z+, x1 < x2, and every δ1, δ2, δ1 < δ2. Then,
(c)
For every x ∈Z+, F(x, δ) is non-decreasing in δ.
(d)
Eδ{g(x)} is non-decreasing in δ.
Proof This result is essentially known (Ferguson, 1967).
However, for the sake of completeness, taking care of the subtleties of present setup, a
proof is being shown below.
(a)
Take any ﬁxed x ∈Z+, andδ1, δ2, δ1 < δ2. Then by equation (a2) , for every
x1

∈Z+
< x, f (x, δ2) f (x1, δ1) ≥
f (x, δ1) f (x1, δ2) and summing this over all
suchx1,
f (x, δ2)

1 −F(x, δ1)

≥f (x, δ1){1 −F(x, δ2)…equation (a3).
Similarly, for every x2

∈Z+
≥x, f (x2, δ2) f (x, δ1) ≥f (x2, δ1) f (x, δ2) and sum-
ming this over all such x2,
F(x, δ2) f (x, δ1) ≥F(x, δ1) f (x, δ2)…equation (a4).
If f (x, δ1)  0, then by equation (a1), F(x, δ1)  0 ≤F(x, δ2). On the other hand, if
f (x, δ1) > 0, thenF(x, δ1) > 0. In this case, if F(x, δ1)  1, then by equation (a3),
F(x, δ2)  1, i.e. F(x, δ1)  F(x, δ2). Finally, if f (x, δ1) > 0andF(x, δ1) < 1, then
by equation (a3) and equation (a4),
F(x,δ2)
F(x,δ1) ≥f (x,δ2)
f (x,δ1) ≥1−F(x,δ2)
1−F(x,δ1) which yields F(x, δ1) ≤F(x, δ2). This proves (a).
(b) (b) Write h(0)  g(0), and h(x)  g(x) −g(x −1), x  1, 2, .. so that.
g(M)

∞
x0 g(M) f (x, δ)

∞
M0
M
x0 h(x) f (M, δ)

∞
x0
∞
Mx h(x) f (M, δ)  ∞
x0 h(x)F(M, δ) and (b) follows from (a), not-
ing that (i) F(0, δ)  1 and (ii) h(x) ≥0(x  1, 2, . . . ) as g(.) is non-decreasing
over Z+. Note that the change in order of summation in the above is justiﬁed because
Eδ{g(X)} exists ﬁnitely for every δ.
Lemma 2 If X follows the binomial distribution with parameters n and φ, then for every
non-decreasing function g(.) over Z+. E{g(x)} is non-decreasing in n as well as φ.
Proof The
probability
mass
function
of
X
is
given
by
f (x, n, φ)

 
n
0ptx

φx(1 −φ)n−x, i f x  0, 1, 2, . . . n
0, otherwise
Where ′n′ is a positive integer and 0 < φ < 1. Clearly, condition (1) is met with δ interpreted
as either norφ. As shown in (i) and (ii) below, (2) is also met with δ interpreted as either
norφ. Hence, the result follows from Lemma 1.
(i) For x1, x2 ∈Z+, x1 < x2, positive integers n1, n2, n1 < n2, and any ﬁxed
φ(o < φ < 1), let
A  f (x2, n2, φ) f (x1, n1, φ) −f (x2, n1, φ) f (x1, n2, φ)
If x
>
n1, then x2
>
n1 and A

0, while if x2
>
n1, then A

f (x2, n2, φ) f (x1, n1, φ) ≥0. If neither x1 nor x2 exceeds n1, then after a little simpli-
ﬁcation,
f (x2,n2,φ) f (x1,n1,φ)
f (x2,n1,φ) f (x1,n2,φ)  (n2−x1)!(n1−x2)!
(n2−x2)!(n1−x1)!  (n2−x2+1)...(n2−x1)
(n1−x2+1)...(n1−x1) > 1, i.e., A > 0
123

Annals of Operations Research
(ii) For x1, x2 ∈Z+, x1, x2, 0 < φ1, φ2 < 1, and any ﬁxed positive integer n, let B 
f (x2, n, φ2) f (x1, n, φ1) f (x1, n, φ2). If x1 > norx2 > n, then B  0. Else, if neither x1
nor x2 exceeds n, then f (x2,n,φ2) f (x1,n,φ1)
f (x2,n,φ1) f (x1,n,φ2) 

φ2(1−φ1)
φ1(1−φ2)
x2−x1 > 1, i.e.B > 0.
Proposition 1 Let 0 < φ1, φ2 < 1, and N and I be positive integers such that N > I. Then,
L

N
i0
i
j0 min(I, j)

N
0pti

φi
1(1 −φ1)N−i
i
0pt j

φ j
2(1 −φ2)i−j
is
non-
decreasing in I, N, and φ1.
Proof Trivially, L is non-decreasing in I, as min(I1, j) ≤min(I2, j) for I1 < I2. Next,
observe that L  N
i0 g(i)

N
0pti

φi
1(1 −φ1)N−i,… Equation (a5).
where g(i)  i
j0 min(I, j)

i
0pt j

φ j
2(1 −φ2)i−j
For any ﬁxed positive i, we can interpret g(i) as the expectation of H(Y)  min(I, Y),
where Y has the binomial distribution with parameters i and φ2. Since H(.) is non-decreasing,
by Lemma 2, g(i) is non-decreasing over positive integers i. Moreover, g(i) ≥0 for every
positive integer i, while, trivially, g(0)  0. Hence, g(.) is non-decreasing over Z+. Now, by
equation (a5), L can be interpreted as the expectation of g(X), where X has the binomial dis-
tribution with parameters N and φ1. Because g(.) is non-decreasing over Z+, it is immediate
from Lemma 2 that L is non-decreasing in N as well as φ1.
Consider the equations.
L(i, j) 
N!
j!(N−j)!(i−j)! ∗(φ1φ2) j ∗[φ1(1 −φ2)]i−j[1 −φ1]N−i …equation (a6).
Where φ1  λ(b)  click probability and φ2  F(p|b)  conversion probability.
π(t, I)  max 
b,q,0

N
i0
i
j0
L(i, j) ∗{(p ∗d) −(b ∗i) −h ∗(I −d) −(c ∗q)
+π(t −1, I −d + q)}
N
i0

Equation (a7).
Where d  min(I, j) and π(0, I)  s ∗I
Proposition 2 In order for the retailer to continue maximizing his proﬁts even at higher
inventories, optimal order quantity must be non-increasing with inventory for a given bid.
Proof We prove the above proposition by induction. We assume that p > c > s. Given that
the bid is constant, it can be implied that L1  L2  L3  · · ·  Ln
Let I ′  I + I.
From equation (a7), we get, π(0, I)  s ∗I
π

1, I ′
−π(1, I) 

c ∗(q1 −q1′′) −h

I −I ′
+ s

I ′ −I

+ s

q′
1 −q1

 (s −c)(q1′ −q1) + (s −h)

I ′ −I

> 0
. . . i f q1 > q′
1
π

2, I ′
−π(2, I)  c

q2 −q′
2

−h

I ′ −I

+ π

1, I ′ −d + q′
2

−π(1, I −d + q2)


q′
2 −q2

(s −h −c) +

I ′ −I

(s −2h) + (s −c)

q′
1 −q1

> 0 . . . i f q2 > q′
2
π

3, I ′
−π(3, I)  c(q3 −q3′) −h

I ′ −I

+ π

2, I ′ −d + q3′

−π(2, I −d + q3)


q′
3 −q3

(s −2h −c) +

I ′ −I

(s −3h) +

q′
2 −q2

(s −h −c)
+

q′
1 −q1

(s −c) > 0
. . . i f
q3 > q′
3
123

Annals of Operations Research
π

t, I ′
−π(t, I) 

I ′ −I

(s −th) +
t
j1

q′
j −q j

(s −(t −1)h −c)
> 0
i f q j > q′
j
This shows that at constant bids, optimal order quantity decreases with inventory.
Proposition 3 In order for the retailer to continue maximizing his proﬁts even at higher
inventories, the optimal bid must be non-decreasing with inventory for a ﬁxed order quantity.
Proof: We prove the above proposition by induction. We assume the retailers order the
same quantity each period, then from Proposition 1, the quantity L(i, j) ∗d changes with
N, φ1, andI. Bid affects Nandφ1. (Also, note that p ≫b).
Therefore, bandI affect L(i, j) ∗d.
π(0, I)  s ∗I
Let I ′  I + I.
π

1, I ′
−π(1, I)  (p + h −s)

L′
1d′
1 −L1d1

+ (s −h)

I ′ −I

+

b1N1φ11 −b′
1N1′φ′
11

if b′
1 ≥b1
π

2, I ′
−π(2, I)  (p + h)(L2′d2′ −L2d2) +

b2N2φ12 −b′
2N ′
2φ12′

+(p + h −s)(L2′L1′d1′ −L2L1d1) +

b1N1φ11 −b1′N ′
1φ11′

+(s −2h)

I ′ −I

+ (s −h)

L2L1d2 −L2′L′
1d′
2

. . . if b2′ ≥b2
π

3, I ′
−π(3, I)  (L3′d3′ −L3d3)(p + h) +

I ′ −I

(s −3h) + (b3N3φ13 −b3′N3′φ13′)
+(b2N2φ12 −b2′N2′φ12′) + (b1N1φ11 −b1′N1′φ11′) + (p + h)(L3′L2′d2′ −L3L2d2)
+(p + h −s)

L −3′L2′L1′d1′ −L3L2L1d1

+ (s −h)
×(L3L2L1d2 −L3′L2′L1′d2′) + (s −h)(L3L2L1d3 −L3′L2′L1′d3′) . . . if b3′ ≥b3
π

3, I ′
−π(3, I)  (L3′d3′ −L3d3)(p + h) +

I ′ −I

(s −3h) + (b3N3φ13 −b3′N3′φ13′)
+(b2N2φ12 −b2′N2′φ12′) + (b1N1φ11 −b1′N1′φ11′) + (p + h)(L3′L2′d2′ −L3L2d2)
+(p + h −s)

L −3′L2′L1′d1′ −L3L2L1d1

+ (s −h)(L3L2L1d2 −L3′L2′L1′d2′)
+(s −h)(L3L2L1d3 −L3′L2′L1′d3′) . . . if b3′ ≥b3
From this, it can be said that the optimal bid should be non-decreasing with inventory
when the retailer orders same quantity every period.
Proposition 4 For demand states d′ > d and ∀t,
(iii)
S2(t,d′) ≥S2(t,d)
(iv)
S2(t+1,d) ≥S2(t,d)
Proof (i) We prove the above proposition by induction. At t  1, the proﬁt maximization
problem reduces to the myopic newsboy problem and hence for d′ > d,S2(1,d′)  S1,d′ ≥
S1,d  S2(1,d).
From Proposition 1, we know that L(i, j) is non-decreasing in I, N, and φ1. Therefore at
t  2, for demand state d′ that is stochastically larger than the demand state d, S2,d′ ≥S2,d.
Hence, S2(2,d′) ≥S2(2,d).
Repeating the above step for t  3, 4, . . . , N, we complete the proof of (i).
(v) Since L(i, j) is non-decreasing in N and φ1, St+1,d ≥St,d. Therefore, S2(t+1,d) 
St+1,d ≥St,d  S2(t,d).
123

Annals of Operations Research
References
Abhishek, V., & Hosanagar, K. (2013). Optimal bidding in multi-item multislot sponsored search auctions.
Operations Research., 61(4), 855–873.
Agarwal, A., Hosanagar, K., & Smith, M. D. (2015). Do organic results help or hurt sponsored search perfor-
mance? Information Systems Research, 26(4), 695–713.
Amazon Listing service. (2019). Various consequences of running out amazon store order & inven-
tory? Retrieved March 22, 2022, from https://www.amazonlistingservice.com/blog/amazon-store-order-
inventory/
Avinadav, T., Herbon, A., & Spiegel, U. (2013). Optimal inventory policy for a perishable item with demand
function sensitive to price and time. International Journal of Production Economics, 144(2), 497–506.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.03.022
Balcer, Y. (1983). Optimal advertising and inventory control of perishable goods. Naval Research Logistics
Quarterly, 30(4), 609–625. https://doi.org/10.1002/nav.3800300406
Banciu, M., & Mirchandani, P. (2013). New results concerning probability distributions with increasing gen-
eralized failure rates. Operations Research, 61(4), 925–931.
Barbosa, B., Saura, J. R., Zekan, S. B., & Ribeiro-Soriano, D. (2023). Deﬁning content marketing and its
inﬂuence on online user behavior: A data-driven prescriptive analytics method. Annals of Operations
Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05261-1
Bulinskaya, E. V. (2004). Stochastic orders and inventory problems. International Journal of Production
Economics, 88(2), 125–135.
Chan, T. Y., & Park, Y.-H. (2015). Consumer search activities and the value of ad positions in sponsored search
advertising. Marketing Science, 34(4), 606–623. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2015.0903
Chen, L. (2008). Combining keyword search advertisement and site–targeted advertisement in search engine
advertising. Journal of Service Science and Management, 1(3), 233–243. https://doi.org/10.4236/jssm.
2008.13025
Chen, B., Li, L., Wang, Q., & Li, S. (2022). Promote or inhibit? Research on the transition of consumer potential
purchase intention. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04777-2
Cheng, F., & Sethi, S. P. (1999). A periodic review inventory model with demand inﬂuenced by promotion
decisions. Management Science, 45(11), 1510–1523. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.45.11.1510
Darmawan, A., Wong, H., & Thorstenson, A. (2018). Integration of promotion and production decisions in
sales and operations planning. International Journal of Production Research, 56(12), 4186–4206. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1431418
Dayanik, S., & Parlar, M. (2013). Dynamic bidding strategies in search-based advertising. Annals of Operations
Research, 211(1), 103–136. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-013-1427-z
Dayanik, S., & Sezer, S. O. (2023). Optimal dynamic multi-keyword bidding policy of an advertiser in search-
based advertising. Mathematical Methods of Operations Research, 97(1), 25–56.
Dinner, I. M., Van Heerde, H. J., & Neslin, S. A. (2014). Driving online and ofﬂine sales: The cross-channel
effects of traditional, online display, and paid search advertising. Journal of Marketing Research, 51(5),
527–545. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmr.11.0466
Erdmann, A., Arilla, R., & Ponzoa, J. M. (2022). Search engine optimization: The long-term strategy of
keyword choice. Journal of Business Research, 144, 650–662.
Feng, Q., & Shanthikumar, J. G. (2022). Applications of stochastic orders and stochastic functions in inventory
and pricing problems. Production and Operations Management, 31(4), 1433–1453.
Ferguson, T. S. (1967). Mathematical statistics: A decision theoretic approach. Academic Press Inc.
Gaede, K. W. (1991). Stochastic orderings in reliability. Lecture notes-monograph series (pp. 123–140).
JSTOR.
Ghose, A., Ipeirotis, P. G., & Li, B. (2014). Examining the impact of ranking on consumer behavior and search
engine revenue. Management Science, 60(7), 1632–1654. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2013.1828
Ghose, A., & Yang, S. (2009). An empirical analysis of search engine advertising: Sponsored search in
electronic markets. Management Science, 55(10), 1605–1622. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1090.1054
Goldfarb, A., & Tucker, C. (2011). Search engine advertising: Channel substitution when pricing ads to context.
Management Science, 57(3), 458–470. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1100.1287
Google Adwords. (2020a). About quality score–Google Ads help. Retrieved November 9, 2020, from https://
support.google.com/google-ads/answer/7050591?hl=en
Google Adwords. (2020b). Estimate your results with bid, budget and target simulators–Google Ads help.
Retrieved March 5, 2020, from https://support.google.com/google-ads/answer/2470105?hl=en
Im, I., Dunn, B. K., Lee, D. I., Galletta, D. F., & Jeong, S. O. (2019). Predicting the intent of sponsored search
users: An exploratory user session-level analysis. Decision Support Systems, 121, 25–36. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.dss.2019.04.001
123

Annals of Operations Research
Jing, X., & Lewis, M. (2011). Stockouts in online retailing. Journal of Marketing Research. https://doi.org/
10.1509/jmkr.48.2.342
Johansson, J. K. (1979). Advertising and the S-curve: A new approach. Journal of Marketing Research, 16(3),
346–354.
Karlin, S., & Carr, C. R. (1962). Prices and optimal inventory policies. Chapter 10 in studies in applied
probability and management science. Stanford University Press.
Krystina, G. (2015). Retailers are losing $1.75 trillion over this. Retrieved January 29, 2017, from http://www.
cnbc.com/2015/11/30/retailers-are-losing-nearly-2-trillion-over-this.html
Kurata, H., & Liu, J. J. (2006). Optimal promotion planning-depth and frequency-for a two-stage supply chain
under Markov switching demand. European Journal of Operational Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejor.2006.01.009
Laffey, D. (2007). Paid search: The innovation that changed the web. Business Horizons, 50(3), 211–218.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2006.09.003
Lariviere,M.A.(2006).Anoteonprobabilitydistributionswithincreasinggeneralizedfailurerates.Operations
Research, 54(3), 602–604.
Little, J. D. C. (1979). Feature article—aggregate advertising models: The state of the art. Operations Research,
27(4), 629–667. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.27.4.629
Lu, Y., Xu, M., & Yu, Y. (2018). Coordinating pricing, ordering and advertising for perishable products over an
inﬁnite horizon. Journal of Systems Science and Systems Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11518-
017-5357-1
Mallidis, I., Sariannidis, N., Vlachos, D., Yakavenka, V., Aifadopoulou, G., & Zopounidis, K. (2022). Optimal
inventory control policies for avoiding food waste. Operational Research, 22, 1–17.
Moe, W. W. (2013). Advanced database marketing: Innovative methodologies and applications for managing
customer relationships. Gower Publishing, Ltd. Retrieved from https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&
lr=&id=U-rJDPt0X4IC&pgis=1
Nguyen, D. H., & Chen, H. (2022). An effective approach for optimization of a perishable inventory system
with uncertainty in both demand and supply. International Transactions in Operational Research, 29(4),
2682–2704.
PR NewsWire. (2012). UK Retailers’ Christmas gamble fails as stock-outs could cost 1.87bn pounds sterling
in lost opportunities this Christmas–The street. Retrieved January 29, 2017, from https://www.thestreet.
com/story/11790107/1/uk-retailers-christmas-gamble-fails-as-stock-outs-could-cost-187bn-pounds-
sterling-in-lost-opportunities-this-christmas.html
Pereira, D. F., Oliveira, J. F., & Carravilla, M. A. (2020). Tactical sales and operations planning: A holis-
tic framework and a literature review of decision-making models. International Journal of Production
Economics, 228, 107695. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPE.2020.107695
Rao, S., Grifﬁs, S. E., & Goldsby, T. J. (2011). Failure to deliver? Linking online order fulﬁllment glitches
with future purchase behavior. Journal of Operations Management, 29(7–8), 692–703.
Scholz, M., Brenner, C., & Hinz, O. (2019). AKEGIS: Automatic keyword generation for sponsored search
advertising in online retailing. Decision Support Systems, 119, 96–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.
2019.02.001
Shah, N. H., Soni, H. N., & Patel, K. A. (2013). Optimizing inventory and marketing policy for non-
instantaneous deteriorating items with generalized type deterioration and holding cost rates. Omega,
41(2), 421–430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2012.03.002
Sogomonian, A. G., & Tang, C. S. (1993). A modeling framework for coordinating promotion and production
decisions within a ﬁrm. Management Science, 39(2), 191–203. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.39.2.191
Statista. (2022). Search advertising: Market data & analysis. Retrieved September 18, 2023, from https://www.
statista.com/study/38338/digital-advertising-report-search-advertising/
Sun, X. (2023). Strategy analysis for a digital content platform considering perishability. Annals of Operations
Research, 320(1), 415–439.
Tan, Y., & Mookerjee, V. S. (2005). Allocating spending between advertising and information technology in
electronic retailing. Management Science, 51(8), 1236–1249. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1050.0424
Tunuguntla, V., Basu, P., Rakshit, K., & Ghosh, D. (2019). Sponsored search advertising and dynamic pric-
ing for perishable products under inventory-linked customer willingness to pay. European Journal of
Operational Research, 276(1), 119–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.12.026
Urban, T. L. (1992). Deterministic inventory models incorporating marketing decisions. Computers & Indus-
trial Engineering, 22(1), 85–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/0360-8352(92)90035-I
Varian, H. R. (2007). Position auctions. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 25(6), 1163–1178.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijindorg.2006.10.002
Villas-Boas, J. M. (1993). Predicting advertising pulsing policies in an oligopoly: A model and empirical test.
Marketing Science, 12(1), 88–102. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.12.1.88
123

Annals of Operations Research
Wei, Y., & Chen (Frank), Y. (2011). Joint determination of inventory replenishment and sales effort with
uncertain market responses. International Journal of Production Economics, 134(2), 368–374. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2009.11.011
Yang, S., & Ghose, A. (2010). Analyzing the relationship between organic and sponsored search advertising:
Positive, negative, or zero interdependence? Marketing Science, 29(4), 602–623. https://doi.org/10.1287/
mksc.1090.0552
Yang, S., Lu, S., & Lu, X. (2014). Modeling competition and its impact on paid-search advertising. Marketing
Science, 33(1), 134–153. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2013.0812
Ye, S., Aydin, G., & Hu, S. (2015). Sponsored search marketing: Dynamic pricing and advertising for an online
retailer. Management Science, 61(6), 1255–1274. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2014.1915
Zhang, J.-L., Chen, J., & Lee, C.-Y. (2008). Joint optimization on pricing, promotion and inventory control
with stochastic demand. International Journal of Production Economics, 116(2), 190–198. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2008.09.008
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123