TITLE: A matheuristic approach to large-scale avionic scheduling
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03608-6
---

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03608-6
S.I.: PATAT 2018
A matheuristic approach to large-scale avionic scheduling
Emil Karlsson1,2
· Elina Rönnberg1,2
· Andreas Stenberg2 · Hannes Uppman2
Published online: 14 May 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Pre-runtime scheduling of avionic systems is used to ensure that the systems provide the
desired functionality at the correct time. This paper considers scheduling of an integrated
modular avionic system which from a more general perspective can be seen as a multipro-
cessor scheduling problem that includes a communication network. The addressed system
is practically relevant and the computational evaluations are made on large-scale instances
developed together with the industrial partner Saab. A subset of the instances is made pub-
licly available. Our contribution is a matheuristic for solving these large-scale instances and
it is obtained by improving the model formulations used in a previously suggested constraint
generation procedure and by including an adaptive large neighbourhood search to extend it
into a matheuristic. Characteristics of our adaptive large neighbourhood search are that it is
made over both discrete and continuous variables and that it needs to balance the search for
feasibility and proﬁtable objective value. The repair operation is to apply a mixed-integer
programming solver on a model where most of the constraints are treated as soft and a viola-
tion of them is instead penalised in the objective function. The largest solved instance, with
respect to the number of tasks, has 54,731 tasks and 2530 communication messages.
Keywords Multiprocessor scheduling · Avionic system · Matheuristic · Adaptive large
neighbourhood search · Integer programming · Scheduling
1 Introduction
Modern aircraft host a huge amount of electronics such as sensors that gather information,
units where the information is processed, actuators that control the aircraft, and equipment
that presents information to the pilot. Electronics in an aircraft is called avionics and due to
the real-time requirements of avionic systems, it is not sufﬁcient that the logical result of a
computation is correct, it is also crucial that the result is produced at the correct time. This
punctuality can be ensured by having a schedule for all activities in the system. Scheduling
of real-time systems can refer either to on-line scheduling where the scheduling decisions are
B Elina Rönnberg
elina.ronnberg@liu.se
1
Department of Mathematics, Linköping University, 581 83 Linköping, Sweden
2
Saab AB, 581 88 Linköping, Sweden
123

426
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
made at runtime or, as in this work, to pre-runtime (off-line) scheduling where the schedule
is created at compile time.
This work addresses the scheduling of an industrially relevant Integrated Modular Avionic
(IMA) system, that was introduced in Blikstad et al. (2018). This problem can be consid-
ered as a multiprocessor scheduling problem, where the tasks have multiple time windows
and precedence relations between them, combined with the scheduling of a communication
network. In the avionics context, a processor is referred to as a module and we consider the
case when all tasks are beforehand assigned to a module. The communication network is
scheduled by assigning communication messages to time slots. To send a communication
message involves the execution of certain tasks on the involved modules and for this reason,
the task and communication scheduling are closely integrated. Compared to the problem for-
mulation used in Blikstad et al. (2018), we here also include the possibility of co-allocation
of messages in a time slot as introduced in Rönnberg (2018). There is no objective function
and the purpose of the scheduling is to ﬁnd a feasible solution or to conclude that none exists.
The future industrial need is a capability to solve very large-scale instances of avionics
scheduling problems of this kind and the contributions of this paper are extensions of previous
work that facilitate this. In the previous works Blikstad et al. (2018), Karlsson and Rönnberg
(2018), and Rönnberg (2018), the largest instance solved has 15 modules and about 20,000
tasks (about 50% of these are ﬁxed tasks and 6000 of the tasks are placed on the most occupied
module).
A ﬁrst contribution of the paper is an exact solution approach based on a constraint
generation procedure which is obtained by combining and improving the models and methods
presented in Blikstad et al. (2018), Karlsson and Rönnberg (2018), Rönnberg (2018), and
Boberg (2017). The constraint generation procedure alternates between solving a relaxation
of the problem and using its solution to restrict the solution space to deﬁne a subproblem.
If this subproblem has a feasible solution, this is a solution to the original problem, and
otherwise new constraints are added to the relaxed problem and the procedure is repeated.
Since it is important that the solution to the relaxed problem has a good chance to yield a
feasible solution to the subproblem, the relaxed problem has an objective function with the
purpose to contribute to this.
The results for the exact constraint generation procedure show that such decomposition
approach is efﬁcient for the problem structure, but in order to solve even larger instances, a
second contribution of this paper is to extend it into a matheuristic method (see e.g. Maniezzo
et al. (2010) and Archetti and Speranza (2014)) by combining it with an Adaptive Large
Neighbourhood Search (ALNS) [see Ropke and Pisinger (2006) and Pisinger and Ropke
(2007)] for solving the relaxed problem. To ﬁnd a feasible solution to the relaxed problem is
for larger instances a true challenge and our ALNS is therefore carefully designed with respect
to searching for feasibility while taking the value of the objective function into account. This
is obtained by the following two key components. Firstly, since the repair method needs to
handle both discrete and continuous variables, several kinds of constraints, and an objective
function, we have chosen to repair the solution by using a mixed integer programming (MIP)-
solver. This gives the possibility to beneﬁt from the very efﬁcient heuristics implemented
in commercial solvers, as initially suggested in Muller et al. (2012). Secondly, the adaptive
mechanism of our ALNS is used to handle the balance between the objective value and
feasibility with respect to various constraints in a strategic oscillation fashion.
Our computational results are provided for two categories of industrially relevant
instances. The ﬁrst category, which is not publicly available, orginates from Blikstad et al.
(2018) and it is included to provide a comparison to our previous work. The second cate-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
427
Fig. 1 An overview of a system with n nodes. The structure of the content is the same for all nodes and
therefore only displayed for node 1 and n
gory is new and derived to be industrially relevant but generic enough to be made publicly
available.
This section continues with a brief presentation of the industrialbackground of the problem
and a review of research that include avionics scheduling and MIP. Thereafter follows a
description of related work on matheuristics and ALNS, the latter with a particular emphasis
on strategies that use MIP-models to repair the solution. The section ends with an outline of
the paper and a summary of its contributions.
1.1 Problem statement
The addressed avionic system scheduling problem was introduced in Blikstad et al. (2018),
where a detailed technical background of the problem statement was given. The ﬁrst
description was extended in Rönnberg (2018) to include further details with respect to
the communication scheduling. Here, we give the problem statement without describing
its complete technical background and refer the interested reader to Blikstad et al. (2018)
and Rönnberg (2018) for these.
The considered avionic system, illustrated in Fig. 1, contains a set of nodes with modules
(processors) that hosts tasks. Each node contains a single communication module (CM),
and one or more application modules (AMs). A CM handles the external, inter-node, and
intra-node communication of the node and an AM runs the software applications. These
applications are grouped and assigned to partitions that are the entities treated as tasks to
be scheduled. The nodes communicate by sending messages on a communication network
(CN) from a single CM to a set of receiving CMs and the communication protocol is such
that messages are sent in discrete time slots. The considered system executes periodically,
meaning that a schedule, called a major frame, is repeated inﬁnitely.
The tasks in the system execute periodically and all tasks on the CMs have the same period
as the system. On the AMs, the period of a task can be a divisor of that of a major frame, and
123

428
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
then there are multiple instances of a task in a major frame. Each task must be performed
on a particular module for the duration of its execution requirement without overlapping any
other task. For each task, there is a set of sub-intervals and each task must be assigned to one
of these. Between each ordered pair of tasks on an AM, there is an additional requirement
that there should be a minimum idle time between them.
There are precedence relations between tasks and these are referred to as dependencies.
A dependency restricts the duration between the start of an instance of a task to the start of
an instance of another task to be within the interval given by a minimal and a maximal time
lag.
To send and receive a message on a CN, there are four types of tasks that are performed in
a particular order on the involved CMs. On the sending CM, there is ﬁrst a task that prepares
the message and then a task that sends the message. On each receiving CM, there is ﬁrst a
task that dequeues the message and then a task that reads the data. Each message sent through
the CN must be assigned to a time slot, and thereby claim some of the capacity available
in this slot. Each slot has a maximum capacity that cannot be exceeded by the combined
requirement of the messages assigned to the slot. If two or more messages are sent in the
same slot, their tasks of the same type must be performed in immediate succession and with a
reduced execution requirement compared to if they were performed separately. Furthermore,
the assignment of a message to a slot imposes slot-unique release times and deadlines on the
tasks involved.
Further details are presented in Sect. 2, along with the mathematical model; there, and
throughout the paper, the model is divided into four components:
– AM-scheduling
– CM-scheduling
– Precedence relations
– CN-scheduling
AM-scheduling and CM-scheduling refers to the scheduling of tasks on the AMs and CMs
respectively, while Precedence relations refers to the dependencies between tasks and CN-
scheduling refers to the communication message scheduling and the additional requirements
on the tasks involved in sending and receiving messages.
The problem statement does not include an objective function since all feasible solutions
to the problem are considered equally good. Instead, the challenge is to determine whether a
feasiblesolutionexistsornot,andifthereisafeasiblesolution,provideaschedule.Aschedule
for a major frame is deﬁned by two types of decisions, the assignment of communication
messages to time slots and the assignment of start times to tasks.
1.2 Related work on avionic scheduling
The solution approach in this paper utilises MIP techniques to solve a pre-runtime schedul-
ing problem that occurs in the development of IMA systems. Therefore, we restrict the
related work on avionic scheduling to contributions that apply MIP approaches to pre-runtime
scheduling of IMA systems. We start by characterising the previous work with respect to the
decisions to be made while scheduling and how they are constrained. This is followed by
a description of solution approaches. For a technically oriented overview of scheduling in
IMA systems, we refer to Blikstad et al. (2018).
In our problem setting, each task is limited to execute on a speciﬁc module and this gives
a reduced complexity compared to when each task must be assigned to a module with respect
to different side constraints, as in Hao et al. (2018) and Eisenbrand et al. (2010). In Hao
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
429
et al. (2018), the assignment is done with respect to memory and security constraints, while
in Eisenbrand et al. (2010) this is done with respect to memory requirements, the bandwidth
of the network linking together the modules, and co-habitation constraints (a subset of tasks
must execute on the same or a speciﬁc module).
In an IMA system, software applications typically must communicate with each other
within certain time limits. This often occurs as precedence constraints between tasks or
instances of tasks forcing them to execute within a given duration of one another. In our
problem setting, we have precedence constraints between particular instances of tasks, while
in the problem setting of Hao et al. (2018), Zhang et al. (2014), Craciunas and Oliver (2016),
and Lhachemi et al. (2016), they have precedence constraints between tasks. When prece-
dence constraints are deﬁned between tasks, the constraint forces the instances of the involved
tasks to execute within a given duration of another. In Craciunas and Oliver (2016) and Lha-
chemi et al. (2016), the number of instances of the tasks involved in a precedence constraint
are assumed to be the same, while in Hao et al. (2018) and Zhang et al. (2014) any number
of instances of the tasks in a precedence constraint is allowed. In Hao et al. (2018), they also
handle constraints related to if tasks execute on the same module or not.
An Ethernet network is often used for communication between tasks on different modules.
Depending on the modelling of this network, the level of interaction between communication
and task scheduling can differ. In our model, a speciﬁc time-triggered Ethernet network,
described in Blikstad et al. (2018), is used where the messages sent on the network must
obey sequencing constraints. The messages sent on the network are associated with tasks on
the modules and this increases the complexity of the scheduling problem. In Zhang et al.
(2014) and Craciunas and Oliver (2016), who both also address time-triggered Ethernet
networks, there are sequencing constraints between messages sent on the network that are
linked to tasks on the modules. However, in Eisenbrand et al. (2010), an Avionics Full-Duplex
Switched Ethernet network is studied, and there the network communication appears as an
extra knapsack constraint on the assignment of tasks to modules, where each module has a
maximum bandwidth limit.
There exist various solution approaches to tackle the scheduling problems in IMA systems
usingMIPtechniques.InHaoetal.(2018),Lhachemietal.(2016),andZhangetal.(2014),the
authors state MIP models and solve problems with up to 5, 10 and, 270 tasks, respectively.
In Eisenbrand et al. (2010) the authors present three different MIP formulations for their
problem and compare their performance to a heuristic for instances with up to 177 tasks.
An exact incremental solution approach utilising the problem structure, as well as a solution
approach for solving the entire problem at once, are presented in Craciunas and Oliver (2016).
Their performance is evaluated on instances with up to 6912 tasks, using both a satisﬁability
modulo theory solver and a MIP solver.
In our problem, the model for the communication between modules is very detailed,
resulting in more tasks than described in existing literature concerning scheduling of IMA
systems. We will present results for instances with up to 54,731 tasks, which is to be compared
to that the maximum number of tasks that we have found in the existing literature is 6912.
1.3 Related work on matheuristics and ALNS
In the proceedings of the ﬁrst workshop on matheuristics in 2008, Caserta and Voß
(2010) described matheuristics as exploiting mathematical programming techniques in
(meta)heuristic frameworks. In the following years, matheuristics received an increased
attention from the combinatorial optimisation community, and a number of contributions on
123

430
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
matheuristics were published and summarised in three surveys. The ﬁrst survey, by Doerner
and Schmid (2010), presented matheuristic techniques applied to rich vehicle routing prob-
lems. The second survey, by Ball (2011), focused on the different application areas in which
matheuristics had been used. In the third survey the topic was again matheuristic techniques
applied to routing problems, this time by Archetti and Speranza (2014). The topic was relevant
to survey once more thanks to the number of contributions in these years.
Since then, matheuristic techniques have been applied to an even wider range of applica-
tions. Two recent examples being Guido et al. (2018), who uses MIP models to explore large
neighbourhoods in a metaheuristic search for an ofﬂine patient-to-bed assignment problem,
and Framinan and Perez-Gonzalez (2018), who use a succession of MIP models in an approx-
imation algorithm for an order scheduling problem. The matheuristic to be presented in this
paper is based on an ALNS that uses restricted MIP models to explore large neighbourhoods
efﬁciently.
The ALNS framework was introduced in the papers Ropke and Pisinger (2006) and
Pisinger and Ropke (2007) as an extension of the large neighbourhood search (LNS) by
Shaw (1998). LNS is a metaheuristic strategy that iteratively tries to improve a solution by
exploring large neighbourhoods. In an LNS, the move of an iteration is deﬁned by two oper-
ators, a destroy operator that creates a neighborhood by destroying the current solution and a
repair operator that reconstruct a solution given a neighborhood. Different destroy and repair
operators are typically deﬁned, and a pair of these is selected at random in an iteration. The
ALNS framework extends LNS by employing a master level metaheuristic (or local search)
to guide the neighbourhood search, together with a mechanism to adapt the algorithm based
on its performance. In Ropke and Pisinger (2006) and Pisinger and Ropke (2007), simulated
annealing was used as the master level metaheuristic.
In Ropke and Pisinger (2006), the ALNS framework was applied to the pickup and delivery
problem with time windows and in Pisinger and Ropke (2007), it was used to solve a general
routing problem. Since then, the ALNS framework has been successfully applied to a number
of different optimization problems; see for example time-tabling in Kiefer et al. (2017),
optimisation of yard assignment in an automotive transshipment terminal in Cordeau et al.
(2011), scheduling twin yard cranes in Gharehgozli et al. (2015), and multi-mode resource-
constrained project scheduling in Gerhards et al. (2017).
In the original ALNS framework, the authors suggest using fast heuristics to repair the
destroyed solution. However, in Muller et al. (2012), the authors instead use MIP models as
repair operators. Their motivation for this is that the heuristics in commercial MIP solvers
have become efﬁcient enough to be used instead of fast problem-speciﬁc heuristics. This
is particularly useful for complex problems where it is not straightforward to implement
efﬁcient heuristics. In Muller et al. (2012), the authors employ a strategy where the destroy
operator releases a set of variables from their current solution while keeping the rest ﬁxed.
This creates a restricted MIP-model that deﬁnes the neighbourhood to be searched. The solver
then acts as the repair operator and tries to ﬁnd a new solution to the restricted MIP model
that improves the objective compared to the solution that was destroyed. Since the solution
of the restricted MIP model of an iteration is a feasible solution for the restricted MIP of the
next iteration, Muller et al. (2012) use steepest descent as the master level heuristic to guide
the neighbourhood search. As a mechanism to improve diversity, Muller et al. (2012) restart
the search with the next best solution if no improvement is found in a predetermined number
of iterations.
Since then, MIP models have been further used in ALNS. Two publications that utilise
restricted MIP models as repair operators, similar to Muller et al. (2012), are Mancini (2016)
that solve a vehicle routing problem, and Belo-Filho et al. (2015) that solve an integrated
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
431
production and distribution problem. Both their algorithms use the solution of the previous
iteration as a feasible starting solution in the next iteration, and then only accept a new
solution if it improves the objective. Neither of them employ a restart mechanism.
In Gerhards et al. (2017), the authors implement MIP models as repair operators in an
ALNS to a solve a multi-mode resource scheduling problem. After each iteration, they per-
form a problem speciﬁc heuristic, called Serial Schedule Generation Scheme, in an attempt
to improve the solution created by the repair operator. A difference in Gerhards et al. (2017),
compared to Muller et al. (2012), is that they use different objectives in the repair operators,
which might result in a solution with a worse global objective than the solution of the previous
iteration. Regardless of the new value of the global objective, the authors always keep their
new solution, and therefore their master level metaheuristic can be interpreted as a variable
neighbourhood descent method.
The work of Pereira et al. (2015) uses repair operators that hybridise the use of a con-
structive heuristic and a MIP model within their ALNS search developed for the probabilistic
maximal covering location-allocation problem. In an iteration, the authors ﬁrst destroy and
repair the location decision by a pair of destroy and repair heuristics, and secondly they
recreate a complete solution to the original problem using a MIP model.
1.4 Outline and contribution
The motivation for the solution method to be presented in this paper is the industrial need
for a scheduling tool that can be used for large-scale avionic scheduling instances of the
kind addressed in this paper. To this end, Sect. 2 ﬁrst presents an exact solution approach
based on a constraint generation procedure which is the outcome of combining models
and methods presented in Blikstad et al. (2018), Karlsson and Rönnberg (2018), Rönnberg
(2018), and Boberg (2017) with some further improvements which yield a signiﬁcant increase
in computational performance.
To further enhance the capability to solve very large-scale problems, Sect. 3 presents how
the constraint generation procedure is extended into a matheuristic. The matheuristic uses
an ALNS to solve the relaxation of the problem used in the constraint generation procedure,
and the search explores the neighbourhoods by solving MIP models. To achieve feasibility
in this relaxed problem is difﬁcult, and we therefore designed the ALNS to balance the focus
between the objective value and feasibility in a way inspired by strategic oscillation, see
Glover (1977).
Section 4 contains computational results for two categories of industrially relevant
instances. The ﬁrst category, which is not publicly available, is included since it is important
for our project. Some of these instances were introduced in Blikstad et al. (2018) and enable
comparision to our previous work. The second category is new and derived to be industrially
relevant but expressed in generic enough terms to be made publicly available.1 As illus-
trated by the computational results for these instances, both the improvements of the exact
approach, as introduced in Sect. 2, and the design and use of an ALNS, introduced in Sect. 3,
successfully contributes to solving very large-scale instances that could not previously be
solved. The paper is ended by concluding remarks in Sect. 5.
1 https://gitlab.liu.se/eliro15/avionics_inst/tree/master.
123

432
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
2 Exact solution approach
A mathematical model and an exact solution approach based on constraint generation were
presented in Blikstad et al. (2018) and the exact procedure to be described in this section is
based on the same mechanisms as the original one. Therefore, we begin this section with a
short review of the original procedure, followed by a summary of the enhancements made,
and then the details of the exact approach proposed in this paper are presented.
2.1 The constraint generation procedure from previous work
Already in Blikstad et al. (2018), the mathematical model was divided into the four com-
ponents Precedence relations, AM-scheduling, CN-scheduling, and CM-scheduling. It was
then observed that for problem instances of practical relevance
– the computational challenge is due to the large number of tasks to be sequenced on the
CMs,
– a considerable amount of the tasks on the CMs are ﬁxed, and
– the technical restrictions, like release times and deadlines of tasks, precedence relations
and CN-scheduling, are not particularly tight.
Together, these characteristics make it proﬁtable to make the following model formulation,
which is suitable for constraint generation. This formulation divides the CM-scheduling com-
ponent into relaxed CM-scheduling and CM-sequencing. For the relaxed CM-scheduling, a
so-called section is deﬁned for each part of a major frame that is not occupied by a ﬁxed task,
and it is required that each non-ﬁxed task is assigned to a section, while complying with all
requirements related to CM-scheduling, except preventing non-ﬁxed CM-tasks from over-
lapping. In a complete model for the problem, CM-sequencing refers to that, for each set of
non-ﬁxed tasks that can be assigned to the same section, require that the tasks cannot overlap.
This complete model, of course, includes an extreme number of variables and constraints,
but by design, this formulations lends itself to constraint generation.
The constraint generation procedure begins with solving a relaxed problem where the
mathematical model includes the components Precedence relations, AM-scheduling, CN-
scheduling, and relaxed CM-scheduling. In a solution to the relaxed problem, each task is
assigned to a section. By restricting the solution space of the complete model to comply with
a solution to the relaxed problem, only a very small subset of CM-sequencing constraints
are relevant to include in the model. Hence, a subproblem is deﬁned by solving the complete
model under the restriction imposed by the solution to the relaxed problem. In the subprob-
lem, there is no guarantee that CM-sequencing is possible, therefore, the CM-sequencing
constraints are treated as soft constraints and the objective of the subproblem is to minimize
the number of overlapping CM-tasks.
If the subproblem ﬁnds a solution where there are no overlaps, a solution to the complete
model has been found. Otherwise, it can be detected which of the CM-sequencing constraints
are violated, and these can be added to the relaxed problem, which is then re-solved. This
process can be repeated until an overlap-free solution to the subproblem is found. Conver-
gence of the method follows from that there is a ﬁnite number of constraints to be added
to the relaxed problem, and that in each iteration, at least one new constraint is added. In
practice, the success of the method relies on that only very few of the constraints need to be
generated.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
433
2.2 The constraint generation procedure proposed in this work
The constraint generation procedure used in this work differs from previous work as follows.
Firstly, in Blikstad et al. (2018), a restriction of the industrial problem was studied, since the
possibility of co-allocating CN-messages was omitted. To allow co-allocation of messages
is important from a practical point of view, but it makes the problem computationally more
challenging because of the additional decisions to be made. In this paper, co-allocation is
included as outlined in Rönnberg (2018), but with some improvements of the mathematical
modelling.
Secondly, the relaxed CM-scheduling component has been improved by, instead of assign-
ing the CM-tasks to a section (that is, part of a major frame that is not occupied by a ﬁxed task)
assign each CM-task to a smaller interval where the task must be placed, as outlined in Karls-
son and Rönnberg (2018). This more ﬁne-grained decision is made possible because after
pre-processing, the interval between the release time and deadline of a task is divided into
several sub-intervals, and it is known that in a feasible solution, a task must be placed within
one of these sub-intervals. Thirdly, in the Bachelor thesis Boberg (2017), a computational
study was performed to investigate which mathematical formulation of the CM-sequencing
componentperformsbest.TheresultsofthisstudyledtoamodiﬁcationoftheCM-sequencing
constraints compared to Blikstad et al. (2018).
By combining these enhancements, together with some further improvements of details,
the resulting mathematical model is as to be presented. The model is divided into a Relaxed
problem and a Subproblem, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The presentation of the model is structured
such that it begins with introducing parts of the formulation that are common for AM- and
CM-scheduling and it continues to present each of the model components according to the
section references in Fig. 2. A consequence of the model changes is that the constraint called
chains in Blikstad et al. (2018) has become redundant and it is therefore removed in this
work. An overview of the solution procedure is presented after the model components.
2.3 Common for AM- and CM-scheduling
Let the set I index all tasks in the system and let P denote the length of the major frame. Task
i has an execution requirement ei and must execute without preemption within the interval
between its release time tr
i and deadline td
i , i ∈I. If tr
i = td
i −ei holds, task i is referred to as
ﬁxed. The period of task i is denoted by pi, i ∈I, with pi being a divisor of P so that there
are P/pi instances of task i in a major frame. For i ∈I, introduce the continuous variable
xi = start time of task i.
Let HCM and HAM denote the set of CMs and the set of AMs, respectively. Let the set Ih
include the indices of the tasks assigned to module h ∈HCM ∪HAM. For the industrial
problem under consideration, all tasks on the CMs have a period of length P and all tasks on
the AMs have a period of length P/64.
The interval between the release time and deadline of a task is, due to technical limitations
and as a consequence of pre-processing, divided into sub-intervals. In a feasible solution, a
task is assigned to one of these intervals. Let the set Qi include the indices of the sub-intervals
of task i, and let the release time and deadline of sub-interval q for task i be denoted by tr
iq
and td
iq, respectively, q ∈Qi, i ∈I. Note that tr
i = minq∈Qi tr
iq and that td
i = maxq∈Qi td
iq.
123

434
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
Fig. 2 Information ﬂow and model components in the constraint generation procedure
For i ∈I, q ∈Qi, introduce the binary variable
αiq =

1, if task i is assigned to sub-interval q,
0, otherwise.
Each task is assigned to one of its sub-intervals by the constraint

q∈Qi
αiq = 1,
i ∈I,
(1)
while the constraint

q∈Qi
tr
iqαiq ≤xi ≤

q∈Qi
td
iqαiq −ei,
i ∈I,
(2)
restricts the release time and deadline of the task to be that of the sub-interval it is assigned
to.
2.4 Precedence relations
In this problem setting, we consider one type of precedence relation constraints called depen-
dencies. The dependencies are indexed by quadruples where (i, j, k,l) refers to restricting
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
435
Fig. 3 Examples of the two ways in which the duration between the start of instance k = 0 of task i to next
start of instance l = 0 of task j can be measured for dependency (i, j, k,l) ∈D
the duration from the start of instance k of task i to the next start of instance l of task j to be
between lmin
i jkl and lmax
i jkl . Let the set D be the set of all dependency indices. For dependency
(i, j, k,l) ∈D introduce the continuous variable
ui jkl = the length of a dependency,
and the binary variable
yD
i jkl =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
1, if instance k of task i starts before instance l of task j
in a major frame,
0, if instance l of task j starts before instance k of task i
in a major frame.
The minimum and maximum length of a dependency (i, j, k,l) ∈D is enforced by the
constraints
ui jkl = x j + lp j −(xi + kpi) + PyD
i jkl,
(3)
lmin
i jkl ≤ui jkl ≤lmax
i jkl .
(4)
Note that the length of a dependency is measured differently depending on the order of the
instances within a major frame. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.
2.5 AM-scheduling
Scheduling of the AMs involves sequencing the tasks while respecting idle times between
them. Let the set IIO
h ⊆{(i, i′) ∈Ih × Ih : i < i′} include all pairs of task indices on AM h
that with respect to their respective release times and deadlines can be placed such that they
overlap or violate the idle times between them, h ∈HAM.
For h ∈HAM, (i, i′) ∈IIO
h , introduce the binary variable
yii′ =

1, if task i starts before task i′,
0, if task i′ starts before task i.
123

436
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
The minimum idle time between tasks is order speciﬁc and for the pair of tasks (i, i′) ∈IIO
h ,
h ∈HAM, it is denoted by lidle
ii′ . The AM-sequencing constraints
xi + ei + lidle
ii′ −(td
i + lidle
ii′ −tr
i′)(1 −yii′) ≤xi′,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
h , h ∈HAM,
(5)
xi′ + ei′ + lidle
i′i −(td
i′ + lidle
i′i −tr
i )yii′ ≤xi,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
h , h ∈HAM,
(6)
make the start times of the tasks comply with the order in which they are sequenced.
2.6 CN-scheduling
For the communication message scheduling, let M be an ordered set of CN-message indices
and, further, let N be an ordered set of CN-slot indices, where the order is with respect to
the location in a major frame. For n ∈N, m ∈M, introduce the binary variable
znm =

1, if message m is assigned to CN-slot n,
0, otherwise.
Each CN-message is assigned to a CN-slot by the constraint

n∈N
znm = 1,
m ∈M,
(7)
while the constraint

m∈M
lmsg
m
znm ≤lslot
n
,
n ∈N,
(8)
ensures that the capacity of each slot is respected, where lslot
n
denotes the capacity of CN-slot
n ∈N and lmsg
m
, denotes the amount of capacity that CN-message m ∈M claims in a slot.
2.6.1 CN-message order
To facilitate some of the modelling to follow, an order between the CN-messages needs to be
established and co-allocation of CN-messages needs to be managed. Co-allocation of CN-
messages refers to that two or more messages are assigned to the same CN-slot, something
which implies that certain tasks are merged on the CMs. To avoid symmetries in the model
with respect to co-allocation of messages, and without loss of generality, co-allocated CN-
messages are forced to be placed in a slot in ascending order with respect to their CN-message
indices.
Introduce, for m′, m ∈M : m < m′, the binary variables
yS
mm′ =

1, if message m is placed before message m′,
0, if message m′ is placed before message m,
and
wmm′ =

1, if message m is placed before message m′ in a slot,
0, otherwise.
Further, let nmin
m
and nmax
m
denote the least and the greatest CN-slot index, respectively, that
is eligible for message m ∈M. For m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′ introduce the constraints
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
437

n∈N
nznm + 1 −wmm′ −(nmax
m
−nmin
m′ + 1)(1 −yS
mm′) ≤

n∈N
nzm′n
≤

n∈N
nznm + (nmax
m′
−nmin
m )(1 −wmm′),
(9)

n∈N
nzm′n + 1 −(nmax
m′
+ 1 −nmin
m )yS
mm′ ≤

n∈N
nznm,
(10)
wmm′ ≤yS
mm′,
(11)
to relate both to the order of the messages and co-allocation of messages to the assignment
of CN-messages to CN-slots, so that the values of the involved variables comply with their
deﬁnitions.
2.6.2 Time restrictions for CN-tasks
There are four types of tasks involved in communicating a CN-message, two on the sending
CM and two on each of the receiving CMs. These tasks are henceforth referred to as CN-tasks
and the elements of the index set K = {1, 2, 3, 4} are used to refer to which type of CN-task
is considered. Let the set IK
k include all tasks of type k ∈K, and introduce the set IM
m to
include the CN-tasks that are involved in communicating CN-message m ∈M.
For each CN-slot and type of CN-task, there are release times and deadlines that the
corresponding CN-tasks must comply with if a CN-message is assigned to this slot. Denote
the release time and deadline that task i ∈IM
m ∩IK
k must comply with if CN-message m is
assigned to slot n by tr-msg
nk
and td-msg
nk
, respectively, n ∈N, k ∈K, m ∈M. The constraint

n∈N
tr-msg
nk
znm ≤xi ≤

n∈N
td-msg
nk
znm −ei,
i ∈IM
m ∩(IK
2 ∪IK
3 ), m ∈M,
(12)
ensures that these times are respected.
For CN-tasks of type 2, it holds that each interval [tr
iq, td
iq], coincides with an interval
[tr-msg
n2
, td-msg
n2
] for some n ∈N, and vice versa, and that ei = td
iq −tr
iq holds, q ∈Qi, i ∈IK
2 .
For this reason, choosing a sub-interval for a CN-task of type 2 and assigning a CN-message
to a CN-slot is in fact the same decision, expressed by the constraint
αiq = znm,
q ∈Qi : tr
iq = tr-msg
n2
, i ∈IK
2 ∩IM
m , m ∈M, n ∈N.
(13)
In the model, these variables are, for clarity reasons, introduced separately.
2.6.3 Merging of CN-tasks
When CN-messages are co-allocated in a slot, their corresponding CN-tasks that are of
the same type and on the same CM will be merged. This is possible since the execution
requirement of CN-tasks constitutes of two terms, the ﬁrst being initialisation and the second
being a message speciﬁc part, and for tasks that are merged, this initialisation is omitted for
all but the ﬁrst of the merged task. For CN-task i ∈IM
m , m ∈M, denote initialisation by einit
i
and the CN-message speciﬁc part by ei −einit
i
. For CN-tasks of type 1, 3, and 4 it hold that
einit
i
≈ei/2 and for CN-tasks of type 2 it hold that einit
i
= ei.
More speciﬁcally, when merging a set of CN-tasks, these tasks are placed in the order
according to their CN-message index and such that, for all but the ﬁrst task, the initialisation
part of the execution requirement overlaps the preceding task. To handle merging in the
123

438
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
Relaxed problem, an order between each pair of tasks that potentially can be merged is
introduced, even if the majority of the tasks are sequenced by the CM-sequencing component.
For m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′, h ∈HCM, k ∈K, introduce the set IIM
khmm′ = {(i, i′) :
i ∈IK
k ∩Ih ∩IM
m , i′ ∈IK
k ∩Ih ∩IM
m′} that contains a pair of tasks that potentially can
be merged and let the set IIM = ∪m′∈M ∪m∈M:m<m′ ∪h∈HCM ∪k∈K IIM
khmm′ include all
such pairs of tasks. For m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′, h ∈HCM, k ∈K, (i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′,
introduce the binary variable
yM
ii′ =

1, if task i starts before task i′,
0, if task i′ starts before task i,
and note that the case yM
ii′ = 1 includes the possibility that i and i′ are merged, even if they
not necessarily are. For m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′ introduce the constraints
xi + ei −einit
i′ wmm′ −(td
i −tr
i′)(1 −yM
ii′) ≤xi′ ≤xi + ei −einit
i′
+

i′′∈IM
m′′∩Ih∩IK
k , m′′∈M:m<m′′<m′
(ei′′ −einit
i′′ )wmm′′
+(td
i′ −ei′ −tr
i −ei + einit
i′ )(1 −wmm′),
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM,
(14)
xi′ + ei′ −(td
i′ −tr
i )yM
ii′ ≤xi,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM,
(15)
wmm′ ≤yM
ii′,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM,
(16)
of which the ﬁrst two relate the start times of the tasks to the order between the tasks, with the
ﬁrst one taking into account the merging. Note that constraint (14) and constraint (15) together
make sure that the tasks do not overlap, except in the sense of merging. Constraint (16) forces
CN-tasks of co-allocated CN-messages to be in the same order as the messages.
2.6.4 CN-task order
For a pair of CN-messages m and m′, where m, m′ ∈M, that are received by the same CM,
the relative order between the CN-tasks of type 3 must be the same as that between message
m and m′. This order is enforced by the constraint
yS
mm′ = yM
ii′,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
3hmm′, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′.
(17)
2.7 CM-scheduling
This section describes the different aspects of CM-scheduling used in the constraint genera-
tion procedure.
2.7.1 Relaxed CM-scheduling
That the CM-scheduling is relaxed refers to that this model component does not contain
anything that prevents tasks from overlapping, except in the case of tasks that potentially can
be merged. What restricts how the tasks on the CMs can be placed are constraints from other
model components and the assignment of sub-intervals to tasks, as introduced in Sect. 2.3.
This section presents how the formulation with respect to the assignment of sub-intervals
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
439
to tasks can be strengthened to cut off solutions that cannot be feasible when the tasks are
required not to overlap.
For a feasible schedule, it holds that for any interval of time, the length of this interval is
at least that of the sum of the execution requirements of the tasks (or the part of the tasks)
that execute within it. This property can be used to strengthen the formulation of the Relaxed
problem by introducing capacity restrictions for some relevant choices of intervals. We here
consider intervals that are formed by combining a sub-interval release time of a task and a
sub-interval deadline of a task. Introduce for h ∈HCM, capacity constraints indexed by the set
Rh and let Icap
r
, r ∈Rh, be the indices of a set of tasks such that for its sub-intervals, indexed
by the set Qir, it holds that maxi∈Icap
r
maxq∈Qir td
iq −mini∈Icap
r
minq∈Qir tr
iq < 
i∈Icap
r
ei.
The constraint

i∈Icap
r

q∈Qir
eiαiq −

(i,i′)∈IIM
khmm′∩Icap
r
, k∈K, m′∈M, m∈M:m<m′
einit
i′ wmm′
≤max
i∈Icap
r
max
q∈Qir
td
iq −min
i∈Icap
r
min
q∈Qir
tr
iq,
r ∈Rh, h ∈HCM,
(18)
yields the restriction that the total execution requirement of the tasks placed within such an
interval does not exceed its length,
For Constraint (18) to be valid also in the case when CN-tasks are merged, it is assumed
that they reduce the capacity required by the tasks placed in the section by the initialisation
length if they are merged, even if they are not placed in the section. This adjustment somewhat
weakens the constraint.
2.7.2 Sub-interval restriction
In a solution to the Relaxed problem, let the notation ¯qi, ¯qi ∈Qi, refer to the sub-interval
that task i is assigned, and restrict the release time and deadline of task i to tr
i ¯qi and td
i ¯qi ,
respectively, i ∈Ih, h ∈HCM. These restrictions allow the set of tasks that are at risk to
overlap to be substantially reduced and this is exploited in the Subproblem.
2.7.3 CM-sequencing
Every set of tasks that have been placed such that they are at risk to overlap on CM h ∈H is
referred to as a sequence. Let Sh denote the set of sequences on CM h, and note that tasks that
are in different sequences cannot overlap with respect to their release times and deadlines.
Let the set IIO
s index all pairs of tasks in sequence s ∈Sh.
For s ∈Sh, h ∈HCM, introduce the binary variable
βs =

1, if there is no overlap between tasks in sequence s,
0, otherwise,
and for (i, i′) ∈IIO
s , the binary variable
yii′ =

1, if task i ﬁnishes before task i′ starts,
0, no requirements on the relation between task i and task i′.
For sequence s ∈Sh, h ∈HCM introduce the CM-sequencing constraints
[CM-seq]s
βs ≤yii′ + yi′i ≤1,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s ,
(19)
123

440
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
xi + ei −(td
i −tr
i′)(1 −yii′) ≤xi′,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s ,
(20)
xi′ + ei′ −(td
i′ −tr
i )(1 −yi′i) ≤xi,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s .
(21)
If βs = 1 for sequence s, the tasks in this sequence are forced not to overlap by requiring
that one task starts before the other by constraint (19), and that the start times of the tasks
comply with this order by constraints (20) and (21). Otherwise if βs = 0 for a sequence s,
the tasks in this sequence are allowed to overlap.
In order to prefer to schedule tasks such that they do not overlap, we introduce the objective
function of the Subproblem as
max

h∈HCM

s∈Sh
βs.
(22)
If a Subproblem solution is found where none of the sequences have tasks that overlap, a
valid schedule is found. Otherwise the values of the βs variables indicate which sequences
contain overlapping tasks.
2.7.4 Generated sequences
A sequence that is not free from overlaps between tasks in a solution to the Subproblem
can be used for feedback to improve future solutions. If a sequence is chosen to be used as
feedback, it is referred to as a generated sequence. Let the set Sgen index such sequences. For
each generated sequence s ∈Sgen, the CM-sequencing constraint [CM-seq]s is combined
with the requirement that βs = 1, thereby forcing the tasks in generated sequence s not to
overlap. The generated sequences constraints are added both to the Relaxed problem and to
the Subproblem.
2.8 Objective functions for the relaxed problem
In the original problem formulation, any feasible solution is considered equally good. In the
constraint generation procedure, however, objective functions are used to guide the search.
This section introduces the two objective functions that are used in the Relaxed problem. The
ﬁrst objective, called the sub-interval space objective, is used in the ﬁrst Relaxed problem to
obtain a solution where tasks preferably are put in sub-intervals where they have a lot of space.
The second objective, called the stabilise objective, is used in subsequent Relaxed problems,
and it aims at assigning as many tasks as possible to the sub-interval of the previous Relaxed
problem solution. To use different types of objective function in the ﬁrst and subsequent
Relaxed problems has turned out to be important to obtain computational efﬁciency.
2.8.1 Sub-interval space objective
The sub-interval space objective tries to assign tasks to sub-intervals where they have a lot of
space. Each sub-interval q ∈Qi is given a reward miq if task i ∈Ih, h ∈HCM, is assigned
to it. For each sub-interval q ∈Qi of task i ∈Ih, h ∈HCM, the reward is calculates as
miq = min
 
td
iq −tr
iq −pi
mobj maxq′∈Qi (td
iq′ −tr
iq′ −pi), 1

,
(23)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
441
where mobj, 0 ≤mobj ≤1, is a parameter used to set a threshold for when a sub-interval is
considered to have a lot of space or not. The objective function is then be stated as
max

h∈HCM

i∈Ih

q∈Qi
miqαiq.
(24)
2.8.2 Stabilise objective
The stabilise objective maximises the number of tasks that are placed in the same sub-interval
as in the solution to the previous Relaxed problem. Let ¯qi denote the sub-interval that task
i was assigned to during the previous iteration of the Relaxed problem, i ∈I. The stabilise
objective can then be stated as
max

i∈I
αi ¯qi .
(25)
2.9 Implementation of the constraint generation procedure
The pseudo-code for the exact procedure can be found in Algorithm 1. Before the constraint
generation procedure, we apply pre-processing components as described in Blikstad et al.
(2018).
Data: A scheduling instance
Result: A valid schedule or a conclusion of infeasibility
Conduct pre-processing
while At least one generated sequence is new do
Solve the Relaxed problem
if Relaxed problem is infeasible then
Conclude that the problem is infeasible
Break
end
Restrict all non-ﬁxed CM-tasks to their assigned sub-intervals
Solve the Subproblem
if There are tasks that overlap then
Add at least one generated sequence to the Relaxed problem and to the Subproblem
end
end
Algorithm 1: Overview of the exact solution approach
3 Matheuristic solution approach
The exact approach presented in the previous section is the backbone also for the matheurstic
to be introduced in this section. The matheuristic components comprise of an ALNS search
for solving the Relaxed problem and a constructive heuristic for creating an initial solution to
be used by the ALNS. Pseudo-code for this matheuristic approach is found in Algorithm 2.
123

442
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
Data: A scheduling instance
Result: A valid schedule
Conduct pre-processing
Find an initial solution to the Repair model
while At least one generated sequence is new do
while Solution has penalty or any of the last k iterations were successful do
for i ←1 to n do
Select a destroy operator at random
Select a repair operator based on the current solution and whether or not to diversify
Construct a Repair model based on the destroy operator, the repair operator, and the
previous solution
Solve the Repair model
end
Determine whether or not to diversify
end
Restrict all non-ﬁxed CM-tasks to their assigned sub-intervals in the current solution
Solve the Subproblem
if There are tasks that overlap then
Add at least one generated sequence to the Repair problem and to the Subproblem
end
end
Algorithm 2: Overview of the matheuristic
3.1 Outline of the ALNS
In the model used in the ALNS, many constraints are treated as soft and a violation of a
constraint is penalised in the objective. By associating different weights with the penalty
and the objective function of the Relaxed problem, it is possible to choose between focus on
feasibility or objective value.
During the ALNS, a solution is deﬁned by that each task is assigned to one of its sub-
intervals and that all other variables of the relaxed problem have values obtained from solving
the penalised model by a MIP-solver. A destroy operation releases some of the tasks from
their sub-intervals and makes them eligible for re-assignment. This re-assignment is done in
the repair operation by applying a MIP-solver to a repair model, which is the penalised model
with weighted objective, where only the released tasks can be re-assigned new sub-intervals.
The master level heuristic guiding our search is based on local search with the alteration
that different repair operators use different objective functions.
The destroy operators are designed to identify tasks that cause costs in the current solution,
or to select tasks at random. For the destroy operators that identify tasks that cause costs,
a subset of the most costly tasks is selected to be released and these are referred to as key
tasks. Since the re-assignment of key tasks might be restricted by constraints involving tasks
related to them, further tasks, referred to as related tasks, are also released.
Which repair operator the ALNS uses depends on whether the current solution is feasible
or not with respect to the Relaxed problem. This is inspired by the concept of strategic
oscillation, see Glover (1977) and Glover and Hao (2011). The selection of repair operator
is done at each iteration and is part of the adaptiveness of the algorithm.
The search is divided into time epochs and each of these consists of a number of iterations.
At the end of a time epoch, it is decided if the ALNS should exit or not. If the search is
continued, it is further decided if a diversify repair operator shall be applied, or if the search
should continue as before. This also contribute to an adaptive search behaviour.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
443
3.2 Repair model
This section describes the MIP model, referred to as the Repair model, that is used in each
iteration of the ALNS. It is a major difﬁculty to ﬁnd a feasible solution to the Relaxed
problem, and therefore the Repair model is a reformulation of the Relaxed problem where
a majority of the constraints are treated as soft and violations of them are penalised in the
objective function. For this purpose, we introduce the penalty variables
– γ CN-slot: violation of CN-slot capacity,
– γ CN-time: violation of time restriction for CN-tasks,
– γ CN-merge: violation of merging of CN-tasks,
– γ cap: violation of relaxed CM-scheduling,
– γ gen: violation of generated sequences,
that measure the violation of feasibility of each constraint type. The total violation of feasibil-
ity of each constraint type along with the maximum violation of each constraint type are given
a weight. Let γ infeas denote the weighted sum of the total and maximum violation of each
constraint type. Three types of constraints are always obeyed during the ALNS: the assign-
ment of each task to a sub-interval constraints [constraints (27)–(29)], the AM-scheduling
constraints (Sect. 2.5), and the Precedence relations constraints (Sect. 2.4).
In order to balance the need for feasibility of a solution with the Relaxed problem objective,
the weights winfeas and wobj are introduced for the Relaxed problem objective and the total
weighted constraint violation, respectively. The weights are decided by the repair operator
and are used in objective function of the Repair model
min winfeasγ infeas + wobjδobj,
(26)
where δobj denotes the Relaxed problem objective.
In each iteration of the ALNS, a set of tasks Irel is released from their current sub-intervals
and allowed to be re-assigned new sub-intervals. Each remaining task i ∈I \ Irel is ﬁxed to
its sub-interval ¯qi of the previous solution. The set of tasks to be released is determined by
the destroy operator and deﬁnes, together with the repair operator, the neighbourhood to be
searched. In the Repair model, the common AM- and CM-scheduling constraints in Sect. 2.3
are replaced with

q∈Qi
αiq = 1,
i ∈I,
(27)
¯αiq = 1,
i ∈I \ Irel,
(28)

q∈Qi
tr
iqαiq ≤xi ≤

q∈Qi
td
iqαiq −ei,
i ∈I.
(29)
Note that the Repair model is free to decide the start times for the tasks within their assigned
sub-intervals, see constraint (29).
3.3 Destroy operators
Given a solution to the Repair model, a destroy operator constructs the set of tasks Irel that
can be assigned to a new sub-interval in the next ALNS iteration. The ALNS utilises multiple
destroy operators. In each iteration, one of the destroy operators is selected at random, with
equal probabilities for all operators. The destroy operators are categorised into two types:
123

444
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
precedence relations operator and random operator. The details of each type are described in
the following sections.
3.3.1 Precedence relations operator
The precedence relations operator is based on the idea of related removal, introduced in Shaw
(1998). Given a solution to the Repair model, tasks that cause a cost in the current solution
are chosen. Such tasks are referred to as key tasks. From the set of key tasks, the precedence
relations operator orders related tasks in increasing distance from the key tasks. The distance
between two tasks is deﬁned as the length of the shortest sequence of dependencies through
which the tasks are connected, or as inﬁnity if no such sequence exists. The set of key tasks
together with the related tasks with the shortest distance to the key tasks are then released
from their current sub-interval.
3.3.2 Random operator
The random operator simply selects tasks at random to be released from their current sub-
interval. In Ropke and Pisinger (2006), this operator is recommended to be included in the
ALNS to improve diversiﬁcation.
3.4 Repair operators
The repair operator controls the balance between the of focus on feasibility and the Relaxed
problem objective by assigning values to the weights in the Repair model objective.
3.4.1 Feasibility repair
The feasibility repair focuses on achieving feasibility by setting wobj = 0 and winfeas = 1.
The objective function of the Repair model then becomes
min γ infeas.
(30)
3.4.2 Diversify repair
The diversify repair tries to improve the solution with respect to the Relaxed problem objec-
tive. This is done by choosing a small value for the weight of the constraint violations winfeas
and setting wobj = 1. The objective of the Repair model then becomes
min winfeasγ infeas + δobj.
(31)
3.4.3 Objective repair
The objective repair is used when the current solution is a feasible solution to the Relaxed
problem. The repair operator tries to improve the Relaxed problem objective while main-
taining feasibility with respect to the Relaxed problem. The objective function of the Repair
model is
min γ obj,
(32)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
445
with the additional constraint
γ infeas = 0.
(33)
3.5 Adaptation
The adaptation part of the ALNS is done at two levels: in each iteration and at the end of
each time epoch (which corresponds to a given number of iterations). The primary decisions
of the adaptation are to determine if the focus should be on feasibility or the relaxed problem
objective and to evaluate if the ALNS is stuck in a local optima, and if so, determine what
the corresponding action should be.
With respect to local optimality, we evaluate, at the end of each time epoch, if any of the
last 5 iterations were successful. If not, we act as follows:
– If the current solution is feasible: we exit the ALNS and enter the Subproblem;
– If the current solution is infeasible: we apply the diversify repair operator.
If one or more of the last 5 iterations were successful, we continue the search as usual. The
decision to focus on feasibility or on the relaxed problem objective is made at each iteration
by selecting different repair operators. This is done according to the following scheme:
– If the current solution is feasible: we apply the objective repair operator;
– If the current solution is infeasible: we apply the feasibility repair operator.
In the case we are at the end of a time epoch and has applied the diversify repair operator,
this adaptation is omitted.
3.6 Creating an initial solution to the ALNS
An initial solution to the ALNS is created by applying a constructive heuristic that takes into
account only some of the constraints. This is done by iteratively solving a MIP-model until
the constraints that are kept hard during the ALNS are respected.
The MIP-model that we use in the constructive heuristic is called the Partition model, see
Appendix B. The Partition model enforces a valid AM-schedule that respects all precedence
relations. The objective function is to maximise a reward that is based on the duration between
tasksondifferentAMsthatcommunicatewitheachother.However,inasolutiontothismodel,
tasks are not necessarily placed within sub-intervals. As a remedy to this, constraints that
assign tasks to sub-intervals, see Sect. 2.3, are added for the tasks that are not within feasible
sub-intervals. This process is repeated and the MIP-model is re-solved until a solution to the
Partition model is found in which all tasks are within allowed sub-intervals. This assignment
of tasks to sub-intervals is used as the initial solution in the ALNS.
4 Results
In this section, we present the computational performance of both the exact approach and
the matheuristic and compare these results to previous work.
123

446
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
Table 1 The number of tasks, dependencies, messages, ﬁxed tasks, AMs, and CMs of the Saab instances
Name
Tasks
Dependencies
Messages
Fixed tasks
AMs
CMs
Instance I
6538
1088
64
4220
2
2
Instance II
14,186
9784
96
7640
6
5
Instance III
19,919
12,616
96
10,500
8
7
Instance IV
20,461
30,245
240
4284
2
2
Instance V
26,268
30,374
1032
4932
3
3
Instance VI
45,026
48,862
2616
11,148
10
8
4.1 Instances
The instances used for the computational evaluation were derived together with the industrial
partner Saab. They are designed such that they are relevant for future avionic systems. One
of the sets, called Saab instances, contains six instances with speciﬁc properties that are
important for Saab, and these instances are therefore not made publicly available. The other
set contains 120 public instances2 and these have a wider range of industrially relevant
properties.
4.1.1 Saab instances
The original motivation of this work was to solve the instances provided by Saab and the
three smallest in this set, Instances I–III, were introduced in Blikstad et al. (2018). For these
instances, the number of dependencies differ compared to what was presented in Blikstad
et al. (2018) because of the modelling changes presented in this paper. Instances IV, V and
VI are new and represent instances that are beyond the scope of what could be solved in
previous work. The number of tasks, dependencies, messages, ﬁxed tasks, AMs and CMs
can be found in Table 1. Note that even if the total number of tasks is of the same magnitude
for Instances III–V, there is a difference in how many modules the tasks are distributed on.
Since Instances IV–V have fewer modules, they are more challenging to solve. Instance VI
is clearly the most challenging due to its large number of tasks and messages.
4.1.2 Public instances
The public instances are divided into the four categories A–D, with 30 instances in each
category. Table 2 provides, for each instance category, the mean values of the number of
tasks, dependencies, messages, ﬁxed tasks, AMs, and CMs, respectively. The relationships
between the number of tasks, messages, ﬁxed tasks, dependencies, and modules are illustrated
in Fig. 4.
Category A contains instances of about the same size and difﬁculty as the smallest of the
Saab instances, while both Category B and C contains instances designed to be of medium
difﬁculty. Instances in Category D are constructed to be very challenging due to the large
numbers of tasks and messages. Worth noting is that the public instances have been con-
structed in such a way that we do not know if a feasible schedule exists or not. Especially for
Category D, we consider each occurrence of solving an instance to be an accomplishment
2 https://gitlab.liu.se/eliro15/avionics_inst/tree/master.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
447
Table 2 Mean values of key attributes of the different categories of public instances
Category
Tasks
Dependencies
Messages
Fixed tasks
AMs
CMs
Category A
4932
9516
172
1359
2.3
2.0
Category B
11,699
22,170
447
1989
2.3
2.0
Category C
20,037
37,707
908
3452
4.8
4.1
Category D
41,655
79,503
1923
6392
9.4
8.2
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
Fig. 4 Relations between the number of tasks, dependencies, messages, ﬁxed tasks, and modules in the public
instances
and together with the instance data,3 we provide the information if an instance has ever been
solved. The largest instance in this set contains 54,731 tasks and 2530 messages and this has
been solved.
Instances in Category B–D have the important characteristic that they are unbalanced with
respect to that certain CMs are assigned more tasks and handle more messages compared to
other CMs in the system. The instances in Category A are not given this property, to keep
them simpler.
3 https://gitlab.liu.se/eliro15/avionics_inst/tree/master.
123

448
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
Table 3 The time-out for the
scheduling tool on the different
instances
Time-out
Saab instances
Public instances
6h
Instance I–III
Category A
36h
Instance IV–V
Category B
48h
–
Category C
72h
Instance VI
Category D
4.2 Test settings
We evaluate the performance of the exact approach and the matheuristic by running the
scheduling tool on a number of instances, using as similar settings as possible for the exact
approach and the matheuristic. Because of the importance of the Saab instances, we ran both
the exact approach and the matheuristic ﬁve times, initialised with different seeds. For the
public instances, the exact approach and the matheuristic were given one attempt each. The
remaining parts of this section describe the computational environment and the settings of
the exact approach and the matheuristic.
4.2.1 Software and hardware speciﬁcations
The scheduling tool has been implemented using Python 3.7 and the MIP models are solved
using Gurobi 8.1.1. All the tests are carried out on a computer with two Intel Xeon Gold 6130
Processors (16 cores, 2.1 GHz) and 384 GB RAM. The scheduling tool is single threaded
except from the calls to Gurobi, which is allowed to use all cores.
4.2.2 Common settings for the exact approach and the matheuristic
This section describes the settings that are the same for the exact approach and the matheuris-
tic. In both solution approaches, we use the sub-interval space objective function with the
parameter mobj = 0.2 in the ﬁrst Relaxed problem. For the Subproblem, there is a maximum
running time of 4h. In order to use the time of the scheduling tool efﬁciently, we also used
a progressive set of time-outs to, in some cases, exit the Subproblem faster. These time-outs
depend on the value of the current solution and the relative MIP-gap. Sometimes an early
exit in the Subproblem will yield many generated sequences, and to limit the effect from this,
we do not add all sequences. When not all sequences are added, we choose the ones with the
least amount of tasks ﬁrst, and quit when 
s∈Sgen |IIO
s | > 90,000. The time-limits for the
entire scheduling tool are given in Table 3.
4.2.3 Settings for the exact approach
In the exact approach, the Relaxed problem will exit when a relative MIP-gap of 10% is
reached in the ﬁrst iteration, and when 0% is reached in the successive iterations. Since it
can be difﬁcult to fulﬁl these requirements, we have an additional way to exit. If a feasible
solution has been found, Gurobi gets a time-limit of 30min to ﬁnd an improved solution,
otherwise we exit the search. However, if an improved solution is found within this time-limit,
it is reset to 30 min and the search is continued.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
449
Table 4 An overview of the destroy operators used in the ALNS along with their settings
Operator
Key task selection strategy
No. dependency steps
No. unlocked tasks
Precedence 1
Worst
2
8000
Precedence 2
Worst
4
8000
Precedence 3
Random
2
8000
Random
–
–
8000
4.2.4 Matheuristic speciﬁc settings
The ALNS is divided into time epochs of 8 iterations. The time-limit for Gurobi is 18 min in
each iteration, with a more aggressive time-out if improved solutions within certain relative
MIP-gaps have been found. We consider an ALNS iteration to be successful if there is a
0.1% decrease of the weighted penalty in a repair with respect to feasibility, or if there is any
improvement in the objective value in the other repair operators.
In the ALNS, we use 4 different destroy operators derived from the two types of oper-
ators described in Sect. 3.3. Each of the destroy operators unlocks 4000 tasks. We use one
random-based operator and three variants of the precedence relations-based destroy operator
as given in Table 4. Two of precedence relations-based destroy operators identify related
tasks reachable by following two dependencies. One of them selects the key tasks as those
associated with the highest cost, while the other selects the key tasks at random among tasks
with costs. The last precedence related destroy operator identiﬁes related tasks reachable by
following four dependencies and selects key tasks associated with the highest cost.
4.3 Performance evaluation of the exact approach and the matheuristic
The main computational results are presented through plots illustrating the number of
instances solved within a certain time. The results for the Saab instances are given in Fig. 5.
For Instances I–III, both the exact approach and the matheuristic ﬁnd a schedule for all ﬁve
seeds. For Instances IV–VI, the matheuristic ﬁnds a schedule for all seeds while the exact
approach fails in all cases. By studying the results in detail, we noted that the exact approach
failed for Instance V–VI because it failed to ﬁnd a feasible solution to the ﬁrst Relaxed prob-
lem. For Instances I–III, the computational times are shorter for the exact approach than for
the matheuristic.
To compare to previous work, we study the computational times for Instance III in Blikstad
et al. (2018), where a restriction of our current problem statement was addressed, and in
Rönnberg (2018), which address the same problem statement as here. In Blikstad et al.
(2018), the computational times range between 0.6 and 14.5h, and in Rönnberg (2018)
it is 5.2h. These times shall be compared to that the worst of times here is < 0.1h. All
improvements can, however, not be contributed to the model enhancements, since we use
different hardware and Gurobi versions, but we still consider the outcome of the model
improvements to be signiﬁcant.
The results for public instances of Categories A and B are illustrated in Fig. 6. Instances
in Category A pose no challenge for neither the exact approach nor the matheuristic and a
solution is found for all runs within the time-limit of the scheduling tool. For Category B,
the exact approach and the matheuristic solves about the same number of instances within
the time-limit, but with slightly faster running times by the matheuristic.
123

450
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
Fig. 5 The number of runs for Saab instances I–III and IV–V, respectively, that are solved within a given time
by the exact approach (blue dotted line), matheuristic (red dashed line), or either of them (black solid line).
Note that to the left the dotted and solid line coincides, while to the right the dashed and the solid line coincides
Fig. 6 The number of instances of Category A and B, respectively, that are solved within a given time by the
exact approach (blue dotted line), matheuristic (red dashed line), or either of them (black solid line)
The results for instances of Categories C and D are illustrated in Fig. 7. For Category C,
the matheuristic has solved 28 instances compared to the 15 by the exact approach at the
ﬁnal time-limit of 48h. Among the 15 instances that were solved by the exact approach, 14
were also solved by the matheuristic.
Category D contains the most challenging instances and here we can, as for Saab
instances IV–VI, see a clear beneﬁt from the matheuristic. After about 34h, when the exact
approach solved its ﬁrst instance, the matheuristic had already solved 26 instances. To fur-
ther analyse the outcome for these instances, we let the scheduling tool complete its 72h.
During the remainder of the 72h, the exact approach solved 6 additional instances and the
matheuristic solved another 2. Worth noting is that all instances solved by the exact approach
were also solved by the matheuristic, but with shorter computational times.
As seen in Fig. 4, there is a wide range in the number of tasks for instances in Category
D. The largest instance contains 54,731 tasks and was only solved by the matheuristic. The
largest instance solved by the exact approach has 36,996 tasks.
During our computational evaluations we noted that the matheuristic typically needs to
generate more sequences than the exact approach in order to ﬁnd a feasible schedule. Statistics
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
451
Fig. 7 The number of instances of Category C and D, respectively, that are solved within a given time by the
exact approach (blue dotted line), matheuristic (red dashed line), or either of them (black solid line)
Table 5 The average number of constraint generation iterations and the number of generated sequences of the
exact approach and the matheuristic on the Saab instances and the public instances
Category
No. iterations
No. generated sequences
Exact
Matheuristic
Exact
Matheuristic
Instance I–III
1.7
1.8
2.0
18.9
Instance IV–VI
2.0
3.7
26.0
54.7
Category A
1.4
1.8
2.2
10.9
Category B
3.0
4.1
38.8
71.3
Category C
3.2
4.2
53.3
93.2
Category D
1.9
5.5
23.6
145.4
for this is found in Table 5. We believe that the difference is due to that the exact approach
produces better solutions to start the constraint generation from and that this is possible
because the Relaxed problem has many solutions with the same objective value, even if
the solutions are rather different in other respects. Even though the solutions obtained by
Gurobi and the ALNS have similar objective values, it somehow seems that the structure of
the solutions produced by Gurobi are better than those from the ALNS with respect to the
constraint generation procedure. We have, however, not been able to understand the reasons
for this.
4.4 Evaluation of the ALNS design
A characteristic of our ALNS is that it makes few iterations over large neighbourhoods
rather than many iterations over small ones. Table 6 presents the average number of ALNS
iterations made in different phases of the matheuristic. Early practical evaluations showed
that we beneﬁt from this choice and we believe that this is because of the complex constraint
structure of the problem.
To study the impact of having the different destroy operators, we conducted additional tests
on Category D and Saab instances IV–VI. In each test, we used only a single destroy operator
and compared the result to our standard matheuristic. In all tests, all other settings were as
123

452
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
Table 6 The average number of ALNS iterations on the Saab instances and the public instances
Category
Total
First relaxed problem
Subsequent relaxed problems
Feas. sol.
Obj. val.
Feas. sol.
Obj. val.
Instance I–III
18.1
1.9
9.9
0.6
5.8
Instance IV–VI
73.1
6.1
29.1
3.7
34.2
Category A
14.7
1.3
7.3
0.8
5.4
Category B
86.8
7.3
17.6
7.2
54.7
Category C
121.2
25.2
21.3
16.6
58.2
Category D
276.7
26.5
69.8
85.5
95.0
The details of what contribute to the total number of iterations is presented for the ﬁrst and subsequent Relaxed
problems, respectively, and divided with respect to if they contribute to improving feasibility (feas. sol.) or
objective value (obj. val.)
Table 7 The number of solved instances of Category D and the number of solved seeds for Instances IV–VI
that was solved by the standard ALNS compared to the cases where only one of the four destroy operators
was used
Category
Standard
Precedence 1
Precedence 2
Precedence 3
Random
Instance IV
5/5
4/5
1/5
5/5
5/5
Instance V
5/5
5/5
3/5
5/5
5/5
Instance VI
5/5
5/5
4/5
4/5
5/5
Category D
28/30
10/30
15/30
23/30
2/30
described in Sect. 4.2. Table 7 presents the number of instances or seeds that were solved
when only a single destroy operator was used, together with the results from the standard
matheuristic. The operator Precedence 3 performed well on Category D by solving 23 out
of 30 instances. However, it failed all attempts to solve Instances IV–VI and these instances
were solved for every seed by both the Random operator and the standard matheuristic. In
all, we see a gain by having multiple destroy operators compared to having a single one since
it enables us to catch different aspects of the problem structure and the instances that we
consider.
5 Conclusions
This paper contributes by proposing approaches for solving large-scale instances of avionic
scheduling problems. This is achieved by improving the model formulations used in a previ-
ously suggested constraint generation procedure and by including an ALNS to extend it into
a matheuristic approach. We can now solve three practically relevant instances that were out
of reach for the previous procedure. To facilitate further testing of our implemented methods,
the paper also introduces a large set of publicly available avionics scheduling instances. The
most challenging category contains instances with up to 54,731 tasks and 2530 messages and
the largest instance among these could be solved using the matheuristic approach.
The bottleneck in the exact procedure is the difﬁculty to obtain feasible solutions to the
Relaxed problem, and the ALNS is designed to overcome this. To balance the search for
feasibility and proﬁtable objective value of the Relaxed problem, a penalty model is used to
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
453
handle when constraints are violated. The search is made over the assignment of sub-intervals
to tasks, but each such assignment corresponds to several possible solutions to this penalty
model; in order to evaluate an assignment, a complete solution to the penalty model is needed.
For this reason, the repair operation is to apply a MIP solver to a Repair model, which is
obtained from the penalty model when only the tasks released by the destroy operation are
available for re-assignment to new sub-intervals.
Each iteration of our ALNS is expensive since each neighbour, with respect to an assign-
ment of sub-intervals to tasks, depends on that the MIP-solver also assigns values to all other
variables of the Repair model. Further, we believe that because of the complex constraint
structure, it is proﬁtable to have large neighbourhoods also with respect to the number of
released tasks and to compensate for these by having rather few iterations and a master
level heuristic of a local search type. Also, an important aspect of the ALNS design is the
alternating behaviour obtained by changing the repair operations in a systematic way.
For future work it can be of relevance to try to ﬁnd smaller neighbourhoods that can be
searched more efﬁciently and to evaluate if it is proﬁtable to make more iterations over such
neighbourhoods instead of, as in the current method, search large neighbourhoods with few
iterations. A further possibility along these lines is to use heuristics for the repair operations.
Another line of future research is to improve the computational efﬁciency with respect to the
subproblem and to try to dynamically add information to strengthen the Relaxed problem
without having to solve the subproblem.
Acknowledgements Open access funding provided by Linköping University. The work is part of a project
funded by the Center for Industrial Information Technology (CENIIT), Project-ID 16.05. The work of Emil
Karlsson is supported by the Research School in Interdisciplinary Mathematics at Linköping University.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
A Repair model
The Repair model is used to deﬁne the neighbourhood in an iteration of the ALNS search.
The Repair model is a reformulation of the Relaxed problem, see Sect. 2, where a majority
of the constraints are treated as soft, and each task must be assigned to a sub-interval.
The weighted violation of each type of constraint
– γ CN-slot: violation of CN-slot capacity,
– γ CN-time: violation of time restriction for CN-tasks,
– γ CN-merge: violation of merging of CN-tasks,
– γ cap: violation of relaxed CM-scheduling,
– γ gen: violation of generated sequences,
is deﬁned by constraints (38)–(43). The sum of all weighted constraint violations γ infeas, is
deﬁned by constraint (37).
To model the different Relaxed problem objectives, we introduce the coefﬁcient
ciq = the reward of assigning sub-interval q to task i,
q ∈Qi, i ∈I,
(34)
123

454
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
to deﬁne the value of the current Relaxed problem objective with constraint (36).
The Repair model is formulated as
min winfeasγ infeas + wobjδobj,
(35)
subject to
[Deﬁne relaxed problem objective variable]
δobj =

i∈I

q∈Qi
ciqαiq,
(36)
[Deﬁne penalty variables]
γ infeas = γ cap + γ CN-time + γ CN-slot + γ CN-merge + γ gen,
(37)
γ prec = wM-maxγ M-max + wM-minγ M-min +

(i, j,k,l)∈D
(wmaxγ max
i jkl + wminγ min
i jkl ),
(38)
γ cap = wM-capγ M-cap + wcap 
r∈Rh

h∈HCM
γ cap
r
,
(39)
γ CN-slot = wM-CN-slotγ M-CN-slot + wCN-slot 
n∈N
γ CN-slot
n
,
(40)
γ CN-time = wM-r-msgγ M-r-msg + wM-d-msgγ M-d-msg
+

m∈M

i∈IM
m ∩IK
3
(wr-msgγ r-msg
ik
+ wd-msgγ d-msg
ik
),
(41)
γ gen = wM-genγ M-gen + wgen 
s∈Sgen

(i,i′)∈IIO
s
(γ gen
ii′
+ γ gen
i′i ),
(42)
γ CN-merge = wM-CN-m-1γ M-CN-m-1 + wM-CN-m-2γ M-CN-m-2 + wM-CN-m-3γ M-CN-m-3
+

m′∈M

m∈M:m<m′

h∈HCM

k∈K

(i,i′)∈IIM
khmm′
(wCN-m-1γ CN-m-1
ii′
+wCN-m-2γ CN-m-2
ii′
+ wCN-m-3γ CN-m-3
ii′
),
(43)
[Common for AM- and CM-scheduling]

q∈Qi
αiq = 1,
i ∈I,
(44)
¯αiq = 1,
i ∈I \ Irel,
(45)

q∈Qi
tr
iqαiq ≤xi ≤

q∈Qi
td
iqαiq −ei,
i ∈I,
(46)
[Precedence relations]
ui jkl = x j + lp j −(xi + kpi) + PyD
i jkl,
(i, j, k,l) ∈D,
(47)
lmin
i jkl ≤ui jkl ≤lmax
i jkl ,
(i, j, k,l) ∈D,
(48)
[AM-scheduling]
xi + ei + lidle
ii′ −(td
i + lidle
ii′ −tr
i′)(1 −yii′) ≤xi′,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
h , h ∈HAM,
(49)
xi′ + ei′ + lidle
i′i −(td
i′ + lidle
i′i −tr
i )yii′ ≤xi,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
h , h ∈HAM,
(50)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
455
[CN-scheduling]

n∈N
znm = 1,
m ∈M,
(51)

m∈M
lmsg
m
znm ≤lslot
n
+ γ CN-slot
n
,
n ∈N,
(52)
γ CN-slot
n
≤

m∈M
lmsg
m
−lslot
n
,
n ∈N,
(53)
γ CN-slot
n
≤γ M-CN-slot
n
,
n ∈N,
(54)
[CN-message order]

n∈N
nznm + 1 −wmm′ −(nmax
m
−nmin
m′ + 1)(1 −yS
mm′) ≤

n∈N
nzm′n
≤

n∈N
nznm + (nmax
m′
−nmin
m )(1 −wmm′),
m ∈M : m < m′, m′ ∈M,
(55)

n∈N
nzm′n + 1 −(nmax
m′
+ 1 −nmin
m )yS
mm′ ≤

n∈N
nznm,
m ∈M : m < m′, m′ ∈M,
(56)
wmm′ ≤yS
mm′,
m ∈M : m < m′, m′ ∈M,
(57)
[Time restrictions for CN-tasks]

n∈N
tr-msg
nk
znm −γ r-msg
ik
≤xi ≤

n∈N
td-msg
nk
znm −ei + γ d-msg
ik
,
i ∈IM
m ∩IK
3 , m ∈M,
(58)
γ r-msg
ik
≤γ M-r-msg,
i ∈IM
m ∩IK
3 , m ∈M,
(59)
γ d-msg
ik
≤γ M-d-msg,
i ∈IM
m ∩IK
3 , m ∈M,
(60)
0 ≤γ r-msg
ik
≤

n∈N
tr-msg
nk
znm,
i ∈IM
m ∩IK
3 , m ∈M,
(61)
0 ≤γ d-msg
ik
≤P + ei −

n∈N
td-msg
nk
znm,
i ∈IM
m ∩IK
3 , m ∈M,
(62)
αiq = znm,
q ∈Qi : tr
iq = tr-msg
n2
, i ∈IK
2 ∩IM
m , m ∈M, n ∈N,
(63)
[Merging of CN-tasks]
wmm′ ≤yM
ii′,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(64)
xi + ei −einit
i′ wmm′ −γ CN-m-1
ii′
−(td
i −tr
i′)(1 −yM
ii′) ≤xi′,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(65)
xi′ −γ CN-m-2
ii′
≤xi + ei −einit
i′
+

i′′∈IM
m′′∩Ih∩IK
k , m′′∈Mkh:m<m′′<m′
(ei′′ −einit
i′′ )wmm′′
+(td
i′ −ei′ −tr
i −ei + einit
i′ )(1 −wmm′),
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(66)
xi′ + ei′ −γ CN-m-3
ii′
−(td
i′ −tr
i )yM
ii′ ≤xi,
123

456
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(67)
0 ≤γ CN-m-1
ii′
≤td
i −tr
i′,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(68)
γ CN-m-1
ii′
≤γ M-CN-m-1,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(69)
0 ≤γ CN-m-2
ii′
td
i′ −ei′ −tr
i −ei + einit
i′ ,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(70)
γ CN-m-2
ii′
≤γ M-CN-m-2,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(71)
0 ≤γ CN-m-3
ii′
≤td
i −tr
i′,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(72)
γ CN-m-3
ii′
≤γ M-CN-m-3,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
khmm′, k ∈K, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(73)
[CN-task order]
yS
mm′ = yM
ii′,
(i, i′) ∈IIM
3hmm′, h ∈HCM, m′ ∈M, m ∈M : m < m′,
(74)
[Relaxed CM-scheduling]

i∈Icap
r

q∈Qir
eiαiq −

(i,i′)∈IIM
khmm′∩Icap
r
, k∈K, m′∈M, m∈M:m<m′
einit
i′ wmm′
≤max
i∈Icap
r
max
q∈Qir
td
iq −min
i∈Icap
r
min
q∈Qir
tr
iq + γ cap
r
,
r ∈Rh, h ∈HCM,
(75)
0 ≤γ cap
r
≤

i∈Icap
r
ei −max
i∈Icap
r
max
q∈Qir
td
iq −min
i∈Icap
r
min
q∈Qir
tr
iq,
r ∈Rh, h ∈HCM,
(76)
γ cap
r
≤γ M-cap,
r ∈Rh, h ∈HCM,
(77)
[Generated sequences]
yii′ + yi′i = 1,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s , s ∈Sgen,
(78)
xi + ei −γ gen
ii′
−(td
i −tr
i′)(1 −yii′) ≤xi′,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s , s ∈Sgen,
(79)
xi′ + ei′ −γ gen
i′i
−(td
i′ −tr
i )(1 −yi′i) ≤xi,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s , s ∈Sgen,
(80)
0 ≤γ gen
ii′
≤ei,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s , s ∈Sgen,
(81)
0 ≤γ gen
i′i
≤ei′,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s , s ∈Sgen,
(82)
γ gen
i′i
≤γ M-gen,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s , s ∈Sgen,
(83)
γ gen
ii′
≤γ M-gen,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
s , s ∈Sgen.
(84)
B Partition model
The purpose of the Partition model is to create a valid AM schedule that maximise the duration
between tasks on AMs that communicate with each other. The Partition model is a simpliﬁed
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
457
model that includes the components AM-scheduling, Precedence relations, Common for
AM- and CM-scheduling along with a part for modelling the objective.
To avoid a solution where tasks are placed too far from their allowed interval, a set of tasks
Iassign is forced to be assigned to a sub-interval. In order to measure the duration between
tasks on AMs that communicate with each other, we create an artiﬁcial dependency between
each pair tasks on AMs that are connected through dependencies. Let Dpart denote the set
of artiﬁcial dependencies and choose the lower and upper bounds on the duration so that
they never will be active. To describe the objective function, introduce for each artiﬁcial
dependency (i, j, k,l) ∈Dpart, an auxiliary variable
uobj
i jkl = the reward for artiﬁcial dependency (i, j, k,l),
along with variable
uobj-min = the minimum reward for an artiﬁcial dependency.
Let the constants l1, l2, l3 and lobj-min be used to give different objective rewards depending
on the relation between the length and lower bound of the artiﬁcial dependencies.
The Partition model is
max

(i, j,k,l)∈Dpart
uobj
i jkl + lobj-minuobj-min,
(85)
subject to
[Objective reward]
uobj
i jkl ≤ui jkl,
(i, j, k,l) ∈Dpart,
(86)
uobj
i jkl ≤l1lmin
i jkl,
(i, j, k,l) ∈Dpart,
(87)
uobj
i jkl ≤l2lmin
i jkl + l3ui jkl,
(i, j, k,l) ∈Dpart,
(88)
uobj-min ≤uobj
i jkl,
(i, j, k,l) ∈Dpart,
(89)
0 ≤uobj
i jkl,
(i, j, k,l) ∈Dpart,
(90)
0 ≤uobj-min,
(91)
[Common for AM- and CM-scheduling]

q∈Qi
αiq = 1,
i ∈Iassign,
(92)

q∈Qi
tr
iqαiq ≤xi ≤

q∈Qi
td
iqαiq −ei,
i ∈Iassign,
(93)
tr
i ≤xi ≤td
i −ei,
i ∈I \ Iassign,
(94)
[Precedence relations]
ui jkl ≤upart-max,
(i, j, k,l) ∈Dpart,
(95)
ui jkl = x j + lp j −(xi + kpi) + PyD
i jkl,
(i, j, k,l) ∈D ∪Dpart,
(96)
lmin
i jkl ≤ui jkl ≤lmax
i jkl ,
(i, j, k,l) ∈D ∪Dpart,
(97)
[AM-scheduling]
xi + ei + lidle
ii′ −(td
i + lidle
ii′ −tr
i′)(1 −yii′) ≤xi′,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
h , h ∈HAM,
(98)
123

458
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
xi′ + ei′ + lidle
i′i −(td
i′ + lidle
i′i −tr
i )yii′ ≤xi,
(i, i′) ∈IIO
h , h ∈HAM.
(99)
References
Archetti, C., & Speranza, M. G. (2014). A survey on matheuristics for routing problems. EURO Journal on
Computational Optimization, 2(4), 223–246.
Ball, M. O. (2011). Heuristics based on mathematical programming. Surveys in Operations Research and
Management Science, 16(1), 21–38.
Belo-Filho, M. A., Amorim, P., & Almada-Lobo, B. (2015). An adaptive large neighbourhood search for the
operational integrated production and distribution problem of perishable products. International Journal
of Production Research, 53(20), 6040–6058.
Blikstad, M., Karlsson, E., Lööw, T., & Rönnberg, E. (2018). An optimisation approach for pre-runtime
scheduling of tasks and communication in an integrated modular avionic system. Optimization and
Engineering, 19(4), 977–1004.
Boberg, J. (2017). A comparison of sequencing formulations in a constraint generation procedure for avionics
scheduling. Bachelor thesis, Linköping University, ISRN: LiTH-MAT-EX–2017/18–SE.
Caserta, M., & Voß, S. (2010). Metaheuristics: Intelligent problem solving. In V. Maniezzo, T. Stützle, &
S. Voß (Eds.), Matheuristics: Hybridizing metaheuristics and mathematical programming (pp. 1–38).
USA: Springer.
Cordeau, J. F., Laporte, G., Moccia, L., & Sorrentino, G. (2011). Optimizing yard assignment in an automotive
transshipment terminal. European Journal of Operational Research, 215(1), 149–160.
Craciunas, S. S., & Oliver, R. S. (2016). Combined task- and network-level scheduling for distributed time-
triggered systems. Real-time Systems, 52(2), 161–200.
Doerner, K. F., & Schmid, V. (2010). Survey: Matheuristics for rich vehicle routing problems. In Hybrid
metaheuristics: 7th International workshop, HM 2010, Vienna, Austria, October 2010 (pp. 206–221).
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Eisenbrand, F., Kesavan, K., Mattikalli, R. S., Niemeier, M., Nordsieck, A. W., Skutella, M., et al. (2010).
Solving an avionics real-time scheduling problem by advanced IP-methods. In M. de Berg & U. Meyer
(Eds.), Algorithms - ESA 2010 (pp. 11–22). Berlin: Springer.
Framinan, J. M., & Perez-Gonzalez, P. (2018). Order scheduling with tardiness objective: Improved approxi-
mate solutions. European Journal of Operational Research, 266(3), 840–850.
Gerhards, P., Stürck, C., & Fink, A. (2017). An adaptive large neighbourhood search as a matheuristic for the
multi-mode resource-constrained project scheduling problem. European Journal of Industrial Engineer-
ing, 11(6), 774–791.
Gharehgozli, A. H., Laporte, G., Yu, Y., & de Koster, R. (2015). Scheduling twin yard cranes in a container
block. Transportation Science, 49(3), 686–705.
Glover, F. (1977). Heuristics for integer programming using surrogate constraints. Decisions Sciences, 8(1),
156–166.
Glover, F., & Hao, J. K. (2011). The case for strategic oscillation. Annals of Operations Research, 183(1),
163–173.
Guido,R.,Groccia,M.C.,&Conforti,D.(2018).Anefﬁcientmatheuristicforofﬂinepatient-to-bedassignment
problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 268(2), 486–503.
Hao, Y., Mu, M., Dai, X., & Li, X. (2018). Schedulability test for IMA systems based on mixed integer linear
programming formulation. Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences, 26(2), 844–
855.
Karlsson, E., & Rönnberg, E. (2018). Explicit modelling of multiple intervals in a constraint generation
procedure for multiprocessor scheduling. In: Kliewer, N., Ehmke, J. F., Borndörfer, R. (Eds.) Operations
research proceedings 2017, Berlin: Springer, pp. 567–572.
Kiefer, A., Hartl, R. F., & Schnell, A. (2017). Adaptive large neighborhood search for the curriculum-based
course timetabling problem. Annals of Operations Research, 252(2), 255–282.
Lhachemi, H., De Azua Ortega, J. A. R., Saussie, D., & Zhu, G. (2016). Partition modeling and optimization of
ARINC 653 operating systems in the context of IMA. In 2016 IEEE/AIAA 35th digital avionics systems
conference (DASC), pp 1–8.
Mancini, S. (2016). A real-life multi depot multi period vehicle routing problem with a heterogeneous ﬂeet:
Formulation and adaptive large neighborhood search based matheuristic. Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies, 70, 100–112.
Maniezzo, V., Stützle, T., & Voß, S. (2010). Matheuristics: Hybridizing metaheuristics and mathematical
programming, annals of information systems (Vol. 10). USA: Springer.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 302:425–459
459
Muller, L. F., Spoorendonk, S., & Pisinger, D. (2012). A hybrid adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic
for lot-sizing with setup times. European Journal of Operational Research, 218(3), 614–623.
Pereira, M. A., Coelho, L. C., Lorena, L. A., & de Souza, L. C. (2015). A hybrid method for the probabilistic
maximal covering location-allocation problem. Computers & Operations Research, 57, 51–59.
Pisinger, D., & Ropke, S. (2007). A general heuristic for vehicle routing problems. Computers & Operations
Research, 34(8), 2403–2435.
Rönnberg, E. (2018). Co-allocation of communication messages in an integrated modular avionic system. In
Kliewer, N., Ehmke, J. F., Borndörfer, R. (Eds.) Operations research proceedings 2017, Berlin: Springer,
pp. 459–465.
Ropke, S., & Pisinger, D. (2006). An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the pickup and delivery
problem with time windows. Transportation Science, 40(4), 455–472.
Shaw, P. (1998). Using constraint programming and local search methods to solve vehicle routing problems.
In Principles and practice of constraint programming— CP98. CP 1998. Lecture notes in computers
science, vol. 1520, pp. 417–431.
Zhang, L., Goswami, D., Schneider, R., & Chakraborty, S. (2014). Task- and Network-level schedule co-
synthesis of ethernet-based time-triggered systems. In Proceedings of the Asia and South Paciﬁc design
automation conference, ASP-DAC, pp. 119–124.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123