TITLE: Improving the quality of life and longevity of the elderly: the role of private versus public health
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06920-1
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 29 April 2025 / Accepted: 21 October 2025
В© The Author(s) 2025
 
 Mauro Maria Baldi
mauromaria.baldi@unimc.it
Raffaella Coppier
raffaella.coppier@unimc.it
Elisabetta Michetti
elisabetta.michetti@unimc.it
1 
Department of Economics and Law, University of Macerata, Macerata, Italy
Improving the quality of life and longevity of the elderly: the 
role of private versus public health
Mauro MariaВ Baldi1
В В· RaffaellaВ Coppier1
В В· ElisabettaВ Michetti1
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06920-1
Abstract
We develop an overlapping generations model to study how the combination of public 
and private health expenditures affects the health status and/or longevity of the elderly, as 
well as its impact on steady-state economic growth. We find that two distinct scenarios 
may arise-one with and one without reliance on private health care-depending on the 
relative value of private versus public health spending. In both cases, a positive locally 
asymptotically steady state emerges in terms of capital per worker, and a switch between 
regimes may occur depending on the share of public balance spent on the health system. 
Furthermore, increasing such a share increases the equilibrium longevity, while the effects 
on health status are ambiguous. Specifically, when the effectiveness of public expenditure 
is low, increasing public resources allocated to healthcare does not necessarily lead to imВӯ
provements in health status. In contrast, when public spending is highly effective, greater 
allocation of public resources becomes a powerful tool to improve health status in old age.
KeywordsвҖӮ Public and private health expendituresВ В· LongevityВ В· Life quality of the 
elderlyВ В· Economic growthВ В· Overlapping generations model
1вҖӮ Introduction
In recent decades, nearly all countries have experienced a substantial increase in human lonВӯ
gevity. Life expectancy estimates the average number of years a person is expected to live 
based on various factors such as their birth year, current age, and demographic characteristics. 
It is a key indicator used to assess the general health and well-being of populations, often 
reflecting the effectiveness of healthcare systems, socioeconomic conditions, lifestyle choices, 
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
and public health policies. Between 1990 and 2022, life expectancy improved in all regions 
of the world, leading to a reduction in disparities between countries. In 2022, Chad (52.997 
years), Lesotho (53.036 years), and Nigeria (53.633 years) had the lowest life expectancy at 
birth (LEB), while Japan (84.82 years), Liechtenstein (84.656 years) and Switzerland (84.255 
years) reported the highest LEB. In 1990, the difference between the highest and lowest LEB-
Japan and South Sudan, respectively-was 49.049 yearsВ (Aytemiz et al., 2024).
By 2022, this gap had narrowed to 31.823 years between Japan and Chad. Despite 
this progress, the remaining disparity is still substantial, highlighting the need to focus on 
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) set forth in the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development. (United Nations, 2024)1
Longevity has been a cornerstone in public health and medical debates and life expecВӯ
tancy is often used to measure the health and well-being of a population (Annas & Galea, 
2018). At least in the developed world, longer expected lifespans have been accompanied by 
a significant increase in healthcare expenditures. A growing body of literature shows a clear 
link between health expenditures and health outcomes (Glied & Smith, 2013). In particular, 
data from advanced countries show that public health spending plays a very important role 
in enhancing longevity, a much greater role than private health spending. This evidence 
stems from the fact that: вҖңpublic health expenditure is devoted, first and foremost, to finance 
actions that affect an important fraction of the population and involve significant positive 
external effects (i.e., what we could identify as basic health: vaccination campaigns, preВӯ
vention of disease, basic framework of health centers, etc.). But once basic programs are 
met, additional public expenditure is likely to be devoted to activities that the private sector 
also offers, so the productivities of the two sectors converge." AГӯsa et al. (2014).
In fact, there are some countries, e.g. the United States, where healthcare expenditure is 
high, but the public component of this expenditure is low, with limited effects on improving 
longevity. With regard to this, in 2023, the life expectancy in the United States was 78.4 
years, which is 4.1 years lower than the average of comparable countries at 82.5 years. As 
AГӯsa et al. (2014) states: вҖңIn particular, the above results offer a plausible explanation for 
the apparently paradoxical data for the USA. While this is the country that devotes the largВӯ
est amount of resources to health (over 13 % of GDP, close to twice the average value in 
the sample), life expectancy was 76.2 years in 2000, below the average. The key element 
that enables us to understand this puzzle is precisely the composition of health expenditure. 
The average value in the sample shows a ratio of public to private expenditures of 3.72. In 
contrast, this ratio is only 0.82 for the USA. That is, the public health system in the USA is 
responsible for only 45 % of the resources devoted to health, compared to the almost 80 % 
average in the OECD countries. The above results show the need for a redesign of the health 
system through an intensive promotion of the public health system."
Although life expectancy has generally increased, healthy life expectancy (HALE) has 
not progressed at the same rate.2 Between 2000 and 2019, HALE increased by 5.3 years, 
from 58.1 to 63.5 years, while overall life expectancy grew by 6.4 years during the same 
period. This indicates that, although people are living longer, they are also spending more 
1вҖүAvailable at: https://sdgs.un.org/goals..
2вҖүHealthy life expectancy is a measure that combines both quantity of life and health status. This refers to the 
average number of years that a person can expect to live in full health, free from disease or disability. It is not 
just about how long people live, but how long they live without major health problems.
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
of those additional years dealing with health problems.3 But, as Zarulli and Caswell (2024) 
stress, surviving in good health is essential because healthy years of life are also a crucial 
part of the dynamics of the life cycle.
These trends underscore the importance of addressing not only longevity, but also health 
status during extended lifespans. Efforts to improve access to healthcare, preventive meaВӯ
sures, and health education are crucial in ensuring that increased life expectancy translates 
into healthier years lived. Governments around the world recognize the importance of the 
health system; therefore, health expenditures throughout the world have increased with 
time.4 Health expenditures are mostly financed through public taxation and are growing 
more than the global economy, accounting for 10% of the world gross domestic product 
(GDP) (25). The average health expenditures as a share of GDP have increased from 7.8% 
in 2005 to 9.8% in 2020 in the OECD countries (Anwar et al., 2023).
In our paper, we propose an economic framework able to account for both elements 
relevant to health: one related to life expectancy (i.e., life quantity), and one expressing 
quality from the point of view of the elderly personвҖҷs health (i.e., health status). We therefore 
construct a 2-period overlapping-generations model that incorporates an analysis of endogВӯ
enous longevity together with the endogenous elderly health status. Therefore, we combine 
two strands of research by considering both the вҖҳquantityвҖҷ of life and health status.
Following (Chakraborty, 2004) and Cipriani and Fioroni (2019), we assume that the 
probability of survival from the first period (adulthood) to the next (old age) is endogВӯ
enously determined through public investment in health.5
It is also important that elderly survivors increase their health status. Hence, we assume, 
following (Varvarigos & Zakaria, 2013), that this state of health depends on both public 
expenditures on medical care, and also on private spending by individuals during the final 
period of their lives. In fact, the elderly can decide to allocate part of their income to health 
care expenditures to improve their utility-enhancing health status. Understanding how pubВӯ
lic and private health expenditures can interact is essential for shaping or reforming health 
care policies.
Bhattacharya and Qiao (2007) and Varvarigos and Zakaria (2013) consider that private 
and public health expenditures are complementary, i.e., an increase in one leads to an increase 
in the other, rather than substituting for it. This occurs when private and public investments 
reinforce each other in improving elderly health.Unlike(Varvarigos & Zakaria, 2013), we 
interpret the public component as a "competitor" to the private input in determining elderly 
health because public and private expenditures have a certain degree of substitutability.
The choice to consider both private and public expenditure by the elderly arises from the 
fact that private expenditure in this context - such as medical treatments and interventions 
3вҖүGHE: Life expectancy and healthy life expectancy. The Global Health Observatory. вҖӢhвҖӢtвҖӢtвҖӢpвҖӢsвҖӢ:вҖӢ/вҖӢ/вҖӢwвҖӢwвҖӢwвҖӢ.вҖӢwвҖӢhвҖӢoвҖӢ.вҖӢiвҖӢnвҖӢtвҖӢ/вҖӢdвҖӢ
aвҖӢtвҖӢaвҖӢ/вҖӢgвҖӢhвҖӢoвҖӢ/вҖӢdвҖӢaвҖӢtвҖӢaвҖӢ/вҖӢtвҖӢhвҖӢeвҖӢmвҖӢeвҖӢsвҖӢ/вҖӢmвҖӢoвҖӢrвҖӢtвҖӢaвҖӢlвҖӢiвҖӢtвҖӢyвҖӢ-вҖӢaвҖӢnвҖӢdвҖӢ-вҖӢgвҖӢlвҖӢoвҖӢbвҖӢaвҖӢlвҖӢ-вҖӢhвҖӢeвҖӢaвҖӢlвҖӢtвҖӢhвҖӢ-вҖӢeвҖӢsвҖӢtвҖӢiвҖӢmвҖӢaвҖӢtвҖӢeвҖӢsвҖӢ/вҖӢgвҖӢhвҖӢeвҖӢ-вҖӢlвҖӢiвҖӢfвҖӢeвҖӢ-вҖӢeвҖӢxвҖӢpвҖӢeвҖӢcвҖӢtвҖӢaвҖӢnвҖӢcвҖӢyвҖӢ-вҖӢaвҖӢnвҖӢdвҖӢ-вҖӢhвҖӢeвҖӢaвҖӢlвҖӢtвҖӢhвҖӢyвҖӢ-вҖӢlвҖӢiвҖӢfвҖӢeвҖӢ-вҖӢeвҖӢxвҖӢpвҖӢeвҖӢcвҖӢtвҖӢaвҖӢnвҖӢcвҖӢyвҖӢ
- WorldВ Health Organization (2022).
4вҖүWHO. Countries are Spending More on Health, But People are Still Paying Too Much Out of Their Own 
Pockets. WHO (2019). Available online at: вҖӢhвҖӢtвҖӢtвҖӢpвҖӢsвҖӢ:вҖӢ/вҖӢ/вҖӢwвҖӢwвҖӢwвҖӢ.вҖӢwвҖӢhвҖӢoвҖӢ.вҖӢiвҖӢnвҖӢtвҖӢ/вҖӢnвҖӢeвҖӢwвҖӢsвҖӢ/вҖӢiвҖӢtвҖӢeвҖӢmвҖӢ/вҖӢ2вҖӢ0вҖӢ-вҖӢ0вҖӢ2вҖӢ-вҖӢ2вҖӢ0вҖӢ1вҖӢ9вҖӢ-вҖӢcвҖӢoвҖӢuвҖӢnвҖӢtвҖӢrвҖӢiвҖӢeвҖӢsвҖӢ-вҖӢaвҖӢrвҖӢeвҖӢ-вҖӢsвҖӢpвҖӢeвҖӢnвҖӢdвҖӢiвҖӢ
nвҖӢgвҖӢ-вҖӢmвҖӢoвҖӢrвҖӢeвҖӢ-вҖӢoвҖӢnвҖӢ-вҖӢhвҖӢeвҖӢaвҖӢlвҖӢtвҖӢhвҖӢ-вҖӢbвҖӢuвҖӢtвҖӢ-вҖӢpвҖӢeвҖӢoвҖӢpвҖӢlвҖӢeвҖӢ-вҖӢaвҖӢrвҖӢeвҖӢ-вҖӢsвҖӢtвҖӢiвҖӢlвҖӢlвҖӢ-вҖӢpвҖӢaвҖӢyвҖӢiвҖӢnвҖӢgвҖӢ-вҖӢtвҖӢoвҖӢoвҖӢ-вҖӢmвҖӢuвҖӢcвҖӢhвҖӢ-вҖӢoвҖӢuвҖӢtвҖӢ-вҖӢoвҖӢfвҖӢ-вҖӢtвҖӢhвҖӢeвҖӢiвҖӢrвҖӢ-вҖӢoвҖӢwвҖӢnвҖӢ-вҖӢpвҖӢoвҖӢcвҖӢkвҖӢeвҖӢtвҖӢsвҖӢ.
5вҖүThe decision not to consider private spending as a determinant of longevity is based on the fact that data on 
developed countries, such as the United States, as highlighted in the introduction, show that public healthcare 
spending is the main determinant of a countryвҖҷs longevity. Furthermore, in our model, longevity is the probВӯ
ability of surviving into the second period, and therefore private spending on longevity should be done by 
young adults, which is not very common. Thus, this modelling makes the analytical model more manageable 
without implying a loss of generality of the model itself.
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
for existing diseases and conditions - tends to improve the health status of the elderly. These 
expenditures are primarily focused on care, as prevention is often not an immediate priority 
for private individuals who allocate their resources mainly toward treatments and therapies. 
As a result, this type of healthcare can be provided interchangeably by the public health 
system or, in cases of deficiencies or excessively long waiting times, by the private system.
In this regard, (Li et al., 2016) conduct a quantitative exercise to examine whether the 
observed differences in the public-private mix of health expenditure can be accounted for by 
variations in the elasticity of substitution between private and public spending, as well as by 
differences in the effectiveness of public expenditure in health production across a sample 
of OECD countries. Following the quantitative analysis by Li et al. (2016), our model conВӯ
siders two different scenarios regarding the effectiveness of public health expenditure, each 
representing two markedly different models of private-public health expenditure mixes.
This paper presents a simple framework to study the dynamic substitutability between 
public health programs and private efforts, aimed at improving health status in old age, 
given that longevity depends on the public health system.
By combining analytical methods and numerical experiments, our model shows that capВӯ
ital per young worker evolves over time according to different dynamics. Specifically, two 
scenarios may emerge: in the first the value of private health spending is higher than public 
spending, leading the elderly to allocate part of their savings to health; in the second the 
value of private health spending is lower than public spending, and the elderly choose not to 
invest in health. In both cases, the model admits a unique, positive, and locally asymptotiВӯ
cally stable steady state. However, as the share of public resources allocated to health care 
changes, a switch between the two scenarios may occur. While this transition does not affect 
the equilibrium level of longevity, its impact on the health status may be ambiguous.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 illustrates the set up of the model. Section 3 
presents the dynamics of the system. Section 4 concludes.
2вҖӮ The economic setup
2.1вҖӮ Health status and quantity in the elderly
We consider a production economy populated by overlapping generations of agents who live 
for two periods: adulthood and old age. Following (Chakraborty, 2004), longevity is endogВӯ
enous, i.e. the probability of surviving from adulthood to old age depends on public expendiВӯ
tures on health. Hence, we assume that longevity depends only on public health expenditures 
made by the government at time t вҲҲN, and the more the government invests in public healthВӯ
care, the greater the probability of an adult surviving as an elderly person.
We define as wt the wage rate of an adult for a unit of effective labor, then, being 
П„ вҲҲ(0, 1) the taxation rate, the public health financed by the state positively depends on 
fiscal revenues i.e., П„wt.
We denote by gt the amount of public expenditure on health at time t, then, let Оі вҲҲ(0, 1) 
be the fraction of the public balance devoted to the health system, we obtain
 
gt = ОіП„wt.
(1)
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
Although the length of each period is normalized to one, an individualвҖҷs lifetime is uncerВӯ
tain. More precisely, the individual probability of surviving from the first period (adulthood) 
to the next (old age) depends on public expenditures on health when young. We refer to this 
component as quantity of life in the elderly, and it is described by a variable measuring the 
survival probability of an adult, thus becoming old in the second period. We denote this 
probability as pt вҲҲ[ВҜp, 1), given a fixed exogenous threshold for longevity, which is associВӯ
ated with no investment in public health, denoted by ВҜp вҲҲ[0, 1).
Then, following (Chakraborty, 2004) and Cipriani and Fioroni (2019), we consider a 
function P : R+ вҶ’[ВҜp, 1) which associates the longevity pt with public health expenditure 
gt, such that, P(0) = ВҜp. Specifically, there exists an exogenous level of longevity where 
limgtвҶ’+вҲһP(gt) вҶ’1, meaning that if public health expenditure is sufficiently high, then 
longevity is close to one. The function P is continuous, twice differentiable and such that 
P вҖІ > 0, indicating that increased public expenditure on health improves longevity, and 
P вҖІвҖІ < 0, reflecting diminishing marginal benefits.
A function satisfying these assumptions is as follows:
 
pt = ВҜp + (1 вҲ’ВҜp)gt
1 + gt
.
(2)
Regarding the health status in the elderly, following (Varvarigos & Zakaria, 2013), we 
assume it is related to the expenditures in the health system through two components: the 
public one, financed by the state via taxation, and the private one, funded by the elderly 
themselves, who divert a portion of their resources from consumption in old age. However, 
unlike (Varvarigos & Zakaria, 2013), we consider private and public health expenditures to 
act as a perfect substitute to improve the health status of the elderly.
The substitutability between private and public health expenditures can be explained by 
the estimates of Li et al. (2016), which suggest that for most OECD countries, either the 
Cobb-Douglas form or a linear form is a reasonable representation for health technology. 
In fact, in old age individuals primarily allocates resources toward treatments and therapies 
aimed at managing the health effects of existing conditions. In this context, private spendВӯ
ing may be a solution to the excessive waiting times in public healthcare and congestion 
problems related to public spending.
We denote private health expenditure in old age as xt+1, which represents a fraction of 
the individualвҖҷs savings. Thus, these savings are used both for consumption in old age and 
for improving health status.
Regarding the health status of the elderly, it is assumed that the health technology that 
determines the health status depends on both private and public health expenditures at time 
t + 1, with a perfect degree of substitutability between them.6
The health status in old age, denoted by ht+1, can be formalized as follows:
 
ht+1 = Оұgt+1 + (1 вҲ’Оұ)xt+1.
(3)
6вҖүConsidering imperfect substitutability between public and private spending on health technology (considerВӯ
ing, for example, a Cobb Douglas function) implies that the technical substitution rate between the two types 
of spending is not constant but decreases as the use of one of the two types of spending increases. As we 
already mentioned, based on the empirical analysis of Li et al. (2016), both types of function (linear or Cobb 
Douglas) are supported by empirical data, but the use of a Cobb Douglas function would make the theoretical 
analysis much more complex.
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
where Оұ вҲҲ(0, 1) represents the effectiveness of public expenditure in improving the health 
status of the elderly, while (1 вҲ’Оұ) is the effectiveness of private expenditure by the elderly 
themselves. The ratio 
Оұ
(1вҲ’Оұ) measures the rate at which private and public health expendiВӯ
ture can be exchanged, while maintaining a constant level of health.
2.2вҖӮ Intertemporal constrained utility maximization
We consider an economy consisting of an infinite sequence of overlapping generations, each 
potentially living for two periods, alongside an infinitely-lived government. Time is discrete, 
that is, t = 1, 2, .... Following (Chakraborty, 2004), we assume that each individual born in 
generation t gives birth to one offspring at the end of period t, before experiencing their morВӯ
tality shock. The new individual becomes economically active only at the beginning of t + 1. 
Therefore, in each period a measure-one cohort of adults is born, each endowed with one unit 
of time, which they inelastically supply to the labor market, earning a wage income wt. FolВӯ
lowing (Cipriani & Fioroni, 2019), to keep the model more tractable, we assume that all adults 
retire at the end of the first period.
In summary, adults benefit from the consumptions during adulthood, consumptions in 
old age, and their health status ht+1 when old, depending on the survival probability. The 
lifetime utility of an individual of generation t is then given by the following function7:
 
Ut = ln ct + pt{ОІ ln ct+1 + Оё ln ht+1},
(4)
where ct is consumption during adulthood, ct+1 is consumption during old age, and ht+1 
is the health status during old age. The parameters ОІ, Оё are positive, and pt represents the 
probability of surviving from youth to old age.
The budget constraint in the first young adulthood period is given by:
 
(1 вҲ’П„)wt = ct + st
(5)
where П„ вҲҲ(0, 1) is the tax rate on labor income and st refers to savings (understood as the 
purchase of annuities). All variables are assumed to be non-negative.
Given the adultsвҖҷ salary and the interest rate, the cost of health expenditure reduces the 
resources available for both future consumption and savings.
The second-period budget constraint is given by:
 
st ЛҶRt+1 = ct+1 + xt+1
(6)
where xt+1 is the private expenditure for health status, and ЛҶRt+1 is the gross return on its 
savings. In fact, consumption in old age is financed by the returns on savings accumulated 
during adulthood. Furthermore, we assume that all goods are perishable and that agents can 
7вҖүThe assumption of additivity in the utility function in overlapping generations models is often used (see, for 
example (DeВ LaВ Croix & Michel, 2002)). Additivity implies that the well-being derived from consumption 
does not depend on the level of health and vice versa. In reality, consumption is often more вҖңusefulвҖқ if you 
are healthy and vice versa: in fact, greater consumption can improve health status. However, this hypothesis 
allows us to analyze choices relating to consumption and health separately: in fact, the agent decides to invest 
part of their savings in health only by looking at the direct contribution to utility, without considering how 
health affects the marginal utility of consumption.
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
only transfer value over time through capital markets. Individuals are assumed to have no 
bequest motives. Following (Chakraborty, 2004), in order to eliminate the risks associated 
with uncertain lifespans, we assume the existence of a perfect annuity market, where all savВӯ
ings are managed through mutual funds. At the end of their youth, individuals deposit their 
savings into a mutual fund. These funds are exclusively invested in capital, and the mutual 
fund guarantees a gross return to those who survive into old age. If these funds yield a gross 
return of ЛҶRt+1 on its investment, then under perfect competition, equilibrium in the annuity 
market is maintained:
 
ЛҶRt+1 = Rt+1
pt
,
(7)
where Rt+1 is the gross interest rate.
To summarize, we can collect all the equations presented so far to formulate the followВӯ
ing constrained optimization problem:
 
max
Ut = ln ct + ОІpt ln ct+1 + Оёpt ln ht+1

(8)
 
s.t.:
gt+1 =ОіП„wt+1

(9)
 
ct + st =(1 вҲ’П„)wt 
(10)
 
ct+1 + xt+1 =st ЛҶRt+1

(11)
 
ЛҶRt+1 =Rt+1
pt

(12)
 
ht+1 =Оұgt+1 + (1 вҲ’Оұ)xt+1

(13)
 
xt+1 вүҘ0.

(14)
The solution of the maximum constrained optimization problem results in the following 
Proposition.
Proposition 2.1вҖӮ The first-order conditions for problem (8вҖ“14) are as follows.
Case A: If
 
(1 вҲ’Оұ)ОёRt+1(1 вҲ’П„)wt вүҘ(1 + ОІpt)ОұОіП„wt+1
(15)
then
 
ct =
1
1 + (ОІ + Оё)pt
[ pt
Rt+1
Оұ
1 вҲ’ОұОіП„wt+1 + (1 вҲ’П„)wt
]
,
(16)
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
 
ct+1 =
ОІRt+1
1 + (ОІ + Оё)pt
[ pt
Rt+1
Оұ
1 вҲ’ОұОіП„wt+1 + (1 вҲ’П„)wt
]
,
(17)
 
xt+1 =
1
1 + (ОІ + Оё)pt
[
ОёRt+1(1 вҲ’П„)wt вҲ’(1 + ОІpt)
Оұ
1 вҲ’ОұОіП„wt+1
]
,
(18)
 
st =
pt
1 + (ОІ + Оё)pt
[
(ОІ + Оё)(1 вҲ’П„)wt вҲ’
1
Rt+1
Оұ
1 вҲ’ОұОіП„wt+1
]
.
(19)
Case B: If
 
(1 вҲ’Оұ)ОёRt+1(1 вҲ’П„)wt < (1 + ОІpt)ОұОіП„wt+1
(20)
then
 
ct = (1 вҲ’П„)wt
1 + ОІpt
,
(21)
 
ct+1 = ОІRt+1(1 вҲ’П„)wt
1 + ОІpt
,
(22)
 
xt+1 = 0,
(23)
 
st = ОІpt(1 вҲ’П„)wt
1 + ОІpt
.
(24)
Moreover, in both cases, these conditions are also sufficient.
ProofвҖӮ See AppendixВ A. 
в–Ў
The previous conditions referred to Case A and Case B become easier to interpret ecoВӯ
nomically. In fact, the condition relating to Case A is:
 
(1 вҲ’Оұ)ОёRt+1(1 вҲ’П„)wt вүҘ(1 + ОІpt)Оұgt+1.
(25)
The left-hand side of the inequality represents the value (Оё) of the (net, discounted) income 
spent on private expenditure when elderly (also taking into account the effectiveness 1 вҲ’Оұ), 
while the right-hand side, on the other hand, represents the value of public expenditure gt+1 
of which the effectiveness Оұ is also taken into account. Therefore, when the inequality of 
Case A is verified, it means that the value of private health expenditure is greater than public 
expenditure. As a consequence, private spending on health by the elderly is positive.
Conversely, in Case B the value of private spending on health is lower than public spendВӯ
ing, and therefore the elderly will not invest their savings in health spending, i. e. xt+1 = 0.
Thanks to the first-order conditions, we can also derive ht+1 by substituting the expresВӯ
sion of xt+1 in both cases A and B (respectively given byВ (18) and byВ (23)) into the forВӯ
mulaВ  (3) and considering that gt+1 = ОіП„wt+1. After some algebraic manipulations, the 
expression for ht+1 in Case A is as follows:
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
 
hA
t+1 = [ОұОіП„wt+1pt + (1 вҲ’Оұ)(1 вҲ’П„)Rt+1wt] Оё
1 + (ОІ + Оё)pt
,
(26)
while for Case B, we obtain:
 
hB
t+1 = ОұОіП„wt+1.
(27)
It is straightforward to observe that hA
t+1 вүҘhB
t+1. In fact, fromВ (13), (9), andВ (14) we have:
 
ht+1 = Оұgt+1 + (1 вҲ’Оұ)xt+1 вүҘОұgt+1 = ОұОіП„wt+1 = hB
t+1.
(28)
In particular, (28) holds if hA
t+1 is substituted on the left-hand side. Alternatively, one arrives 
at a similar conclusion by boundingВ (26) usingВ (15). In fact, fromВ (15) we have:
 
hA
t+1 =ОұОіП„wt+1ptОё + (1 вҲ’Оұ)(1 вҲ’П„)Rt+1wtОё
1 + (ОІ + Оё)pt
вүҘОұОіП„wt+1ptОё + (1 + ОІpt) ОұОіП„wt+1
1 + (ОІ + Оё)pt
= ОұОіП„wt+1 = hB
t+1.
As for the expression of pt, in both cases we find that by substituting (1) into (2), we obtain:
 
pt = ВҜp + (1 вҲ’ВҜp)gt
1 + gt
= ВҜp + (1 вҲ’ВҜp)ОіП„wt
1 + ОіП„wt
.
(29)
Thus, it can be seen that the quantity of life, i.e. longevity, is equal in the two scenarios as it 
depends only on public spending; conversely, health status is higher in scenario A where the 
elderly invest part of their savings in improving their health.
2.3вҖӮ Production, investment and saving
As previously mentioned, at each period, a new generation of adults, each with measure one, 
enters the economy. Each agent is endowed with one unit of labor during their youth and is 
compulsorily retired in old age.
The aggregate production technology of the economy is assumed to follow a constant-
returns-to-scale production function, utilizing both labor and capital. Capital stock is 
assumed to fully depreciate after one period of use, meaning that the capital stock in any 
given period is equal to the savings in the previous period.
Production in time t employs physical capital Kt and labor L. We denote Yt the aggregate 
output and represent the aggregate technology of the economy by the following production 
function:
 
Yt = F(Kt, L) = AKОҙ
t L1вҲ’Оҙ.
(30)
In that equation, Yt, Kt, and L respectively stand for aggregate output, physical capital stock 
and effective labor in the economy in period t, while A is the total factor productivity, and 
Оҙ вҲҲ(0, 1) is the productivity of physical capital.
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
Defining the capital stock per young worker as kt = Kt
L , the production function can be 
rewritten as
 
Yt
L (вүЎyt) вүЎAkОҙ
t .
Perfect competition in the final goods market implies that the wage rate wt and the interest 
rate rt are equal to the marginal productivity of labor and capital, so that:
 
wt = A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t 
(31)
and
 
rt = AОҙkОҙвҲ’1
t
,
(32)
and we obtain the following gross interest rate:
 
Rt+1 = 1 + rt+1.
(33)
From the capital market, the following equilibrium condition is assumed to hold:
 
kt+1 = st.
(34)
3вҖӮ Qualitative and quantitative dynamics
To describe the evolution of the economy over time, we consider both the necessary and sufВӯ
ficient conditions of the constrained optimization problem as stated in PropositionВ 2.1, as well 
as the relationships among capital per young worker, the wage rate, and the gross interest rate 
under the assumption of capital market equilibrium, as presented in Sect. 2.3.
The capital per young worker over time is obtained in the following PropositionВ 3.1.
Proposition 3.1вҖӮ Let (kt, kt+1) вҲҲR2
+ and
 
pt (kt) = ВҜp + (1 вҲ’ВҜp) ОіП„A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
1 + ОіП„A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
.
(35)
Define
 fC(kt, kt+1) =
[
Оё (
1 + AОҙkОҙвҲ’1
t+1
)
(1 вҲ’П„)kОҙ
t вҲ’(1 + ОІpt(kt))
Оұ
1 вҲ’ОұОіП„kОҙ
t+1
]
A(1 вҲ’Оҙ). (36)
(a) If fC (kt, kt+1) вүҘ0, then the following relationship between kt and kt+1 must hold:
 
fA (kt, kt+1) := kt+1 вҲ’
A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)pt (kt)
1 + (ОІ + Оё)pt (kt)
[
(ОІ + Оё)(1 вҲ’П„)kОҙ
t вҲ’
1
1 + AОҙkОҙвҲ’1
t+1
Оұ
1 вҲ’ОұОіП„kОҙ
t+1
]
= 0. (37)
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
(b) Otherwise, if fC (kt, kt+1) < 0, then the following relationship between kt and kt+1 
must hold:
 
fB (kt, kt+1) := kt+1 вҲ’ОІpt (kt) (1 вҲ’П„)A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
1 + ОІpt (kt)
= 0.
(38)
ProofвҖӮ See AppendixВ B. 
в–Ў
Notice that condition fC (kt, kt+1) вүҘ0 refers to Case A of Proposition 2.1, where the 
attributed value of private health expenditure exceeds the value of public spending, resulting 
in positive private health investment by the elderly. Conversely, condition fC (kt, kt+1) < 0 
is related to Case B of Proposition 2.1, i.e. the value of private health spending is lower than 
the value of public spending, and therefore the elderly will not invest their savings in health. 
PropositionВ 3.1 outlines the conditions that determine which case point (kt, kt+1) belongs 
to and implicitly describes the evolution of capital per young worker over time in both 
cases, i.e. with or without private health expenditure.
The boundary equation fC (kt, kt+1) = 0 as given by equation (36) separates the plane 
R2
+ into two regions, RA and RB, given by
 
RA = {(kt, kt+1) вҲҲR2
+ : fC (kt, kt+1) вүҘ0},
(39)
where the evolution of capital per worker over time is fully described by the implicit equaВӯ
tion fA(kt, kt+1) = 0 as defined by equation (37), and
 
RB = {(kt, kt+1) вҲҲR2
+ : fC (kt, kt+1) < 0},
(40)
where the evolution of capital per worker over time is fully described by the implicit equaВӯ
tion fB(kt, kt+1) = 0 as defined by equation (38).
Hence, the shape of the curve fC (kt, kt+1) = 0 on the plane plays an important role in 
the description of the dynamics shown by the proposed model.
Several numerical experiments indicate that the boundary equation passes through the 
origin and is strictly increasing and concave. Notice also that fC(0, k) < 0, вҲҖk > 0, hence 
the yвҲ’axes belongs to RB. As a consequence, the region RA (resp. region RB) corresponds 
to the set of points below the curve fC (resp. above the curve fC). This behavior is clariВӯ
fied in Fig. 1a, where the two regions are depicted in different colors (from now on we will 
associate the color cyan with Case A and magenta with Case B).
Analyzing the dynamics generated by the discrete-time equations defined by fA in RA 
and fB in RB is quite complex. This complexity arises both from the analytical form of the 
functions involved and from the fact that one of them is defined in an implicit form. As a 
result, a more thorough investigation of the existence and stability of steady-state equilibria 
requires a combination of analytical techniques and numerical methods.
With regard to the numerical experiments that will be conducted to support the analytiВӯ
cal results, in TableВ 1 we present the values assigned to some of the parameters used in the 
model, while others may vary within their respective domains to facilitate a comparative 
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
analysis. Several numerical experiments show that the qualitative results do not change 
when these parameters vary, and therefore the results described remain valid even for sysВӯ
tems characterized by different values of A or ВҜp, thus demonstrating their general validity 
and robustness.
Firstly, to focus on the role that the public health system can have on the quantity of life 
and health status in old age, we allow the parameter Оі, which measures the share of the 
public budget allocated to the health system, to vary. This serves as a bifurcation parameter 
in our simulations. Secondly, we also consider the role of the parameter Оұ, which measures 
the effectiveness of public spending in the health production function.
As previously mentioned, and in line with Li et al. (2016), we consider two distinct 
values of Оұ, which correspond to two different models for the mix of private and public 
health expenditures. In particular, a value of Оұ = 0, 5, represents countries, such as the US, 
Switzerland, and France in which the effectiveness of public and private expenditure in the 
health production function is equal. In contrast, some countries, such as Denmark, Italy, 
New Zealand, Norway, and Sweden demonstrate greater effectiveness in public spending 
compared to private spending (a value of Оұ approximately equal to 0,В 8).
In Fig. 1b, we numerically obtain a curve given by Оі = О“(Оұ) in the set [0, 1] Г— [0, 1], sepВӯ
arating the parameter plane (Оұ, Оі) into two regions, one referred to the combinations leading 
to Case A of Proposition 2.1 (in cyan) and the other one referred to Case B of Proposition 2.1 
(in magenta). Notice that, when we fix all parameters as shown in Table 1 and allow Оұ and 
Parameter values
References
ВҜp = 0.5
Exogenous longevity level
П„ = 0.3
Average level of taxation of OECD countries
ОІ = Оё = 0.3
Varvarigos and Zakaria (2013)
Оҙ = 0.3
Bhattacharya and Qiao (2007)
A = 10
Scale parameter
Table 1вҖӮ Values assigned 
to parameters in numerical 
experiments
 
Fig. 1вҖӮ a The border fC that separates region A (in cyan) from region B (in magenta) is represented by a 
dashed black line. b The curve Оі = О“(Оұ) that separates the combinations of parameters (Оұ, Оі) leading to 
Case A (in cyan) or Case B (in magenta) is obtained
 
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
Оі to vary, if Оұ вҶ’0+ or Оі вҶ’0+, the curve fC (kt, kt+1) = 0 tends to the yвҲ’axis, meaning 
that the economic model is fully described by fA.
The magenta case refers to a situation in which, once the values of the other parameters 
have been set, low values of Оі and Оұ -indicating insufficient allocation of tax revenue to 
public healthcare and low efficiency of public spending in the healthcare production funcВӯ
tion -lead individuals to allocate part of their savings to private healthcare expenditures, 
thereby shifting the system into Scenario A.
Conversely, if Оі or Оұ are not too low, the elderly place a higher value on public healthcare 
than on private healthcare. This results in Case B from Proposition 2.1, where no resources 
are allocated to the private healthcare system.
In the following analysis, we will study the qualitative and quantitative dynamics of the 
model defined in Proposition 3.1, distinguishing between the Case A (where the value of priВӯ
vate healthcare expenditure exceeds the value of public expenditure and the elderly invest 
in private healthcare), and the Case B (where the value of private healthcare is lower than 
that of public spending, leading the elderly to not invest their savings in private healthcare), 
as outlined in Proposition 2.1.
3.1вҖӮ Scenario A: private healthcare spending.
Consider the case where Proposition 3.1 point (a) is verified. In this case, the relationship 
between kt and kt+1 must satisfy the implicit function fA, as given by equation (37), within 
the domain RA, as defined in equation (39). This refers to combinations of Оұ and Оі that belong 
to the region shaded in cyan in Fig. 1b.
While the shape of the curve fA(kt, kt+1) = 0 in R2
+ cannot be derived analytically, 
numerous numerical experiments have been conducted, all of which confirm that fA defines 
a function that passes through the origin, is strictly increasing, and concave.
Based on the numerical evidence summarized above, the following remark trivially 
holds.
Remark 3.2вҖӮ The implicit function fA(kt, kt+1) admits a unique positive fixed point 
EA(kвҲ—
A, kвҲ—
A) which is asymptotically stable. If EA вҲҲRA, then it represents a feasible fixed 
point; otherwise, it is a virtual fixed point. Additionally, the point E0 = (0, 0) is an unstable 
fixed point.
The evidence presented in RemarkВ 3.2 can be better understood by examining Fig. 2, 
which shows the evolution of capital per young worker over time, starting from a given 
initial condition. In these diagrams, the curves fA (kt, kt+1) = 0 and fB (kt, kt+1) = 0 are 
drawn with solid lines when feasible and with dashed lines in their respective colors when 
unfeasible. The boundary fC (kt, kt+1) = 0, instead, is represented by a black dashed line. 
In both cases the effectiveness of public and private expenditure in the health production 
function is equally shared (i.e. Оұ = 0.5), while the share of the public budget allocated to 
the health system is either a low or high value (i.e. Оі = 0.5 and Оі = 0.9). Notice that any 
positive initial condition generates a trajectory that converges to kвҲ—
A, the feasible steady state 
for all choices of Оі, as long as Оұ = 0.5.
When the effectiveness of public and private expenditure in the health production funcВӯ
tion is equally shared, the feasible steady state is characterized by positive private healthcare 
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
by the elderly, regardless of the level of public budget allocated to the health system. In this 
scenario, the value by the elderly place on private healthcare expenditure exceeds that of 
public healthcare expenditure for any value of Оі. As a result, the elderly will always choose 
to allocate a portion of their savings to healthcare spending, independent of the public budВӯ
get commitment to healthcare.
3.2вҖӮ Scenario B: no private healthcare spending
We now consider the case where Proposition 3.1 point (b) is verified. This corresponds to 
combinations of Оұ and Оі that lie within the region shaded in magenta in Fig. 1b. In this case, 
RB as defined by equation (40), applies, and the evolution of capital per worker is described 
by fB as given in equation (38).
In the following PropositionВ 3.3, we show that fB has an explicit form and we outline 
its key properties.
Proposition 3.3вҖӮ The implicit function fB in equation (38) is equivalent to the following 
explicit function ЛҶfB : R+ вҶ’R+:
 
ЛҶfB (kt) = ОІpt (kt) (1 вҲ’П„)A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
1 + ОІpt (kt)
.
(41)
Moreover, this function has the following properties: 
(a) It passes through the origin.
(b) It is strictly monotonically increasing.
(c) 
lim
ktвҶ’+вҲһ
ЛҶfB (kt) = +вҲһ.
(d) 
lim
ktвҶ’0+ ЛҶf вҖІ
B (kt) = +вҲһ.
ProofвҖӮ See AppendixВ C. 
в–Ў
Fig. 2вҖӮ KoneigвҖ“Lamerary staircase diagram for fA
 
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
Observe also that, although it cannot be proven analytically, numerous numerical experiВӯ
ments have shown that ЛҶfB is concave. By considering the above mentioned considerations, 
the following remark trivially holds.
Remark 3.4вҖӮ The function ЛҶfB admits a unique positive fixed point EB = (kвҲ—
B, kвҲ—
B) which is 
asymptotically stable. If EB вҲҲRB, then it represents a feasible fixed point; otherwise it is 
a virtual fixed point.
The main evidence is represented graphically in Fig. 3, showing the scale diagrams in 
which the generic trajectory converges to kвҲ—
B. Notice that this scenario emerges if Оұ and Оі 
are large enough.
In this case, while high effectiveness of public spending in producing вҖңhealth" is a necВӯ
essary condition for transitioning from an equilibrium with private healthcare spending by 
the elderly to one with only public healthcare spending, it is not sufficient on its own. In 
fact, when public spending is more effective than private spending, and provided the public 
budget allocated to the health system is sufficient large, the model admits a unique positive 
steady state that is locally asymptotically stable and characterized by no private healthcare 
spending by individuals.
This outcome arises because, although public healthcare spending is highly effective 
in generating health, this alone is does not make it optimal for the elderly to forgo private 
healthcare expenditures. For this shift to occur, public healthcare spending-despite its higher 
productivity compared to private spending-must account for a substantial portion of overall 
public revenues. Under these conditions, the system benefits from a large and highly effiВӯ
cient public healthcare sector, making it no longer advantageous for the elderly to allocate 
their savings to private healthcare.
3.3вҖӮ Switching between scenarios
As shown, both scenarios, with or without private healthcare spending, may arise depending 
on the parameter values. More precisely, both fA and fB admit, at most one unique positive 
fixed point (denoted kвҲ—
A and kвҲ—
B, respectively), which can be either feasible (if it lies within RA 
or RB) or virtual (if it does not belong to the domain of the corresponding function).
Fig. 3вҖӮ KoneigвҲ’Lamerary staircase diagram for fB
 
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
A key question, however, concerns how the system transitions between these scenarВӯ
ios as a parameter -specifically, the share of the public budget allocated to the healthcare 
system- changes.
We first consider the case with low Оұ-value, i.e. Оұ = 0.5 so that, as emerges from Fig. 
1b, the fixed point always belong to RA, i.e., a positive fraction of savings is allocated to 
private healthcare for all levels of public budget devoted to health system Оі. The resulting 
equilibrium value of capital per worker, kвҲ—= kвҲ—
A as moving Оі вҲҲ(0, 1), is shown in Fig. 4a. 
The virtual fixed point associated with the no-private-spending scenario typically results in 
a lower level of kвҲ—, assuming the feasible equilibrium solution is maximizing. However the 
corresponding curve (in cyan) exhibits a hump-shaped pattern: as Оі increases, the equilibВӯ
rium value of capital per worker initially rises and then declines. This suggests the existence 
of an optimal public budget share for healthcare that maximizes the equilibrium outcome.
We now turn to the case of a high Оұ-value, specifically Оұ = 0.8. In contrast to the previВӯ
ous case, the resulting scenario here depends on the Оі-value, the share of the public budget 
allocated to the health system. For low values of Оі, the model again produces scenario A, 
characterized by positive healthcare spending. In this case, the maximum capital per young 
worker level is reached at Оі вүғ0.11. However, as the share of the public spending on healthВӯ
care increases and crosses the threshold value Оі вүғ0.6, a transition occurs: the fixed point 
kвҲ—
A becomes virtual, while the fixed point kвҲ—
B becomes feasible. This marks a shift to a new 
situation in which there is no private healthcare spending.
In this case, since public healthcare spending is highly effective, then there exists a 
threshold level of tax revenue allocated to healthcare that shifts the equilibrium from Case A 
to Case B. This implies that, if public spending is highly productive in generating вҖңhealth", 
there is no need for the elderly to allocate part of their savings to health expenditure. In these 
countries, an effective and extensive public healthcare system alone is sufficient to ensure a 
good health status. Conversely, if public and private healthcare spending are equally effecВӯ
tive, only the scenario involving private health expenditure can emerge. In this case, no 
level of public spending is sufficient to prevent the elderly from investing in вҖңhealth".
Finally, we aim to asses whether, and to what extent, the optimal choices emerging from 
both scenarios affect both life quantity and health status.
Fig. 4вҖӮ The equilibrium point kвҲ— for region A (in cyan) and region B (in magenta) being Оі вҲҲ(0, 1)
 
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
Longevity is given by pt(kt) as defined in equation (35), while health status in old age 
-depending on the scenario- is described by the following equations:
 
hA
t+1 =
{
ОұОіП„kОҙ
t+1
[
ВҜp + (1вҲ’ВҜp)ОіП„A(1вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
1+ОіП„A(1вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
]
+ (1 вҲ’Оұ)(1 вҲ’П„) (
1 + AОҙkОҙвҲ’1
t+1
)
kОҙ
t
}
A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)Оё
1 + (ОІ + Оё)
[
ВҜp + (1вҲ’ВҜp)ОіП„A(1вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
1+ОіП„A(1вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
]
, (42)
in the case of positive private healthcare spending, and
 
hB
t+1 = ОұОіП„A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t+1,
(43)
in the case of no private healthcare spending.
With regard to longevity, even if its functional form remains the same across both sceВӯ
narios, it varies with the equilibrium level of capital per worker, which in turn depends on 
the share of the public budget Оі allocated to the healthcare system.
As shown clearly in both Figs. 5a and 6a, life expectancy increases as Оі increases, even 
in the absence of private healthcare spending. This evidence holds regardless of whether 
public spending is relatively effective or not and it persists even when transitions between 
scenarios occur. This is because longevity is determined solely by public healthcare spendВӯ
ing, not private expenditure, which makes the outcome similar in both scenarios.
However, a different behavior emerges when considering health status. Specifically, 
when the effectiveness of public healthcare spending is low, increasing the share of the 
public budget dedicated to health does not necessarily improve health status- this is eviВӯ
dent in Fig. 5b. In contrast, when public spending is highly effective, even a shift between 
scenarios, does not hinder improvements: increasing the public budget share dedicated to 
health becomes an effective tool for enhancing the equilibrium level of health status (see 
Fig. 6b). Indeed, when public healthcare spending is significantly more productive than 
private spending, a scenario with only public healthcare -without any private health expenВӯ
diture-may result in a higher health status. This provides important policy insights: if public 
healthcare spending is significantly more effective than private alternatives, and the State 
Fig. 5вҖӮ Equilibrium values of pвҲ— (panel a) and hвҲ— (panel b) with Оұ = 0.5 for region A (in cyan) and region 
B (in magenta) being Оі вҲҲ(0, 1)
 
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
chooses to allocate a large share of its tax revenue to healthcare, a fully public system can 
ensure a higher health status than a mixed public-private model.
4вҖӮ Conclusion
We considered an overlapping generations model to investigate the role of public versus priВӯ
vate healthcare in determining both the quantity of life and health status in old age, as well as 
its impact on steady-state economic growth.
Depending on the comparison between the value of private and public health expendiВӯ
tures, two scenarios can emerge: either the elderly allocate a positive amount of their savВӯ
ings to private healthcare, or they choose not to invest in private health at all.
With regard to the existence and stability of steady-state equilibria in capital per worker 
- and the corresponding dynamics of life quantity and health status - we combine analytiВӯ
cal tools with numerical methods to demonstrate that, in each scenario, a positive, locally 
asymptotically stable steady-state emerges. This steady state can be either feasible or virВӯ
tual, depending on the modelвҖҷs parameter values.
Accordingly, we fixed the values of the main parameters and vary both the share of the 
public budget allocated to healthcare and the efficiency of public spending in the health 
production function.
On the one hand, our work is able to show that if public and private spending are equally 
effective in the health production function, then the feasible steady-state is characterized 
by positive private health expenditure by the elderly, regardless of the share of the public 
budget allocated to the health system. Differently, if public spending is more efficient than 
private expenditure, then there is a transition from a situation with positive private healthВӯ
care spending to a one with no private healthcare spending, as long as the share of the public 
budget devoted to the healthcare system is increased.
Fig. 6вҖӮ Equilibrium values of pвҲ— (panel a) and hвҲ— (panel b) with Оұ = 0.8 for region A (in cyan) and region 
B (in magenta) being Оі вҲҲ(0, 1)
 
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
On the other hand, it shows that an increase in the share of the public budget allocated 
to the healthcare system has a positive effect on longevity in both scenarios, whether or 
not the elderly engage in private healthcare spending. However, the impact of this increase 
on health status may be ambiguous, as it depends critically on the effectiveness of public 
spending within the health production function. Specifically, when public expenditure is 
relatively ineffective, increasing the allocation of public resources to healthcare does not 
necessarily result in improvements in health status. In contrast, when public spending is 
highly effective, a larger allocation of public resources becomes a powerful tool to improve 
health status in old age.
The abovementioned results results suggest that policymakers could improve the effecВӯ
tiveness of public health expenditures by prioritizing preventive care programs, improving 
access to primary healthcare services, and investing in vaccination and disease control iniВӯ
tiatives. In addition, targeted subsidies for essential treatments and the expansion of public 
hospital capacity could help ensure that increased public spending is translated into tangible 
improvements in both longevity and health outcomes.
4.1вҖӮ Further developments of the model can be considered in future research
First, different health technologies could be considered that take into account the imperВӯ
fect substitutability between public and private healthcare expenditures. In fact, considering 
imperfect substitutability, such as by adopting a Cobb-Douglas specification, the rate of 
technological substitution between public and private expenditure would no longer remain 
constant but would diminish. This means, for example, that as public healthcare expenditure 
increases, its marginal вҖҷproductivityвҖҷ would fall relative to private expenditure. This adjustВӯ
ment could alter the optimal allocation between public and private spending; however, anaВӯ
lyzing this case would require a new model, which may not be analytically tractable given 
the added complexity introduced by non-linearities.
Furthermore, the assumption of additivity in the utility function implies that the utility 
derived from consumption is independent of the individualвҖҷs health status, and vice versa. 
The additive specification allows consumption and health-related decisions to be analyzed 
separately. Under this assumption, agents allocate savings to health solely based on its direct 
contribution to utility, without accounting for the way health might influence the marginal 
utility of consumption. In contrast, a non-additive (e.g., multiplicative) utility specification 
introduces complementarity between health and consumption. In such a framework, better 
health increases the marginal utility of consumption, thereby increasing the likelihood of 
higher investment in healthcare. Similarly, greater consumption can reinforce health and 
improve its marginal utility. While this approach is more realistic, it significantly increases 
the modelвҖҷs complexity and eliminates the possibility of treating the two choices indepenВӯ
dently. However, it represents a promising and natural extension, which we plan to pursue 
in future research.
Finally, an important extension of the model in future research could be to consider that 
longevity, as well as health in old age, depends not only on public spending but also on priВӯ
vate spending. This inclusion could perhaps make the model difficult to study analytically, 
but it would certainly add interesting elements for further reflection.
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
Appendix A
We begin by making preliminary substitutions to simplify the maximization problem, 
reducing the number of constraints. To do this, we substitute the expression for gt+1 given 
byВ (9) intoВ (13), and the expression for ЛҶRt+1 given byВ (12) intoВ (11). Then, fromВ (11), we 
calculate st as
 
st =
pt
Rt+1
(ct+1 + xt+1)
(A.1)
and substitute this expression intoВ (10). Finally, we substituteВ (13) intoВ (8) and obtain the 
following equivalent model:
 
max
Ut = ln ct + ОІpt ln ct+1 + Оёpt ln [ОұОіП„wt+1 + (1 вҲ’Оұ)xt+1]

(A.2)
 
s.t.:
ct +
pt
Rt+1
(ct+1 + xt+1) = (1 вҲ’П„)wt 
(A.3)
 
вҲ’xt+1 вүӨ0.

(A.4)
We solve modelВ (A.2вҖ“A.4) using the method of Lagrange multipliers. In this regard, we 
define О·t as the Lagrange multiplier associated with constraintВ (A.3), and Оҫt as the Lagrange 
multiplier associated with constraintВ (A.4). We observe that modelВ (A.2вҖ“A.4) is a mixed 
constrained maximization problem, as it includes both an equality constraint and an inequalВӯ
ity constraint. According to, the theorem on Lagrange multipliers (see, for instance, Simon 
and Blume 1994,В pp. 434 and 435), the constraint qualification requires that the rank of the 
Jacobian matrix -evaluated at a local maximizer and corresponding to the set of equality 
constraints and binding inequality constraints- be maximal. In our case, this matrix, regardВӯ
less of the point at which it is evaluated, is given by:
 
[
1
pt
Rt+1
pt
Rt+1
0
0
вҲ’1
]
.
Since its rank is always maximal, the constraint qualification condition is satisfied.
We can therefore construct the Lagrangian function, whose expression is:
 
Lt (ct, ct+1, О·t, Оҫt) = ln ct + ОІpt ln ct+1 + Оёpt ln [ОұОіП„wt+1 + (1 вҲ’Оұ)xt+1]
вҲ’О·t
[
ct +
pt
Rt+1
(ct+1 + xt+1) вҲ’(1 вҲ’П„)wt
]
+ Оҫtxt+1
By differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to the decision variables ct, ct+1, and xt+1 
we respectively obtain:
 
вҲӮLt
вҲӮct
= 0 :
1
ct
вҲ’О·t = 0
(A.5)
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
 
вҲӮLt
вҲӮct+1
= 0 :
ОІpt
ct+1
вҲ’О·t
pt
Rt+1
= 0
(A.6)
 
вҲӮLt
вҲӮxt+1
= 0 :
(1 вҲ’Оұ) Оёpt
ОұОіП„wt+1 + (1 вҲ’Оұ)xt+1
вҲ’О·t
pt
Rt+1
+ Оҫt = 0.
(A.7)
It is also necessary to satisfy the initial constraints:
 
ct +
pt
Rt+1
(ct+1 + xt+1) = (1 вҲ’П„)wt
(A.8)
and
 
xt+1 вүҘ0.
(A.9)
Moreover, the complementary slackness condition requires that:
 
Оҫtxt+1 = 0.
(A.10)
Finally, the non-negativity condition for the multiplier associated with the inequality conВӯ
straint is given by:
 
Оҫt вүҘ0.
(A.11)
FromВ (A.5) we get
 
ct = 1
О·t
.
(A.12)
Likewise, fromВ (A.6) we get
 
ct+1 = ОІRt+1
О·t
.
(A.13)
We first consider the case when xt+1 > 0. We refer to this case as Case A. In light ofВ (A.10), 
this implies that Оҫt = 0. By replacing Оҫt = 0 into (A.7), after some algebra, we find the folВӯ
lowing expression for xt+1:
 
xt+1 = Оё
О·t
Rt+1 вҲ’
Оұ
1 вҲ’ОұОіП„wt+1.
(A.14)
By substitutingВ (A.12), (A.13), andВ (A.14) intoВ (A.3), we find
 
О·t =
1
1
1+(ОІ+Оё)pt
[
pt
Rt+1
Оұ
1вҲ’ОұОіП„wt+1 + (1 вҲ’П„)wt
].
(A.15)
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
By substituting this value intoВ (A.12), (A.13), andВ (A.14), we obtain the value of ct, ct+1, 
and xt+1 respectively. Finally, by imposing xt+1 > 0, we get the following condition:
 
(1 вҲ’Оұ)ОёRt+1(1 вҲ’П„)wt > (1 + ОІpt)ОұОіП„wt+1.
(A.16)
Case B arises when Оҫt > 0, which implies xt+1 = 0. FromВ (A.7), we obtain
 
Оҫt =
pt
Rt+1
О·t вҲ’
(1 вҲ’Оұ) Оёpt
ОұОіП„wt+1 + (1 вҲ’Оұ)xt+1
.
(A.17)
By substitutingВ (A.12), (A.13), and xt+1 = 0 intoВ (A.3), we find
 
О·t =
1 + ОІpt
(1 вҲ’П„)wt
.
(A.18)
By substituting this value intoВ  (A.12) and (A.13), we obtain the value of ct and ct+1, 
respectively.
Moreover, by substitutingВ  (A.18) intoВ  (A.17), we find the condition characterizing 
CaseВ  B. The case when Оҫt = 0 and xt+1 = 0 represents the boundary between the two 
regions corresponding to Cases A and B. This justifies the use of вүҘ (instead of >) in the 
inequality describing Case A.
The expressions (19) and (24) for st are obtained by substituting the values of ct+1 and 
xt+1 into (A.1), respectively for Cases A and B.
Finally, the Hessian matrix of the Lagrangian function with respect to the decision variВӯ
ables ct, ct+1, and xt+1 is given by:
 
HLt =
пЈ®
пЈҜпЈ°
вҲ’1
c2
t
0
0
0
вҲ’ОІpt
c2
t+1
0
0
0
вҲ’
Оё(1вҲ’Оұ)2pt
[ОұОіП„wt+1+(1вҲ’Оұ)xt+1]2
пЈ№
пЈәпЈ».
(A.19)
This matrix is clearly negative definite. Consequently, the first-order conditions are also 
sufficient.
Appendix B
FromВ (31), it follows that
 
wt+1 = A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t+1.
(B.1)
Likewise, (32) implies
 
rt+1 = AОҙkОҙ
t+1.
(B.2)
Consequently, fromВ (33) we obtain:
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
 
Rt+1 = 1 + rt+1 = 1 + AОҙkОҙ
t+1.
(B.3)
FromВ (29) andВ (31), we can obtain a new expression for pt as follows:
 
ВҜp + (1 вҲ’ВҜp)ОіП„wt
1 + ОіП„wt
= ВҜp + (1 вҲ’ВҜp)ОіП„A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
1 + ОіП„A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)kОҙ
t
=: pt(kt).
(B.4)
As stated in PropositionВ 2.1, the boundary separating regions A and B is given by the folВӯ
lowing equation:
 
ОёRt+1(1 вҲ’П„)wt = (1 + ОІpt)
Оұ
1 вҲ’ОұОіП„wt+1.
(B.5)
Bringing all terms to the left-hand side, applying the previously mentioned substitutions, 
and making the dependence of pt on kt explicit as stated inВ (B.4), we define the left-hand 
side of this new equation as fC (kt, kt+1). This allow us to express the boundary condition 
in terms of the equation
 
[
Оё (
1 + AОҙkОҙвҲ’1
t+1
)
(1 вҲ’П„)kОҙ
t вҲ’(1 + ОІpt(kt))
Оұ
1 вҲ’ОұОіП„kОҙ
t+1
]
A(1 вҲ’Оҙ) = 0.
Next, for both Cases A and Case B, we substitute the expression for st from (34), taking into 
account the previous substitutions both in the expression of st and in the conditions characВӯ
terizing each case. From this, the thesis follows. As with the boundary condition, all terms 
must be brought to the left-hand side. We then define fA for region A and fB for region B.
Appendix C
(a) It is trivial to verify that ЛҶfB(0) = 0.
(b) By applying the chain rule to compute ЛҶf вҖІ
B(kt), we obtain:
 
ЛҶf вҖІ
B(kt) = ОІ(1 вҲ’П„)A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)
(1 + ОІ pt(kt))2
[
pвҖІ
t(kt) kОҙ
t + Оҙ pt(kt) kОҙвҲ’1
t
(1 + ОІ pt(kt))]
.
(C.1)
Since all the parameters are positive, kt вүҘ0, pt(kt) > 0 for all kt вүҘ0, and pвҖІ(kt) > 0 for 
all kt вүҘ0, it follows that ЛҶf вҖІ
B(kt) вүҘ0 for all kt вүҘ0. (c) 
Exploiting the fact that 
for all kt вүҘ0 it holds that ВҜp вүӨpt (kt) < 1, and we obtain:
 
ЛҶfB (kt) > ОІВҜp(1 вҲ’П„)A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)
1 + ОІ
kОҙ
t .
(C.2)
Applying the squeeze theorem, the claim follows. (d) 
We compute the first derivative at 
0 by taking the limit of the incremental ratio as h вҶ’0+. Specifically, also in light 
ofВ (C.2), we have:
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
 
lim
ktвҶ’0+ ЛҶf вҖІ
B(kt) = lim
hвҶ’0+
ЛҶfB(h) вҲ’ЛҶfB(0)
h
= lim
hвҶ’0+
ЛҶfB(h)
h
> lim
hвҶ’0+
ОІВҜp(1 вҲ’П„)A(1 вҲ’Оҙ)
1 + ОІ
1
h1вҲ’Оҙ = +вҲһ.
FundingвҖӮ This work has been funded by the European Union - NextGenerationEU under the Italian Ministry 
of University and Research (MUR) National Innovation Ecosystem grant ECS00000041 - VITALITY - CUP 
D83C22000710005.
Declarations
Conflict of interestвҖӮ We declare that there are no conflict of interest.
Open AccessвҖӮ This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and 
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. 
You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. 
The images or other third party material in this article are included in the articleвҖҷs Creative Commons licence, 
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the articleвҖҷs Creative 
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, 
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit вҖӢhвҖӢ
tвҖӢtвҖӢpвҖӢ:вҖӢ/вҖӢ/вҖӢcвҖӢrвҖӢeвҖӢaвҖӢtвҖӢiвҖӢvвҖӢeвҖӢcвҖӢoвҖӢmвҖӢmвҖӢoвҖӢnвҖӢsвҖӢ.вҖӢoвҖӢrвҖӢgвҖӢ/вҖӢlвҖӢiвҖӢcвҖӢeвҖӢnвҖӢsвҖӢeвҖӢsвҖӢ/вҖӢbвҖӢyвҖӢ-вҖӢnвҖӢcвҖӢ-вҖӢnвҖӢdвҖӢ/вҖӢ4вҖӢ.вҖӢ0вҖӢ/.
References
AГӯsa, R., Clemente, J., & Pueyo, F. (2014). The influence of (public) health expenditure on longevity. InterВӯ
national Journal of Public Health, 59, 867вҖ“875.
Annas, GeorgeВ J., & Galea, Sandro. (2018). Dying healthy: Public health priorities for fixed population life 
expectancies. Annals of Internal Medicine, 169(8), 568вҖ“569.
Anwar, Asim., Hyder, Shabir.,MohamedВ Nor, Norashidah ., & Younis, Mustafa.(2023). Government health 
expenditures and health outcome nexus: A study on oecd countries. Frontiers in Public Health (11), 
1123759 .
Aytemiz, Levent., Sart., Gamze, Bayar., Yilmaz, Danilina, Marina., & Sezgin Funda H. (2024). The long-
term effect of social, educational, and health expenditures on indicators of life expectancy: An empirical 
analysis for the oecd countries. Frontiers in Public Health, 12, 1497794.
Bhattacharya, J., & Qiao, X. (2007). Public and private expenditures on health in a growth model. Journal of 
Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(8), 2519вҖ“2535.
Chakraborty, S. (2004). Endogenous lifetime and economic growth. Journal of Economic Theory, 116(1), 
119вҖ“137.
Cipriani, GiamВ Pietro., & Fioroni, Tamara. (2019). Health spending, education and endogenous demographВӯ
ics in an olg model. Human Capital and Economic Growth: The Impact of Health, Education and DemoВӯ
graphic Change, pp. 209вҖ“249.
DeВ LaВ Croix, David., & Michel, Philippe. (2002). A theory of economic growth: dynamics and policy in 
overlapping generations. Cambridge University Press.
Glied, Sherry., & Smith, PeterВ C.(2013). The Oxford handbook of health economics. Oxford University 
Press.
Li, Shuyun May, Moslehi, Solmaz, & Yew, Siew Ling. (2016). Public-private mix of health expenditure: 
A political economy and quantitative analysis. Canadian Journal of Economics Revue canadienne 
dвҖҷГ©conomique, 49(2), 834вҖ“866.
WorldВ  Health Organization etВ  al.(2022). Ghe: Life expectancy and healthy life expectancy. The Global 
Health Observatory [Internet].[cited 26 Aug 2022]. https://www who.int/data/gho/data/themes/
mortality-and-global-health-estimates/ghe-life-expectancy-and-healthy-life-expectancy.
Simon, C.В  P., & Blume, L.(1994). Mathematics for economists. W. W. Norton & Company, ISBN 
978-0-393-11752-3.
Varvarigos, Dimitrios., & Zakaria, Intan Zanariah. (2013). Endogenous fertility in a growth model with pubВӯ
lic and private health expenditures. Journal of Population Economics, 26, 67вҖ“85.
1вҖҜ3

Annals of Operations Research
Zarulli, Virginia., Caswell, Hal.(2024) Longer healthy life, but for how many? A stochastic analysis of 
healthy lifespan inequality. Annals of Operations Research, pages 1вҖ“18.
Publisher's NoteвҖӮ Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1вҖҜ3