TITLE: Information sharing through digitalisation in decentralised supply chains
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05105-4
---

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05105-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Information sharing through digitalisation in decentralised
supply chains
Dimitris Zissis1
Accepted: 22 November 2022 / Published online: 18 December 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
This study investigates the impact of private information on decision making process and
how emerging technologies can facilitate information sharing and reduce misinformation
in decentralised settings. Focusing on business environments, we examine if information
sharing between distinct partners can be a mutually beneﬁcial option. In principle, infor-
mation affects the preferences and the actions of decision makers and usually contributes
to inefﬁciencies for the entire system. A supply chain with two rational ﬁrms is consid-
ered; the ﬁrms have conﬂicting objectives and possess information that cannot be veriﬁed.
Real-time communication through a cloud platform is allowed, before the ﬁrms ﬁnalise their
strategies. During the communication phase, both ﬁrms are free to report whatever infor-
mation optimises their individual objectives, even fake. Misinformation seems a plausible
option, especially in competitive environments, since the ﬁrms may take advantages from
such behaviour. We demonstrate that sharing the actual information can be beneﬁcial for
both, under the implementation of an appropriate mechanism that considers the welfare of
the entire chain. Despite the individualistic behaviour of independent decision makers, it is
doable to eliminate entirely information asymmetry and misinformation. This happens by
including sufﬁcient incentives on a mechanism that induce ﬁrms to reveal their information,
because it is in their self-interest to do so. The value of information and the expected beneﬁts
of the voluntary information sharing are calculated, indicating the potential improvement.
Keywords Misinformation · Incentive compatibility · Mediator system · Coordination ·
Win–win situation · Cloud platform technologies
1 Introduction
The recent disruptions (COVID-19 pandemic and the Russo-Ukrainian crisis) have laid bare
several uncomfortable truths regarding the critical role of information, especially in dynamic
environments such as global supply chains (Flynn et al., 2021). Massive shortages and delays
have been observed not only about specialised products, but also for basic/essential products
such as pasta, palm oil, etc. An indicative example is from the UK grocery sector, where major
B Dimitris Zissis
d.zisis@uea.ac.uk
1
Norwich Business School, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK
123

764
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
retailersfacedabnormalqueuesupto15,000customers(DailyMail,2021),forcingretailersto
set quantity restrictions for certain products (The Guardian, 2020). During turbulent periods,
a statement regarding new developments is enough to create chaos and an emotional trigger
of public anxiety and panic, as the level of uncertainty is extremely high both for the society
and the businesses. An example (except for the stock market) is about the changes in buying
behaviour, where the customers fear of the unknown and ask for unusually large quantities
of products (Kovacs and Falagara Sigala, 2021). The latter contributes to huge backorders,
creating signiﬁcant operational “issues” and challenges to supply chains (Ivanov, 2020).
These operational issues should be addressed as soon as possible, since they put ﬁrms’
viability on risk.
The developments in information and communication technologies (Wang et al., 2021)
along with the high internet penetration rate (Xiong et al., 2021) enable cloud services and
blockchain technology as facilitators to easy access to information. The rapid growth of
social media platforms (Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, etc.) and cloud platforms (Amazon
Web Services, Microsoft’s Azure, Google Cloud Platform, etc.) allows the circulation of
information in real time, providing also new features that facilitate bilateral connections
between independent decision makers and avoid lengthy negotiations (Constantinides et al.,
2018). It is possible to spread news and disseminate information from almost anywhere in
the world, anytime, by just using a mobile device. Signiﬁcant beneﬁts have been reported
by the adoption of emerging technologies in supply chains regarding the information aspect
(Pournader et al., 2020). However, there is a debate whether the material that is shared and
the sender are trustworthy or not and how to verify information. During abnormal periods
the need of verifying information is more intense since everything can be deemed as true.
A characteristic example was during COVID-19 pandemic, where governments across the
world announced unprecedented measures such as extensive lockdowns, travel restrictions,
etc. to reduce the spread of the virus. Many production lines and business activities were sus-
pended until further notice, making everything to seem possible. Under these unprecedented
circumstances, common sense does not always prevail and it is hard to spot what is true or
not.
Information is a fundamental and vital element of the world, since almost all the decisions
(and the outcomes of these) are based on the available information. Focusing on business
environments and decentralised settings, nobody is willing to reveal his/her private informa-
tion for free; since all the parties seek to use their information as a competitive advantage and
secure more proﬁts for themselves (Vosooghidizaji et al., 2020). Hence, the ﬁrms select their
decisions, attempting to optimise their individual objectives without considering the global
optimum. To expect truthful behaviour and information sharing by all the business partners
is a relevant assumption (Karabati and Sayin, 2008); however, it is not always realistic since
some parties prefer to lie in an attempt to increase their beneﬁts. Thus, misinformation (and/or
deception) is a possible choice, as long as the others cannot verify the information that is
shared. Examples of private information (that is hard to get veriﬁed) are usually related to cost
structures, demand, sales data, etc. In this study, misinformation is allowed and examined;
as there are several cases in which business partners anticipate more individual gains if they
share fake information.
Our main objective is to investigate the impact of private information and information
sharing on the performance of supply chains and the role of technology on that. We consider a
decentralised setting with two independent nodes that both have private information regarding
their operations and the relative costs. The nodes interact with each other to fulﬁl customer
demand. Regarding the information, it is assumed that each node is the only one who knows
its own information, and the other one cannot verify it. Communication is allowed as a means
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
765
of coordinating their decisions. This may lead to reduced operational costs for both. However,
the nodes are not willing to reveal their information and intend to use it as a negotiation lever
to secure a better agreement for themselves. We employ the Revelation Principle (Myerson,
1991), a fundamental principle of Mechanism Design, to prove that it can be in the nodes’
self-interest to share honestly their information and achieve reduced individual costs.
In this context, the contribution of our work lies in the following directions: (1) to explore
the role of information and quantify the value of it in supply chains; (2) to design a framework
based on a cloud platform under which information sharing between distinct business partners
(even between competitors) is mutually beneﬁcial; (3) to increase the level of efﬁciency and
mitigatetheimpactofdisruptionsinsupplychainsthroughprivateinformationextraction.The
importance of sharing and disseminating true and accurate information is more intense during
disruptions,sincethemajorityofsupplychainsareinsufﬁcientlypreparedforlow-probability,
high-impact events and the conditions are fragile.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 brieﬂy reviews the related lit-
erature. Section 3 presents the model and the necessary formulation. In Sect. 4, we prove
that information sharing can be beneﬁcial for both business partners and quantify the value
of information in a decentralised supply chain. Conclusions and potential extensions are
discussed in Sect. 5.
2 Research background
In today’s dynamic and global business environment, information is one of the most valuable
assets. This is also evidenced by several quotes that highlight the importance of information;
some examples are: “Information is the oxygen of the modern age” by Ronald Reagan and
“Bringing together the right information with the right people will dramatically improve a
company’s ability to develop and act on strategic business opportunities” by Bill Gates. Good
decisions are impossible without information; so, businesses and organisations are constantly
looking for more and better information to support their decision-making processes and
achieve their targets (Yan et al., 2021). A signiﬁcant portion of their budget is allocated to
information and how to use it effectively. The latter is conspicuous based on the increasing
number of job openings and courses relative to data analytics and business forecasting. In
this work, the research background is concentrated on the following streams: (1) the role
of information and (2) how emerging technologies can improve the overall performance,
focusing mainly on supply chains.
2.1 Information in supply chains
Supply chains consist of several distinct decision makers (nodes) that have different pref-
erences, objectives, and information (Chopra, 2019). The nodes decide on their actions
according to the information that they have available, seeking to increase their individual
payoffs. In business environments, companies usually have conﬂicting objectives and are
unwilling to share their information. A thorough review in the Supply Chain Management
literature reveals signiﬁcant efforts relative to information and how business partners and
competitors handle it (Vosooghidizaji et al., 2020).
A major stream is devoted to cases in which all the nodes have access to the same informa-
tion. However, that assumption is restrictive and does not reﬂect the supply chain dynamics.
Over the last twenty years, several researchers have proposed models to tackle information
123

766
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
asymmetries in decentralised settings. Cachon and Fisher (2000), Corbett and de Groote
(2000), and Ha (2001) were among the ﬁrst who examined the role of information in supply
chains. Speciﬁcally, Cachon and Fisher (2000) investigated how the information impacts on
the nodes’ strategies and measured the value of information sharing regarding demand and
inventory in a chain with a single supplier and N identical retailers. Corbett and de Groote
(2000) studied a setting in which the buyer possesses information about the inventory holding
cost and is not willing to share it with his supplier. The latter assumes a continuous distribu-
tion about buyer’s holding cost, while a quantity discount is employed to inﬂuence buyers’
ordering behaviour, resulting in reduced cost for the supplier and the entire chain. Ha (2001)
showed that the optimal solution for a chain is not feasible under information asymmetries
and employed a cutoff policy to improve chain performance.
Opportunities for mutual beneﬁts can arise if the nodes reveal their information (Fiala,
2005). In line with that, Karabati and Sayin (2008) proposed vertical information sharing,
seeking to achieve better individual gains for all; but it was assumed that the nodes share
honestly their information. However, the main challenge is how to convince individual com-
panies to share their information. In case that only one party has information, there are models
to extract it by him/her. A possible way is through the design and the implementation of a
screening mechanism that induces the party with information to reveal it, because it is in
his/her self-interest (Cakanyildirim et al., 2012). This is usually not free of charge, as the
one who designs the mechanism should pay “information rent” to the other (Zhou et al.,
2019). Nevertheless, there are studies in which a supply chain can achieve the global opti-
mum through such mechanisms (Schoenmeyr and Graves, 2022). There are also works that
tackle settings in which the information asymmetry is two-dimensional; e.g. Pishchulov and
Richter (2016) considered that both the holding and the setup cost is unknown and proposed
an incentive compatible contract to coordinate the chain. The impact of information sharing
has also been studied by Inderfurth et al. (2013) who conducted a laboratory experiment and
demonstrated that information sharing mitigates inefﬁciencies.
The situation becomes really complex when all the parties have private information, since
the assumption who is responsible to design a screening mechanism is not plausible. Such
settings are common in the Economics literature; models based on bargaining games and
auctions have been proposed to address the multi-way information asymmetry (Shneyerov
and Wong, 2010). Studies on supply chains that examine bilateral information asymmetry
are sparse. To the best of our knowledge, the only related work is the one by Zissis et al.
(2020) who assumed bilateral information asymmetry in the context of subsidiaries within
a group and introduced the notion of a mediator who facilitates group coordination. Shen et
al. (2019) provided a comprehensive review about information in supply chains.
This work focuses how to tackle bilateral information asymmetry in a decentralised supply
chain. The nodes are not obliged to reveal their private information, as they are independent
and rational decision makers. With the advancement of technology, we seek to extract nodes’
privateinformationbasedonavoluntarybasistoenablecoordinationindecentralisedsettings.
2.2 Misinformation and emerging technologies
Business entities have information about their cost structures (e.g., operating under overtime
shifts, outsourcing some activities, etc.), demand (e.g., different forecasting methods), and/or
sales data. Such kind of information is hard to be veriﬁed; hence, only the party who has
the information knows about it. Business entities are usually distinct decision makers (inde-
pendent companies); so, they are not obliged to reveal their information. In some cases, they
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
767
prefer to share incorrect information, as this is beneﬁcial for them. Therefore, misinformation
and/or deception is a possible choice and should be considered when we examine and analyse
how the companies decide on their actions.
A well-known effect that demonstrates the consequences of making decision based on
inaccurate information in supply chains is the Bullwhip Effect (Lee et al., 1997). That effect
is related to information distortion as we move up the supply chain, because every node
orders more items than needed at a given time. This contributes to a signiﬁcantly larger
production without being necessary and leads to massive shortages, delays, and increased
operational costs across the chain. Information asymmetry is recognised as one of the most
powerful sources of the Bullwhip Effect. The reader is referred to Wang and Disney (2016)
for a detailed overview regarding the Bullwhip Effect.
The importance of mitigating the information distortion is underlined both by academics
and practitioners who seek with the development of technology to propose applicable and
realistic solutions (Papadopoulos et al., 2017; Sheel and Nath, 2019). Technologies enable
a spurred tremendous progress in many sectors of the economy (Xu et al., 2018), allowing
the creation of additional beneﬁts. The role of emerging technologies in the Fourth Industrial
Revolution is also highlighted as they provide a tool to address effectively operational issues,
especially during disruptions (Silbermayr and Minner, 2016; Snyder et al., 2016).
Focusing on information, technology can play a catalytic role in managing dissemina-
tion of it by mitigating the impact of inaccurate information/fake news (Tandoc et al., 2018)
and increasing the performance of the entire chain. A recent study has revealed that col-
laborations among independent companies can be possible through the implementation of
innovative technologies (Cisneros-Cabrera et al., 2021), creating beneﬁts for all the partic-
ipants. This indicates room for improvement in business environments among partners or
even competitors. Nowadays, there is an increasing trend of digital platforms to facilitate
collaboration and information sharing among business partners (Constantinides et al., 2018).
Furthermore, several studies have been ﬂourished that adopt emerging technologies (Akter
et al., 2022); such as Blockchain Technology (Babich and Hilary, 2020; Pournader et al.,
2020) and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Baryannis et al., 2019) to address operational issues and
promote sustainability in supply chains (Tsolakis et al., 2022). We refer the reader to Yang
et al. (2021) about the drivers, processes, and impact of the adoption of digital and emerging
technologies in supply chains; as, a detailed review of that area is out of the scope of this
study.
The main idea of this work is to use a cloud platform and support an external entity to
design an incentive compatible mechanism, seeking to extract nodes’ private information and
optimise the welfare of the entire chain. Hence, supply chain coordination can be possible in
decentralised settings with decision makers who behave selﬁsh. The cloud technology plat-
form enables features that facilitate the design and the implementation of such mechanisms
in business environments.
3 Analytical formulation
3.1 Model description
We consider a decentralised supply chain with two nodes, a supplier and a retailer, which
trade a single product. We denote the supplier by S, the retailer by R, and refer to them
using female and male pronouns, respectively. The nodes interact with each other to satisfy
123

768
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
customers’ demand D (D > 0); since there are no other ways to fulﬁl demand. Demand
D is referred to a speciﬁc period. The supplier makes goods available to the retailer who is
responsible to satisfy customers’ demand on time. Shortages and backorders are not allowed,
since the demand is assumed deterministic and known to both nodes (Sucky, 2006). We
assume that nodes have agreed on the wholesale price; i.e., the price that the retailer pays
to the supplier per unit of product. Both nodes are rational, risk neutral, and have private
information that affects how they decide on their actions. Speciﬁcally, the nodes select their
decisions under the objective to minimise their own cost, based on the available information
that they possess.
The order quantity Q (Q > 0) is selected by the retailer who has the market power and
interacts with the (end-)customers. Thus, he places an order to the supplier who starts the
production and prepares the exact number of goods. The supplier cannot keep ﬁnished goods
as inventory due to limited storage capacity at her premises and completed orders (equal
to the order quantity) are directly forwarded to the retailer. The supplier operates under a
lot-for-lot policy, paying a setup cost per order and a production cost per unit, denoted by
KS (KS > 0) and PS (PS > 0), respectively. To clarify that the supplier does not incur
any inventory holding costs, as she keeps the ﬁnished goods until the production batch to
be completed; a negligibly period of time as the production rate is assumed to be large. The
setup cost is ﬁxed (independent of the order quantity) and known to both nodes. However,
the production cost is known only to the supplier. Given that the wholesale price is agreed
and the customers’ demand is deterministic, we omit the ﬁxed term regarding the value of
selling the products to the retailer; as it does not affect the shape of her cost function. Based
on the above, the supplier’s cost for a period is expressed as:
CS(Q) = KS D/Q + PS D.
(1)
The retailer who is responsible to decide on the order quantity, pays ordering and holding
cost. The holding cost of keeping one unit as inventory for a period (same period with
the demand D), HR (HR > 0), is assumed to be a percentage of the unit production cost
(Krajewski et al., 2019). To highlight that the holding cost is linked with the production cost
(not with the wholesale price as is usually assumed in the literature); we assume that, as
the retailer’s holding cost may be affected by the production mode (factory, process, raw
material, etc.). The ordering cost is ﬁxed (independent of the order quantity), known to both
nodes and is denoted by K R (K R > 0). Similarly as above, we omit the payment regarding
the wholesale price. Thus, the retailer’s cost function for a period is expressed as:
CR(Q) = K R D/Q + HR PS Q/2.
(2)
We observe that the supplier’s cost is solely a function of the order quantity Q (retailer’s
decision). If the supplier could decide about it, she would favor as large as possible quantities
since her cost (Eq. 1) is a decreasing function of Q. The total supply chain cost is equal to
the sum of supplier’s and retailer’s cost (Eqs. 1 and 2), denoted by CJ(·). It can be easily
observed that the optimal order quantity for the chain, Q J (i.e., the centralised solution) is
larger than the optimal retailer’s order quantity, Q R (i.e., the one that minimises retailer’s
cost function - decentralised solution). The calculations of the optimal order quantities are
provided in the appendix. Since the retailer decides on the order quantity, the total cost is not
the optimum; indicating room for improvement.
A higher order quantity is preferable from both the chain and the supplier’s perspective.
However, that results in increased cost for the retailer, making him not willing to accept it;
unless he receives sufﬁcient incentives that cover his additional cost. In this work, a transfer
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
769
paymentisemployedtoredistributethetotalcostonbothnodesandfacilitatethecoordination.
In thatsense, we allow the supplier to provide a quantity discountto the retailer and share some
of her potential beneﬁts with him, as an incentive to induce him to increase the order quantity.
Thus, the supplier is a decision maker who selects the quantity discount that will be offered
to the retailer. In case of complete information, there are applicable ways such as quantity
discounts, two-part tariffs, rebates, etc., under which the nodes coordinate their decisions
(Arshinder et al., 2008). However, the most challenging area relating to coordination is for
incomplete information settings, where the coordination is hard to achieve and in some cases
is not even possible (Zissis et al., 2015).
3.2 Private information
Both nodes have private information; the supplier about the production cost and the retailer
about the holding cost. Speciﬁcally, the information asymmetry is modelled by assuming that
the supplier’s production cost and the retailer’s holding cost are discrete random variables.
Our aim is to examine whether it can be beneﬁcial for distinct decision makers to share
honestly their information, creating additional beneﬁts. Note that, they are not obliged to do
it, as they are independent entities with conﬂicting objectives. They make decisions seeking
to optimise their individual costs. Hence, misinformation should be considered as a possible
choice, which is a relevant assumption as long as the others cannot verify the information
that is shared.
To model private information and examine misinformation, we employ a Bayesian game
(Gibbons, 1992); a common approach in supply chain analysis (Cachon and Netessine, 2006).
Thus, a ﬁnite set is used to model private information. Every element of the set incorporates
all the information that a node can have. Obviously, every node has a different set, reﬂecting
his/her information. Each time only one element of the set is selected, which is known
only to the corresponding node. The selected element (denoted by t) includes all the private
information that a node possesses, and we refer to that node as to be type-t. Every node is free
to act as any of his/her possible types attempting to optimise his/her individual objectives. In
case that a node does not act according to his/her actual type, this means that he/she selects
the option of misinformation. The assumption of a ﬁnite set, regarding the information that
a node has, is more realistic for practical problems (Lovejoy, 2006); as (1) the prices and
business decisions are discrete, and (2) the possible alternatives are limited.
To drive the research process in a realistic setting, we consider that the single product
manufactured (by a supplier) is based on raw materials that can be sourced to alternative
providers. We adopt a dual sourcing strategy by considering two alternative options for her.
Speciﬁcally, the production cost per unit (PS) can be either cheap Pc with probability q or
expensive Pe with probability 1 −q (probability of failure of the cheap provider). A dual
sourcing strategy is a common approach, after the March 2000 ﬁre at Philips microchip plant
in Albuquerque, that led two of the cell-phone giants (Nokia and Ericsson) to chaos (Yu
et al., 2009). The providers offer different prices for such materials and have discrete and
limited capacities, known to both nodes. However, the limited capacities do not allow the a
priori assumption of “lower price selection” (Stevenson, 2015, Ch.5). The supplier learns if
the cheap provider is able to deliver the raw materials or she needs to use the expensive one;
i.e., she knows the real value of PS before deciding on the discount. The retailer does not
have access to that information; so, he considers PS as a discrete random variable such that:
P(PS = Pc) = q = 1 −P(PS = Pe).
123

770
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
Table 1 Probabilities for the
possible “chain proﬁles”
Raw material
Warehouse
Probability
Expensive
Owned
(1 −q)p
Expensive
Outsourcing
(1 −q)(1 −p)
Cheap
Owned
qp
Cheap
Outsourcing
q(1 −p)
Regarding the retailer’s holding cost, it is assumed that there are two alternatives. The
retailer keeps inventory at his owned warehouse with a low cost per unit, Hl, which happens
with probability p. In case that his warehouse is running out capacity (with probability
1 −p), he operates through an outsourcing storage facility; however, that option incurs a
higher holding cost per unit, Hh. Hence, the actual cost depends on which facility will be used.
The retailer knows if his facility is available or not, before deciding on the order quantity.
The supplier is not aware of which facility will be used; so, she considers HR as a discrete
random variable such that: P(HR = Hl) = p = 1 −P(HR = Hh).
In the proposed setting both nodes have discrete private information; each has two alter-
natives. Hence, there are four possible combinations regarding the information (nodes’ type).
The availability of the raw materials is not related with the storage facilities; so, the probabil-
ities of all the combinations (“chain proﬁles”) are calculated by multiplying the probability
of the ﬁrst event by the second. These are presented in Table 1.
The Revelation Principle is used to prove that it can be beneﬁcial for both nodes to share
their information. For the implementation of the Revelation Principle, the reservation levels
of nodes are required. The reservation level is deﬁned as the cost that a decision maker pays
under the worst-case scenario for him/her (Gibbons, 1992). In other words, the reservation
level reﬂects on the maximum cost that a node may shoulder. That cost depends on the
information that a node has, which is a relevant assumption in business environments as
different information leads to different managerial decisions and related costs (Cakanyildirim
et al., 2012). Hence, the reservation level is not a single value, but it takes different values (as
many as the alternative options for each node). In this work, it means that there are two values
about the reservation level of each node. Speciﬁcally, the worst case scenario for the retailer
is when the production cost is expensive and discounts are not provided. So, he decides on
the order quantity minimising his cost function (Eq. 2), given he knows which storage facility
will be used. Thus, his reservation level is:
Retailer:

C+
R,l = √2K R DHl Pe,
if owned warehouse is used,
C+
R,h = √2K R DHh Pe, otherwise.
(3)
For the supplier, the worst case scenario is when she receives a small order quantity (as
her cost is a decreasing function of Q). The minimum order that she has to deliver is when
the retailer behaves as to operate under the expensive storage facility, assuming that the
production cost is expensive as well. In that case, the minimum order quantity equals to
√2K R D/Hh Pe. However, the supplier knows the actual production cost (i.e., if the cheap
provider is available or not); so, her reservation level is:
Supplier:

C+
S,c = KS
√DHh Pe/2K R + PcD, if cheap provider is used,
C+
S,e = KS
√DHh Pe/2K R + PeD, otherwise.
(4)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
771
Fig. 1 Work overview
3.3 Information sharing
In this context, exchange of information is a critical factor to the chain performance. To
investigate the role and the value of information, the nodes are allowed to communicate any
information they possess through a mediation system. The idea behind the communication is
to coordinate their decisions and achieve the minimum cost for the chain. This creates extra
beneﬁts that may lead to reduced individual costs for both. The communication occurs before
the nodes ﬁnalise their decisions and due to technology developments is effective in real time.
During the communication phase, the nodes are free either to share any information (real or
fake) or to decline the communication. They are willing to take part to communication if that
is aligned with their individual objectives and their reservation levels are not violated.
The mediation system is considered credible by promoting the welfare of the entire chain
and facilitates the communication in real time, through a cloud platform. The communi-
cation is effective in a short period of time, avoiding negotiations between the nodes. The
mediation system comprises the design of a mechanism that makes recommendations to the
nodes about their decisions (i.e., the quantity discount for the supplier and the order quantity
for the retailer) for all the possible chain proﬁles. Speciﬁcally, at the beginning of the com-
munication phase, the mediation system releases a mechanism that deﬁnes nodes’ decisions
for all the possible chain proﬁles and then asks from both nodes to report conﬁdentially
their information. Every node reports his/her type by using the platform, while is unaware
of the reported type by the other node. Due to the emerging technologies that exist today,
the mediator system is informed immediately while each node does not have access on the
reported type of the other. After collecting the reported information, the mediation system
makes recommendations about the nodes’ decisions, according to the announced mechanism.
To highlight that every node learns only the recommendation that is designed for him/her at
that stage; a necessary feature of the coordination mechanism. A cloud platform allows this
“restricted” access to information for every node. Figure 1depicts nodes’ interactions with
the cloud platform.
The nodes are not obliged to take part in the communication and share their private infor-
mation. In terms of modelling, this means that both nodes are informed about the mechanism
and the related recommendations, and then select whether they join to the communication
by reporting real or fake information. Therefore, the mechanism should include incentives
to attract both nodes to participate. The incentives that ensure voluntary participation of the
nodes are known in the literature as individual rationality or participation constraints (Myer-
son, 1991). However, these constraints cannot guarantee that the nodes share honestly their
real information.
As the private information cannot be veriﬁed and only the nodes have access to that, it
may be beneﬁcial for them to share fake information and take advantage of such behaviour.
Note that, the nodes are rational decision makers and independent entities; so, a priori truthful
123

772
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
behaviour cannot be expected. We anticipate that the nodes may join the communication by
reporting fake information in an attempt to achieve better individual gains. This means that
misinformation is a possible strategy for them. To make coordination attainable, the medi-
ation system should extract the real information. This is ensured by incorporating incentive
compatibility constraints to the mechanism that provide sufﬁcient incentives to the nodes to
reveal their information (Myerson, 1991).
The reason of the incorporation appropriate incentives to a mechanism is to induce both
nodes for joining the communication and revealing their information on a voluntary basis.
The critical aspect of making coordination attainable is to extract actual information from the
nodes because it is in their self-interest. It is easy to observe that, in any case, there is always
a preferable information that every node would like to share based on his/her cost function
(Eqs. 1 and 2 ). Speciﬁcally, the retailer prefers a large discount; so, he will always reports
high holding cost (even his actual cost is low) unless he receives appreciate incentives to do
otherwise. On the other hand, the supplier prefers a large order quantity; so, she always reports
low production cost (even the actual cost is high), seeking to induce retailer to increase the
order quantity. This occurs as the retailer is not aware of the actual production cost when the
deal is discussed. Obviously, he learns the actual production cost when he stores the product,
but he cannot amend the ﬁnancial agreement at that point.
One of the main objectives of this work is to overcome the barrier of information in
decentralised settings. Both nodes prefer to report a speciﬁc information regardless of the
actual one. In the following section, we show how this can be overcome by designing and
implementing a mechanism that provides incentives to them to reveal their information (for
all the possible chain proﬁles), because under this strategy their individual objectives are
optimised.
4 Coordination
In this section, it is demonstrated that the centralised solution can be achieved in a decen-
tralised setting in which the nodes have conﬂicting objectives and possess private information.
This means that independent decision makers are able to capture the maximum level of ben-
eﬁts and improve the performance of the entire chain without any enforcement policy. The
achievement of coordination is possible through the introduction of a mediation system that
considers and acts according to the objectives of the entire chain, while it overcomes the
barrier of private information at the same time. To clarify that the objective of the entire
chain is expressed through the cost function CJ(·), which is the total chain cost; i.e., the sum
of supplier’s (Eq. 1) and retailer’s cost (Eq. 2).
Therefore, the mediation system solves an optimisation problem with objective function to
be the E(CJ(Q)) under participation and incentive compatibility constraints. The philosophy
behind this approach is ﬁrst to increase the joint beneﬁts and reach the maximum level and
then to allocate the extra beneﬁts between the participants in a way that reﬂects their relative
powers. Hence, it would be useful to know in advance how much improvement can be
achieved through the centralised solution (coordination).
4.1 Benefits from coordination
An interesting question is regarding the potential beneﬁts that can arise, if the nodes coordi-
nate their decisions about the order quantity. In general, the difference between the total
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
773
cost under the decentralised and the centralised solution is the maximum beneﬁts that
can arise from coordination. These beneﬁts will be shared between the nodes and can be
also considered as an indication of how much willing the nodes are to achieve coordina-
tion. Moreover, it represents the maximum value that a mediator system creates since its
integration to the node interactions. This value can be also thought as the magnitude of
platform fees that the ﬁrms would be prepared to pay and communicate through the plat-
form to coordinate their decisions. In our setting, the potential beneﬁts coincide with the
expected value E(CJ(Q R) −CJ(Q J)), where: Q R is the optimal order quantity consider-
ing only the retailer’s cost, and Q J is the optimal order quantity for the entire chain (see
appendix). After some algebra, the value CJ(Q R)−CJ(Q J) equals to: K√2DHR PS, where
K = (2K R + KS −2√K R(K R + KS))/2√K R. The term K
√
2D is constant; therefore, the
expected beneﬁts E(CJ(Q R) −CJ(Q J)) are:
K
√
2D

p(1 −q)

Hl Pe + pq

Hl Pc + (1 −p)(1 −q)

Hh Pe + (1 −p)q

Hh Pc

.
The estimation of the expected beneﬁts that arise from the coordination presupposes that
both nodes reveal honestly their information, making possible the selection of the optimal
order quantity for the entire chain no matter what chain proﬁle prevails. Hence, the maximum
level of the beneﬁts will be available if the mediator system succeed in coordinating nodes’
decisions and overcoming the barrier of private information. An important aspect is that
parties are aware of the improvement that can be achieved; i.e., the extra beneﬁts that will be
shared between them if coordinate their decisions about the order quantity.
However, the challenges are: (1) whether coordination can be attainable in decentralised
settings without restricting participants’ freedom when they select their actions/strategies;
and (2) if a mediator system is capable to extract the private information that both nodes have,
independent of which chain proﬁle prevails. It is crucial to design a mechanism that obtains
the real information for all the chain proﬁles and not only for some of those. In this work,
we focus on the information sharing aspect, examining if that can be a beneﬁcial option for
both nodes for every possible combination regarding their private information.
4.2 Existence of coordination mechanisms
One of the main assumptions of this work is that both nodes decide on their actions under the
objective to optimise their individual costs, without any consideration of the welfare of the
entire chain. This is common in today’s business world which is ultra competitive and every
party has different preferences, objectives, and information. Despite the decentralised setting,
it is possible for independent ﬁrms to reveal their information and achieve coordination
(the centralised solution) through the design of an appropriate mechanism. The idea is to
implement a mechanism that induce nodes to reveal their information, because it is in their
self-interest to do so.
Zissis et al. (2020) has proven a theorem about the existence of coordination mechanisms
that incorporate participation and incentive compatibility constraints. In other words, there
are mechanisms in which the nodes voluntarily reveal their information because that strategy
optimises their individual goals. Thus, individual objectives can be aligned with the entire
chain objectives. The outcome of that alignment is to achieve the optimal joint cost and
eliminate any inefﬁciencies. The following corollary is deduced from the theorem that has
been proven by Zissis et al. (2020).
123

774
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
Corollary 1 There exist (non negative) discounts for all the possible chain proﬁles that the
supplier should provide to the retailer in order to induce him to select the order quantity that
minimises the total cost of the chain, because it is in both entities’ self-interest.
A signiﬁcant result of the coordination mechanisms is the achievement of extracting
the private information from both nodes for all the possible chain proﬁles. This happens by
providing sufﬁcient incentives (through a transfer payment—in that work a quantity discount
pair is used) to the nodes that align the individual objectives with the objectives of the entire
chain. The nodes in an attempt to optimise their costs, coordinate their actions by revealing
their information. Hence, information sharing between independent decision makers with
conﬂicting objectives can be a proﬁtable and sustainable strategy for both.
Speciﬁcally, an appropriately designed quantity discount pair (X, Y) is sufﬁcient to make
the nodes willing to share honestly their information, reaching a win–win situation. A quan-
tity discount pair (X, Y) means that the supplier pays a discount Y to the retailer, if and
only if the order quantity equals to X. Based on the Revelation Principle, it is sufﬁcient to
consider quantity discounts with four pairs, one for each possible chain proﬁle. The idea is to
distinguish the four proﬁles, inducing the nodes to select the real one through self-selection.
The latter is interesting since the private information that the nodes have, cannot be veriﬁed.
To have access to their information, we should use either enforcement policies or provide
sufﬁcient incentives to them to voluntarily reveal it. Attempting to impose actions based on
which independent nodes are obliged to share their information cannot be considered as a
wise policy, especially in decentralised settings. Thus, the most preferred way in business
environments should be the incorporation of sufﬁcient incentives that promote the voluntary
information sharing.
Based on Corollary 1, discounts are provided from the supplier to the retailer only for
order quantities that coordinate the entire chain and achieve the minimum total cost; these
are: Xr,s = √2(K R + KS)D/Hr Ps,r = l, h and s = c, e. According to theorem by Zissis
et al. (2020), the value of the discounts Yr,s are not unique which is a beneﬁcial feature of the
coordination mechanisms. That allows to consider secondary objectives (during the design
phase) which reﬂect on other aspects such as the relative power of the nodes and how the
extra beneﬁts will be allocated to them in a fair way. That ﬂexibility makes the role of the
mediator system signiﬁcant compared to a facilitator who just helps the parties to coordinate
their actions.
Obviously, the minimum values of discounts are preferable for the supplier, while the
retailer prefers as large as possible discounts. An interesting observation that arises from
the minimum and the maximum values of discounts that achieve coordination, is about the
guaranteed beneﬁts that each node captures through the communication and the incorporation
of a mediator system. The guaranteed beneﬁts indicate the impact of communication on the
nodes’ reservation levels and quantify the value of information. It is out of the scope of this
study to allocate the extra beneﬁts to the nodes and make assumptions about the relative
power of the nodes. We highlight that the values of the discounts do not affect the beneﬁts
that arise from coordination, since the discount that will be implemented is a transfer payment
from the supplier to the retailer. The concept of transfer payments is used to redistribute the
total cost in a way that provides sufﬁcient incentives to the nodes to reveal their information
and streamline the order quantity under which they operate to satisfy the customer’s demand.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
775
5 Concluding remarks
Motivated by the recent supply chain disruptions and the related challenges, we have exam-
ined the impact of information in decentralised settings and how information sharing can
improve the performance of the entire chain. A decentralised setting with two independent
nodes (ﬁrms) has been considered. Each ﬁrm possesses information that is hard to be veri-
ﬁed by others, while their preferences are conﬂicting. Both decide on their actions seeking
to optimise their individual objectives, without considering the welfare of the entire chain.
They are allowed to communicate about their information and preferences in an attempt to
coordinate their decisions and achieve reduced costs. However, they are not obliged to reveal
their real information as they are not part of the same group.
Misinformation is a possible option; especially if the ﬁrms anticipate to capture more
individual beneﬁts by following a such strategy. It is also plausible as every node is aware
only of his/her information and there is no way to verify private information. We have shown
that information sharing can be always beneﬁcial for ﬁrms with conﬂicting objectives under
a mediation system that considers the welfare of the entire chain. The ﬁrms are willing to
share their information if their objectives are optimised and their reservation levels are not
violated. The idea is to design a mechanism that facilitates the communication and includes
incentives for both nodes to reveal their information because it is in their self-interest to do
so. Therefore, misinformation can be eliminated through a carefully designed mechanism;
this results in increased supply chain efﬁciency, allowing win–win situations.
Nowadays with the developments of the technology, such mechanisms seem easier to be
developed than some years ago. An important aspect of the technological advancement is
regarding the implementation cost of mechanisms which is reasonable and not prohibitive. In
this study, the mechanism that extracts private information is a mediation system on a cloud
platform. The high internet penetration rate allows the implementation of cloud services in
real time, avoiding lengthy negotiations. Such instruments should have top priority for the
policymakers, as these can address effectively issues about proﬁtability, viability, shortages,
etc. by enabling agility and resilience in supply chains (Tsolakis et al., 2021). This is more
intense during disruptions, as all the supply chain actors operate under special conditions
that harm efﬁciency.
The expected beneﬁts from the voluntary revealing of private information and the value
of information have been quantiﬁed; so, the ﬁrms are aware about the improvement that can
be achieved if they integrate a mediation system and streamline their decisions. The expected
beneﬁts are also an indication about the willingness-to-pay threshold that ﬁrms can shoulder
(in total) to incorporate a mechanism to their interactions. The value of information represents
the power that a decision maker has and how much improvement should be added to his/her
reservation level when communication is allowed.
Overcoming the barriers to information sharing between business partners even if they are
competitors, is the main ﬁnding of this study. Through mechanism design and the Revelation
Principle, there are applicable ways to induce independent decision makers to achieve the
centralised solution, without restricting their freedom. This is attainable as the mechanism
includes incentives that align the individual objectives (of all the parties) with the objectives
of the entire chain. Thus, the parties select the strategy that optimises their objectives but at
the same time this strategy achieves the optimum for the whole chain. This alignment leads
also to signiﬁcant indirect beneﬁts that are difﬁcult to quantify. For example, as the order
quantities that are moved between the supplier and the retailer are increased, environmental
beneﬁts arise (Zissis et al., 2018).
123

776
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
An interesting observation is related with the fact that when both nodes have private infor-
mation, the inefﬁciencies caused by information asymmetry can be completely eliminated.
However, this is not always possible in settings where only one node has information. The
intuitive explanation of that is due to the integration of a mediation system (external entity)
which considers the welfare of the entire chain and designs a mechanism to achieve the chain
optimum. In models with two nodes where only one has information, it is common for the
other one to act as a leader and use a screening mechanism trying to extract information and
optimising his/her objectives (Schoenmeyr and Graves, 2022). In principle, the individualis-
tic behaviour of the leader during the design of a screening mechanism does not always allow
to reach the centralised solution, resulting in inefﬁciencies for the chain. The main issue is
related to information rent that the node without information should pay to the node with
information to get access to his/her information.
There are several directions that seem promising for future research. The ﬁrst one is
to consider models in which the parties have more than two alternatives regarding their
information, or have two-dimensional private information. It would be great to investigate
the role of two-dimensional information and if it is possible to eliminate the asymmetry
under such cases. Another interesting extension would be the incorporation of consumers’
behaviour to the model and how extreme behaviours such as panic buying affects nodes’
interactions and the information sharing. Last but not least, to study supply chain models
with more than two decision makers from different tiers, considering also aspects such as
lead time and constraints regarding replenishment policies.
Acknowledgements The author would like to thank the Senior Editor and the two anonymous referees for
their comments and suggestions that helped to improve the context and the presentation of the material in the
paper.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix
Calculation of the optimal retailer’s order quantity: QR
The optimal order quantity can be derived by taking the ﬁrst order derivative of the retailer’s
cost function (Eq. 2), setting equal to zero and solving with respect to Q. After some algebra,
the optimal retailer’s order quantity equals to: Q R = √2K R D/HR PS.
Calculation of the optimal order quantity for the entire chain: QJ
Similarly as above by considering this time the total cost of the chain which is: CJ(Q) =
(K R + KS)D/Q + HR PS Q/2 + PS D. After some algebra, the optimal order quantity for
the entire chain is: Q J = √2(K R + KS)D/HR PS.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
777
References
Akter, S., Michael, K., Uddin, M. R., McCarthy, G., & Rahman, M. (2022). Transforming business using
digital innovations: The application of AI, blockchain, cloud and data analytics. Annals of Operations
Research, 308, 7–39.
Arshinder, K., Kanda, A., & Deshmukh, S. (2008). Supply chain coordination: Perspectives, empirical studies
and research directions. International Journal of Production Economics, 115(2), 316–335.
Babich, V., & Hilary, G. (2020). OM forum-distributed ledgers and operations: What operations manage-
ment researchers should know about blockchain technology. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management, 22(2), 223–240.
Baryannis, G., Validi, S., Dani, S., & Antoniou, G. (2019). Supply chain risk management and artiﬁcial
intelligence: State of the art and future research directions. International Journal of Production Research,
57(7), 2179–2202.
Cachon, G. P., & Fisher, M. (2000). Supply chain inventory management and the value of shared information.
Management Science, 46(8), 1032–1048.
Cachon, G. P., & Netessine, S. (2006). Game theory in supply chain analysis. In Models, methods, and
applications for innovative decision making, chapter 8 (pp. 200–233).
Cakanyildirim, M., Feng, Q., Gan, X., & Sethi, S. (2012). Contracting and coordination under asymmetric
production cost information. Production and Operations Management, 21(2), 345–360.
Chopra, S. (2019). Supply chain management: Strategy, planning, and operation (7th ed.). Pearson.
Cisneros-Cabrera, S., Pishchulov, G., Sampaio, P., Mehandjiev, N., Liu, Z., & Kununka, S. (2021). An approach
and decision support tool for forming industry 4.0 supply chain collaborations. Computers in Industry,
125, 103391.
Constantinides, P., Henfridsson, O., & Parker, G. G. (2018). Introduction-platforms and infrastructures in the
digital age. Information Systems Research, 29(2), 381–400.
Corbett, C., & de Groote, X. (2000). A supplier’s optimal quantity discount policy under asymmetric
information. Management Science, 46(3), 444–450.
Daily Mail. (2021). You are number 14,222 in the queue!’ Sainsbury’s, Tesco and Ocado sites struggle under
panic-buying strain with delivery slots booked up until NEXT WEEK - as shoppers ﬁnd bare supermarket
shelves. 05/01/2021.
Fiala, P. (2005). Information sharing in supply chains. Omega, 33(5), 419–423.
Flynn, B., Cantor, D., Pagell, M., Dooley, K. J., & Azadegan, A. (2021). From the editors: Introduction to
managing supply chains beyond COVID-19: Preparing for the next global mega-disruption. Journal of
Supply Chain Management, 57(1), 3–6.
Gibbons, R. (1992). A primer in game theory. Prentice Hall.
Ha, A. Y. (2001). Supplier-buyer contracting: Asymmetric cost information and cutoff level policy for buyer
participation. Naval Research Logistics, 48(1), 41–64.
Inderfurth, K., Sadrieh, A., & Voigt, G. (2013). The impact of information sharing on supply chain performance
under asymmetric information. Production and Operations Management, 22(2), 410–425.
Ivanov, D. (2020). Viable supply chain model: Integrating agility, resilience and sustainability perspectives.
Lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Annals of Operations Research.
Karabati, S., & Sayin, S. (2008). Single-supplier/multiple-buyer supply chain coordination: Incorporating
buyers’ expectations under vertical information sharing. European Journal of Operational Research,
187(3), 746–764.
Kovacs, G., & Falagara Sigala, I. (2021). Lessons learned from humanitarian logistics to manage supply chain
disruptions. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 57(1), 41–49.
Krajewski, L., Ritzman, L., & Malhotra, M. (2019). Operations management processes and supply chains
(12th ed.). Pearson.
Lee, H. L., Padmanabhan, V., & Whang, S. (1997). The bullwhip effect in supply chains. Sloan Management
Review, 38(3), 93–102.
Lovejoy, W. S. (2006). Optimal mechanisms with ﬁnite agent types. Management Science, 52(5), 788–803.
Myerson, R. (1991). Game theory: Analysis of conﬂict. Harvard University Press.
Papadopoulos, T., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Altay, N., Childe, S. J., & Fosso-Wamba, S. (2017). The
role of big data in explaining disaster resilience in supply chains for sustainability. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 142, 1108–1118.
Pishchulov, G., & Richter, K. (2016). Optimal contract design in the joint economic lot size problem with
multi-dimensional asymmetric information. European Journal of Operational Research, 253(3), 711–
733.
123

778
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:763–778
Pournader, M., Shi, Y., Seuring, S., & Koh, S. L. (2020). Blockchain applications in supply chains, transport
and logistics: A systematic review of the literature. International Journal of Production Research, 58(7),
2063–2081.
Schoenmeyr, T., & Graves, S. C. (2022). Coordination of multiechelon supply chains using the guaranteed
service framework. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 24(3), 1859–1871.
Sheel, A., & Nath, V. (2019). Effect of blockchain technology adoption on supply chain adaptability, agility,
alignment and performance. Management Research Review, 42(12), 1353–1374.
Shen, B., Choi, T.-M., & Minner, S. (2019). A review on supply chain contracting with information considera-
tions: Information updating and information asymmetry. International Journal of Production Research,
57(15–16), 4898–4936.
Shneyerov, A., & Wong, A. C. L. (2010). Bilateral matching and bargaining with private information. Games
and Economic Behavior, 68(2), 748–762.
Silbermayr, L., & Minner, S. (2016). Dual sourcing under disruption risk and cost improvement through
learning. European Journal of Operational Research, 250(1), 226–238.
Snyder, L. V., Atan, Z., Peng, P., Rong, Y., Schmitt, A. J., & Sinsoysal, B. (2016). OR/MS models for supply
chain disruptions: A review. IIE Transactions, 48(2), 89–109.
Stevenson, W. J. (2015). Operations management (12th ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Sucky, E. (2006). A bargaining model with asymmetric information for a single supplier–single buyer problem.
European Journal of Operational Research, 171(2), 516–535.
Tandoc, E. C., Lim, Z. W., & Ling, R. (2018). Deﬁning “fake news”. Digital Journalism, 6(2), 137–153.
The Guardian. (2020). UK supermarkets take steps to prevent panic buying and shortages. 17/03/2020.
Tsolakis, N., Zissis, D., Papaefthimiou, S., & Korﬁatis, N. (2022). Towards AI driven environmental sus-
tainability: An application of automated logistics in container port terminals. International Journal of
Production Research, 60(14), 4508–4528.
Tsolakis, N., Zissis, D., & Tjahjono, B. (2021). Scrutinising the interplay between governance and resilience
in supply chain management: A systems thinking framework. European Management Journal, (In Press).
Vosooghidizaji, M., Taghipour, A., & Canel-Depitre, B. (2020). Supply chain coordination under information
asymmetry: A review. International Journal of Production Research, 58(6), 1805–1834.
Wang, D., Liu, W., Liang, Y., & Wei, S. (2021). Decision optimization in service supply chain: The impact of
demand and supply-driven data value and altruistic behavior. Annals of Operations Research, (In Press).
Wang, X., & Disney, S. M. (2016). The bullwhip effect: Progress, trends and directions. European Journal of
Operational Research, 250(3), 691–701.
Xiong, F., Zang, L., & Gao, Y. (2021). Internet penetration as national innovation capacity: Worldwide evidence
on the impact of ICTs on innovation development. Information Technology for Development, 0(0):1–17.
Xu, L. D., Xu, E. L., & Li, L. (2018). Industry 4.0: State of the art and future trends. International Journal of
Production Research, 56(8), 2941–2962.
Yan, P., Pei, J., Zhou, Y., & Pardalos, P. M. (2021). When platform exploits data analysis advantage: Change
of OEM-led supply chain structure. Annals of Operations Research, (In Press).
Yang, M., Fu, M., & Zhang, Z. (2021). The adoption of digital technologies in supply chains: Drivers, process
and impact. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 169, 120795.
Yu, H., Zeng, A. Z., & Zhao, L. (2009). Single or dual sourcing: Decision-making in the presence of supply
chain disruption risks. Omega, 37(4), 788–800.
Zhou, J., Zhao, R., & Wang, W. (2019). Pricing decision of a manufacturer in a dual-channel supply chain
with asymmetric information. European Journal of Operational Research, 278(3), 809–820.
Zissis, D., Ioannou, G., & Burnetas, A. (2015). Supply chain coordination under discrete information
asymmetries and quantity discounts. Omega, 53, 21–29.
Zissis, D., Ioannou, G., & Burnetas, A. (2020). Coordinating lot sizing decisions under bilateral information
asymmetry. Production and Operations Management, 29(2), 371–387.
Zissis, D., Saharidis, G. K., Aktas, E., & Ioannou, G. (2018). Emission reduction via supply chain coordination.
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 62, 36–46.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123