TITLE: Multi-armed bandit games
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06336-3
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06336-3
ORIGINAL - SURVEY OR EXPOSITION
Multi-armed bandit games
Kemal Gürsoy1
Received: 16 April 2024 / Accepted: 27 September 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
A sequential optimization model, known as the multi-armed bandit problem, is concerned
with optimal allocation of resources between competing activities, in order to generate the
most likely beneﬁts, for a given period of time. In this work, following the objective of a
multi-armed bandit problem, we consider a mean-ﬁeld game model to approach to a large
number of multi-armed bandit problems, and propose some connections between dynamic
games and sequential optimization problems.
Keywords Mean-ﬁeld games · Min–max games · Multi-armed bandit problem
1 Introduction
The decision making in complicated environments has many different approaches, yet there
are mainly two practical ones: one is the game theory approach and the other one is the
sequential optimization approach. In general, these two approaches are considered different
methods, but we will try to build a bridge between these two. Particularly, we will investigate
the connection between the mean-ﬁeld games and the multi-armed bandit problem. The bond
between these different approaches emerges when there are many interacting agents (decision
makers) making sequential decisions in random environments.
Themodernmethodsforunderstandingdynamicenvironmentshavebeganwhen(Poincaré
1895, 1898,1902,1905,1908) categorized problems as either uninteresting problems, such as
problems that either have a solution, or do not have a solution, and as interesting problems,
that are problems such that identifying them as solvable, or not solvable, problems would not
be sufﬁcient, since they also produce new questions that have to be investigated. I believe that
the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is one of the interesting problems, in the Poincaré’s
sene. MAB problem has a known solution, but by changing one assumption at a time, you
may get another interesting problem.
The multi-armed bandit problem could be described as selecting one project among a ﬁxed
number of projects, and collecting a reward generated by the state of the selected project.
The selected project changes its state according to a Markov process. Rewards are generated
as a sequence of activating projects, and these rewards are added together, perhaps based
on a time-discount manner. The objective is to construct an optimal policy as a sequential
B Kemal Gürsoy
kgursoy@business.rutgers.edu
1
RBS, Department of MSIS, Rutgers University, Room 5146 100 Rockafeller Road, Piscataway, NJ
08854, USA
123

Annals of Operations Research
activation rule, for all the projects that will generate the maximum expected total (discounted)
reward.
Within a casino context these projects may be considered as slot machines, also known
as one-armed bandits, and selecting which one-armed bandit to activate, one at a time,
among many one-armed bandits is known as the multi-armed bandit problem. Here, there
is only one gambler in the casino, and only the activated one-armed bandit will change
its state while other bandits will wait for their turns to be activated. The gambler needs a
decision policy: “how to select bandits in order to maximize the total rewards?” However, the
sequential selection of one bandit at a time, and getting discounted rewards as time goes by
createsanotherproblem,howtoresolvetheconﬂictamongselectionsofalreadyexperimented
bandits that will yield immediate expected rewards versus not yet experimented bandits that
will yield possibly better expected rewards. Thus, the multi-armed bandit problem represents
an adaptive decision process, produces learning and acting, to generate maximum rewards..
2 Intuitive construction
In this work, we consider the following partial brief history.
René Déscartes constructed a new geometric problem for identifying properties of
an object, based on the shape information, and he called that problem as the inverse
geometry problem. On the other hand, Abraham De Moivre was working on calculating
probabilities, for chance plays. Later on, based on the De Moivre’s work, Thomas Bayes
constructed an approach to the re-computation of probabilities, by using emerging evidence.
Laplace, Lagrange, Cauchy, and Bernoulli were instrumental to construct variational calcu-
lus, for optimization methods, and connecting geometry with probability computations. Also,
Borel, Weyl, Reimann, Poincare, and Sobolev constructed the basis of geometric properties
(identiﬁed by topological invariants), in order to learn from the shape of an object.
Meanwhile, Cournot and Marquise De Chatelet were working on a different problem of
decision making, based on the information generated by a number of decision makers. Where
Cournotselectedthecostofanaction,asadecisionmakinginstrument,andcategorizedgames
such as monopoly (one decision maker), duopoly (two decision makers), oligopoly (in the
order of ten decision makers), and free-market (more than ten decision makers). That has
been considered the beginning of modern game theory.
In the last century, Von Neumann and Nash were interested in solving game theory prob-
lems, by searching for stationary equilibria. Currently, their approaches are used as standard
methods to support decision making for multiple decision makers (agents). In physics and
engineering, these approaches may be used to construct models, in order to capture and
represent interaction of large number of objects, such as statistical mechanics, or stochastic
control of integrating many diverse systems.
Recently, there is an interest of games with large number of players, and these games
are called Mean-Field Games, which uses the idea of capturing an average behavior, for
large number of players (Caines et al., 2017). In physics, Mean Energy Field represents
the ensemble average behavior of a ﬁeld, such as an electro-magnetic ﬁeld, and it makes
understanding possible for a collection of large number of different individual, yet interacting
events. This analogy proved itself to be useful for approaching to a large number (or inﬁnitely
many) players. The following interpretation of game theory with large number of players was
provided by (Ba¸sar & Bernhard, 1989).
123

Annals of Operations Research
“Let there be a large number of symmetric players, i.e. available strategies are the same
for all players during the game. Analyze the behavior of the Nash equilibria when the number
of players goes to inﬁnity.”
Meanwhile, a description of the Mean-Field Theory was provided by the Wikipedia, as
follows.
“In physics and probability theory, the Mean-Field Theory (MFT), or self-consistent ﬁeld
theory studies the behavior of high-dimensional random models by studying a simpler model
that approximates the original by averaging over degrees of freedom, the number of values in
the ﬁnal calculation of a statistic that are free to vary. Such models consider many individual
components that interact with each other.”
The main idea of MFT is to replace all interactions by one body with an average, or
effective, interaction. This reduces any many-body problem into a one-body problem. Hence,
the ease of solving MFT problems means that some insight into the behavior of the system can
beobtainedatalowercomputationalcost.MFThassincebeenappliedtoawiderangeofﬁelds
outside of physics, including statistical inference, graphical models, artiﬁcial intelligence,
and others.
The idea ﬁrst appeared in physics when Maxwell combined electric energy ﬁeld with the
magnetic energy ﬁeld. That generated an interest in the transient and stationary behaviors
of the electromagnetic energy ﬁeld, where a ﬁeld denotes an entity that produces change, or
motion. This new energy ﬁeld deﬁnition attracted the attention of Hamilton and he constructed
a four dimensional number system for this energy ﬁeld, known as quaternions. In statistical
mechanics the work of Pierre Curie and Pierre Weiss utilized the MFT to describe phase
transitions of stable energy systems.
Systems with many (sometimes inﬁnite) degrees of freedom are generally hard to solve,
or to compute, in closed analytic forms, except for some simple cases, such as Gaussian
random-ﬁeld theories. Often, combinatorial problems arise here, that make things difﬁcult,
and in this case the MFT is an approximation method that makes the original problem maybe
solvable, or open to computations.
InMFT,theHamiltonianmaybeexpandedintermsofthemagnitudeofﬂuctuationsaround
the mean of the ﬁeld. In this context, MFT can be viewed as the “zeroth-order” expansion of
the Hamiltonian in ﬂuctuations. That is to say that an MFT system has no ﬂuctuations, but
this coincides with the idea that one is replacing all interactions with a “mean-ﬁeld”.
Quite often, MFT provides a convenient starting point for studying higher-order ﬂuctu-
ations. For example, when computing the partition function, studying the combinatorics of
the interaction terms in the Hamiltonian can sometimes at best produce perturbation results
that correct the mean-ﬁeld approximation.
In general, dimensionality plays an active role in determining whether a mean-ﬁeld
approach will work for any particular problem. There is sometimes a critical dimension
above which MFT is valid and below which it is not.
Since, many interactions are replaced in MFT by one effective interaction, such that if
the ﬁeld exhibits many random interactions in the original system, they tend to cancel each
other and the mean effective interaction represented by MFT will be more accurate. This
is true in cases of high dimensionality, when the Hamiltonian includes long-range effects.
The Ginzburg criterion is the formal expression of how ﬂuctuations render MFT a poor
approximation, often depending upon the number of spatial dimensions of the system (Caines
et al., 2017).
The coherence of the information, or the stability of the model, requires a well-deﬁned
supporting structure. Within the applied topology, discrete Morse theory came into light as
one of the main tools to understand cell complexes arising in different contexts, as well as
123

Annals of Operations Research
to reduce the complexity of homology. In this context, homology implies stability, a.k.a.
persistence in topology. The theory of persistence modules originated in topological data
analysis and became an active area of research in the algebraic topology and category the-
ory. This may be applied to Lie algebra, which is the essential tool for solving nonlinear
partial differential equation systems with an ordinary linear differential operator. Lie theory
is amalgamated with this generalization in the form of abstract Lie groups, represented by
Lie algebra, and their actions, using the essentially topological formalism of principal bun-
dles (geometry) and associated logical connections (category theory), where we may acquire
characteristics information from the shape of an object. It has been observed that the local
information generated by semi-simple Lie groups generates the global information about
the space-time characteristics, provided by local data assimilation (statistics). This statistical
understanding has very important contributions to identify evidence-based logical coherence
of many interacting events.
Therefore, we may begin building a bridge between a particular sequential optimization
method, known as the Multi-Armed Bandit problem, and the mean-ﬁeld games. After that, we
may investigate the connection between general many-player games with the MAB problem.
2.1 Competing projects
Assume thatthere are ﬁnitely many projects to activate, untilan activated projectis completed.
Assume that
A1) Each project i has a positive reward, Ri, upon its completion.
A2) The completion time of each project i is a positive and conditionally independent
random variable τi ∼Fi(xi, ti), subject to a probability law. This probability law is
identiﬁed by its distribution function, Fi, based on the state of the project, xi, and the
activation time of the project, ti.
A3) The expected reward of a project i, E[Rie−ατi |xi, ti], depends upon its completion
time, τi, where α ∈(0, 1) is the time-discount factor, for all projects.
In this work, we considered several approaches to make good selections among competing
projects. One approach is the combinatorial approach, another one is the mean ﬁeld game
theory approach, and ﬁnally we will present the min–max games approach, to make multi-
agent decisions.
There is a huge literature for games with a continuum of players, started in the late 1950s in
econometrics, known as Cournot-Nash equilibria. Recently, (Caines et al., 2017) introduced
stochastic optimal control methods, merged with the multiplayer games and generated a
practical model to approach many player differential games in a stochastic environment.
Hence, this work may be a motivator to look for some degree of integration between
diverse ﬁelds, and how to connect them.
3 Selecting an ensemble of bandits
The problem is to decide how to utilize available projects, in order to maximize the collective
utility of them. Consequently, relevant facts will be obtained and processed by a background
knowledge, in order to generate sufﬁcient and necessary information to make the best possible
decision. In the rich and long history of decision making methods, there is one method that
is relevant for this work, and it is known as the sequential analysis, see (Dodge & Romig,
1929; Wald, 1947, 1950; Thompson, 1933), and (Robbins, 1952). Sequential analysis refers
123

Annals of Operations Research
to deciding when is the best time to terminate an experiment, and to take actions accordingly,
see Chow et al. Chow et al. (1971), and (Blackwell & Ferguson, 1968). The goal is to allocate
resources sequentially into several activities such that the overall beneﬁts collected during
the life cycle of all activities will be maximized. The multi-armed bandit problem concerns
these types of problems, see (Gittins & Jones, 1972), and (Gittins, 1979). A multi-armed
bandit refers to a collection of independent binomial reward processes; and a multi-armed
bandit problem is how to select one process and to decide how long to activate it, in order to
collect the maximum expected average reward. It is assumed that the state of the activated
process will change according to a probability law, yet the states of the inactive processes
will not change. The state-space is the Cartesian product of the individual bandits’ state
spaces, and the σ-ﬁeld is generated by the tensor product of individual bandits’ σ-ﬁelds,
parametrized by time. Thus, the evolution of a multi-armed bandit process is governed by
a semi-Markov decision process, with a binary action space. As one process is activated,
the probability law that governs this process is learned, to some extent. Therefore, choosing
between bandits that are known versus bandits that are unknown introduces the dilemma of
choice; thus it may be tempting to activate the bandit with which we have the most experience,
for less risk and immediate gain. But, a bandit with which we have not experimented yet
may have a better chance to be the most proﬁtable one. That is the dilemma of taking actions
that yield immediate reward versus actions whose rewards would only appear in the future,
see (Kiefer & Wolfowitz, 1952), and (Lai & Robbins, 1985). There is an approach to solve
these classes of problems, based on the Hardy-Littlewood maximal function theorem, see
(Hardy et al., 1994), and Atiyah (1990). It states that among a set of measurable functions
over an index set I, { fi|i ∈I}, the maximal function is found by comparing the volume
generated by these functions, subject to a positive measure, say μ > 0, relative to the volume
generated by the measure itself. Then the supremum of this ratio identiﬁes the maximal
function M f = supi∈I {

dμ( fi)/

dμ}.
An economical index based on ensemble averages of economical entities and maximal
function theorem was constructed by Wald (1939). Another application of this theorem is to
solve the multi-armed bandit problems by constructing a positive measure of performance
for bandits that depends upon their history and to allocate resources at each decision moment
to a bandit that has the highest performance measure at that time. This performance measure
is known as the Gittins index, see (Gittins & Jones, 1972). If there are a ﬁnite number of
bandits, say N, then let α ∈(0, 1) be a discount factor, Xt
i be the state of the bandit i at
time t, and R(Xt
i ) be the bounded reward generated by activating the bandit i at time t,
starting at an initial time s, for i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , N. We could now connect the empirical
evidence and optimal decision making by using mathematical constructs, as presented by
Wald (1943); Schwartz (1981, 1984); Prékopa (1956, 1957, 1958) Robbins and Siegmund
[45] Seip (2004); Arnold (2006), and Nahmod (2016), among others.
We are trying to maximize the discounted total expected reward by selecting an activation
order of the projects, E[
i=1,N

t=s,T αt R(Xt
i )|F(Xs
i )].
Hence, the Gittins index for the bandit i, at time s, to identify this selection would be
Gi(s) = supτ>s E[
t=s,τ−1 αt R(Xt
i )|F(Xs
i )]/E[
t=s,τ−1 αt|F(Xs
i )],where F(Xs
i )isthe
σ-ﬁeld generated by the history of Xs
i and τ is the stopping time of the activated bandit i.
Thus, τ
= arg supτ>s{E[
t=s,τ−1 αt R(Xt
i )|F(Xs
i )]/E[
t=s,τ−1 αt|F(Xs
i )]}. This
formulation helps to compare performance of the bandits and then select the one that will pro-
vide the maximum average reward rate, together with its activation time duration. Ordering
bandits by using their Gittins indices, from the highest index to the lowest index, provides an
optimal policy for activating them, see (Gittins, 1979). For more comprehensive information,
please also see (Gittins, 1989, 1994). A generalization of the multi-armed bandit problem is
123

Annals of Operations Research
to let bandits inﬂuence each other, while keeping the independence assumption for the state
transition probabilities for the bandits. A multiplicative inﬂuence for the rewards was intro-
duced by Nash, with a performance measure different than Gittins index, known as the Nash
index, see (Nash & Gittins, 1977), also see (Nash, 1980). If 0 < Q(Xt
j) < 1, then this gives
the original Nash index construct, which indicates that there is a diminishing collaboration
between bandits. Let −1 < Q(Xt
j) < 1 be the inﬂuence factor of bandit j at a state Xt
j that
is not activated at time t. Here, we generalized this multiplicative effect between bandits, and
this inﬂuence factor may be constructed as a function of the covariances between bandits,
such that if Q(Xt
j) is negative; then this implies that there is an adverse effect between the ban-
dits, such as a competitive inﬂuence. Hence, cooperation and competition among projects is
captured by this generalization. Consequently, for i ̸= j, the discounted inﬂuential expected
reward would be deﬁned as E[
i=1,N

t=s,T αt R(Xt
i ) j=1,N Q j(Xt
j)|F(Xs
i )].
Also, we could deﬁne the generalized Nash index for the bandit i as follows, Ni(s) =
supτ∈T {E[
t=s,τ−1 αt R(Xt
i )|F(Xs
i )]/E[Q(Xs
i ) −αt Q(Xτ
i )|F(Xs
i )]}.
For an optimal policy, see (Gürsoy, 2020).
3.1 Multi-armed bandit problem in applications
In the above approach, an optimization method for sequentially choosing some, from many
interacting projects has been considered. A sequential choice from several populations was
investigated by (Katehakis & Robbins, 1995), and optimal adaptive policies for sequential
selections was investigated by (Burnetas & Katehakis, 1996). The multi-armed bandit prob-
lem is the predecessor of our work. Another approach would be to construct a multivariate
stochastic differential equations model and solve it based on empirical boundary conditions
that satisfy certain model-ﬁltration assumptions, see (Karatzas & Shreve, 1996). Moreover,
competition, or cooperation, is a realistic form of interactions among projects. Hence, we
have incorporated a multiplicative inﬂuence factor, expressing competition or cooperation
among projects, in the collective discounted reward structure, by following the work of (Nash,
1980). On the other hand, our model assumes perfect information for sequentially activating
these ensembles of projects, which may not be a realistic assumption, in that case, a model
that would incorporate the missing information may be a better approach, see (Kumar &
Varaiya, 1986). Or, a restless bandit model that differs from others by letting the changing
of the state of un-activated bandits as well as changing states of the activated ones might
be considered, see (Glazebrook, 1993; Glazebrook et al., 2013). The algorithm presented
here is an optimal selection policy among the ensemble of inﬂuential projects, by choosing
the highest expected discounted total reward. That provides: a) a sequence of ensemble of
projects with their activation times, and b) how long they will be active. The computational
complexity of Nash indices is discouraging at best. If you set the multiplicative inﬂuence
factor to be one, then the inﬂuences among projects will disappear, and consequently the
decision problem can be approached by the Gittins index method.
There are computationally efﬁcient algorithms designed to compute Gittins indices, see
Katehakis and Veinott (Katehakis & Veinott, 1987), and see Varaiya et al. (1985), for algo-
rithms that are suitable for practically computing the discounted expected rewards. Another
approach is to construct bounds for the optimal expected discounted reward by utilizing a
myopic policy, or a greedy algorithm, see (Edmonds amb Karp, 1970), such that it selects
an ensemble of projects that will provide the maximum collective inﬂuential reward at a
decision time, without paying any attention to the future alternatives, until all the project
ensembles are scheduled to be activated. This myopic selection would provide a lower bound
123

Annals of Operations Research
to the optimal reward. Also, when we set the discount factor to be equal to one, then the
total inﬂuential reward is independent of the project activation time sequence, and we apply
the myopic policy to schedule activation of the ensemble of projects, then the total non-
discounted inﬂuential reward achieved by this policy would provide an upper bound for the
optimal total discounted inﬂuential reward. These bounds will help in reducing the number
of computations for the expected revenues when the number of projects gets larger, and this
may be useful to build a dynamic programming approach to activate the ensemble of projects,
see (Gürsoy, 2020). This approach provides an optimal schedule for activating the collection
of projects, one bundle at a time, and can be generalized further if one wishes to introduce
different discount factors for different projects, such as different interest rates, see (Brown
& Smith, 2013).
The above approach is suitable to handle ﬂexible cases when there is a change in the origi-
nal set of projects, such as abandoning some projects for future activations, or considering new
projects for future activations, by restarting the optimization algorithm at the change-time.
However, here the optimization algorithm was constructed based on the expected discounted
values, on the other hand, averages may not be suitable for making decisions in the rare event
case, therefore, a performance measure that is different than the average values may be a
necessity.
Advances in the machine learning have renewed interest in the multi-armed bandit prob-
lem, see (Cowan & Katehakis, 2015; Burnetas et al., 2017; Cowan et al., 2018; Cowan
& Katehakis, 2015), and Cowan and Katehakis (2015). Tthe multi-armed bandit prob-
lem became one of the fundamental problems in reinforcement learning, see (Chan, 2020;
Koulouriotis & Xanthopoulos, 2008).
4 Game theoretic approach to select an ensemble of bandits
In this approach, we may consider that there are N number of agents and each agent-i has
its own utility functional at the time instant t, ui,t, such that
ui,t = fi(ˆu1,t, ˆu2,t, . . . , ˆui−1,t, ˆui,t, ˆui+1,t, . . . , ˆuN,t), where ˆu j,t is the expected value of
the utility at time instant t, for all j = 1, 2, . . . , N.
Assume that each agent is playing the same game against all other agents.
4.1 Mean-field games and bandits
Thecommonapproachtothemanyplayerstochasticgamesistoemploythestochasticoptimal
control theory, together with the interacting many-particles system model of physics.
Assume that each agent solves a multi-armed bandit problem as a player of a mean-ﬁeld
game, similar to the ensemble of multi-armed bandits.
The evolution of each agent is represented by a stochastic differential equation, such that
all other players are arguments of this evolution function.
By following (Caines et al., 2017), we may solve a set of partial differential equations,
according to a common boundary condition for all players. This solution would yield a stable
Nash equilibrium for all players.That would be the sufﬁcient and necessary information for
selecting players that would generate the maximum expected discounted reward.
That approach is possible if the number of players is large (converges to inﬁnity) and if
they are all subject to a common probability law. If this is not a possibility, then a minimax
design of dynamic game approach (Ba¸sar & Bernhard, 1989, 1995) would be beneﬁcial
123

Annals of Operations Research
to represent the minimizing the worst case scenarios, as min–max games, for multi-armed
bandits.
Therefore, we may consider searching for an equilibrium for all agents, and that would
generate optimal strategies for each player, since that would be an optimal evolution for an
ergodic population.
Large population multi-agent games represent natural phenomena. investigating these
games is quite challenging and approaches are searching for static equilibria. On the other
hand, large dynamic stochastic systems beneﬁt from the mean ﬁeld games generated by the
evolution of the system. Thus, mean-ﬁeld games may be considered as the dynamic formu-
lation with large populations of asymptotically negligible agents, collectively generating the
average evolution of the population.
This modern approach is quickly developing and in this work, mean-ﬁeld games is con-
nected to multi-armed bandit problem, such that each agent solves a multi-armed problem,
and collectively, they would generate the evolution of the average reward.
Here, agents are controlled stochastic models, coupled by their dynamics. An individual
agent controls its own stochastic process, subject to a common disturbance. Where the control
law of an agent is a function such that it maps from an agent’s information space to this agent’s
action space. Different models to represent agent dynamics, such as diffusion models, Markov
chain and other discrete-time models, nonlinear Markov models are provided in Caines et
al. (2017), where a general case is represented by the set of control equations for each agent,
coupled with all other agents, such that:
dxi(t) = 1
N
N
j=1 f (t, xi(t), ui(t), x j(t))dt + σdwi(t).
Here, xi(t) ∈Rn is the sate, ui(t) ∈Rm is the control, yi(t) ∈R is the output, and
wi(t) ∈Rr is a standard Wiener process, indexed by time, t.
Also, the dynamics of a generic agent is described as:
dxt = f (xt, ut, μt)dt + σdwt,
where f (xt, ut, μt) =

R f (x, u, y)dμt(y).
For an ergodic system, μt could be the secular-mean of the collective reward.
As in multi-armed bandit problems, the reward function of any agent is the expectation
of the integral reward of all possible sample paths of the system, and if we restrict ourself
with the ergodic systems, then the reward function would be the time-average of the integral
reward.
4.2 Mean-field game model
We may consider that there are N number of agents (armed bandits) and each agent, identiﬁed
by the agent number i, has its own utility functional at the time instant t, ui,t, such that
ui,t =  ˆu j,t, where ˆu j,t is the expected value of the utility at time instant t, for all
j = 1, 2, . . . , N.
Simplifying this, we will have a functional form,
ui,t = fi(ˆu1,t, ˆu2,t, . . . , ˆui−1,t, ˆui,t, ˆui+1,t, . . . , ˆuN,t).
It may be convenient to use historical data to generate an estimator, such as ˆu j,t =
u j,t−1, or perhaps, ˆu j,t =
1
t−1
t−1
s=1 u j,s, or any type of averages, for some number of past
observations.
In case of perfect information, one may use ˆu j,t = u j,t for all j ̸= i.
Thus, we may deﬁne the mean utility for the ensemble, at the time instant t, such that this
ensemble average is ¯ut = 1
N
N
j=1u j,t.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Instead of working with a set of function of functions, we could deﬁne a nominal utility, as
the average of all utilities, and that would identify a trajectory of evolution for the ensemble’s
equilibrium. That would be the decision function for a dynamic equilibrium.
5 Approximating a diﬀusion equation with an ordinary diﬀerential
equation
A random evolution of the trajectory of pollens in a pond was observed by the botanist Brown,
in the nineteenth century, and this created an interest in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance, and Bachelier
constructed a mathematical model to represent ﬁnancial markets (Bourse) in France, by
employing the Brownian motion. In the twentieth century, Einstein use the Brownian motion
to estimate the molecular diameter. Following in this vein, Wiener expressed the Brown-
ian motion as a continuous stochastic process. The Markovian properties of the Brownian
motion was described by Kolmogorov, and the random evolution in a constant environment,
a.k.a. diffusion process, as a Brownian motion was constructed by Feller. Following the Kol-
mogorov’s work, Itô constructed the Markovian properties of the Brownian motion, by using
the Taylor series approximation. The main characteristic of the Brownian motion is such that
it is Hölder continuous with index γ < 1
2, but not Lipschitz continuous, that is the Brownian
motion is a continuous stochastic process, but nowhere differentiable. Thus, we may need
an instrument to understand the evolution of a Brownian motion, particularly, the diffusion
equation.
Let ω(t) ∈Rn with ω(0) = 0 and t ∈[0, ∞), such that,
E[ω(s) −ω(t)|Ft] = 0 and E[(ω(s) −ω(t))(ω(s) −ω(t))′|Ft] = 0, for 0 ≤< s,
(, F, P) is a probability space, Ft ⊆F is a ﬁltration by ω(z), z ≤t.
Let there be a differentiable function, νϵ(t) such that
νϵ(t)=ωt −
 t
0 e−t−s
ϵ dω(s), as ϵ →0.
Therefore, integration by parts yield,
dνϵ
dt = 1
ϵ ω(t) −1
ϵ2
 t
0 ω(s)e−t−s
ϵ ds.
Consequently, E[||νϵ(t) −ω(t)||2] < ϵ, for t ∈[0, T ].
Thus, νϵ(t) = ω(t) −uϵ(t), where uϵ(t) =
 t
0 e−t−s
ϵ dω(s).
That is, component-wise duϵ,i = −1
ϵ uϵ,idt + dωi, for i = 1, 2, . . . , n.
Hence, dνϵ
dt = 1
ϵ uϵ(t), and if there is a “stopping time” τ,
a.k.a. “killing time of the process”, then we have
limϵ→0 E[||νϵ(τ) −ω(τ)||2] ≤ϵe−cT , for c > 0.
One can observe that there exists a differentiable process that approximates the diffusion
process in the mean, and this would be an indicator that the approximation on the averages
may be useful to employ the mean-ﬁeld theory, for a sufﬁciently large number of diffusion
processes.
6 Nonlinear stochastic control connection
The mean-ﬁeld games may be applied to nonlinear, controlled stochastic systems as well, by
replacing the stochastic diffusion equations with a family of integro-differential generators,
such that the evolution of a typical agent is described by a generator of the Lévy-Khintchine
123

Annals of Operations Research
type.Consequently,eachoftheagentsgeneratesaFellerprocessincaseofanonlinearMarkov
process. One may use the following simple deﬁnition of a nonlinear Markov process.
A nonlinear Markov process is identiﬁed by a family of generators {At,μ|t ≥0, μ ∈
P(Rd)}, such that 0 ≤s ≤t is a family of processes of the type {X(s)μ}, deﬁned on a
ﬁltered probability space, (, F, Ft, P(Rd)), that solves a nonlinear martingale problem,
generated by the family {At,μ}.
A suggestion for approaching to these nonlinear integro-differential equations may be
using a Lie algebra approach, by introducing stochastic perturbations, and tightening the
maximum perturbation around the trajectory of evolution. This method may be used for
approximately solving these equations by translating them into a set of ordinary linear differ-
ential equations, evolving in a perturbation region, and ﬁnding their trajectories within this
bounded region. Then, controlling and shrinking the boundary of this region.
6.1 Min–max games and bandits
In the case of each agent is subject to its own environment and governed by an individual
probability law, the mean-ﬁeld games method would be non-informative. In this case, the
stochastic decision making may beneﬁt from employing min–max dynamic games approach
(Ba¸sar & Bernhard, 1989) that would minimize the maximum entropy in data space, and
that would be similar to a combinatorial-algebraic topology approach (Gürsoy, 2020). In this
case, each agent would seek to maximize its expected reward, yet the average reward for
the population would be in between the maximum and the minimum expected reward for all
agents. Consequently, the saddle point search for all reward decisions may be a representative
for the population’s nominal evolution.
7 Conclusions
It is considered that in practice, the game theory searches for an equilibrium that would satisfy
all the players, and optimization theory searches for the best feasible solution for allocation
available resources into desired activities, where the best is a relative term, usually refers
to minimum energy/cost, or maximum beneﬁt/proﬁt, according to the underlying problem.
However, it is this author’s point of view that these seemingly different ﬁelds of decision mak-
ing may beneﬁt with connections between them. In the twentieth century, starting with the
J. W. Gibbs’s desire to understand the interacting particles systems, E. Ising’s understanding
of electromagnetic ﬁeld of atomic spins, and E. Schrödinger’s desire to represent the mean
energy ﬁeld of many waves, generated the probabilistic maximum principle, and as a techno-
logical method this approach is used in control theory as a robust control for integrating many
different systems, sometimes referred as the H∞optimal control, which addresses the best
design for the worst-case scenario, for integrated systems, subject to unknown disturbances.
In this context, a stochastic-dynamic game theory could be a natural approach to design deci-
sion models. This expectation generated point of interest for this work, namely we approach
decision making for a collective of agents such that each agent solves a multi-armed bandit
problem, in order to make the best decision, where each agent is considered as a bandit in
this multi-armed bandit problem. The average best for all agents may not be the best for an
individual agent, yet that would be the most agreeable decision for the collective. Thus, this
produce a dynamic equilibrium, and this equilibrium is a way to bring order for a complicated
chaotic situation.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Another approach is to use Hamilton-Jacobi (Bernoulli)-Bellman approach to solve a
sequential optimization problem in order to construct the mean-ﬁeld-energy trajectory. That
approach needs solving partial differential equations for each object with the same boundary
conditions and then constructing the ensemble average trajectory, representing their average
evolution.
There may be other methods to approach to a chaotic, complex and interacting multiple
agents case, yet the approach provided here is a simple way of ﬁnding an agreeable decision
to all agents. Of course, this approach has its shortcomings, such as when the average does
not mean anything for a collection of objects, where a local space is a domain of an agent
only, or for a dominating agent that controls all others.
The main objective of this work is to understand how to build bridges between seemingly
different approaches. Here, it was observed that it is possible to do so and this observation
begs a natural question, namely, what could be done to connect different ﬁelds of knowledge,
in order to generate new and interesting questions.
Acknowledgements I am thankful to my beloved teachers; Cahit Arf, Peter E. Caines, Israel M. Gelfand,
Michael N. Katehakis, Herbert E. Robbins, and George Zames, from whom I have signiﬁcantly learned many
different aspects of this particular work. Also, I thank the referees for helping me to improve this article.
Funding There was no funding, ﬁnancial or otherwise, from any interested party, to write this manuscript.
Data availability There is no data set used for writing this manuscript. This work did not use any life-form,
such as human or animal, to conduct experiments and learn from them.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest This manuscript is not submitted to more than one journal for simultaneous consideration,
and it has not been published elsewhere in any form or language. There is no plagiarism in this manuscript
and proper acknowledgements of others’ work were provided. Also, proper citations were provided and no
personal attacks or allegations were made in this manuscript.
Human and animal rights This manuscript does not pose a threat to public health or national security.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Arnold, V. I. (2006). Smooth function statistics. Functional Analysis and Other Mathematic, 1, 111–118.
Atiyah, M. (1990). The geometry and physics of knots. Great Britain: Cambridge University Press.
Ba¸sar, T., & Bernhard, P. (1995). H∞Optimal Control and Related Minimax Design Problem (2nd ed.). Berlin:
Birkhäuser.
Ba¸sar, T. M., & Bernhard, P. (1989). Differential Games and Applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Blackwell, D., & Ferguson, T. S. (1968). The big match. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 39, 159–163.
Brown, D. B., & Smith, J. E. (2013). Optimal sequential exploration: bandits, clairvoyants and wildcats.
Operations Research, 61, 644–665.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Burnetas,A.N.,Kanavetas,O.,&Katehakis,M.N.(2017).Asymptoticallyoptimalmulti-armedbanditpolicies
under a cost constraint. Probability in the Engineering and Information Sciences, 31(3), 284–316.
Burnetas, A. N., & Katehakis, M. N. (1996). Optimal adaptive policies for sequential allocation problems.
Advences in Applied Probability, 17(2), 122–142.
Caines, P. E., Huang, M., & Malhamé, R. P. (2017). Mean-Field Games. New York: Springer.
Chan, H. P. (2020). The multi-armed bandit problems: An efﬁcient nonparametric solution. Annals of Statistics,
48, 346–373.
Chow, Y. S., Robbins, H. E., & Siegmund, D. (1971). Great expectations: The theory of optimal stopping.
Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Cowan, W., Honda, Y., & Katehakis, M. N. (2018). Normal bandits of unknown means and variances: asymp-
totic optimality, ﬁnite horizon regret bounds, and solution to an open problem. Journal of Machine
Learning Research (JMLR), 18, 1–18.
Cowan, W.,& Katehakis, M. N. (2015). Asymptotic behaviour of minimal-exploration allocation policies:
Almost sure, arbitrarily slow growing regret. arXiv:1510.02865
Cowan, W., Katehakis, M. N. (2015). Asymptotically optimal sequential experimentation under generalized
ranking. arXiv:1510.02041
Cowan, W., & Katehakis, M. N. (2015). Multi-armed bandits under general depreciation and commitmentt.
Probability in the Engineering and Information Sciences, 29(1), 51–76.
Dodge, H. F., & Romig, H. G. (1929). A method of sampling inspections. Bell Systems Technical Journal, 8,
613–631.
Edmonds, J., Karp, R. M. (1970). Theoretical improvements in algorithmic efﬁciency for network ﬂow prob-
lems. In Combinatorial structures and their applications, proceedings, pages 93–96, New York. Gordon
and Breach Science Publishers, Inc.
Gittins, J. C. (1979). Bandit processes and dynamic allocation indices. Journal of Royal Statistics Society, 8,
148–177.
Gittins, J. C. (1989). Multi-armed bandit allocation indices. Chichester: Wiley.
Gittins, J. C. (1994). Indices on thin ice. In F. P. Kelly (Ed.), Probability, Statistics and Optimization. Haboken:
Wiley.
Gittins, J. C., & Jones, D. M. (1972). A dynamic allocation index for sequential design of experiments. Hungary:
In Colloquia Mathematica Societatis Janos Bolyai.
Glazebrook, K. D. (1993). Indices for families of competing Markov decision processes with inﬂuences.
Annals of Applied Probability, 3, 1013–1032.
Glazebrook, K. D., Hodge, D. J., & Kirkbridge, C. (2013). Monotone policies and indexability for bidirectional
restless bandits. Advances in Applied Probability, 45, 57–91.
Gürsoy, K. (2020). An optimal selection for ensembles of inﬂuential projects. Annals of Operations Research.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03536-5
Hardy, G. H., Littlewood, J. E., & Polya, G. (1994). Inequalities (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Karatzas, I., & Shreve, S. E. (1996). Brownian motion and stochastic calculus (2nd ed.). New York: Springer-
Verlag.
Katehakis, M. N., & Veinott, A. F., Jr. (1987). The multiarmed bandit problem: Decomposition and
computation. Mathematics of Operations Research, 12(2), 262–268.
Katehakis, M. N., & Robbins, H. E. (1995). Sequential choice from several populations. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 92, 8584–8565.
Kiefer, J., & Wolfowitz, J. (1952). Stochastic estimation of the maximum of a regression function. The Annals
of Mathematical Statistics, 23, 462–466.
Koulouriotis, D. E., & Xanthopoulos, A. (2008). Reinforcement learning and evolutionary algorithms for
non-stationary multi-armed bandit problem. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 196, 913–922.
Kumar, P. R., & Varaiya, P. (1986). Stochastic Systems: Estimation. Identiﬁcation and Adaptive Control:
Prentice Hall.
Lai, T. L., Robbins, H. E. (1985). Asymptotically efﬁcient adaptive allocation rules. Advances in Applied
Mathematics, pages 4–22.
Nahmod, A. R. (2016). The nonlinear Shrödinger equation on tori: Integrating harmonic analysis, geometry,
and probability. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 53, 51–85.
Nash, P. (1980). A generalized bandit problem. Journal of Royal Statistical Society, 8, 165–169.
Nash, P., & Gittins, J. C. (1977). A Hamiltonian approach to optimal stochastic resource allocation. Advances
in Applied Probability, 9, 55–68.
Poincaré, H. (1895). aAnalysis situs. Journal de l’École Polytechnique, 1, 1–123.
Poincaré,H.(1898).Therelationsofanalysisandmathematicalphysics.BulletinoftheAmericanMathematical
Society, 4, 247–255.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Poincaré, H. (1902). La science et l’hypothèse. Paris: Flammarion.
Poincaré, H. (1905). La valeur de la science. Paris: Flammarion.
Poincaré, H. (1908). La science et la méthod. Paris: Flammarion.
Prékopa, A. (1956). On stochastic set functions i. Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungarica, 7,
215–263.
Prékopa, A. (1957). On stochastic set functions ii. Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungarica, 8,
337–374.
Prékopa, A. (1958). On stochastic set functions iii. Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum Hungarica, 9,
375–400.
Robbins, H. E. (1952). Some aspects of the sequential design of experiments. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 5, 527–535.
Robbins, H. E., & Siegmund, D. A convergence theorem for nonnegative almost supermartingales and some
applications. In J. S. Rustagi, editor, Optimization methods in statistics, pages 233–257.
Schwartz, L. (1981). Geometry and probability in Banach spaces. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Schwartz, L. (1984). Semimartingales and their stochastic calculus on manifolds. Montreal: Universite de
Montreal.
Seip, K. (2004). Interpolation and sampling in spaces of analytic functions. Rhode Island: American
Mathematical Society.
Thompson, W. R. (1933). On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the
evidence of two samples. Biometrica, 25, 285–294.
Varaiya, P. P., Walrand, J. C., & Büyükkoc, C. (1985). Extensions of the multiarmed bandit problem: the
discounted case. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 30, 426–439.
Wald, A. (1939). A new formula for the index of cost of living. Econometrica, 7, 319–331.
Wald, A. (1943). On a statistical generalization of metric spaces. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 29, 196–197.
Wald, A. (1947). Sequential analysis. New York: Wiley.
Wald, A. (1950). Statistical decision function. New York: Wiley.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123