TITLE: The nexus between black and digital gold: evidence from US markets
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04192-z
---

Vol.:(0123456789)
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04192-z
1 3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The nexus between black and digital gold: evidence from US 
markets
Toan Luu Duc Huynh1,2,3 · Rizwan Ahmed4 · Muhammad Ali Nasir1,5   · 
Muhammad Shahbaz6,7,8 · Ngoc Quang Anh Huynh1
Accepted: 25 June 2021 / Published online: 22 July 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
In the context of the debate on cryptocurrencies as the ‘digital gold’, this study explores 
the nexus between the Bitcoin and US oil returns by employing a rich set of parametric and 
non-parametric approaches. We examine the dependence structure of the US oil market 
and Bitcoin through Clayton copulas, normal copulas, and Gumbel copulas. Copulas help 
us to test the volatility of these dependence structures through left-tailed, right-tailed or 
normal distributions. We collected daily data from 5 February 2014 to 24 January 2019 
on Bitcoin prices and oil prices. The data on bitcoin prices were extracted from coinmar-
ketcap.com. The US oil prices were collected from the Federal Reserve Economic Data 
source. Maximum pseudo-likelihood estimation was applied to the dataset and showed that 
the US oil returns and Bitcoin are highly vulnerable to tail risks. The multiplier bootstrap-
based goodness-of-fit test as well as Kendal plots also suggest left-tail dependence, and 
this adds to the robustness of the results. The stationary bootstrap test for the partial cross-
quantilogram indicates which quantile in the left tail has a statistically significant relation-
ship between Bitcoin and US oil returns. The study has crucial implications in terms of 
portfolio diversification using cryptocurrencies and oil-based hedging instruments.
Keywords  Bitcoin · Copulas · Kendall plots · Partial cross-quantilogram · Oil market · US 
oil return · Tail risk and bootstrap test
1  Introduction
Uncertain price movements and risk contagions have been observed in the financial and 
energy markets due to unpredictability in economic development, discontinuity of eco-
nomic policy and international geopolitical conflicts (e.g., see Li & Wei, 2018; Wei et al., 
2017; Zhang & Wang, 2019; Mei et al., 2017; Fratzscher, 2012; and Wei et al., 2018). 
Investors typically select several hedging assets to offset their risk in the financial and 
energy markets. Crude oil and gold have long served as risk management tools to hedge 
against economic risks (Cunado et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2016; Ruan et al., 2016; Tang & 
 * Muhammad Ali Nasir 
 
M.A.Nasir@hud.ac.uk; m.a.nasir@ueh.edu.vn
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

522
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
Xiong, 2010; and Lei et al., 2019). In addition, cryptocurrencies have increasingly had a 
similar role since Bitcoin was introduced in 2008 (Nakamoto, 2008).
Bitcoin has been categorized as the ‘new gold’ or ‘digital gold’ by many financial media 
channels e.g., Bloomberg, CNN and Forbes. Furthermore, the Commodity futures trading 
commission (CFTC) has officially specified that virtual money is a form of commodity, 
in the same way as crude oil and gold. The market value of 1 Bitcoin as of 19 April 2021 
was $56,617. Its value had sharply increased from $28,990 on 31 December 2020. Moreo-
ver, studies have confirmed that Bitcoin can be adopted for risk management and used as 
a short-term hedging tool in extreme market situations (Bouri et al., 2017; Demir et al., 
2018; Eom et al., 2019). The digital currency innovation has changed the traditional con-
cept of production function, which on three factors, i.e., land, labour and capital; however, 
the development of digital instruments and the proliferation of the internet have widened 
the landscape for financial modelling, economic risk and business. According to Schwab 
(2016), hedging through digital currencies is a revolutionary advance.
Our paper is linked to broad two strands of the literature. The first is research on finan-
cial modelling and risk management in relation to oil (the ‘black gold’), which has tradi-
tionally been used for hedging, safe haven and diversification (see studies on oil and similar 
asset classes in Sherman, 1986; Chua et al., 1990; Upper, 2000; Ciner, 2001; Hillier et al., 
2006; Kaul & Sapp, 2006). The second strand is the literature on risk management, in par-
ticular for energy and environmental derivatives, through the use of new technologies like 
blockchain and cryptocurrencies; our study examines Bitcoin, which is widely considered 
a modern alternative safe-haven asset. Our paper provides fresh insight on the financial 
modelling and risk management of the key energy and environmental instrument, i.e. oil. 
Importantly, our analysis will give policymakers a better understanding and a new perspec-
tive on the roles of Bitcoin and oil as hedges and safe havens.
Our paper investigates the relationship between Bitcoin and US oil returns. Despite cli-
mate concerns, oil is one of the important sources of energy for household consumption 
and industries. Currently, oil is considered to be one of the main assets in the commod-
ity markets for trading and hedging. Most economies in the world keep close track of oil 
price changes, because they can cause both microscopic as well as macroscopic problems, 
mainly through their effects on the equity market. High oil costs tend to lead to increases 
in the prices of other goods and services. Therefore, investors might be concerned about 
inflation. Oil prices also reflect the absorption costs for many manufacturing companies; 
hence, their profits and earnings might be affected. Consumer spending often declines in 
response to high oil prices, which leads to a decline in revenues for many companies as 
well. Thus, increases in oil prices often restrain further spending and investment. On 21 
November 2018, the then US President, Donald J. Trump, posted on his Twitter account: 
“Oil prices getting lower. Great! Like a big Tax Cut for America and the World. Enjoy! 
$54, was just $82. Thank you to Saudi Arabia, but let’s go lower!”1 So, what happens if oil 
prices fall? Many industries may benefit from reduced production costs. Further, inflation 
will be stabilised. Hence, there is no pressure on interest rates, and more funds are avail-
able for investment. In this light, reductions in the oil price might encourage investment 
in attractive markets such as Bitcoin. Conversely, volatility in oil prices leads to uncertain 
policy; it also affects consumers’ and investors’ behaviours. Therefore, many studies have 
sought to relate oil prices to stock prices. Here, the work of Jones and Kaul (1996) is the 
1  From Reuters (https://​www.​reute​rs.​com/​artic​le/​us-​usa-​trump-​oil-​idUSK​CN1NQ​1M3).

523
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
foundation of theoretical and empirical studies of the nexus between oil and stock prices in 
the US and Canada; they argue that equity and oil markets have a statistical correlation. In 
the same year, Huang et al. (1996) found that oil futures contract returns significantly affect 
oil firms’ returns. Similarly, Faff and Brailsford (1999) and Sadorsky (1999, 2001) identify 
the relationship between oil and stock markets.2 However, few studies have investigated the 
co-movement of oil prices and Bitcoin. Therefore, this study attempts to contribute to the 
literature regarding the relationship between oil and Bitcoin.
Currently, cryptocurrencies are not only a trading market without transaction cost but 
also a decentralised system for initial coin offerings (ICO) and investment (e.g. futures 
contracts for Bitcoin3). In early 2021, the rapid increase in Bitcoin prices made many head-
lines in social media, leading to more interest from investors as well as warnings from 
authorities. Many earlier studies were inconclusive regarding whether Bitcoin is an invest-
ment asset or not (Briere et al., 2015). Therefore, we treat Bitcoin as a financial asset to test 
whether the oil price affects investment via inflation transmission. Bitcoin has become a 
‘digital financial’ phenomenon, giving rise to much debate and many hypotheses have been 
proposed to explain movements in its value as well as the necessary economic methods. 
For example, Symitsi and Chalvatzis (2019) were the first to suggest the role of Bitcoin as 
a kind of commodity.
The US oil markets have also attracted much research attention, especially variations in 
demand and supply, because of their influence on the US economy (Sarwar et al., 2019). 
Lee and Ni (2002) emphasised that oil price shocks could have a variety of effects (positive 
or negative) on the economy, such as inflation, inflation expectations, governmental expen-
ditures, and investor behaviours.4 Hamilton (2003) confirmed that oil shocks are associ-
ated with gross domestic product (GDP) growth. Moreover, Shapiro and Watson (1988) 
found that oil shocks could be used to predict exogenous political events in the Middle 
East. Therefore, we take into account US oil prices via their returns for model estimation.
Several previous studies have found bidirectional causality between two financial mar-
kets (Ajayi & Mougoue, 1996; Bae et al., 2003; Baele, 2005; Boyson et al., 2010; Jebran 
& Iqbal, 2016; Pan et  al., 2007). However, they focused on the stock market, foreign 
exchange, or oil market. Few studies emphasise the spillover effect between the Bitcoin 
market and the oil market, both of which are volatile. Hence, a detailed investigation of the 
relationship between Bitcoin and the oil market is due, in part so that investors and policy-
makers can understand the co-movements of these assets.
Our results indicate that the Bitcoin and the US oil returns are highly exposed to tail-
risk. The robustness of this result is enhanced by the additional use of the multiplier boot-
strap-based goodness-of-fit test as well as Kendal plots, which also demonstrate the left-tail 
dependence. Furthermore, Selmi et al. (2018) explain the strong association between Bit-
coin and oil returns in terms of Bitcoin’s similarities with gold, particularly from a risk tak-
er’s point of view. Both are considered to be “counter-cyclical” to stocks or commodities 
2  The few country analyses include Hammoudeh et al. (2004) for the US, El-Sharif et al. (2005) for the UK 
markets, Park and Ratti (2008) for European countries, Papapetrou (2001) for the Greek market, Maghy-
ereh and Al-Kandari (2007) for GCC countries, Cong et al. (2008) for China, and Narayan and Narayan 
(2010) for Vietnam, with ambiguous empirical results. Lanza et al. (2005) also investigated the relationship 
between stock returns and oil and gas, whereas Nwala (2007) employed further quantitative techniques.
3  The CME group also introduced this market to investors (https://​www.​cmegr​oup.​com/​tradi​ng/​equity-​
index/​us-​index/​bitco​in.​html).
4  Montoro (2012) and Natal (2012) asserted that US oil shocks could be an indicator of monetary policy 
trade-off, which means that policymakers need to choose between inflation and stability.

524
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
and therefore “safe havens”. However, there are fundamental differences. First, Bitcoin is 
a relatively new market, and so investors have little experience of it; moreover, they also 
need advanced understanding of the associated data processing. Second, Bitcoin is much 
more volatile than gold. Third, the Bitcoin market has a thin volume, and is less organised 
and less regulated than the gold market. Fourth, the gold market is generally accepted to be 
a safe haven, by central banks, governments and individual investors, which is not the case 
for Bitcoin. Finally, the determinants of the gold price are well established, unlike those of 
Bitcoin, irrespective of its safe haven status. Therefore, one can suppose that investors who 
select gold as a safe haven are not the same as those who select Bitcoin.
This study makes a novel contribution in distinguishing risk management and hedg-
ing through financial modelling and fills a gap in the literature by relating the digital cur-
rency revolution to the energy markets. More specifically, the contribution is threefold: 
(i) this paper investigates the interdependence and spillover between the oil market and 
the Bitcoin trading market via their prices; (ii) this study employs different quantitative 
approaches—normal copulas, Clayton copulas and Gumbel copulas—to capture and con-
firm the dependence structure between Bitcoin returns and US oil returns; (iii) the robust-
ness of the empirical findings is investigated by applying a stationary bootstrap for the par-
tial cross-quantilogram. We find that Bitcoin and US oil returns have left-tail dependence 
and that Bitcoin can be used as a hedge against movements in oil prices. In addition, when 
investors select two kinds of assets in their portfolios, they should regularly inspect their 
co-movements.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature on the Bitcoin and oil 
market. Section 3 describes data collection. Section 4 discusses the quantitative techniques. 
Section 5 reports and discusses the empirical results. Section 6 presents the conclusions 
and policy implications.
2  Literature review
Gold and crude oil are traditionally viewed as secure assets for investors to hedge market 
risks, and the recently introduced Bitcoin can be similarly viewed. The ability to obtain 
market risk information and to counter risk efficiently with these three major hedging 
assets, however, has not been investigated thoroughly with financial modelling and risk 
management techniques.
In our paper, we test the value of Bitcoin as a variable associated with the dynamic com-
modity variable of US oil returns. Most of the comparable studies on covariate research 
have focused on financial markets such as exchange rate, and stock, gold and oil prices. To 
date, very few studies have been conducted on the cryptocurrency markets. Huynh et al. 
(2018) indicated that there is a strong contagion risk among cryptocurrency markets. Their 
study, like ours, employed Kendall plots and the copulas approach but they did not indicate 
which quantile shows a strong correlation among these assets. Using GARCH and ECM, 
Van Wijk (2013) confirmed a long-run relationship between the Dow Jones index, the 
EUR/USD exchange rate and West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil prices. Interestingly, all 
these variables significantly influenced Bitcoin returns, with a linear relationship between 
them. Nevertheless, more analysis is required to investigate tail-dependence and the use 
of quantitative techniques. More recent studies related to cryptocurrency and crude oil 
movements have highlighted cryptocurrency as a substitute medium of exchange due to 
its safety, transparency and cost-effectiveness (e.g. see Yuneline, 2019; Huynh et al., 2020; 

525
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
Jawadi et al., 2019; Ameur et al., 2020). Some of these examine the ARCH effects (e.g. 
Canh et al., 2019; Mensi et al., 2019) and have used an advanced method, namely time-
varying vector-autoregression connectedness (TVP-VAR connectedness) (see for instance 
Dahir et al., 2019; Giudici and Abu-Hashish, 2019; Zeng et al., 2020).
In the present study, we investigate the relationship via the tail dependence structure. 
This methodological approach determines whether the two variables change in the same 
way or opposite directions in terms of the tail on their distributions. The left tail represents 
losses, the right tail gains. A normal distribution reflects random movements. Therefore, 
we use the dependence structure of the fat tail of the distributions of Bitcoin and US oil 
returns.
US oil is the subject of our research because it is an indicator of many economic signals. 
First, US oil is an important element of the cost of doing business in the United States and 
also a reference price for many countries. Moreover, higher inflation has a direct relation-
ship with higher oil prices. When US oil prices increase, the impact will pass on to the 
consumer and businesses. Balke et al. (2002) asserted that rising US oil prices can cause 
financial stress and adversely affect monetary policies. However, a decline in US oil prices 
promotes investment. This can be theoretically explained by the study by Fisher (1896). 
Investors are likely to turn to investment assets other than oil when its price declines. Kang 
et al. (2014) examine how oil price shocks influence the US bond markets. Although their 
findings are interesting, they fail to explain why oil price shocks encourage financial lev-
erage. Smyth and Narayan (2018) concluded that oil prices affect credit default swaps 
(CDSs), which are used to hedge by many companies. Therefore, oil prices determine the 
CDS spread, and so have an impact on financial markets.
Baur et al. (2018b) asserted that Bitcoin can also be used as a tool for hedging. There-
fore, understanding the relationship between oil prices and Bitcoin is important before 
deciding on a hedging strategy. However, Bitcoin exchange markets are uncertain. All 
transactions are anonymous and are encoded. If oil prices decrease, what is the reaction of 
the Bitcoin exchange? Will there be a flight of capital to this new investment channel? Wan 
(2005) has contributed to the development of a theoretical framework as well as empirical 
evidence that decreases in the oil price increase stock prices via a dividend payout mecha-
nism. However, the Bitcoin exchange markets have both demand and supply sides. The 
prices are driven by market signals. Based on the theory of interest as well as the ear-
lier studies on capital flight, we investigate this relation in terms of dependence structure. 
Accordingly, below we review both Bitcoin studies and the literature on links between oil 
and Bitcoin prices.
Huhtinen (2014) examined the role of Bitcoin (both the demand and the supply sides) 
in the context of economic theory. Sapuric and Kokkinaki (2014) provided some empirical 
evidence that Bitcoin volatilities (i.e. its rate of exchange with other currencies) are consid-
erably undervalued. Gronwald (2015) studied the sensitivity of the Bitcoin market to news 
in comparison with other markets. The author found that Bitcoin has extreme price move-
ments and relies on demand-side factors while there was no evidence on the supply side. 
Briere et al. (2015) concluded that a portfolio with a small proportion of Bitcoin might be 
considered to be well diversified.
In relation to Bitcoin’s economic value, Cheah and Fry (2015) argued that it has zero 
fundamental value. Therefore, investments in this market are purely speculative. Another 
market efficiency perspective comes from a study by Jakub (2015), who showed that Bit-
coin is likely to react quickly to publicly released information whereas the information 
related to macro-financial terms or economic context has a non-significant effect, and in 
support of this Baek and Elbeck (2015) found that the Bitcoin markets are driven more 

526
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
by the pressures of buyers and sellers than by economic fundamentals. Bouoiyour and 
Selmi (2015) argued that there is no evidence that Bitcoin used as safe haven for investors. 
Moreover, there is a largely speculative behaviour of Bitcoin, which shows the depend-
ence structure with the Shanghai stock market and hash rate. Dyhrberg (2016a, 2016b) 
found that Bitcoin’s traits can be seen as a mixture of those of gold and the US dollar. As 
a type of investment, Bitcoin might be considered to have similar hedging abilities to gold. 
The implications of Dyhrberg’s work are that Bitcoin requires portfolio management, risk 
analysis as well as the evaluation of investor sentiment. In contrast, Ciaian et al. (2016a, 
2016b) found that market forces drive Bitcoin prices and that macroscopic factors do not 
have a strong relationship with Bitcoin over the long term.
Moore and Stephen (2016) examined the case of the Central Bank of Barbados. The 
Bank held a small amount of Bitcoin, which significantly increased the return but had a 
non-significant influence on volatility. Moreover, Urquhart (2016) showed that the Bitcoin 
markets are presently inefficient but gradually moving towards being an efficient market. 
Jiang et al. (2018) reached a similar conclusion but Nadarajah and Chu (2017) argued that 
Bitcoin returns with simple power transformation do presently meet the efficient market 
hypothesis. Especially, Vidal-Tomás and Ibañez (2018) suggested that the Bitcoin market 
is semi-strong efficient but does not reflect monetary market news. When it comes to Bit-
coin’s exchange rate against the US dollar and the euro, Sensoy (2019), using high-fre-
quency data, showed that the latter markets are slightly more efficient.
Khuntia and Pattanayak (2018) presented evidence that Bitcoin has some efficiency/
inefficiency characteristics that match the adaptive market hypothesis. A typical question 
regarding the economic characteristics of Bitcoin is ‘Does Bitcoin have a transaction cost?’ 
Koutmos (2018) in fact explained the relationship between Bitcoin returns and transaction 
activity. From another perspective, Blau (2018) could find no statistical evidence of specu-
lative trading. Meanwhile, Takaishi (2018) investigated the skewness and multifractality of 
Bitcoin. Su et al. (2018) judged that Bitcoin can be used as a hedging instrument against 
market-specific risk. Feng et al. (2018) studied informed trading in the Bitcoin market.
Lintilhac and Tourin (2017) contributed an optimal dynamic pairs trading strategy 
and concluded that investors should be cautious because of limited liquidity and market 
depth. Balcilar et al. (2017) analysed the ability of Bitcoin volume to predict its returns 
and showed that the volume could forecast the return in the quantile range 0.25 to 0.75 
whereas there was no evidence that volume affects volatility. Urquhart (2017) also con-
firmed that Bitcoin price clustering is significant, consistent with the hypothesis of Harris 
(1991). After testing a rich set of quantitative techniques, Katsiampa (2017) reported that 
AR-GARCH is the best model to explain Bitcoin volatility. In contrast, Ardia et al. (2019) 
found that MS-GARCH models outperformed AR-GARCH models in predicting Bitcoin 
volatility. Bariviera et al. (2017) showed that the Hurst exponent indicator changed in the 
early years of Bitcoin but was likely to be stable thereafter. Their study also implemented 
many quantitative methodologies.
The result from Baur et al. (2018a) contradicts the study by Dyhrberg (2016a). Bitcoin 
has different traits to both gold and the dollar. Therefore, its correlation characteristics are 
quite typical compared to the other assets. Additionally, Baur et al. (2018b) asserted that 
there is no relationship between Bitcoin and assets such as stocks, bonds, and commodities. 
Hence, those findings encourage the use of Bitcoin as a hedging instrument, even though 
many investors currently consider it to be purely a speculative investment or alternative 
currency.
Employing a series of tests, Aalborg et  al. (2019) found that Bitcoin returns were 
not predicted by volatility, trading volume or number of Google searches for the term. 

527
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
Kristoufek (2013) also examined whether Bitcoin has a statistical relationship with online 
searches, and provides some insights on bubble behaviours as well as investors’ attention. 
Dastgir et al. (2019) employed the copula-based Granger causality test and indicated that 
it has tail dependence on Bitcoin and the number of Google searches. Nasir et al. (2019) 
employed parametric and non-parametric approaches to test the relationship between Bit-
coin returns/volume and the Google search index. They confirmed that Google search 
engine use could forecast Bitcoin returns and volatility. An alternative approach by Pana-
giotidis et al. (2018) using LASSO regression confirms these findings. The Bitcoin returns 
can be predicted by search intensity (Google trend), gold returns and policy uncertainty. 
Furthermore, Yelowitz and Wilson (2015), in their analysis of Google search data, found 
that computer programming abilities and illegal activities are characteristics of those 
with an interest in Bitcoin, whereas professional investors do not consider Bitcoin to be 
an investment tool. Urquhart (2018) contributed to this literature by studying the attention 
given to Bitcoin; previous day volatility and volume of trading were both significant driv-
ers of next-day attention. Corbet et al. (2018) reported no evidence of a persistent bubble in 
the Bitcoin market. Interestingly, Demir et al. (2018) provided new insight about economic 
policy uncertainty (EPU), which can well explain both Bitcoin returns and volatility (this 
index has a negative relationship with Bitcoin returns). Finally, Thies and Molnár (2018) 
employed a new quantitative technique called Bayesian change point integrated structural 
break to estimate Bitcoin returns.
In addition to the literature on Bitcoin itself, a series of studies have looked at the poten-
tial relationship between Bitcoin and oil prices. For instance, Van Wijk (2013) employed 
the vector error correction model to investigate the relationship between Bitcoin and differ-
ent kinds of assets, including oil. The conclusion was that Bitcoin and oil prices are nega-
tively related. Nevertheless, that study did not examine the tail risk on structural depend-
ence. Wang et al. (2016) investigated whether oil prices and trading volume have an impact 
on Bitcoin prices. They found that oil prices have a negative effect on Bitcoin prices in the 
long run. Giudici and Abu-Hashish (2019) also examined the relationship between Bitcoin 
and different exchange markets. They investigated how Bitcoin and oil returns move and 
found that there is no significant partial correlation with Bitcoin prices. Their study only 
employs the network VAR process and it did not show the dependence structure and rela-
tionship on the tail structure, which could be interpreted as a spillover risk among these 
markets. Guesmi et al. (2019) suggested that Bitcoin might be exploited as a hedging strat-
egy, because its addition could significantly minimise the risks of a portfolio with three 
kinds of assets (gold, oil and equities). Although this study indirectly mentioned the move-
ment between Bitcoin and oil, it failed to explain how risks are transmitted between Bit-
coin and oil, and vice versa. Noticeably, the study by Selmi et al. (2018) shed new light on 
the characteristics of Bitcoin, and whether it could be used to hedge for oil in comparison 
with gold. Their study indicated that the addition of Bitcoin can reduce portfolio risks with 
oil (as an element). Selmi et al. (2018) employed quantile-on-quantile regression as well as 
CoVaR to investigate their hypotheses. To examine the joint distribution of the assets, we 
use copulas as well as cross-quantilogram to capture the different distributions of Bitcoin 
and oil. This approach allows us to better understand the transmission mechanism through 
oil prices and other assets.
The above detailed review of the literature, with the key studies highlighted in Table 1, 
shows that few studies have examined the relationship between Bitcoin and oil prices. The 
present study fills this research gap by employing different types of quantitative techniques. 
The paper contributes to the current literature by reporting the dependence structure 
between Bitcoin and oil prices.

528
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
Table 1   List of recent studies of cryptocurrencies and crude oil
Year of 
publica-
tion
Names of authors, title of paper and journal
Empirical evidence
2019
Title of paper: Systematic risk in cryptocurrency market: Evidence from DCC-
MGARCH model
Authors:
Nguyen Phuc Canh, UdomsakWongchoti,
Su DinhThanh and Nguyen Trung Thong
Name of Journal: Finance Research Letters
This study analyses the structural breaks and volatility spillovers of the seven 
largest cryptocurrencies: Bitcoin, Litecoin, Ripple, Stellar, Monero, Dash, and 
Bytecoin. The main results are as follows:
Structural breaks exist in the cryptocurrencies
The shifts spread from smaller cryptocurrencies (in market capitalisation) to 
larger ones
Volatility spillovers indicate strong positive correlations among cryptocurrencies
2019
Title of Paper:
Structural breaks and double long memory of cryptocurrency prices: A com-
parative analysis from Bitcoin and Ethereum
Authors:
Walid Mensi, Khamis Hamed Al-Yahyaee and
Sang Hoon Kang
Name of Journal: Finance Research Letters
Structural breaks affect the dual long memory of Bitcoin and Ethereum
The authors applied four different ARFIMA-GARCH family models
They found dual long memory present in Bitcoin and Ethereum returns and 
volatility
Persistence decreases after considering long memory and switching states
 FIGARCH with structural breaks is the most appropriate technique for volatility 
predictions
2019
Title of Paper:
Forecasting cryptocurrency returns and volume using search engines
Authors: Muhammad Ali Nasir,
Toan Luu Duc Huynh,
Sang Phu Nguyen and
Duy Duong
Journal Name:
Financial Innovation
The frequency of Google searches predicts positive returns and a surge in Bitcoin 
trading volume. Shocks to search values had a positive effect, which persisted 
for at least a week. The results have implications regarding the dynamics of 
cryptocurrencies/Bitcoins
2019
Title of Paper:
Analysis of cryptocurrency’s characteristics in four perspectives
Author:
Mirza Hedismarlina Yuneline
Name of Journal:
Journal of Asian Business and Economic Studies
This study examined the implications of cryptocurrency from the perspective 
of the nature of money, legal issues, the economy and Sharia. They found that 
cryptocurrency does not meet the criteria for a currency. Further, from the 
economic viewpoint, cryptocurrency does not fully match the characteristics of 
a currency due to high price volatility. From the Sharia perspective, cryptocur-
rency can be considered property (mal) but not as a monetary value (thaman-
niyah)

529
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
Table 1   (continued)
Year of 
publica-
tion
Names of authors, title of paper and journal
Empirical evidence
2019
Title of Paper:
Do Jumps and Co-jumps Improve Volatility Forecasting of Oil and Currency 
Markets?
Authors:
Fredj Jawadi,
Waël Louhichi,
Hachmi Ben Ameur and Zied Ftiti
Name of Journal:
The Energy Journal
The authors found both markets show significant co-jumps driven by unantici-
pated macroeconomic news. Further, their model outperforms Corsi (2009)’s 
model in providing better forecasts. Specifically, co-jumps establish a key vari-
able in forecasting oil price volatility
2020
Title of Paper:
Diversification in the age of the 4th industrial revolution: The role of artificial 
intelligence, green bonds and cryptocurrencies
Authors:
Toan Luu Duc Huynh,
Erik Hille and
Muhammad Ali Nasir
Name of Journal:
Technological Forecasting and Social Change
The paper highlights the importance of AI and robotics stocks, green bonds, and 
Bitcoin in portfolio diversification
Portfolios containing of these assets showed heavy tail dependence
Volatility transmission is higher in the short term
Bitcoin and gold are important assets for hedging and gold may act as a safe 
haven
NASDAQ AI and general equity indexes are not good hedging instruments for 
each other

530
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
3  Data
The daily data cover 5 February 2014 to 24 January 2019 for both Bitcoin prices and oil 
prices. The data on Bitcoin prices are extracted from coinmarketcap.com. US oil prices are 
collected from Federal Reserve Economic Data (https://​fred.​stlou​isfed.​org/). We use the log-
arithm of the return,5 following Miller (1972).6 The advantage of using the logarithm is that 
it has a more normal distribution. This is a prerequisite for the analysis of many multidimen-
sional statistics as well as for deep learning techniques. Bitcoin and US oil prices are contin-
uous-time stochastic processes, and so are continuous returns rather than discrete returns for 
each period. Thus, using the logarithm of returns (continuous returns) for these variables is 
better than using price or raw returns (discrete returns) (Hudson & Gregoriou, 2015).
Descriptive statistics are reported in Table 2. It can be seen that Bitcoin prices and oil prices 
are heavy-tail with high kurtosis values. The Bitcoin return has a positive mean but it is skewed 
to the left (negative skewness). Oil has a negative return with a -skew to the right. The interpre-
tation of negative skewness (−0.37139) is that there are larger losses as the magnitude of the 
return increases. That is, overall, Bitcoin average returns over the research period are positive 
(0.000812) but they do also see large losses. Similar studies on Bitcoin have been conducted (e.g. 
Gronwald, 2015; Huhtinen, 2014; Sapuric & Kokkinaki, 2014). In contrast, the US oil means 
returns are negative (−0.00014) but have positive skewness (0.131320). This means that some 
of the US oil returns have a high positive value. The inverted characteristics of the movements of 
the two variables suggest there may be spillover, or contagion risks and gains from these invest-
ments. Because of their different distributions and characteristics, we employ copulas to capture 
the tail dependence between Bitcoin prices and oil prices, as they are able to capture dependence 
at any tail of the specific joint distribution (Xu & Brin, 2016). McNeil et al. (2015) also reported 
that copulas are better able to estimate results than simple maximisation methods because the 
copula function of flexibility evaluates the dimension of variables in different tails.
4  Methodology
4.1  The copulas7 approach
Many methods have been used to estimate the dependence structure between two vari-
ables, such as correlation coefficients, cointegration tests, Granger causality, dynamic 
Table 2   Descriptive statistics
Variable
Mean
SD
Min
Max
Skewness
Kurtosis
Br (Bitcoin return)
0.000812
0.039296
−0.23757
0.225119
−0.37139
8.590618
Or (Oil return)
−0.00014
0.008458
−0.04832
0.049029
0.131320
7.944991
7  The word ‘copula’ derives from the Latin for ‘a link, tie, bond’.
5  Many previous papers use this methodology for Bitcoin returns, such as Jiang et al. (2018) and Sensoy 
(2019).
6  rt = ln
(
Pt
Pt−1
)
 in which ­Pt is the index at time t.

531
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
conditional correlation, and generalised autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity 
(GARCH) modelling and its variants (GARCH-MIDAS, FIGARCH, TGARCH, etc.). 
Some non-parametric quantitative techniques, such as Kendall (K)-plots, can be used 
to detect the existence of a dependence structure, and some parametric techniques, such 
as copulas, can capture how much one variable contributes to joint distribution on the 
tail (along with other variables). The main reason to use a non-parametric approach is 
to ensure the robustness of the results of a parametric technique (here, copulas). Nguyen 
and Bhatti (2012) and Huynh et  al. (2018) examine parametric and non-parametric 
approaches.
A copula function generates the links from the nth-dimension of univariate marginal 
distributions to full multivariate distributions, which results in a joint distribution func-
tion of these random variables. Correlation is a scalar measure of dependence, and so 
cannot present the dependence structure of risks. On the other hand, copulas determine 
the dependence relationship and can indicate the position of tail dependence (left, right 
or normal).
Copulas are multivariate distribution functions. Assume that H is the distribution 
function of a d-dimensional random vector X = (X1, … , Xd
) . Then
in which, x = (x1, … , xd
) ∈ℝd.
The distribution function ­Fj of ­Xj, j ∈{1, … , d} can be derived from the multivariate 
distribution function H as Fj
(xj
) = H(∞, … , ∞, xj, ∞, … , ∞), xj ∈ℝ . Therefore, we 
denote ­F1…Fd the univariate margins. Hofert (2018) introduced the simple approach of 
copulas, where the multivariate distribution function has standard uniform univariate 
margins, that is, U(0, 1) margins.
We use three kinds of copulas, namely normal, Clayton and Gumbel, to investigate 
the relationship between Bitcoin and US oil returns. Huynh et al. (2018) introduced the 
use of normal copulas, which do not have tail-dependence characteristics, through the 
formula:
where u and v are random variables and this parameter is in the range (0 ≤휃≤1 ). The 
Gumbel and Clayton copulas respectively represent right-tail and left-tail dependence. Jin 
(2018) summarised how to estimate the main characteristics of Gumbel and Clayton copu-
las (see Table 3).
(1)
H(x) = ℙ(X ≤x) = ℙ(X1 ≤x1, … , Xd ≤xd
)
(2)
C휃(u, v) =
휙−1(u)
∫
−∞
dx
휙−1(v)
∫
−∞
dy
1
2휋
√
1 −휃2
exp

−x2 −2휃xy + y2
21 −휃2

Table 3   Clayton and Gumbel copulas: a summary. Source: Jin (2018)
Level of dependence in the left tail is denoted 휆L and in the right tail 휆U , and u and v are random variables
Name
Copulas function
Parameter
Structure dependence
Clayton
CC(u, v;휃) = CC(1 −u, 1 −v;휃)
휃
Asymmetric tail depend-
ence:휆U = 0, 휆L = 2−1∕휃
Gumbel
CG(u, v;훿) = exp
(
−(
(−log u)훿+ (−log v)훿)1∕훿)
훿
Asymmetric tail depend-
ence:휆U = 2 −21∕훿, 휆L = 0

532
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
Hofert (2018) demonstrated that the coefficient of lower and upper tail dependence of 
u and v can be expressed as:
Let u and v be random variables with marginal distribution functions ­F1, ­F2. Then, 
휆L(u, v) ∈(0, 1] (respectively 휆U(u, v) ∈(0, 1]) . This is the fundamental concept of esti-
mating the parameters in these copulas.
The maximum pseudo-likelihood estimator is the most appropriate method for selecting 
copulas. If ­F1,…, ­Fd is known, the maximum likelihood estimator is also defined. However, 
it is likely to be unknown for univariate margins. Therefore, following Genest et al. (1995), 
Tsukahara (2005) and Kojadinovic and Yan (2010), the maximum pseudo-likelihood esti-
mator is applied in our study:
Ui,n denotes univariate margins and n indicates the finite samples. For copula families, with 
the characteristics of finite samples and an asymptotic phenomenon, the maximum pseudo-
likelihood estimator seems to be efficient. Therefore, our estimation for the selection of 
copula families is statistically based on the highest log-likelihood value. To ensure that 
our model has goodness-of-fit, we perform the multiplier bootstrap method for the selected 
copulas. Because we use it as our robustness test, we employ the five-step algorithm pro-
posed by Genest and Rémillard (2008): (i) compute the pseudo-observations; (ii) estimate 
휃n of 휃 from pseudo-observations; (iii) compute the test statistic Sgof
n  ; (iv) repeat steps (i) 
to (iii) for every k ∈{1, … , N} if larger integer; (v) calculate the p-value for testing. Our 
methodology does not have any endogeneity issues. To deal with endogeneity issues (see 
e.g. Ullah et al., 2018, 2020).
4.2  Bivariate copula Kendall plots
This concept draws from Genest and Boies (2003). The methodology used for continuous 
multivariate data meets the two basic requirements: (i) it is based on rank and (ii) maxi-
mally invariant statistics under transformations can be used without changing the copulas 
estimation results. The main use of bivariate copula Kendall plots is to rank the data, which 
are collected in a quantile–quantile-plot (QQ-plot) to test the normal features. A pair of 
variable (Xi, Yi) will transform into ( Wi ∶n, H(i)) within i = 1, 2…n. Therefore, the value of 
­Hi is defined as follows:
The ordered values of the bivariate distribution function are calculated by 
Hi ∶= ̂Fu,v(u1, v1) . Thereafter, Wi ∶n is the expected value of the order statistic from n ran-
dom variables and K0(휔) = 휔−휔log(휔) , known as the corresponding density. Hence, a Ken-
dal plot can be seen as the bivariate copula equivalent to the QQ-plot.
(3)
휆L = 휆L(u, v) = lim
t↓0 ℙ(v ≤F←
2 (q)|u ≤F←
1 (q)
),
(4)
𝜆U = 𝜆U(u, v) = lim
t↑1 ℙ(v > F←
2 (q)|u > F←
1 (q)
),
(5)
휃n = argsup
휃∈Θ
n
∑
i=1
logc휃
(Ui,n
)
(6)
Wi ∶n =
1
∫
0
휔k0(휔)
{
K0(휔)
}i−1{
1 −K0(휔)
}n−id휔

533
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
4.3  Stationary bootstrap for the partial cross‑quantilogram
The cross-quantilogram is a quantitative technique that obtains important econometric infor-
mation for interpretation. It allows consideration of arbitrary lags and it does not meet moment 
conditions for a time series. Therefore, we further employ this approach to capture the proper-
ties of the joint distribution, especially tail dependence.
Linton and Whang (2007) first introduced the term ‘quantilogram’. The method predicts 
the correlogram pattern of two stationary time series in different quantiles. If it is extended to 
the analysis of many multivariates, this approach becomes the cross-quantilogram, as used by 
Han et al. (2016). The main use of the cross-quantilogram is to estimate parameters (denoted 
휌휏(k) with 휏 as a conditional or unconditional quantile) where there are two random variables 
{xt ≤휏(휏1)} and {yt−k ≤휏(휏2)} for an arbitrary pair of 휏= (휏1, 휏2) . The cross-quantilogram 
to estimate the dependence is defined as the cross-correlation of the quantile-hit process:
where
To 
measure 
dependence 
between 
two 
events 
{휏1,t
(휏l
1
) ≤x ≤휏1,t
(휏h
1
)}
 
and 
{휏2,t
(휏l
2
) ≤y ≤휏2,t
(휏h
2
)}
 for arbitrary quantile ranges [휏l
1, 휏h
1] and [휏l
2, 휏h
2] , an alternative cal-
culation of the cross-quantilogram is defined:
Here, we apply the method used by Politis and Romano (1994a, 1994b) to estimate the crit-
ical values by the stationary bootstrap. The stationary bootstrap sampling process treats sta-
tionary conditions only. The cross-quantilogram based on the stationary bootstrap is defined 
as:
5  Empirical findings
The first step is to test the stationary properties of Bitcoin and US oil returns. For this pur-
pose, we apply ADF (Dickey & Fuller, 1981) and PP (Phillips & Perron, 1988) unit-root 
tests. The empirical results of ADF and PP unit root tests are reported in Table 4. We find 
that Bitcoin and oil prices in the USA are level with intercept and indicates 1% level of sig-
nificance. This shows that Bitcoin and the US oil returns are integrated at I(0), which leads 
us to further empirical analysis.
Concomitantly, we also performed the ARCH–LM, which is is Engel’s LM test, for 
heteroskedasticity, conducted using 10 lags. The results show that, at the 1% significance 
(7)
휌휏(k) =
E
[
휓휏1
(
xt −휏
(
휏1
))
휓휏2
(
yt −휏
(
휏2
))]
√
E
[
휓2
휏1
(xt −휏(휏1
))]√
E
[
휓2
휏2
(yt −휏(휏2
))]
(8)
𝜓𝜏i
(xt −𝜏(𝜏i
)) = 1[yt < 𝜏(𝜏i
)]
(9)
𝜓[𝜏l
i,𝜏h
i ]
(xt −𝜏([𝜏l
i, 𝜏h
i ] )) = 1[[𝜏l
i < yt < 𝜏h
i
] −(𝜏l
i −𝜏h
i )
(10)
휌휏(k) =
∑T
t=k+1
휓휏1
x∗
t −휏∗
t
휏1
휓휏2
y∗
t−k −휏∗
t−k
휏2

∑T
t=k+1 휓2
휏1
x∗
t −휏∗
t
휏1
∑T
t=k+1 휓2
휏2
y∗
t −휏∗
t
휏2


534
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
level, all ten tests reject the null hypothesis that the errors are not autoregressive condi-
tional heteroskedastic. Therefore, we found the GARCH effects for our variables.8
After confirming that Bitcoin and oil prices in the USA are integrated at I(0), we esti-
mate the copula parameters to fit the value based on the maximum pseudo-likelihood of 
our 1815 observations for two dimensions. With the method of optimisation converged, 
Table 5 presents the copula parameters and maximised log-likelihoods. We chose the most 
appropriate copulas based on the highest log-likelihood values. Notably, Clayton copu-
las were usually the most appropriate in terms of the log-likelihood criterion (see Genest 
et al., 1995; Tsukahara, 2005; Kojadinovic & Yan, 2010). This also shows that the left-tail 
dependence has specific characteristics for the pair of Bitcoin and the US oil returns. It 
indicates the probability of the co-occurrence of extreme downside events for the two kinds 
of investments. That is, when Bitcoin suffers a loss in its return, the US oil market is also 
likely to experience a negative return. Interestingly, in recent years, the US government has 
tended to expect oil prices to decrease. Currently, US oil prices are experiencing a sharp 
pullback, which leads to negative returns as well. Therefore, investors are likely to change 
their capital investment flows from cryptocurrencies to another type of asset (e.g. Bitcoin 
as an alternative investment). Unexpectedly, this phenomenon leads to a decline in Bitcoin 
prices—a ‘crash’ after a ‘hot bubble’. In brief, we can see that the capital flow from the 
oil market to the Bitcoin market is ineffective. It is likely to have an extreme downside in 
returns when these kinds of assets experience a negative shock.
We used the sorted-out approach to analyse data from a period of several days in which 
there were negative co-movements of Bitcoin and oil returns. There were 64, 37, 59, 67 
and 64 days in the years 2018, 2017, 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively, when both Bit-
coin and oil returns had negative returns. After reaching a peak of $19,783.06 per one Bit-
coin, this alternative investment crashed in 2018. This was related to the collapse of one 
of the biggest Bitcoin exchanges (Bitconnect) in 2018. The year 2018 also saw trade ten-
sions between the US and China, as well as political disruptions in Europe. These factors 
Table 4   ADF and PP unit toot 
tests
*, **, and *** denote the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, 
respectively
Variables
Augmented Dickey-
Fuller
Phillips-Perron
br (Bitcoin return)
−42.409***
−42.412***
or (Oil return)
−45.283***
−45.297***
Table 5   The estimated 
parameters for paired bitcoin and 
US oil returns
The bold numbers represent the chosen Copula for further analyses
Assume that ∁ is a Normal, Clayton or Gumbel Copulas. Afterwards, 
the algorithm fits two trivariate copula families to our data for generat-
ing the parameters and log−likelihood values
Copulas
휃
Log-likelihood
Normal
0.001
0.001
Clayton
0.01
0.141
Gumbel
1
−8.734e−07
8  The results are available upon request.

535
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
suggested the prospect of a global recession, which led to a decline in US oil prices. Hence, 
the capital flows of investors between the Bitcoin and oil markets were inefficient. Based on 
our findings, we suggest the downside co-movements of these assets was due to the occur-
rence of bad events that were highly likely to lead to other bad events. Our results contrib-
ute to the empirical evidence that Bitcoin and US oil markets share a downside trend and 
experience a shock in negative returns (the related studies on Bitcoin and commodities 
include Dyhrberg, 2016a, 2016b; Ciaian et al., 2016a, 2016b; and Urquhart, 2016).
Following the suggestions made by Genest et al. (2009) and Fermanian (2013) in their 
literature reviews, we test whether our copulas belong to at least one family of copulas or 
not. The null hypothesis is H0 ∶∁∈ℂ versus HA ∶∁∉ℂ . We use the p-value methodol-
ogy from Genest and Rémillard (2008) to assess the multiplier bootstrap value. Our null 
hypothesis is constructed as H0 ∶∁∈ℂClayton versus H0 ∶∁∉ℂClayton.
Based on the p-value, we fail to reject the null hypothesis of bivariate financial log-
returns between Bitcoin and US oil prices. Therefore, our estimation is Clayton copulas 
(Table 6). This confirms the above finding that Bitcoin and US oil returns have co-move-
ments on the downside. Overall, our results indicate that Bitcoin returns parallel US oil 
prices due to contagion. Thus, there is a link between the two markets. Investors are likely 
to invest in one of them at the same investigation. Therefore, when a negative extreme 
event happens, both markets are likely to see a ‘flight to safety’, as mentioned by Bernanke 
et al. (1994). Furthermore, we suggest that negative information in relation to US oil might 
lead to a crash in the Bitcoin market. This reflects information efficiency, given that the 
same information transmits to both markets. The US oil markets heavily rely on the United 
States economy, which also causes uncertainty in the Bitcoin exchange markets.
5.1  Bivariate copula Kendall plots
We employ a rich set of quantitative techniques to determine whether Bitcoin and the US 
oil returns share their dependence structure or not. The bivariate copula Kendall plots show 
that this pair of assets have a common dependence structure. Genest and Boies (2003) con-
clude that variables’ deviations from the 45° degree diagonal line can show dependence. 
Points of the Kendall plots above the diagonal line reveal positive dependence, and vice 
versa for negative dependence. Based on the results presented in Fig. 1, we can conclude 
that the two variables have a common dependence structure. Moreover, there are more 
deviations below the diagonal line, which demonstrates that Bitcoin and US oil returns 
have a negative dependence, according to the non-parametric approach. Our results, once 
again, confirm that there is a contagion risk from the US oil and Bitcoin exchange markets. 
We find that the contagion risk attracts the attention of investors who want to move from a 
downside asset to another asset (capital flight). However, this can cause volatility spillovers 
for the alternative investment.
This approach also acts as a robustness check on the prior findings, as it again shows 
that Bitcoin and US oil returns have a dependence structure.
Table 6   Multiplier bootstrap−
based goodness−of−fit test of 
the Clayton Copula
*, **, and *** denote the significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, 
respectively
Test
Parameter
Statistics
P−value
Goodness−of−fit
0.012
0.012
0.930

536
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
5.2  Stationary bootstrap for the partial cross‑quantilogram
We examine the stationary bootstrap for partial cross-quantilogram for two variables (Bitcoin and US oil 
returns). Using the stationary bootstrap in Politis and Romano (1994a, 1994b), our results are statistically 
simulated by the number of repetitions for the stationary bootstrap, up to 10 times. Due to the computational 
burden, we compute the stationary bootstrap for the partial cross-quantilogram as left-tailed quantile levels 
휏i = 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5 and for the two lagged values (the first order and the second-order).
In our bootstrapping process, we set the number of repetitions for stationarity at 10 with 
each trial of 10,000 bootstrap replications. The rules of Politis and White (2004) and Patton 
et al. (2009)were followed to decide these tuning parameters. From Table 7, it can be seen 
that the stationary bootstrap for the cross-quantilogram is significant in the quantile 휏i = 0.1 
for the parameter, which meets the 5% level of significance. There are non-significant param-
eters in the second-ordered lag value (the spillover effects). There is evidence that the effects 
of left-tail dependence in the stationary bootstrap for cross-quantilogram are unsteady. 
Because this is left-tail dependence, we do not consider the sign of the parameters, and so it 
is apparent only that there is a risk spillover (in one direction or other) between Bitcoin and 
US oil returns. Interestingly, there is a decrease in the magnitude of the cross-quantilogram 
by each quantile: the higher the quantile, the lower the cross-quantilogram parameter. Thus, a 
shock is likely to have a significant impact on both Bitcoin and US oil returns in the quantile 
휏i = 0.1 . Using this quantitative technique, we also examine the quantile for the left-tailed 
dependence between our two variables. This result confirms the previous findings and consti-
tutes further evidence in a specific quantile for contagion risk among these assets.
Our findings are also in line with those of Wang et al. (2016). However, Wang et al. (2016) 
found a negative relationship whereas we estimate co-movements in the left-tail distribution. This 
means that the Bitcoin returns and the US oil returns are likely to see an extreme loss at the same 
time, which is considered to be contagion risk or spillover risk (Nguyen & Bhatti, 2012). Our find-
ings are similar to those of Cappiello et al. (2006), who found a spillover (with negative effect) from 
the US oil market, although their study looked at stocks and bonds rather than a cryptocurrency.
However, our findings are in contrast to those reported by Selmi et  al. (2018), who 
suggested that Bitcoin should be a good hedging instrument. The main reason for the 
Fig. 1   Bitcoin and US oil returns on bivariate copula Kendall plots. Source: R implemented

537
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
conflicting findings may be that our study covers the period up to 24 January 2019, which 
was before the crash. Furthermore, their study emphasised the relationship of Bitcoin to oil 
and gold. Therefore, in our study, we suggest empirical evidence with different quantitative 
techniques that Bitcoin and oil returns have a left-tail dependence structure, which might 
trigger spillover or contagion risks in the downside trend.
5.3  Robustness check
In this section, we use an advanced method, namely time-varying vector-autoregression 
connectedness (TVP-VAR connectedness), without taking into account the tail dependence 
to see how these commodities are connected to each other. The detailed methodology is set 
out in Huynh et al. (2020) and Pham and Huynh (2020).
In line with the previous findings and results, these commodities exhibit higher con-
nectedness in their volatility, which supports the left-tail dependence of the losses on both 
of them. Overall, our findings shed new light on the relationship between oil and Bitcoin 
in terms of returns and volatility. Accordingly, the return connectedness exhibits a high 
persistent trend over the period 2015 to 2018 (Fig. 2). Bitcoin and crude oil saw the high-
est return spillover effect at the beginning of 2013. This marked a boom in Bitcoin when 
traded at the exchange. However, the volatility spillover effect reached a high in 2017, 
when Bitcoin saw a market crash.
We then expanded our dataset through to April 2021 to cover the pandemic, to examine 
the effect of that public health crisis on the connectedness of the two assets. In addition, we 
also employed the new measure to adjust the total connectedness of the two assets.
Figure 3 plots the spillover effects between the two assets in terms of return and volatil-
ity over the extended period, that is, from 2012 to 2021. We find that the volatility linkage 
Table 7   The stationary bootstrap 
for cross−quantilogram analysis
The bold numbers represent the chosen Copula for further analyses
We use a significance level of 5% as the criterion for a critical value. 
The parameters ̂휌휏(k) are estimated to detect the predictability of the 
Bitcoin and the US oil returns in the left−tailed
휏i
Critical value
̂휌휏(k) Cross−
Quantilogram
Lag value (1)
0.05
[−0.109; 0.041]
0.102
0.1
[−0.080; 0.078]
0.070
0.2
[−0.063; 0.000]
0.046
0.3
[−0.057; 0.020]
0.035
0.4
[−0.055; 0.022]
0.028
0.5
[−0.043; 0.020]
0.023
Lag value (2)
0.05
[0.000; −0.005]
−0.005
0.1
[−0.005; 0.000]
−0.007
0.2
[−0.007; ≅0]
−0.011
0.3
[−0.010; 0.000]
−0.015
0.4
[−0.012; 0.000]
−0.019
0.5
[−0.017; ≅0]
−0.023

538
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
is more pronounced in three periods: the cryptocurrency boom (2013), the market crash 
(2017–2018), and the pandemic period (2020).
Figure 4 illustrates how the returns and volatility exhibit the spillover in the network. 
We can see the directions of shocks: sending or receiving from ‘starting’ points.
Finally, we examine the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the total return and vola-
tility connectedness, as presented in Table 8.
It is important to note that the severe shock of the pandemic plays an important role in the con-
nectedness of Bitcoin and oil. The higher the number of cases, the higher is the degree of spillover 
of these two assets in terms of returns. This implies that public health shocks can predict a higher 
level of connectedness between two assets. Therefore, the portfolio diversification strategy should 
account for the fact that the systemic risk of two asset classes also increases. Our study is also 
consistent with earlier studies that have found that the COVID-19 pandemic is associated with 
contagious risk (Huynh, Foglia, Doukas, 2021; Liu et al., 2021).
6  Conclusion and implications
This study investigates US oil returns and links them with a financial hedging instrument, 
i.e., Bitcoin. A risk management strategy identifies possible risks, problems or uncertain-
ties before they occur. For example, stakeholders can design a framework to avoid com-
modity risk through Bitcoin, a new financial instrument.
Fig. 2   The total connectedness in return and volatility between Bitcoin and oil returns. a Returns, b Real-
ised volatility. Notes: The total return and volatility connectedness values are 0.9% and 1.3%, respectively

539
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
Fig. 3   The total connectedness in return and volatility between Bitcoin and oil returns with the extended 
data. a Returns. b Realised volatility. Notes: We adjusted the total connectedness index by using the 
approaches by Gabauer (2021) and Chatziantoniou and Gabauer (2021)
Fig. 4   Diagram to illustrate the 
connectedness between Bitcoin 
and oil. Notes: Thicker lines 
indicate a higher degree of shock. 
Red and blue respectively repre-
sent the ‘sending’ and ‘receiving’ 
shocks among variables.

540
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
We employed various quantitative techniques, both non-parametric (Kendall-plots) and 
parametric (three kinds of copulas and stationary bootstrap for the partial cross-quantilo-
gram), to test the tail-dependence structure between Bitcoin and US oil returns. Our results 
show that Bitcoin has strong left-tail dependence with US oil, which means clayton copu-
las capture (the movement in) these variables. Furthermore, the stationary bootstrap for 
the partial cross-quantilogram test shows evidence that these variables share left-tail dis-
tribution at the low quantile,휏= 0.1 . This phenomenon comes from the flight-to-quality 
and inappropriately diversified portfolios. The robustness of the multiplier bootstrap-based 
goodness-of-fit test is employed to ensure that the Clayton copulas (left-tail distribution) 
capture this relationship.
Our results add to the existing literature for investors, policymakers as well as risk man-
agers. For instance, it is very important to use Bitcoin as a hedging instrument against 
movements in oil commodities. In addition, when investors choose two kinds of assets in 
their portfolios, they should regularly examine their co-movements. Further, immediate 
action should be taken when one of these two returns experiences an unforeseen shock. We 
would also like to suggest some implications regarding the spillover between Bitcoin and 
the US oil markets for international investors, portfolio managers and policymakers. For 
instance, portfolio management and hedging strategies using Bitcoin as well as oil com-
modities need to take account of ‘bad’ news and information.9 Investors should pay careful 
attention to adverse information, ‘bad news’, regarding uncertain policies or a crash. More 
importantly, investors need to design the most appropriate strategies for hedging against a 
downside trend in these assets.
We suggest that policymakers also pay attention to these two markets in terms of any 
kind of information, because bad news might adversely influence their returns at extreme 
values, with a joint probability of a downside trend. When one of two markets has moved 
in an unusual pattern, this is a good forecasting tool for policymakers.
Our paper sheds light on the left-tail dependence between Bitcoin and US oil returns 
using different methodologies. There have been very few studies of this pair of investment 
Table 8   Effect of the COVID−19 
pandemic on connectedness
* < 0.1, ** < 0.05, *** < 0.01
The robust SE are in brackets
Variables
Return connectedness
Volatility 
connected-
ness
Log(COVID−19 cases)
0.211***
[2.99]
Log(COVID−19 deaths)
0.129***
[2.56]
Constant
3.806***
[4.22]
4.652***
[6.55]
F−stat
8.92***
6.54**
R−squared (%)
2.96
2.31
9  Our suggestions are supported by the following studies: Arouri et  al. (2011), Nazlioglu et  al. (2013), 
Broadstock and Filis (2014), Ewing and Malik (2016), Kang et al. (2014), Wang et al. (2016). We employ 
different kinds of quantitative techniques to test the dependence structure of these variables (Bitcoin and US 
oil prices) and confirm the left-tail dependence structure.

541
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
assets. This paper does, though, have some limitations. First, we examine only the relation-
ship between Bitcoin and US oil. Other variables would be of interest, such as the WTI 
index, derivatives on energy commodities, etc. Secondly, one of the new approaches for 
testing for a dependence structure is entropy in statistics, and research on that would be 
interesting. Finally, our results suggest that investigation of the influence of economic and 
policy shocks on structural breaks in Bitcoin and US oil returns would be interesting.
Acknowledgements  This study is funded by the University of Economics Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam 
under the registered project 2021-07-05-0447.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Aalborg, H. A., Molnár, P., & de Vries, J. E. (2019). What can explain the price, volatility and trading vol-
ume of Bitcoin? Finance Research Letters, 29, 255–265.
Ajayi, R. A., & Mougoue, M. (1996). On the dynamic relation between stock prices and exchange rates. 
Journal of Financial Research, 19, 193–207.
Ben Ameur, H., Ftiti, Z., Jawadi, F., et al. (2020). Measuring extreme risk dependence between the oil and 
gas markets. Ann Oper Res. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10479-​020-​03796-1
Ardia, D., Bluteau, K., & Rüede, M. (2019). Regime changes in Bitcoin GARCH volatility dynamics. 
Finance Research Letters, 29, 266–271.
Arouri, M. E. H., Jouini, J., & Nguyen, D. K. (2011). Volatility spillovers between oil prices and stock sec-
tor returns: Implications for portfolio management. Journal of International Money and Finance, 30, 
1387–1405.
Bae, K. H., Karolyi, G. A., & Stulz, R. M. (2003). A new approach to measuring financial contagion. The 
Review of Financial Studies, 16, 717–763.
Baek, C., & Elbeck, M. (2015). Bitcoins as an investment or speculative vehicle? A first look. Applied Eco-
nomics Letters, 22, 30–34.
Baele, L. (2005). Volatility Spillover Effects in European Equity Markets. Journal of Financial and Quanti-
tative Analysis, 40, 373–401.
Balcilar, M., Bouri, E., Gupta, R., & Roubaud, D. (2017). Can volume predict Bitcoin returns and volatility? 
A quantiles-based approach. Economic Modelling, 64, 74–81.
Balke, N. S., Brown, S. P., & Yücel, M. K. (2002). Oil price shocks and the US economy: Where does the 
asymmetry originate?. The Energy Journal, 27–52.
Bariviera, A. F., Basgall, M. J., Hasperué, W., & Naiouf, M. (2017). Some stylized facts of the Bitcoin mar-
ket. Physica a: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 484, 82–90.
Baur, D. G., Dimpfl, T., & Kuck, K. (2018a). Bitcoin, gold and the US dollar–A replication and extension. 
Finance Research Letters, 25, 103–110.
Baur, D. G., Hong, K., & Lee, A. D. (2018b). Bitcoin: Medium of exchange or speculative assets? Journal 
of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 54, 177–189.
Bernanke, B., Gertler, M., & Gilchrist, S. (1994). The financial accelerator and the flight to quality. National 
Bureau of Economic Research. 4789.
Blau, B. M. (2018). Price dynamics and speculative trading in Bitcoin. Research in International Business 
and Finance, 43, 15–21.
Bouoiyour, J., & Selmi, R. (2015). What does Bitcoin look like? Annals of Economics and Finance, 16, 
449–492.
Bouri, E., Gupta, R., Tiwari, A. K., & Roubaud, D. (2017). Does Bitcoin hedge global uncertainty? Evi-
dence from wavelet-based quantile-in-quantile regressions. Finance Research Letters, 23, 87–95.

542
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
Boyson, N. M., Stahel, C. W., & Stulz, R. M. (2010). Hedge fund contagion and liquidity shocks. The Jour-
nal of Finance, 65, 1789–1816.
Briere, M., Oosterlinck, K., & Szafarz, A. (2015). Virtual currency, tangible return: Portfolio diversification 
with bitcoin. Journal of Asset Management, 16, 365–373.
Broadstock, D. C., & Filis, G. (2014). Oil price shocks and stock market returns: New evidence from the 
United States and China. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 33, 
417–433.
Canh, N. P., Wongchoti, U., Thanh, S. D., & Thong, N. T. (2019). Systematic risk in cryptocurrency market: 
Evidence from DCC-MGARCH model. Finance Research Letters, 29, 90–100.
Cappiello, L., Engle, R. F., & Sheppard, K. (2006). Asymmetric dynamics in the correlations of global 
equity and bond returns. Journal of Financial Econometrics, 4, 537–572.
Chatziantoniou, I., & Gabauer, D. (2021). EMU risk-synchronisation and financial fragility through the 
prism of dynamic connectedness. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 79, 1–14.
Cheah, E. T., & Fry, J. (2015). Speculative bubbles in Bitcoin markets? An empirical investigation into the 
fundamental value of Bitcoin. Economics Letters, 130, 32–36.
Chua, J. H., Sick, G., & Woodward, R. S. (1990). Diversifying with gold stocks. Financial Analysts Journal, 
46(4), 76–79.
Ciaian, P., Rajcaniova, M., & Kancs, d’A. . (2016a). The digital agenda of virtual currencies: Can BitCoin 
become a global currency? Information Systems and e-Business Management, 14, 883–919.
Ciaian, P., Rajcaniova, M., & de Kancs, A. (2016b). The economics of BitCoin price formation. Applied 
Economics, 48, 1799–1815.
Ciner, C. (2001). On the long run relationship between gold and silver prices A note. Global Finance Jour-
nal, 12(2), 299–303.
Cong, R. G., Wei, Y. M., Jiao, J. L., & Fan, Y. (2008). Relationships between oil price shocks and stock 
market: An empirical analysis from China. Energy Policy, 36, 3544–3553.
Corbet, S., Lucey, B., & Yarovaya, L. (2018). Datestamping the Bitcoin and Ethereum bubbles. Finance 
Research Letters, 26, 81–88.
Cunado, J., Gil-Alana, L. A., & Gupta, R. (2019). Persistence in trends and cycles of gold and silver prices: 
Evidence from historical data. Physica a: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 514, 345–354.
Dahir, A. M., Mahat, F., Noordin, B. A. A., & Ab Razak, N. H. (2019). Dynamic connectedness between 
Bitcoin and equity market information across BRICS countries: Evidence from TVP-VAR connected-
ness approach. International Journal of Managerial Finance, 16(3), 357–371.
Dastgir, S., Demir, E., Downing, G., Gozgor, G., & Lau, C. K. M. (2019). The causal relationship between 
Bitcoin attention and Bitcoin returns: Evidence from the Copula-based Granger causality test. 
Finance Research Letters, 28, 160–164.
Demir, E., Gozgor, G., Lau, C. K. M., & Vigne, S. A. (2018). Does economic policy uncertainty predict the 
Bitcoin returns? An empirical investigation. Finance Research Letters, 26, 145–149.
Dickey, D. A., & Fuller, W. A. (1981). Likelihood ratio statistics for autoregressive time series with a unit 
root. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 49, 1057–1072.
Dyhrberg, A. H. (2016a). Bitcoin, gold and the dollar–A GARCH volatility analysis. Finance Research Let-
ters, 16, 85–92.
Dyhrberg, A. H. (2016b). Hedging capabilities of bitcoin. Is it virtual gold? Finance Research Letters, 16, 
139–144.
El-Sharif, I., Brown, D., Burton, B., Nixon, B., & Russell, A. (2005). Evidence on the nature and extent of 
the relationship between oil prices and equity values in the UK. Energy Economics, 27, 819–830.
Eom, C., Kaizoji, T., Kang, S. H., & Pichl, L. (2019). Bitcoin and investor sentiment: Statistical characteris-
tics and predictability. Physica a: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 514, 511–521.
Ewing, B. T., & Malik, F. (2016). Volatility spillovers between oil prices and the stock market under struc-
tural breaks. Global Finance Journal, 29, 12–23.
Faff, R. W., & Brailsford, T. J. (1999). Oil price risk and the Australian stock market. Journal of Energy 
Finance and Development, 4, 69–87.
Feng, W., Wang, Y., & Zhang, Z. (2018). Informed trading in the Bitcoin market. Finance Research Let-
ters, 26, 63–70.
Fermanian, J.-D. (2013). An overview of the goodness-of-fit test problem for copulas. In P. Jaworski, F. 
Durante, & W. K. Härdle (Eds.), Copulas in mathematical and quantitative finance (pp. 61–89). 
Springer.
Fisher, I. (1896). Appreciation and interest: A study of the influence of monetary appreciation and 
depreciation on the rate of interest with applications to the bimetallic controversy and the theory 
of interest. American Economic Association., 11, 4.

543
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
Fratzscher, M. (2012). Capital flows, push versus pull factors and the global financial crisis. Journal of 
International Economics, 88(2), 341–356.
Gabauer, D. (2021). Dynamic measures of asymmetric & pairwise connectedness within an optimal cur-
rency area: Evidence from the ERM I system. Journal of Multinational Financial Management, 
60, 100680.
Genest, C., & Boies, J. C. (2003). Detecting dependence with Kendall plots. The American Statistician, 
57, 275–284.
Genest, C., & Rémillard, B. (2008). Validity of the parametric bootstrap for goodness-of-fit testing in 
semiparametric models. Annales De L’institut Henri Poincaré: Probabilités Et Statistiques, 44, 
1096–1127.
Genest, C., Ghoudi, K., & Rivest, L.-P. (1995). A semiparametric estimation procedure of dependence 
parameters in multivariate families of distributions. Biometrika, 82, 543–552.
Genest, C., Rémillard, B., & Beaudoin, D. (2009). Goodness-of-fit tests for copulas: A review and a 
power study. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 44, 199–213.
Giudici, P., & Abu-Hashish, I. (2019). What determines bitcoin exchange prices? A network VAR 
approach. Finance Research Letters, 28, 309–318.
Gronwald, M. (2015). the economics of Bitcoins: News, Supply vs Demand and Slumps. Discussion 
Paper in Economics, 15–17.
Guesmi, K., Saadi, S., Abid, I., & Ftiti, Z. (2019). Portfolio diversification with virtual currency: Evi-
dence from bitcoin. International Review of Financial Analysis, 63, 431–437.
Hamilton, J. D. (2003). What is an oil shock? Journal of Econometrics, 113, 363–398.
Hammoudeh, S., Dibooglu, S., & Aleisa, E. (2004). Relationships among US oil prices and oil industry 
equity indices. International Review of Economics and Finance, 13, 427–453.
Han, H., Linton, O., Oka, T., & Whang, Y. J. (2016). The cross-quantilogram: Measuring quantile 
dependence and testing directional predictability between time series. Journal of Econometrics, 
193, 251–270.
Harris, L. (1991). Stock price clustering and discreteness. Review of Financial Studies, 4, 389–415.
Hillier, D., Draper, P., & Faff, R. (2006). Do precious metals shine? An investment perspective. Finan-
cial Analysts Journal, 62(2), 98–106.
Hofert, M. (2018). Elements of Copula modeling with R. Springer.
Huang, R. D., Masulis, R. W., & Stoll, H. R. (1996). Energy shocks and financial markets. Journal of 
Futures Markets: Futures, Options, and Other Derivative Products, 16, 1–27.
Hudson, R. S., & Gregoriou, A. (2015). Calculating and comparing security returns is harder than you 
think: A comparison between logarithmic and simple returns. International Review of Financial 
Analysis, 38, 151–162.
Huhtinen, T. P. (2014). Bitcoin as a monetary system: Examining attention and attendance. Master The-
sis - Aalton University School of Business, P1, 110.
Huynh, T. L. D., Nguyen, S. P., & Duong, D. (2018). Contagion risk measured by return among crypto-
currencies. International econometric conference of Vietnam (pp. 987–998). Springer.
Huynh, T. L. D., Hille, E., & Nasir, M. A. (2020). Diversification in the age of the 4th industrial revolu-
tion. The role of artificial intelligence, green bonds and cryptocurrencies. Technological Forecast-
ing and Social Change, 159, 120188.
Huynh, T. L. D., Foglia, M., & Doukas, J. A. (2021). COVID-19 and tail-event driven network risk in 
the eurozone. Finance Research Letters. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​frl.​2021.​102070
Jakub, B. (2015). Does Bitcoin follow the hypothesis of efficient market? International Journal of Economic 
Sciences, 4, 10–23.
Jebran, K., & Iqbal, A. (2016). Dynamics of volatility spillover between stock market and foreign exchange 
market: Evidence from Asian Countries. Financial Innovation, 2, 3.
Jawadi, F., Louhichi, W., Ameur, H. B., & Ftiti, Z. (2019). Do jumps and co-jumps improve volatility fore-
casting of oil and currency markets? The Energy Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5547/​01956​574.​40.​SI2.​
fjaw
Jiang, Y., Nie, H., & Ruan, W. (2018). Time-varying long-term memory in Bitcoin market. Finance 
Research Letters, 25, 280–284.
Jin, X. (2018). Downside and upside risk spillovers from China to Asian stock markets: A CoVaR-copula 
approach. Finance Research Letters, 25, 202–212.
Jones, C. M., & Kaul, G. (1996). Oil and the stock markets. Journal of Finance, 51, 463–491.
Kang, W., Ratti, R. A., & Yoon, K. H. (2014). The impact of oil price shocks on US bond market returns. 
Energy Economics, 44, 248–258.
Katsiampa, P. (2017). Volatility estimation for Bitcoin: A comparison of GARCH models. Economics Let-
ters, 158, 3–6.

544
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
Kaul, A., & Sapp, S. (2006). Y2K fears and safe haven trading of the US dollar. Journal of International 
Money and Finance, 25(5), 760–779.
Khuntia, S., & Pattanayak, J. K. (2018). Adaptive market hypothesis and evolving predictability of bitcoin. 
Economics Letters, 167, 26–28.
Kojadinovic, I., & Yan, J. (2010). Comparison of three semiparametric methods for estimating dependence 
parameters in copula models. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 47, 52–63.
Koutmos, D. (2018). Bitcoin returns and transaction activity. Economics Letters, 167, 81–85.
Kristoufek, L. (2013). BitCoin meets Google Trends and Wikipedia: Quantifying the relationship between 
phenomena of the Internet era. Scientific Reports, 3, 3415.
Lanza, A., Manera, M., Grasso, M., & Giovannini, M. (2005). Long-run models of oil stock prices. Environ-
mental Modelling and Software, 20, 1423–1430.
Lee, K., & Ni, S. (2002). On the dynamic effects of oil price shocks: A study using industry level data. Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics, 49(4), 823–852.
Lei, L., Shang, Y., Chen, Y., & Wei, Y. (2019). Does the financial crisis change the economic risk perception 
of crude oil traders? A MIDAS quantile regression approach. Finance Research Letters, 30, 341–351.
Lin, F. L., Chen, Y. F., & Yang, S. Y. (2016). Does the value of US dollar matter with the price of oil 
and gold? A dynamic analysis from time–frequency space. International Review of Economics and 
Finance, 43, 59–71.
Lintilhac, P. S., & Tourin, A. (2017). Model-based pairs trading in the bitcoin markets. Quantitative 
Finance, 17, 703–716.
Linton, O., & Whang, Y. J. (2007). The quantilogram: With an application to evaluating directional predict-
ability. Journal of Econometrics, 141, 250–282.
Li, X., & Wei, Y. (2018). The dependence and risk spillover between crude oil market and China stock mar-
ket: New evidence from a variational mode decomposition-based copula method. Energy Economics, 
74, 565–581.
Liu, Z., Huynh, T. L. D., & Dai, P. F. (2021). The impact of COVID-19 on the stock market crash risk in 
China. Research in International Business and Finance, 57, 101419.
Maghyereh, A., & Al-Kandari, A. (2007). Oil prices and stock markets in GCC countries: New evidence 
from nonlinear cointegration analysis. Managerial Finance, 33, 449–460.
McNeil, A. J., Frey, R., & Embrechts, P. (2015). Quantitative Risk Management: Concepts. Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Mei, D., Liu, J., Ma, F., & Chen, W. (2017). Forecasting stock market volatility: Do realized skewness and 
kurtosis help? Physica a: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 481, 153–159.
Mensi, W., Al-Yahyaee, K. H., & Kang, S. H. (2019). Structural breaks and double long memory of cryp-
tocurrency prices: A comparative analysis from Bitcoin and Ethereum. Finance Research Letters, 29, 
222–230.
Montoro, C. (2012). Oil shocks and optimal monetary policy. Macroeconomic Dynamics, 16, 240–277.
Moore, W., & Stephen, J. (2016). Should cryptocurrencies be included in the portfolio of international 
reserves held by central banks? Cogent Economics and Finance, 4, 1147119.
Nadarajah, S., & Chu, J. (2017). On the inefficiency of Bitcoin. Economics Letters, 150, 6–9.
Nakamoto, S. and Bitcoin, A., 2008. A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Bitcoin.–URL: https://​bitco​in.​
org/​bitco​in.​pdf.
Narayan, P. K., & Narayan, S. (2010). Modelling the impact of oil prices on Vietnam’s stock prices. Applied 
Energy, 87, 356–361.
Nasir, M. A., Huynh, T. L. D., Nguyen, S. P., & Duong, D. (2019). Forecasting cryptocurrency returns 
and volume using search engines. Financial Innovation, 5, 2.
Natal, J. M. (2012). Monetary policy response to oil price shocks. Journal of Money, Credit and Bank-
ing, 44, 53–101.
Nazlioglu, S., Erdem, C., & Soytas, U. (2013). Volatility spillover between oil and agricultural commod-
ity markets. Energy Economics, 36, 658–665.
Nguyen, C. C., & Bhatti, M. I. (2012). Copula model dependency between oil prices and stock markets: 
Evidence from China and Vietnam. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and 
Money, 22, 758–773.
Nwala, K. (2007). An empirical investigation into the relation of oil to stock market prices. North Amer-
ican Journal of Finance and Banking Research, 1.
Pan, M. S., Fok, R. C. W., & Liu, Y. A. (2007). Dynamic linkages between exchange rates and stock 
prices: Evidence from East Asian markets. International Review of Economics and Finance, 16, 
503–520.
Panagiotidis, T., Stengos, T., & Vravosinos, O. (2018). On the determinants of bitcoin returns: A LASSO 
approach. Finance Research Letters, 27, 235–240.

545
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546 
1 3
Papapetrou, E. (2001). Oil price shocks, stock market, economic activity and employment in Greece. 
Energy Economics, 23, 511–532.
Park, J., & Ratti, R. A. (2008). Oil price shocks and stock markets in the US and 13 European countries. 
Energy Economics, 30, 2587–2608.
Patton, A., Politis, D. N., & White, H. (2009). Correction to Automatic block-length selection for the 
dependent bootstrap. Econometric Reviews, 28, 372–375.
Pham, L., & Huynh, T. L. D. (2020). How does investor attention influence the green bond market? 
Finance Research Letters, 35, 101533.
Phillips, P. C., & Perron, P. (1988). Testing for a unit root in time series regression. Biometrika, 75, 335–346.
Politis, D. N., & Romano, J. P. (1994a). The stationary bootstrap. Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 89, 1303–1313.
Politis, D. N., & White, H. (2004). Automatic block-length selection for the dependent bootstrap. Econo-
metric Reviews, 23, 53–70.
Politis, D. N., & Romano, J. P. (1994b). The stationary bootstrap. Journal of the American Statistical 
Association., 89, 1303–1313.
Ruan, Q., Jiang, W., & Ma, G. (2016). Cross-correlations between price and volume in Chinese gold 
markets. Physica a: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 451, 10–22.
Sadorsky, P. (1999). Oil price shocks and stock market activity. Energy Economics, 21, 449–469.
Sadorsky, P. (2001). Risk factors in stock returns of Canadian oil and gas companies. Energy Economics, 
23, 17–28.
Sapuric, S., & Kokkinaki, A. (2014). Bitcoin is volatile! Isn’t that right? International conference on 
business information systems (pp. 255–265). Springer.
Sarwar, S., Shahbaz, M., Anwar, A., & Tiwari, A. K. (2019). The importance of oil assets for portfolio 
optimization: The analysis of firm level stocks. Energy Economics, 78, 217–234.
Selmi, R., Mensi, W., Hammoudeh, S., & Bouoiyour, J. (2018). Is Bitcoin a hedge, a safe haven or a 
diversifier for oil price movements? A comparison with gold. Energy Economics, 74, 787–801.
Sensoy, A. (2019). The inefficiency of Bitcoin revisited: A high-frequency analysis with alternative cur-
rencies. Finance Research Letters, 28, 68–73.
Schwab, K. (2016). The Fourth Industrial Revolution: what it means, how to respond. Retrieved 11 25, 
2017, from World Economic Forum: https://​www.​wefor​um.​org/​agenda/​2016/​01/​the-​fourt​hindu​
strial-​revol​ution-​what-​it-​means-​and-​how-​to-​respo​nd/
Shapiro, M. D., & Watson, M. W. (1988). Sources of business cycle fluctuations. NBER Macroeconom-
ics Annual, 3, 111–148.
Sherman, E. J. (1986). Gold investment: Theory and application. Prentice Hall.
Smyth, R., & Narayan, P. K. (2018). What do we know about oil prices and stock returns? International 
Review of Financial Analysis, 57, 148–156.
Su, C. W., Li, Z. Z., Tao, R., & Si, D. K. (2018). Testing for multiple bubbles in bitcoin markets: A gen-
eralized sup ADF test. Japan and the World Economy, 46, 56–63.
Symitsi, E., & Chalvatzis, K. J. (2019). The economic value of Bitcoin: A portfolio analysis of curren-
cies, gold, oil and stocks. Research in International Business and Finance, 48, 97–110.
Takaishi, T. (2018). Statistical properties and multifractality of Bitcoin. Physica a: Statistical Mechanics 
and Its Applications, 506, 507–519.
Tang, K. and Xiong, W., (2010). Index investing and the financialization of commodities. NBER Working 
Paper, 16385.
Thies, S., & Molnár, P. (2018). Bayesian change point analysis of Bitcoin returns. Finance Research Letters, 
27, 223–227.
Tsukahara, H. (2005). Semiparametric estimation in copula models. The Canadian Journal of Statistics, 33, 
357–375.
Ullah, S., Akhtar, P., & Zaefarian, G. (2018). Dealing with endogeneity bias: The generalized method of 
moments (GMM) for panel data. Industrial Marketing Management, 71, 69–78.
Ullah, S., Zaefarian, G. and Ullah, F., (2020). How to use instrumental variables in addressing endogeneity? 
A step-by-step procedure for non-specialists. Industrial Marketing Management, Editorial.
Upper, C., (2000). How Safe was the ’Safe Haven’? Financial Market Liquidity during the 1998 Turbu-
lences. Deutsche Bundesbank Working Paper, 1/00, 49.
Urquhart, A. (2016). The inefficiency of Bitcoin. Economics Letters, 148, 80–82.
Urquhart, A. (2017). Price clustering in Bitcoin. Economics Letters, 159, 145–148.
Urquhart, A. (2018). What causes the attention of Bitcoin? Economics Letters, 166, 40–44.
Van Wijk, D. (2013). What can be expected from the BitCoin. Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam.
Vidal-Tomás, D., & Ibañez, A. (2018). Semi-strong efficiency of Bitcoin. Finance Research Letters, 27, 
259–265.

546
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 334:521–546
1 3
Wan, W. P. (2005). Country resource environments, firm capabilities, and corporate diversification strate-
gies. Journal of Management Studies, 42, 161–182.
Wang, J., Xue, Y., and Liu, M. (2016). An analysis of bitcoin price based on VEC model. In 2016 Interna-
tional Conference on Economics and Management Innovations. Atlantis Press.
Wei, Y., Liu, J., Lai, X., & Hu, Y. (2017). Which determinant is the most informative in forecasting crude 
oil market volatility: Fundamental, speculation, or uncertainty? Energy Economics, 68, 141–150.
Wei, Y., Yu, Q., Liu, J., & Cao, Y. (2018). Hot money and China’s stock market volatility: Further evi-
dence using the GARCH–MIDAS model. Physica a: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 492, 
923–930.
Xu, J., & Brin, L. (2016). The benefit of using random matrix theory to fit high-dimensional t-copulas. Jour-
nal of Operational Risk, 11, 1–21.
Yelowitz, A., & Wilson, M. (2015). Characteristics of Bitcoin users: An analysis of Google search data. 
Applied Economics Letters, 22, 1030–1036.
Yuneline, M. H. (2019). Analysis of cryptocurrency’s characteristics in four perspectives. Journal of Asian 
Business and Economic Studies, 26(2), 206–219.
Zeng, T., Yang, M., & Shen, Y. (2020). Fancy Bitcoin and conventional financial assets: Measuring market 
integration based on connectedness networks. Economic Modelling, 90, 209–220.
Zhang, Y., & Wang, J. (2019). Linkage influence of energy market on financial market by multiscale com-
plexity synchronization. Physica a: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 516, 254–266.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Toan Luu Duc Huynh1,2,3 · Rizwan Ahmed4 · Muhammad Ali Nasir1,5   · 
Muhammad Shahbaz6,7,8 · Ngoc Quang Anh Huynh1
 
Toan Luu Duc Huynh 
 
toanhld@ueh.edu.vn
 
Rizwan Ahmed 
 
r.ahmed.6@bham.ac.uk
 
Muhammad Shahbaz 
 
muhdshahbaz77@gmail.com
 
Ngoc Quang Anh Huynh 
 
anhhnq@ueh.edu.vn
1 
School of Banking, University of Economics Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
2 
Chair of Behavioral Finance, WHU – Otto Beisheim School of Management, Vallendar, Germany
3 
IPAG Business School, Paris, France
4 
Department of Finance, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
5 
Huddersfield Business School, University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield, UK
6 
School of Management and Economics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
7 
Institute of Business Research, University of Economics Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City, 
Viet Nam
8 
Department of Land Economy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK