TITLE: Broker network connectivity and the cross-section of expected returns
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07082-4
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07082-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Broker network connectivity and the cross-section of
expected returns
Murat Tiniç1,5
· Ahmet ¸Sensoy2
· Muge Demir3 · Duc Khuong Nguyen4,6
Received: 22 July 2022 / Accepted: 22 January 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
We examine the systematic impact of broker network connectivity on future returns in
an order-driven market. For all stocks traded in Borsa Istanbul between March 2005 and
November 2015, we estimate network density, reciprocity, and average weighted clustering
coefﬁcients as proxies for the broker network connectivity. Our results indicate a negative
and signiﬁcant predictive relationship between connectivity and one-month ahead returns.
Stocks in the lowest connectivity quintile earn 1.2% - 1.8% monthly return premiums. We
further identify an economic mechanism as to why investors demand a premium for holding
stocks with sparse broker networks through intraday panel regressions. Our results suggest
that broker connectivity is associated with lower adverse selection risks, even for order-driven
markets where intermediaries are assumed to be passive agents.
Keywords Limit order book · Trading networks · Broker networks · Network connectivity ·
Pricing factors
JEL Classiﬁcation G11 · G12 · G14 · G24
1 Introduction
In asset pricing theory, a stock’s expected return is determined by its exposure to a number
of common risk factors (Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1965b,a; Ross, 1976). Empirically, funda-
mental factors such as ﬁrm size, book-to-market ratio, and price momentum drive individual
M. Demir: Any views expressed herein reﬂect the current views of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the European Investment Fund or the European Investment Bank Group.
B Murat Tiniç
mtinic@metu.edu.tr
1
School of Business and Economics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2
Faculty of Business Administration, Ihsan Dogramaci Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey
3
European Investment Fund, Luxembourg, Luxembourg
4
De Vinci Research Center, De Vinci Higher Education, Paris, France
5
Department of Business Administration, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
6
Faculty of Finance and Accounting, Prague University of Economics and Business, Prague, Czech
Republic
123

Annals of Operations Research
stock returns (Carhart, 1997; Fama & French, 1993). The effects of investor connectedness
through trading relationships on asset prices remain unclear. From a theoretical point of view,
Ozsoylev and Walden (2011) show that connectivity can impact asset prices in an informa-
tion network composed of traders because it plays a role in the ﬂow of information through
ﬁnancial markets. Moreover, an increase in an agent’s connectivity increases its proﬁts when
the overall connectedness of the investor network is held constant. In contrast, an increase
in the overall network connectedness is found to lower agents’ proﬁt as information dis-
seminates through time when that agent’s connectivity is held constant.1 These theoretical
ﬁndings imply that higher connectivity of the overall trading network could yield lower
proﬁts as more information is compounded into prices, eventually diminishing everyone’s
informational rent.
In this paper, we investigate the relationship between broker network connectivity and the
cross-section of expected returns in an order-driven market by using a unique dataset from
Borsa Istanbul (BIST), where both counterparties are identiﬁed at the brokerage house level
for each trade. We ﬁrst construct a network for each stock where the network nodes repre-
sent brokers, and directed links between these nodes represent the trade ﬂow among them.
Each link is associated with a weight deﬁned by the normalized cash ﬂow of the trade. The
connectivity of each network is captured by network density (a proxy for global connectiv-
ity), weighted clustering coefﬁcient (a proxy for local connectivity), and network reciprocity
measures. We then analyze the systematic relationship between network connectivity mea-
sures and monthly stock returns to examine whether investors in BIST demand a premium
for holding stocks with sparse broker networks.2
Accordingly, we start with a long-short portfolio analysis to see whether a strategy based
on network connectivity can provide investors in BIST with a positive and signiﬁcant return.
Using single and double-sorted quintile portfolios, we show that stocks in the lowest connec-
tivity quintile can earn 1.2% to 1.8% monthly return premiums. To strengthen our hypothesis,
we further run ﬁrm-level cross-sectional regression and factor tests and document a neg-
ative and statistically signiﬁcant relationship between broker network connectedness and
one-month-ahead stock returns. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁndings indicate that transitioning from
the lowest to the highest connectivity quintile is, on average, associated with a reduction
in expected returns of up to 2%. The statistical signiﬁcance of the predictive relationship
between network connectivity and future returns remains even after controlling for common
pricing factors such as market risk, ﬁrm size, book-to-market ratio, illiquidity, momentum,
return reversal, idiosyncratic volatility, and lottery stock characteristics. Our results suggest
that the connectivity discount is more evident for small ﬁrms.
In examining the systematic impact of broker network connectivity in BIST, we pay extra
attention to its relationship between overall trading volume. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst document
that the pairwise correlation between our connectivity measures and overall trading volume is,
on average, 85%. Next, in a multivariate portfolio setting, we show that the systematic impact
of broker network connectivity on future returns is only evident for network reciprocity after
controlling for the variation in overall trading volume. Similarly, the predictive relationship
between network connectivity and future returns disappears after controlling for the variation
in trading volume, potentially due to multicollinearity.
1 In a related study, Billio et al. (2017) show that network connectivity represents a factor for systematic
exposure to common pricing factors, and residuals of traditional linear factor models exhibit serial-correlation
and heteroskedasticity whenever network exposures are omitted from the model.
2 The importance of brokerage houses in information dissemination is emphasized by Di Maggio et al. (2019)
who show that brokers indeed play a crucial role in shaping information dissemination in stock markets.
123

Annals of Operations Research
These ﬁndings align with the current debate in the market microstructure literature. BIST
is an order-driven market where prices match electronically based on price and time priority
(Aktas & Kryzanowski, 2014). There are no designated or voluntary market makers in BIST
for the sample period that we study. In order-driven markets, market intermediaries (brokers)
are assumed to be passive agents whose only responsibility is to transmit clients’ orders to
the exchange (Harris, 2003). A direct implication of this assumption may be that any broker
network structure in these types of markets is formed completely at random, and these
networks merely document overall turnover.3 Therefore, there is a conﬂict in order-driven
markets between the information hypothesis, which suggests that dense broker networks
serve as an effective conduit of information diffusion, and the liquidity hypothesis, which
indicates that broker networks are just complex proxies for the overall trading volume. To
identify the economic channel vis-à-vis these competing hypotheses, we examine the intraday
(60-minute) predictive relationship between broker network connectivity, transaction costs,
market quality, and intraday returns.
First, we note that the pairwise correlations between network connectivity proxies and
overall trading volume at intraday frequency are lower than those in monthly frequency,
albeit still positive and signiﬁcant (on average around 50%). Nonetheless, we can compare
and contrast information and liquidity hypotheses in terms of the systematic impact of broker
network connectivity. The results of our intraday panel regressions support the information
hypothesis. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst document that an increase in broker network connectivity
is associated with a signiﬁcant reduction in the adverse selection component of the spread,
whichproxiespermanentpricechangeandinformedtrading.Weﬁndnosigniﬁcantunivariate
relationship between broker network connectivity and the transitory component of the spread,
which proxies temporary price changes and liquidity trading.
Next, unlike the expectations of the liquidity hypothesis, we show that an increase in broker
network connectivity is associated with a decrease in overall liquidity even after controlling
for the variation in overall trading volume. These ﬁndings support the information hypothesis,
align with the theoretical expectations of Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1988) and recent empirical
ﬁndings (Ibikunle 2018; Rzayev and Ibikunle 2019), which show that the participation of
informed traders moves in tandem with the overall liquidity in the market.
We then provide additional support for the information hypothesis by documenting that
increased broker network connectivity is associated with lower future return volatility. Our
results suggest that dense broker networks in BIST are associated with a more stabilized
price process and lower return volatility, even after controlling for overall trading volume.
Finally, we document a negative and signiﬁcant predictive relationship between broker
network connectivity and intraday returns, even after controlling for the variation in overall
trading volume. These ﬁndings align with the theoretical expectations of Easley and O’Hara
(2004), who argue that uninformed investors demand a premium for holding stocks with
high levels of information asymmetry. To the extent that a dense broker network connectivity
proxies better information diffusion and lower levels of information asymmetry, the informa-
tion hypothesis predicts lower future returns for dense broker networks. Our results suggest
that investors demand a premium for holding stocks with sparse broker networks, even in
order-driven markets where brokers are assumed to be passive agents. We further establish
a potential economic channel for connectivity discount via intraday panel regressions by
documenting that broker connections may facilitate an efﬁcient ﬂow of information. The
3 This argument is different than the setting presented in Han et al. (2024), which particularly examine
off-exchange block trading by broker-dealers and document that central brokers provide superior liquidity
provision. We examine a fully electronic order-driven market with no market making.
123

Annals of Operations Research
speciﬁc broker links for a particular stock may increase transparency and reduce investment
risk associated with information asymmetry.
In sum, our study brings three major contributions to the related literature. First, it extends
past studies on the relationship between investor/broker ﬁrm centrality and future stock
returns by considering, in the same framework, the impact of the overall connectivity of
these networks on future returns, as theoretically discussed by Ozsoylev and Walden (2011).
In particular, if the connectivity of broker networks improves information ﬂow for a spe-
ciﬁc stock, this would decrease the risk involved in investing in this stock due to reduced
information asymmetry.
Second, our results can provide strategies capable of predicting future returns since the
real-time counterparty information for stocks traded in BIST can be purchased from data
vendors.4 This is more advantageous compared to the studies in the existing literature that use
proprietaryinvestor-leveldatabecause,despitetheusefulnessinimprovingourunderstanding
of investor interactions in secondary markets, the results have no practical use by equity
traders due to the lack of ex-ante data availability.
Finally, we combine the asset pricing literature with network analysis by differentiating
the global and local connectivity of agents in the network via alternative measures. Studies in
other ﬁelds, such as physics and neuroscience, suggest that local clusters may have different
topological properties from those at the global network level (Guimera & Nunes Amaral,
2005; Jie et al., 2014; Ravasz et al., 2002). This difference can affect the dynamics of various
network aspects (Chen et al., 2015). Our analysis allows us to examine whether a similar
phenomenon exists in the case of empirical investor networks. In particular, we investigate
whether the expected returns in the cross-section are affected differently concerning the local
vs. global connectivity of brokerage houses.
As more and more exchanges adopt fully order-driven or hybrid market structures (Rosu
et al., 2010), especially in developed economies, one may expect that the role of market
intermediaries in the price discovery process will be substantially decreased in the future.
However, our results suggest that the trading relationships between brokers in the form of
network connectivity can systematically inﬂuence the cross-section of expected return by
reducing information asymmetry.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a brief literature
review. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 explains how we measure the connectedness
of the brokerage house networks. Section 5 states the hypotheses and presents monthly and
intraday models used in our empirical analyses. The results are presented in Section 6. Section
7 concludes.
2 Literature Review
To date, modeling complex relationships across ﬁnancial markets or investors as a network
has gained considerable attention in ﬁnance and economics literature. Network theories have
been recently applied to the analysis of contagion effects, systematic risk, and interbank risk
exposures (Allen and Gale, 2000; Nier et al., 2007; Battiston et al., 2012; Drehmann and
Tarashev, 2013; Minoiu and Reyes, 2013; Craig and von Peter, 2014; Eboli, 2019; Diem
and Pichler, 2020; Linardi et al., 2020; Grilli et al., 2020) as well as asset linkages across
industries and sectors on the grounds of contagion risk (Ahern, 2013; Billio et al., 2012;
4 See https://www.borsaistanbul.com/en/sayfa/2727/market-data-products for details
123

Annals of Operations Research
Diebold & Yilmaz, 2008; Leitner, 2005).5 However, due to limited data availability, only a
few studies have been able to empirically examine the relationship between investors in the
market through their trading activities or professional/personal ties and how these relation-
ships are reﬂected in their trading success. Concerning professional/personal associations,
Larcker et al. (2013) show that ﬁrms with central boards of directors earn superior risk-
adjusted stock returns and that a long-short position in the most-least central ﬁrms earns
average annual returns of 4.68%. Ahern (2013) provides a comprehensive analysis of the
social relationships that underlie illegal insider trading networks and ﬁnds that insiders
earn prodigious returns of 35% over 21 days, with more central insiders earning greater
returns. Rossi et al. (2018) show a positive relationship between network centrality and
risk-adjusted performance in a delegated investment setting. Speciﬁcally, more connected
managers take more portfolio risk and receive higher investor ﬂows, consistent with the idea
that these managers improve their ability to exploit investment opportunities through their
network connections. Egginton and McCumber (2019) examine the relationship between
stock market liquidity and the network centrality of ﬁrm executives and show that ﬁrms
whose executive ofﬁcers are more central in the network of executives have higher stock
liquidity.
The literature on empirical investor networks constructed via investors’ trading activities
is similarly scarce and contains only a few studies. For example, Pareek (2012) builds on an
information network of U.S. mutual funds where two funds are connected in this network if
they both take a prominent position in the same stock. Using network density to measure the
speed of information diffusion in this network, the author ﬁnds that stocks with a lower net-
work density demonstrate stronger return momentum over medium horizons. Pareek (2012)
indicates that the return momentum is due to the delayed response to market-wide informa-
tion, consistent with the gradual information diffusion model of Hong and Stein (1999). In a
similar network construction framework, Ozsoylev et al. (2014) study the trading behavior
of all investors in Borsa Istanbul for the year 2005 and ﬁnd that central investors earn higher
returns and trade earlier than peripheral investors around information events, which is con-
sistent with the theory of information networks. Cohen-Cole et al. (2014) construct investor
networks for the Dow and S&P 500 e-mini futures markets in which the links are established
between the counter-parties of a trade. They show that high returns are associated with high
degrees of centrality, irrespective of network complexity. Using account-level data for all
traders in the Helsinki Stock Exchange between 1998 and 2003, Walden (2019) shows that
more central agents make higher proﬁts at the investor level. On the other hand, network
topology affects the dynamics of market volatility and trading volume at the aggregate level.
Bajo et al. (2020) document that block-holdings from central institutional investors enhance
ﬁrm value more than other investors.
For decentralized trade networks of over-the-counter (OTC) municipal bond markets,
Li and Schürhoff (2019) uncover that investors face a trade-off between transaction costs
and execution speed whereby central traders provide immediacy in trade execution at the
expense of double round-trip markups. In a similar market structure for OTC Euro to Swiss
Franc spot rate, Hagströmer and Menkveld (2019) document that the price quote innovations
of central dealers to an information shock are quicker. Hence, they conclude that central
dealers are more informed. Finally, they underline that dealer connections get weaker after
the information becomes public, reducing the speed at which it is disseminated.
Chuang (2016) construct a network to model the connectivity across brokerage ﬁrms and
examine the effect of information diffusion among investors on stock returns. For the sample
5 For a review of different applications of network analysis in ﬁnance, see (Allen and Babus2009).
123

Annals of Operations Research
of 95 brokerage ﬁrms and 1330 different stocks traded in the Taiwan Stock Exchange from
2004 to 2011, the author ﬁnds that the centrality of brokerage ﬁrms has a strong explanatory
power over stock returns even after controlling for the Fama-French pricing factors and other
stock characteristics. Di Maggio et al. (2019) investigate whether the network of relation-
ships between brokers and investors6 affects the returns and whether brokers have any role
in inﬂuencing how information is incorporated into prices. The authors ﬁnd that the network
of relationships between brokers and institutional investors shapes the information diffusion
in the stock market, where the prices are public information (not an OTC market). Further-
more, the authors document that the trades placed through more central brokers generate
signiﬁcantly higher abnormal returns.
Operations research techniques are heavily employed to resolve ﬁnance problems (Board
et al., 2003). A growing branch of operations research literature examines ﬁnancial networks,
mostly in the context of interdependence between banks and/or ﬁrms. For example, Elliott
et al. (2014) develop a model for contagions and cascades of failures between organizations
linked through a network of ﬁnancialinterdependencies. Chen etal. (2021) propose a dynamic
model to study the systemic risk of banking networks and the dynamics of bank defaults.
Amini et al. (2016) study the resilience to contagion in ﬁnancial networks by driving an
analyticalexpressionfortheasymptoticfractionofdefaultsregardingnetworkcharacteristics.
Amini and Minca (2016) provide a framework for testing the possibility of large cascades in
banking networks.
Another growing branch investigates trade networks. Nguyen et al. (2016) speciﬁcally,
study delays in decentralized trade networks where intermediaries between producers and
consumers facilitate the trade. In terms of equity trading, Sun et al. (2014) highlight the power
of trade relationships proxied with a trade network in predicting future prices. Adamic et al.
(2017) highlight the role of trade networks in modeling information asymmetry in E-mini
S&P 500 stock index futures. Our study also contributes to this literature by emphasizing the
importance of broker networks in order-driven settings.
2.1 Institutional background for Borsa Istanbul
At the micro level, brokers in BIST have, albeit partial, unique access to the information in
the order ﬂow. Moreover, the Turkish Capital Market Law does not prohibit brokers from
using order-ﬂow information as long as they offer better prices than the standing orders in
the limit order book (Kankoç Aydın, 2019).7 Therefore, brokerage houses in BIST are in
a unique state where they can actively monitor the market conditions and contribute to the
price discovery process either through their proprietary trades (Anand & Subrahmanyam,
2008) or by transmitting privileged information to their customers (McNally et al., 2017). At
the macro level, most orders in BIST are submitted by brokers who are part of large business
groups with retail and investment banking operations in Turkey. Brokers that are a part of
large conglomerates can have a superior ability to transmit information to ﬁnancial markets
(Fecht et al., 2018), especially around corporate events.8 Accordingly, different brokerage
6 Golez et al. (2024) uses brokers as a source of connection between mutual funds and ﬁnancial groups.
7 Several studies emphasize the importance of strict regulations for brokerage activity, especially for emerging
markets including BIST (˙Imi¸siker et al., 2015; Khwaja & Mian, 2005).
8 There is a large literature on information leakages around corporate events in emerging economies. See
Hekimo˘glu and Tanyeri (2011), Arslan and Simsir (2016), and Simsir and Simsek (2022) on the information
leakages around corporate events in BIST.
123

Annals of Operations Research
houses may represent different clientele, and the trading relationships among these brokers
may not be at random, even in a fully order-driven market.
For instance, previous studies document heterogeneities across the contributions of bro-
kerage houses to the price discovery process in BIST. Speciﬁcally, Tiniç and Savaser (2020)
show that the clients of brokerage houses in BIST are at an informational disadvantage com-
pared to domestic brokerage houses. The informational disadvantage of foreign brokerage
houses is partially alleviated, and foreigners can exert signiﬁcant price impact during times
of political turmoil, where domestic investors are involved in ﬁre sales due to the potential
funding constraints generated by the depreciation of local currency. To that end, Tiniç and
Savaser (2020) underline that the foreign brokerage houses in BIST strategically increase
their activity in the limit order book during times of political uncertainty.
Broker behavior in BIST can also shape future investment behavior. Speciﬁcally, unlike
many markets, BIST discloses the identity of brokerage houses on both the bid and ask sides
of the limit order book in real-time as part of their pre-trade transparency rules after 2015.
Investors can observe the limit order book and base their investment decisions on who is on
the other side of the trade by examining only the brokerage houses. In turn, a lack of diversity
of brokers in standing orders may signal the presence of potential informed order ﬂow.
Building on these arguments, if broker networks promote efﬁcient information ﬂow, then
stronger connections among brokers trading a given stock may mitigate adverse selection
risks stemming from information asymmetry (Alós-Ferrer & Weidenholzer, 2008; Ozsoylev
& Walden, 2011; Ozsoylev et al., 2014). Accordingly, we hypothesize that greater trading
connectivity among brokers is associated with faster information diffusion. As private infor-
mation becomes public more rapidly, adverse selection risks are reduced, and corresponding
expected returns decline (Easley & O’Hara, 2004).
3 Data
We obtain trade and quote data for all stocks traded in Borsa Istanbul (BIST) between March
2005 and November 2015 from BIST Datastore. Each entry in our quote data contains
information about the date, time, ticker, order ID, order type, order quantity, and price for
all company stocks. In addition, each entry has a ﬂag for the intermediary ID that provides
information about the brokerage house that sent the order to the exchange.9 The order type
shows whether the order is a buy or a sell order. This enables us to objectively track the order
arrival process for each stock.
The trade data contains every single trade that took place for all stocks in BIST. Each trade
includes information on the date, time, ticker, quantity, and price. Moreover, each trade entry
contains the order ID for the orders on the buy and the sell side of a given trade. For each
side of the trade, we match the intermediaries who sent the order to the exchange through
the order ID.
Our dataset enables us to form a directed and weighted network of brokerage houses for
every stock traded in BIST. In our setup, for a given stock, brokerage houses represent the
nodes; a realized trade between the brokerage houses represents the link across these nodes;
and the size (in terms of normalized traded value) of the buy and sell activities across the
brokerage houses represents the weights. Finally, the direction in this network is deﬁned as
9 Orders can be submitted from retail or institutional clients of brokers. However, we cannot separate orders
with respect to client type. There are no differences between investors in our sample in terms of latency since
high-frequency traders joined BIST after November 2015 through co-location services, which became possible
with the upgrade to NASDAQ’s Genium INET trading engine.
123

Annals of Operations Research
the direction of the cash ﬂow (due to trading) from one broker to another, that is, the link is
directed from the buyer of the stock to the seller. Eventually, in any calendar month and for
each stock in the market, we construct a weighted and directed network as described above.
Further details regarding the broker networks are provided in Section 4.
3.1 Monthly firm-specific measures
We obtain ﬁrm-speciﬁc price levels, accounting variables, and benchmark index levels
(BIST100) from the Bloomberg Terminal. All monthly variables are denominated in the
local currency, Turkish Lira (TL). We calculate the following variables for each stock at the
end of each month.
• Size (SI Z E) for a given month is the natural logarithm of the ﬁrm’s market value: the
end-of-month price times the number of shares outstanding.
• Book-to-market ratio (BT M) for a ﬁrm is the ratio of its end-of-month total equity value
to its market value.
• Beta (BET A) is the market risk of a given stock i in month m and is obtained from the
market model given below;
Ri,d = αi,m + βi,m Rmkt
d
+ εi,d. d = 1, . . . , Dm.
(1)
where Dm is the number of trading days in month m. Ri,d and Rmkt
d
are the daily loga-
rithmic returns on the stock i and the BIST100 index on a given day d, respectively. We
estimate equation (1) for each stock using the daily returns within each month.
• Total volume (T V ) for a given month is the TL-denominated total trading volume for
that stock in a given month. We denote the logarithmic transformation of T V as V OL.
• Illiquidity (I LLI Q) is a measure of the price impact of trades. For each month m, it
is estimated as the sample average of the ratio of absolute daily stock return to its total
trading volume (Amihud, 2002), such as
I LLI Qi,m =
1
Dm
Dm

d=1
|Ri,d|
T Vi,d
∗1000.
(2)
where T Vi,d is the TL-denominated trading volume for stock i on day d.
• Idiosyncratic volatility (I V OL) measures the non-systematic risk of a stock obtained by
the standard deviation of the daily residuals, ei,d, from the model presented in equation
(1). That is,
I V OLi,m =

var(ei,d).
(3)
• Reversal (REV ) for each stock in each month is the return on the stock over the previous
month (Jegadeesh, 1990).
• Momentum (MOM) for each stock i in each month m is the cumulative percentage
return over the last six months. That is,
MOMi,m = Pi,m−1 −Pi,m−7
Pi,m−7
.
(4)
where Pi,m the price of stock i at the end of month m.
• Max factor (M AX) is deﬁned as the maximum daily return of stock i within a given
month m (Bali et al., 2011), that is,
123

Annals of Operations Research
M AXi,m = max(Ri,d). d = 1, . . . , Dm.
(5)
Table 1 provides the descriptive statistics on the monthly ﬁrm-speciﬁc variables along with
pairwise correlations. One key observation is the positive and statistically signiﬁcant correla-
tion between trading volume (V OL) and all three network connectivity measures, suggesting
that broker connectivity tends to increase with the intensity of trading activity. This is intu-
itive in an order-driven market like BIST, where more frequently traded stocks are likely to
involve a broader and more active set of brokers. Additionally, ﬁrm size (SI Z E) also exhibits
a positive correlation with connectivity, indicating that larger ﬁrms—presumably more liquid
and widely held—tend to be traded across more interconnected broker networks. Conversely,
network measures are negatively correlated with illiquidity (I LLI Q). The inverse relation-
ship with I LLI Q suggests that stocks embedded in denser or more reciprocated broker
networks tend to be more liquid, as expected.
3.2 Intraday firm-specific measures
To examine a potential mechanism behind the systematic impact of broker network mea-
sures on equity returns, we compute ﬁrm-speciﬁc characteristics for volatility, liquidity, and
transaction costs at 60-minute intraday intervals for all stocks traded in BIST between March
2005 and November 2015.
• Return (RETU RN) for each stock i in time interval t is calculated as the logarithmic
return log(Pi,t/Pi,t−1) where Pi,t is the last price of ﬁrm i in time interval t.
• Volatility (SDRET ) for each stock i in time interval t is the standard deviation of trade-
by-trade returns for the given ﬁrm in that particular time interval.
• We take volume (V OL) for each stock i in time interval t as the natural logarithm of the
TL-denominated trading volume.
• We also compute the intraday Amihud illiquidity measure (I LLI Q) for ﬁrm i in time
interval t, similar to equation (2).
• We compute trade (buy-sell) imbalance (BSI) for ﬁrm i in time interval t as the absolute
difference between buyer- and seller-initiated trades, that is,
BSIi,t = |Bi,t −Si,t|.
(6)
where Bi,t (Si,t) corresponds to the total number of buyer-initiated (seller-initiated)
trades.
Finally, to understand whether the systematic impact of broker networks on the cross-
section of equity returns in BIST is due to information asymmetry or simply due to liquidity
reasons, we examine the intraday variation in transaction costs. In particular, we make use
of the seminal Glosten and Harris (1988) framework to decompose the total spread into
two different components: an adverse selection component (ASC) related to information
asymmetry and permanent price change, and a transitory component (TC) associated with
the order processing costs and temporary price change.
We denote mt as the true value of a stock conditional on the information available at time
t. In line with the Glosten and Harris (1988) framework, we let the true value change with
the information coming to the market with the new trade as follows:
mt = mt−1 + Zt + Qt + εt.
(7)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Descriptive Statistics: ﬁrm-speciﬁc measures at monthly frequency. In this table, we present the descriptive statistics for ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors that are calculated for all
stocks that are traded in BIST between March 2005 - November 2015.
ND
WCC
RCP
RETURN
BETA
SIZE
BTM
MOM
REV
ILLIQ
IVOL
MAX
VOL
Panel A: Descriptive Statistics
Obervations
40,418
40,418
40,418
40,043
40,407
40,418
40,418
37,751
39,645
40,412
40,407
40,412
40,418
Mean
0.19
0.56
0.69
0.003
0.62
18.93
1.09
0.10
0.003
0.007
0.022
0.057
16.85
St.Dev.
0.11
0.16
0.11
0.15
0.54
1.95
1.01
0.48
0.15
0.19
0.01
0.04
1.94
Minimum
0.00
0.00
0.00
-2.90
-11.84
13.82
0.00
-0.93
-2.90
0.00
0.00
-0.21
5.47
Maximum
0.70
0.97
0.94
2.29
15.82
24.50
26.30
20.30
2.29
15.39
0.39
1.78
23.82
Panel B: Pairwise Correlations
ND
1
WCC
0.926*
1
RCP
0.754*
0.791*
1
RETURN
0.115*
0.125*
0.094*
1
BETA
0.315*
0.311*
0.249*
-0.133*
1
SIZE
0.537*
0.525*
0.237*
0.061*
0.164*
1
BTM
-0.120*
-0.138*
-0.136*
-0.089*
0.012*
-0.251*
1
MOM
0.125*
0.140*
0.096*
-0.015*
-0.008
0.098*
-0.181*
1
REV
0.078*
0.090*
0.062*
0.034*
-0.048*
0.065*
-0.098*
0.378*
1
ILLIQ
-0.054*
-0.098*
-0.123*
-0.002
-0.031*
-0.053*
0.011*
-0.009
-0.002
1
IVOL
0.131*
0.117*
0.203*
0.145*
0.039*
-0.224*
0.001
0.137*
0.070*
0.027*
1
MAX
0.196*
0.188*
0.255*
0.329*
0.140*
-0.138*
-0.022*
0.071*
0.008
0.006
0.828*
1
VOL
0.911*
0.933*
0.727*
0.125*
0.286*
0.649*
-0.172*
0.171*
0.118*
-0.106*
0.035*
0.108*
1
RETURN represents the monthly log returns. BETA is the systematic risk factor. SIZE is the logarithm of the end-of-month market capitalization. BTM is the book-to-market
ratio. MOM is the momentum variable. ILLIQ is the Amihud illiquidity measure. MAX is the maximum daily return within a month. IVOL is the idiosyncratic volatility. REV
is the return reversal measured by one-month lag return. VOL is the logarithm of the total trading volume. ND is the network density, which is also our global connectivity
measure. WCC is the average weighted clustering coefﬁcient, our average local connectivity measure. RCP denotes the network reciprocity. In Panel A, we present the number
of observations, mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum values for each variable in our sample. In Panel B, we present the pairwise correlations. * indicates statistical
signiﬁcance at least at 5%
123

Annals of Operations Research
where Qt = 1 (Qt = −1) if the trade is buyer-initiated (seller-initiated). To that end, Zt
is labelled as the adverse selection component of the spread as it permanently changes the
true value of the underlying stock.
Traders cannot observe the true value of the stock, but they can follow transaction prices,
Pt, which are functions of the true value with some noise:
Pt = mt + Ct Qt.
(8)
To that end, we can say that the new trade changes the observed prices as well. But this
change is temporary. Ct is labeled as the transitory component of the spread, which only
affects observed prices but does not affect the true value of the underlying stock.
Glosten and Harris (1988), following we set Vt to denote the trade size. Then the transitory
and adverse selection components of the spread can be written respectively as follows:
Ct = c0 + c1Vt.
(9)
Zt = z0 + z1Vt.
(10)
We can then estimate the parameters for the ASC and TC by making use of the ﬁrst
difference in prices, which yields the following equation:
Pt = z0Qt + z1QtVt + c0(Qt) + c1(QtVt) + εt.
(11)
where the estimate for ASC is given as 2 × ˆZt = 2 × ( ˆz0 + ˆz1 ¯V ) , and the estimate for
TC is given as 2 × ˆCt = 2 × ( ˆc0 + ˆc1 ¯V ). ¯V is the average trade size for a given stock in a
given time interval.
For each stock i in each time interval t, we calculate the adverse selection component of
the spread (ASCi,t) and the transitory component of the spread (TCi,t) using the Glosten
and Harris (1988) framework10.
Table 2 provides descriptive statistics along with the pairwise correlations of intraday
variables. In Table 2, Panel A, we observe that the average adverse selection component of the
spread is around 0.01 TL, whereas the average transitory component of the spread is around
0.07 TL. This indicates that the percentage of the spread attributable to adverse selection
is around 13%, in line with Savaser and Tiniç (2023). Intraday volatility and liquidity have
the highest positive correlation among intraday ﬁrm-speciﬁc variables other than network
measures. We also observe a signiﬁcant and high positive correlation between V OL and BSI,
and between ASC and TC. Among all intraday measures excluding the network measures
(N D, WCC, and RC P), the largest negative correlation is between V OL and SDRET , as
expected.
4 Measuring broker connectedness
Consideraweightedanddirectednetwork G(V , E, w)foraparticularstock,where V denotes
the set of nodes (brokerage houses) in the network, and v ∈V denotes a speciﬁc node within
10 When estimating equation (11), we require at least 30 trades for a given stock in a given time interval.
Since negative spreads are meaningless, we remove an observation from our intraday panel if the estimate for
ASC or TC is less than zero (Glosten & Harris, 1988; Huang & Stoll, 1997). Since quote and trade data are
not adjusted for corporate events like dividends or stock splits, we remove an observation from our intraday
panel if the 60-minute return for a stock is higher than 20% or less than -20%, which are the designated circuit
breaker levels to prevent extreme returns between March 2005 and November 2015 for BIST stocks.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Descriptive statistics: ﬁrm-speciﬁc measures at 60 minute frequency. In this table, we present the descriptive statistics for intraday ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors that are calculated
for all stocks that are traded in BIST between March 2005 - November 2015 at 60 minute intervals.
ND
WCC
RCP
RETURN
VOL
SDRET
BSI
ILLIQ
ASC
TC
Panel A: Descriptive Statistics
Observations
5,742,628
5,742,628
5,729,833
8,902,330
5,742,628
5,618,551
5,742,628
5,742,628
3,041,753
3,040,085
Mean
0.01
0.05
0.09
0.00
10.88
0.00
63.35
0.50
0.01
0.07
Std. Dev.
0.01
0.07
0.13
0.01
2.64
0.00
161.88
2.67
0.26
0.29
Minimum
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.20
-1.97
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Maximum
0.32
0.77
1.00
0.20
22.23
0.67
16753.00
771.60
303.42
38.23
Panel B: Pairwise Correlations
ND
1
WCC
0.9225*
1
RCP
0.6233*
0.7197*
1
RETURN
0.0973*
0.0865*
0.0582*
1
VOL
0.6136*
0.6865*
0.5089*
0.0399*
1
SDRET
-0.1786*
-0.2042*
-0.1314*
-0.0389*
-0.3429*
1
BSI
0.8163*
0.7593*
0.5322*
0.1410*
0.4508*
-0.1243*
1
ILLIQ
-0.0721*
-0.0857*
-0.0608*
0.0065*
-0.2128*
0.5661*
-0.0488*
1
ASC
-0.0071*
-0.0092*
-0.0033*
-0.0029*
-0.0097*
0.0056*
-0.0090*
-0.0070*
1
TC
0.0537*
0.0468*
0.0328*
0.0001
0.0717*
-0.0263*
0.0210*
-0.0357*
0.2974*
1
RETURN represents the monthly 60-minute log returns. VOL is the logarithm of the total trading volume. SDRET is the standard deviation of trade-by-trade returns. BSI is
the trade (buy-sell) imbalance. ILLIQ is the Amihud illiquidity measure. ASC is the adverse selection component of the spread. TC is the transitory component of the spread.
Both ASC and TC are calculated using the Glosten and Harris (1988) (GH) framework. We require at least 30 trades when estimating the GH model. We remove negative values
for ASC and TC estimates from our sample. ND is the network density, which is also our global connectivity measure. WCC is the average weighted clustering coefﬁcient, our
average local connectivity measure. RCP denotes the network reciprocity. In Panel A, we present the number of observations, mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum
values for each variable in our intraday sample. In Panel B, we present the pairwise correlations. * indicates statistical signiﬁcance at least at 5%
123

Annals of Operations Research
that set. Nodes are connected by links (cash ﬂows across brokerage houses due to the trading
of a given stock) such that E ⊆V × V and (v, v′) ∈E if there is a link extending from
node v to v′. Each link is associated with a weight (normalized cash ﬂows across any two
brokerage houses) such that w : E →[0, 1]. Adjacent nodes of a node v are denoted by
Nv = Nin
v ∪N out
v
, where Nin
v
= {v′ : w(v′, v) > 0} and Nv = {v′ : w(v, v′) > 0}. The
existence of a link (v, v′) (that is, a trade relationship across any two brokerage houses) is
represented by av,v′ = 1 if w(v, v′) > 0 and 0, otherwise.
We estimate the connectedness of this weighted and directed network G(V , E, w) using
three alternative measures, namely network density (N D), weighted clustering coefﬁcient
(WCC), and network reciprocity (RC P). For our monthly analyses, we compute alternative
measures of broker network connectedness for each stock i in each month m. For our intraday
panel regressions, we calculate alternative network measures for each stock i, in each of the
60-minute time intervals t.
4.1 Network density
Network density (N D) is used to estimate the global connectivity level of a network for a
particular stock traded across brokerage houses. We compute N D as the number of directed
links observed in the network divided by the maximum possible number of directed links for
a given period. It measures the probability of a directed connection between two brokerage
houses in the network and shows how close the network is to a complete network. N D takes
values between 0 and 1. Formally, it is deﬁned as follows:
N D =
|E|
|V | × (|V | −1).
(12)
where | · | denotes the number of elements in the considered set.
4.2 Weighted clustering coefficient
The weighted clustering coefﬁcient (WCC) is used to estimate the local connectivity level
of a given brokerage house for a particular stock and for a particular time period. WCC tries
to answer the following question: Given that a brokerage house has connections to two other
brokerage houses, what is the (weighted) probability that these two distinct counterparties
also have a trading relationship so that all three form a closed triangle pattern?
In estimating the weighted probability, the measure puts more weight on stronger inter-
actions with higher amounts of trade ﬂow. WCC values range between 0 and 1. The higher
the value of the measure, the higher the probability of the brokerage house forming tightly
connected counterparties, weighted by the size of the trade ﬂows11.
In estimating WCC, there are three main triangle patterns as shown in Figure 1. Those are
‘cycle’ (Figure 1-(a) and (b))., ‘in’ (Figure 1-(c)), and ‘middle’ (Figure 1-(d)) patterns. We
calculate the overall WCC, which takes all three types of trade ﬂow patterns into account.
Since WCC is a node-speciﬁc measure, we take the average of WCC values calculated for
11 While our network density and reciprocity measures do not take link weight into account, WCC fully
utilizes it. Minoiu and Reyes (2013) and Tabak et al. (2014) underline that weighted networks are important
as they are capable of providing nuanced aspects of the network topology.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Triangle ﬂows for weighted clustering coefﬁcient. Source: Tabak et al., (2014)
all nodes in the network to get a network measure for a particular stock in a given time
interval12.
We calculate WCC as the ratio of the number of triangle pattern relationships that the
node actually forms to the possible number of triangle pattern relationships that the node can
form, weighted by the size of the ﬂows on a triangle13.
WCC(v) =

v′,w′′∈Nv w(v′, v′′)
|Nv| × (|Nv| −1)
(13)
4.3 Network reciprocity
Reciprocity (RC P) is a measure of the likelihood of nodes in a directed network to be
mutually linked. RC P takes values between 0 and 1. Let A be the adjacency matrix of our
directed network G, that is, A = [a j,k] with a j,k = 1 if there is a link from brokerage house
j to k, and 0 otherwise. We measure reciprocity of G in the following way:
RC P =

j̸=k a j,k

j̸=k a j,kak, j
.
(14)
Table 1 provides the descriptive statistics of our connectivity measures at a monthly
frequency. Figure 2 provides the cross-sectional averages of each connectivity measure for
each month in our sample. The average global connectivity, proxied by network density,
is 19%. The average local connectivity measured by WCC is 56%. These numbers reﬂect
the much higher intensity of local trading relationships across the brokerage houses during
the analysis period compared to the whole trading connectedness. The average reciprocity
measure of the network is 69% which indicates that more than half of the trading ﬂows are
bilateral within an average network.
Table 1 shows that network connectivity measures are negatively and signiﬁcantly corre-
lated with book-to-market ratio and illiquidity, while they are positively correlated with other
variables. In terms of magnitude, the highest positive correlation is found to be between VOL
and connectivity measures. This implies that the connectivity of brokerage houses tends to
increase with the overall trading volume. It is therefore vital to assess whether the impact of
broker networks on securities returns is persistent after controlling for the overall increase
in the trading volume. We aim to explore a potential economic channel behind the network
12 This approach has been used by Watts and Strogatz (1998) on various network centrality measures to
analyze the network complexity. For similar applications in ﬁnance, see Minoiu and Reyes (2013) and Minoiu
et al. (2015).
13 The estimation is done via the algorithm developed by Clemente and Grassi (2018)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Monthly variation in average connectivity measures. In this ﬁgure, we present the cross-sectional
averages for network density (ND), weighted clustering coefﬁcient (WCC), and reciprocity (RCP) measures
for all months between March 2005 - November 2015. We construct our network measures using intraday
quotes and trades for all stocks traded in Borsa Istanbul
effect of brokerage houses in order-driven markets through intraday panel regressions on
transaction costs, liquidity, volatility, and returns. In Table 1, we also observe a signiﬁcant
and positive correlation between SI Z E and connectivity measures, which may indicate that
both local and global connectivity increase with ﬁrm size.
Table 2 reports the descriptive statistics along with the pairwise correlations of ﬁrm-
speciﬁc measures at 60-minute time intervals. The average global connectivity proxied by
N D is 1%. The average local connectivity measured by WCC is around 5%. The average
reciprocity measure of the network is around 10%. Similar to our network estimates at
monthly frequency, we observe that the local relationships across brokerage houses are much
stronger compared to global connectedness. In intraday frequency, we observe that network
measures are positively correlated with overall trading volume and trade imbalance, even
though the pairwise correlations are signiﬁcantly smaller compared to correlations in monthly
frequency. The pairwise correlation between network measures and overall illiquidity is again
negative and statistically signiﬁcant. We also observe a negative and signiﬁcant pairwise
correlationbetweenournetworkproxiesandtheadverseselectioncomponentofthespread.In
line with the information hypothesis, this may indicate that, on average, the spread attributable
to adverse selection risk is smaller for stocks that have a connected broker network. The
network measures have a positive and signiﬁcant pairwise correlation with the transitory
component of the spread, indicating a higher likelihood of transitory price movements with
dense broker networks.
In Figure 3, we observe that broker connectivity varies signiﬁcantly throughout the day.
Speciﬁcally, we observe an M-shaped intraday variation for our average local connectivity
(WCC) and network reciprocity (RC P) measures throughout a trading day. However, there
seems to be a very small variation in the global connectivity of brokers (N D). In our intraday
panel regressions, we add time ﬁxed effects to control for the unobserved intraday hetero-
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Intraday variation in average connectivity measures. In this ﬁgure, we present the cross-sectional
average for network density (ND), weighted clustering coefﬁcient (WCC), and reciprocity (RCP) measures
for 60-minute trading intervals within a trading day. We construct our network measures using intraday quotes
and trades for all stocks traded in Borsa Istanbul
geneity in our network estimates, along with ﬁrm ﬁxed effects, which control for unobserved
heterogeneity across different stocks.
5 Methodology
5.1 Broker network connectivity and the cross-section of expected returns
5.1.1 Univariate portfolio analysis
To test the relationship between network connectivity and future return, we ﬁrst make use
of portfolio analysis. Speciﬁcally, we sort the stocks in our sample into quintile portfolios
based on their connectivity measures at the beginning of each month. This setting enables
us to mimic an investor’s portfolio that has a long position in the stocks with high network
connectivity and a short position of equal size in stocks that have low network connectivity.
Information hypothesis, which suggests a high speed of information diffusion under high
network connectivity, would imply that this zero-cost portfolio should have a signiﬁcant and
negative return due to lower adverse selection risks. Let RHigh and RLow respectively denote
the returns of top and bottom quintile portfolios, then our ﬁrst hypothesis can be written as
follows:
Hypothesis 1:
H0 : RHigh −RLow = 0
HA : RHigh −RLow < 0
123

Annals of Operations Research
5.1.2 Multivariate portfolio analysis
The pairwise correlation coefﬁcients in Table 1 assert a signiﬁcant and positive relationship
between connectivity measures and trading volume (V OL). For order-driven markets like
Borsa Istanbul, brokers are assumed to be passive agents, solely passing their clients’ orders to
the exchange. To that end, in order-driven markets, broker connections can simply document
overall turnover. The systematic impact of network brokers on the cross-section of expected
returns may therefore be because of liquidity, rather than information asymmetry. Moreover,
although they are not as high as those between V OL, the pairwise correlations between ﬁrm
size, beta, and our network measures also present the need for additional controls. Therefore,
we perform a multivariate portfolio analysis to control for variation in V OL, SI Z E, and
BET A. We ﬁrst sort the stocks into quintiles based on the V OL (SI Z E) [BET A] measures
at the end of the previous month. Then we divide each V OL (SI Z E) [BET A] quintile into
ﬁve groups based on end-of-month connectivity estimates of the stocks in that quintile. This
procedure gives us 25 different portfolios. We form zero-cost portfolios Rp for each quintile
(p = 1, . . . , 5) by subtracting returns of the portfolio with highly connected stocks, RHigh
p
,
from the returns of the portfolio with low connected stocks, RLow
p
. The returns of the zero-cost
portfolio in a multivariate setting allow us to examine the impact of network connectivity on
stock returns, controlling for trade volume (ﬁrm size), [market risk]. To that end, our second
hypothesis is given as follows;
Hypothesis 2:
H0 : Rp = 0
HA : Rp < 0
For further analysis, we also employ factor tests to examine the relationship between
network connectivity and stock returns, controlling for the most popular empirical asset
pricing factors. We present the standard model below.
Rp = ϑ1
p + ϑ2
p Rmkt + ϑ3
pSM B + ϑ4
p H ML + ϑ5
pU M D + εp
p = 1, . . . , 5.
(15)
where Rmkt represents the return on the market index (BIST100). SM B and H ML,
respectively, denote the size and the value factor of Fama and French (1992), while U M D
is the momentum factor of Carhart (1997). SM B, H ML, and U M D are constructed as the
univariate portfolios based on monthly SI Z E, BT M, and REV levels, respectively. We then
test the hypothesis that the constant terms ϑ1 ≡(ϑ1
1, . . . , ϑ1
p) are jointly equal to zero.
Hypothesis 3:
H0 : ϑ1 = 0
HA : ϑ1 < 0
To test this hypothesis, we use the Gibbons-Ross-Shaken (GRS) test statistic (Gibbons et
al., 1989).
5.1.3 Firm-level cross-sectional regressions
Finally, to test the relationship between network connectivity and future returns, controlling
for several different factors, we estimate the regression model presented in equation (16). For
each month, in our sample, future returns are regressed on our network connectivity measures
and various ﬁrm-speciﬁc characteristics,
123

Annals of Operations Research
RETU RNi,m+1 = γ0,m + γ1,mCON N ECTi,m +
10

k=2
γ ′
k,m Xk
i,m + εi,m.
(16)
where RETU RNi,m+1 is the monthly return on stock i on month m +1. CON N ECTi,m
can be the global connectivity proxied by network density N Di,m, average local connectivity
proxied by WCCi,m, and network reciprocity RC Pi,m. The matrix Xi,m includes all of the
other ﬁrm-speciﬁc measures: SI Z E, BET A, BT M, MOM, REV , I V OL, M AX, I LLI Q,
and V OL, described in detail in Section 3.1.
Earlier theoretical works suggest that higher trade connectivity of agents for a particular
asset can provide faster diffusion of information in the market, leading to lower proﬁts as
private information becomes public over time in a fast manner, reducing the information
asymmetry, thereby decreasing the adverse selection risk involved with this asset. Accord-
ingly, it is plausible to test whether increased brokerage house connectivity decreases the
expected returns or not after controlling for several ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors. Therefore, we form
our fourth hypothesis as follows:
Hypothesis 4:
H0 : γ1 = 0
HA : γ1 < 0
5.2 Does broker network connectivity measure information diffusion or liquidity?
Evidence from intraday panel regressions
Up to this point, we present our methodology for our analyses in monthly frequency, where
we examine the systematic impact of broker network connectivity on the cross-section of
expected returns. Even though these analyses would answer whether investors in BIST
demand a premium for holding stocks with sparse broker networks, they do not help us
understand the underlying economic mechanism as to why investors demand a premium for
holding stocks with sparse broker networks.
Financial networks or ﬁnancial connectivity are primarily associated with information
dissemination. Ozsoylev and Walden (2011) show that an increase in overall connectedness
in investor networks decreases investors’ proﬁts as information disseminates faster in the
networkovertime.Furthermore,theyshowthatholdingeveryoneelse’sconnectivityconstant,
an increase in an agent’s connectedness in an investor network results in an increase in
her proﬁts. These theoretical ﬁndings imply that higher connectivity of the overall trading
network could yield lower returns as more information is compounded into prices, eventually
diminishing everyone’s information rent.
However, BIST is a centralized limit order book market (CLOB) where prices match
electronically based on price and time priority. In electronic CLOB markets where there
are no market makers, intermediaries are assumed to be passive agents whose only role is to
transmit clients’ orders to the exchange (Harris, 2003). A direct implication of this assumption
may be that any network structure for brokers is formed entirely at random in order-driven
markets, and these networks would merely document overall turnover. Therefore, there is
a conﬂict between the information hypothesis, which suggests that dense broker networks
serve as an effective conduit for information diffusion, and the liquidity hypothesis, which
suggests that broker networks are just complex proxies for the overall trading volume. As
a consequence of this conﬂict, in our monthly analyses, we are restricted from establishing
123

Annals of Operations Research
whether investors in BIST demand a premium due to information asymmetry or due to
liquidity.
In this section, we form intraday panel regressions to explore the underlying economic
mechanism behind the systematic impact of broker networks on future returns in CLOB
markets. We use an empirical setting similar to what is presented in Rzayev and Ibikunle
(2019) to examine the intraday predictive relationship between broker network connectivity
and future transaction costs, along with future liquidity, volatility, and returns.
5.2.1 Broker network connectivity and transaction costs
First, we focus on the relationship between broker network connectivity and transaction
costs. The role of transaction costs in ﬁnancial markets is mainly emphasized in market
microstructure literature, where both the theoretical and empirical studies document that liq-
uidity providers adjust transaction costs when faced with the risk of being adversely selected
(Copeland & Galai, 1983; Easley & O’Hara, 1987; Glosten & Milgrom, 1985; Kyle, 1985).
These studies provide a framework for how information in the order ﬂow is incorporated into
the prices. Glosten and Milgrom (1985) show that when an uninformed liquidity provider
observesabuy(sell)order,sherevisesherexpectationforthestockvalueupward(downward),
and these revisions will be directly reﬂected in the transaction costs and subsequently in the
equilibrium prices. Using the seminal framework of Glosten and Harris (1988), presented in
equation (11), we decompose the spreads into two: an adverse selection component related to
informed trading and permanent price change, and a transitory component related to liquidity
and temporary price change. This setting enables us to investigate whether the changes in the
broker networks are associated with changes in the transaction costs due to risks related to
information asymmetry or liquidity. In a panel regression setting, we examine the intraday
(60-minute) predictive relationship between the broker network connectivity and the adverse
selection (transitory) component of the spread as presented in equation (17) ((18)):
ASCi,t = θ A
i + ν A
t + δ A
1 CON N ECTi,t−1 + δ A
2 V OLi,t−1 + δ A
3 BSIi,t−1
+δ A
4 SDRETi,t−1 + εA
i,t.
(17)
TCi,t = θ T
i + νT
t + δT
1 CON N ECTi,t−1 + δT
2 V OLi,t−1 + δ A
3 BSIi,t−1
+δT
4 SDRETi,t−1 + εT
i,t.
(18)
where ASCi,t and TCi,t, respectively, denote adverse selection and the transitory com-
ponent of the spread for the ﬁrm i in the time interval t. CON N ECTi,t−1 can be the
global connectivity proxied by network density, N Di,t, average local connectivity proxied
by WCCi,t, and network reciprocity, RC Pi,t. V OLi,t is the logarithm of the total trading
volume of ﬁrm i in time interval t. BSIi,t is the absolute trade (buy-sell) imbalance for ﬁrm i
in time interval t. SDRETi,t corresponds to the standard deviation of trade-by-trade returns
of ﬁrm i in time interval t. We also include ﬁrm- and time-speciﬁc ﬁxed effects, respectively
denoted by θi and νt, to control for the unobserved heterogeneity across ﬁrms and time.
We expect a negative relationship between broker network connectivity and the adverse
selection component of the spread to the extent that broker network connectivity facilitates
efﬁcient diffusion of information and reduces the overall adverse selection risk. Moreover,
123

Annals of Operations Research
if the primary attribute of the network measures is their ability to capture information asym-
metry, we do not expect to observe any signiﬁcant relationship between CON N ECT and
TC. To that end, we write our ﬁfth hypothesis as follows:
Hypothesis 5:
H0 : δ A
1 = 0
HA : δ A
1 < 0
5.2.2 Broker network connectivity and intraday liquidity
We then examine the intraday predictive relationship between broker network connectivity
and future market (il)liquidity. Standard liquidity frameworks indicate that informed investors
draw liquidity from the market, resulting in a negative relationship between informed trading
levelsandfutureliquidity(Glosten,1994;Seppi,1997).Thisviewalignswiththefundamental
microstructure models of information asymmetry presented in the previous section, where
liquidity providers are argued to increase the overall transaction costs (hence reduce the
overall liquidity) when faced with adverse selection risk due to information asymmetry
(Easley & O’Hara, 1987; Glosten & Milgrom, 1985). Contrary to this line of argument,
the liquidity provision model of Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1988) argue that informed trading
and liquidity trading move in tandem since informed investors would want to disguise their
advantage to obtain maximum beneﬁt. (Ibikunle, 2018) documents a positive relationship
between informed trading activity and overall liquidity, which provides empirical evidence
towards informed traders’ tendency to enter the market only when they can hide themselves
among liquidity traders. We set up the following framework to examine the relationship
between broker network connectivity and future liquidity levels.
I LLI Qi,t = θi + νt + δ1CON N ECTi,t−1 + δ2V OLi,t−1 + δ3BSIi,t−1
+δ4SDRETi,t−1 + εi,t.
(19)
Since our dependent variable I LLI Qi,t is an inverse measure of liquidity (Amihud,
2002), to the extent that broker network connectivity proxies better information diffusion
and lower information asymmetry, we expect a positive relationship between CON N ECT
and I LLI Q in line with (Admati & Pﬂeiderer, 1988; Ibikunle, 2018; Rzayev and Ibikunle,
2019). Therefore, we write our sixth hypothesis as follows:
Hypothesis 6:
H0 : δ1 = 0
HA : δ1 > 0
5.2.3 Broker network connectivity and intraday volatility
Next, we investigate the intraday predictive relationship between broker network connec-
tivity and return volatility. Examining this relationship provides us another opportunity to
disentangle whether broker network connectivity is an inverse measure of information asym-
metry or just a measure of liquidity. The empirical studies in the existing literature establish
a well-founded positive relationship between trading volume and volatility (Collin-Dufresne
& Fos, 2016; Hellwig et al., 1980; Karpoff, 1987; Lee & Rui, 2002; Park, 2010). Collin-
Dufresne and Fos (2016) attribute the positive relationship to liquidity traders. Rzayev and
123

Annals of Operations Research
Ibikunle (2019) document that informed trading activity reduces overall volatility. We set up
the following framework to examine the relationship between broker network connectivity
and future volatility:
SDRETi,t = θi + νt + δ1CON N ECTi,t−1 + δ2V OLi,t−1 + δ3BSIi,t−1
+δ4SDRETi,t−1 + εi,t.
(20)
To the extent that broker network connectivity is a measure of information diffusion, we
expect a more stabilized price process and lower return volatility for stocks with dense broker
network connectivity. Therefore, we write hypothesis seven as follows:
Hypothesis 7:
H0 : δ1 = 0
HA : δ1 < 0
5.2.4 Broker network connectivity and intraday returns
Finally, we investigate the predictive relationship between broker network connectivity and
60-minute returns in a panel regression setting with ﬁrm and time ﬁxed effects. Examining
the impact of broker network connectivity on future returns in higher frequencies has two
advantages over analyses in lower frequencies. First, ﬁrm-speciﬁc information is usually
short-lived (Chang et al., 2014). Therefore, intraday analyses would help us better capture
the co-movements between broker network connectivity and future returns. Second, the
seminal works of Chordia et al. (2002, 2008) examine market inefﬁciencies over a short
horizon by documenting the predictive power of lag order imbalances on future returns and
argue that investors are slow to act on new information. This ﬁnding is in line with the
theoretical expectations of Easley and O’Hara (2004). In a rational expectations model with
information asymmetry, Easley and O’Hara (2004) document that uninformed investors are
slow to update their portfolios in the presence of new information arriving at the market and
therefore demand a premium for holding stocks with high levels of information asymmetry.
RETU RNi,t = θi + νt + δ1CON N ECTi,t−1 + δ2V OLi,t−1 + δ3SDRETi,t−1
+ δ4I LLI Qi,t−1δ5 ASCi,t−1 + δ6TCi,t−1 + εi,t.
(21)
To the extent that broker network connectivity is a measure of information diffusion and
an inverse measure of information asymmetry, we expect that average returns would be lower
in stocks with dense broker networks. Therefore, we write our last hypothesis as follows:
Hypothesis 8:
H0 : δ1 = 0
HA : δ1 < 0
123

Annals of Operations Research
6 Results
6.1 Broker networks and the cross-section of expected returns
6.1.1 Univariate portfolio analysis
Inthissection,weconductunivariateportfolioanalysiswherewesortstocksbasedonnetwork
connectivity measures, construct quintile portfolios, and follow the returns of these portfolios
for the subsequent month. This procedure enables us to mimic an investor’s portfolio that has
a long position in stocks with the highest broker network connectivity and a short position
of equal size in stocks that have the lowest broker connectivity. Therefore, we are able to
examine whether the investors in BIST demand a premium for holding stocks with less broker
connectedness.
The average portfolio characteristics are presented in Table 3. Speciﬁcally, Panels A, B,
and C of Table 3 present the average characteristics of portfolios formed using N D, WCC,
and RC P, respectively. In all three panels, we ﬁrst observe that the network connectivity
measures of each portfolio increase monotonically as we move from low connectivity to high
connectivity portfolios, which is a mechanical consequence of our portfolio construction rule.
Next, we observe that high-connectivity portfolios usually contain companies with higher
market capitalization and higher market risk. To that end, we can argue that stocks with high
network density may have higher sensitivity to market movements. Book-to-market ratios are,
on average, higher for low connectivity stocks. Furthermore, we observe that the stocks with
high network density on average have higher liquidity and idiosyncratic volatility. Finally,
we see that the lottery stock characteristics are higher for stocks that have higher network
density.
Panel A of Table 3 shows that stocks in the lowest network density quintile have a monthly
value-weighted average return of -1.1%. The average return decreases monotonically as we
move from the low network density to the high. The average value weighted difference
between the highest and the lowest density quintile is around -1.2%, with a t-statistic of -2.97,
which suggests that stocks with higher network density have signiﬁcantly lower expected
returns, as expected. The difference for the equally-weighted returns is around -1.3% again
signiﬁcant at a 1% level. In addition, the return difference is similar across the selection of
connectivity measures. In particular, Panel B (Panel C) of Table 3 indicates that the average
value-weighted return difference between the highest and lowest WCC (RC P) portfolios
is -1.1% (-1.7%) and signiﬁcant at a 1% level, very similar to our ﬁndings for ND based
portfolios.
Furthermore, we examine whether the standard asset pricing models can explain away
the average return differences between high and low connectivity portfolios. Speciﬁcally, we
make use of the standard four-factor model that incorporates market return Rm, along with the
size (SM B) and the value (H ML) factors of Fama and French (1993), and the momentum
(U M D) factor of Carhart (1997). In Panels A, B, and C of Table 3, we also report the
estimates of the constant terms for equally-weighted (α−EW) and value-weighted (α−V W)
return premiums obtained from the four-factor model for each of the quintile portfolios.
The estimates for the constant term give us the excess return for each quintile portfolio. In
Panel A, we observe that the lowest density portfolio has a value-weighted excess return
of about 1%, whereas the excess return on the highest density portfolio is around -80 bps.
Therefore, the return premium on the zero-cost portfolio is -1.8%, statistically signiﬁcant at
a 1% level. This result is again robust when we consider equally-weighted portfolios and
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Results of the univariate portfolio analysis - This table presents average portfolio characteristics for quintile portfolios based on network connectivity measures.
Low
2
3
4
High
HML
s.e. (HML)
t(HML)
p(HML)
ND
0.070
0.125
0.171
0.231
0.360
0.290∗∗∗
0.00
76.17
0.00
RETURN - EW
0.012
0.009
0.001
0.000
−0.002
−0.013∗∗∗
0.00
−3.23
0.00
RETURN - VW
0.011
0.009
0.002
0.000
−0.001
−0.012∗∗∗
0.00
−2.97
0.00
α −EW
0.010
0.006
−0.002
−0.007
−0.008
−0.018∗∗∗
0.00
−5.63
0.00
α −V W
0.010
0.006
−0.002
−0.006
−0.008
−0.018∗∗∗
0.00
−5.50
0.00
SIZE
17.872
18.323
18.582
19.162
20.588
2.716∗∗∗
0.09
28.64
0.00
BETA
0.430
0.554
0.621
0.691
0.860
0.430∗∗∗
0.02
28.57
0.00
BTM
1.253
1.151
1.091
1.019
0.952
−0.301∗∗∗
0.02
−13.61
0.00
MOM
0.072
0.077
0.086
0.112
0.161
0.089∗∗∗
0.02
5.54
0.00
REV
−0.002
0.000
0.000
0.006
0.015
0.016∗∗∗
0.00
3.79
0.00
ILLIQ
0.0292
0.0001
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
−0.029∗∗∗
0.01
−4.03
0.00
IVOL
0.019
0.019
0.021
0.024
0.025
0.006∗∗∗
0.00
12.24
0.00
MAX
0.046
0.050
0.057
0.065
0.070
0.024∗∗∗
0.00
20.20
0.00
VOL
14.63
15.95
16.73
17.64
19.37
4.736∗∗∗
0.11
42.83
0.00
Panel B: Weighted Clustering Coefﬁcient
WCC
0.350
0.488
0.566
0.645
0.768
0.418∗∗∗
0.01
55.96
0.00
RETURN - EW
0.013
0.009
0.001
−0.003
0.001
−0.012∗∗∗
0.00
−3.11
0.00
RETURN - VW
0.012
0.009
0.001
−0.002
0.001
−0.011∗∗∗
0.00
−2.89
0.00
α −EW
0.010
0.006
−0.003
−0.008
−0.007
−0.018∗∗∗
0.00
−5.96
0.00
α −V W
0.01
0.01
0.00
−0.01
−0.01
−0.017∗∗∗
0.00
−5.84
0.00
SIZE
17.850
18.245
18.506
19.099
20.823
2.972∗∗∗
0.08
37.57
0.00
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 continued
Low
2
3
4
High
HML
s.e. (HML)
t(HML)
p(HML)
BETA
0.440
0.555
0.614
0.682
0.862
0.422∗∗∗
0.02
28.03
0.00
BTM
1.277
1.155
1.065
1.005
0.965
−0.312∗∗∗
0.02
−13.82
0.00
MOM
0.059
0.068
0.097
0.127
0.157
0.098∗∗∗
0.02
6.14
0.00
REV
−0.004
−0.002
0.002
0.008
0.015
0.019∗∗∗
0.00
4.62
0.00
ILLIQ
0.029
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
−0.029∗∗∗
0.01
−4.04
0.00
IVOL
0.019
0.019
0.022
0.025
0.024
0.005∗∗∗
0.00
10.06
0.00
MAX
0.0454
0.0494
0.0587
0.0676
0.0653
0.020∗∗∗
0.00
17.83
0.00
VOL
14.594
15.928
16.719
17.645
19.423
4.828∗∗∗
0.11
45.01
0.00
Panel C: Network Reciprocity (RCP)
RCP
0.537
0.648
0.699
0.745
0.810
0.273∗∗∗
0.01
38.25
0.00
RETURN - EW
0.010
0.011
0.006
0.001
−0.008
−0.018∗∗∗
0.00
−4.85
0.00
RETURN - VW
0.010
0.011
0.006
0.002
−0.007
−0.017∗∗∗
0.00
−4.59
0.00
α −EW
0.008
0.006
0.000
−0.004
−0.011
−0.019∗∗∗
0.00
−5.00
0.00
α −V W
0.008
0.006
0.000
−0.004
−0.011
−0.018∗∗∗
0.00
−4.95
0.00
SIZE
18.534
18.668
18.794
18.946
19.582
1.048∗∗∗
0.12
8.50
0.00
BETA
0.450
0.576
0.637
0.693
0.798
0.348∗∗∗
0.02
17.44
0.00
BTM
1.233
1.238
1.119
1.004
0.874
−0.359∗∗∗
0.02
−16.91
0.00
MOM
0.082
0.066
0.079
0.100
0.180
0.097∗∗∗
0.02
6.14
0.00
REV
0.002
−0.002
0.000
0.001
0.019
0.017∗∗∗
0.00
3.81
0.00
ILLIQ
0.0291
0.0002
0.0001
0.0001
0.0000
−0.029∗∗∗
0.01
−4.02
0.00
IVOL
0.019
0.018
0.020
0.022
0.030
0.011∗∗∗
0.00
22.78
0.00
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 continued
Low
2
3
4
High
HML
s.e. (HML)
t(HML)
p(HML)
MAX
0.045
0.047
0.053
0.061
0.081
0.037∗∗∗
0.00
31.08
0.00
VOL
15.08
16.18
16.81
17.46
18.79
3.710∗∗∗
0.13
27.95
0.00
At the end of each month, we sort our stocks into quintile portfolios based on network measures and follow the portfolio returns for the subsequent month. Speciﬁcally, Panels
A, B, and C respectively present the portfolios based on monthly network density (ND), weighted clustering coefﬁcient (WCC), and network reciprocity (RCP) measures. Low
(High) represents the portfolio consisting of stocks with the lowest (highest) connectivity measures. High-Low represents the zero investment broker connectivity portfolio that
mimics an investor’s portfolio who has a long position in High and a short position of equal size in Low. The last three columns of each panel respectively denote the Newey-West
standard errors (Newey & West, 1987), t-statistics, and the corresponding p-values for the zero-cost portfolio (High - Low).RETURN - EW (RETURN - VW) is the equally-
(value-) weighted returns of a corresponding quintile portfolio. α −EW (α −V W) is the Fama-French four factor return premium associated with the equally- (value-) weighted
portfolio returns. SIZE is the logarithm of the end-of-month market capitalization. BETA is the systematic risk factor. BTM is the book-to-market ratio. MOM is the momentum
variable. REV is the return reversal measured by one-month lag returns. ILLIQ is the Amihud illiquidity measure (Amihud, 2002). IVOL is the idiosyncratic volatility. MAX is
the maximum daily return within a month. VOL is the natural logarithm of the Turkish Lira-denominated trade volume. *** indicates statistical signiﬁcance at a 1% level
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Cumulative returns for univariate network density portfolios. In this ﬁgure we present the cumulative
returns for equally weighted and value weighted portfolios that mimics an investor who has a long position in
stocks with low network density and a short position of equal size in stocks with high network density along
with the cumulative returns for the market index (BIST 100). All returns are denominated in local currency,
Turkish Lira
different connectivity measures. In particular, Panel B (C) indicates that the value-weighted
return premium associated with the zero-cost portfolios constructed using WCC (RC P) is
-1.7% (-1.8%), which is also statistically signiﬁcant at a 1% level. Given that the average
monthly return is around 30 bps, the return premium on the zero-cost connectivity portfolios
provides not only statistically signiﬁcant but also economically signiﬁcant return premiums.
Finally, we graphically examine the performance of univariate portfolios. In Figures 4,
5, and 6, we plot cumulative returns for univariate portfolios constructed using N D, WCC,
and RC P. In all three ﬁgures, we observe that the TL-denominated returns of zero-cost
portfolios, regardless of being equally- or value-weighted, outperform the benchmark return
by a signiﬁcant margin, especially towards the end of our sample period.
Overall, the results of our univariate portfolio analysis suggest that stocks that are traded in
networks with dense broker connectivity have, on average, lower expected returns compared
to stocks that are traded in networks with sparse broker connectivity. To that end, we document
that the investors in BIST demand a premium for holding stocks that are traded in networks
with low broker connectivity, as expected. Next, we control for other ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors in
a multivariate setting.
6.1.2 Multivariate portfolio analysis
Next, we test whether other ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors such as ﬁrm size (SI Z E), market risk
(BET A), and trading volume (V OL) have a signiﬁcant impact in explaining the negative
relationship between broker network connectivity and future returns via multivariate portfolio
sorts. Speciﬁcally, to control for ﬁrm size, we ﬁrst sort stocks into quintiles based on end-of-
month market capitalization. Then, we sort stocks in each SIZE quintile based on monthly
network connectivity proxies. For each of the initial market capitalization quintiles, we form
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Cumulative returns for univariate local connectivity (weighted clustering coefﬁcient) portfolios. In this
ﬁgure we present the cumulative returns for equally weighted and value weighted portfolios that mimics an
investor who has a long position in stocks with low average local connectivity (weighted clustering coefﬁcient)
and a short position of equal size in stocks with high average local connectivity along with the cumulative
returns for the market index (BIST 100). All returns are denominated in local currency, Turkish Lira
Fig. 6 Cumulative returns for univariate network reciprocity portfolios. In this ﬁgure we present the cumulative
returns for equally weighted and value weighted portfolios that mimics an investor who has a long position in
stocks with low network reciprocity and a short position of equal size in stocks with high network reciprocity
along with the cumulative returns for the market index (BIST 100). All returns are denominated in local
currency, Turkish Lira
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Multivariate Portfolio Analysis: 5x5 portfolios on global connectivity (ND) and ﬁrm size (SIZE).
This table presents the characteristics of multivariate portfolios based on ND and SIZE.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: ND
Low
0.046
0.078
0.085
0.082
0.108
2
0.082
0.123
0.136
0.145
0.196
3
0.113
0.155
0.175
0.200
0.271
4
0.148
0.193
0.223
0.263
0.344
High
0.212
0.260
0.308
0.359
0.467
Panel B: SIZE
Low
15.96
17.76
18.73
19.92
21.32
2
16.29
17.75
18.76
19.88
21.40
3
16.47
17.76
18.79
19.84
21.66
4
16.66
17.80
18.80
19.89
21.95
High
16.74
17.83
18.83
19.93
22.52
Panel C: RETURN - EW
Low
0.016
0.013
0.007
0.009
0.005
2
0.009
0.008
0.01
0.003
0.004
3
0.012
0.004
0.001
0.002
0.007
4
0.008
−0.001
−0.002
0.005
0.005
High
−0.017
−0.014
−0.004
0.000
0.001
HML
−0.033∗∗∗
−0.026∗∗∗
−0.010∗
−0.010∗
−0.004
s.e.(HML)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
t(HML)
(−5.30)
(−4.45)
(−1.88)
(−1.67)
(−0.72)
p(HML)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.06)
(0.10)
(0.48)
At the beginning of each month, we divide the sample into SIZE quintiles based on the log market capitalization
of the previous month. Then we divide each quintile into ﬁve groups based on the previous month’s ND
measures, which proxy for global connectivity. Panel A corresponds to the average ND of each portfolio. Panel
B corresponds to the average market capitalization of each portfolio. Panel C represents the average equally
weighted monthly returns (RETURN-EW) in each portfolio. HML is the difference between High and Low
connectivity portfolios for each SIZE quintile. s.e. (HML), t(HML), and p(HML) respectively correspond
to the Newey-West corrected standard errors and associated t-statistics and p-values. ***, **, * indicates
statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively
zero-cost portfolios by subtracting the returns of the portfolio with highly connected stocks
from the returns of the portfolio with less connected stocks. This procedure enables us to
control the impact of market capitalization on the relationship between broker connectivity
and future returns.
Tables 4, 5, 6 present the characteristics of 5x5 portfolios constructed using SI Z E and
network density (N D), weighted clustering coefﬁcient (WCC), and network reciprocity
(RC P), respectively. In all three tables, Panel A (Panel B) documents the average network
measure (average ﬁrm size) of each portfolio. Similarly, Panel C shows the equally-weighted
return characteristics14 of each portfolio along with the zero-cost portfolio constructed as the
difference between High and Low connectivity stocks for each SI Z E quintile.
14 We report the results only for equally-weighted returns to save space, as the results for value-weighted
portfolios are very similar.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 5 Multivariate Portfolio Analysis: 5x5 portfolios on local connectivity (WCC) and ﬁrm size (SIZE).
This table presents the characteristics of multivariate portfolios based on WCC and SIZE.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: WCC
Low
0.266
0.369
0.393
0.385
0.447
2
0.388
0.479
0.506
0.526
0.613
3
0.460
0.535
0.568
0.609
0.707
4
0.524
0.588
0.627
0.680
0.773
High
0.609
0.661
0.707
0.762
0.849
Panel B: SIZE
Low
15.95
17.76
18.73
19.91
21.27
2
16.31
17.74
18.76
19.86
21.38
3
16.50
17.77
18.78
19.84
21.60
4
16.63
17.80
18.79
19.89
21.91
High
16.73
17.83
18.85
19.96
22.69
Panel C: RETURN - EW
Low
0.017
0.016
0.011
0.006
0.005
2
0.009
0.006
0.009
0.003
0.003
3
0.012
0.003
−0.001
0.006
0.007
4
0.005
−0.005
0.001
0.001
0.003
High
−0.015
−0.012
−0.008
0.002
0.003
HML
−0.033∗∗∗
−0.027∗∗∗
−0.018∗∗∗
−0.005
−0.002
s.e.(HML)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
t(HML)
(−5.15)
(−4.87)
(−3.40)
(−0.84)
(−0.33)
p(HML)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.41)
(0.74)
At the beginning of each month, we divide the sample into SIZE quintiles based on the log market capitalization
of the previous month. Then we divide each quintile into ﬁve groups based on the previous month’s WCC
measures, which proxy for local connectivity. Panel A corresponds to the average WCC of each portfolio. Panel
B corresponds to the average market capitalization of each portfolio. Panel C represents the average equally
weighted monthly returns (RETURN-EW) in each portfolio. HML is the difference between High and Low
connectivity portfolios for each SIZE quintile. s.e. (HML), t(HML), and p(HML) respectively correspond
to the Newey-West corrected standard errors and associated t-statistics and p-values. ***, **, * indicates
statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively
For all of the network connectivity proxies, the zero-cost portfolio for the ﬁrst, second,
and third SI Z E quintiles has negative and statistically signiﬁcant returns. In particular,
Table 4 shows that the average portfolio return for zero-cost N D −SI Z E portfolios for
the ﬁrst, second, and third size quintiles is -3.3%, -2.6%, and -1%, respectively. In Table 5,
we observe that the average returns for the zero-cost WCC −SI Z E portfolios for the ﬁrst
three size quintiles are similar, with the corresponding estimates of -3.3%, -2.7%, and -1.8%,
respectively. Finally, in Table 6, we show that respective average portfolio returns for the
zero-cost RC P −SI Z E portfolios are -3.1%, -3.0%, and -1.9%. For all network measures,
we also observe that the statistical signiﬁcance of the difference in average portfolio return
between high and low connectivity portfolios diminishes for the largest ﬁrms. To that end,
we may argue that the systematic impact of broker network connectivity is most evident over
ﬁrms with relatively low market capitalization.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 6 Multivariate Portfolio Analysis: 5x5 portfolios on network reciprocity (RCP) and ﬁrm size (SIZE).
This table presents the characteristics of multivariate portfolios based on RCP and SIZE.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: RCP
Low
0.473
0.575
0.572
0.536
0.573
2
0.610
0.662
0.658
0.639
0.674
3
0.669
0.706
0.703
0.696
0.725
4
0.717
0.744
0.748
0.747
0.767
High
0.778
0.800
0.810
0.812
0.829
Panel B: SIZE
Low
16.05
17.77
18.78
19.94
21.24
2
16.33
17.77
18.78
19.89
21.48
3
16.50
17.78
18.76
19.89
21.74
4
16.58
17.78
18.79
19.88
21.99
High
16.67
17.80
18.80
19.86
22.40
Panel C: RETURN - EW
Low
0.014
0.013
0.01
0.005
0.004
2
0.013
0.007
0.008
0.008
0.007
3
0.012
0.007
0.005
0.006
0.007
4
0.005
−0.001
−0.002
0.006
0.004
High
−0.016
−0.017
−0.01
−0.007
−0.001
HML
−0.031∗∗∗
−0.030∗∗∗
−0.019∗∗∗
−0.012∗∗
−0.004
s.e.(HML)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
t(HML)
(−4.41)
(−4.97)
(−3.20)
(−2.08)
(−0.83)
p(HML)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.04)
(0.41)
At the beginning of each month, we divide the sample into SIZE quintiles based on the log market capitalization
of the previous month. Then we divide each quintile into ﬁve groups based on the previous month’s RCP
measures, which proxy for network reciprocity. Panel A corresponds to the average RCP of each portfolio.
Panel B corresponds to the average market capitalization of each portfolio. Panel C represents the average
equally weighted monthly returns (RETURN-EW) in each portfolio. HML is the difference between High and
Low reciprocity portfolios for each SIZE quintile. s.e. (HML), t(HML), and p(HML) respectively correspond
to the Newey-West corrected standard errors and associated t-statistics and p-values. ***, **, * indicates
statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively
We repeat the same analysis with the end-of-month market risk proxy (BET A) and form
ﬁve different zero-cost CON N ECT −BET A portfolios. Tables 7, 8, and 9 present the
characteristics of 5x5 portfolios constructed using market risk and N D, WCC, and RC P,
respectively. As in the case of the size factor, in all three tables, Panels A and B respectively
document the average network connectivity and the average market risk of each portfolio.
Panel C shows the return characteristics of each portfolio along with the zero-cost portfolio
constructed as the difference between High and Low broker connectivity stocks for each
BETA quintile.
For all of the network connectivity proxies, the zero-cost portfolios for all BET A quintiles
have negative returns. In Table 7, we observe that the average portfolio returns for the zero-
cost N D −BET A portfolios vary between -2.3% and -0.9%, all statistically signiﬁcant at
least at the 5% level, except for the highest BET A quintile. The structure is very similar for
WCC −BET A portfolios presented in Table 8, where the equally weighted returns vary
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 7 Multivariate Portfolio Analysis: 5x5 portfolios on global connectivity (ND) and market risk (BETA).
This table presents the characteristics of multivariate portfolios based on ND and BETA.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: ND
Low
0.049
0.064
0.077
0.091
0.114
2
0.094
0.107
0.123
0.145
0.188
3
0.134
0.141
0.161
0.187
0.248
4
0.184
0.190
0.211
0.242
0.320
High
0.289
0.290
0.315
0.350
0.451
Panel B: BETA
Low
0.00
0.41
0.62
0.82
1.24
2
0.01
0.41
0.62
0.83
1.22
3
0.03
0.41
0.62
0.83
1.24
4
−0.04
0.42
0.62
0.84
1.29
High
−0.11
0.42
0.63
0.84
1.38
Panel C: RETURN - EW
Low
0.009
0.012
0.014
0.015
0.007
2
0.006
0.009
0.008
0.010
0.007
3
0.002
0.003
0.005
0.005
−0.002
4
−0.012
−0.004
0.002
0.002
0.001
High
−0.013
0.002
0.001
0.001
−0.002
HML
−0.023∗∗∗
−0.011∗∗
−0.013∗∗∗
−0.014∗∗∗
−0.009
s.e.(HML)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)
t(HML)
(−3.77)
(−2.10)
(−3.00)
(−2.96)
(−1.48)
p(HML)
(0.00)
(0.04)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.14)
At the beginning of each month, we divide the sample into BETA quintiles based on previous month estimates
for market risk. Then we divide each quintile into ﬁve groups based on the previous month’s ND measures,
which proxy for global connectivity. Panel A corresponds to the average ND of each portfolio. Panel B corre-
sponds to the average market risk of each portfolio. Panel C represents the average equally weighted monthly
returns (RETURN-EW) in each portfolio. HML is the difference between High and Low connectivity portfo-
lios for each BETA quintile. s.e. (HML), t(HML), and p(HML) respectively correspond to the Newey-West
corrected standard errors and associated t-statistics and p-values. ***, **, * indicates statistical signiﬁcance
at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively
between -2.7% and -0.9%, all statistically signiﬁcant except the highest BET A quintile.
The average return difference between stocks with high and low broker connectivity is most
evident, both in terms of statistical and economic signiﬁcance, for RC P −BET A portfolios.
Speciﬁcally, in Table 9, we demonstrate that the average equally weighted return on zero-
cost RC P −BET A portfolios varies between -3.4% and -1.3%, all statistically signiﬁcant
at a 1% level. These results lead us to suggest that network connectivity may systematically
inﬂuence prices in order-driven markets even after controlling for the variation in BET A.
Finally, we conduct a multivariate portfolio analysis with VOL and form ﬁve different
zero-cost CON N ECT −V OL portfolios. Tables 10, 11, and 12 present the characteristics
of 5x5 portfolios constructed using trading volume and N D, WCC, and RC P, respectively.
Similar to the case for SI Z E and BET A factors, in all three tables, Panel A and Panel B
respectively document the average network connectivity and the average trade volume for
each portfolio. Panel C shows the return characteristics of each portfolio along with the zero-
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 8 Multivariate Portfolio Analysis: 5x5 portfolios on local connectivity (WCC) and market risk (BETA).
This table presents the characteristics of multivariate portfolios based on WCC and BETA.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: WCC
Low
0.281
0.335
0.371
0.404
0.453
2
0.419
0.449
0.482
0.520
0.588
3
0.504
0.517
0.549
0.587
0.662
4
0.582
0.590
0.621
0.657
0.734
High
0.696
0.704
0.731
0.761
0.833
Panel B: BETA
Low
0.00
0.41
0.62
0.83
1.23
2
0.03
0.41
0.62
0.83
1.23
3
0.02
0.42
0.62
0.83
1.26
4
−0.05
0.42
0.62
0.83
1.29
High
−0.10
0.42
0.63
0.84
1.35
Panel C: RETURN - EW
Low
0.011
0.013
0.012
0.016
0.010
2
0.005
0.012
0.012
0.009
0.002
3
0.003
0.001
0.003
0.005
−0.003
4
−0.010
−0.007
0.000
0.000
0.000
High
−0.016
0.003
0.003
0.004
0.002
HML
−0.027∗∗∗
−0.010∗∗
−0.009∗∗∗
−0.012∗∗∗
−0.009
s.e.(HML)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)
t(HML)
(−4.56)
(−2.18)
(−2.14)
(−2.43)
(−1.55)
p(HML)
(0.00)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.12)
At the beginning of each month, we divide the sample into BETA quintiles based on previous month estimates
for market risk. Then we divide each quintile into ﬁve groups based on the previous month’s WCC measures,
which proxy for local connectivity. Panel A corresponds to the average WCC of each portfolio. Panel B corre-
sponds to the average market risk of each portfolio. Panel C represents the average equally weighted monthly
returns (RETURN-EW) in each portfolio. HML is the difference between High and Low connectivity portfo-
lios for each BETA quintile. s.e. (HML), t(HML), and p(HML) respectively correspond to the Newey-West
corrected standard errors and associated t-statistics and p-values. ***, **, * indicates statistical signiﬁcance
at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively
cost portfolios constructed as the difference between High and Low connectivity stocks for
each V OL quintile.
We observe that the pricing impact of network density disappears after controlling for the
trading volume. In Table 10, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the average portfolio
returns for zero-cost ND-VOL portfolios are statistically different from zero. We observe a
similar case in Table 11 where the average portfolio returns for zero-cost WCC −V OL
portfolios for only the second and third volume quintiles are negative and statistically signiﬁ-
cant. Similar to the case for CON N ECT −BET A portfolios, the average return difference
between stocks with high and low broker connectivity is most evident, both in terms of
economic and statistical signiﬁcance for RC P −V OL portfolios. Speciﬁcally, the average
portfolio returns for the zero-cost RC P −V OL portfolios are statistically signiﬁcant for
the third, fourth, and ﬁfth VOL quintiles, indicating that the systematic impact of network
reciprocity is more pronounced on stocks with high trading volume. The coefﬁcients of the
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 9 Multivariate Portfolio Analysis: 5x5 portfolios on network reciprocity (RCP) and market risk (BETA).
This table presents the characteristics of multivariate portfolios based on RCP and BETA.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: RCP
Low
0.470
0.529
0.560
0.584
0.616
2
0.603
0.625
0.647
0.669
0.709
3
0.667
0.673
0.690
0.711
0.752
4
0.721
0.717
0.731
0.749
0.789
High
0.796
0.782
0.789
0.803
0.842
Panel B: BETA
Low
−0.01
0.41
0.62
0.83
1.22
2
0.04
0.41
0.62
0.83
1.21
3
0.03
0.42
0.62
0.84
1.23
4
−0.01
0.42
0.62
0.84
1.28
High
−0.16
0.42
0.63
0.84
1.43
Panel C: RETURN-EW
Low
0.009
0.012
0.010
0.011
0.012
2
0.004
0.008
0.013
0.014
0.004
3
0.008
0.003
0.010
0.005
0.005
4
−0.004
0.004
0.002
0.005
−0.002
High
−0.024
−0.005
−0.005
−0.002
−0.008
HML
−0.034∗∗∗
−0.018∗∗∗
−0.015∗∗∗
−0.013∗∗∗
−0.02∗∗∗
s.e.(HML)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
t(HML)
(−5.13)
(−3.74)
(−2.95)
(−2.96)
(−3.81)
p(HML)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
At the beginning of each month, we divide the sample into BETA quintiles based on previous month estimates
for market risk. Then we divide each quintile into ﬁve groups based on the previous month’s RCP measures,
which proxy for network reciprocity. Panel A corresponds to the average RCP of each portfolio. Panel B corre-
sponds to the average market risk of each portfolio. Panel C represents the average equally weighted monthly
returns (RETURN-EW) in each portfolio. HML is the difference between High and Low reciprocity portfo-
lios for each BETA quintile. s.e. (HML), t(HML), and p(HML) respectively correspond to the Newey-West
corrected standard errors and associated t-statistics and p-values. ***, **, * indicates statistical signiﬁcance
at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively
third, fourth, and ﬁfth VOL quintiles for the zero-cost RC P −V OL portfolios are -1.7%,
-2%, and -2%, respectively, indicating economic signiﬁcance for the reciprocity factor.
We then examine the systematic impact of broker network connectivity on stock returns
through equation (15). Tables 13, 14, and 15 provide the results for the factor regressions
on equally-weighted returns15 of CON N ECT −SI Z E, CON N ECT −BET A, and
CON N ECT −V OL portfolios. In all three tables, Panels A, B, and C, respectively, show
the results for portfolios where we use N D, WCC, and RC P as connectivity proxies.
We ﬁrst investigate the monthly return premiums associated with CON N ECT −SI Z E
portfolios. In Panel A of Table 13, we observe that the coefﬁcient for the constant term varies
between -3.4% and -36 bps for zero-cost N D −SI Z E portfolios. They are statistically
15 We present the factor analysis results only for equally-weighted portfolios, since the results for value-
weighted portfolios are very similar.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table10 Multivariate Portfolio Analysis: 5x5 portfolios on global connectivity (ND) and trade volume (VOL).
This table presents the characteristics of multivariate portfolios based on ND and VOL.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: ND
Low
0.036
0.089
0.122
0.162
0.238
2
0.059
0.115
0.156
0.206
0.298
3
0.076
0.13
0.175
0.231
0.338
4
0.092
0.144
0.192
0.255
0.385
High
0.114
0.166
0.218
0.291
0.483
Panel B: VOL
Low
13.28
15.73
16.61
17.58
18.81
2
14.16
15.79
16.65
17.59
19.00
3
14.65
15.86
16.7
17.65
19.26
4
14.93
15.95
16.78
17.79
19.72
High
15.15
16.07
16.92
17.99
20.87
Panel C: RETURN - EW
Low
0.009
0.014
0.002
−0.001
−0.005
2
0.012
0.008
−0.003
0.005
0.004
3
0.010
0.011
−0.001
−0.003
−0.005
4
0.013
0.007
−0.002
0.000
0.003
High
0.014
0.007
−0.002
−0.004
−0.002
HML
0.006
−0.007
−0.004
−0.003
0.002
s.e.(HML)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
t(HML)
(0.99)
(−1.53)
(−0.63)
(−0.44)
(0.44)
p(HML)
(0.32)
(0.13)
(0.53)
(0.66)
(0.67)
At the beginning of each month, we divide the sample into VOL quintiles based on the logarithm of the
previous month’s total trading volume. Then we divide each quintile into ﬁve groups based on the previous
month’s ND measures, which proxy for global connectivity. Panel A corresponds to the average ND of each
portfolio. Panel B corresponds to the average log trade volume of each portfolio. Panel C represents the
average equally weighted monthly returns (RETURN-EW) in each portfolio. HML is the difference between
High and Low connectivity portfolios for each VOL quintile. s.e. (HML), t(HML), and p(HML) respectively
correspond to the Newey-West corrected standard errors and associated t-statistics and p-values. ***, **, *
indicates statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively
signiﬁcant at least at a 5% level for all quintiles except those stocks with the largest market
capitalization. We further reject the null hypothesis that the constant terms are jointly equal
to zero, highlighting the systematic pricing impact of broker network density, controlling for
ﬁrm size. In Panel B of Table 13, when we measure network risk with WCC, we observe that
the magnitudes of the monthly premiums are quite similar to those of N D. The constant term
varies between -3.2% and -20 bps. The return premiums associated with the ﬁrst, second, and
third quintiles are statistically signiﬁcant. However, we are able to reject the null hypothesis
that the constant terms are jointly equal to zero for the zero-cost WCC −SI Z E portfolios as
well. The results are consistent for zero-cost RC P −SI Z E portfolios, presented in Table 13
Panel C. The zero-cost portfolios seem to provide statistically signiﬁcant return premiums
for all quintiles except the largest SI Z E quintile. However, once again, we are able to ﬁrmly
reject the null hypothesis that the return premiums associated with zero-cost RC P −SI Z E
portfolios are jointly equal to zero, indicating that broker connectivity is systematically
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 11 Multivariate Portfolio Analysis: 5x5 portfolios on local connectivity (WCC) and trade volume
(VOL). This table presents the characteristics of multivariate portfolios based on WCC and VOL.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: WCC
Low
0.230
0.409
0.488
0.561
0.665
2
0.319
0.466
0.542
0.616
0.722
3
0.371
0.493
0.567
0.642
0.756
4
0.413
0.518
0.591
0.666
0.793
High
0.462
0.553
0.624
0.702
0.854
Panel B: VOL
Low
13.29
15.72
16.60
17.52
18.72
2
14.15
15.78
16.65
17.57
18.94
3
14.65
15.88
16.71
17.68
19.24
4
14.94
15.96
16.79
17.81
19.78
High
15.14
16.07
16.92
18.00
20.98
Panel C: RETURN - EW
Low
0.010
0.012
0.004
0.000
−0.009
2
0.011
0.012
0.000
0.002
0.001
3
0.015
0.011
−0.004
−0.001
−0.001
4
0.010
0.010
−0.003
−0.004
0.001
High
0.012
0.002
−0.004
−0.001
0.002
HML
0.001
−0.009∗
−0.007∗
−0.001
0.01∗∗
s.e.(HML)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
t(HML)
(0.16)
(−1.90)
(−1.75)
(−0.21)
(2.28)
p(HML)
(0.88)
(0.06)
(0.08)
(0.83)
(0.02)
At the beginning of each month, we divide the sample into VOL quintiles based on the logarithm of the
previous month’s total trading volume. Then we divide each quintile into ﬁve groups based on the previous
month’s WCC measures, which proxy for local connectivity. Panel A corresponds to the average WCC of
each portfolio. Panel B corresponds to the average log trade volume of each portfolio. Panel C represents the
average equally weighted monthly returns (RETURN-EW) in each portfolio. HML is the difference between
High and Low connectivity portfolios for each VOL quintile. s.e. (HML), t(HML), and p(HML) respectively
correspond to the Newey-West corrected standard errors and associated t-statistics and p-values. ***, **, *
indicates statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively
priced in equity markets even after controlling for ﬁrm size. Overall, our results align with
our previous ﬁndings, which suggest that the connectivity impact is more prominent for small
stocks.
Next, we examine the monthly return premium associated with CON N ECT −BET A
portfolios. In Table 14 - Panel A, we document that the return premiums associated with
the zero-cost N D −BET A portfolios vary between -2.5% and -72 bps, all statistically
signiﬁcant except for the ﬁfth BET A quintile. For WCC −BET A portfolios, the results
presented in Panel B are quite similar, with return premiums varying between -2.9%, and
-49 bps, again, all statistically signiﬁcant except the largest BETA quintile. For both N D −
BET A and WCC −BET A portfolios, however, we strongly reject the null hypothesis that
return premiums are jointly equal to zero, highlighting the systemic price impact of broker
connectivity on stock returns even after controlling for market risk. In Panel C, similar to
our previous results, we observe that the impact is strongest for RC P −BET A portfolios
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 12 Multivariate Portfolio Analysis: 5x5 portfolios on network reciprocity (RCP) and trade volume
(VOL). This table presents the characteristics of multivariate portfolios based on RCP and VOL.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: RCP
Low
0.424
0.560
0.595
0.628
0.693
2
0.541
0.637
0.672
0.696
0.747
3
0.593
0.672
0.710
0.737
0.781
4
0.634
0.703
0.740
0.774
0.814
High
0.686
0.740
0.776
0.813
0.857
Panel B: VOL
Low
13.53
15.83
16.70
17.67
18.89
2
14.26
15.84
16.71
17.73
19.29
3
14.57
15.87
16.70
17.70
19.51
4
14.82
15.91
16.75
17.68
19.69
High
14.99
15.96
16.81
17.81
20.30
Panel C: RETURN - EW
Low
0.011
0.009
0.006
0.005
0.005
2
0.011
0.013
0.001
0.008
0.007
3
0.013
0.006
0.001
0.002
0.004
4
0.014
0.013
−0.002
−0.005
−0.006
High
0.011
0.006
−0.013
−0.014
−0.016
HML
0.000
−0.001
−0.017∗∗∗
−0.02∗∗∗
−0.02∗∗∗
s.e. (HML)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
t(HML)
(−0.01)
(−0.29)
(−3.27)
(−3.28)
(−4.16)
p(HML)
(0.99)
(0.77)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
At the beginning of each month, we divide the sample into VOL quintiles based on the logarithm of the
previous month’s total trading volume. Then we divide each quintile into ﬁve groups based on the previous
month’s RCP measures, which proxy for network reciprocity. Panel A corresponds to the average RCP of
each portfolio. Panel B corresponds to the average log trade volume of each portfolio. Panel C represents the
average equally weighted monthly returns (RETURN-EW) in each portfolio. HML is the difference between
High and Low reciprocity portfolios for each VOL quintile. s.e. (HML), t(HML), and p(HML) respectively
correspond to the Newey-West corrected standard errors and associated t-statistics and p-values. ***, **, *
indicates statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively
with return premiums varying between -3.5% and -1.6%, all statistically signiﬁcant at a 1%
level. In Panel C, we are again able to reject the null hypothesis that the return premiums on
zero-cost RC P −BET A portfolios are jointly equal to zero, indicating that the connectivity
discount is prevalent even after controlling for market risk.
Finally, we document the monthly return premium associated with zero-cost
CON N ECT −V OL portfolios. Table 15 - Panel A shows that the premiums for zero-
cost N D −V OL portfolios vary between -1.2% and 50 bps. Even though we are able to
reject the null hypothesis that premiums for zero-cost N D −V OL portfolios are jointly
equal to zero at a 10% level, we observe a statistically signiﬁcant return premium associated
only with the second VOL quintile. This ﬁnding is in line with our previous results, where
we document that the variation in global connectivity can mainly be explained away by the
variation in overall turnover. The results are very similar for our local connectivity proxy.
In Table 15, the coefﬁcients for constant terms vary between -1.3% and 1.4%. Using the
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table13 Factor regression results: CONNECT-SIZE portfolios. This table presents the results of the following
regressiononthetime-seriesofequallyweightedmonthlyreturnsofﬁvezero-costCONNECT-SIZEportfolios:
Rp = ϑ1p + ϑ2p Rmkt + ϑ3pSM B + ϑ4p H ML + ϑ5pU M D + εp.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: ND-SIZE portfolios
ϑ1
−0.0316∗∗∗
−0.0343∗∗∗
−0.0117∗∗
−0.0175∗∗
−0.0036
(0.0074)
(0.0067)
(0.0059)
(0.0072)
(0.0070)
ϑ2
0.0691
−0.0675
0.0097
−0.0503
−0.0303
(0.0836)
(0.0884)
(0.0789)
(0.0895)
(0.0775)
ϑ3
−0.0193
−0.2556
−0.1961
−0.2301
0.1158
(0.1638)
(0.2014)
(0.1817)
(0.2105)
(0.1945)
ϑ4
−0.1870
0.4389∗∗
0.0076
0.4785∗
0.0506
(0.2274)
(0.2210)
(0.2311)
(0.2449)
(0.2121)
ϑ5
0.3835
0.1464
0.3239
0.4872∗
−0.0124
(0.2666)
(0.1712)
(0.2435)
(0.2635)
(0.1765)
R2
3.9%
3.9%
3.4%
6.2%
0.6%
GRS
8.41∗∗∗
p(GRS)
(0.00)
Panel B: WCC-SIZE portfolios
ϑ1
−0.0321∗∗∗
−0.0324∗∗∗
−0.0220∗∗∗
−0.0108
−0.0020
(0.0080)
(0.0060)
(0.0056)
(0.0068)
(0.0069)
ϑ2
0.0789
−0.0640
−0.0717
−0.0307
−0.1204
(0.0750)
(0.0691)
(0.0765)
(0.0939)
(0.0787)
ϑ3
0.0874
−0.2422
−0.3602∗∗
−0.1401
0.0838
(0.1648)
(0.1628)
(0.1680)
(0.1967)
(0.1737)
ϑ4
−0.1645
0.2832∗
0.2108
0.4166
0.1729
(0.2153)
(0.1669)
(0.2540)
(0.2583)
(0.2224)
ϑ5
0.3640
0.1145
0.1141
0.4836∗
−0.0691
(0.2580)
(0.1635)
(0.2302)
(0.2635)
(0.1707)
R2
3.1%
2.7%
3.8%
5.8%
2.7%
GRS
9.20∗∗∗
p(GRS)
(0.00)
Panel C: RCP - SIZE portfolios
ϑ1
−0.0295∗∗∗
−0.0395∗∗∗
−0.0217∗∗∗
−0.0197∗∗∗
−0.0069
(0.0089)
(0.0066)
(0.0067)
(0.0070)
(0.0061)
ϑ2
−0.0547
−0.1615∗∗
−0.0791
−0.1311∗
−0.1820∗∗∗
(0.0917)
(0.0776)
(0.0735)
(0.0784)
(0.0590)
ϑ3
−0.1213
−0.3668∗
−0.1915
−0.2804
−0.1572
(0.1939)
(0.1921)
(0.1670)
(0.1955)
(0.1546)
ϑ4
−0.0895
0.6154∗∗∗
0.1722
0.5294∗∗
0.2945
(0.2456)
(0.1950)
(0.2314)
(0.2317)
(0.1864)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 13 continued
Low
2
3
4
High
ϑ5
0.2540
0.1264
0.2487
0.4068∗
−0.0518
(0.2594)
(0.1832)
(0.2371)
(0.2435)
(0.1542)
R2
2.1%
7.6%
2.6%
7.0%
5.3%
GRS
8.45∗∗∗
p(GRS)
(0.00)
The sample period is between March 2005 and November 2015. Panel A provides the results for portfolios
constructed using the global connectivity measure (network density, ND). Panel B provides the results for
portfolios constructed using the average local connectivity measure (weighted clustering coefﬁcient, WCC).
Panel C provides the results for portfolios constructed using network reciprocity (RCP). We provide the
coefﬁcient estimate and its respective Newey-West standard errors in parentheses. For goodness of ﬁt, we
provide R2 measures. Last two rows in each panel provide the Gibbons et al. (1989) test statistic and the
corresponding p-value for the null hypothesis that ϑ1 = 0. ***, **, * denotes statistical signiﬁcance at 1%,
5%, and 10%, respectively
Table 14 Factor regression results: CONNECT-BETA portfolios. This table presents the results of the fol-
lowing regression on the time-series of equally weighted monthly returns of ﬁve zero-cost CONNECT-BETA
portfolios: Rp = ϑ1p + ϑ2p Rmkt + ϑ3pSM B + ϑ4p H ML + ϑ5pU M D + εp.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: ND-BETA portfolios
ϑ1
−0.0258∗∗∗
−0.0146∗∗
−0.0180∗∗∗
−0.0162∗∗∗
−0.0072
(0.0064)
(0.0058)
(0.0053)
(0.0058)
(0.0076)
ϑ2
−0.0592
0.1380∗∗
−0.0314
0.0265
−0.0777
(0.0592)
(0.0657)
(0.0681)
(0.0669)
(0.0800)
ϑ3
−0.0588
−0.1367
−0.3866∗∗
0.0587
0.0508
(0.1868)
(0.1529)
(0.1789)
(0.1374)
(0.1973)
ϑ4
0.1827
0.1265
0.2683
0.1495
−0.0722
(0.2140)
(0.1884)
(0.1756)
(0.1887)
(0.2312)
ϑ5
0.4590∗
0.3673∗∗
0.2782
−0.0417
0.0830
(0.2479)
(0.1733)
(0.1858)
(0.1437)
(0.2409)
R2
0.0387
0.0785
0.0705
0.0137
0.0154
GRS
4.87∗∗∗
p(GRS)
(0.00)
Panel B: WCC-BETA portfolios
ϑ1
−0.0290∗∗∗
−0.0134∗∗
−0.0131∗∗
−0.0154∗∗∗
−0.0049
(0.0064)
(0.0055)
(0.0052)
(0.0057)
(0.0074)
ϑ2
−0.0637
0.1022
−0.0656
0.0608
−0.0617
(0.0657)
(0.0651)
(0.0552)
(0.0624)
(0.0894)
ϑ3
0.0008
−0.1144
−0.3124∗
0.0814
0.0801
(0.1935)
(0.1558)
(0.1648)
(0.1426)
(0.1901)
ϑ4
0.0862
0.0925
0.2776∗
0.2011
−0.2215
(0.2300)
(0.1928)
(0.1609)
(0.1817)
(0.2138)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 14 continued
Low
2
3
4
High
ϑ5
0.4065
0.2667
0.2822
−0.1383
−0.0199
(0.2765)
(0.1822)
(0.1788)
(0.1423)
(0.2166)
R2
3.4%
4.7%
6.5%
4.4%
2.0%
GRS
4.95∗∗∗
p(GRS)
(0.00)
Panel C: RCP - BETA portfolios
ϑ1
−0.0356∗∗∗
−0.0204∗∗∗
−0.0213∗∗∗
−0.0161∗∗∗
−0.0173∗∗∗
(0.0072)
(0.0061)
(0.0056)
(0.0061)
(0.0060)
ϑ2
−0.1019
0.0327
−0.1195
−0.0682
0.0269
(0.0724)
(0.0576)
(0.1012)
(0.0604)
(0.0889)
ϑ3
−0.0700
−0.1957
−0.4607∗∗∗
0.0319
−0.0115
(0.2390)
(0.1389)
(0.1615)
(0.1298)
(0.1843)
ϑ4
0.1618
0.0773
0.5077∗∗
0.2566
−0.2272
(0.2584)
(0.1943)
(0.1990)
(0.2118)
(0.2071)
ϑ5
0.3346
0.3183∗
0.1854
−0.1405
−0.0654
(0.2899)
(0.1704)
(0.1780)
(0.1707)
(0.2018)
R2
2.6%
4.1%
9.5%
3.3%
1.0%
GRS
7.70∗∗∗
p(GRS)
(0.00)
The sample period is between March 2005 and November 2015. Panel A provides the results for portfolios
constructed using the global connectivity measure (network density, ND). Panel B provides the results for
portfolios constructed using the average local connectivity measure (weighted clustering coefﬁcient, WCC).
Panel C provides the results for portfolios constructed using network reciprocity (RCP). We provide the
coefﬁcient estimate and its respective Newey-West standard errors in parentheses. For goodness of ﬁt, we
provide R2 measures. Last two rows in each panel provide the Gibbons et al. (1989) test statistic and the
corresponding p-value for the null hypothesis that ϑ1 = 0. ***, **, * denotes statistical signiﬁcance at 1%,
5%, and 10%, respectively
results of our GRS test, we reject the null hypothesis that the monthly premiums associated
with WCC −V OL portfolios are jointly equal to zero. However, only the return associated
with the second V OL quintile is negative and statistically signiﬁcant. This result may further
suggest that the variation in overall trading volume can largely explain the pricing impact
of the local connectivity of brokers. Unlike the results for N D and WCC, we observe that
the pricing impact of RC P is robust after controlling for the variation in trading volume.
Speciﬁcally, in Table 15 - Panel C, we observe that the monthly premium associated with
RC P −V OL portfolios varies between -2.3% and 16 bps. The return premiums are sta-
tistically signiﬁcant for all V OL quintiles, except the ﬁrst one, which contains stocks with
the lowest trading volume. In addition, we ﬁrmly reject the null hypothesis that the return
premiums associated with zero-cost RC P −V OL portfolios are jointly equal to zero at a
1% signiﬁcance level with the corresponding GRS test statistic equalling 4.87.
Overall, our results from the multivariate portfolio analyses indicate that the broker con-
nectivity risk cannot be explained by variation in SI Z E and BET A. On the other hand,
we observe that the pricing impact of N D and WCC largely disappears after controlling
for the variation in V OL. More importantly, we document that both the average returns and
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 15 Factor regression results: CONNECT-VOL portfolios. This table presents the results of the following
regression on the time-series of equally weighted monthly returns of ﬁve zero-cost CONNECT-VOL portfolios:
Rp = ϑ1p + ϑ2p Rmkt + ϑ3pSM B + ϑ4p H ML + ϑ5pU M D + εp.
Low
2
3
4
High
Panel A: ND-VOL portfolios
ϑ1
0.0055
−0.0123∗∗
−0.0055
−0.0051
0.0050
(0.0066)
(0.0049)
(0.0066)
(0.0070)
(0.0050)
ϑ2
0.1041
−0.0375
−0.0184
0.0425
−0.0030
(0.0644)
(0.0608)
(0.0890)
(0.0744)
(0.0820)
ϑ3
0.2270
−0.1907
−0.0347
−0.4299∗∗
−0.0382
(0.1840)
(0.1604)
(0.2014)
(0.1671)
(0.1792)
ϑ4
−0.0231
0.3338∗
0.1501
0.1071
−0.0848
(0.2309)
(0.1883)
(0.2127)
(0.1764)
(0.2012)
ϑ5
0.2555
0.2790∗
0.0932
0.3812∗∗
−0.0698
(0.2275)
(0.1554)
(0.2314)
(0.1741)
(0.1444)
R2
2.8%
4.8%
0.4%
6.7%
0.4%
GRS
1.88∗
p(GRS)
(0.10)
Panel B: WCC-VOL portfolios
ϑ1
−0.0003
−0.0126∗∗∗
−0.0076
−0.0044
0.0133∗∗
(0.0060)
(0.0049)
(0.0054)
(0.0072)
(0.0052)
ϑ2
0.0934
−0.0147
−0.0534
0.0582
−0.0559
(0.0675)
(0.0648)
(0.0662)
(0.0608)
(0.0797)
ϑ3
0.1443
−0.1415
−0.2630
−0.2028
0.2543
(0.1739)
(0.1580)
(0.1639)
(0.1530)
(0.1775)
ϑ4
0.0472
0.1277
0.0222
0.1734
−0.0809
(0.2373)
(0.1524)
(0.1770)
(0.1764)
(0.1961)
ϑ5
0.2367
0.1701
−0.1100
0.1700
−0.0226
(0.1972)
(0.1490)
(0.1864)
(0.1585)
(0.1352)
R2
2.5%
1.6%
2.3%
2.6%
3.4%
GRS
1.99∗
p(GRS)
(0.09)
Panel C: RCP - VOL portfolios
ϑ1
0.0016
−0.0094∗
−0.0167∗∗∗
−0.0221∗∗∗
−0.0231∗∗∗
(0.0073)
(0.0050)
(0.0064)
(0.0083)
(0.0055)
ϑ2
−0.0540
−0.0161
−0.1283∗
−0.1242
−0.0315
(0.0730)
(0.0719)
(0.0656)
(0.0801)
(0.0619)
ϑ3
0.1505
−0.1375
−0.2023
−0.2411
−0.0501
(0.1866)
(0.1783)
(0.1640)
(0.2066)
(0.1549)
ϑ4
−0.0716
0.3540∗∗
0.0416
0.1818
0.2571
(0.2309)
(0.1782)
(0.1698)
(0.1940)
(0.1767)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 15 continued
Low
2
3
4
High
ϑ5
0.2008
0.3986∗∗
−0.2960∗
−0.0548
0.0324
(0.2095)
(0.1979)
(0.1783)
(0.1811)
(0.1832)
R2
2.2%
6.6%
3.9%
2.2%
1.4%
GRS
4.92∗∗∗
p(GRS)
(0.00)
The sample period is between March 2005 and November 2015. Panel A provides the results for portfolios
constructed using the global connectivity measure (network density, ND). Panel B provides the results for
portfolios constructed using the average local connectivity measure (weighted clustering coefﬁcient, WCC).
Panel C provides the results for portfolios constructed using network reciprocity (RCP). We provide the
coefﬁcient estimate and its respective Newey-West standard errors in parentheses. For goodness of ﬁt, we
provide R2 measures. Last two rows in each panel provide the Gibbons et al. (1989) test statistic and the
corresponding p-value for the null hypothesis that ϑ1 = 0. ***, **, * denotes statistical signiﬁcance at 1%,
5%, and 10%, respectively
the associated monthly return premiums for RC P-based portfolios remain statistically and
economically signiﬁcant even after controlling for variation in V OL.
6.1.3 Firm-level cross-sectional regressions
In this section, we analyze the predictive relationship between network density (N D),
weighted clustering coefﬁcient (WCC), and network reciprocity (RC P) and future returns
via ﬁrm-level cross-sectional regressions. This setting enables us to control for various ﬁrm-
speciﬁc factors such as ﬁrm size (SI Z E), value (BT M), market risk (BET A), idiosyncratic
volatility (I V OL), illiquidity (I LLI Q), historical return characteristics (REV , MOM, and
M AX), and trading volume (V OL) at the same time.
In Table 16, we present the predictive relationship between broker connectivity measures
and future returns. Speciﬁcally, Panels A, B, and C of Table 16 document the results for
N D, WCC, and RC P. In the ﬁrst column of Panel A, we document a signiﬁcant and
negative relationship for one-month ahead returns, in line with our expectations. N D has
a coefﬁcient of -0.042, signiﬁcant at a 1% level. The interpretation of the economic effect
of network density is similar to our previous ﬁndings. In particular, Table 3 suggests that
the connectivity difference between High and Low ND portfolios is 0.29. Multiplying this
difference by the average slope suggests that investors demand a premium of about -1.2%
moving from Low N D to High N D portfolios, which is consistent with the value-weighted
return difference between these portfolios. In Panel A of Table 16, columns 2 to 9 extend the
univariate regression by incorporating additional ﬁrm-speciﬁc controls (except V OL) one
by one. The coefﬁcient of N D varies between -0.067 and -0.034, all statistically signiﬁcant
at least at a 5% level. To that end, we can argue that the monthly return premium due to
network density risk is between 1% and 2%, indicating that the predictive relationship is
not only statistically signiﬁcant but also economically signiﬁcant. In Column 10 of Panel A,
we also try to control for V OL in our regressions, even though we are aware of potential
problems due to multicollinearity. The pairwise correlation between N D and V OL is above
90% (see Table 1), and multicollinearity distorts our ﬁndings as the coefﬁcient of the N D
switches sign when we include V OL in our model.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 16 Firm-level cross-sectional regressions. This table presents the coefﬁcient estimates from the following model: Ri,m+1 = γ0,m + γ1,mCON N ECTi,m +
11
k=3 γ ′
k,m Xi,m + εi,m.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Panel A: Network Density
Intercept
0.013*
-0.010
-0.017***
-0.042***
-0.046
-0.045
0.006
0.003
0.003
0.067***
(0.07)
(0.54)
(0.32)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.75)
(0.88)
(0.88)
(0.01)
ND
-0.042***
-0.054***
-0.062***
-0.063***
-0.066***
-0.067***
-0.036***
-0.040***
-0.034**
0.044**
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.04)
SIZE
0.001*
0.002**
0.002***
0.003***
0.003***
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002**
(0.08)
(0.05)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.53)
(0.43)
(0.45)
(0.05)
BETA
0.005*
0.004
0.003
0.003
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
(0.06)
(0.16)
(0.21)
(0.27)
(0.38)
(0.43)
(0.49)
(0.45)
BTM
0.008***
0.007***
0.007***
0.006***
0.006***
0.006***
0.006***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
MOM
-0.010**
-0.011**
-0.007
-0.007
-0.007
-0.006
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.16)
(0.18)
(0.16)
(0.23)
REV
0.014
0.018**
0.018**
0.019**
0.020**
(0.15)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.02)
IVOL
-0.712***
-0.751***
-0.800***
-0.823***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
MAX
0.031
0.041
0.046
(0.63)
(0.52)
(0.47)
ILLIQ
2.478
-3.915
(0.72)
(0.57)
VOL
-0.006***
(0.00)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 16 continued
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Panel B: Weighted Clustering Coefﬁcient
Intercept
0.024***
0.000
-0.004
-0.028*
-0.032*
-0.031*
0.012
0.010
0.010
0.051*
(0.00)
(0.99)
(0.82)
(0.10)
(0.07)
(0.08)
(0.52)
(0.60)
(0.60)
(0.06)
WCC
-0.033***
-0.042***
-0.048***
-0.047***
-0.052***
-0.053***
-0.032***
-0.035***
-0.030***
0.025
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.20)
SIZE
0.001*
0.002**
0.003***
0.003***
0.003***
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002**
(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.37)
(0.30)
(0.35)
(0.05)
BETA
0.005*
0.004
0.003
0.003
0.002
0.003
0.002
0.002
(0.06)
(0.17)
(0.21)
(0.26)
(0.32)
(0.36)
(0.43)
(0.44)
BTM
0.008***
0.007***
0.007***
0.006***
0.006***
0.006***
0.006***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
MOM
-0.010**
-0.011
-0.007
-0.007
-0.007
-0.006
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.17)
(0.19)
(0.16)
(0.21)
REV
0.013
0.018**
0.018**
0.019**
0.020**
(0.16)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.02)
IVOL
-0.692***
-0.737***
-0.778***
-0.769***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
MAX
0.034
0.041
0.037
(0.59)
(0.52)
(0.57)
ILLIQ
0.376
-2.379
(0.96)
(0.72)
VOL
-0.005***
(0.00)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 16 continued
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Panel C: Network Reciprocity
Intercept
0.049***
0.042***
0.043***
0.017
0.017
0.018
0.042
0.043***
0.036**
0.035**
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.31)
(0.32)
(0.29)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.04)
(0.05)
RCP
-0.064***
-0.063***
-0.068***
-0.060***
-0.064***
-0.065***
-0.037***
-0.041***
-0.033***
0.003
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.02)
(0.86)
SIZE
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001*
(0.66)
(0.69)
(0.17)
(0.13)
(0.14)
(0.72)
(0.75)
(0.84)
(0.08)
BETA
0.004
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002
(0.17)
(0.41)
(0.49)
(0.58)
(0.68)
(0.73)
(0.82)
(0.62)
BTM
0.007***
0.006***
0.005***
0.005***
0.005***
0.005***
0.006***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
MOM
-0.010**
-0.011
-0.007
-0.007
-0.007
-0.006
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.17)
(0.19)
(0.16)
(0.21)
REV
0.013
0.018**
0.018**
0.019**
0.020**
(0.16)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.02)
IVOL
-0.688***
-0.758***
-0.807***
-0.780***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
MAX
0.046
0.052
0.046
(0.48)
(0.42)
(0.47)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 16 continued
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
ILLIQ
3.647
-3.479
(0.68)
(0.63)
VOL
-0.003***
(0.00)
Each month, we regress the stock return on previous months’ broker connectivity measures (network density, weighted clustering coefﬁcient, network reciprocity) along with
control factors SIZE, BETA, BTM, MOM, REV, IVOL, MAX, ILLIQ, and VOL. Entries in the table are the time-series averages of the coefﬁcients obtained from the cross-
sectional regressions. Values in parentheses present the corresponding p-values obtained from the Newey-West standard errors. Panels A, B, and C present the results for network
density (ND), weighted clustering coefﬁcient (WCC), and network reciprocity (RCP), respectively. ***, **, * indicates statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively
123

Annals of Operations Research
In Panels B and C, we repeat the analysis for WCC and RC P. In both panels, our ﬁndings
provide a similar picture. Speciﬁcally, we observe that the coefﬁcient estimate under the
univariate regression for WCC (RC P) is -0.033 (-0.064), statistically signiﬁcant at a 1%
level. The corresponding estimate for the monthly return premium for an investor moving
from a Low WCC (RC P) to a High WCC (RC P) portfolio equals -1.3% (-1.7%). The
predictive relationship between WCC (RC P) and one-month ahead returns survives under
a multivariate regression setting where we control for all other ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors except
VOL. In columns 2 to 9 of Panel B (C) the coefﬁcient of WCC (RC P) varies between
-0.053 and -0.030 (-0.068 and -0.033), indicating a monthly premium between -2.2% and
-1.2% (-1.8% and -1%). The coefﬁcients for both WCC and RC P switch positive and lose
statistical signiﬁcance due to multicollinearity when we control for V OL in column 10 of
both panels.
6.2 Intraday panel regressions
Our results so far support the conjecture that investors demand a premium for holding stocks
with sparse broker networks. Unfortunately, since network connectivity measures have an
extremely high correlation with overall trading volume, we are not able to understand the fun-
damental economic mechanism behind the systematic impact of broker network connectivity
on the cross-section of expected returns.
These ﬁndings are in line with the existing tension in the literature. On the one hand, the
information hypothesis suggests that broker networks can be direct proxies for measuring
information dissemination at the ﬁrm level (Ozsoylev & Walden, 2011). Therefore, increases
in links between brokers in a trading network can result in a signiﬁcant reduction of adverse
selection risks. On the other hand, the liquidity hypothesis indicates that in order-driven
markets without market intermediaries serving as voluntary or designated market makers,
brokers are assumed to be passive agents, solely passing their clients’ orders to the exchange
Harris (2003). In that regard, broker connections occur at random, and links between brokers
in order-driven markets essentially document overall turnover.
In the next subsection, we aim to test whether broker network connectivity measures
information asymmetry or liquidity initially by decomposing the spread into two components:
an adverse selection component related to informed trading and permanent price change,
and a transitory component related to liquidity trading and temporary price change. In the
following parts of this section, we respectively examine the predictive relationship between
broker network connectivity with intraday (60-minute) liquidity, volatility, and returns via
panel regressions with the ﬁrm- and time-ﬁxed effects (Rzayev and Ibikunle, 2019).
6.2.1 Broker network connectivity and transaction costs
In Table 17, we present the results of our intraday panel regressions, where we examine the
predictive relationship between broker network connectivity and transaction costs. Using
the seminal framework of Glosten and Harris (1988) presented in equation (11), we ﬁrst
decompose the total spread into two: an adverse selection component (ASC) and a transi-
tory component (TC). ASC proxies for the permanent price change and informed trading,
whereas the TC is attributed to temporary price change and liquidity trading. Panels A and B
of Table 17 respectively document the results of our analyses where the dependent variable is
ASC and TC (models presented in equations (17) and (18)), respectively. To the extent that
broker network connectivity measures better information diffusion, the information hypothe-
123

Annals of Operations Research
sis expects stocks with dense broker networks to have lower ASC levels even after controlling
for variations in trading volume, absolute trade imbalance, and standard deviation of returns.
On the contrary, the liquidity hypothesis indicates that broker network connectivity prox-
ies in order-driven markets merely document turnover as links between brokers are formed
at random. Therefore, according to the liquidity hypothesis, there should be no signiﬁcant
predictive relationship between broker connectivity measures and future ASC levels.
Our results support the information hypothesis. In Table 17 - Panel A1, we document
a negative and statistically signiﬁcant predictive relationship between network density and
ASC. Speciﬁcally, a 1% increase in broker network density is associated with an average
0.25TL decrease in transaction costs attributable to adverse selection risks. This ﬁnding is
robust under a multivariate setting where we control for variation in total trading volume,
absolute trade imbalance, and standard deviation of trade-by-trade returns. In Panels A2
and A3, we observe that the relationship between broker network connectivity and future
ASC levels is robust under different connectivity proxies. In particular, the results presented
in Panel A2 (A3) indicate that a 1% increase in weighted clustering coefﬁcient (network
reciprocity), on average, is associated with two percentage points (39 basis points) future
reductionin ASC levels.Wecanarguethatthepredictiverelationshipbetweenbrokernetwork
connectivity and ASC levels is also economically signiﬁcant since the average ASC in our
sample is around one percentage point.
Furthermore, in Panels B1, B2, and B3 of Table 17, we observe that the relationship
between broker network connectivity (measured by network density, weighted clustering
coefﬁcient, and network reciprocity, respectively) and future TC levels are not statistically
signiﬁcant under the univariate setting, controlling for ﬁrm- and time-ﬁxed effects. This is
sharply in contrast to the expectations of the liquidity hypothesis. Even though the coefﬁ-
cient for broker connectivity measures gains signiﬁcance under the multivariate setting, we
attribute the changes in statistical signiﬁcance to potential multicollinearity between broker
connectivity and trading volume. Combining the evidence presented in Panels A and B of
Table 17, we can therefore argue that the variation in broker network connectivity signiﬁ-
cantly covaries with ASC but not TC. This ﬁnding further supports the conjecture that an
increase in broker network connectivity results in better diffusion of private information,
which reduces information asymmetry for liquidity providers and results in lower transac-
tion costs attributable to adverse selection risk. However, the spread attributable to liquidity
trading seems not to be affected by the network connectivity.
6.2.2 Broker network connectivity and intraday liquidity
Next, we test the predictive relationship between broker network connectivity and intraday
liquidity. On the one hand, standard models for liquidity provision suggest that informed
traders demand liquidity from the market (Glosten, 1994; Seppi, 1997). On the other hand,
Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1988) suggest that informed trading activity moves in tandem with the
overall liquidity as investors with private information may maximize their beneﬁt from hiding
their advantage from others. Recent empirical studies also document a positive relationship
between informed trading activity and liquidity (Ibikunle, 2018; Rzayev and Ibikunle, 2019).
In line with these studies, we argue that the information hypothesis predicts a positive rela-
tionship between broker network connectivity (reduction in information asymmetry) and
future illiquidity levels proxied by the Amihud measure (Amihud, 2002). On the contrary,
the liquidity hypothesis expects a negative relationship between broker connectivity and
future illiquidity.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 17 Intraday panel regressions: Broker connectivity and future transaction costs. In this table, Panel A represents the results of the following panel regression: ASCi,t =
θ A
i + ν At + δA
1 CON N ECTi,t−1 + δA
2 V OLi,t−1 + δA
3 BSIi,t−1 + δA
4 SDRETi,t−1 + εA
i,t whereas Panel B represents the results of the following panel regression: TCi,t =
θT
i + νTt + δT
1 CON N ECTi,t−1 + δT
2 V OLi,t−1 + δT
3 BSIi,t−1 + δT
4 SDRETi,t−1 + εT
i,t.
Panel A1: ND
Panel A2: WCC
Panel A3: RCP
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Adverse selection component of the spread (ASC)
CONNECT
-0.246***
-0.184***
-0.0468***
-0.0248***
-0.0208***
-0.00391***
(-28.95)
(-17.51)
(-20.81)
(-9.225)
(-11.48)
(-3.282)
VOL
-0.000979***
-0.000912***
-0.00133***
(-6.323)
(-5.573)
(-9.400)
BSI
3.17e-06***
-3.71e-07
-3.90e-06***
(9.195)
(-0.742)
(-8.359)
SDRET
0.930***
0.923***
0.902***
(15.21)
(15.13)
(14.63)
Constant
0.0148***
0.0228***
0.0156***
0.0222***
0.0150***
0.0265***
(54.96)
(12.27)
(46.21)
(11.54)
(35.89)
(15.36)
Observations
2,193,116
2,176,773
2,193,116
2,176,773
2,192,483
2,176,566
R-squared
1.3%
2.4%
1.3%
2.4%
1.3%
2.4%
Firm Time FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 17 continued
Panel A1: ND
Panel A2: WCC
Panel A3: RCP
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
Panel B: Transitory component of the spread (TC)
CONNECT
-0.0128
-0.822***
0.0103***
-0.163***
0.00155
-0.0502***
(-0.721)
(-32.08)
(3.525)
(-35.83)
(1.080)
(-31.30)
VOL
0.00994***
0.0114***
0.00963***
(75.41)
(86.84)
(75.07)
BSI
1.74e-05***
1.08e-05***
-7.72e-06***
(11.99)
(6.984)
(-6.032)
SDRET
5.040***
5.076***
5.009***
(55.87)
(56.31)
(55.64)
Constant
0.0697***
-0.0588***
0.0688***
-0.0734***
0.0693***
-0.0542***
(257.6)
(-36.55)
(241.2)
(-46.43)
(259.1)
(-34.05)
Observations
2,192,521
2,176,182
2,192,521
2,176,182
2,191,888
2,175,976
R2
35.4%
35.5%
35.4%
35.6%
35.4%
35.5%
Firm Time FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
ASCi,t and TCi,t respectively represent the adverse selection and the transitory component of the spread for ﬁrm i in time interval t. In each panel, the ﬁrst column corresponds
to the variable names. Columns 2 and 3, respectively, present the univariate and multivariate results for network density (ND). Columns 4 and 5, respectively, show the univariate
and multivariate results for the weighted clustering coefﬁcient (WCC). Columns 6 and 7, respectively, document the univariate and multivariate results for network reciprocity
(RCP). T Vi,t is the natural logarithm of the total trading volume. BSIi,t is the absolute difference between buyer- and seller-initiated trades for ﬁrm i in time interval t. SDRETi,t
is the standard deviation of trade-by-trade returns of ﬁrm i in time interval t. We calculate all variables in 60-minute time intervals. For each variable, we provide coefﬁcient
estimates along with the absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses. t-statistics are obtained from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors (White, 1980). ***, **, * indicate
statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 18 Intraday panel regressions: Broker connectivity and future liquidity. In this table, we present the results of the following panel regression: I LLI Qi,t = θi + νt +
δ1CON N ECTi,t−1 + δ2V OLi,t−1 + δ3BSIi,t−1 + δ4SDRETi,t−1 + εi,t.
Panel A: ND
Panel B: WCC
Panel C: RCP
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
Amihud illiquidity measure (ILLIQ)
CONNECT
-10.06***
3.911***
-2.259***
0.665***
-0.840***
0.121***
(-157.3)
(26.60)
(-170.5)
(21.28)
(-90.65)
(8.616)
VOL
-0.0741***
-0.0775***
-0.0708***
(-42.25)
(-40.19)
(-39.14)
BSI
-6.57e-05***
-2.43e-05***
8.17e-05***
(-8.719)
(-3.897)
(14.54)
SDRET
160.0***
160.0***
160.5***
(59.12)
(59.10)
(58.98)
Constant
0.548***
0.694***
0.584***
0.724***
0.558***
0.662***
(377.6)
(26.10)
(359.6)
(25.99)
(327.3)
(24.51)
Observations
3,896,007
3,825,543
3,896,007
3,825,543
3,890,121
3,823,692
R2
11%
16%
11%
16%
11%
16%
Firm Time FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
I LLI Q Amihud illiquidity measure presented in equation (2) for ﬁrm i in time interval t. The ﬁrst column corresponds to the variable names. Columns 2 and 3, respectively,
present the univariate and multivariate results for network density (ND). Columns 4 and 5, respectively, show the univariate and multivariate results for the weighted clustering
coefﬁcient (WCC). Columns 6 and 7, respectively, document the univariate and multivariate results for network reciprocity (RCP). T Vi,t is the natural logarithm of the total
trading volume. BSIi,t is the absolute difference between buyer- and seller-initiated trades for ﬁrm i in time interval t. SDRETi,t is the standard deviation of trade-by-trade
returns of ﬁrm i in time interval t. We calculate all variables in 60-minute time intervals. For each variable, we provide coefﬁcient estimates along with the absolute value of
t-statistics in parentheses. t-statistics are obtained from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors (White, 1980). ***, **, * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5% and 10%
levels, respectively
123

Annals of Operations Research
We present the estimates obtained from equation (19) in Table 18. Panels A, B, and C
of Table 18 present the univariate and multivariate results where the dependent variable for
broker network connectivity is network density, weighted clustering coefﬁcient, and network
reciprocity, respectively. Under the univariate setting, we observe a negative and statistically
signiﬁcant relationship between broker network connectivity and future illiquidity levels.
This would imply that as broker networks become more dense, the future liquidity of a
stock increases. However, under the multivariate setting, the coefﬁcient for broker network
connectivity switches sign for all of the alternative connectivity proxies. This ﬁnding may
suggest that, after controlling for variation in overall trading volume, absolute trade imbal-
ance, and the volatility of trade-by-trade returns, an increase in broker network connectivity
(decrease in information asymmetry) is associated with a decrease in future liquidity levels,
as suggested by the information hypothesis. Therefore, once again, our results factor the
information hypothesis over the liquidity hypothesis. Similar to our ﬁndings presented in the
previous subsection, the negative effect of broker connectivity on future illiquidity levels is
both statistically and economically signiﬁcant.
6.2.3 Broker network connectivity and intraday volatility
We then investigate the intraday predictive relationship between broker network connectivity
and return volatility, presented in equation (20). We estimate this predictive relationship to
further extricate whether broker network connectivity proxies better information diffusion or
merely documents overall turnover. The previous literature establishes a well-founded posi-
tive relationship between trading volume and volatility (Hellwig et al., 1980; Karpoff, 1987;
Park, 2010). In that regard, if the broker network connectivity merely documents overall
turnover as suggested by the liquidity hypothesis, we would expect to observe a positive rela-
tionship between broker network connectivity and future volatility. However, recent studies
attribute the positive relationship between trading volume and volatility to liquidity traders
(Collin-Dufresne & Fos, 2016). In supporting this conjecture, Rzayev and Ibikunle (2019)
empirically document a negative relationship between informed trading volume and future
volatility. To the extent that broker network connectivity is a measure of better information
diffusion, the information hypothesis expects a more stable price process and lower return
volatility for stocks with dense broker networks.
Table 19 presents the results. Speciﬁcally, Panels A, B, and C of Table 19 present the
results of univariate and multivariate regressions where the independent variable for broker
network connectivity is selected as broker network density, weighted clustering coefﬁcient,
and network reciprocity, respectively. Our results align with the expectations of the infor-
mation hypothesis rather than the liquidity hypothesis. Notably, under a univariate setting,
we observe that a 1% increase in network density (weighted clustering coefﬁcient) [network
reciprocity] is on average associated with a statistically signiﬁcant 327 (67) [24] basis points
decrease in future volatility levels. The relationship remains negative and statistically signiﬁ-
cant under multivariate settings for all proxies except network reciprocity. Speciﬁcally, a 1%
increase in network density (weighted clustering coefﬁcient) is associated with an 83 (10)
basis points decrease in future volatility levels. Given that the sample average for SDRET
is around 40 basis points, we can argue that the relationship is not only statistically signiﬁ-
cant but also economically signiﬁcant even after controlling for several intraday ﬁrm-speciﬁc
factors.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 19 Intraday panel regressions: Broker connectivity and future volatility. In this table, we present the results of the following panel regression: SDRETi,t = θi + νt +
δ1CON N ECTi,t−1 + δ2V OLi,t−1 + δ3BSIi,t−1 + δ4SDRETi,t−1 + εi,t. SDRETi,t is the standard deviation of trade-by-trade returns of ﬁrm i in time interval t.
Volatility
Panel A: ND
Panel B: WCC
Panel C: RCP
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
CONNECT
-0.0327***
-0.00837***
-0.00673***
-0.00107***
-0.00241***
-1.84e-05
(-292.3)
(-39.14)
(-381.6)
(-25.13)
(-209.6)
(-1.078)
VOL
-0.000165***
-0.000163***
-0.000178***
(-53.99)
(-49.65)
(-57.09)
BSI
3.12e-07***
1.50e-07***
-6.35e-08***
(28.99)
(17.18)
(-9.211)
SDRET
0.331***
0.331***
0.331***
(72.55)
(72.49)
(72.35)
Constant
0.00356***
0.00400***
0.00365***
0.00398***
0.00357***
0.00411***
(2,024)
(82.76)
(1,945)
(79.31)
(1,775)
(84.40)
Observations
3,838,195
3,773,835
3,838,195
3,773,835
3,833,017
3,772,200
R2
28%
42%
28%
42%
27%
42%
Firm Time FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Columns 2 and 3, respectively, present the univariate and multivariate results for network density (ND). Columns 4 and 5, respectively, show the univariate and multivariate
results for the weighted clustering coefﬁcient (WCC). Columns 6 and 7, respectively, document the univariate and multivariate results for network reciprocity (RCP). T Vi,t
is the natural logarithm of the total trading volume. BSIi,t is the absolute difference between buyer- and seller-initiated trades for ﬁrm i in time interval t. We calculate all
variables in 60-minute time intervals. For each variable, we provide coefﬁcient estimates along with the absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses. t-statistics are obtained from
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors (White, 1980). ***, **, * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively
123

Annals of Operations Research
6.2.4 Broker network connectivity and intraday returns
Finally, we test the predictive relationship between broker network connectivity and future
intradayreturns,presentedinequation (21).TheresultsarepresentedinTable20.Speciﬁcally,
Panels A, B, and C of Table 20 present the univariate and multivariate regressions where the
independent variable for broker network connectivity is taken as network density, weighted
clustering coefﬁcient, and network reciprocity, respectively. In each of the three panels, we
observe a signiﬁcant and negative relationship between broker connectivity and future returns
in a univariate setting. Furthermore, for all of the network proxies, the negative predictive
relationship persists under several alternative multivariate settings. Speciﬁcally, a 1% increase
in network density (weighted clustering coefﬁcient) [network reciprocity] is associated with
a 169 (60) [23] bps decrease in future 60-minute returns in most restricted settings, showing
that the network impact is statistically and economically signiﬁcant. Our results suggest that
the expected returns are higher for stocks with sparse networks even after controlling for the
variation in trading volume, volatility of returns, illiquidity levels, transaction costs, along
with unobserved heterogeneity across ﬁrms and time. It is important to underline that, unlike
our analysis in monthly frequency, we observe that the predictive relationship between broker
connectivity and intraday future returns is not affected by the variation in trade volume.
Overall, our intraday panel regressions demonstrate the relevance of broker networks in
order-driven markets. Speciﬁcally, we show that there is a signiﬁcant and negative predictive
relationship between broker network connectivity and the adverse selection component of
the spread, even after controlling for overall trading volume, absolute trade imbalance, and
return volatility. To that end, we can argue that information asymmetry is larger for stocks that
have sparse broker network connectivity. We further document that the univariate predictive
relationship between broker connectivity and the transitory component of the spread is sta-
tistically insigniﬁcant, which further supports the information hypothesis over the liquidity
hypothesis. Next, we document that an increase in broker connectivity is associated with a
decrease in overall liquidity after controlling for the variation in overall trading volume. This
ﬁnding is in line with theoretical expectations of Admati and Pﬂeiderer (1988) and empirical
ﬁndings of (Ibikunle 2018; Rzayev and Ibikunle 2019), which show that the participation of
informed traders moves in tandem with overall liquidity. We then provide additional support
for the information hypothesis by documenting that an increase in broker network connectiv-
ity is associated with lower future volatility. In that regard, stocks with dense broker networks
have a more stable price process even after controlling for the variation in overall trading
volume, along with other ﬁrm-speciﬁc measures. Finally, we document a negative and sta-
tistically signiﬁcant relationship between broker network connectivity and intraday returns
after controlling for variations in several factors, including the overall trading volume. This
ﬁnding is in line with the expectations of Easley and O’Hara (2004), who argue that unin-
formed investors demand a premium for holding stocks that have high levels of information
asymmetry. To the extent that broker network connectivity proxies better information diffu-
sion and lower levels of information asymmetry, the information hypothesis predicts lower
future returns for dense broker networks.
7 Conclusion
There is a conﬂict in the literature about the role of market intermediaries in order-driven
markets. On the one hand, in order-driven markets where there are no designated market
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 20 Intraday panel regressions: Broker connectivity and future returns. In this table, we present the results of the following panel regression: RETU RNi,t = θi + νt +
δ1CON N ECTi,t−1 + δ2V OLi,t−1 + δ3SDRETi,t−1 + δ4I LLI Qi,t−1δ5 ASCi,t−1 + δ6TCi,t−1 + εi,t. RETU RNi,t is the logarithmic return for ﬁrm i in time period t.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Network density
CONNECT
-0.0245***
-0.0276***
-0.0250***
-0.0249***
-0.0168***
-0.0169***
(-37.87)
(-37.28)
(-33.07)
(-32.85)
(-18.13)
(-18.25)
TV
3.03e-05***
9.03e-07
-1.15e-07
-6.70e-05***
-6.37e-05***
(11.22)
(0.279)
(-0.0356)
(-8.498)
(-8.049)
SDRET
-0.00450*
-0.00168
0.0210***
0.0224***
(-1.673)
(-0.532)
(2.986)
(3.164)
ILLIQ
-9.13e-06*
2.16e-05
2.18e-05
(-1.913)
(1.596)
(1.608)
ASC
2.96e-05*
6.09e-05
(1.818)
(1.501)
TC
-4.60e-05
(-1.586)
Constant
0.000138***
-0.000171***
0.000162***
0.000166***
0.000805***
0.000764***
(25.82)
(-6.249)
(4.303)
(4.454)
(8.256)
(7.795)
Observations
5,742,277
5,742,277
5,618,209
5,618,209
3,041,520
3,038,416
R-squared
0.20%
0.20%
0.20%
0.20%
0.30%
0.30%
Firm Time FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 20 continued
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel B: Weighted clustering coefﬁcient
CONNECT
-0.00522***
-0.00683***
-0.00649***
-0.00648***
-0.00596***
-0.00600***
(-51.85)
(-57.17)
(-52.64)
(-52.37)
(-36.43)
(-36.62)
TV
7.87e-05***
5.97e-05***
5.90e-05***
8.14e-05***
8.61e-05***
(28.30)
(17.95)
(17.84)
(9.726)
(10.24)
SDRET
-0.00298
-0.00140
0.0255***
0.0274***
(-1.112)
(-0.445)
(3.632)
(3.873)
ILLIQ
-5.13e-06
2.61e-05*
2.60e-05*
(-1.074)
(1.929)
(1.915)
ASC
2.62e-05
6.27e-05
(1.571)
(1.557)
TC
-7.03e-05**
(-2.420)
Constant
0.000210***
-0.000572***
-0.000363***
-0.000360***
-0.000793***
-0.000851***
(38.99)
(-20.52)
(-9.530)
(-9.510)
(-7.820)
(-8.345)
Observations
5,742,277
5,742,277
5,618,209
5,618,209
3,041,520
3,038,416
R-squared
0.20%
0.30%
0.20%
0.20%
0.30%
0.30%
Firm Time FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 20 continued
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel C: Network reciprocity
CONNECT
-0.00207***
-0.00226***
-0.00208***
-0.00208***
-0.00227***
-0.00228***
(-49.37)
(-50.59)
(-46.34)
(-46.18)
(-35.79)
(-35.89)
TV
2.38e-05***
-5.59e-06*
-6.66e-06**
-5.37e-05***
-5.09e-05***
(9.262)
(-1.825)
(-2.193)
(-7.816)
(-7.381)
SDRET
-0.00340
1.52e-05
0.0273***
0.0288***
(-1.255)
(0.00477)
(3.890)
(4.073)
ILLIQ
-1.10e-05**
1.70e-05
1.70e-05
(-2.301)
(1.253)
(1.256)
ASC
3.05e-05*
7.09e-05*
(1.932)
(1.786)
TC
-5.45e-05*
(-1.882)
Constant
0.000169***
-7.16e-05***
0.000257***
0.000261***
0.000771***
0.000735***
(33.51)
(-2.681)
(6.982)
(7.129)
(8.738)
(8.301)
Observations
5,729,485
5,729,485
5,614,095
5,614,095
3,041,508
3,038,406
R2
0.20%
0.20%
0.20%
0.20%
0.30%
0.30%
Firm Time FE
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Panel A presents the univariate and multivariate results for network density (ND). Panel B shows the univariate and multivariate results for the weighted clustering coefﬁcient
(WCC). Panel C documents the univariate and multivariate results for network reciprocity (RCP). V OLi,t is the natural logarithm of the total trading volume. SDRETi,t is the
standard deviation of trade-by-trade returns of ﬁrm i in time interval t. I LLI Q Amihud illiquidity measure presented in equation (2) for ﬁrm i in time interval t. ASCi,t and
TCi,t respectively represent the adverse selection and the transitory component of the spread for ﬁrm i in time interval t. We calculate all variables in 60-minute time intervals.
For each variable, we provide coefﬁcient estimates along with the absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses. t-statistics are obtained from heteroskedasticity-consistent standard
errors (White, 1980). ***,**,* indicate statistical signiﬁcance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively
123

Annals of Operations Research
makers, intermediaries (brokers) are assumed to be passive agents whose only role is to
transmit clients’ orders to the exchange. In this setting, the liquidity hypothesis suggests that
broker connections occur at random and merely document overall turnover. On the other
hand, the information hypothesis suggests that dense broker networks can result in more
efﬁcient dissemination of private information, reducing adverse selection risks.
In this paper, we empirically examine whether broker connections can be systematically
priced in an order-driven market, Borsa Istanbul, thanks to order and trade book data where
traders are identiﬁed at the broker level at high frequency. Our results indicate a negative
and statistically signiﬁcant relationship between broker connectivity and future returns, sug-
gesting that in BIST, investors demand a premium for holding stocks with sparse broker
networks. We document that, on average, moving from the lowest connectivity to the highest
broker connectivity quintile results 1% to 2% reduction in future expected returns, even after
controlling for many ﬁrm-speciﬁc controls. These results seem to be robust under different
speciﬁcations of broker network connectivity.
However, all of the connectivity proxies presented in this paper are signiﬁcantly correlated
with overall trading volume, and the predictive relationship between broker connectivity
measures future returns at a monthly frequency disappears after accounting for the variation
in trading volume. Therefore, we cannot say the reduction in future expected returns is due
to better diffusion of private information and reduction in adverse selection risks.
To understand whether the network premium observed in monthly frequency for BIST
stocks is due to risks associated with liquidity or information asymmetry, we examine the
intraday (60-minute) predictive relationship between network connectivity, transaction costs,
along with liquidity, volatility, and returns in a panel regression setting.
The results of our intraday panel regressions provide support for the information hypoth-
esis. In particular, we show that an increase in network connectivity is associated with a
signiﬁcant decrease in the adverse selection component of the spread, which proxies for per-
manent price changes and informed trading. We fail to reject the null hypothesis that there is
no signiﬁcant univariate predictive broker network connectivity and transitory component of
the spread, which proxies for temporary price change and liquidity trading. Next, we show
that an increase in broker network connectivity (reduction in adverse selection risk) decreases
liquidity, controlling for the variation in overall trade volume and several other ﬁrm-speciﬁc
characteristics. This ﬁnding aligns with the conclusions of recent empirical studies, which
suggest that informed trading may enhance liquidity in secondary markets. Additionally, our
results suggest that an increase in broker network connectivity decreases future volatility,
implying that dense broker networks are associated with more stable price processes. In line
with our monthly analyses, we document a negative and statistically signiﬁcant relationship
between broker network connectivity and intraday returns, even after controlling for various
ﬁrm-speciﬁc characteristics including the overall trade volume.
Consequently, the ﬁndings presented in this paper contribute to the current debate on the
role of intermediaries in order-driven markets. More speciﬁcally, we document that investors
demand a premium for holding stocks with sparse broker networks even in order-driven
markets where brokers are assumed to be passive agents. We further establish a potential
economic channel for network premium by documenting that broker connections may facil-
itate a more efﬁcient ﬂow of private information. The speciﬁc broker links for a particular
stock may increase the diffusion of private information and reduce adverse selection risk
associated with informed trading.
The increasing prevalence of order-driven markets, especially in developed economies,
may lead to the conclusion that the role of market intermediaries will be limited in the future.
However, our results show that even in order-driven markets with no designated or volun-
123

Annals of Operations Research
tary market makers, the trading network among market intermediaries may systematically
inﬂuence securities prices through promoting efﬁcient diffusion of information.
Declarations
Conﬂict of Interest Tiniç declares that he has no conﬂict of interest. Sensoy declares that he has no conﬂict
of interest. Demir declares that she has no conﬂict of interest. Duc Khuong Nguyen acknowledges thesup-
port provided by the Prague University of Economics and Business as part of Institutional Firefox https://
pdfeprooﬁng.straive.com/springer/stor_html_corr.asp?ﬁle=authrl...2of324-02-2026,14:51 Research Support
No. IP 100040.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adamic, L., Brunetti, C., Harris, J. H., & Kirilenko, A. (2017). Trading networks. The Econometrics Journal,
20(3), S126–S149.
Admati, A. R., & Pﬂeiderer, P. (1988). A theory of intraday patterns: Volume and price variability. The Review
of Financial Studies, 1(1), 3–40.
Ahern, K. R. (2013). Network centrality and the cross-section of stock returns. SSRN Working Paper.
Aktas, O. U., & Kryzanowski, L. (2014). Trade classiﬁcation accuracy for the bist. Journal of International
Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 33, 259–282.
Allen, F., & Babus, A. (2009). In: Kleindorfer, P., & Wind, J. (Eds.), Network-based Strategies and Compe-
tencies, chapter: Networks in Finance, (pp. 367–382). Wharton School Publishing, Upper Saddle River,
NJ.
Allen, F., & Gale, D. (2000). Financial contagion. Journal of Political Economy, 108, 1–33.
Alós-Ferrer, C., & Weidenholzer, S. (2008). Contagion and efﬁciency. Journal of Economic Theory, 143,
251–274.
Amihud, Y. (2002). Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects. Journal of Financial
Markets, 5, 31–56.
Amini, H., Cont, R., & Minca, A. (2016). Resilience to contagion in ﬁnancial networks. Mathematical ﬁnance,
26(2), 329–365.
Amini, H., & Minca, A. (2016). Inhomogeneous ﬁnancial networks and contagious links. Operations Research,
64(5), 1109–1120.
Anand, A., & Subrahmanyam, A. (2008). Information and the intermediary: Are market intermediaries
informed traders in electronic markets? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 43(1), 1–28.
Arslan, H. B., & Simsir, S. A. (2016). Measuring takeover premiums in cross-border mergers and acquisitions:
Insights from turkey. Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 52(1), 188–203.
Bajo, E., Croci, E., & Marinelli, N. (2020). Institutional investor networks and ﬁrm value. Journal of Business
Research, 112, 65–80.
Bali, T. G., Cakici, N., & Whitelaw, R. F. (2011). Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and the cross-section of
expected returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 99, 427–446.
Battiston, S., Delli Gatti, D., Gallegati, M., Greenwald, B., & Stiglitz, J. E. (2012). Liaisons dangereuses:
Increasing connectivity, risk sharing, and systemic risk. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36,
1121–1141.
Billio, M., Caporin, M., Panzica, R. C., & Pelizzon, L. (2017). The impact of network connectivity on factor
exposures, asset pricing and portfolio diversiﬁcation. SAFE Working Paper No. 166.
Billio, M., Getmansky, M., Lo, A. W., & Pelizzon, L. (2012). Econometric measures of connectedness and
systemic risk in the ﬁnance and insurance sectors. Journal of Financial Economics, 104, 535–559.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Board, J., Sutcliffe, C., & Ziemba, W. T. (2003). Applying operations research techniques to ﬁnancial markets.
Interfaces, 33(2), 12–24.
Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance, 52, 57–82.
Chang, S. S., Chang, L. V., & Wang, F. A. (2014). A dynamic intraday measure of the probability of informed
trading and ﬁrm-speciﬁc return variation. Journal of Empirical Finance, 29, 80–94.
Chen, K., Luo, P., Sun, B., & Wang, H. (2015). Which stocks are proﬁtable? a network method to investigate
the effects of network structure on stock returns. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications,
436, 224–235.
Chen, H., Wang, T., & Yao, D. D. (2021). Financial network and systemic risk-a dynamic model. Production
and Operations Management, 30(8), 2441–2466.
Chordia, T., Roll, R., & Subrahmanyam, A. (2002). Order imbalance, liquidity, and market returns. Journal
of Financial economics, 65(1), 111–130.
Chordia, T., Roll, R., & Subrahmanyam, A. (2008). Liquidity and market efﬁciency. Journal of ﬁnancial
Economics, 87(2), 249–268.
Chuang, H. (2016). Brokers’ ﬁnancial network and stock return. North American Journal of Economics and
Finance, 36, 172–183.
Clemente, G., & Grassi, R. (2018). Directed clustering in weighted networks: A new perspective. Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals, 107, 26–38.
Cohen-Cole, E., Kirilenko, A., & Patacchini, E. (2014). Trading networks and liquidity provision. Journal of
Financial Economics, 113, 235–251.
Collin-Dufresne, P., & Fos, V. (2016). Insider trading, stochastic liquidity, and equilibrium prices. Economet-
rica, 84(4), 1441–1475.
Copeland, T. E., & Galai, D. (1983). Information effects on the bid-ask spread. The Journal of Finance, 38(5),
1457–1469.
Craig, B., & von Peter, G. (2014). Interbank tiering and money center banks. Journal of Financial Intermedi-
ation, 23, 322–347.
Di Maggio, M., Franzoni, F., Kermani, A., & Sommavilla, C. (2019). The relevance of broker networks for
information diffusion in the stock market. Journal of Financial Economics, 134, 419–446.
Diebold, F. X., & Yilmaz, K. (2008). Measuring ﬁnancial asset return and volatility spillovers, with application
to global equity markets. The Economic Journal, 119, 158–171.
Diem, C., Pichler, A., & Thurner, S. (2020). What is the minimal systemic risk in ﬁnancial exposure networks?
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 116, Article 103900.
Drehmann, M., & Tarashev, N. (2013). Measuring the systemic importance of interconnected banks. Journal
of Financial Intermediation, 22, 586–607.
Easley, D., & O’Hara, M. (1987). Price, trade size, and information in securities markets. Journal of Financial
economics, 19(1), 69–90.
Easley, D., & O’Hara, M. (2004). Information and the cost of capital. Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1553–1583.
Eboli, M. (2019). A ﬂow network analysis of direct balance-sheet contagion in ﬁnancial networks. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 103, 205–233.
Egginton, J. F., & McCumber, W. R. (2019). Executive network centrality and stock liquidity. Financial
Management, 48, 849–871.
Elliott, M., Golub, B., & Jackson, M. O. (2014). Financial networks and contagion. American Economic
Review, 104(10), 3115–3153.
Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of Finance, 47,
427–465.
Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal of
Financial Economics, 33, 3–56.
Fecht, F., Hackethal, A., & Karabulut, Y. (2018). Is proprietary trading detrimental to retail investors? The
Journal of Finance, 73(3), 1323–1361.
Gibbons, M. R., Ross, S. A., & Shanken, J. (1989). A test of the efﬁciency of a given portfolio. Econometrica,
57, 1121–1152.
Glosten, L. R. (1994). Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable? The Journal of Finance, 49(4),
1127–1161.
Glosten, L. R., & Harris, L. E. (1988). Estimating the components of the bid/ask spread. Journal of ﬁnancial
Economics, 21(1), 123–142.
Glosten, L. R., & Milgrom, P. R. (1985). Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heteroge-
neously informed traders. Journal of ﬁnancial economics, 14(1), 71–100.
Golez, B., Rizzo, A. E., & Zambrana, R. (2024). Friendly investing and information sharing in the asset
management industry. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 59(6), 2869–2898.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Grilli,R.,Tedeschi,G.,&Gallegati,M.(2020).Businessﬂuctuationsinabehavioralswitchingmodel:Gridlock
effects and credit crunch phenomena in ﬁnancial networks. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
114, Article 103863.
Guimera, R., & Nunes Amaral, L. A. (2005). Functional cartography of complex metabolic networks. Nature,
433, 895–900.
Hagströmer, B., & Menkveld, A. J. (2019). Information revelation in decentralized markets. Journal of Finance,
74(6), 2751–2787.
Han, M., Kim, S., & Nanda, V. K. (2024). Institutional brokerage networks: Facilitating liquidity provision.
The Review of Financial Studies, 37(9), 2903–2935.
Harris, L. (2003). Trading and exchanges: Market microstructure for practitioners. OUP USA.
Hekimo˘glu, M. H., & Tanyeri, B. (2011). Türk ¸sirket birle¸smelerinin satın alınan ¸sirketlerin hisse senedi
ﬁyatları üzerindeki etkileri. ˙Iktisat ˙I¸sletme ve Finans, 26(308), 53–70.
Hellwig, M. F., et al. (1980). On the aggregation of information in competitive markets. Journal of Economic
Theory, 22(3), 477–498.
Hong, H., & Stein, J. C. (1999). A uniﬁed theory of underreaction, momentum trading and overreaction in
asset markets. Journal of Finance, 54, 2143–2184.
Huang, R. D., & Stoll, H. R. (1997). The components of the bid-ask spread: A general approach. The Review
of Financial Studies, 10(4), 995–1034.
Ibikunle, G. (2018). Trading places: Price leadership and the competition for order ﬂow. Journal of Empirical
Finance, 49, 178–200.
˙Imi¸siker, S., Özcan, R., & Ta¸s, B. K. O. (2015). Price manipulation by intermediaries. Emerging Markets
Finance and Trade, 51(4), 788–797.
Jegadeesh, N. (1990). Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. Journal of Finance, 45, 881–898.
Jie, B., Zhang, D., Gao, W., Wang, Q., Wee, C. Y., & Shen, D. (2014). Integration of network topological and
connectivity properties for neuroimaging classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
61, 576–589.
Kankoç Aydın, D. (2019). Sermaye piyasalarında aracılık faaliyetlerinin hukuki niteli˘gi (in Turkish). PhD
thesis, Bilkent University.
Karpoff, J. M. (1987). The relation between price changes and trading volume: A survey. Journal of Financial
and quantitative Analysis, 22(1), 109–126.
Khwaja, A. I., & Mian, A. (2005). Unchecked intermediaries: Price manipulation in an emerging stock market.
Journal of Financial Economics, 78(1), 203–241.
Kyle, A. S. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society,
1315–1335.
Larcker, D. F., So, E. C., & Wang, C. C. Y. (2013). Boardroom centrality and ﬁrm performances. Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 55, 225–250.
Lee, B.-S., & Rui, O. M. (2002). The dynamic relationship between stock returns and trading volume: Domestic
and cross-country evidence. Journal of Banking & Finance, 26(1), 51–78.
Leitner,Y.(2005).Financialnetworks:Contagion,commitment,andprivatesectorbailouts.JournalofFinance,
60, 2925–2953.
Linardi, F., Diks, C., van der Leij, M., & Lazier, I. (2020). Dynamic interbank network analysis using latent
space models. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 112, Article 103792.
Lintner, J. (1965). Security prices, risk and maximal gains from diversiﬁcation. Journal of Finance, 20, 587–
615.
Lintner, J. (1965). The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock portfolios and
capital budgets. Review of Economics and Statistics, 47, 13–37.
Li, D., & Schürhoff, N. (2019). Dealer networks. Journal of Finance, 74(1), 91–144.
McNally, W. J., Shkilko, A., & Smith, B. F. (2017). Do brokers of insiders tip other clients? Management
Science, 63(2), 317–332.
Minoiu, C., Kang, C., Subrahmanian, V., & Berea, A. (2015). Does ﬁnancial connectedness predict crises?
Quantitative Finance, 15, 607–624.
Minoiu, C., & Reyes, J. A. (2013). A network analysis of global banking: 1978–2010. Journal of Financial
Stability, 9, 168–184.
Newey, W. K., & West, K. D. (1987). A simple, positive semi-deﬁnite, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation.
Econometrica, 55, 703–708.
Nguyen, T., Subramanian, V., & Berry, R. (2016). Delay in trade networks. Operations Research, 64(3),
646–661.
Nier, E., Yang, J., Yorulmazer, T., & Alentorn, A. (2007). Network models and ﬁnancial stability. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 31, 2033–2060.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Ozsoylev, H. N., & Walden, J. (2011). Asset pricing in large information networks. Journal of Economic
Theory, 146, 2252–2280.
Ozsoylev, H. N., Walden, J., Yavuz, M. D., & Bildik, R. (2014). Investor networks in the stock market. Review
of Financial Studies, 27, 1323–1366.
Pareek, A. (2012). Information networks: Implications for mutual fund trading behavior and stock returns.
SSRN Working Paper.
Park, B.-J. (2010). Surprising information, the mdh, and the relationship between volatility and trading volume.
Journal of Financial Markets, 13(3), 344–366.
Ravasz, E., Somera, A. L., Mongru, D. A., Oltvai, Z. N., & A.-L., Barabasi (2002). Hierarchical organization
of modularity in metabolic networks. Science,297, 1551–1555.
Ross, S. A. (1976). Arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic Theory, 13, 341–360.
Rossi, A. G., Blake, D., Timmermann, A., Tonks, I., & Wermers, R. (2018). Network centrality and delegated
investment performance. Journal of Financial Economics, 128, 183–206.
Rosu, I. et al. (2010). Liquidity and information in order driven markets. Chicago Booth School of Business.
Rzayev, K., & Ibikunle, G. (2019). A state-space modeling of the information content of trading volume.
Journal of Financial Markets, 46, Article 100507.
Savaser, T., & Tiniç, M. (2023). Information shocks and the cross section of expected returns. Borsa Istanbul
Review, 23(2), 378–401.
Seppi, D. J. (1997). Liquidity provision with limit orders and a strategic specialist. The Review of Financial
Studies, 10(1), 103–150.
Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk. Journal
of Finance, 19, 425–442.
Simsir, S. A., & Simsek, K. D. (2022). The market impact of private information before corporate announce-
ments: Evidence from turkey. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 80,
Article 101624.
Sun, X.-Q., Shen, H.-W., & Cheng, X.-Q. (2014). Trading network predicts stock price. Scientiﬁc reports,
4(1), 3711.
Tabak, B. M., Takami, M., Rocha, J. M., Cajueiro, D. O., & Souza, S. R. (2014). Directed clustering coefﬁcient
as a measure of systemic risk in complex banking networks. Physica A, 394, 211–216.
Tiniç, M., & Savaser, T. (2020). Political turmoil and the impact of foreign orders on equity prices. Journal of
International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 65, Article 101174.
Walden, J. (2019). Trading, proﬁts, and volatility in a dynamic information network model. Review of Economic
Studies, 86, 2248–2283.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 393, 440–442.
White, H. (1980). A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for het-
eroskedasticity. Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society, 817–838.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123