TITLE: Fake news, misinformation, disinformation and supply chain risks and disruptions: risk management and resilience using blockchain
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05242-4
---

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05242-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Fake news, misinformation, disinformation and supply chain
risks and disruptions: risk management and resilience using
blockchain
Pythagoras N. Petratos1
· Alessio Faccia2
Accepted: 16 February 2023 / Published online: 8 March 2023
© Crown 2023
Abstract
Fake news, misinformation and disinformation have signiﬁcantly increased over the past
years, and they have a profound effect on societies and supply chains. This paper examines
the relationship of information risks with supply chain disruptions and proposes blockchain
applications and strategies to mitigate and manage them. We critically review the literature
of SCRM and SCRES and ﬁnd that information ﬂows and risks are relatively attracting less
attention. We contribute by suggesting that information integrates other ﬂows, processes and
operations, and it is an overarching theme that is essential in every part of the supply chain.
Based on related studies we create a theoretical framework that incorporates fake news, mis-
information and disinformation. To our knowledge, this is a ﬁrst attempt to combine types
of misleading information and SCRM/SCRES. We ﬁnd that fake news, misinformation and
disinformation can be ampliﬁed and cause larger supply chain disruptions, especially when
they are exogenous and intentional. Finally, we present both theoretical and practical applica-
tions of blockchain technology to supply chain and ﬁnd support that blockchain can actually
advance risk management and resilience of supply chains. Cooperation and information
sharing are effective strategies.
Keywords SCRM · Fake news · Misinformation · Disinformation · Resilience
1 Introduction
Fake news, misinformation and disinformation have signiﬁcantly increased over the past
years, profoundly affecting societies and supply chains. This paper examines the relationship
and risks of these forms of information with supply chain disruptions and proposes blockchain
applications and strategies to mitigate and manage such risks. While fake news is not a
new phenomenon, a major proliferation of fake news occurred in the 2016 US Presidential
elections, and they attracted much attention and became a public concern (Grinberg et al.,
B Pythagoras N. Petratos
Pythagoras.petratos@coventry.ac.uk
1
Coventry University Business School, Coventry, UK
2
Birmingham University Business School, Dubai, UAE
123

736
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
2019). The concern has not only been because of the signiﬁcance of the well-functioning of
democracy and the importance of the US Presidential election, not only for the US but also
for the rest of the world, but also due to the vast size of fake news and new forms of media
communications, namely social media.
Social media enabled new operations in communications, like easy access, quick spread,
targeted audiences, and lack of controls. For example, Allcott and Gentzkow (2017) found
that Facebook’s fake news during the 2016 elections was shared around 38 million times,
translating to approximately 760 million clicks. During the 2016 Presidential election, fake
news on Twitter accounted for nearly 6% of all news consumption, but it was heavily con-
centrated on some users (Grinberg et al., 2019). Finally, the production of fake news, or
disinformation, as we will discuss later, came in many cases from foreign countries and
actors (NASEM, 2018). Fakes news, misinformation, and disinformation remain signiﬁcant
risks to elections worldwide.
Another surge of fake news, misinformation and disinformation appeared during the
COVID-19 crisis, known as the infodemic. “An infodemic is too much information, includ-
ing false or misleading information in digital and physical environments during a disease
outbreak […] It causes confusion and risk-taking behaviours […] An infodemic can inten-
sify or lengthen outbreaks […] With growing digitisation – expanding social media and
internet use – information can spread more rapidly. It can help ﬁll information voids more
quickly and amplify harmful messages.” (WHO, 2022). Thus, the infodemic has a signiﬁcant
effect on strengthening and extending the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic
had substantial negative effects on supply chains, and there are changes and digitisation
in supply chains, while risk management resilience is a top priority (EY, 2021). “Entering
the COVID-19 pandemic wreaked havoc on supply chains”, and there are after-shock risks
still disrupting them (Ivanov, 2021). Supply chain disruptions during COVID-19 have been
largely idiosyncratic, impacting different ﬁrms at different times for different reasons (Dunn,
2021). COVID-19 differs from other supply chain disruptions, such as the ﬁnancial system
and demand and supply (Moritz, 2022). Therefore, the risks and impact on supply chains of
COVID-19 are different from previous literature, and their study contributes to the literature.
Scholars and practitioners emphasise that managing disruption and risk in the supply chain
should be a crucial capability for ﬁrms (Shekarian & Mellat Parast, 2020). Nevertheless,
despite the criticality of supply chains, businesses and economies face unprecedented risks
and disruptions. Companies impacted by supply chain disruptions have experienced ‘adverse
consequences and dramatic ﬁnancial losses’ (Bugert & Lasch, 2018). In order to better
manage supply chain risks and ensure proﬁtability and continuity (Tang, 2006), organisations
have used Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM). SCRM is a popular research area, and
interest in this subject has grown (Ceryno et al., 2013). Numerous literature reviews have
conﬁrmed the importance and extent of SCRM over the years (Tang, 2006; Khan et al., 2008;
Manuj & Mentzer, 2008; Rao & Goldsby, 2009; Tang & Nurmaya Musa, 2011; Colicchia &
Strozzi, 2012; Sodhi et al., 2011; Ceryno et al., 2013; Fahimnia et al. 2015; Ho et al., 2015;
Snyder et al., 2015; Rajagopal et al., 2017; Prakash et al., 2017; Bugert & Lasch, 2018; Elock
Son, 2018; Seipp et al., 2020; Shekarian & Mellat Parast, 2020).
Tang (2006), based on the deﬁnitions of SCRM, makes a distinction between two dimen-
sions (i) Supply chain risks and disruptions; and (ii) the Mitigation Approach concerning
supply management, demand management and, most importantly, in our context, informa-
tion management. The second dimension overlaps with another important ﬁeld of study,
Supply Chain Resilience (SCRES). SCRES “reduces the impact of disruptions by identi-
fying strategies that allow a supply chain to react to a disruption while recovering to its
original functional state or better” and has received more attention in recent years (Shekarian
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
737
& Mellat Parast, 2020). While not as extensive as SCRM, there are several reviews on the
literature (Ali et al., 2017; Durach et al., 2015; Hohenstein et al., 2015; Katsaliaki et al.,
2021; Kochan & Nowicki, 2018; Tukamuhabwa et al., 2015) displays its substantial size and
growing importance.
1.1 Motivation
This paper builds upon the widely used literature on SCRM and SCRES. The main purpose is
to assess information risks in fake news, misinformation and disinformation on supply chain
disruptions. In addition, DuHadway et al. (2019) found that “strategies to mitigate supply
chain risk tend to treat disruptive events as homogenous, despite having different causes and
requiring different risk management strategies”, and they developed a framework to under-
stand risk management strategies the source of the disruption as endogenous or exogenous
to the supply chain if the cause was an intentional or inadvertent act. Based on DuHadway
et al. (2019), we expand and enrich their framework about fake news, misinformation and
disinformation. As we will discuss later, this misleading or wrong information presents both
exogenous and endogenous causes and intentional and inadvertent effects (see Fig. 1).
Tang (2006) and Tang and Nurmaya Musa (2011) emphasise the importance of informa-
tion management in supply chains. They combine deﬁnitions of supply chain management. In
the context of SCRM, they deﬁne it as the management of information ﬂows. After reviewing
the literature, they conclude that information ﬂow risk has received relatively less attention
(Tang, 2006; Tang & Nurmaya Musa, 2011). Motivated by this limited attention to the infor-
mation element, we argue that information and information risks are critical in supply chain
disruptions, especially as they become even more important as digitisation and Information
Technology (IT) are gaining pace (see Fig. 1).
Fisher Ke et al. (2015) ﬁnd support that industry characteristics have an impact on global
supply chains. It is hard to evaluate the impact and disruptions of misinformation, disinforma-
tion and fake news on speciﬁc countries, sectors/industries and supply chains. Nevertheless,
this paper contributes by initiating an attempt to study how supply chains were affected, by
the quality of information, especially during COVID-19 and the related infodemic. Industries
that are foremost impacted by misleading information are media and social media. Media
Fig. 1 DuHadway et al. (2019) Framework enriched
123

738
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
and Social media are crucial since they can distort and amplify misleading information. For
example, Tasnim et al. (2020) examined the impact of Misinformation on COVID-19 and
found that it promoted erroneous practices and disrupted health and food supply chains.
There is exhaustive literature on how misleading information and COVID-19 substantially
impacted supply lines in healthcare. In addition, there are effects and disruption caused by
fake news and disinformation on other industries such as tobacco, energy, food and the
ﬁnancial industries (Akhtar et al., 2022).
Blockchain is an emerging information technology that can provide several potential
applications related to supply chains (Helo & Hao, 2019). In times of increased risk and
uncertainty, Blockchain can manage and improve supply chain resilience (Etemadi et al.,
2021). To contribute to the limited literature on information risks of SCRM (Supply Chain
Risk Management) and the great potential of blockchain applications in SCRES, we identify
two major research questions.
• RQ1 What are the information risks, particularly concerning fake news, misinformation
and disinformation, and how can they disrupt supply chains?
• RQ2 How do blockchain technologies improve information management risk management
and increase supply chain resilience?
In answering these research questions, we use the SCRM literature to examine information
risks and how they affect supply chains. Then by utilising SCRES, risk management and
mitigation strategies and practical applications based on Blockchain are recommended. This
study’s main contribution is expanding on the limited literature on information management
and risks in the supply chain. Most importantly, it provides an innovative perspective by
analysing fake news, misinformation, and disinformation concerning information ﬂows and
risks. This part is a new contribution, as far as we are aware. The second major contribution
is recommending risk management and mitigation strategies and applications of emerging
blockchain technologies. While there is some recent literature on blockchain and supply
chains, we expand on it and focus on the information aspects.
The paper is organised as follows.
– Section 2 reviews the most relevant literature on SCRM and SRES, mainly focusing on
information management. We also review basic literature on Blockchain about supply
chains and associated risks.
– Section 3 is devoted to the analysis of information, in particular fake news, misinformation
and disinformation.
– Section 4 describes and relates information processing theory to supply chains and disrup-
tion.
– Section 5 provides propositions and strategies for information risk management. We exam-
ine various blockchain applications in supply chains and recommend risk management and
mitigation strategies to reduce disruption and improve resiliency.
– Finally, in the last Section 6, we conclude the paper by summarising the main ﬁndings and
contributions, limitations and outline future research.
2 Literature review
Below, we review four primary bodies of literature to theoretically and practically analyse the
impact and risks of misleading information on supply chain disruptions and how blockchain
technology can help manage such risks, following a similar methodology to the literature
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
739
review by DuHadway et al. (2019). We ﬁrst review the role of information in SCRM. Based on
Sodhi and Son (2012), we look at different aspects of SCRM, split into subsections to better
understand diversity. Then we describe Blockchain and examine how it can have numer-
ous advantages for the supply chain sector. We deﬁne misleading information, particularly
Fake News, Misinformation and Disinformation. Consequently, after examining the role of
information in SCRM and the nature of misleading information, we review organisational
information processing theory (OIPT), which constitutes the main framework of our analysis
in the next section.
2.1 The importance of information
Information is an overarching theme in supply chain management. While information man-
agement and risk analysis present some literature limitations, the use of information has
wide applicability. Prakash et al. (2017) emphasise the central role of information in Sup-
ply Chains Management “a supply chain (SC) has to manage the ﬂow of a large amount of
information and a variety of products across all its stage”. Information is essential to decision-
makers in supply chain management. Rajagoral et al. (2017), in a review of decision-making
models for supply chain risk, ﬁnd that information risks are the least addressed and receive
limited, and we argue disproportionate attention. Rao and Goldsby (2009) argue that decision-
maker-related risks include decision-maker knowledge/information and information-seeking
behaviour. Lavastre et al. (2012) suggest that effective SCRM is based on collaboration and
relevant information exchanges and discuss the beneﬁts of a comprehensive information
system for the entire supply chain to anticipate all possible contingencies. Without appropri-
ate information, it is impossible to anticipate risks and contingencies, and decision-makers
cannot effectively react.
The literature captures some information aspects related to fake news, misinformation
and disinformation, such as quality and visibility. Katsaliaki et al. (2021) conclude that
quality information sharing and investing in appropriate technologies, including Blockchain,
helps with visibility in the supply chain and enhance trust and cooperation to better protect
against disruptive events. Visibility is crucial to monitor and managing information quality
and identifying fake news, information, and disinformation. Baryannis et al. (2019) discuss
the problem of interpretability and how practitioners can understand information to make
decisions that can mitigate or prevent risks. Interpretability is valuable since the interpretation
of information can distinguish it from misleading or wrong information. Another interesting
conceptualisation of risks is relational risks (Manuj & Mentzer, 2008), such as distorting
information (Baird & Thomas, 1985).
2.1.1 Information ﬂow risks and information distortion
The major part of the related literature concerns information ﬂows and risks. Spekman and
Davis (2004) studied information ﬂows early as six risk sources. They examined the extended
enterprise and argued that achieving transparency and visibility of information throughout
the supply chain and utilising technology can bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts and competitive gains
(Spekman & Davis, 2004). In addition, they analyse different aspects of information, notably
visibility and sharing of information, topics repeated in the literature, and we examine them in
more detail just below. Jüttner et al. (2003) used the perspective that supply chain disruptions
affect the ﬂow of information, and therefore supply chain risks comprise any risks for the
information. There can be disruptions and ‘chaos effects’ in supply chains from factors such as
123

740
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
distorted information throughout the supply chain or simply a lack of understanding amongst
organisations (Jüttner et al., 2003).
It is useful for our study to brieﬂy examine the concept of information distortion, which
can largely overlap with fake news, misinformation, and disinformation. There is a growing
literature attempting to understand information distortion better and ﬂows in the supply
chain (Sahin & Robinson, 2002), but it seems that this literature has not signiﬁcantly grown
during the last couple of decades. The literature can be separated into two phases, an early
one focusing on understanding complexities and the information distortions, including the
“bullwhip effect”, and a second phase targeting information coordination and sharing. The
latter phase’s themes remain the focus of the more recent literature. Lee et al. (1997) connect
information distortion with the bullwhip effect by studying a speciﬁc aspect of demand
information ﬂow. Holweg and Bicheno (2016) describe different sources of distortions, and
they can be directly or indirectly related to information ﬂows, including the ‘Forrester’
(bullwhip) and the ‘Burbidge’ effects.
Forrester’s (1961) seminal work is important because of the bullwhip effect and because he
recognises the protagonist’s role of information by suggesting that an information network
integrates other ﬂows. In simple terms, Forrester (1961) acknowledged the challenges of
information and that not perfect or inaccurate information increases variability and, thus, risk
as we move upwards in the supply chain. He also linked decision-making with varying ﬂows
of information that are converted into control signals for other ﬂows: “Information is the input
to a decision, and the decisions are affected by all inﬂuences that act on the information ﬂows.
Information can be distorted in other ways than by delays and ampliﬁcation. Information is
modiﬁed […] information is interpreted differently by different people and organisations.
Prejudices, history, integrity, hope and the internal political environment of an organisation
all bias information ﬂows. The information contains errors, random noise, and unknown
perturbations from external sources.” (Forrester, 1961). The interpretation of information and
especially perturbations by external sources might coincide with fake news, misinformation,
and disinformation. In this context, a major advantage of this research lies in the distortion
and ampliﬁcation mechanisms.
2.1.2 Information, demand and supply risks
Despite the importance of information, especially in early literature, information risks are
least addressed, needing more attention (Rajagopal et al., 2017). As noticed above, informa-
tion risks are often part of demand risk. Shekarian and Parast’s (2020) review of the literature
argues that there is no consensus and deﬁnition for each type of supply chain risk. Information
risks are incorporated in demand risks as potential disturbances in the ﬂow of information,
insufﬁcient or distorted information, and supply risks as potential disturbances within the
network. While it is recognised that there are risks in information ﬂows and used to keep all
supply chain elements updated, examples are often connected to demand and supply, such
as order, delivery, and inventory status (Tang & Nurmaya Musa, 2011).
2.1.3 Collaboration, information sharing and information systems
Tang (2006) emphasises the importance of information management as the main approach
for managing supply chain risks and classiﬁes the literature on managing information risks in
supply chain visibility and information sharing. There is extensive literature on information
sharing. To understand the signiﬁcance of collaboration, SCRM is deﬁned as ‘the manage-
ment of risks through coordination and collaboration’ (Tang, 2006). Different mechanisms
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
741
exist to coordinate/collaborate; one way is to access different information available to supply
chain partners (Tang, 2006). In another survey of SCRM, Colicchia and Strozzi (2012) argue
that the focus goes beyond the single company and involves the collaborative sharing of infor-
mation and best practices of supply chain partners. Finally, an empirical review ﬁnds that
effective SCRM is based on collaboration with timely and relevant information exchanges
(Lavastre et al., 2012). The question that arises, and it is key for examining fake news, mis-
information and disinformation on supply chain disruption, is “what is the quality of the
information that partners share?” Some of this information might be wrong or misleading,
intentionally or unintentionally.
Within this broad coordination and collaboration area, speciﬁc disruption and risk infor-
mation can be shared among partners. Most papers on supply chain disruptions assume
knowledge of the disruption process exactly, but in reality, it is often difﬁcult to estimate
disruption because suppliers and partners might not be willing to share disruption infor-
mation (Snyder et al., 2015). Therefore, there might be misinformation concerning supply
chain disruptions in the form of a lack of inaccurate information. Nevertheless, several stud-
ies demonstrate the value of accurate disruption information (Snyder et al., 2015); therefore,
examining it in more detail is useful. Risk-related information is another topic that we believe
has much value in SCRM but is largely neglected. It is crucial not only because it is used to
manage and mitigate risks but also because it can be hard to interpret and estimate, especially
in the case of signiﬁcant and unprecedented uncertainty (like COVID-19), and therefore
might be subject to fake news, misinformation and disinformation. Lavastre (2012) argues
that cooperation to improve supply chain visibility and share risk-related information would
reduce supply chain risks.
This visibility relies heavily on good information systems and connectivity throughout
the supply chain (Lavastre et al., 2012). The role of IT is, therefore, critical in communicat-
ing information throughout the supply chain, especially with the digitisation of numerous
operations. Rajagopal et al. (2017) review the literature, classify operation risks, and con-
nect information ﬂow risks with the risks associated with information systems, security and
disruption, intellectual property, information outsourcing and accuracy. Similarly, Tang and
Nurmaya Musa (2011) ﬁnd information ﬂow risks from the issues of information system
security and disruption, intellectual property, information accuracy and information out-
sourcing risk. There are internal risks, such as forecast inaccuracy and information system
risks (Bugert & Rainer, 2018). IT capabilities are important for information sharing and
increasing visibility, transparency and connectivity (Ali et al., 2017). Katsaliaki et al. (2021)
categorise Information Systems disruptions as one of the sectors of supply chain disrup-
tion. It is needless to continue emphasising the importance of information systems in supply
chain disruption. Nevertheless, information systems can be prone to misleading and wrong
information and associated cybersecurity risks.
2.2 Blockchain
The Blockchain is a secure technology that ensures transparency and is useful for storing and
sharing information (Siyal et al., 2019), which records all the transactions that have taken
place among users since its inception. The blockchain ledger is shared by those same users
who are responsible for verifying the validity of the data sharing (Liang et al., 2017) and is
currently appreciated for tracking the transfer of assets as well as for the automatic execution
of smart contracts (Kongmanee et al., 2019; Szabo, 1997). Three main types of blockchains
can be identiﬁed: public (open to everyone), private (where only certain users have access)
123

742
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
and consortium (where instead of only a single organisation, multiple organisations govern
the platform) (Zhang & Lin, 2018).
The mechanism is based on three principles (Bhutta et al., 2021):
– Transparency: everyone can examine the transactions registered in the Blockchain since
its inception;
– Decentralisation:itsnetworkoperationmakestheBlockchainindependentfromanycentral
control body;
– Security: the transactions made through the Blockchain are encrypted, and the data cannot
be tampered with or altered.
The user must enter a key that allows registering the sharing data to carry out any transac-
tion. This data is encrypted and grouped into “blocks”(Yeasmin & Baig, 2019) and then sent
to the various nodes on the network for validation. This phase allows certifying, among other
things, the parties’ identity and the transactions’ feasibility. Finally, the ledger is duplicated
on the servers that make up the network (Lim et al., 2018), making it impossible to modify
the Blockchain or the content of one of the blocks without the approval of all connected
computers.
The Blockchain offers numerous advantages for the supply chain sector, and in particular,
it allows to:
– Automate purchasing processes (Omar et al., 2021). The Blockchain allows the creation
of smart contracts. When the conditions selected by the users are met, these contracts
automatically execute the terms, for example, the payment of service.
– Streamline trade (Hellwig & Huchzermeier, 2019). The validation times of exchanges
between suppliers and customers (contracts, signatures, orders, payments) are drastically
reduced, and the management of ﬂows and relationships with partners takes place almost
in real time.
– Ensure supplies (Ahmad et al., 2021). It is possible to assign a speciﬁc tag to each product
registered in the Blockchain to guarantee its supply in an extremely short time. Further-
more, information such as audit trail, storage, authenticity and certiﬁcate of ownership are
all stored in the same place.
– Ensure complete traceability (Galvez et al., 2018; Shahid et al., 2020) (audit trail) and,
accordingly, visibility. It provides a list of all actions carried out by users: an immutable
and ﬂawless proof that ensures the integrity of the information provided.
– Increase responsiveness (Hamida et al., 2017). The Blockchain allows for avoiding
counterfeiting by identifying problems from the initial stages of the transactions (i.e.,
inconsistencies in the validation phase, dubious identity of a party). If there is a need to
return a product, a notiﬁcation is sent immediately.
– Standardise internal documents (Rieger et al., 2019). The validity of the information shared
between the partners avoids the multiplication of document versions; each party involved
in the exchange thus has the same available data.
However, this technology still needs to be reﬁned by developers to be tailored for supply
chain purposes (Esmaeilian et al., 2020). Other limitations concern its scalability and security
(Zheng et al., 2017). It is not yet possible to process large infrastructure data—for which
a millisecond return is required (Aberer et al., 2006; Esposito et al., 2021; István et al.,
2018)—while the Blockchain can only process transactions at one or two digits per second
(Bach et al., 2018). Therefore, not surprisingly, many multinationals, including Walmart,
collaborate with IBM to develop a blockchain designed speciﬁcally for their businesses
(Lacity & Van Hoek, 2021; Kamath, 2018).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
743
Blockchain cannot solve all supply chain and logistics challenges alone. It can certainly
help ensure transaction security (Singh & Singh, 2016), fraud avoidance (Hyvärinen et al.,
2017) and error reduction (Nguyen & Dang, 2018). Technical developments are already
planned to facilitate its application to the supply chain and associated operations. It can
be argued that blockchain technology is still not very mature, especially concerning supply
chains. However, the companies that started the trials underline the increase in transparency
and security (Angelis & Ribeiro da Silva, 2019). Some have seen reduced costs and time to
conduct operations (Pan et al., 2020). The Blockchain ﬁnds application in various ﬁelds, such
as Healthcare, Transport, Finance, Food and Manufacturing (Dutta et al., 2020). Blockchain
in manufacturing allows more data control, increasing the speed of retrieval, and it can
help reduce the problems of information asymmetry and imperfect information. Greater data
security, reliability, integrity, transparency and visibility in all production and distribution
processes become essential to manage better and support Blockchain supply chains.
2.2.1 Blockchain and supply chain disruption and risks
Although the Blockchain can computerise the concept of trust, there is no lack of performance
gaps, such as the ethical problem (Dierksmeier & Seele, 2019) linked to the high energy
consumption required and the poor scalability of the solution, since in the face of a large
number of transactions the processing time increases (Nyamtiga et al., 2019). The relationship
between companies and suppliers is increasingly digital, and cyber-criminals (Wang et al.,
2019) can compromise any link in the company Supply Chain in various ways to steal
sensitive data or information. The most common attacks against the corporate supply chain
are Watering Holes (Zimba et al., 2019) and Ransomware (Pletinckx et al., 2018): Each node
involved in the supply chain is a potential risk factor, and this makes the adoption of Cyber
Risk prevention and management measures essential, in addition to adequate Cyber Security
tools capable of detecting third-party violations and protecting the Supply Chain from cyber
threats.
2.2.2 Additional technologies in supply chain decision making
The business community has started thinking about how industry 4.0 technology could help
misleading combat information, especially how it could check such misinformation and fake
news (Chatterjee et al., 2022). Petratos (2021) suggest that business sectors can create and use
a range of anti-misinformation, disinformation, and fake news tools. However, it is useful to
strategically align such technologies with the supply-chain industry decision-making, which
depends on the quantity and quality of information. While Blockchain mainly applies to
information security, other industry 4.0 technologies use applications to detect and monitor
misleading information. Therefore, the technologies mentioned below can provide lessons
learnt and best practices and might beneﬁt stakeholders such as operational managers, social
media researchers, or practitioners.
2.2.2.1 Big data analytics
Koot et al. (2021), in a systematic literature review, ﬁnd that
there is a fusion of the Internet of Things (IoT) and Big Data Analytics (BDA) in supply
chains. Moreover, these technologies can better predict and monitor supply chains (Koot
et al., 2021). In an extensive literature review, Nguyen and Dang (2018) conﬁrm that BDA
and its application in SCM have revolutionised ‘supply chains (SCs)’. They also suggest that
risk management appears in a few papers and has only been exploited in detecting procure-
ment risk (Nguyen & Dang, 2018), implying a gap in this literature. Addo-Tenkorang and
123

744
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
Helo (2016) also review the literature on big data applications in supply chain management
and suggest that as data and/or information supply-chain management data are in general
conﬁdential and sensitive, the security aspect of big data/IoT could be further investigated
for authenticity, and certainly our analysis and Blockchain contributes by such investigation
and solution and ﬁlling a gap in risk management.
2.2.2.2 Artiﬁcial intelligence, machine and deep learning
The above literature on BDA
includes several terms as Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) (Koot
et al., 2021; Nguyen & Dang, 2018; Addo-Tenkorang & Helo, 2016), indicating the fusion,
complementarity and in some cases integration of technologies in SCM. Nevertheless, the
literature on AI, ML and Deep Learning in SCM is distinct and extensive. Toorajipour et al.
(2021) conducted a systematic literature review on artiﬁcial intelligence in supply chain
management and suggested a categorisation with ﬁelds and subﬁelds. The supply chain ﬁled
is approximately 1/3 of the literature, and there is only one paper, the subﬁeld of SCRM (i.e.
Tsang et al. 2018).
Riahi et al. (2021) perform a descriptive bibliometric analysis on the application of AI
in the supply chain. They also found different industries but also classiﬁed papers on the
AI algorithm or technique, and the most used technique was genetic algorithms (14 papers)
which decreased both the bullwhip effect (BWE) and the cash ﬂow bullwhip (CF-BWE), but
also genetic algorithms were also used for risk assessment and present applications related to
our analysis (Riahi et al., 2021). Baryannis et al. (2019) provide a comprehensive literature
review of the supply chain relevant to SCRM using AI approaches and categorise existing
literature according to the AI methodology used, covering topics such as Machine Learning
and Big Data Analytics withing this ﬁeld. It conﬁrms once more the relationship and overlap
between technologies. Most importantly, they examine and categorise the reviewed studies
concerning the speciﬁc SCRM tasks and ﬁnd that the vast majority of studies focus on
risk response (84%), mainly supply chain models for the avoidance or mitigation of risk
and uncertainty effects, while other categories deal with identiﬁcation and assessment or
combinations of the three categories (Baryannis et al., 2019). Some of these studies might
be combined with our proposed framework and enriched with other technologies on top of
Blockchain for better risk management and mitigation of types of misleading information.
Naz et al. (2022) suggest that the disruptions that occurred due to the COVID-19 pandemic
created a severe need for supply chain resiliency (SCR) and conduct a systematic literature
review to identify the signiﬁcance of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) for creating a resilient supply
chain and solutions for supply chain risk mitigation and examine the potential contribution
of AI and SCR. They ﬁnd substantial evidence of signiﬁcant disruptions and associated risks
and propose a research framework for AI in SCR that will facilitate technological develop-
ment in supply chain ﬁrms to combat sudden risks and disruptions (Naz et al., 2022). In
their framework, they recommend (Proposition 2) the applicability of emerging technology
like AI […] and Blockchain in creating a resilient supply chain, and our study contributes
to this direction. They also emphasise the importance of good quality information sharing
(Naz et al., 2022), which is a key element of this paper. It should also be mentioned that
there is a growing and evolving literature on these topics, such as Nayal et al. (2021) high-
lighting the need to ensure reliable information and suggesting that the application of AI-ML
in the context of industry 4.0 technologies like Blockchain may have a strong potential to
improve information capabilities; Rodríguez-Espíndola (2020) examine the integration of
AI and Blockchain with potential for augmented decision making and risk reduction, and
Wamba and Queiroz (2020) that suggest that the interplay between Blockchain and artiﬁcial
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
745
intelligence could contribute to creating value. This paper contributes towards this combi-
nation by providing a methodology for blockchain application and information in SCM and
SCRM.
3 Fake news, misinformation and disinformation
Firstly, it is essential to deﬁne fake news, misinformation, and disinformation for our study.
While these terms present some commonalities and fall within the broader deﬁnition of false
or wrong information, they can behave differently and have diverse effects and disruptions
in supply chains. Starting from the most popular term, fake news is deﬁned as “originally US
news that conveys or incorporates false, fabricated, or deliberately misleading information, or
that is characterised as or accused of doing so” (Oxford English Dictionary, 2021). It should
be noted that fake news is related to media and social media. Misinformation has a broader
and more generic deﬁnition that it is used by a different organisation (i.e. WHO) as “wrong
or misleading information” (Oxford English Dictionary, 2021).
Disinformation, on the other hand, signiﬁcantly differs from the other two, deﬁned as
“The dissemination of deliberately false information, esp. when supplied by a government or
its agent to a foreign power or the media, to inﬂuence the policies or opinions of those who
receive it” (Oxford English Dictionary, 2021). Disinformation is by far the most dangerous
type. Since governments supply it, it can be very sophisticated, using various media and other
communication channels and supported by substantial resources. Therefore, disinformation
can encompass many capabilities and have considerable impact and risks. Alexander and
Smith (2011) discuss a taxonomy of disinformation and deﬁne it as intentional deception,
which has been applied in wars. The potential severity and application of disinformation
under speciﬁc conditions are displayed in that sense.
It should be emphasised at this point that intention is a critical feature. Disinformation
is, therefore, clearly intentional. In general, fake news and misinformation are considered
to be inadvertent. Ireton and Posetti (2018) suggest misinformation is “not created to cause
harm”. However, it could be argued that this is a grey area. Allcott and Gentzkow (2017)
deﬁne fake news as “news articles that are intentionally and veriﬁably false and could mislead
readers”, displaying some intention. The intent and intention to cause harm to differ since
the latter goes one step further. Søe (2019) examine truth- to the intention/intentionality and
misleadingness/non-misleadingness concerning misinformation and disinformation. After
critically reviewing the literature, the balance seems to be that disinformation is intentional,
while misinformation is inadvertent, concluding that disinformation ‘is intentionally mis-
leading’ and misinformation ‘unintendedly misleading’. We adopt this distinction for our
analysis.
Intent is an important term related to law motive. “In Law, [motive] This is why one
committed the crime, the inducement, reason, or willful desire and purpose behind the com-
mission of an offence. Whether the purpose was good, like helping someone commit suicide,
or bad, like murder, it is not a deciding factor in guilt or innocence. However, the intent
is […]It may be used by a defence attorney in punishment mitigation or by a prosecuting
attorney as circumstantial evidence to prove guilt” (Black’s Law Dictionary, 2022). We do
not want to expand on legal issues, but we highlighted that to display that there could be legal
repercussions and therefore risks from disinformation and fake news and misinformation.
Deception is another useful concept that has been predominantly used in the military
context. However, Chadwick and Stanyer (2021) deﬁne deception as an ‘identiﬁable actor’s
123

746
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
prior intention to mislead results’ and propose deception as a bridging concept facilitating the
study of disinformation, misinformation and misperceptions. This study is valuable because
it suggests that attention must go beyond individual variables to capture media-systemic
distortions in information supply (Chadwick & Stanyer, 2021). It enables our analysis since
it provides an innovative feature of systemic wide information disruptions that assists in
conceptualising how wrong and misleading information can disrupt supply chains. While
most models discuss unique events and disruption, Chadwick and Stanyer (2021) suggest
systemic-wide, continuous and persistent information issues and potential disruption.
There can be different aspects of distinguishing fake news, misinformation, disinformation
and other similar concepts like deception. In the context of operations management and the
purpose of this study, we are rather interested in information and not so much the different
characteristics. We can use a simple dimension that can encompass other characteristics but
capture the effect of disruption. Petratos (2021) argues that “quality of information” is another
bridging concept, where different types of wrong and misleading information can overlap,
and quality information is critical for organisations. For this study, we can argue that there
can be a scale of quality of information. There can be fully positive, perfect information that
can assist in the efﬁciency of supply chains. At the same time, fake news, misinformation, and
disinformation can help dimmish the quality of information and disrupt the supply chain.
Disinformation can be the worst case of information quality due to its severity, resources
backing it and high level of distortion. Negative quality information can cause catastrophes
and paralysis in supply chains. The quality of the information scale can be directly related to
the level of disruption in the supply chain.
4 Organisational information processing theory
DuHadway et al. (2017) utilise and integrate Organisational Information Processing Theory
(OIPT) to explain how organisations can proactively respond and manage the risks of different
types of supply chain disruption disruptions. We follow this methodology not only because
the study of DuHadway et al. (2017) largely facilitates our analysis but also because OIPT is
grounded on information and uncertainty (risk). Galbraith (1974) describes the main premise
of the Information Processing Model as “the greater the task uncertainty, the greater the
amountofinformationthatmustbeprocessedamongdecision-makers”.Inaddition,Galbraith
(1974) identiﬁes some important dimensions; the timing of information ﬂows to and from
the decision mechanism, the frequency of decision, the capacity of the decision-maker to
process information and the degree of formalisation of information ﬂow. These dimensions
can be associated with some of the concepts presented above and provide consistency to
the methodology. Formalisation and processing can present some analogies regarding the
easiness and ability of interpretation.
While Galbraith (1974) focused on the amount of information, later studies highlighted the
quality of information. Daft and Lengel (1984, 1986) discuss the richness of communication
media information and the structural characteristics of formal information systems. Stock
and Tatikonda (2008) argue that the quality of information is important, but they equate it
with richness (Haußmann et al., 2011). Therefore, there is also a gap in the literature on OITP
concerning the quality of information, and our paper contributes to it. OITPs state that organ-
isations are structured around information, and (information) and its management (i.e., the
use of information) are the organisation’s most critical performance, while there is increas-
ing awareness among researchers that information is perhaps the most critical organisational
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
747
contingency (Fairbank et al., 2006). There is empirical support for the Information Process-
ing theory and, most importantly, for the scope of our analysis, information processing has
a positive relationship with risk management performance (Fairbank et al., 2006).
Therefore, information processing is crucial to the management and mitigation strate-
gies for supply chain risk (DuHadway et al., 2017). Information processing theory (IPT) is
a widely adopted theoretical framework to examine ﬁrms’ performance, and such studies
have contributed signiﬁcantly to the development of the SCRM literature (Fan et al., 2016).
Although the literature emphasises that ﬁrms can effectively reduce supply chain risks and
disruptions through risk information, as presented above, studies examining how ﬁrms can
use the information to achieve superior performance are scant in the literature (Fan et al.,
2016). Thus, our study also contributes to this lacuna in literature. We build upon the study of
DuHadway et al. (2017) that connect OITP to disruption and suggest a series of propositions
examining the implications of supply chain disruptions/risks. Following this framework and
methodology, we similarly assess information risks from fake news, misinformation, and
disinformation to supply chain disruption. Accordingly, we propose risk management and
mitigation strategies based on blockchain technologies.
5 Framework, propositions and strategies
DuHadway et al. (2019) create a framework that categorises supply chain risk/disruptions
in two ways: exogenous or endogenous to the ﬁrm and inadvertent or intentional. Following
this framework and methodology, we analyse fake news, misinformation and disinformation
along these dimensions. When examining these information concepts above, the distinction
between inadvertent and intentional was made for fake news/misinformation and disinforma-
tion, respectively. However, we still have to analyse how misleading information behaves and
impacts an organisation as exogenous or endogenous. In order to do so, we construct some
basic models of how low-quality information can impact and be transmitted to and within
organisations and disrupt supply chains. Since there is not much literature on information
and supply chain disruption, we use alternative literature. OITP facilitates this analysis and,
in particular, the bullwhip effect. Consequently, we develop a set of propositions to analyse
and assess how fake news, misinformation and disinformation can disrupt the supply chain
and propose appropriate risk management strategies (Fig. 2).
Proposition 1 Information is essential in all parts of the supply chain.
While information and information risks have not been studied much, they are essential
for all parts and processes of the supply chain. Decision-makers should manage information
across all supply chain stages (Prakash et al., 2017). Spekman and Davis (2004) argued that
information should be transparent and visible throughout the supply chain. Galbraith (1974)
emphasises that information must be processed during tasks in the Information Processing
Model. All changes in resource allocation, schedules, and priorities require information
processing during task performance. In addition, there is a need for information processing
to coordinate all interdependent tasks. Earlier articles in supply chain management (i.e.
Kraljic, 1983) stressed the importance of considering the risks from interconnected ﬂows of
material, information and funds in networks, and this literature had gained momentum with
many studies reporting disrupted supply chains and concepts for risk management strategies
(Wagner & Bode, 2009).
It is useful to highlight in practice the essential role of information in the supply chain, as
depicted in Fig. 3. This slightly modiﬁed version of Beamon (1998) describes the supply chain
123

748
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
Fig. 2 Classiﬁcation of disruptive events concerning Information Types. Source: DuHadway et al. (2019)
Fig. 3 The supply chain framework
processes. We include the customers who express the exogenous information from the market
to the supply chain. The customers signal and provide information about their preferences
mainly to the retailer. Then such information is transmitted endogenously to the supply chain,
from retailers to transportation, storage, manufacturing and suppliers. Information is used for
transportation, storage, manufacturing and ordering operations and processes. According to
consumers’ demands, information might change and be processed accordingly. It is a simple
example to highlight information’s role in every stage of the supply chain. However, the
transmission channels and complexity of operation can be much greater in reality.
Proposition 2 Better quality information can reduce risks and disruptions in every part of
the supply chain.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
749
Fig. 4 Information risks in the extended supply chain
Following the above, we argue that fake news, misinformation, and disinformation can
disrupt every part of the supply chain. The severity of disruption depends on the quality of
information. The literature focuses on speciﬁc aspects and risks, notably demand and sup-
ply risks (Shekarian & Mellat Parast, 2020; Tang & Nurmaya Musa, 2011). Nevertheless,
information is critical to every node of decision-making, operation and process. In order
to capture those risks and disruptions, we use a modiﬁed version of Manuj and Mentzer
(2008) and Menzter (2001), described in Fig. 4. Most of these risks are overlapping and
interdependent and do not exist in isolation (Manuj & Mentzer, 2008). For example, secu-
rity risk includes Information systems and infrastructure security that largely overlap with
information risks. Another advantage of this model is that it displays the domestic and global
environment except for the extended supply chain. It is crucial for our analysis since it can
analyse the exogenous risks and disruption resulting from low-quality information.
Supply, demand, operations, and security, and we argue that information risks are associ-
ated with supply chains and disrupt the operations of mainly matching supply with demand
(Manuj & Mentzer, 2008). We also argue that information is an overarching theme and can
largely inﬂuence other types of risks and their aspects. Demand and supply risks are con-
cerned with potential disturbances in the ﬂow of products and information (Shekarian &
Mellat Parast, 2020). We further suggest that better quality information can avoid distur-
bances in the ﬂow of products. Supply risks involve ‘the potential difference between actual
and forecasted demand’ (Shekarian & Mellat Parast, 2020). More and better information
can assist in forecasting and managing the ‘unanticipated or volatile demand, insufﬁcient
or distorted information from customers about orders or demand quantities’ (Shekarian and
Parast, 2019) aspects of supply risks. In addition, supply risks and disruption of supplies
in terms of time, quality, and quantity can be more effectively managed with better quality
information. Finally, risks as a process encompassing aspects of the ‘reliability of the sup-
porting communication system’ (Shekarian & Parast, 2019) can be reduced by having better
information.
123

750
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
Proposition 3a There is a higher risk, and the impact of disruptions on supply chains is
more negative when those disruptions are due to exogenous fake news, misinformation and
disinformation.
Proposition 3b There is a higher risk and the impact more negative of disruptions on supply
chains when those disruptions are due to intentional rather than inadvertent wrong and
misleading information.
Propositions 3a and 3b are largely based on DuHadway et al. (2019) arguing that ‘The
impact of disruptions on ﬁrm performance is more negative when those disruptions are due
to an intentional rather than an inadvertent cause.’ We expand the scope of the proposition
from the ﬁrm to the extended supply chain. The ﬁrm is included as part of the supply chain,
and there can be different ﬁrms and organisations in the supply chain. Again, this depends
on the scale and complexity of operations and supply chains. Nevertheless, the deﬁnition of
an exogenous disruption occurs outside the supply chain, while an endogenous disruption
occurs within the supply chain rather than the ﬁrm (DuHadway et al., 2019).
We also follow some methods DuHadway et al. (2019) proposed on different operational
classiﬁcations of disruption events and risks. They are (i) Force Majeure disruption due to
non-deliberate events outside of the supply chain, from accidental and exogenous causes
and might include disruptions such as natural disasters, economic and political instability,
port closures, terrorism, and are the most well-studied disruption within the literature. (ii)
Performance Failure disruption is due to a negligent act that is endogenous to the supply
chain. (iii) Targeted Strike disruption is caused by intentional and exogenous supply chain
factors, such as competitors, government intervention cyberattacks, and industrial theft. (iv)
Inside Jobs are intentional and endogenous to the supply chain, such as fraudulent behaviour
between organisations (DuHadway et al. 2019).
Fake news and misinformation can have negative effects and disrupt supply chains. Never-
theless, we argue that intentional and exogenous disinformation can cause signiﬁcant damage
and substantial disruptions. It is because it corresponds to targeted strike disruption and inside
jobs. An illustrative example is the Takata airbag scandal. The Takata airbags deﬁne a new
level of deception, with effects increasing mortality risks to consumers and social impacts
going beyond a global societal level (Hammadi et al., 2018). Takata is a notable case of
intentionally wrong information within the extended supply chain. Takata was a renowned
company producing airbags. Around 2000 the company noticed internally that airbag inﬂators
were not functioning properly, and some erupted in tests, while in 2004, a Takata executive
admitted to ‘manipulating’ airbag information (Jones & Bomey, 2022). Despite this informa-
tion, Takata did not properly provide it to other partners n the supply chain and consumers.
“Approximately 67 million Takata airbags (priority groups 1–12) have been recalled because
these airbags can explode when deployed, causing serious injury or even death” and has
affected many car manufacturers and models. (NHTSA, 2022).
Raman et al. (2020) use Greater London as a case study and show that disinformation
can lead to energy disruptions and propagate in social networks, potentially amplifying the
attack’s impact. Such energy shocks can be exogenous to supply chains and cause large
disruptions. Similarly, Waniek et al. (2021) found that trafﬁc networks are vulnerable to
disinformation attacks. Consequently, this is another exogenous risk that can impact supply
chains since transportation, as shown in the Fig. 3, is an important part. Finally, we would like
to emphasise that disinformation can be highly sophisticated and complicated by combining
different events and risks as targeted strike disruption, including an inside job. The risks and
complexity of disinformation, deception and modes of cyber attacks have been described
in other studies as Kello (2013), who mention supply chain risks and vulnerabilities due
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
751
to information systems and offshore manufacturers and additional forms of attacks using
information (i.e. Line X) and the disruptive potential of counterintelligence on material
supply chains (Gartzke & Lindsay, 2015).
Proposition 4 Fake news, misinformation and disinformation can be ampliﬁed and cause
larger supply chain disruptions.
One of the key characteristics of fake news, misinformation and disinformation is that
social media have created innovative communication channels and have contributed to the
quick spread and ampliﬁcation of low-quality information. Beyond the purpose of this paper
and an area that requires future research, it is not easy to model and analyse in detail how
low-quality information is transmitted within the extended supply chain. As discussed above,
disinformationcampaignscanaffectvariouspartsofthesupplychain.Insomecases,systemic
effects can impact multiple parts and have a persistent character.
Nevertheless, what is important is that fake news, misinformation and disinformation can
be distorted and ampliﬁed. We can distinguish different effects. One of the effects is that
low-quality information can be further distorted in the supply chain. It might be due to a
lack of understanding, problems with interpretability and a lack of effective information
systems presented in the literature review. These distortion effects can be even stronger when
fake news, misinformation and disinformation are further ampliﬁed by exogenous actors at
different parts of the extended supply chain. In addition, ampliﬁcation can come from within
the supply chain.
Forrester (1961) argued that information, and for that reason, low-quality information, can
be ampliﬁed. In addition, although he recognised that there could be external perturbations,
he argued that not perfect and inaccurate (i.e. low-quality information) can be distorted, as
modiﬁed and contain errors, but implied that this is mainly within the extended supply chain.
Consequently, such low-quality information could create bullwhip effects and increase risks,
further disrupting the supply chain. While Forrester mainly analyses the endogenous effects,
we expand on the exogenous events. Finally, it should be argued that since information
integrates other ﬂows (Forrester, 1961), as material and ﬁnancial, the ampliﬁcation effects
and disruption can be spread to other ﬂows and operations and create even bigger disruptions.
Proposition 5 Supply Chain Visibility and Information sharing can be effective risk manage-
ment strategies for all types of disruptions.
SCRM has been deﬁned “as management of risks through coordination and cooperation”
(Tang, 2006). Therefore coordination and cooperation through sharing information can be an
effective risk management strategy. Nevertheless, this assumes that they share good-quality
information. If they share fake news, misinformation and disinformation, this can cause
contagion effects, disruption in other parts of the supply chain, and ampliﬁcation. Thus,
sharing information is particularly useful when it concerns awareness and prevention of low-
quality information. Moreover, it should be ensured that the shared information is of good
quality within the supply chain, and in this direction, as we analyse below, Blockchain plays
a protagonist role.
Another important aspect is to have good quality information about supply chain risks.
Information about risks should include situational awareness and estimation of such risks.
Fake news, misinformation, disinformation, and deception can undermine supply chain risks.
In many cases, supply chain risks and disruptions might be attributed to suppliers or other
partners in the supply chain rather than the ﬁrm itself. Therefore, good quality information
about these risks is essential for detection.
123

752
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
Moreover, besides accurate information, timely information is valuable. It is especially
true when risk is realised, and a supply chain disruption occurs. Quality information about
the disruption is necessary for risk mitigation and recovery strategies. Finally, information
sharing for IT systems is crucial. IT systems can improve visibility and effective information
sharing, but they communicate information. Lack of availability or integrity of information
can lead to disruptions in the supply chain. The literature relates related information risks to
IT systems (Bugert & Rainer, 2018; Rajagopal et al., 2017; Tang & Nurmaya Musa, 2011).
Sharing information about IT vulnerabilities and cybersecurity risks is necessary across the
supply chain. It should be noted that cyber attackers use misinformation and, in particular,
disinformation to inﬁltrate IT systems (Petratos, 2021). Blockchain can signiﬁcantly reduce
risks to IT systems and supply chains.
Proposition 6 Blockchain applications can manage information risks and reduce supply
chain disruptions.
Against all the information above supply chain risks, Blockchain can offer various solu-
tions and improve risk management. Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLT), as Blockchain
is known, allow visibility and ensure transparency while sharing information securely within
a network. Firstly we would like to present some existing applications in operations manage-
ment. Then we discuss and propose blockchain recommendations and strategies to improve
risk management and resilience of supply chains. It should be emphasised that Blockchain
is a rather new technology, especially concerning the applications to the supply chain.
With its relative advantages in terms of quality and transparency, blockchain technolo-
gies in manufacturing have become an excellent opportunity to increase the availability and
quality of information for various processes. Some of these processes concern the monitor-
ing and management of the supply chain and all its phases, from raw material to ﬁnished
product (Litke et al., 2019); digital tracking of each movement of the goods to allow autho-
rised personnel to access any information relating to the shipment, obtaining a guarantee of
truthfulness (Tijan et al., 2019);. There is a range of additional tracking applications using
Blockchain. Lucena et al. (2018) propose tracking, which has instant information on com-
plete products from its electronic manufacturing service providers, and the Blockchain helps
to track and authenticate them in real time.
Tracking asset maintenance can also be improved if an asset is mainly maintained accord-
ing to the schedule, and notably, it supports multiple parties (Pundir et al., 2019). There is also
tracking critical parameters (Kuhn et al., 2018) for a product sensitive, such as storage condi-
tions. In combination with other emerging technologies, the Blockchain can help (i.e. IoT, AI,
etc.) companies monitor conditions. Monitoring resource conditions using Blockchain and
IoT helps monitor the conditions of assets in remote locations. (Alcarria et al., 2018). Such
applications can be particularly useful for situational awareness and detecting supply chain
risks. Similarly, the tracing of products is enabled by Blockchain, which allows the tracing of
products or components by recording the entire production path of a product, from the origin
of its components until the product reaches the consumer (Duan et al., 2020; Subramanian
et al., 2020). Tracing of origin traces the attributes of a product and any change in ownership
(Lu & Xu, 2017).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
753
Table 1 Propositions and Relevant Literature Overview
No.
Propositions
Summary
Relevant literature
1
Information is essential in all
parts of the supply chain
Information processing is an
essential part of the supply
chain. Therefore, preserving
its integrity is an extremely
critical task
Prakash et al. (2017),
Spekman and Davis (2004),
Galbraith (1974), Kraljic
(1983), Wagner and Bode
(2009), Beamon (1998)
2
Better quality information
can reduce risk and
disruptions in every part of
the supply chain
Transmission mechanisms in
the supply chain potentially
allow bad information to
disrupt the entire chain
Shekarian & Mellat Parast,
2020), Tang and Nurmaya
Musa (2011), Manuj and
Mentzer (2008), Menzter
(2001)
3a
There is a higher risk, and
the impact of disruptions
on supply chains is more
negative when those
disruptions are due to
exogenous fake news,
misinformation and
disinformation
Exogenous and intentional
mislaedng information prove
more dangerous than
endogenous and inadvertent
ones
DuHadway et al. (2019),
Hammadi et al., (2018),
Jones and Bomey (2022),
NHTSA (2022), Waniek
et al. (2021), Kello (2013),
Gartzke and Lindsay (2015)
3b
There is a higher risk and the
impact more negative of
disruptions on supply
chains when those
disruptions are due to
intentional rather than
inadvertent wrong and
misleading information
4
Fake news, misinformation
and disinformation can be
ampliﬁed and cause larger
supply chain disruptions
Media and Social Media are
the most affected industries
and play a pivotal role in
amplifying the effect of fake
news, misinformation and
disinformation
Forrester (1961), Grado´n
et al. (2021),
Landon-Murray et al.
(2019), Shu et al. (2020)
5
Supply Chain Visibility and
Information Sharing can
be effective risk
management strategies for
all types of disruptions
Information sharing for IT
systems is crucial. Sharing
information about IT
vulnerabilities and
cybersecurity risks is
necessary across the supply
chain. It should be noted that
cyber attackers use
misinformation and, in
particular, disinformation to
inﬁltrate IT systems
Tang (2006), Bugert and
Rainer (2018), Rajagopal
et al. (2017), Tang and
Nurmaya Musa (2011),
Petratos (2021)
123

754
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
Table 1 (continued)
No.
Propositions
Summary
Relevant literature
6
Blockchain applications can
manage information risks
and reduce supply chain
disruptions
Blockchain
can
signiﬁcantly
reduce risks to IT systems and
supply
chains.
Distributed
Ledger Technologies (DLT),
asBlockchainisknown,allow
visibility and ensure trans-
parency while sharing infor-
mation securely within a net-
work
Among the applications:
monitoring and management
of all supply chain phases,
obtaining a guarantee of
truthfulness, tracking asset
maintenance, tracking critical
parameters, monitoring
resource conditions, tracing
of products, and prevention
of counterfeit products. It
guarantees goods’
authenticity and reduces
counterfeiting and Inventory
and theft tracking and
tracking of returned goods. It
can keep the entire history of
a product and allows the ﬁrm
and consumers, as in
previous cases, and
regulators to determine if
that product has been
manufactured and managed
in a compliant manner
Litke et al. (2019), Tijan et al.
(2019), Lucena et al.
(2018), Pundir et al. (2019),
Kuhn et al. (2018), Alcarria
et al. (2018), Duan et al.
(2020), Subramanian et al.
(2020), Lu and Xu (2017),
Kumar and Tripathi (2019),
Chang et al. (2020),
Banerjee (2018), Gozman
et al. (2020), Satapathy
et al. (2019), Guo et al.
(2021), Petratos (2021),
Kello (2013)
Another key area of applications is retail trade which focuses on digital markets and
counterfeiting prevention. Counterfeiting is based on wrong and misleading information.
Blockchain applications in this ﬁeld include blockchain-enabled markets trust and; the pre-
vention of counterfeit products (Kumar & Tripathi, 2019). With the Blockchain’s ability to
trace the origin of each part of a ﬁnal product, it is possible to have total control and visibility
for all interested parties. Blockchain guarantees the authenticity of the goods and reduces
counterfeiting and Inventory and theft tracking and tracking of returned goods (Chang et al.,
2020). Blockchain also allows organisations to extend warranties to customers with genuine
products and avoid losses in warranty fraud (Banerjee, 2018). Finally, it can keep the entire
history of a product and allows not only the ﬁrm and consumers, as in previous cases, but also
regulators to determine if that product has been manufactured and managed in a compliant
manner (Gozman et al., 2020).
The ‘digital wire’ provides integrated visibility of assets (Satapathy et al., 2019). In con-
trast to management, Blockchain applications achieve decision efﬁciency, improve execution
speed, and support faster dispute resolution (Guo et al., 2021). All these blockchain applica-
tions improve the security and integrity of information within parts of the extended supply
chain. At the same time, some of these applications reduce the risks with exogenous factors
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
755
and provide good quality information to customers and the market. Nevertheless, challenges
remain. While the Blockchain can secure the information and communicate it effectively,
this information should not be interfered with from the source.
Fake news, misinformation and disinformation should be avoided before reaching the
Blockchain. Petratos (2021) proposes risk management strategies as he uses and develops
anti-misinformation, disinformation, and fake news tools and technologies (i.e. bot/spam
detection, credibility scoring, etc.) that can detect and track and prevent low-quality infor-
mation. Good quality information can also be secured with Blockchain before reaching the
supply chain. More innovation is required towards this area and should be encouraged by
governments and other stakeholders. In addition, more investment is necessary for two rea-
sons; ﬁrst, because the risk of fake news, misinformation and disinformation has signiﬁcantly
grown and second, because some of the risk management and mitigation strategies as the
Blockchain have not been developed yet. Protection against supply chain risks requires gov-
ernment and industry coordination, but such efforts have barely commenced and developed
(Kello, 2013). Therefore, further sharing information, creating partnerships, and sufﬁciently
investing to realise them can be valuable. (Petratos, 2021). However, this partnership and
capacity development should be within the supply chain and beyond it, in the industry, and
with government agencies, like the police and the military, to increase the resilience of supply
chains (Table 1).
6 Conclusion, limitations and future research
Fake news, misinformation and disinformation have become signiﬁcant problems for soci-
eties and supply chains. Moreover, their risks are increasing. It is highlighted by the
‘infodemic’ of COVID-19 but also in the news and literature. This paper examines the dis-
ruption and risks to supply chains and makes three distinct contributions. First, we review
the literature on information and supply chains and ﬁnd that information ﬂows and risks
are attracting less attention. We contribute to this literature, mainly SCRM and SCRES, by
further analysing it and suggesting that information integrates other ﬂows, processes and
operations, and it is an overarching theme that is essential in every part of the supply chain.
In addition, previous research on risks lacks a cohesive theoretical framework (DuHadway
et al. 2019) and is based on related studies. We expand on creating a theoretical framework
incorporating fake news, misinformation and disinformation.
The second main contribution is analysing low-quality information and its risks and dis-
ruption on the supply chain. We examine fake news, misinformation and disinformation,
their characteristics, risk and disruptions to supply chains. We ﬁnd that there is a higher risk,
and the impact of disruptions on supply chains is more negative when those disruptions are
due to exogenous fake news, misinformation and disinformation and when those disruptions
are intentional. Fake news, misinformation and disinformation can be ampliﬁed and cause
larger supply chain disruptions. These ﬁndings answer the research question: What are the
information risks, and how can they disrupt supply chains?
The third contribution comes from exploring the question of how blockchain technologies
improve information management risk management and increase supply chain resilience. The
framework presented in this paper provides a useful tool for managing risks due to misleading
information disruptions in practice. We present some applications of Blockchain to the supply
chain and ﬁnd support that Blockchain can advance the risk management and resilience of
supply chains. Moreover blockchain can have practical beneﬁts by facilitating cooperation
123

756
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
and partnerships among different supply chain participants. Another practical implication
for decision makers is that information sharing is an effective strategy for supply chain risk
management. Nevertheless, this study comes with two main limitations. It is a theoretical
study, and blockchain applications to supply chains are a novice and arguably not very mature.
Future research can provide empirical evidence and expand supply chains’ different models
and applications. Moreover, future research can expand and combine blockchain technology
with other Industry 4.0 technologies for more effective SCRM.
Acknowledgements Pythagoras Petratos would like to thank the organizers and participants of the Biosecurity
Group for their invitation to present and their useful comments. He would also like to thank Marco Ciappelli
and Sean Martin of ITPS magazine for the interesting discussions.
Funding There is no funding.
Declarations
Competing interests There are not any competing interests.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Aberer, K., Hauswirth, M., & Salehi, A. (2006). A middleware for fast and ﬂexible sensor network deployment.
In Proceedings of the international conference on very large data bases (VLDB 2006) (No. CONF).
Ahmad, R. W., Salah, K., Jayaraman, R., Yaqoob, I., Omar, M., & Ellahham, S. (2021). Blockchain-based
forward supply chain and waste management for COVID-19 medical equipment and supplies. IEEE
Access, 9, 44905–44927. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2021.3066503
Akhtar, P., Ghouri, A. M., Khan, H., ul Haq, M., Awan, U., Zahoor, N., Khan, Z., & Ashraf, A. (2022). Detecting
fake news and disinformation using artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning to avoid supply chain
disruptions. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05015-5
Al Essa, T. S. (2022, January 14). How the COVID-19 pandemic has changed supply chain practices. Retrieved
January 27, 2022, from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/01/5-ways-the-covid-19-pandemic-has-
changed-the-supply-chain/
Alcarria, R., Bordel, B., Robles, T., Martín, D., & Manso-Callejo, M. Á. (2018). A blockchain-based autho-
risation system for trustworthy resource monitoring and trading in smart communities. Sensors, 18(10),
3561.
Alexander, J., & Smith, J. (2011). Disinformation: A taxonomy. IEEE Security & Privacy Magazine, 9(1),
58–63. https://doi.org/10.1109/msp.2010.141
Ali, A., Mahfouz, A., & Arisha, A. (2017). Analysing supply chain resilience: Integrating the constructs
in a concept mapping framework via a systematic literature review. Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, 22(1), 16–39. https://doi.org/10.1108/scm-06-2016-0197
Allcott, H., & Gentzkow, M. (2017). Social media and fake news in the 2016 election. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 31(2), 211–236. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.31.2.211
Angelis, J., & Ribeiro da Silva, E. (2019). Blockchain adoption: A value driver perspective. Business Horizons,
62(3), 307–314. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2018.12.001
Aqlan, F., & Lam, S. S. (2015). Supply Chain Risk Modelling and mitigation. International Journal of Pro-
duction Research, 53(18), 5640–5656. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2015.1047975
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
757
Bach, L.M., Mihaljevic, B., & Zagar, M. (2018). Comparative analysis of blockchain consensus algorithms.
In 2018 41st international convention on information and communication technology, electronics and
microelectronics (MIPRO) (pp. 1545–1550).
Baird, I. S., & Thomas, H. (1985). Toward a contingency model of strategic risk taking. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 10(2), 230–243. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1985.4278108
Banerjee, A. (2018). Blockchain technology: Supply chain insights from ERP. In Advances in computers (Vol.
111, pp. 69–98). Elsevier.
Baryannis, G., Dani, S., & Antoniou, G. (2019). Predicting supply chain risks using machine learning:
The trade-off between performance and interpretability. Future Generation Computer Systems, 101,
993–1004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.07.059
Beamon, B. M. (1998). Supply Chain Design and analysis. International Journal of Production Economics,
55(3), 281–294. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0925-5273(98)00079-6
Bhutta, M. N., Khwaja, A. A., Nadeem, A., Ahmad, H. F., Khan, M. K., Hanif, M. A., Song, H., Alshamari,
M., & Cao, Y. (2021). A survey on Blockchain technology: Evolution, architecture and security. IEEE
Access, 9, 61048–61073. https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2021.3072849
Bugert, N., & Lasch, R. (2018). Supply chain disruption models: A critical review. Logistics Research, 11(5),
1–35.
Ceryno, P. S., Scavarda, L. F., Klingebiel, K., & Yüzgülec, G. (2013). Supply chain risk management: A content
analysis approach. International Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management, 4(3), 141–150.
Chadwick, A., & Stanyer, J. (2021). Deception as a bridging concept in the study of disinformation, misinfor-
mation, and misperceptions: Toward a holistic framework. Communication Theory, 32(1), 1–24. https://
doi.org/10.1093/ct/qtab019
Chang, Y., Iakovou, E., & Shi, W. (2020). Blockchain in global supply chains and cross border trade: A
critical synthesis of the state-of-the-art, challenges and opportunities. International Journal of Production
Research, 58(7), 2082–2099.
Chatterjee, S., Chaudhuri, R., & Vrontis, D. (2022). Role of fake news and misinformation in supply chain
disruption: Impact of technology competency as moderator. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10479-022-05001-x
Chen, F., Drezner, Z., Ryan, J. K., & Simchi-Levi, D. (2000). Quantifying the bullwhip effect in a simple supply
chain: The impact of forecasting, lead times, and information. Management Science, 46(3), 436–443.
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.46.3.436.12069
Colicchia, C., & Strozzi, F. (2012). Supply chain risk management: A new methodology for a systematic
literature review. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 17(4), 403–418. https://doi.org/
10.1108/13598541211246558
Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. H. (1986). Organisational Information Requirements, media richness and structural
design. Management Science, 32(5), 554–571. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.32.5.554
Dierksmeier, C., & Seele, P. (2019). Blockchain and business ethics. Business Ethics: A European Review,
29(2), 348–359. https://doi.org/10.1111/beer.12259
Duan, J., Zhang, C., Gong, Y., Brown, S., & Li, Z. (2020). A content-analysis based literature review in
blockchain adoption within food supply chain. International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health, 17(5), 1784.
DuHadway, S., Carnovale, S., & Hazen, B. (2017). Understanding risk management for intentional supply
chain disruptions: Risk detection, risk mitigation, and risk recovery. Annals of Operations Research,
283(1–2), 179–198. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2452-0
Dunn, J. E. (2021). Covid-19 and Supply Chains: A year of evolving disruption. Cleveland Fed District Data
Briefs. https://doi.org/10.26509/frbc-ddb-20210226
Durach, C. F., Wieland, A., & Machuca, J. A. D. (2015). Antecedents and dimensions of supply chain
robustness: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics
Management, 45(1/2), 118–137. https://doi.org/10.1108/ijpdlm-05-2013-0133
Dutta, P., Choi, T.-M., Somani, S., & Butala, R. (2020). Blockchain technology in Supply Chain Operations:
Applications, challenges and research opportunities. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2020.102067
Elock Son, C. (2018). Supply Chain Risk Management: A review of thirteen years of research. American
JournalofIndustrialandBusinessManagement,08(12),2294–2320.https://doi.org/10.4236/ajibm.2018.
812154
Esmaeilian, B., Sarkis, J., Lewis, K., & Behdad, S. (2020). Blockchain for the future of Sustainable Supply
Chain Management in industry 4.0. Resources, Conservation and Recycling. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2020.105064
123

758
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
Esposito, C., Ficco, M., & Gupta, B. B. (2021). Blockchain-based authentication and authorisation for smart
city applications. Information Processing & Management, 58(2), 102–468. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.
2020.102468
Etemadi, N., Borbon-Galvez, Y., Strozzi, F., & Etemadi, T. (2021). Supply chain disruption risk manage-
ment with blockchain: A dynamic literature review. Information, 12(2), 70. https://doi.org/10.3390/
info12020070
Fairbank, J. F., Labianca, G. J., Steensma, H. K., & Metters, R. (2006). Information processing design
choices, strategy, and risk management performance. Journal of Management Information Systems,
23(1), 293–319. https://doi.org/10.2753/mis0742-1222230110
Fan, H., Cheng, T. C., Li, G., & Lee, P. K. (2016). The effectiveness of supply chain risk information processing
capability: an information processing perspective. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management,
63(4), 414–425. https://doi.org/10.1109/tem.2016.2598814
Fisher Ke, J., Windle, R. J., Han, C., & Britto, R. (2015). Aligning supply chain transportation strategy with
industry characteristics: Evidence from the US-Asia supply chain. International Journal of Physical
Distribution & Logistics Management, 45(9/10), 837–860. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-06-2014-
0130
Forrester, J. W. (1961). Industrial dynamics. MIT Press.
Galbraith, J. R. (1974). Organisation design: An information processing view. Interfaces, 4(3), 28–36. https://
doi.org/10.1287/inte.4.3.28
Galvez, J. F., Mejuto, J. C., & Simal-Gandara, J. (2018). Future challenges on the use of Blockchain for food
traceability analysis. TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 107, 222–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.
2018.08.011
Gartzke, E., & Lindsay, J. R. (2015). Weaving tangled webs: Offense, defense, and deception in Cyberspace.
Security Studies, 24(2), 316–348. https://doi.org/10.1080/09636412.2015.1038188
Gozman, D., Liebenau, J., & Aste, T. (2020). A case study of using blockchain technology in regulatory
technology. MIS Quarterly Executive, 19(1), 19–37.
Grado´n, K. T., Hołyst, J. A., Moy, W. R., Sienkiewicz, J., & Suchecki, K. (2021). Countering misinformation:
A multidisciplinary approach. Big Data & Society, 8(1), 20539517211013850.
Grinberg, N., Joseph, K., Friedland, L., Swire-Thompson, B., & Lazer, D. (2019). Fake news on Twitter
during the 2016 US presidential election. Science, 363(6425), 374–378. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aau2706
Guo, L., Liu, Q., Shi, K., Gao, Y., Luo, J., & Chen, J. (2021). A blockchain-driven electronic contract man-
agement system for commodity procurement in electronic power industry. IEEE Access, 9, 9473–9480.
Hamida, E.B., Brousmiche, K., Levard, H., & Thea, E. (2017). Blockchain for Enterprise: Overview, Oppor-
tunities and Challenges. In ICWMC 2017.
Hammadi, A.M., Taylor, R., & Reiners, T. (2018). Exploring supply chain deception, sustainability, and
customer perceptions.
Harapko, S. (2021, February 18). How covid-19 impacted supply chains and what comes next. Retrieved
January 27, 2022, from https://www.ey.com/en_gl/supply-chain/how-covid-19-impacted-supply-chains-
and-what-comes-next
Haußmann, C., Dwivedi, Y. K., Venkitachalam, K., & Williams, M. D. (2011). A summary and review of
Galbraith’s Organizational Information Processing Theory. Information Systems Theory. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-1-4419-9707-4_5
Heinbockel, W. J., Laderman, E. R., & Serrao, G. J. (2017). Supply Chain Cyber resiliency mitiga-
tions. Retrieved February 8, 2022, from https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/pr-18-
0854-supply-chain-cyber-resiliency-mitigations.pdf
Hellwig, D., & Huchzermeier, A. (2019). An industry study of blockchain technology’s impact on Trade
Finance. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3453767
Helper, S., & Soltas, E. (2021, June 17). Why the pandemic has disrupted supply chains. Retrieved January
27, 2022, from https://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/written-materials/2021/06/17/why-the-pandemic-has-
disrupted-supply-chains/
Ho, W., Zheng, T., Yildiz, H., & Talluri, S. (2015). Supply Chain Risk Management: A literature review.
International Journal of Production Research, 53(16), 5031–5069. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2015.1030467
Hohenstein, N.-O., Feisel, E., Hartmann, E., & Giunipero, L. (2015). Research on the phenomenon of sup-
ply chain resilience. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 45(1/2),
90–117. https://doi.org/10.1108/ijpdlm-05-2013-0128
Holweg, M., & Bicheno, J. (2016). The reverse ampliﬁcation effect in supply chains. Developments in Logistics
and Supply Chain Management. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137541253_5
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
759
Hyvärinen, H., Risius, M., & Friis, G. (2017). A blockchain-based approach towards overcoming ﬁnancial
fraud in public sector services. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 59(6), 441–456. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12599-017-0502-4
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics—Part C: Applications and reviews publication informa-
tion. (2006). IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews),
36(4). https://doi.org/10.1109/tsmcc.2006.878800
István, Z., Sorniotti, A., & Vukolic, M. (2018). StreamChain: Do Blockchains Need Blocks? In Proceedings
of the 2nd Workshop on Scalable and Resilient Infrastructures for Distributed Ledgers.
Ivanov, D. (2021). Exiting the COVID-19 pandemic: After-shock risks and avoidance of disruption tails in
supply chains. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04047-7
Jones, C., & Bomey, N. Timeline: How Takata’s air-bag scandal erupted. Retrieved February 10, 2022, from
https://eu.usatoday.com/story/money/2017/06/25/takata-air-bag-scandal-timeline/103184598/
Jüttner, U., Peck, H., & Christopher, M. (2003). Supply Chain Risk Management: Outlining an agenda for
future research. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 6(4), 197–210. https://
doi.org/10.1080/13675560310001627016
Kamath, R. (2018). Food traceability on Blockchain: Walmart’s pork and Mango pilots with IBM. The Journal
of the British Blockchain Association, 1(1), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.31585/jbba-1-1-(10)2018
Katsaliaki, K., Galetsi, P., & Kumar, S. (2021). Supply chain disruptions and resilience: A major review and
future research agenda. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03912-1
Kello, L. (2013). The meaning of the Cyber Revolution: Perils to theory and Statecraft. International Security,
38(2), 7–40. https://doi.org/10.1162/isec_a_00138
Khan, O., Christopher, M., & Burnes, B. (2008). The impact of product design on Supply Chain Risk: A case
study. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 38(5), 412–432. https://
doi.org/10.1108/09600030810882834
Kochan, C. G., & Nowicki, D. R. (2018). Supply Chain Resilience: A systematic literature review and typologi-
cal framework. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 48(8), 842–865.
https://doi.org/10.1108/ijpdlm-02-2017-0099
Kongmanee, J., Kijsanayothin, P., & Hewett, R. (2019). Securing smart contracts in Blockchain. 2019 34th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering Workshop (ASEW), 69–76.
Kuhn, M., Nguyen, H. G., Otten, H., & Franke, J. (2018, November). Blockchain enabled traceability–securing
process quality in manufacturing chains in the age of autonomous driving. In 2018 IEEE international
conference on technology management, operations and decisions (ICTMOD) (pp. 131–136). IEEE.
Kumar, R., & Tripathi, R. (2019, January). Traceability of counterfeit medicine supply chain through
Blockchain. In 2019 11th International Conference on Communication Systems & Networks (COM-
SNETS) (pp. 568–570). IEEE.
Lacity, M., & Van Hoek, R. (2021). What we’ve learned so far about blockchain for business. MIT Sloan
Management Review, 62(3), 48–54.
Landon-Murray, M., Mujkic, E., & Nussbaum, B. (2019). Disinformation in contemporary US foreign policy:
Impacts and ethics in an era of fake news, social media, and artiﬁcial intelligence. Public Integrity, 21(5),
512–522.
Lee, H., Padmanabhan, V., & Whang, S. (1997). Information distortion in a supply chain: The bullwhip effect.
Management Science, 43(4), 546–558. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1040.0266
Li, X., Ghadami, A., Drake, J. M., Rohani, P., & Epureanu, B. I. (2021). Mathematical model of the feedback
between global supply chain disruption and Covid-19 Dynamics. Scientiﬁc Reports. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41598-021-94619-1
Liang, X., Zhao, J., Shetty, S., Liu, J., & Li, D. (2017). Integrating Blockchain for Data Sharing and collabora-
tion in Mobile Healthcare Applications. In 2017 IEEE 28th annual international symposium on personal,
indoor, and mobile radio communications (PIMRC). https://doi.org/10.1109/pimrc.2017.8292361
Lim, S. Y., Fotsing, P., Almasri, A., Musa, O., Mat Kiah, M. L., Ang, T. F., & Ismail, R. (2018). Blockchain
technology the identity management and Authentication Service Disruptor: A survey. International Jour-
nal on Advanced Science, Engineering and Information Technology, 8(4–2), 1735–1745. https://doi.org/
10.18517/ijaseit.8.4-2.6838
Litke, A., Anagnostopoulos, D., & Varvarigou, T. (2019). Blockchains for supply chain management: Archi-
tectural elements and challenges towards a global scale deployment. Logistics, 3(1), 5.
Lu, Q., & Xu, X. (2017). Adaptable blockchain-based systems: A case study for product traceability. IEEE
Software, 34(6), 21–27.
Lucena, P., Binotto, A. P., Momo, F. D. S., & Kim, H. (2018). A case study for grain quality assurance tracking
based on a Blockchain business network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07877.
Manuj, I., & Mentzer, J. T. (2008). Global supply chain risk management. Journal of Business Logistics, 29(1),
133–155. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2158-1592.2008.tb00072.x
123

760
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
Min, H. (2019). Blockchain technology for enhancing supply chain resilience. Business Horizons, 62(1),
35–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2018.08.012
Moritz, B. What is different about COVID-19 and other supply chain disruptions? Retrieved January 27,
2022, from https://www.smeal.psu.edu/cscr/research-and-news-updates/documents/supply-chains-and-
covid19.pdf/view
Moyaux, T., Chaib-draa, B., & D’Amours, S. (2007). Information sharing as a coordination mechanism for
reducing the bullwhip effect in a supply chain. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part C (applications and Reviews), 37(3), 396–409. https://doi.org/10.1109/tsmcc.2006.887014
Nguyen, Q. K., & Dang, Q. V. (2018). Blockchain technology for the Advancement of the Future. In 2018 4th
international conference on green technology and sustainable development (GTSD). https://doi.org/10.
1109/gtsd.2018.8595577
NHTSA. Takata recall spotlight. Retrieved February 10, 2022, from https://www.nhtsa.gov/equipment/takata-
recall-spotlight
Nyamtiga, B. W., Sicato, J. C., Rathore, S., Sung, Y., & Park, J. H. (2019). Blockchain-based secure
storage management with Edge Computing for IOT. Electronics, 8(8), 828. https://doi.org/10.3390/
electronics8080828
Omar, I. A., Jayaraman, R., Debe, M. S., Salah, K., Yaqoob, I., & Omar, M. (2021). Automating procurement
contracts in the healthcare supply chain using blockchain smart contracts. IEEE Access, 9, 37397–37409.
https://doi.org/10.1109/access.2021.3062471
Pan, X., Pan, X., Song, M., Ai, B., & Ming, Y. (2020). Blockchain technology and enterprise operational
capabilities: An empirical test. International Journal of Information Management, 52, 101–946. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.05.002
Petratos, P. N. (2021). Misinformation, disinformation, and fake news: Cyber risks to business. Business
Horizons, 64(6), 763–774. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2021.07.012
Pletinckx, S., Trap, C., & Doerr, C. (2018). Malware coordination using the Blockchain: An analysis of the
CERBER ransomware. In 2018 IEEE conference on communications and network security (CNS). https://
doi.org/10.1109/cns.2018.8433199
Prakash, S., Soni, G., & Rathore, A. P. (2017). A critical analysis of supply chain risk management content:
A structured literature review. Journal of Advances in Management Research, 14(1), 69–90. https://doi.
org/10.1108/jamr-10-2015-0073
Pundir, A. K., Jagannath, J. D., Chakraborty, M., & Ganpathy, L. (2019, January). Technology integration
for improved performance: A case study in digitisation of supply chain with integration of internet of
things and blockchain technology. In 2019 IEEE 9th annual computing and communication workshop
and conference (CCWC) (pp. 0170–0176). IEEE.
Rajagopal, V., Prasanna Venkatesan, S., & Goh, M. (2017). Decision-making models for supply chain risk
mitigation: A review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 113, 646–682. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.
2017.09.043
Raman, G., AlShebli, B., Waniek, M., Rahwan, T., & Peng, J.C.-H. (2020). How weaponising disinformation
can bring down a city’s power grid. PLoS ONE, 15(8), e0236517. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0236517
Rao, S., & Goldsby, T. J. (2009). Supply chain risks: A review and typology. The International Journal of
Logistics Management, 20(1), 97–123. https://doi.org/10.1108/09574090910954864
Rieger, A., Guggenmos, F., Lockl, J., Fridgen, G., & Urbach, N. (2019). Building a blockchain application
that complies with the EU general data protection regulation. MIS Quarterly Executive, 18(4), 263–279.
https://doi.org/10.17705/2msqe.00020
Sahin, F., & Robinson, E. P. (2002). Flow coordination and information sharing in supply chains: Review,
implications, and directions for future research. Decision Sciences, 33(4), 505–536. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1540-5915.2002.tb01654.x
Satapathy, U., Mohanta, B. K., Panda, S. S., Sobhanayak, S., & Jena, D. (2019, July). A secure framework for
communication in internet of things application using hyperledger based Blockchain. In 2019 10th inter-
national conference on computing, communication and networking technologies (ICCCNT) (pp. 1–7).
IEEE.
Seipp, V., Michel, A., & Siegfried, P. (2020). Review of International Supply Chain Risk Within banking reg-
ulations in Asia, US and EU including cost efﬁciency proposals. Journal of Financial Risk Management,
09(03), 229–251. https://doi.org/10.4236/jfrm.2020.93013
Shahid, A., Almogren, A., Javaid, N., Al-Zahrani, F. A., Zuair, M., & Alam, M. (2020). Blockchain-based
agri-food supply chain: A complete solution. IEEE Access, 8, 69230–69243. https://doi.org/10.1109/
access.2020.2986257
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
761
Shekarian, M., & Mellat Parast, M. (2020). An integrative approach to supply chain Disruption Risk and
Resilience Management: A literature review. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applica-
tions, 24(5), 427–455. https://doi.org/10.1080/13675567.2020.1763935
Shu, K., Wang, S., Lee, D. and Liu, H., (2020). Mining disinformation and fake news: Concepts, methods,
and recent advancements. In Disinformation, misinformation, and fake news in social media (pp. 1–19).
Cham: Springer.
Singh, S., & Singh, N. (2016). Blockchain: Future of ﬁnancial and cyber security. In 2016 2nd international
conference on contemporary computing and informatics (IC3I) (pp. 463–467).
Siyal, A. A., Junejo, A. Z., Zawish, M., Ahmed, K., Khalil, A., & Soursou, G. (2019). Applications of
blockchain technology in medicine and healthcare: Challenges and future perspectives. Cryptography,
3(1), 3. https://doi.org/10.3390/cryptography3010003
Snyder, L. V., Atan, Z., Peng, P., Rong, Y., Schmitt, A. J., & Sinsoysal, B. (2015). Or/MS models for supply
chain disruptions: A review. IIE Transactions, 48(2), 89–109. https://doi.org/10.1080/0740817x.2015.
1067735
Sodhi, M. M. S., Son, B.-G., & Tang, C. S. (2011). Researchers’ perspectives on supply chain risk manage-
ment. Production and Operations Management, 21(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1937-5956.2011.
01251.x
Søe, S. O. (2019). A uniﬁed account of information, misinformation, and disinformation. Synthese. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02444-x
Spekman, R. E., & Davis, E. W. (2004). Risky business: Expanding the discussion on risk and the extended
enterprise. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 34(5), 414–433.
https://doi.org/10.1108/09600030410545454
Subramanian, N., Chaudhuri, A., & Kayikci, Y. (2020). Blockchain applications in food supply chain. In
Blockchain and supply chain logistics (pp. 21–29). Cham: Palgrave Pivot.
Swanson, D., & Suzuki, Y. (2020). Covid-19 carves new facets of supply chain disruption. Transportation
Journal, 59(4), 325–334. https://doi.org/10.5325/transportationj.59.4.0325
Szabo, N. (1997). Formalising and securing relationships on public networks. First Monday. https://doi.org/
10.5210/fm.v2i9.548
Tang, C. S. (2006). Perspectives in supply chain risk management. International Journal of Production Eco-
nomics, 103(2), 451–488. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2005.12.006
Tang, O., & Nurmaya Musa, S. (2011). Identifying risk issues and research advancements in supply chain risk
management. International Journal of Production Economics, 133(1), 25–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2010.06.013
Tasnim, S., Hossain, M. M., & Mazumder, H. (2020). Impact of rumors and misinformation on COVID-19
in social media. Journal of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, 53(3), 171–174. https://doi.org/10.
3961/jpmph.20.094. Epub 2020 Apr 2.
Tijan, E., Aksentijevi´c, S., Ivani´c, K., & Jardas, M. (2019). Blockchain technology implementation in logistics.
Sustainability, 11(4), 1185. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11041185
Tukamuhabwa, B. R., Stevenson, M., Busby, J., & Zorzini, M. (2015). Supply chain resilience: Deﬁnition,
review and theoretical foundations for further study. International Journal of Production Research,
53(18), 5592–5623. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2015.1037934
Wagner, S. M., & Bode, C. (2009). Dominant risks and risk management practices in supply chains. Interna-
tional Series in Operations Research & Management Science. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-79934-
6_17
Wang, Y., Han, J. H., & Beynon-Davies, P. (2019). Understanding blockchain technology for future supply
chains: A systematic literature review and research agenda. Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal, 24(1), 62–84. https://doi.org/10.1108/scm-03-2018-0148
Waniek, M., Raman, G., AlShebli, B., Peng, J.C.-H., & Rahwan, T. (2021). Trafﬁc Networks are vulnerable
to disinformation attacks. Scientiﬁc Reports. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-84291-w
World Health Organization. Infodemic. Retrieved January 27, 2022, from https://www.who.int/health-topics/
infodemic#tab=tab_1
Yang, T., & Fan, W. (2014). Information Management Strategies and supply chain performance under
demand disruptions. International Journal of Production Research, 54(1), 8–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2014.991456
Yeasmin, S., & Baig, A. (2019). Unblocking the potential of Blockchain. In 2019 international conference on
electrical and computing technologies and applications (ICECTA). https://doi.org/10.1109/icecta48151.
2019.8959713
Zhang, A., & Lin, X. (2018). Towards secure and privacy-preserving data sharing in e-health systems via
consortium blockchain. Journal of Medical Systems. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-018-0995-5
123

762
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:735–762
Zheng, Z., Xie, S., Dai, H., Chen, X. & Wang, H. (2017, June). An overview of blockchain technology:
Architecture, consensus, and future trends. In 2017 IEEE international congress on big data (BigData
congress) (pp. 557–564).
Zhu, P., Hu, J., Li, X., & Zhu, Q. (2021). Using blockchain technology to enhance the traceability of original
achievements. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management.
Zimba, A., Wang, Z., & Mulenga, M. (2019). Cryptojacking Injection: A paradigm shift to cryptocurrency-
based web-centric internet attacks. Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce,
29(1), 40–59. https://doi.org/10.1080/10919392.2019.1552747
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123