TITLE: Pharmaceutical retail supply chain responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05866-0
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 28 September 2023 / Accepted: 24 January 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
 
 Dmitry Ivanov
dmitry.ivanov@hwr-berlin.de
1 
Department of Business and Economics, Berlin School of Economics and Law, Badensche Str. 
52, 10825 Berlin, Germany
Pharmaceutical retail supply chain responses to the 
COVID-19 pandemic
Maria Schleifenheimer1 · Dmitry Ivanov1
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05866-0
Abstract
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the importance of resilient supply chain and 
operations management in the pharmaceutical industry has intensified. A particular chal­
lenge has been the timely adaptation to rapid fluctuations in the business environment to 
cope with disruptions and ensure the adequate supply of medical equipment and phar­
maceuticals. In this study, we perform a simulation-based analysis of pandemic-triggered 
impacts on pharmaceutical supply chains in Germany with the aim of examining supply 
chain response to the COVID-19 pandemic. To accomplish this, we build a digital supply 
chain model using a hybrid approach that combines case study analysis and discrete-
event simulation implemented in anyLogistix. Based on the results, we propose a specific 
response action plan for the pharmaceutical industry that can be deployed in response to 
severe disruptions and pandemic-like crises. We also offer a resilience framework for the 
post-pandemic environment as a guideline for strategic decision-making.
Keywords  COVID-19 pandemic · Pharmaceutical industry · Supply chain analytics · 
Resilience · Digital supply chain · AnyLogistix
1  Introduction
Pandemics and significant disruptions in global markets call for fast adaptations and have 
shifted the focus to the key role of supply chain (SC) resilience (Hosseini et al., 2019; Dubey 
et al., 2023; Hägele et al., 2023; Sawik, 2023). In particular, SCs of essential goods, such 
as pharmaceuticals, have been required to adapt quickly to rapid changes in the business 
environment to cope with disruptions and ensure the adequate supply of medical equipment 
and pharmaceuticals (Lücker et al., 2021; Dolgui et al., 2023; Yousefi Sarmad et al., 2023). 
A fundamental aspect to consider are the distinct patterns of demand changes for essential 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
/ Published online: 7 February 2024

and non-essential goods, with the term ‘essential’ referring to items necessary for living, 
including food, pharmaceutical goods, and shelter (Li et al., 2023b; Sodhi et al., 2023).
Dolgui et al. (2023) stress that in a situation such as the pandemic, the demand for essen­
tial goods increases noticeably, whereas the demand for non-essential goods declines. Dur­
ing the COVID-19 pandemic, the pharmaceutical retail sector experienced a sharp increase 
in demand, as people were panic buying and exhibiting hoarding behaviors (Paul et al., 
2022; Li et al., 2023a). Given these distinct dynamics, the management of the pharmaceuti­
cal industry and its SCs became increasingly important. The pharmaceutical industry had 
to implement specific actions in a timely manner to respond to the changes and adapt their 
operations to ensure the availability of goods. However, while the literature on SC resilience 
in the pandemic setting has grown significantly (Aldrighetti et al., 2023; Alikhani et al., 
2023; Ivanov et al., 2023), knowledge is lacking as to how pharmaceutical supply chains 
(PSC) have responded to the pandemic and what actions should be taken in the future to 
increase their resilience. This research gap inspired our first research question (RQ):
RQ 1 “How has the COVID-19 pandemic impacted PSC performance?”
The motivation behind RQ1 stems from the assessment of the impact of COVID-19 pan­
demic disruptions on the PSC. Using a hybrid approach combining case-study and simula­
tion analysis, we examine responses of German PSCs to the COVID-19 pandemic. Based 
on the examination of what occurred in the past, our second objective is to propose a future 
action plan, which motivated our second RQ:
RQ 2 “How can PSC resilience be improved?”
As a generalized outcome related to RQ2, we propose a specific action plan for the phar­
maceutical industry that can be deployed in response to severe disruptions and pandemic-
like crises. From the insights obtained, we develop a framework for the post-pandemic 
environment, which includes specific recommendations for resilience and risk mitigation. In 
summary, the first RQ is aimed at obtaining insights into the impact of the pandemic through 
the analysis of various disruption scenarios. This will enable the identification of specific 
SC risks in the PSC. The second RQ is intended to provide specific actions to address the 
risk factors identified in the preceding analysis to increase SC resilience in the pharmaceuti­
cal industry. Through examination of the two RQs, our research contributes to literature by 
providing practice-based insights into the effects of the pandemic on PSCs that can be used 
to develop specific measures to enhance disruption management and resilience.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. A literature review is provide in 
Sect. 2. The practical context of our study and the methodology are explained in Sect. 3. A 
case study and the respective simulation model of the PSC in Germany are set up in Sect. 4. 
In Sect. 5, the simulation results are analyzed using selected KPIs (Key Performance Indica­
tors) to obtain insight into the impact and extent of pandemic disruptions as well as specific 
SC risks (RQ1). In Sects. 6 and 7, we discuss the simulation results. An SC risk-action 
framework and a resilience framework for the post-pandemic environment are proposed 
(RQ2). We conclude in Sect. 8 by summarizing the major insights of our study and outlining 
directions for future research.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1034

2  Literature review
The pandemic-related disruptions resulted from a variety of factors, including the sudden 
changes in demand, regional and national lockdowns, restrictions of global trade and travel, 
reduced labor force availability, temporary closure of sites, increased transportation and 
lead times, and bottlenecks as well as supply shortages (Graves et al., 2023; Browning et al., 
2023; Ivanov & Dolgui, 2022). The sequential nature of the outbreaks and the high intercon­
nectedness of the above-mentioned factors posed an unforeseen challenge that was hard to 
predict or contain (Ivanov, 2022, Shen & Sun, 2023). Initially, demand changes occurred, 
where demand dropped for some goods but increased for others, including PPE and vac­
cines. Added to these demand changes was a reduced labor force and hence a sharp decline 
of production capacity. This led to limited supply and shortages, which, in turn, disrupted 
value chains dramatically (Paul & Chowdhury, 2021; Ramani et al., 2022; Brusset et al., 
2023).
During the pandemic, supply in the health sector and the crisis resilience of related 
economic sectors, such as the pharmaceutical industry, became the focus of political and 
social debates, given their essential nature and importance to public health. With personal 
protective equipment (PPE) such as surgical face masks, gloves, face shields and medical 
gowns being the most effective means of protection against the spread of the virus, and the 
rising number of patients requiring hospital medical care, the demand for medical prod­
ucts surged (Dolgui et al., 2023; Chervenkova & Ivanov, 2023). The unfolding of the pan­
demic has clearly shown that particular attention must be given to the providers of essential 
goods such as medical equipment and pharmaceutical products (Sodhi et al., 2023; Li et al., 
2023b). Furthermore, the essential role of the pharmaceutical industry makes it imperative 
to develop strategies to anticipate, mitigate, and adapt in high-risk scenarios and under the 
constant threat of disruptions.
In the pharmaceutical industry, the effects of the pandemic were most noticeable in the 
retail sector, with demand changes resulting from demand for new items such as PPE as well 
as panic buying and stocking of other medications, new requirements regarding hygiene, 
labor shortages, and bottlenecks in supply and distribution (Ivanov, 2021b; Ivanov & Kes­
kin, 2023; Rozhkov et al., 2022). Changes also became quickly apparent in the manufac­
turing area. SC uncertainty rose as new rules on social distancing impacted the efficiency 
of operations and factories were operating with limited capacities or were shut down tem­
porarily, especially in China, which was the primary producer of drug components. These 
factors, in combination with COVID-related drugs and equipment being prioritized, not 
only affected the ability to source, make, and distribute drugs, but also resulted in increased 
prices and lead times.
Although SC disruptions are not a new phenomenon and have been researched exten­
sively, the COVID pandemic has made it clear that new challenges and circumstances can 
arise that call for quick adaptation and recovery. While previous literature has assessed a 
wide variety of locally contained as well as spreading disruptions (i.e., the ripple effect), 
severe, simultaneous disruptions at a multitude of SC nodes and links within the pharmaceu­
tical industry have never been examined in the context of the pandemic. Nor has a recovery 
analysis examining the post-disruption environment been carried out specifically on the 
pharmaceutical industry. To close this research gap, this study aims to contribute to SC 
resilience research by generating new knowledge on the impact of the pandemic-related 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1035

disruptions on the pharmaceutical industry. The second aim is to establish a framework for 
increasing resilience by providing specific actions that address the identified shortcomings 
and risks in the PSC in a post-disruption environment.
3  Practical context and methodology
3.1  Pharmaceutical supply chain in Germany
Producing a drug involves a complex interaction between suppliers, sub-suppliers, manu­
facturers, wholesalers, retailers and regulatory oversight bodies. Figure 1 displays a simpli­
fied version of a PSC network and its key players. Arrows mark the direction of product 
flows and hence transportation; for the purpose of this research, return processes have been 
excluded.
Pharmaceutical products are generally composed of two main inputs: active pharmaceu­
tical ingredients (APIs) and excipients. APIs are the ingredients that generate the desired 
pharmacological effect, while excipients are the inactive substances that are included for 
the manufacturability, composition, and performance of the finished pharmaceutical prod­
uct (FPP). At the supply stage, ingredients and starting materials are either imported or 
produced locally in primary production. Within the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector, 
primary production can be subdivided into excipient production, auxiliary material provi­
sion, and API production.
The components are shipped to the drug product manufacturer and combined into tab­
lets, ointments, and liquids. The final products are then packaged into tubes, blisters packs, 
etc. In compliance with safety, environmental, and quality regulations, the pharmaceuticals 
are subject to continuous checks throughout the entire process before they are approved 
to be released for transport. Finished goods were traditionally shipped to pharmaceutical 
wholesalers but are now also distributed directly to customers, including pharmacies and 
hospitals, from where they are then provided to patients and online retailers, or prepared 
for export. In Germany, 9 manufacturer-neutral distributors are organized in the PHAGRO 
Federal Association of Pharmaceutical Wholesalers (Bundesverband des pharmazeutischen 
Fig. 1  PSC in Germany
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1036

Großhandels e.V.), which operates 104 branches throughout the country. The central task of 
the wholesalers is to ensure the timely nationwide supply of medicines to the public. The 
branches deliver medicine to public pharmacies an average of three times a day to avoid 
unnecessarily high stock levels in pharmacies.
3.2  COVID-19 disruptions in Germany’s pharmaceutical industry
Like most industries, the pharmaceutical industry has been severely impacted by disruptions 
triggered by the pandemic outbreak. However, the importance of the pharmaceutical indus­
try has been especially highlighted by media and literature, given the essential nature of its 
outputs. During the pandemic, several interconnected factors affected and limited the ability 
to source, produce, and deliver pharmaceutical products, an effect which has been magnified 
by the sequential and geographically diverse nature of the outbreaks.
Primarily visible were the changes in demand patterns for pharmaceutical products and 
medical equipment (Ayati et al., 2020). Demand increased for certain goods, such as PPE, 
vaccines, and other COVID-related pharmaceutical goods. Panic buying and hoarding by 
consumers also led to a surge in demand, especially for over-the-counter cold medicines, 
fever and pain relievers such as Paracetamol, multivitamins, and immune boosters, all of 
which could be used to reduce COVID-symptoms.
The effects of the pandemic also extended to transportation, which was disrupted on 
several levels. Many countries imposed substantial restrictions on imports and exports, and 
border security was increased to ensure the adherence to limitations of in-country and cross-
border movements. Disruptions also adversely affected the supply side, where shortages 
had been rising for both excipients and APIs (Miller et al., 2021). The main impact resulted 
from export restrictions and bans imposed by China and India, two major producers of APIs 
and generics, and unexpectedly limited supply, as well as labor shortages and temporary 
closures (Malviya et al. 2022). The demand increase and simultaneous hoarding and non-
release of pharmaceutical supplies to buying countries multiplied the effect of the disrup­
tions and led to an unforeseen erratic product supply.
3.3  Research methodology
We use a hybrid methodology combining case study and discrete-event simulation model­
ling. Simulation models, which are used in quantitative research, allow complex problems 
in SCs to be solved, where a multitude of elements are connected and build complex inter­
dependencies throughout the various stages of a SC network (Ivanov, 2023b). Simulation 
allows the depiction of individual discrete events that form a chronological sequence of 
operations (Jackson et al., 2023). Although simulations are a simplification of reality, they 
have the potential to explain problems that entail high levels of complexity. One significant 
advantage of simulation models is the ability to consider time-dependent parameters, which 
enables the assessment of the situational changes as well as the impact of disruptions on 
the SC performance over time (Ivanov, 2021a; Singh et al., 2021). Moreover, simulation 
enables randomness and logical constraints (e.g., randomness in disruptions or recovery) 
to be considered and evaluated though the use of performance indicators (Ivanov, 2020).
We selected anyLogistix for simulation because it allows the analysis of a wide variety of 
elements, the interconnections of variables, and objective functions and has proven to be a 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1037

suitable tool for risk and resilience analysis, and it can cope with high levels of complexity 
(Ivanov, 2020). anyLogistix combines different types of descriptive, predictive and pre­
scriptive analytics, including simulation, optimization, and visualization to analyze, design 
and optimize SCs.
Our study combines a deductive approach, where hypotheses are initially formulated and 
the theory is then tested using simulation with an inductive approach for creating new theo­
ries and concepts that allow the drawing of valid new conclusions. The case study for the 
pharmaceutical industry is developed using secondary data on the German pharmaceutical 
industry to construct the digital SC in anyLogistix and is used as data input for the discrete-
event simulation. The setup of the SC model in anyLogistix is considered a disruption-free 
base scenario based on which four distinct disruption scenarios will be simulated. The dis­
ruptive events are set based on the pandemic timeline. Simulation methodology allows the 
researcher to obtain insights into the impact of the pandemic on the German pharmaceutical 
industry by simplifying the reality to a certain degree and making use of selected operational 
and financial performance indicators to quantify the findings. Use of a combined qualitative 
and quantitative research approach with primary and secondary sources ensures that the 
results and the derived managerial recommendations are valid despite the simplification and 
use of certain assumptions. Based on the findings from the literature research and simula­
tion, specific actions in response to identified SC issues are derived and used to create a 
framework for increasing resilience within the industry in a post-pandemic environment.
4  Simulation model
We consider a multi-stage SC network simulation for the German pharmaceutical indus­
try, which includes suppliers, manufacturers, wholesalers and pharmacies. Owing to the 
complexity of the SC network in Germany and the vast number of pharmaceuticals that 
are registered for sale, the simulation design will be simplified to include the ten most sold 
medications (from 2015 to 2019) provided by IMS Health (2019). These are grouped into 
four product categories, namely pain relievers, respiratory drugs, wound care, and CKM 
drugs (cardiovascular, kidney, and metabolic disease drugs). In total, 100 customer locations 
(pharmacies) have been selected and distributed across the German federal states based on 
population density. The locations are based on actual pharmacies within Germany, which 
have been selected using the official health portal of German pharmacists (Aponet.de, n.d.).
4.1  Assumptions and simulation logic
The following assumptions have been made. The demand is based on the average yearly 
demand of the selected pharmaceuticals. Customers demand products from all product cat­
egories, and all wholesalers obtain and stock all products from the respective FPP manu­
facturer. Regarding inventory, it is assumed that manufacturers and DCs apply an (s, S) 
min-max inventory policy with safety stock, according to which goods are (re-)ordered 
when inventory levels fall below the fixed replenishment point (s + safety stock). In this 
case, the ordered quantity is set so that the resulting total inventory quantity is equal to 
S + safety stock. For FPPs at manufacturers, the replenishment point (s) has been set to the 
respective total daily demand multiplied by 4, and the maximum inventory level (S) has 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1038

been set at s + 150,000 pieces, with a safety stock of 100,000 pieces based on the dataset 
considered. For excipients at manufacturers, the (s, S) levels have been selected following 
the same logic. For wholesalers, (s, S) inventory levels have been set with the aim of achiev­
ing specific overall supply level days, using manufacturers’ inventory levels per product as 
a base. The following supply level days for FPPs have been determined based on the level 
of importance of the product for public health as well as overall demand: CKM drugs, 23 
days; wound care, 14 days; respiratory medication, 12 days; and pain medication, 10 days. 
Overall, inventory carrying costs amount to 28% of the total costs.
For supplier selection, the composition of the individual pharmaceuticals in the cat­
egories was first investigated to identify excipient commonalities, on the basis of which 
regional, medical-grade suppliers were subsequently identified through online search. In 
terms of transportation, excipients and FPPs are transported via refrigerated trucks, given 
their temperature sensitivity, with a capacity of 500,000 pieces per truck and an average 
speed of 80 km/h. The transportation cost calculation is distance-based with fixed costs, 
where anyLogistix takes into consideration variable costs multiplied by distance as param­
eters for computation. The variable costs have been set in accordance with recent figures 
published by the DVZ (2021), where the average transportation cost per kilometer was 
calculated to be 1.57 €/km.
The cost of shipping from the manufacturer to the wholesaler is already included in the 
final agreed-upon price. Such costs are therefore included in the manufacturer’s inventory 
expenditure, which is the sum of the initial inventory purchase cost and the replenishment 
costs. The costs are computed by multiplying the initial stock (in units) by the correspond­
ing cost value of the product. Production costs are considered for manufacturers and have 
been computed by dividing the total yearly cost (including rent/m2, utilities, personnel costs, 
and energy costs) by the total number of products.
The simulation model logic is as follows (Fig. 2). Each customer places orders at the 
wholesaler, who states that the PHAGRO delivers to all pharmacies three times a day. All 
orders delivered within the expected lead time (ELT) of 0.5 days are classified as on-time 
Fig. 2  Simulation Model Design
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1039

deliveries. All others are classified as delayed deliveries and have a negative impact on the 
ELT service level, defined as the ratio of on-time orders to the overall number of outgoing 
orders.
4.2  4.2. Experimental setup and performance assessment
Several disruptions are simulated based on the actual timeline of events caused by COVID-
19 and corresponding measures implemented by the German government (Fig.  3). The 
approximate duration of waves is marked in blue.
Various simulations of the German PSC are set up based on the developments depicted in 
the timeline, including one pre-pandemic scenario and four disruption scenarios. The results 
will be evaluated using selected KPIs. These include:
 
●
Expected lead time (ELT): the time period within which the product is anticipated to be 
received by the customer who placed the order.
 
●
ELT service level: the ratio of orders fulfilled on time (within the expected lead time) to 
total orders. The ELT service level disregards whether orders are fulfilled from inven­
tory or produced goods and is, therefore, a suitable indicator of total SC responsiveness, 
including distribution and manufacturing.
 
●
Fulfilment (late orders): displays statistics on the order quantity that failed to be fulfilled 
within the expected lead time and, hence, includes all orders still being delivered after 
the expiration of the ELT.
 
●
Demand (product backlog): shows the number of processed products for all incomplete 
orders, i.e., orders currently lacking the required number of products.
 
●
Available inventory, including backlog: displays the number of products available in 
stock without including the quantities of products for incomplete orders and is, thus, the 
difference between the available inventory and the demand (product backlog).
 
●
Financial indicators: this KPI gives detailed information on the incurred expenses and 
Fig. 3  COVID-19 Pandemic Timeline Germany (based onBMG (2022)
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1040

generated revenue, including costs (e.g., transportation costs, inventory costs, inbound/
outbound processing costs, among others) as well as total profit and revenue for the 
respective scenario (anyLogistix, n.d.c).
These KPIs will be used to assess the following simulation scenarios:
(0) Pre-pandemic (disruption-free scenario).
The first simulation analyzes PSC performance prior to the pandemic outbreak with no 
(major) disruptions. A simulation is run for a two-year period (01/01/2020–12/31/2021). 
Results from this simulation will be used as a baseline to be compared with disruption 
scenarios.
(1) Demand increase.
Demand patterns changed significantly in response to the pandemic outbreak. To simulate 
the effects on German PSCs and determine the impact on their performance, various demand 
changes within fixed time periods will be simulated. The products, respective changes to the 
demand coefficients, and periods have been selected based on the literature review and pan­
demic timeline in previous chapters. Simulated events are depicted in Table 1.
(2) Transportation bottlenecks
The transportation bottlenecks will be simulated in accordance with the pandemic timeline 
for six different time periods. Making use of the anyLogistix event type ‘path state,’ material 
flow disruptions of five days each are simulated, as depicted in Fig. 4.
(3) Supply-side disruptions.
Disruptions on the supply side will be simulated as depicted in Table 2. Using the event type 
‘facility state’ in anyLogistix, the impact of shutdowns of two suppliers and one manufac­
turing site is simulated and analyzed.
Event
Demand 
coefficient
Time period
Initial Demand
1.00
01/01/2020–
02/29/2020
Demand Increase 1
Pain Relievers
1.15
03/01/2020–
03/03/2020
Demand Recovery
Pain Relievers
0.90
07/01/2020–
12/31/2021
Demand Increase 2
Respiratory Medication
1.13
03/01/2020–
03/05/2020
Demand Recovery
Respiratory Medication
0.90
07/01/2020–
04/30/2021
Demand Increase 3
Respiratory Medication
1.05
05/01/2021–
12/31/2021
Table 1  Experiment description: 
increased demand
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1041

The first event simulates a shutdown of one major supplier for one week at the beginning 
of the pandemic. At this point, isolation regulations were the strictest and mandatory quar­
antine regulations applied to all infected workers. In line with the number of daily reported 
cases, the second and third events are each set for a 12-day period, as case numbers rose 
more drastically during the respective pandemic waves. Thereby, the effects of restricted 
workforce availability and hence, limited production capacity are assessed. Simulation 
results are analyzed using the selected KPIs.
(4) Pandemic disruption.
The multiple disruption scenario analysis combines the disruption simulations (1–3) to 
examine the impact of the pandemic on the German PSC performance, where disruptions not 
only occurred as isolated events but also hit the SC simultaneously and were time-delayed.
5  Results and discussion
In this section, we present and discuss the simulation results.
Event
Time period
Shutdown of Starch supplier
Nordmann, Rassmann GmbH
03/16/2020–03/23/2020
Shutdown of Glycerol supplier
Glaconchemie GmbH
12/21/2020–01/02/2021
Shutdown of CKM drugs manufacturer
Merck KGaA
04/20/2021–05/02/2021
Table 2  Experiment Description: 
Supply-Side Disruptions
 
Fig. 4  Experiment Description: Transportation Bottlenecks
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1042

5.1  Simulation 0—pre-pandemic (disruption-free scenario)
Simulation 0 depicts the pre-pandemic SC state of the German pharmaceutical industry, 
without the occurrence of disruptions. Figure 5 shows the SC network performance.
The financial indicators show that the SC network, including sourcing, production, and 
distribution, is profitable. With an overall revenue of 2.65bn EUR, 43% is attributed to 
costs (1.14bn EUR), leaving 57% profit (1.51bn EUR). The high inventory expenditures 
within the PSC occur because inventory is stocked to a greater degree than in other indus­
tries, given that pharmacies are supplied on a highly frequent basis, and the items provided 
are essential to society. Furthermore, inventory is not only kept at the manufacturing site 
but at wholesalers to a large degree. However, this varies widely within the industry as 
some goods are easily perishable, and others can be stored for several months. Overall, the 
min-max inventory policy with safety stock selected for the simulation ensures sufficient 
inventory for the high turnover while still maintaining buffer inventory to mitigate slight 
fluctuations.
Fig. 5  Simulation results: pre-pandemic (disruption-free scenario)
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1043

Regarding transportation, the computation results show 231,323 shipped vehicles with a 
total travel distance of 47,136,509 km, totaling 67.3mn EUR in transportation costs. Based 
on the frequency of shipments and the usage of LSPs, this represents 6% of the total costs. 
Outbound processing makes up a share of 8%, as shipments from wholesalers to all custom­
ers are issued three times per day, which is relatively frequent. Other costs include operat­
ing, administrative, and personnel costs, summing up to 2% of total costs. Lastly, production 
costs comprise 1% of total costs, given that production is highly automated, which allows 
for a large output in a minimal amount of time.
In addition to the financial indicators, the KPI dashboard (Fig. 4) displays lead time in 
the form of a histogram, where the x-axis marks the time in days, and the y-axis the number 
of occurrences within that time. Accordingly, data from the histogram can be interpreted as 
goods being delivered to customers within a time frame of zero and six hours. Most items, 
however, are delivered within 0.1 days, or 2.4 h. With the expected lead time being 0.5 days, 
the customers’ requirements are fully met for all products. The lead time is short due to fre­
quently recurring orders and high inventory turnover at the wholesalers.
In terms of the product backlog, which refers to the number of processed products for 
those orders that currently lack the required number of products, the disruption-free sce­
nario shows no such backlog. This can be interpreted as all orders being delivered in-full 
and customer demand being satisfied 100%.
In line with these findings is the KPI fulfilment (late orders), indicating the number of 
orders that did not arrive within the expected lead time of 0.5 days. Any order being deliv­
ered later would thus be classified as a late order. All orders are delivered on time, given that 
the number of late orders is equal to zero. Hence, all of the 877,208 orders are being fulfilled 
on time and in full (OTIF).
These findings are supported by the ELT service level statistics, which refer to the num­
ber of on-time orders relative to the number of outgoing orders, and are, thus, an indicator of 
total SC responsiveness. As derived from the fulfilment KPI, all orders are fulfilled on time, 
which supports the finding that the ELT service level is 1, meaning that customers receive 
100% of their orders within the expected lead time.
Lastly, the average daily available inventory is displayed in Fig. 8 and shows inven­
tory levels for all four products at the PHAGRO (CKM drugs = blue, respiratory medica­
tion = green, pain relievers = red, wound care = black). With the previously elaborated (s, 
S)-policy stocks are kept between the maximum level (S + safety stock) and the replenish­
ment point (s + safety stock). This prevents excessive inventories while also ensuring that 
some stock is maintained to buffer against slight demand fluctuations. The results clearly 
indicate sufficient stock from the beginning throughout the entire time period. With stable 
inventory levels, sufficient stock is available to fulfil demand.
In summary, Simulation 0, with no disruptions of the SC network, displays the optimal 
performance of the German PSC. With complete fulfilment of demand, high profitability, 
and regular and stable inventory levels, this scenario poses the base against which the dis­
ruptive scenarios in the following section will be compared.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1044

5.2  Disruption simulation
For Simulation 1, we assess the impact of a demand increase in response to the pandemic 
outbreak, and rising case numbers on performance of the PSC network in Germany. The 
results are depicted in Fig. 6. A backlog is evident for both manufacturers and wholesalers.
Simulation 2 depicts the effects of bottlenecks in transportation on PSC performance dur­
ing the first COVID-19 wave (Figs. 6 and 7).
As shown in Fig. 7, financial performance is not majorly impacted by the disruption 
throughout the two-year period. With a significant reduction of excipients being delivered 
from suppliers to the manufacturing sites, a decrease in the available inventory (FPPs) can 
also be evidenced, leading to a decrease in inventory costs. With this, the number of late 
orders increases for pain relievers, wound care, and respiratory medication. However, the 
level of increase is low compared to the total number of orders. Thus, the ELT service level 
remains near 100% at all times throughout the period. This means that demand is still being 
Fig. 6  Simulation 1 results: demand increase
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1045

satisfied for the most part, indicated by the number of products being delivered on-time 
relative to all orders shipped.
Simulation 3 aims at assessing the impact of supply-side disruptions. Figure 8 depicts the 
effect on PSC performance following the shutdowns of two suppliers (Starch supplier Nor­
dmann, Rassmann GmbH—7 days; Glycerol supplier Glaconchemie GmbH—12 days) and 
one production site (CKM drug manufacturer Merck KGaA—12 days) within a specified 
time period. It should be noted that contrary to the previous simulations, the available inven­
tory is displayed for manufacturers and wholesalers to demonstrate the disruption impact 
more clearly, as both nodes are affected here.
In Simulation 4, all disruptions are combined to simulate the impact of the pandemic on 
the German PSC performance. The results are depicted in Fig. 9.
In terms of financial performance, the COVID-pandemic had a negative impact on the 
products under review. As depicted in Simulation 1, the demand increase is considered 
the main driver for higher revenues generated throughout the two-year period. This is also 
Fig. 7  Simulation 2 results: transportation bottlenecks
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1046

visible in the pandemic simulation, with revenues increasing by 2% compared to the base 
scenario. However, given the simultaneously occurring SC disruptions, costs increase by 
15% to a total of 1.3bn EUR, thereby taking up almost half of all revenues (2.7bn EUR). 
The main share of this development can be traced back to the significant rise of transpor­
tation and production costs in response to the effects of the disruptions rippling through 
the SC. One cost driver for transportation is the rise of the overall quantity of goods to 
be transported with increased demand, leading to a rising number of shipped vehicles. In 
addition, as transport is disrupted and manufacturing capacities for excipients and FPPs are 
restricted or temporarily shut down, more incomplete orders are shipped from manufactur­
ers to wholesalers and to customers, causing the capacity utilization of trucks to decline and 
costs to rise. As a consequence of the extended number of orders and goods to be handled, 
inbound and outbound processing costs also rise; other costs, however, remain level since 
they are considered fixed costs. As for inventory carrying costs, a decrease of 10% is appar­
ent, as suppliers are unable to deliver excipients, thereby restricting the production of FPPs, 
which is combined with manufacturing sites being shut down. The existing inventory at 
Fig. 8  Simulation 3 results: supply-side disruptions
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1047

manufacturers and wholesalers is, thus, turned over quickly, and inventory levels (temporar­
ily) decline. As a consequence, profit decreases by 8% (− 120mn EUR) compared to in the 
undisrupted base scenario.
In more detail, upon assessment of the available inventory, the extent of the COVID-
related SC disruptions becomes apparent. With increased demand, closures on the supply 
side, and transportation bottlenecks during the first pandemic wave all products are affected, 
even though to a varying extent.
For pain relievers, the impact of simultaneous disruptions and their effects rippling 
through the SC become especially apparent. While the time for the inventory level to fully 
recover averaged 153 days for isolated disruptions, it took almost four times that in the pan­
demic simulation, as the combined disruptive impacts caused inventory levels to decline to 
a point where safety stock, the applicable (s, S)-inventory policy and available production 
capacities were no longer able to ensure timely recovery. Compared to the impact of the first 
pandemic wave, the disruptions occurring during the third wave are even more significant 
to the overall SC performance. Especially for products that were significantly impacted 
Fig. 9  Simulation 4 results - COVID-19 pandemic disruptions
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1048

during the first wave and which were still recovering, such as respiratory medication, addi­
tional disruptions led to a sharp decline in inventory levels. No recovery was possible for 
these products within the time period under consideration, assuming that neither additional 
capacities for storage or production nor measures regarding the inventory or sourcing strat­
egy were implemented.
These findings are supported by the KPIs products backlog and fulfilment (late orders). 
As seen in the individual disruption simulations, it is not possible attain 100% on-time 
fulfilment of orders following the SC disruptions, which leaves demand unsatisfied. With 
the start of disruptions, product backlog spikes resulted from excipients not being delivered 
due to supply-side disruptions, combined with transportation disruptions and increasing 
demand. A great share of the backlog is eliminated once suppliers resume their operations. 
Overall, following the sharp rise, the number of backlogged products slightly increases 
further due to ripple effects but eventually starts to decrease as the wave subsides. This pat­
tern is also reflected by the late orders, which rise during the first pandemic wave and then 
remain fairly stable at around 200 orders. During the third wave of the pandemic, where 
further disruptions occurred, both indicators denote a significant rise in backlog again and 
hence late products. This can be traced back to the previously mentioned assumption that 
no additional storage/manufacturing capacities were created and no reactive SC measures 
were implemented, causing insufficient quantities to be produced and readily available for 
distribution to customers. While the total of 31,312 delayed orders made up just 4% of all 
orders, 13mn pieces were delivered late.
Moreover, the lead time depicts a significant change compared to the base scenario, as 
most orders are now delivered within 0 and 80 days. The mean lead time more than doubled 
from 0.10 to 0.25 days, implying that pharmacies across Germany had longer waiting times 
to receive their goods.
The impact of the disruptions on SC performance further affects the ELT service level. 
During the first and second pandemic waves, disruptions can be mostly buffered against due 
to the use of safety stock and generally high stock levels, implying only a minor impact on 
the service level by decreasing it to 0.94 temporarily. However, the additional disruptions 
clearly have a greater effect during the phase of recovery, with the service level decreasing 
by close to 0.7 over an extended period of time.
In summary, Simulation 4 clearly depicts the interdependencies of variables within the 
SC network as well as the impact of combined disruptive effects on German PSC perfor­
mance. The results confirm the assumption that while the industry did largely profit from the 
increased demand during the COVID-19 pandemic, weaknesses within the network were 
revealed that negatively impacted SC performance.
5.3  Comparative analysis
Following the baseline scenario and the analysis of four distinct simulations to assess the 
pharmaceutical industry in Germany and the impact of the pandemic on its global SC net­
work, we now compare the simulation outcomes to derive generalized insights (Table 3). 
The essential findings are summarized below.
For Simulation 1, where demand increases, the average daily available inventory 
decreases, with more orders having to be manufactured and distributed, leading to a faster 
turnover of items. With this, the number of required vehicles almost triples, causing trans­
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1049

Table 3  Comparison of computational results
KPI / 
Simulation
Simulation 0
Pre-Pandemic
Simulation 1
Demand 
Increase
Simulation 2
Transportation 
Bottlenecks
Simulation 3
Supply Side 
Disruptions
Simulation 4
Pandemic
Total Rev­
enue (in €)
2,658,767,218.6
2,707,844,221.8
2,685,767,218.6
2,658,712,737.2
2,704,793,677.1
Total Costs 
(in €)
1,144,077,244.3
1,286,508,684.1
1,140,017,807.7
1,160,251,908.0
1,310,409,099.1
Total Profit 
(in €)
1,514,689,974.3
1,421,335,537.7
1,518,749,410.8
1,498,460,829.2
1,394,384,577.9
Av. Daily 
Available 
Inventory 
(FPPs)
5,579,306
4,167,489
5,592,632
4,827,161
3,663,598
Av. Daily 
Available 
Inventory 
(Excipients)
32,054,110
28,411,097
33,131,117
31,263,772
33,355,297
Inventory 
Carrying 
Costs
318,705,563.8
304,238,232.1
310,344,466.9
312,335,765.8
285,711,227.3
Transporta­
tion Costs
(in €)
67,366,550.7
207,840,513
71,351,783.2
87,248,963.4
246,731,401.1
Total 
Number of 
Shipped 
Vehicles
231,323
670,144
237,191
263,967
675,150
Vehicle 
Capacity 
Utilization
0.042
0.015
0.041
0.037
0.0015
Mean Lead 
Time
(in Days)
0.10
0.112
0.104
0.106
0.253
Max. Lead 
Time
(in Days)
0.22
152.94
46.03
33.77
483.07
Demand 
Placed by 
Customers 
(Products)
312,109,664
318,326,559
312,109,664
312,109,664
318,326,559
Fulfil­
ment (Late 
Orders)
0
1,648
63
103
31,312
Fulfil­
ment (Late 
Products)
0
704,710
22,418
25,479
13,012,765
ELT Service 
Level*
*At the low­
est level
1.00
0.90
0.95
0.97
0.71
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1050

portation expenses to spike. At the same time, orders are delayed due to capacity limitations, 
resulting in longer lead times and delayed orders, which in turn negatively impact the ELT 
service level, causing it to reach just 90%. While total revenues are increased due to higher 
sales, associated costs rise at a greater speed, leading to less profit than in the base scenario.
Transportation bottlenecks in Simulation 2 affect various nodes of the SC and restrict 
transportation between suppliers, manufacturers, and wholesalers. These bottlenecks have a 
comparably low impact on SC performance. Overall, inventory levels rise slightly due to the 
backlog and temporary inability to transport goods from manufacturers to the PHAGRO, 
and so does the number of transported vehicles, as orders are only being partially shipped. 
Despite the backlog, which is, however, minimal compared to the total number of orders, the 
mean lead time remains nearly level, and service levels only decrease slightly. In terms of 
Fig. 10  SC resilience framework for the german pharmaceutical industry post-disruption
 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1051

financial impact, revenues remain level compared to the base scenario. Total costs, however, 
are lower despite increased transportation costs, as fewer items are brought from suppliers 
and more inventory is consumed from stock, which reduces handling and inventory costs.
With disruptions on the supply side, as assessed in Simulation 3, less inventory is avail­
able overall for manufacturing, which reduces carrying costs. As for transportation, this 
implies that more vehicles need to be shipped but are less utilized, which causes rising 
transportation costs and thus slightly reduced profitability. Despite the small number of 
backlogged orders, the mean lead time is barely impacted, leaving the ELT service level at 
97%. We note that the maximum lead time is a cumulative lead time from the warehouses 
to all customers.
Combining all three isolated disruption scenarios, Simulation 4 examines the impact of 
the pandemic on PSC performance and the interrelation of variables. On the supply side, 
transportation and demand simultaneously and subsequently affect the SC, and impact of 
disruptions on the performance becomes more significant. The simulation displayed overall 
increased excipient inventory levels but reduced FPP levels, which leads to the conclusion 
that through the interplay of disruptions, items become backlogged and production capaci­
ties are, at least partially, insufficient, as not all excipients can be converted into FPPs. At 
the same time, inventory costs are lower due to temporary disruptions on the supply side 
and an overall faster turnover of inventory. As expected, transportation costs pose the big­
gest cost factor, as more vehicles have to be dispatched to deliver available items and with 
lower capacity utilization.
To summarize, firstly, the pandemic situation proved to be less profitable for the items 
in question, despite the higher sales numbers. Secondly, the impact of the ripple effect 
becomes apparent, as disruptive events occur simultaneously as well as sometimes being 
delayed, thereby causing the impact on the SC network’s performance to aggregate. Lastly, 
the pandemic-related disruptions showed that with disruptions occurring during the recov­
ery phase and no reactive measures being put in place (e.g., in terms of capacities or backup 
suppliers/facilities), the security of supply is no longer fully guaranteed, as late orders/prod­
ucts spike, leading the ELT service level to drop to 71% and causing a large quantity of 
demand to remain unfulfilled or majorly delayed.
When cross-comparing all simulations against the baseline scenario, results suggest that 
despite increased demand, profitability does not increase at the same rate if no capacities are 
freed up to compensate for the additional quantities. The assessment further highlighted that 
this exact event thus has the highest impact on SC performance, compared to other isolated 
events, as backlog increases with adverse effects on lead time and demand fulfilment and 
hence, customer satisfaction. Both transportation bottlenecks and supply-side disruptions, 
when simulated independently, also displayed decreasing lead times and backlogged orders 
although on a significantly smaller scale and with less impact on service level. Despite 
transportation bottlenecks being simulated to last for a shorter period than the supply-side 
disruptions, the difference in impact on SC performance was relatively small. Based on 
these findings, it can be concluded that not only the length of disruption is important, but 
also the essentiality and character of the node it affects within the SC network. These find­
ings provide valuable insights into the impact of the pandemic on the SC network and can 
therefore be used as a base for developing specific measures to increase resilience and mini­
mize disruptive impacts in the future.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1052

5.4  Generalizing the impact of the pandemic on Germany’s pharmaceutical 
industry
The pandemic generated a multitude of challenges as well as opportunities for the Ger­
man pharmaceutical industry, given its unforeseen nature and the general unpredictability 
of events and interplay of factors along the SC. With high levels of uncertainty, consumers 
have changed their purchasing behavior to stock up on medication, especially medication 
related to the symptoms of COVID-19. Consequently, sales have risen in patterns that differ 
from those of the usual seasonal changes, straining an industry charged with the production 
of PPE and vaccines even further.
These unprecedented changes have imposed significant pressure on the PSC, bringing 
to light weaknesses within the network. Particularly during the first two waves of the pan­
demic, when uncertainty was high and the pandemic was a new and unpredictable develop­
ment, the management of inventory and stock levels posed a challenge. With a reduction 
of inventory, increased backlogs, and delayed orders, shortages of pharmaceuticals were 
no rarity. Although the inventory situation improved once regulatory measures were eased 
and panic buying lessened as the prevailing level of uncertainty also declined, recovery was 
slow. For the subsequent waves of rising case numbers, the increase in demand was seen to 
be more significant, compared to the first wave, as it hit SCs, which were still recovering, 
leaving a great strain on stocked items and manufacturing capacities.
In addition to the demand increase, supplier and manufacturer sites experienced the 
repercussions of the pandemic, with sites having to operate at reduced capacity or shut down 
entirely due to COVID outbreaks and quarantine regulations imposed by the government. 
These supply-side disruptions posed further challenges to the SC network, as components 
were missing and production capacity was limited, which led not only to decreased inven­
tory levels but also delayed orders and longer lead times.
Similar effects on the movement of goods were triggered by transportation bottlenecks 
caused by the combined effects of delays at borders due to stricter entry restrictions and the 
limited availability of personnel in trucking. These significantly impacted the efficiency of 
transport, increased costs, and hence the availability of materials and goods along the entire 
SC network. In turn, delivery times and the closely related service level were negatively 
affected.
In summary, the COVID-19 pandemic has had extensive effects on the PSC in Germany, 
with major repercussions on suppliers, manufacturers, wholesalers and, ultimately, custom­
ers. While certainly not all product categories were affected in the same way, and high 
stock levels within the industry provided some resilience to buffer against the strains on 
production capacity, inventory, and transportation, the effects were still noticeable and they 
greatly impacted the availability of goods essential to society. Furthermore, the pandemic 
has uncovered weaknesses along the SC, which have been known for some time but have 
not been brought to light to such an extent, such as low visibility resulting from a highly 
complex SC network. Overall, the issues identified within the SC network of the German 
pharmaceutical industry, based on the simulation results and the examined literature, can be 
grouped as follows: (a) changes in demand patterns, (b) increased demand, (c) transporta­
tion bottlenecks, (d) supply-side disruption, (e) inventory shortages, (f) capacity constraints 
(storage and manufacturing), (g) product shortages, (h) increased lead times, (i) rise of new 
sales channels (e-commerce), and (j) dependence on government regulations (hygiene, 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1053

compliance, etc.). While the pandemic seems to be near its end, these challenges remain 
and must be addressed with suitable measures to increase long-term resilience within the 
industry and secure supply in future potential long-term crises.
5.5  Managerial implications and recommendations
In this section, we propose specific recommendations for increasing resilience in a post-
pandemic environment in the PSC in Germany. The proposed framework is intended to be 
used as a general guideline for actors within the PSC network. As depicted in Fig. 9, these 
recommendations are grouped into three phases aimed at increasing resilience in the phar­
maceutical industry in a post-disruption environment.
The framework combines both reactive and proactive strategies for the phases of stabili­
zation, recovery, and preparedness and provides specific actions for players in the pharma­
ceutical industry to respond and adapt to the post-disruption environment.
In the first phase, considering the weaknesses brought to light by the COVID-19 pan­
demic, all players along the PSC network should perform an impact evaluation to assess the 
extent of the pandemic disruptions and the interrelations of variables and their respective 
effects on SC performance and derive managerial implications. Carrying out the analysis 
jointly with multiple actors along the SC will enable the sharing of resources, such as infor­
mation, and thus yield a more precise evaluation. Using real data and quantifying it through 
the use of KPIs allows for a detailed analysis and enables a holistic assessment of the SC and 
the associated risks and impacts through simulation. In light of the fast-changing environ­
ment, it is essential that this assessment be carried out in a timely manner so that business 
continuity plans can be reviewed and amended accordingly (Ivanov, 2023a). These actions 
are likely to bring about a stabilization of the situation.
In the second phase, the focus should be on adaptation and resilience to enable the phar­
maceutical industry in Germany to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic disruptions. Manu­
facturers and wholesalers should increase collaborative efforts not only with one another but 
also along the SC network. In this way, communication and exchange can amplify day-to-
day operations, as well as resilience in the long run, with planning and supply being aligned 
to minimize the disruptive impact on SC performance and achieve the best possible perfor­
mance (Li et al., 2022a, b. Furthermore, the use of digital technologies, such as track and 
trace or digital twins, is a main enabler in creating end-to-end visibility and transparency. 
Obtaining visibility beyond tier-1 suppliers allows manufacturers and wholesalers, as well 
as pharmacies, to anticipate risks and disruptions and to implement measures respectively to 
counteract them (Li et al., 2020). Particularly in terms of inventory management, real-time 
data and transparency would improve accuracy, efficiency, and robustness, prevent stock-
outs, and guarantee availability. With the same strategic goal, the SC configuration should 
be re-evaluated, especially focusing on risk diversification through multiple sourcing, 
alternative transportation, and manufacturing/storage capacities. This will enable a faster 
response to changes in the environment, such as a demand increase, shutdowns of sites, and 
transport bottlenecks, as observed during the pandemic, and would mitigate the severity of 
the impact (Ivanov, 2022, Ivanov, 2023a).
In the third phase, players in the pharmaceutical industry are recommended to leverage new 
opportunities arising from the pandemic. With the pharmaceutical industry having proven to 
be capable of unprecedented endeavors, such as the rapid development of new drugs, the vast 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1054

potential of the industry to profit from the pandemic has been uncovered, and new opportunities 
should be seized. With the significant rise of e-commerce during the pandemic, opportunities for 
the retail of pharmaceuticals should be further explored (MacCarthy and Ivanov, 2022b). It is 
suggested that the SC and operations be transformed to support the shift to online pharmacies, 
increased (contactless) home deliveries, and digital payment methods. Thus, pharmaceutical 
firms should invest heavily in new digital technologies to support this change (Maccarthy and 
Ivanov, 2022a, Zhang et al., 2022). Building an SC that is more heavily reliant on AI, blockchain, 
automation, robotics, and track and trace technologies not only allows leveraging opportuni­
ties for growth but increased productivity and resilience (Dubey et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2022, 
Maccarthy and Ivanov, 2022a). Lastly, opportunities from long-term partnerships with various 
stakeholders should be explored and leveraged (Dolgui et al., 2023).
In summary, ample opportunities are available for the pharmaceutical (retail) industry to sta­
bilize and recover from the pandemic and increase resilience in the long run. Despite the high 
implementation costs and considerable effort required, the actions proposed in the framework 
are recommended, especially in light of the essentiality of the goods.
6  Conclusion
This study focused on SC resilience in the German pharmaceutical sector in light of the global 
COVID-19 pandemic. We examined the impact of disruptions on the pharmaceutical industry 
in Germany during a two-year time frame using a hybrid case study simulation model and sec­
ondary data from academic literature. The research was conducted with the aim of proposing 
specific SC response actions to mitigate the disruptive impact on SC performance and to develop 
a framework applicable to the creation of resilience in a post-disruption environment.
For the first assessment, the analysis of relevant literature was combined with an SC simula­
tion model created in the simulation and optimization software anyLogistix based on secondary 
data. The simulation examined the impact of selected disruptions on the PSC, aiming to identify 
the impact of the pandemic and weaknesses within the SC network. Results showed that the 
pandemic did largely impact the industry, yet it also opened up new opportunities for growth 
and development. The implications of the focus shifting to the manufacturing of PPE and the 
development of vaccines combined with the impact of SC disruptions became apparent in terms 
of increased lead times, decreased service levels, delayed or unattended orders, and rising costs, 
revealed in the simulation and supported by the literature. Especially in the case of additional 
disruptions occurring during recovery periods, the simulated SC has proven to be incapable of 
buffering against the disruptive impact without the implementation of reactive measures. How­
ever, the significant increase in demand for pharmaceutical items also drove revenues up.
The simulation and cross-comparison of computational results affirmed that generally, the 
length of the disruption and the type of node affected directly relate to the severity of the impact. 
Furthermore, the impact of disruptions is aggravated when multiple disruptions occur simulta­
neously, and their impact is accumulated and ripples through the SC. Specific SC actions have 
been identified in response to the identified weaknesses during the COVID-19 pandemic. These 
include (1) digitalization, (2) SC visibility and transparency, (3) SC flexibility and robustness, 
(4) SC network configuration and design, and (5) SC collaboration and partnerships. Addition­
ally, a framework for increasing SC resilience within the German pharmaceutical industry in a 
post-disruption environment has been developed based on the research findings. The three-stage 
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1055

framework specifies strategies for stabilization, recovery, and future development, including (a) 
the evaluation of the impact of the pandemic disruptions on SC performance, (b) adaptation and 
resilience creation and (c) leveraging future opportunities. To summarize, our study contributes 
to the existing base of knowledge on SC disruption management and resilience within the Ger­
man pharmaceutical industry by evaluating the impact of the pandemic and developing a tailored 
approach for increasing resilience in a post-pandemic environment with the aim of supporting 
decision-makers to make informed, strategic decisions before, during, and after disruptions.
In terms of limitations of this research, it must be noted that the case study considered 
only part of the German PSC. Since no primary data on the topic were available at the time of 
research, selected assumptions and generalizations had to be made based on secondary sources, 
which may have resulted in a lack of accuracy and, therefore, misinterpretation. Contributing to 
this is the fact that a simulation always entails a simplification of reality to a certain degree to 
reduce complexity. For example, only land transport was considered in this research, and suppli­
ers were located solely within Europe. Lastly, since the COVID-19 pandemic is a relatively new 
but ongoing occurrence with various interdependent variables, this research study was limited 
by a lack of previous research and studies on the topic. It is, therefore, subject to change based 
on new developments.
For future research in the field, the impact of the pandemic and its implications remain a topic 
of high importance due to the essentiality of the industry. As disruptions become more frequent, 
their unpredictability remains, making it essential to develop and constantly adapt resilience 
measures. Therefore, generic actions must be developed to recover from the pandemic and pre­
pare for the future by leveraging available technologies and collaboration opportunities. For the 
pharmaceutical industry specifically, an interesting research area would be to explore the value 
of nearshoring production and SC collaboration to enhance flexibility, as this has been one of 
the biggest challenges faced during the pandemic. Additionally, the implementation and use of 
technology to support this process, increase visibility, and improve predictive analytics should be 
investigated for the pharmaceutical industry to ensure the best possible SC network configura­
tion in future.
Acknowledgements  We thank the guest editor and two anonymous reviewers whose comments helped us to 
improve the manuscript immensely.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  No conflict of interest has to be declared.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1056

References
Aldrighetti, R., Battini, D., & Ivanov, D. (2023). Efficient resilience portfolio design in the supply chain with 
consideration of preparedness and recovery investments. Omega, 117, 102841.
Alikhani, R., Ranjbar, R., Jamali, A., Torabi, S. A., & Zobel, C. W. (2023). Towards increasing synergistic 
effects of resilience strategies in supply chain network design. Omega, 116, 102819.
Aponet.de (n.d (October 2022).) Apothekensuche: Hier finden Sie jede Apotheke in Deutschland. Available 
at: https://?www.aponet.de?/?apotheke/?apothekensuche. (Accessed: 14 October 2022)
Ayati, N., Saiyarsarai, P., & Nikfar, S. (2020). Short and long term impacts of COVID-19 on the pharmaceuti­
cal sector. DARU Journal of PSCiences, 28(2), 799–805. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40199-020-00358-5.
BMG (2022). Chronik zum Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2: Chronik aller Entwicklungen im Kampf gegen COVID-
19 (Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2) und der dazugehörigen Maßnahmen des Bundesgesundheitsministeriums, 
13 January. Available at: https://?www.bundesgesundheitsministerium.de?/?coronavirus/?chronik-
?coronavirus.html (Accessed: 17 November 2022).
Browning, T., Kumar, M., Sanders, N., Sodhi, M. S., Thürer, M., & Tortorella, G. L. (2023). From sup­
ply chain risk to system-wide disruptions: Research opportunities in forecasting, risk management 
and product design. International Journal of Operations & Production Management. https://doi.
org/10.1108/IJOPM-09-2022-0573.
Brusset, X., Ivanov, D., Jebali, A., La Torre, D., & Repetto, M. (2023). A dynamic approach to supply chain 
reconfiguration and ripple effect analysis in an epidemic. International Journal of Production Econom­
ics, 263, 108935.
Chervenkova, T., & Ivanov, D. (2023). Adaptation strategies for building supply chain viability: A case study 
analysis of the global automotive industry re-purposing during the COVID-19 pandemic. Transporta­
tion Research: Part E, 177, 103249.
Choi, T. M., Kumar, S., Yue, X., & Chan, H. L. (2022). Disruptive technologies and operations management 
in the industry 4.0 era and beyond. Production and Operations Management, 31(1), 9–31.
Dolgui, A., Gusikhin, O., Ivanov, D., Li, X., & Stecke, K. (2023). A network-of-networks adaptation for 
Cross-industry Manufacturing Repurposing. IISE Transactions. https://doi.org/10.1080/24725854.202
3.2253881.
Dubey, R., Bryde, D. J., Dwivedi, Y. K., Graham, G., & Foropon, C. (2022). Impact of artificial intelligence-
driven big data analytics culture on agility and resilience in humanitarian supply chain: A practice-based 
view. International Journal of Production Economics, 250, 108618.
Dubey, R., Bryde, D. J., Dwivedi, Y. K., Graham, G., Foropon, C., & Papadopoulos, T. (2023). Dynamic digi­
tal capabilities and supply chain resilience: The role of government effectiveness. International Journal 
of Production Economics, 258, 108790.
DVZ (2021). Transportpreise auf Europas Straßen steigen. Available at: https://www.dvz.de/rubriken/land/
detail/news/transportpreis-in-europa-steigt.html (Accessed: 26 December 2022).
Graves, S. C., Tomlin, B. T., & Willems, S. P. (2023). Supply chain challenges in the post–covid era. Produc­
tion and Operations Management, 31(12), 4319–4332.
Hägele, S., Grosse, E., & Ivanov, D. (2023). Supply chain resilience: A tertiary study. International Journal 
of Integrated Supply Management, 16(1), 52–81.
Hosseini, S., Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2019). Review of quantitative methods for supply chain resilience 
analysis. Transportation Research: Part E, 125, 285–307.
IMS Health (2019). Arzneimittel - Meistverkaufte Präparate in Deutschland 2017. Available at: https://
de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/548361/umfrage/top-20-der-meistverkauften-arzneimittel-in-
deutschland/ (Accessed: 5 November 2022).
Ivanov, D. (2020). Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on global supply chains: A simulation-based 
analysis on the coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2) case. Transportation Research Part E: 
Logistics and Transportation Review, 136, 101922.
Ivanov, D. (2021a). Introduction to Supply Chain Resilience. Springer Nature.
Ivanov, D. (2021b). Supply chain viability and the COVID-19 pandemic: A conceptual and formal gener­
alisation of four major adaptation strategies. International Journal of Production Research, 59(12), 
3535–3552.
Ivanov, D. (2022). Viable supply chain model: Integrating agility, resilience and sustainability perspec­
tives—lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Annals of Operations Research, 
319, 1411–1431.
Ivanov, D. (2023a). Two views of supply chain resilience. International Journal of Production Research. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2023.2253328.
Ivanov, D. (2023b). Intelligent Digital Twin (iDT) for supply chain Stress-Testing, resilience, and viability. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 263, 108938.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1057

Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2022). The shortage economy and its implications for supply chain and operations 
management. International Journal of Production Research, 60(24), 7141–7154.
Ivanov, D., & Keskin, B. (2023). Post-pandemic adaptation and development of supply chain viability theory. 
Omega, 116, 102806.
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., Blackhurst, J., & Choi, T. M. (2023). Toward supply chain viability theory: From les­
sons learned through COVID-19 pandemic to viable ecosystems. International Journal of Production 
Research, 61(8), 2402–2415.
Jackson, I., Saenz, M., & Ivanov, D. (2023). From natural language to simulations: Applying AI to automate 
simulation modelling of logistics systems. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org
/10.1080/00207543.2023.2276811.
Li, G., Liu, M., Bian, Y., & Sethi, S. (2020). Guarding against disruption risk by contracting under Informa­
tion Asymmetry. Decision Sciences, 51(6), 1521–1559.
Li, G., Liu, M., & Zheng, H. (2022a). Subsidization or diversification? Mitigating supply disruption with 
manufacturer information sharing. Omega, 112, 102670.
Li, G., Li, X., & Liu, M. (2022b). Inducing Supplier Backup via Manufacturer Information Sharing under 
Supply disruption risk (p. 108914). Computers & Industrial Engineering.
Li, S., He, Y., Huang, H., Lin, J., & Ivanov, D. (2023a). Supply chain hoarding and contingent sourcing 
strategies in anticipation of price hikes and product shortages. IISE Transactions. https://doi.org/10.10
80/24725854.2023.2184515.
Li, M., Sodhi, M., Tang, C., & Yu, J. (2023b). Preparedness with a system integrating inventory, capacity, and 
capability for future pandemics and other disasters. Production and Operations Management, 32(2), 
564–583.
Lücker, F., Chopra, S., & Seifert, R. W. (2021). Mitigating product shortages due to disruptions in multi-stage 
supply chains. Production and Operations Management, 30(4), 941–964.
Maccarthy, B., & Ivanov, D. (2022a). Digital supply chain. Elsevier.
MacCarthy, B., & Ivanov, D. (2022b). The digital supply Chain—emergence, concepts, definitions, and tech­
nologies. In B. MacCarthy, & D. Ivanov (Eds.), The Digital Supply Chain (pp. 3–14). Elsevier.
MacCarthy, B., Ahmed, W., & Demirel, G. (2022). Mapping the supply chain: Why, what and how? Interna­
tional Journal of Production Economics, 108688.
Malviya, R. (2022). ‘Impact on Pharmaceutical Industry due to Sudden Pandemic Attack (COVID-19)’, 3(2). 
https://doi.org/10.2174/2666796702666211122152928.
Miller, F. A., et al. (2021). Vulnerability of the medical product supply chain: The wake-up call of COVID-
19. BMJ Quality & Safety, 30(4), 331–335. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2020-012133.
Paul, S. K., & Chowdhury, P. (2021). A production recovery plan in manufacturing supply chains for a high-
demand item during COVID-19. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Manage­
ment, 51(2), 104–125.
Paul, S. K., Chowdhury, P., Chakrabortty, R. K., et al. (2022). A mathematical model for managing the multi-
dimensional impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in supply chain of a high-demand item. Annals of 
Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04650-2.
Ramani, V., Ghosh, D., & Sodhi, M. (2022). Understanding systemic disruption from the Covid-19-induced 
semiconductor shortage for the auto industry. Omega, 113, 102720.
Rozhkov, M., Ivanov, D., Blackhurst, J., & Nair, A. (2022). Adapting supply chain operations in anticipation 
of and during the COVID-19 pandemic. Omega, 110, 102635.
Sawik, T. (2023). A stochastic optimization Approach to maintain Supply Chain viability under the Ripple 
Effect. International Journal of Production Research, 61(8), 2452–2469.
Shen, Z. M., & Sun, Y. (2023). Strengthening supply chain resilience during COVID-19: A case study of 
JD.com. Journal of Operations Management, 69(3), 359–383.
Singh, S., Kumar, R., Panchal, R., & Tiwari, M. K. (2021). Impact of COVID-19 on logistics systems and 
disruptions in food supply chain. Int Journal of Production Research, 59(7), 1993–2008.
Sodhi, M. S., Tang, C. S., & Willenson, E. T. (2023). Research opportunities in preparing supply chains of 
essential goods for future pandemics. International Journal of Production Research, 61(8), 2416–2431.
Yousefi Sarmad, M., Pishvaee, M. S., Jahani, H., et al. (2023). Integrated planning for a global pharmaceutical 
supply chain: An ambidexterity perspective. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-023-05554-5.
Zhang, G., MacCarthy, B., & Ivanov, D. (2022). The cloud, platforms, and digital twins—enablers of the dig­
ital supply chain. In B. MacCarthy, & D. Ivanov (Eds.), The Digital Supply Chain (pp. 77–91). Elsevier.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:1033–1058
1058