TITLE: Managing customer waiting times in an inventory system using Conditional Value-at-Risk measure
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06221-z
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06221-z
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Managing customer waiting times in an inventory system
using Conditional Value-at-Risk measure
Taher Ahmadi1,2
· Alireza F. Hesaraki3 · Anwar Mahmoodi4 ·
Ahmadreza Marandi5
Received: 20 November 2023 / Accepted: 7 August 2024 / Published online: 29 August 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
In today’s fast-paced world, delays or prolonged customer waiting times pose a threat to
the ﬁrm’s proﬁtability. This study utilizes the mean-CVaR metric to incorporate the risk
associated with prolonged customer waiting times into the optimal trade-off decisions. For
this purpose, we consider a single inventory system that faces Poisson demand and utilizes
a base-stock policy to replenish its inventory, which takes a ﬁxed amount of time. The ﬁrm
implements a preorder strategy, encouraging customers to place their orders a ﬁxed amount
of time in advance of their actual needs, a period referred to as the commitment lead time.
The ﬁrm rewards customers with a bonus termed the commitment cost, which increases with
the length of the commitment lead time. We aim to determine the optimal control policy,
including the optimal base-stock level and optimal commitment lead time, that minimizes
the long-run average cost. The cost includes inventory holding, commitment, and customer
waiting costs, with the latter adjusted for the ﬁrm’s degree of risk aversion. The optimal
policy depends on the interdependence of the decisions, with the optimal commitment lead
time following a “bang-bang” pattern, and the corresponding optimal base-stock level taking
an “all-or-nothing” form. For linear commitment costs with a cost factor per time unit, we
identify a threshold that increases with the ﬁrm’s risk aversion degree. Firms with greater
risk aversion typically favor the buy-to-order strategy, while those with lower risk aversion
B Taher Ahmadi
t.ahmadi@nyenrode.nl
Alireza F. Hesaraki
a.hesaraki@qub.ac.uk
Anwar Mahmoodi
anwar.mahmoodi@uok.ac.ir
Ahmadreza Marandi
a.marandi@tue.nl
1
Marketing & SCM Center, Nyenrode Business University, Straatweg 25, P.O. Box 130, 3620 AC
Breukelen, The Netherlands
2
Industrial Engineering and Innovation Sciences Department, Postbus 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven,
The Netherlands
3
Queen’s Business School, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK
4
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Kurdistan, Sanandaj, Iran
5
Industrial Engineering and Innovation Sciences Department, Eindhoven University of Technology,
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
123

2
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
may opt for either buy-to-stock or buy-to-order depending on their assessment of waiting
costs.
Keywords Inventory management · Advance demand information · Customer waiting time
risk · Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR)
1 Introduction
In today’s fast-paced world, the role of efﬁcient inventory systems in maintaining customer
satisfaction has become indispensable. Delays or prolonged waiting times pose a threat to this
achievement, potentially eroding customer loyalty, damaging the company’s reputation, and
hindering efforts to retain customers (Heskett et al., 1994). In the increasingly competitive
business landscape, the ability to fulﬁll orders promptly can be a signiﬁcant differentiator,
potentially swaying customer preference towards ﬁrms with shorter waiting times. Wait-
related issues are the primary cause of customer loss in retail, a problem that persists despite
the move to online operations (Yu, 2020). However, fulﬁlling all the orders promptly requires
keeping excessive inventories, which can be costly and harm the ﬁrm’s proﬁtability. There-
fore, business ﬁrms need to make trade-off decisions between stockouts and overstocking.
The inherent difﬁculty in achieving this trade-off largely stems from the struggle to match
supply with demand effectively. Uncertainty in customer demand signiﬁcantly exacerbates
the mismatch between supply and demand (Alım & Beullens, 2022). With advancements in
IT and emerging technologies, it has become more possible than ever for ﬁrms to implement
a preorder strategy. This approach allows business ﬁrms to gather Advance Demand Infor-
mation (ADI) from customers before their actual needs, thereby gaining early awareness of
the demand, enabling them to align their inventory system activities with the demand and
supply dynamics, and in turn, minimizing the mismatch between supply and demand.
To motivate customers to place orders ahead of time, companies can introduce a bonus
scheme,suchasofferingapricediscount(Junetal.,2019;Mukherjeeetal.,2021)orproviding
a free complimentary product (Mukherjee et al., 2021). This bonus incentivizes customers
to follow the preorder strategy and place their orders within a speciﬁc timeframe, known as
the commitment lead time (Ahmadi et al., 2019a). From the ﬁrm’s perspective, the bonus is
perceived as a commitment cost which is increasing in the length of commitment lead time.
Today, the preorder strategy is being widely employed not only by various industries in the
service sector, such as restaurants, hospitality, entertainment, and airlines, but also by those
in the manufacturing sector, including furniture, home appliances, automotive, consumer
electronics, fast fashion, and more. In addition to well-known cellphone producers like Apple,
Samsung, and Xiaomi utilizing preorder strategies (Peng & Tian, 2022), the strategy is
also gaining traction in South Korea’s fashion industry. It is attracting younger consumers
through signiﬁcant discounts while also aiding the industry in reducing excess inventory and
garmentwaste.1 Furthermore,accordingtoasurveyconductedbytheautomotivemarketplace
platform cars.com, 41% of respondents plan to preorder their next car.2
Despite extensive research on preorder strategies and their broad application in practice,
there has been limited investigation into how the commitment lead time facilitated by such
strategies can assist business ﬁrms in managing customer waiting times. Emphasis needs to be
1 Source: https://pulsenews.co.kr/view.php?sc=30800021&year=2022&no=1088942.
2 Source: https://www.cars.com/articles/2022-auto-trends-preorders-go-mainstream-consumer-interest-in-
evs-doubles-and-digital-car-buying-accelerates-amid-ongoing-inventory-shortages-446438/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
3
given to time-based service measures, which have been relatively unexplored in the inventory
and service management literature (Ahmadi et al., 2020). Historically, most research has
predominantly focused on inventory-centric measures like the replenishment cycle service
level, ﬁll rate, and ready rate, as elaborated by Silver et al. (2016). Ahmadi et al. (2020)
was the ﬁrst to explore the impact of commitment lead time on customer waiting time in
inventory systems, considering two time-based service criteria. The ﬁrst criterion was based
on the customers’ average waiting time, while the second employed the Value-at-Risk (VaR)
measure, which lacks certain crucial mathematical properties such as convexity (Zhang et al.,
2009). Consequently, they optimized operational holding and commitment costs concerning
these time-based service criteria using constraint optimizations. Although the time-based
service on average waiting time allows ﬁrms to provide waiting time estimates, thereby
potentially reducing overall customer waiting time (Yu, 2020), extended lead times can
signiﬁcantly compromise a ﬁrm’s proﬁtability. A study by Yu (2020) revealed that waiting
times exceeding customer expectations could signiﬁcantly damage the customer experience,
with the penalties for such delays being up to seven times more severe than the rewards for
shorter-than-expected waiting times.
Inspired by the ﬁndings related to signiﬁcant extra costs associated with extended wait time
by Yu (2020), and diverging from Ahmadi et al. (2020), we employ the Conditional Value-
at-Risk (CVaR) as the coherent risk measure to model the costs associated with extended
customer waiting time. We incorporate the mean-CVaR of customer waiting time into the
overall cost function, enabling ﬁrms to consider extreme wait times alongside average waiting
times when assessing cost trade-offs. Essentially, we substitute the backordering cost term
in the conventional inventory optimization problems with the costs associated with the mean
and CVaR of customer waiting time, reﬂecting a speciﬁc level of risk aversion by the deci-
sion maker when determining cost trade-offs. Even though CVaR was initially introduced
to manage the risk of losses in ﬁnance and later applied to Newsvendor-based inventory
management problems, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst to model
waiting time using CVaR in the inventory management literature.
We examine an inventory system with the same settings as Ahmadi et al. (2020), while
utilizing CVaR as a coherent risk measure to model the risk associated with extended customer
waiting time. We use the mean-CVaR approach to incorporate the costs associated with both
average and extended customer waiting times into the overall average cost function, which
includes inventory holding and commitment costs, as well. Speciﬁcally, we consider a single-
location inventory system that faces customer demand following Poisson distribution. The
inventory system has implemented a preorder strategy and replenishes its inventory according
to a base-stock policy from an external supplier with ample stock, which takes a ﬁxed amount
of time. The ﬁrm aims to determine its optimal control policy, including the optimal base-
stock level and commitment lead time, under which its average total cost-encompassing
holding costs, commitment costs, and customer waiting costs related to a speciﬁc degree of
the ﬁrm’s risk aversion-is minimized. We mathematically formulate the problem and analyze
it to provide answers to the following research questions:
1. How do decision variables affect the CVaR of customer waiting time concerning a speciﬁc
degree of the ﬁrm’s risk aversion? We ﬁnd that both the base-stock level and commitment
leadtimecandecreasetheCVaRofcustomerwaitingtime.Thisimpliesthatahigherbase-
stock level will mitigate stockout cases and, consequently, potential extreme customer
waiting times. Similarly, a longer commitment lead time leads to less uncertainty in lead
time demand and consequently less extended customer waiting time.
123

4
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
2. What are the characteristics of the optimal control policy concerning a speciﬁc degree of
the ﬁrm’s risk aversion? For any degree of the ﬁrm’s risk aversion, we ﬁnd a closed-form
optimal control policy where the optimal base-stock level and optimal commitment lead
time are interdependent. The optimal commitment lead time is of the bang-bang type,
and its corresponding optimal base-stock level is of the all-or-nothing type. More specif-
ically, when the optimal commitment lead time equals the replenishment lead time, the
corresponding base-stock level is zero. Conversely, when the optimal commitment lead
time is zero, the optimal base-stock level is the solution to the well-known Newsvendor
problem.
3. What role does commitment lead time play in forming the optimal control policy based on
various degrees of the ﬁrm’s risk aversion? With regard to the linear commitment cost, we
identify a threshold for the commitment cost factor per time unit. If the commitment cost
factor exceeds this threshold, the optimal commitment lead time is zero. However, if the
commitment cost factor is below this threshold, the optimal commitment lead time equals
the replenishment lead time. In all other situations, the optimal commitment lead time
is either zero or equivalent to the replenishment lead time. Furthermore, the threshold
for the commitment cost factor increases as the ﬁrm becomes more risk-averse toward
customer waiting times.
4. How does the ﬁrm’s attitude towards risk, speciﬁcally concerning customer waiting
time, affect optimal strategies? When linear commitment cost is considered, as the ﬁrm
becomes less risk-averse, the optimal strategy could be either Buy-to-Stock (BTS) or
Buy-to-Order (BTO). However, it’s crucial to emphasize that while the BTS strategy
is often more cost-effective, it doesn’t necessarily guarantee proﬁtability. On the other
hand, as ﬁrms adopt a more conservative stance, the BTO strategy becomes a dominant
and more cost-effective choice, even though it too can result in unproﬁtable scenarios.
Notably, for ﬁrms exhibiting high degrees of risk aversion, BTO typically becomes the
sole optimal strategy.
The ﬁndings and outcomes of this research can be utilized across various industries to sup-
port ﬁrms’ competitive advantage through responsiveness, customization, and cost efﬁciency.
By adopting preorder strategies facilitated through IT-based platforms and Internet-of-things
(IoT) technologies, businesses in the construction, food service, and pharmaceutical indus-
tries can mitigate the risk associated with prolonged customer waiting times in their optimal
trade-off decisions. In the construction industry, suppliers can encourage construction ﬁrms to
preorder necessary items based on ﬁnalized blueprints of the construction, ensuring availabil-
ity and cost efﬁciency. Similarly, in the food service industry, restaurants can reduce customer
wait times and minimize food waste by encouraging customers to preorder their meals. Phar-
maceutical companies can guarantee the timely availability of critical medications, especially
those with limited shelf life or required for seasonal illnesses, by incentivizing preorders from
pharmacies and hospitals.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sect.2, we review pertinent litera-
ture. This is followed by a detailed problem description and its mathematical representation
in Sect.3. Subsequent analysis and results are discussed in Sect.4. Section5 provides an
in-depth exploration of the linear form of commitment lead time. We conclude the paper in
Sect.6, emphasizing its practical relevance. All proofs can be found in Appendix A.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
5
2 Literature review
Our study is primarily positioned within the research stream that investigates inventory sys-
tems with ADI, achieved through the implementation of the preorder strategy. The preorder
strategy is widely acknowledged as a conventional means to secure ADI and has been exten-
sively studied. Hariharan and Zipkin (1995) were the pioneers in considering this strategy
for a single-echelon continuous review inventory system with Poisson demand. Follow-
ing this seminal work, Gallego and Özer (2001) investigated the application of ADI in a
single-echelon inventory system under a periodic-review policy. Subsequently, researchers
expanded the periodic-review inventory system to include multi-echelon serial systems (Gal-
lego & Özer, 2003) and single-echelon capacitated production systems (Özer & Wei, 2004).
Thonemann (2002) and Karaesmen et al. (2004) analyzed the beneﬁts of ADI in supply
chain and production/inventory systems, respectively, by examining the conditions under
which sharing ADI results in signiﬁcant cost savings or brings substantial beneﬁts.
Following the establishment of the ADI concept, scholars have further extended its appli-
cation and explored variants of ADI for various inventory problems. For instance, Tan et
al. (2007) examined the impact of utilizing imperfect ADI on inventory policies and devel-
oped an expression to quantify the expected cost beneﬁts of imperfect ADI for the myopic
problem. Gayon et al. (2009) addressed a production-inventory system with imperfect ADI
and multiple customer classes, proposing a state-dependent base-stock policy as the optimal
production policy and a state-dependent multilevel rationing policy as the optimal inventory-
allocation policy. Wang and Toktay (2008) made a notable contribution to the ADI literature
by considering ﬂexible delivery. They demonstrated that, under homogeneous lead time,
increasing the demand lead time is more beneﬁcial than decreasing the supply lead time.
Ralfs and Kiesmüller (2022) extended Wang and Toktay (2008)’s study by incorporating
shipment consolidation, emphasizing that the adoption of shipment consolidation for ﬂexible
deliveries leads to even greater cost reduction. Li and Zhang (2013) focused on the preorder
strategy for perishable products, investigating the implications of ADI for a seller’s inventory
and pricing decisions when dealing with strategic customers. Bernstein and DeCroix (2015)
examined the impact of different types of ADI for multi-product systems, providing insights
into capacity decision-making and exploring the value of aggregate demand information
across products.
Ahmadi et al. (2019a) analyzed an inventory system obtaining ADI by introducing com-
mitment cost. They deﬁned commitment lead time as the duration between a customer placing
an order and the order’s delivery. To incentivize customers to place orders in advance, they
introduced a bonus scheme in the form of commitment cost, which is a function of com-
mitment lead time and is paid to customers to follow the preorder strategy. Under linear
commitment cost, they found that the optimal commitment lead time is either zero or equal
to the replenishment lead time. In another study by Ahmadi et al. (2019b), the value of using
commitment lead time in managing assemble-to-order systems was examined. Alım and
Beullens (2022) considered a single-item periodic review inventory system with advance
demand and explored a demand postponement mechanism where customers are expected
to wait longer for delivery in exchange for discounts. They claimed that their proposed
mechanism promises more efﬁcient system performance. Figueira et al. (2023) suggested an
allocation policy in which commitment to a customer order occurs upon the arrival of the
order, rather than committing at the moment the order is due. They evaluated their proposed
approach analytically and numerically using real data and found that their policy leads to a
higher ﬁll rate. Rippe and Kiesmüller (2023) focused on the application of imperfect ADI
123

6
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
for the repair kit problem. They demonstrated the potential cost savings that can be achieved
by utilizing information about the condition of malfunctioning appliances. It is important to
note that none of the aforementioned studies have considered service levels based on cus-
tomer waiting time, the risk associated with prolonged customer waiting time, or ﬁrms’ risk
attitudes. In our present study, we investigate these factors within the context of a company
that utilizes commitment lead time.
Another area of research relevant to our study is the examination of customer-oriented
measures, speciﬁcally focusing on customer waiting time in inventory systems. Typically,
scholars in inventory and service management literature emphasize inventory-related service
measures such as stock-out probability, replenishment cycle service level, ﬁll rate, and ready
rate (Silver et al., 2016). In contrast, management-oriented supply chain textbooks prioritize
time-based service measures (Tempelmeier & Fischer, 2010).
One form of time-based service measure is the window ﬁll rate, which refers to fulﬁlling
a speciﬁc percentage of customer orders (ﬁll rate) within a speciﬁed time window (Ahmadi
et al., 2020; Johansson & Olsson, 2017, 2018; Tsai & Ho, 2019). The length of the time
window can be adjusted based on customers’ waiting time tolerance-the maximum time a
customer is willing to wait for delivery (Berk & Toy, 2023)-while the ﬁll rate can be adjusted
based on competitor benchmarks and associated inventory costs (Ahmadi et al., 2020). For
example, the minimum ﬁll rates for electronics, personal care, and pharmaceutical products
are suggested to be 91%, 88.7%, and 90.2%, respectively (Shang & Liu, 2011).
Scholars have signiﬁcantly advanced the ﬁeld of time-based service management by deriv-
ing probability distributions for customer waiting times. These distributions are essential
for formulating time-based service measures aimed at enhancing customer satisfaction and
operational efﬁciency in inventory systems. This process involves developing precise or
approximate distributions of waiting times, considering speciﬁc control policies and inven-
tory system characteristics (Ahmadi et al., 2020; Chen & Zheng, 1992; Higa et al., 1975;
Kiesmüller & de Kok, 2006; Kruse, 1980; Tempelmeier & Fischer, 2010, 2019; van der
Heijden & De Kok, 1992). Time-based service measures can be utilized either as service
constraints (Ahmadi et al., 2020; Johansson & Olsson, 2017) or as components in a total
cost minimization approach (Berk & Toy, 2023; Johansson & Olsson, 2017; Sangeetha et al.,
2020). These constraints are typically framed as either a chance constraint, which limits the
probability of customer waiting time exceeding a certain threshold (Ahmadi et al., 2020), or
as an expected waiting time constraint, ensuring that average waiting times remain within a
speciﬁed window (Ahmadi et al., 2020; Tsai & Ho, 2019).
Giat and Dreyfuss (2021) developed exact and approximate formulas for the window ﬁll
rate in periodic review systems with order crossover. They found that overstocking is bene-
ﬁcial when customers’ tolerable wait times are high while understocking is preferable when
tolerable wait times are low. Johansson and Olsson (2017, 2018) examined a two-echelon
system with ﬁxed and exponentially increasing backorder costs as functions of waiting time.
Their research showed that shifting inventory to the upstream is more effective when long
waiting times are costly. Similarly, Khan et al. (2019) modeled backlogs in terms of waiting
times, emphasizing the need for optimization to reduce customer delays.
Sangeetha et al. (2020) advanced the ﬁeld by using semi-Markov decision processes in a
continuous review inventory system to minimize costs associated with waiting times. Sarkar
and Giri (2022) explored an integrated supply chain, formulating backlogging rates as a
non-increasing function of waiting times, where longer waits translated into more shortages.
Tsai and Ho (2019) proposed a sample-average-approximation-based simulation for a two-
echelon system to optimize costs while meeting expected customer waiting times within
speciﬁc windows. Berk and Toy (2023) addressed customer waiting time tolerance in a serial
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
7
inventory system, linking purchase decisions to waiting time tolerance and considering lost
sale costs when demands are not fulﬁlled within these tolerances.
Ahmadi et al. (2020) speciﬁcally considered time-based service measures in the presence
of ADI. They addressed two different time-based service considerations for inventory systems
withcommitmentleadtime,demonstratingthatthepresenceofcommitmentleadtimereduces
the maximum waiting time for customers. These studies collectively underscore the critical
importance of managing waiting times to enhance customer satisfaction and operational
efﬁciency in inventory systems.
However, none of the aforementioned papers incorporates the ﬁrms’ risk attitude in their
study. In our research, we employ mean-CVaR to incorporate the average customer waiting
time and extended waiting times according to a speciﬁc degree of the ﬁrm’s risk aversion.
Therefore, another line of research related to our work involves studies that investigate the
effect of risk attitudes on inventory systems. There have been several studies that consider risk
management in the inventory problem, and we refer the reader to the review papers by Chiu
and Choi (2016), Filippi et al. (2020), and Wang et al. (2021) in this ﬁeld. Most of these studies
have considered CVaR to incorporate risk into the classical Newsvendor problem. Gotoh and
Takano (2007) was the ﬁrst to consider a risk-averse Newsvendor using the CVaR measure.
They found that risk-averse Newsvendor orders smaller quantities compared to risk-neutral
newsvendor. Furthermore, several papers have considered CVaR for the extended version of
the classical Newsvendor problem. For example, Zhang et al. (2009) investigated the multi-
period version of the problem for the risk-averse Newsvendor using CVaR, and Wu et al.
(2014) examined a similar problem in a competitive environment.
In addition to considering the decision maker’s risk attitudes, some studies have also
addressed the randomness of other parameters, such as shortage cost (Wu et al., 2013a) and
capacity (Wu et al., 2013b). Xu et al. (2018) investigated the impact of shortage cost on the
optimal ordering decisions of the risk-averse Newsvendor with CVaR measure. Wang et al.
(2020) examined a risk-averse retailer’s ordering decisions considering a layaway program.
They employed the CVaR measure and concluded that the optimal order quantity depends
on different loss functions and different demand distribution functions. Li and Arreola-Risa
(2022) addressed a risk-averse company with a single-installation inventory system and
Poisson demand. The company aims to minimize the CVaR of its annual costs using a base
stock policy. They showed that the optimal base stock is analytically intractable and derived
a closed-form approximation for the optimal base stock. However, none of these papers
modeled customer waiting time using CVaR in the presence of commitment lead time.
There are very few papers that have investigated both the ADI and the risk attitudes of
the seller. Zhao and Stecke (2010) examined advance selling with ADI for a Newsvendor
problem when consumers are loss averse. Prasad et al. (2011) investigated a similar problem
when consumers are risk averse and analyzed the conditions under which the retailer uses
the advance selling strategy. Yang et al. (2020) addressed a three-echelon supply chain and
analyzed the impact of advance demand discounts. They found that when an advance order
discount is considered at both levels that receive orders from their downstream level, the
CVaR signiﬁcantly decreases.
Despite the increasing popularity of the preorder strategy across various industries and
the growing signiﬁcance of managing customer waiting time in inventory systems, there is
still a notable research gap that remains unexplored. Current studies often overlook the risk
associated with extended waiting times and neglect to consider ﬁrms’ risk-aversion attitudes
in their analysis. Our study aims to bridge this gap by utilizing the CVaR measure to quantify
the downside risk of customer waiting time and integrate it into the overall costs of the system
with commitment lead time. We examine the problem of jointly determining the base stock
123

8
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
Fig. 1 An Illustration of the system with commitment lead time and the customer waiting time
level and commitment lead time, exploring the conditions under which offering commitment
lead time becomes advantageous when the ﬁrm employs the CVaR to mitigate the downside
risk of prolonged customer waiting time. Additionally, we investigate how ﬁrms’ risk aversion
attitudes inﬂuence the optimal control policy. Our research provides valuable insights into
effective inventory management strategies considering commitment lead time and ﬁrms’ risk
preferences, advancing the understanding of preorder strategies, customer waiting times, and
risk management in inventory systems.
3 Problem description and formulation
In this section, we begin by outlining the problem in Sect. 3.1. This is followed by an
introduction to some key preliminaries in Sect. 3.2. Subsequently, we present the long-run
average cost formulation in Sect. 3.3.
3.1 Problem statement
We consider a single ﬁrm that employs a base-stock policy with a base-stock level denoted by
s to control the inventory of a single item and manage its replenishment from an uncapacitated
supplier. The replenishment lead time, represented by l, remains constant. Customer orders
follow a Poisson process with an arrival rate of λ per time unit, where each customer places an
order for a single unit of the item. To ensure efﬁcient operations, the ﬁrm utilizes a preorder
strategy, which requires customers to place their orders ψ time units before their actual needs.
Here, ψ ≥0 represents the commitment lead time. As a result of this preorder strategy, two
types of delivery dates are relevant: the agreed delivery date and the actual delivery date.
Figure1 provides a visual representation of these dates.
Suppose a customer requires a unit of the product at time t1, indicating the occurrence of
customer demand. Following the preorder strategy, the customer places the order with the ﬁrm
at time t1−ψ. Depending on the ﬁrm’s inventory level at time t1, this demand may be fulﬁlled
at time t1 or later at time t2, where t2 ≥t1. Consequently, we deﬁne the agreed delivery date
as t1 and the actual delivery date as t2. If t2 = t1, the customer’s demand is satisﬁed on the
agreed delivery date. However, if t2 > t1, the customer’s demand is backlogged, and the
customer experiences a waiting time of t2 −t1 time units. Given the stochastic nature of the
ﬁrm’s inventory level, the customer waiting time becomes a stochastic variable denoted by
W(s, ψ), which depends on the values of s and ψ.
To incentivize customers to place orders in advance, the ﬁrm incurs a commitment cost
denoted by K(ψ) per customer order. We assume that K(0) = 0, and the function K(ψ)
is strictly increasing and convex concerning the commitment lead time ψ. The convexity of
the commitment cost implies that longer commitment lead times become more appealing to
customers. Additionally, the ﬁrm incurs an inventory holding cost of h per unit of the product
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
9
per time unit. If the customer’s demand is backlogged, the ﬁrm also bears a waiting cost of
p per unit of the product per time unit.
The primary objective of the ﬁrm is to determine the optimal control policy (s, ψ), which
combines the base-stock level s and the commitment lead time ψ. This policy aims to min-
imize the long-run average total cost, considering the holding cost, commitment cost, and
waiting cost. Furthermore, the ﬁrm aims to maintain a speciﬁc level of the customer waiting
risk factor, denoted by η.
3.2 Preliminaries
In this section, we develop the average cost function for the long run, which incorporates
various components such as inventory holding costs, commitment costs, and customers’
waiting costs. We take into account the commitment lead time and the CVaR measure to
effectively manage customer waiting time. For a standard single-location inventory system,
the net inventory level at time t + l, denoted by I N(t + l), can be described using the
fundamental principle of ﬂow conservation as I N(t +l) = I P(t)−D(t, t +l]. Here, I P(t)
represents the inventory position of the ﬁrm at time t, and D(t, t+l] represents the cumulative
customer demand in (t, t + l]. Ahmadi et al. (2020) propose a modiﬁcation to this equation
by considering the commitment lead time ψ, yielding the following expression:
I N(t + l) = s −D(t + ψ, t + l].
(1)
Taking into account that customer orders transform into customer demand after ψ time units,
we can express D (t1, t2] = D−(t1 −ψ, t2 −ψ], where D−(t1 −ψ, t2 −ψ] represents
the cumulative customer orders in (t1 −ψ, t2 −ψ], with t1 < t2. By substituting this into
Equation (1), we obtain I N(t + l) = s −D−(t, t + l −ψ]. In the steady-state situation, we
can further simplify it as I N(s, ψ) = s −X(ψ), where X(ψ) follows a Poisson distribution
with a mean of μX(ψ) = λ(l −ψ), where ψ ≤l. Throughout the paper, we denote the
probability mass function of X(ψ) as PX(ψ)(.) and its cumulative distribution function as
FX(ψ)(.).
3.3 Long-run average cost formulation
Diverging from the inventory and service management literature, which primarily focuses
on inventory-related service metrics, we adopt time-based service measures as emphasized
in management-oriented textbooks on supply chain management (Ahmadi et al., 2020; Tem-
pelmeier & Fischer, 2010). Time-based service measures place importance on promptly
meeting customer demand and minimizing waiting times when shortages occur, ultimately
leading to enhanced customer satisfaction and loyalty. To achieve this objective, we formu-
late the penalty cost associated with customers’ waiting by considering both the average and
CVaR of waiting time at a speciﬁc conﬁdence level. By employing this approach, our goal
is not only to minimize average customers’ waiting time but also to minimize the average
of the longest waiting times (Dehlendorff et al., 2010). Consequently, the long-run average
total cost of the ﬁrm, encompassing inventory holding costs, commitment costs, and costs
associated with customers’ waiting, can be expressed as follows:
123

10
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
C(s, ψ) = hE [max(I N(s, ψ), 0)]



Average holding cost
+
λK(ψ)
  
Average commitment cost
+
λp

E [W(s, ψ)] + CVaRη[W(s, ψ)]




Average customers’ waiting cost
,
(2)
where E[.] is the expectation operator, s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], and η ∈(0, 1). In what follows,
we will calculate E [W(s, ψ)] and CVaRη[W(s, ψ)].
4 Analysis
In this section, we start by examining the random variable associated with customer waiting
time in Sect. 4.1. Subsequently, we calculate and analyze VaR and CVaR as risk measures
for customer waiting time in Sect. 4.2. We conclude the section in Sect. 4.3 by delving into
the long-run cost function and characterizing the optimal control policies.
4.1 Analyzing customer wait times
The success of inventory systems hinges on customer satisfaction, which can be compromised
by extended waiting times and may subsequently negatively impact the ﬁrm’s reputation and
customer retention (Heskett et al., 1994). In the increasingly competitive business landscape,
the ability to fulﬁll orders promptly can be a signiﬁcant differentiator, potentially swaying
customer preference towards ﬁrms with shorter waiting times. When the ﬁrm experiences an
inventory shortage, in the case of demand backlogs, customers need to wait until the items
become available again, resulting in backlog demand.
In our inventory system, customer waiting times are inﬂuenced by the decision variables
(i.e., the base-stock level s and the commitment lead time ψ). Increasing the base-stock level
(s) can mitigate customer waiting times by increasing the capacity and decreasing the chances
of stock-outs. Similarly, a longer commitment lead time (ψ) facilitates improved demand
anticipation and better inventory planning, subsequently further reducing waiting times.
To facilitate the mathematical derivation in terms of the Poisson distribution, we employ
the transformation stated in Lemma 1.
Lemma 1 For any s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], w ∈[0,l −ψ], let FW(s,ψ)(w) be the cumulative
distribution function of customer waiting time at w. Then FW(s,ψ)(w) = FY(ψ,w)(s −1),
where Y(ψ, w) is a Poisson random variable with mean μY(ψ,w) = λ(l −ψ −w).
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.1. Throughout the paper, we make use of two Poisson
random variables, namely X(ψ) and Y(ψ, w), where X(ψ) has a mean of μX(ψ) = λ(l −ψ)
and Y(ψ, w) has a mean of μY(ψ,w) = λ(l −ψ −w). Here, ψ ranges from 0 to l, and w
ranges from 0 to l −ψ. When w = 0, X(ψ) and Y(ψ, 0) are identical and we use them
interchangeably.
Ahmadi et al. (2020) formulated the probability density function of the customer waiting
time, as given by Expression (3). This model is applied to a single location inventory system
where demand follows a Poisson process with a rate of λ for a single product under the (s, ψ)
policy.
fW(s,ψ)(w) = FY(ψ,0)(s −1)δ(w) + λPY(ψ,w)(s −1) [H(w) −H(w −l + ψ)],
(3)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
11
where δ(·) and H(·) represent the Dirac delta function and right-continuous Heaviside step
function, respectively. Additionally, PY(ψ,w)(s) denotes the probability mass function of the
Poisson random variable Y(ψ, w):
PY(ψ,w)(s) =

μY(ψ,w)
 s
s!
e−μY(ψ,w),
s ∈N0,
, w ∈[0,l −ψ].
The expected value of the customer waiting time in terms of base-stock level s and com-
mitment lead time ψ is given by the following expression (Ahmadi et al., 2020):
W(s, ψ) =1
λ

sFY(ψ,0)(s) −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + μY(ψ,0) −s
 
,
(4)
where FY(ψ,w)(s)representsthePoissonCumulativeDistributionFunction(CDF)ofY(ψ, w)
evaluated at s. While the expected waiting time provides a measure of the average waiting time
a customer might experience, it does not capture the full picture of the customer experience.
It’s a single-point estimate and does not account for variability or unpredictability in waiting
times. High variability in waiting times that can lead to customer dissatisfaction (Kostecki,
1996) should be captured. The following proposition provides the standard deviation of
customer waiting under the (s, ψ) policy.
Proposition 1 Let W(s, ψ) and σW(s,ψ) be the expected value and standard deviation of
customer waiting time. Then
σW(s,ψ) =

s

1 −FY(ψ,0)(s)
 
λ2
+ W(s, ψ)
μY(ψ,0) −s
λ
−W(s, ψ)

.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.2. Proposition 1 captures how changes in decision
variables (e.g., s and ψ), as well as the parameters of the inventory system (e.g., λ and
l), can inﬂuence the variability in customer waiting times. From Proposition 1, the behav-
ior of variability of waiting times with respect to decision variables can be formulated as
Proposition 2.
Proposition 2 For any s ∈N0 and ψ ∈[0,l], the standard deviation of customer waiting
time σW(s,ψ) is non-increasing in ψ and
dσW(s,ψ)
dψ

−

W(s,ψ)
σW(s,ψ)

FY(ψ,0)(s −1), if s ∈N and ψ ∈[0,l),
0,
if s = 0 or ψ = l.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.3. Proposition 2 highlights that at the extreme values of
decision variables (i.e., when the base-stock level is at its minimum s = 0 or the commitment
lead time is at its maximum ψ = l), there is no variability in customer waiting times.
Speciﬁcally, when s = 0, all customers must wait exactly l −ψ time units (i.e., W(s,l) =
l −ψ and σW(s,l) = 0), and when ψ = l, all customers experience zero waiting time (i.e.,
W(s,l) = 0 and σW(s,l) = 0).
Furthermore, Proposition 2 suggests that an extended commitment lead time always results
in reduced variability in customer waiting time, making the delivery service more consistent
and reliable (see Fig.2a).
However, as depicted in Fig.2b, a larger base-stock level doesn’t always lead to reduced
wait time variability; instead, it may increase variability for smaller base-stock values. This
counter-intuitive observation suggests that with a low base-stock level, minor supply or
demand ﬂuctuations can markedly increase waiting times due to the business’s limited
123

12
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
Fig. 2 An illustration of σW(s,ψ) behavior in terms of ψ and s
Fig. 3 An illustration of σW(s,ψ) behavior in terms of ψ and s
buffering capacity, leading to immediate stockouts and subsequently, greater waiting time
variability.
Thedynamicsofcustomerwaitingtimeinresponsetotheinventorysystemparametersalso
provide valuable insights. For instance, as depicted in Fig.3a, extended replenishment lead
times tend to increase the variability in customer waiting time. The effect of the demand rate
is, however, more nuanced. While lower demand rates typically lead to increased variability,
Fig.3b demonstrates that for sufﬁciently small demand rates, the variability actually escalates.
In conclusion, both the decision-maker’s choices and the parameters of the inventory
system can signiﬁcantly impact customer waiting time variability. To effectively manage
this variability, the overall and extreme waiting times should be minimized. In the next
subsection, we apply Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) measure to manage the variability
of customer waiting time within our inventory system. These methods are then articulated
through mathematical modeling.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
13
4.2 Customer waiting time risk measures: VaR and CVaR
Excessive customer waiting time is a critical concern for businesses, as it can lead to customer
dissatisfaction and penalty costs. This waiting time, characterized by the random variable
W(s, ψ), embodies an inherent uncertainty depicted by the probability density function in
Expression (3). To manage this uncertainty, businesses adopt risk measures reﬂective of their
risk aversion level, denoted by η and ranging from 0 (risk-seeking) to 1 (risk-averse). Utilizing
Value-at-Risk (VaR) and Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR), ﬁrms can effectively gauge and
respond to risks associated with customer waiting times, aligning their strategies with their
risk tolerances and preferences. In what follows, we will ﬁrst delve into the concept of VaR,
followed by an exploration of CVaR.
The VaR for customer waiting time indicates the minimum time-span, referred to as w, for
which the likelihood of waiting beyond this span doesn’t exceed a predetermined limit, η (Shi
et al., 2019). In essence, η reﬂects the risk tolerance of the decision-maker. Consequently,
we deﬁne VaRη as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (VaRη(s, ψ)) The VaR of the customer waiting time associated with policy
(s, ψ) and given conﬁdence level η is the quantile of the customer waiting time distribution
for the pre-determined level η and mathematically can be formulated as
VaRη(s, ψ) := VaRη

W(s, ψ)

= min
w

w : p (W(s, ψ) > w) ≤η

.
The mathematical formulation of VaRη(s, ψ) in Deﬁnition 1, can be calculated as Expres-
sion (5).
VaRη(s, ψ) = min
w

w : P(W(s, ψ) > w) ≤η

= min
w

w : 1 −P (W(s, ψ) < w) ≤η

= min
w

w : 1 −FW(s,ψ)(w) ≤η

= min
w

w : FY(w,ψ)(s −1) ≥1 −η

,
(5)
where w ∈[0,l −ψ], η ∈(0, 1], and where the last equality holds due to Lemma 1. The
parameter η represents the degree of risk aversion of the decision maker towards customer
waiting time. Speciﬁcally, a bigger value of η indicates a higher level of risk aversion,
implying that the decision maker is more cautious and seeks to minimize the potential impact
of customer waiting time on their decisions.
Put simply, VaRη conveys the longest wait time that an organization is prepared to tolerate
with a likelihood of 1 −η or greater. The concept of VaRη is visually represented in Fig.4.
This measure provides a quantiﬁable means to evaluate the inherent risks in waiting times,
assisting in strategic decisions aimed at optimizing customer service and reducing costs
associated with backlogged demand.
While VaR offers valuable insights, it has certain drawbacks, such as challenges in min-
imization when the random variable doesn’t follow a normal distribution (Shi et al., 2019;
Rockafellar & Uryasev, 2000). In response, Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000) introduced the
CVaR measure.
Deﬁnition 2 (CVaR) The CVaR of the customer waiting time associated with policy (s, ψ)
and a given a conﬁdence level η, denoted as CVaRη(s, ψ), is the conditional expected cus-
tomer waiting time given the waiting time is more than the η-quantile, and mathematically
123

14
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
Fig. 4 An illustration of VaRη for managing customer’s waiting time W(s, ψ)
can be formulated as
CVaRη(s, ψ) := CVaRη [W(s, ψ)] = E

W(s, ψ)
W(s, ψ) ≥VaRη(s, ψ)

.
Unlike VaRη, CVaR exhibits convexity with respect to both the random variable and the
risk aversion level. According to Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000), VaRη and CVaRη can be
calculated by minimizing the following fundamental formula over w.
Wη(s, ψ, w) = w +
1
1 −ηE

W(s, ψ) −w
 +
,
where (x)+ = max(x, 0).
(6)
According to Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000), VaRη and CVaRη can be deﬁned as the
argmin
w
and min of Expressions (6) presented as Expressions (7) and (8), respectively.
VaRη(s, ψ) = argmin
w

w +
1
1 −ηE

W(s, ψ) −w
 +
.
(7)
CVaRη(s, ψ) = min
w
Wη(s, ψ, w),
(8)
where Wη(s, ψ, w) can be calculated in terms of the mean and CDF of Y(s, ψ) as presented
in the following proposition.
Proposition 3 For any s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], and w ∈[0,l −ψ], Wη(s, ψ, w) can be
calculated as
Wη(s, ψ, w) = w +
1
λ(1 −η)

sFY(ψ,w)(s) −μY(ψ,w)FY(ψ,w)(s −1) + μY(ψ,w) −s
 
,
where Y(ψ, w) is a Poisson random variable with mean μY(ψ,w) = λ(l −ψ −w).
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.4. By utilizing Proposition 3, we can examine the
behavior of Wη(s, ψ, w) concerning w.
Proposition 4 For any ψ ∈[0,l] and η ∈(0, 1), the behaviour of Wη(s, ψ, w) with respect
to w is as follows:
1. If s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) < η, Wη(s, ψ, w) initially decreases and then increases,
2. If s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) ≥η, Wη(s, ψ, w) strictly increases, and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
15
3. If s = 0, Wη(s, ψ, w) strictly decreases.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.5. The ﬁndings of Proposition 4 are visualized in
Figs.5a, 5b, and 5c. Based on the ﬁndings presented in Proposition 4, depicted in Fig.5, the
range of VaRη can differ depending on the scenarios. Speciﬁcally, it can vary between 0 and
l −ψ, be equal to 0, or be equal to l −ψ, respectively.
As one can see in Fig.5, Wη(s, ψ, w) is a strictly convex function when s ∈N. From
Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000), we know the convexity of Wη(s, ψ, w) in w. The next
corollary shows that it is strictly convex.
Corollary 1 For any s ∈N, ψ ∈[0,l], and η ∈(0, 1), Wη(s, ψ, w) is strictly convex in w.
Furthermore, if s = 0, then Wη(s, ψ, w) is linear in w.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.6. Corollary 1 ensures the existence and uniqueness
of VaRη and CVaRη. The results of Proposition 4 and Corollary 1 provide the basis for
calculating VaRη and CVaRη(s, ψ).
Proposition 5 For any s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], and η ∈(0, 1), VaRη(s, ψ) is unique and equal
to
VaRη(s, ψ) =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
w0 : FY(ψ,w0)(s −1) = η, if s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) < η,
0,
if s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) ≥η,
l −ψ,
if s = 0.
Fig. 5 An illustration of VaRη and CVaRη using Wη(s, ψ, w)
123

16
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
Furthermore, for any s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], and η ∈(0, 1), CVaRη(s, ψ) is unique and equal
to
CVaRη(s, ψ) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
1
λ

μY(ψ,0) + s
 pY(ψ,w0)(s)
1−η
−1

, if s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) < η,
W(s,ψ)
1−η ,
if s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) ≥η,
l −ψ,
if s = 0.
The proofs are deferred to Appendix A.7. It is noteworthy that for given s ∈N0 and η ∈(0, 1),
CVaRη(s, ψ) is continuous in ψ over [0,l].
Proposition 6 Given any s ∈N0 and ψ ∈[0,l] with η ∈(0, 1), it follows that the functions
VaRη(s, ψ) and CVaRη(s, ψ) are non-increasing in ψ. More speciﬁcally,
1. When s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) < η, or when s = 0, VaRη(s, ψ) and CVaRη(s, ψ) are
linear and we have ∂VaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
= −1 and ∂CVaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
= −1.
2. When s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) ≥η, we have ∂VaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
= 0 and ∂CVaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
=
FY(ψ,0)(s)−1
1−η
.
The proofs are deferred to Appendix A.8. Proposition 6 highlights the beneﬁcial impact of
commitment lead time on reducing both VaRη and CVaRη, as depicted in Figs.6a and 6b,
respectively. This means that as the value of ψ increases, the values of VaRη and CVaRη
either decrease or remain constant.
4.3 Long-run average cost function analysis
The long-run average total cost C(s, ψ), based on Expression (2), considering the holding
cost, commitment cost, and costs associated with customers waiting times depends on the
decision variables. By substituting E [max(I N(s, ψ), 0)] and W(s, ψ) in Expression (2) with
the corresponding terms found in Ahmadi et al. (2019a, 2020), we can formulate C(s, ψ) as
follows.
Fig. 6 An illustration of VaRη and CVaRη behavior in terms of ψ
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
17
Fig. 7 The domain of sub-functions C1(s, ψ) and C2(s, ψ)
C(s, ψ) = h

sFX(ψ)(s) −μX(ψ)FX(ψ)(s −1)
 
+ λp

W(s, ψ) + CVaRη(s, ψ)
 
+ λK(ψ)
= (h + p)

sFX(ψ)(s) −μX(ψ)FX(ψ)(s −1)
 
+ p

μX(ψ) −s
 
+ λpCVaRη(s, ψ) + λK(ψ).
(9)
For any s ∈N, CVaRη(s, ψ) is a piecewise function on its domain [0,l]. Let us deﬁne
C1(s, ψ) and C2(s, ψ) as follows:
C1(s, ψ) =(h + p)

sFX(ψ)(s) −μX(ψ)FX(ψ)(s −1)
 
+ 2p

μX(ψ) −s
 
+

p
1 −η

sPX(ψ,VaRη)(s),
(10)
and
C2(s, ψ) =

h +

1 +
1
1 −η

p
 
sFX(ψ)(s) −μX(ψ)FX(ψ)(s −1)
 
+ p

1 +
1
1 −η
 
μX(ψ) −s
 
.
(11)
Thus, C(s, ψ) can be rewritten as:
C(s, ψ) =

C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ), if 0 ≤ψ < VaRη(s, 0),
C2(s, ψ) + λK(ψ), if VaRη(s, 0) ≤ψ ≤l.
(12)
If FX(0)(s−1) ≥η, then VaRη(s, 0) ∈[0,l] does not exist such that FX(VaRη(s,0))(s−1) = η.
In this case, C(s, ψ) = C2(s, ψ)+λK(ψ). Figure7 shows how the domain of [0,l] is divided
into [0, VaRη(s, 0)] and [VaRη(s, 0),l].
Lemma 2 Given η ∈(0, 1) and p > h > 0, we have
η <
(2 −η) p
(2 −η) p + (1 −η)h < 1 <
2p
p + h .
123

18
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.9.
Lemma 3 Let K(ψ) =
 ψ
0 φ(x)dx denote the commitment cost function. Let us assume for
x ≥0 that φ(x) is positive, increasing, and differentiable, and (x) = (p −h) −φ(x) is
a positive function. Then, for any s ∈N, the term C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ) is convex and strictly
decreasing with respect to ψ over

0, VaRη(s, 0)

.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.10. In Lemma 3, (x) and φ(x) are two auxiliary
functions, which are used for validation of Lemma 4 and computing the commitment cost
K(ψ) =
 ψ
0 φ(x) dx, respectively. A constant φ(x) = c indicates the unit commitment cost
per customer per time unit, and a linear commitment cost K(ψ) = cψ yields φ(x) = c and
 (x) = (p −h) −c > 0. Considering the high penalty costs compared to holding costs
and c < h, the positivity of (x) forms a reasonable assumption about the commitment cost
factor magnitude.
Lemma 4 Let K(ψ) =
 ψ
0 φ(x)dx denote the commitment cost function. Let us assume for
x ≥0 that φ(x) is positive, increasing, and differentiable, and (x) = (p −h) −φ(x) is a
positive function. Then, for any s ∈N0, we have
min
ψ∈[0,l] C(s, ψ) =
min
ψ∈[VaRη(s,0),l]
{C2(s, ψ) + λK(ψ)}
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.11. Lemma 4 states that for a given s ∈N0, the minimum
value of C(s, ψ) with respect to ψ over the interval [0,l] is the same as the minimum value of
a function C2(s, ψ) + λK(ψ) over a different interval [VaRη(s, 0),l]. Based on this ﬁnding,
we will further investigate the behavior of C2(s, ψ) to proceed with the optimization of
C(s, ψ) with respect to both s ∈N0 and ψ ∈[0,l].
Lemma 5 For a given s ∈N, C2(s, ψ) is convex in ψ, and for a given ψ ∈[VaRη(s, 0),l],
C2(s, ψ) is convex in s.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.12. Lemma 5 provides valuable insights for minimizing
C2(s, ψ) when one of the decision variables is predetermined. For instance, with a ﬁxed ψ,
the corresponding optimal s can be derived. Utilizing this approach to minimize the cost
function in Expression (12), our initial objective is to optimize C2(s, ψ) with respect to s.
This results in a continuous univariate piece-wise convex function C2(ψ) that depends solely
on ψ, represented as in Equation (13):
C2(ψ) = min
s∈N0
C2(s, ψ).
(13)
Each convex piece of C2(ψ) corresponds to a distinct base-stock level. Let sψ denote the
optimal base-stock level for a given ψ ∈[0,l]. The following lemma shows how sψ can be
computed.
Lemma 6 For any given ψ ∈[0,l] and η ∈(0, 1), the corresponding optimal base-stock
level, denoted as sψ, belongs to the following singleton set:

s ∈N0 :
FX(ψ)(s −1) <
(2 −η) p
(2 −η) p + (1 −η)h ≤FX(ψ)(s),
η ∈(0, 1)

.
The proofs are deferred to Appendix A.13. According to Lemma 6, for a given value of
ψ ∈[0,l], the corresponding optimal base-stock level depends on η and its behavior in
terms of η is presented in the following proposition.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
19
Fig. 8 Behavior of optimal sψ with respect to risk aversion factor (η) for a given value of ψ
Proposition 7 For a given ψ ∈[0,l], its corresponding optimal base-stock level sψ is non-
decreasing in η.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.14. According to Proposition 6, as the decision maker
becomes more conservative, a higher optimal level of inventory is needed to mitigate the
risk of long customer waiting times. Also, as illustrated in Fig.8, with a longer commitment
lead time, the risk of long customer waiting times decreases and therefore, a lower level of
optimal base stock is needed. The behavior of sψ in terms of ψ can be characterized as the
following theorem.
Theorem 1 For a given η ∈(0, 1) and ψ ∈[0,l], the optimal base-stock level sψ is non-
increasing in ψ. Moreover, for any ψ ∈[0,l], the optimal base-stock levels constitute a ﬁnite
set {s0, s0 −1, . . . , 2, 1, 0}, where s0 is the optimal base-stock level for ψ = 0 and belongs
to

s ∈N0 : FX(0)(s −1) <
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h ≤FX(0)(s)

.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.16. Theorem 1 suggests that as the commitment lead
time increases, the optimal inventory level either remains the same or decreases. Additionally,
the risk aversion factor inﬂuences the maximum base-stock level s0.
Lemma 7 For any positive values of p and h such that h < p, the function s0 behaves as a
non-decreasing step function with respect to η over the interval (0, 1).
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.17. Lemma 7 highlights the connection between a
system’s risk attitude and its optimal inventory decisions. As the system adopts a more
conservative or risk-averse perspective, the optimal inventory level is adjusted cautiously. In
order to identify the optimal control policy (s, ψ) considering a speciﬁc risk aversion degree,
we introduce a lower bound for C(s, ψ) in Lemma 8.
Lemma 8 For any ψ ∈[0,l], there exists a lower bound C(ψ) for C(sψ, ψ) with the deﬁni-
tion
C(ψ) = μX(ψ)
μX(0)
C2 (s0, 0) + λK(ψ),
where s0 ∈

s ∈N0 : FX(0)(s −1) <
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h ≤FX(0)(s)

.
123

20
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
Fig. 9 The behavior of cost function and tight and linear lower bounds with respect to ψ
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.15. Lemma 8 provides a lower bound for the piece-wise
convex lower bound C2(ψ) + λK(ψ). Given that both C(ψ) and C2(ψ) + λK(ψ) maintain
the same value at the start and end points of the interval [0,l], as illustrated in Fig.9, we can
develop the optimal control policy as outlined in the subsequent theorem.
Theorem 2 For every η ∈(0, 1), the optimal commitment lead time adheres to a “bang-
bang” policy and the corresponding optimal base-stock level exhibits an “all-or-nothing”
behavior.
We defer the proof to Appendix A.18. According to Theorem2, the optimal commitment
lead time is equal to either no commitment lead time (i.e., ψ = 0) or full commitment lead
time (i.e., ψ = l). When there is no commitment lead time, the optimal base-stock level
is s∗= s0, derived from the traditional inventory system. In this case, the optimal strategy
is the Buy-to-Stock (BTS) approach. Conversely, when the optimal commitment lead time
is equal to the replenishment lead time, the optimal base-stock level is zero. Hence, in this
situation, the optimal strategy is the Buy-to-Order (BTO) approach.
5 Linear commitment cost function
In this section, our focus lies on a linear commitment cost function denoted as K(ψ) = cψ,
where c represents the commitment cost factor per unit of time. Linear commitment costs
indicate that the expenses escalate proportionally to the duration of the commitment lead
time, a notion that has been previously explored in the literature (Ahmadi et al., 2019b,a,
2020). By employing this linear commitment cost, we can establish a threshold, denoted as
c0, for the commitment cost factor. The following corollary represents c0 in terms of system
parameters.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
21
Corollary 2 (threshold policy) Considering a linear commitment cost function with φ(x) = c
and (x) = (p −h) −c > 0, there exists a unique threshold for the commitment cost factor
c, denoted as c0 and is given by
c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
= (p + (1 −η)(p + h))

s0FX(0) (s0) −μX(0)FX(0) (s0 −1)
 
+ p(2 −η)

μX(0) −s0
 
(1 −η)μX(0)
,
where s0 is deﬁned by s0 =

s ∈N0 : FX(0)(s −1) < 8 ≤FX(0)(s)

. If c > c0, then ψ∗= 0
and s∗= s0; otherwise, ψ∗= l and s∗= 0.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.19. Corollary 2 introduces a threshold policy that
allows for the determination of the optimal control policy, which can be either buy-to-stock
or buy-to-order. Simply put, if the commitment cost factor c is less than c0, it is economically
advantageous for the ﬁrm to consider the full commitment lead time. Conversely, if c exceeds
c0, it becomes more cost-effective to forego the commitment lead time entirely. Moreover,
when c is equal to c0, it indicates a state of cost indifference, wherein other factors must be
considered to choose between the no commitment or full commitment strategies. Since c0
is inﬂuenced by the customer waiting time risk aversion factor η, examining how η impacts
the threshold c0 would provide valuable insights.
Corollary 3 The unit commitment cost threshold c0(μ, h, p, η) exhibits continuity and
increases with respect to the customer waiting time risk aversion factor, η.
The proof is deferred to Appendix A.19. This corollary demonstrates how the customer
waiting time risk aversion factor η inﬂuences the determination of the optimal control policy.
As the decision maker’s risk aversion increases, reﬂected by an elevated value of η, the unit
commitment cost threshold c0 also rises. This implies that ﬁrms are required to consider a
higher level of commitment lead time (or cost) to justify longer replenishment lead times,
effectively reducing the risk of customer waiting and, consequently, customer dissatisfaction.
Additionally, it is worth noting that the threshold c0 can be inﬂuenced by various other
inventory system parameters (e.g., h, p, and μX(0)), which are detailed in Ahmadi et al.
(2019a). When the holding cost factor h increases (indicating higher product value) or the
penalty cost factor p rises, the threshold c0 also increases, emphasizing the signiﬁcance of
commitment lead time in the optimal control policy. On the other hand, when there is an
increase in demand during the lead time (μX(0)), known as lead time demand, the threshold
decreases, highlighting the importance of maintaining inventory in the optimal control policy.
5.1 Profitability of the optimal strategy
In light of linear commitment cost, we found a threshold policy to determine the cost-effective
optimal control policy in the form of either a BTS or a BTO strategy. However, further
investigation is required to evaluate the proﬁtability of these strategies in relation to the
customer waiting time risk aversion factor η. Let v denote the selling price per unit of the
product, and 
i represent the ﬁrm’s average total proﬁt per unit of time associated with
Strategy i. When the optimal strategy is BTO, the average total cost equals λcl. Thus, 
BTO
can be deﬁned by Expression (14):

BTO = λv −λcl = λ(v −cl).
(14)
Upon analyzing Expression (14), the following corollary emerges.
123

22
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
Fig. 10 An Illustration of optimal strategies in terms of the ﬁrm’s risk aversion degree
Corollary 4 In a situation where c < c0, the optimal cost-effective strategy is BTS, and it can
be characterized by the following three possibilities:
1. If c < v
l , the optimal cost-effective BTO strategy is proﬁtable,
2. If c > v
l , the optimal cost-effective BTO strategy is non-proﬁtable, and
3. Otherwise, the optimal cost-effective BTS strategy results in neither proﬁt nor loss (break-
even point).
The results presented in Corollary 4 can be proven by considering the cases where 
BT O is
positive, negative, and equal to zero. As stated in Corollary 4, for the optimal BTS strategy to
be proﬁtable, the commitment cost factor should be lower than the minimum value between
c0 and v
l

i.e., c < min

c0, v
l
 
.
On the other hand, when the optimal strategy is BTS, the average total cost is μX(0)c0. In
this case, 
BTS is deﬁned by Expression (15):

BTS = λv −μX(0)c0 = λ(v −lc0).
(15)
Similarly, analyzing Expression (15) results in the following corollary.
Corollary 5 In a situation where c > c0, the optimal cost-effective strategy is BTS, and it can
be characterized by the following three possibilities:
1. If c0 < v
l , the optimal cost-effective BTS strategy is proﬁtable,
2. If c0 > v
l , the optimal cost-effective BTS strategy is non-proﬁtable, and
3. Otherwise, the optimal cost-effective BTS strategy results in neither proﬁt nor loss (break-
even point).
The results presented in Corollary 5 can be veriﬁed by considering the scenarios where

BT O is positive, negative, and zero. The results of Corollaries 5 and 4 are visualized in
Fig.10, which speciﬁes four distinct scenarios for optimal strategies based on the customer
waiting time risk aversion factor (η) and the thresholds c0 and v
l .
Figure 10 provides valuable insights for managers seeking to understand the impact of
commitment lead time on decision makers’ risk aversion attitude toward customer waiting
time and its implications for cost-trade-offs and proﬁtability. As decision-makers become
less risk-averse (i.e., η →0), the optimal strategy may involve either BTS or BTO. However,
it’s important to note that while the BTS strategy is often the most cost-effective strategy, it
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
23
may not always lead to proﬁtability. Conversely, when decision-makers become more risk-
averse (i.e., η →1), the BTO strategy becomes a dominant cost-effective strategy, although it
may also result in non-proﬁtable outcomes. It is noteworthy to mention that for conservative
decision-makers, BTO is the optimal strategy.
6 Conclusions and practical relevance
In this paper, we investigated the role of ADI obtained from a preorder strategy in managing
customer waiting time in a business ﬁrm that controls a single-location inventory system.
The ﬁrm faces customer demand that follows a pure Poisson process. The ﬁrm uses a base-
stock policy to replenish its inventory from an external supplier with ample stock, which
takes a ﬁxed amount of time. In cases where the ﬁrm is out of stock, demand is backlogged,
meaning that customers wait until the product becomes available again. The ﬁrm utilizes a
preorder strategy through which it can obtain ADI from customers and use this information
to better match demand with supply. The ﬁrm offers a bonus, called commitment cost, to
incentivize customers to follow the preorder strategy and provide the ﬁrm with ADI, whose
duration is called commitment lead time. Due to the importance of customer waiting time on
the customer experience, their loyalty, and the proﬁtability of the ﬁrm, we used the mean-
CVaR approach to take not only the average waiting times but also the prolonged waiting
times into consideration. We replace the backordering cost term in the conventional inventory
optimization problems with the mean and CVaR of customer waiting time for a given degree
of the ﬁrm’s risk aversion. The long-run average overall cost function was comprised of
inventory holding, commitment, and customer waiting time costs. The objective was to ﬁnd
the optimal control policy including the optimal base-stock level and optimal commitment
lead time such that the long-run average overall cost is minimized.
By analyzing the customer waiting time, we found that the behavior of standard deviation
of the customer waiting time concerning decision variables does not always decrease. It was
intuitive to see that when the ﬁrm accepts a longer commitment lead time, the variability in
the customer waiting time decreases. This can be explained by reducing the uncertainty in the
demand lead time. However, we found it counterintuitive to see the variability of customer
waiting time increase for small enough base-stock levels and then decrease for bigger values
of base-stock levels. This can be argued as with a small base-stock level the ﬁrm does not have
enoughcapacitytoabsorbanydemandshocksandevensmallsocksleadtolongwaitingtimes.
This made it interesting to see how the commitment lead time and base-stock level contribute
to the cost-effective optimal control policy. Also, we found that both the base-stock level and
commitment lead time can decrease the CVaR of customer waiting time. This implies that a
higher base-stock level will mitigate stockout cases and consequently potentially prolonged
customer waiting times. Similarly, a longer commitment lead time leads to less uncertainty
in lead time demand and consequently less extended customer waiting time.
For any degree of the ﬁrm’s risk aversion, we found a closed-form optimal control policy
wheretheoptimalbase-stocklevelandoptimalcommitmentleadtimeareinterdependent.The
optimal commitment lead time was of a bang-bang type, and its corresponding optimal base-
stock level is of an all-or-nothing type. More speciﬁcally, when the optimal commitment
lead time equals the replenishment lead time, the corresponding base-stock level is zero.
Conversely,whentheoptimalcommitmentleadtimeiszero,theoptimalbase-stocklevelisthe
solution to the well-known Newsvendor problem. Of course, when the optimal commitment
lead time is equal to the ﬁrm’s replenishment lead time, customers face no waiting, and
123

24
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
this happens when the ﬁrm has a high degree of risk aversion. However, when the optimal
commitment lead time is zero, the ﬁrm has a low degree of risk aversion.
With regard to the linear commitment cost function, we identify a threshold for the com-
mitment cost factor per time unit. If the commitment cost factor exceeds this threshold, the
optimal commitment lead time is zero. However, if the commitment cost factor is below this
threshold, the optimal commitment lead time equals the ﬁrm’s replenishment lead time. Oth-
erwise, the optimal commitment lead time is either zero or equivalent to the replenishment
lead time. Furthermore, the threshold for the commitment cost factor increases as the ﬁrm
becomes more risk-averse toward customer waiting time. Furthermore, as the ﬁrm becomes
less risk-averse, the optimal strategy could be either Buy-to-Stock (BTS) or Buy-to-Order
(BTO). However, it’s crucial to emphasize that while the BTS strategy is often more cost-
effective, it doesn’t necessarily guarantee proﬁtability. On the other hand, as ﬁrms adopt a
more conservative stance, the BTO strategy becomes a dominant and more cost-effective
choice, even though it too can result in unproﬁtable scenarios. Notably, for ﬁrms exhibiting
high degrees of risk aversion, BTO typically becomes the sole optimal strategy.
Our research provides invaluable insights, enabling ﬁrms to mitigate risks associated with
prolonged waiting periods when making optimal trade-off decisions, as well as enhancing
their capacity for product or service customization. This is achieved without compromising
speed and efﬁciency or incurring high operational costs. Essentially, businesses can stand
out and gain a competitive advantage in the market by offering increased customization and
rapid responses, all while maintaining manageable operational expenses. By utilizing IT-
based platforms such as mobile applications, and incorporating emerging technologies like
the Internet-of-Things (IoT), ﬁrms can adopt pre-order strategies. This results in a mutually
beneﬁcial scenario where the ﬁrm receives ADI, and its customers enjoy price reductions,
guaranteed product availability, and a higher level of customization. In the construction
industry, the concept of commitment lead time is exceptionally relevant. Once a construc-
tion blueprint is complete, the exact quantity of required items (e.g., windows, doors, lamps,
household appliances, etc.) is determined. As these items aren’t immediately needed, it makes
sense to preorder them from suppliers in exchange for a price reduction. This method also
beneﬁts suppliers, as they can use the ADI to ensure the availability of items while reduc-
ing operational costs. In the food service industry, particularly in restaurants, the concept of
commitment lead time can be implemented by offering discounts to customers who preorder
their meals. This strategy not only reduces customer waiting times, and enhances responsive-
ness, but also improves customer satisfaction. Since preordering generally results in lower
inventory levels and a better match between supply and demand, it also has the potential to
reduce food waste. Pharmaceutical companies can adopt commitment lead time practices as
well, offering price reductions to pharmacies and hospitals that preorder medications. This
is especially relevant for medications with limited shelf life or those required for seasonal
illnesses, ensuring the timely availability of crucial medications and minimizing waste.
A Appendix
A.1 Proof of Lemma 1
For any s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], w ∈[0,l −ψ], and using Expression (3), we have
FW(s,ψ)(w) = P{W(s, ψ) ≤w}
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
25
=
s−1

k=0

μY(ψ,w)
 k
k!
e−μY(ψ,w) = FY(ψ,w)(s −1),
where Y(ψ, w) is a Poisson random variable with mean μY(ψ,w).
⊓⊔
A.2 Proof of Proposition 1
To calculate σW(s,ψ), we ﬁrst need to calculate E

W(s, ψ)2
and E [W(s, ψ)]. We calculate
E

W(s, ψ)2
as follows:
E

W(s, ψ)2
=
 ∞
−∞
w2 fW(s,ψ)(w)dw = 02FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 ∞
−∞
δ(w)
+
 l−ψ
0
w2λPY(ψ,w)(s −1)dw
=
 l−ψ
0
w2λ[λ(l −ψ −w)]s−1
(s −1)!
e−λ(l−ψ−w)dw
=
 λ(l−ψ)
0

l −ψ −χ
λ
2
λ χs−1
(s −1)!e−χ 1
λdχ
=
1
λ2(s −1)!
 λ(l−ψ)
0
[λ(l −ψ) −χ]2 χs−1e−χdχ
=
1
λ2(s −1)!
 μY(ψ,0)
0

μY(ψ,0) −χ
 2 χs−1e−χdχ
=
1
λ2(s −1)!
  μY(ψ,0)
0

μ2
Y(ψ,0) −2χμY(ψ,0) + χ2
χs−1e−χdχ
!
=
1
λ2(s −1)!

μ2
Y(ψ,0)
 μY(ψ,0)
0
χs−1e−χdχ



A
lower
incomplete
gamma
function
−2μY(ψ,0)
 μY(ψ,0)
0
χse−χdχ



B
integration by
parts
+
 μY(ψ,0)
0
χs+1e−χdχ



C
integration by
parts

=
1
λ2(s −1)!

μ2
Y(ψ,0) A −2μY(ψ,0)B + C

For A, we can write the following:
A =
 μY(ψ,0)
0
χs−1e−χdχ = (s −1)!

1 −FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 
To calculate B with integration by parts, let u = χs and dv = e−χdχ. Thus, du =
sχs−1dχ and v = −e−χ:
123

26
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
B =
 μY(ψ,0)
0
χse−χdχ = χse−χ
0
μY(ψ,0)
+s
 μY(ψ,0)
0
χs−1e−χdχ = −μs
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + s A
To calculate C with integration by parts, let u = χs+1 and dv = e−χdχ. Thus, du =
(s + 1)χsdχ and v = −e−χ:
C =
 μY(ψ,0)
0
χs+1e−χdχ = χs+1e−χ
0
μY(ψ,0)
+ (s + 1)
 μY(ψ,0)
0
χse−χdχ
= −μs+1
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + (s + 1)B
= −μs+1
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + (s + 1)

−μs
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + s A

We proceed with the calculation of E

W(s, ψ)2
by substituting A, B, and C into Expression
(A.2):
E

W(s, ψ)2
=
1
λ2(s −1)!

μ2
Y(ψ,0) A −2μY(ψ,0)B + C

=
1
λ2(s −1)!

μ2
Y(ψ,0) A −2μY(ψ,0)

−μs
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + s A

−μs+1
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + (s + 1)

−μs
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + s A

=
1
λ2(s −1)!

μ2
Y(ψ,0) A + 2μs+1
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) −2sμY(ψ,0) A −μs+1
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0)
−(s + 1)μs
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + s(s + 1)A

=
1
λ2(s −1)!

s A +

μY(ψ,0) −s
 2 A −(s + 1)μs
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + μs+1
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0)

=
1
λ2(s −1)!

s +

μY(ψ,0) −s
 2
A −(s + 1)μs
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0) + μs+1
Y(ψ,0)e−μY(ψ,0)

= 1
λ2
⎛
⎝

s +

μY(ψ,0) −s
 2 
1 −FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 
−(s + 1)
μs
Y(ψ,0)
(s −1)! e−μY(ψ,0) +
μs+1
Y(ψ,0)
(s −1)! e−μY(ψ,0)
⎞
⎠
= 1
λ2

s +

μY(ψ,0) −s
 2 
1 −FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 
−s(s + 1)pY(ψ,0)(s) + μ2
Y(ψ,0) pY(ψ,0)(s −1)

= 1
λ2

s +

μY(ψ,0) −s
 2 
1 −FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 
+ μY(ψ,0)

μY(ψ,0) −(s + 1)
 
pY(ψ,0)(s −1)

= 1
λ2

s +

μY(ψ,0) −s
 2 
1 −FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 
+ s

μY(ψ,0) −(s + 1)
 
pY(ψ,0)(s)

= 1
λ2

s

1 −FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 
+

μY(ψ,0) −s
 2 
1 −FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 
+s

μY(ψ,0) −s
 
pY(ψ,0)(s) −spY(ψ,0)(s)

= 1
λ2

s −s

FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + pY(ψ,0)(s)
 
+

μY(ψ,0) −s
 

μY(ψ,0) −s −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + sFY(ψ,0)(s −1) + spY(ψ,0)(s)
 
= 1
λ2

s

1 −FY(ψ,0)(s)
 
+

μY(ψ,0) −s
 
μY(ψ,0) −s −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + sFY(ψ,0)(s)
 
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
27
= 1
λ2

s

1 −FY(ψ,0)(s)
 
+

μY(ψ,0) −s
 
sFY(ψ,0)(s) −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + μY(ψ,0) −s
 
= 1
λ2

s

1 −FY(ψ,0)(s)
 
+ λ

μY(ψ,0) −s
 
E[W(s, ψ)]

.
(16)
BysubstitutingthelastexpressionderivedinEquation(16)intoσ 2
W(s,ψ) = E

W(s, ψ)2
−
E [W(s, ψ)]2, we can calculate the standard deviation of the customer waiting time:
σW(s,ψ) =
&
E

W(s, ψ)2
−E [W(s, ψ)]2
=
'
1
λ2

s

1 −FY(ψ,0)(s)
 
+ λ

μY(ψ,0) −s
 
E[W(s, ψ)]

−E [W(s, ψ)]2
=

s

1 −FY(ψ,0)(s)
 
λ2
+ W(s, ψ)
μY(ψ,0) −s
λ
−W(s, ψ)

.
⊓⊔
A.3 Proof of Proposition 2
First, we derive dσW(s,ψ)
dψ
. Considering dμY(ψ,0)
dψ
= −λ and dFY(ψ,0)(s)
dψ
= λPY(ψ,0)(s) (Ahmadi
et al., 2019a), along with dW(s,ψ)
dψ
= FY(ψ,0)(s −1) −1 (Ahmadi et al., 2020), and using
Proposition 1, for any s ∈N and ψ ∈[0,l), we can compute dσW(s,ψ)
dψ
as follows.
dσW(s,ψ)
dψ
=
−s
λ PY(ψ,0)(s) +

FY(ψ,0)(s −1) −1
  μY(ψ,0)−s
λ
−W(s, ψ)

+ W(s, ψ)

−1 −

FY(ψ,0)(s −1) −1
 
2σW(s,ψ)
=
−s
λ PY(ψ,0)(s) +

FY(ψ,0)(s −1) −1
  μY(ψ,0)−s
λ
−W(s, ψ)

−W(s, ψ)FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
2σW(s,ψ)
=
−sPY(ψ,0)(s) +

FY(ψ,0)(s −1) −1
 
μY(ψ,0) −s −λW(s, ψ)
 
−λW(s, ψ)FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
2λσW(s,ψ)
.
(17)
Now, we try to simplify the numerator by extending it using Expression (4) and then doing
some algebra. We can write the numerator as
−sPY(ψ,0)(s) +

FY(ψ,0)(s −1) −1
 
−sFY(ψ,0)(s) + μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 
−FY(ψ,0)(s −1)

sFY(ψ,0)(s) −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + μY(ψ,0) −s
 
= −sPY(ψ,0)(s) −sFY(ψ,0)(s −1)FY(ψ,0)(s) + μY(ψ,0)

FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 2
+sFY(ψ,0)(s) −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) −sFY(ψ,0)(s −1)FY(ψ,0)(s)
+μY(ψ,0)

FY(ψ,0)(s −1)
 2
−μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + sFY(ψ,0)(s −1)
= s

FY(ψ,0)(s) −PY(ψ,0)(s)
 
+ sFY(ψ,0)(s −1)
+2FY(ψ,0)(s −1)

−sFY(ψ,0)(s) + μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) −μY(ψ,0)
 
= 2sFY(ψ,0)(s −1) −2FY(ψ,0)(s −1)

sFY(ψ,0)(s) −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + μY(ψ,0)
 
= −2FY(ψ,0)(s −1)

sFY(ψ,0)(s) −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + μY(ψ,0) −s
 
= −2λFY(ψ,0)(s −1)W(s, ψ).
(18)
123

28
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
By substituting (18) with the numerator in Expression (17), we get
dσW(s,ψ)
dψ
= −2λFY(ψ,0)(s −1)W(s, ψ)
2λσW(s,ψ)
= −
(
W(s, ψ)
σW(s,ψ)
)
FY(ψ,0)(s −1).
Since, for any s ∈N, ψ ∈[0,l), W(s, ψ) > 0, σW(s,ψ) > 0, and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) > 0, then
dσW(s,ψ)
dψ
< 0.Moreover,whens = 0 orψ = l,σW(s,ψ) = 0 resultsin dσW(s,ψ)
dψ
= 0.Therefore,
for any s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], dσW(s,ψ)
dψ
≤0. This implies that σW(s,ψ) is non-increasing in ψ. ⊓⊔
A.4 Proof of Proposition 3
In calculating E

(W(s, ψ) −w)+
:=
 ∞
−∞(τ −w)+ fW(s,ψ)(τ)dτ, we note that based on
Equation (3) or Fig.4, for τ /∈[0,l −ψ], we have fW(s,ψ)(τ) = 0. Moreover, (τ −w)+ = 0
for τ < w. Thus, the integral should be calculated over τ ∈[w,l −ψ]:
Wη(s, ψ, w) = w +
1
1 −ηE

W(s, ψ) −w
 +
= w +
1
1 −η
 l−ψ
w
(τ −w) fW(s,ψ)(τ)dτ
= w +
1
1 −η
 l−ψ
w
τ fW(s,ψ)(τ)dτ −w
 l−ψ
w
fW(s,ψ)(τ)dτ

= w +
1
1 −η
  l−ψ
w
τλs (l −ψ −τ)s−1
(s −1)!
e−λ(l−ψ−τ)dτ
−w

FW(s,ψ)(l −ψ) −FW(s,ψ)(w)
 
= w +
1
1 −η
 λs−1
(s −1)!
 l−ψ
w
τλ(l −ψ −τ)s−1e−λ(l−ψ−τ)dτ
−w

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
 !
By setting χ := λ(l −ψ −τ), we have
Wη(s, ψ, w)
= w +
1
1 −η
 
λs
(s −1)!
 0
λ(l−ψ−w)

l −ψ −χ
λ
 χ
λ
s−1
e−χ
−dχ
λ

−w

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
 !
= w +
1
1 −η
 
1
λ(s −1)!
 λ(l−ψ−w)
0

μY(ψ,0) −χ
 
χs−1e−χdχ −w

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
 !
= w +
1
1 −η
 
1
λ(s −1)!

μY(ψ,0)
 μY(ψ,w)
0
χs−1e−χdχ −
 μY(ψ,w)
0
χse−χdχ

−w

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
 !
= w +
1
1 −η
 
1
λ(s −1)!

μY(ψ,0)(s −1)!

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)

123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
29
−s!

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s)

−w

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
 !
= w +
1
1 −η
 1
λ

μY(ψ,0)

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)

−s

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s)

−w

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
 !
= w +
1
1 −η
 1
λ

sFY(ψ,w)(s) −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,w)(s −1) + μY(ψ,0) −s
 
−w

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
 !
= w +
1
λ(1 −η)
 
sFY(ψ,w)(s) −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,w)(s −1) + μY(ψ,0)
−s −λw

1 −FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
 !
= w +
1
λ(1 −η)
 
sFY(ψ,w)(s) −(μY(ψ,0) −λw)FY(ψ,w)(s −1) + (μY(ψ,0) −λw) −s
!
= w +
1
λ(1 −η)
 
sFY(ψ,w)(s) −μY(ψ,w)FY(ψ,w)(s −1) + μY(ψ,w) −s
!
.
⊓⊔
A.5 Proof of Proposition 4
Based on Proposition 3, we can write
∂Wη(s, ψ, w)
∂w
= 1 +
1
λ(1 −η)
 
s ∂FY(ψ,w)(s)
∂w
−
∂μY(ψ,w)
∂w

FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
−μY(ψ,w)
∂FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
∂w
+ ∂μY(ψ,w)
∂w
!
.
Drawing on Ahmadi et al. (2019a) and considering the symmetry between ψ and w in
the distribution of Y(ψ, w), we arrive at ∂FY(ψ,w)(s)
∂w
= λPY(ψ,w)(s) and ∂μY(ψ,w)
∂w
= −λ.
Therefore,
∂Wη(s, ψ, w)
∂w
= 1 +
1
λ(1 −η)

sλPY(ψ,w)(s) + λFY(ψ,w)(s −1)
−μY(ψ,w)λPY(ψ,w)(s −1) −λ
 
(19a)
= 1 +
1
1 −η

sPY(ψ,w)(s) + FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
−μY(ψ,w)PY(ψ,w)(s −1) −1
 
(19b)
= 1 +
1
1 −η

μY(ψ,w)PY(ψ,w)(s −1) + FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
−μY(ψ,w)PY(ψ,w)(s −1) −1
 
(19c)
= 1 +
1
1 −η

FY(ψ,w)(s −1) −1
 
.
(19d)
123

30
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
For any s ∈N, ψ ∈[0,l], w ∈[0,l −ψ], and η ∈(0, 1), using Expression (19d), we
can calculate ∂Wη(s,ψ,w)
∂w
.
∂Wη(s, ψ, w)
∂w
= 1 +
1
1 −η

FY(ψ,w)(s −1) −1
 
.
(20)
1. If FY(ψ,0)(s −1) < η: As mentioned in Ahmadi et al. (2020), FY(ψ,w)(s −1) is a
continuously increasing function in w, and FY(ψ,l−ψ)(s−1) = 1. Since FY(ψ,0)(s−1) <
η, there exists a value w0 ∈(0,l −ψ) such that FY(ψ,w0)(s −1) = η. According to
Expression (20), Wη(s, ψ, w) initially decreases, reaches 0 at w0, and then increases as
w varies within the range (0,l −ψ).
2. If FY(ψ,0)(s −1) ≥η: Since FY(ψ,0)(s −1) ≥η and FY(ψ,w)(s −1) is an increasing
function in w, then for any w ∈(0,l−ψ), FY(ψ,w)(s−1) > η. Based on Expression (20),
we can write
∂Wη(s, ψ, w)
∂w
= 1 +
1
1 −η

FY(ψ,w)(s −1) −1
 
> 1 +
1
1 −η (η −1) = 0.
Therefore, ∂Wη(s,ψ,w)
∂w
> 0 and it implies that Wη(s, ψ, w) increases as w varies within
the range (0,l −ψ).
3. If s = 0: When s = 0, according to Proposition 3, the expression for Wη(0, ψ, w) is
given by Wη(0, ψ, w) = −
η
1−ηw+ l−ψ
1−η . Consequently, ∂Wη(0,ψ,w)
∂w
= −
η
1−η < 0. This
implies that Wη(0, ψ, w) decreases as w varies within the range (0,l −ψ).
⊓⊔
A.6 Proof of Corollary 1
For s = 0, the claim holds due to Proposition 4.3. Now, we show that ∂2Wη(s,ψ,w)
∂w2
≥0 for
the given values of s ∈N, ψ ∈[0,l], and η ∈(0, 1). From (20), we have
∂2Wη(s, ψ, w)
∂w2
=

1
1 −η
 ∂FY(ψ,w)(s −1)
∂w
=
λ
1 −η PY(ψ,w)(s −1).
Since for any η ∈(0, 1), η > 0, we have ∂2Wη(s,ψ,w)
∂w2
> 0. Hence, Wη(s, ψ, w) is
strictly convex in w for a given s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], and η ∈(0, 1). Therefore, it has a unique
minimum.
⊓⊔
A.7 Proof of Proposition 5
For s ∈N, since Wη(s, ψ, w) is strictly convex in w and the domain [0,l −ψ] is bounded,
Wη(s, ψ, w) has a unique minimum. Therefore, Proposition 4 and Corollary 1 imply
VaRη(s, ψ) =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
w0 : FY(ψ,w0)(s −1) = η, if s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) < η,
0,
if s ≥1 and FY(ψ,0)(s −1) ≥η,
l −ψ,
if s = 0.
We substitute the value of VaRη(s, ψ) in Expression (7) for each segment. When s = 0,
then w = l −ψ. Then, using Proposition 3, we can write
CVaRη(0, ψ) = Wη(0, ψ,l −ψ) = l −ψ +
1
λ(1 −η) (0) = l −ψ.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
31
When s ≥1, then if FX(ψ)(s −1) > η, VaRη(s, ψ) = 0. Hence, using Proposition 3, by
substituting w with 0, then we get
CVaRη(s, ψ) =Wη(s, ψ, 0)
=0 +
1
λ(1 −η)

sFY(ψ,0)(s)
−μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + μY(ψ,0) −s
 
=
1
1 −η
1
λ

sFY(ψ,0)(s) −μY(ψ,0)FY(ψ,0)(s −1) + μY(ψ,0) −s
 
=
1
1 −η

W(s, ψ)
 
.
When s ≥1, then if FX(ψ)(s−1) ≤η, then there exists w0 ∈[0,l−ψ] and VaRη(s, ψ) =
{w0 :
FY(ψ,w0)(s −1) = η}. Hence, using Proposition 3, by substituting w with w0, then
we get
CVaRη(s, ψ) = Wη(s, ψ, w0)
= w0 +
1
λ(1 −η)

sFY(ψ,w0)(s) −μY(ψ,w0)FY(ψ,w0)(s −1) + μY(ψ,w0) −s
 
= w0 +
1
λ(1 −η)

s(FY(ψ,w0)(s −1) + pY(ψ,w0)(s))
−μY(ψ,w0)FY(ψ,w0)(s −1) + μY(ψ,w0) −s
 
= w0 +
1
λ(1 −η)

s(η + pY(ψ,w0)(s)) −ημY(ψ,w0) + μY(ψ,w0) −s
 
= w0 +
1
λ(1 −η)

(1 −η)μY(ψ,w0) + s(pY(ψ,w0)(s) −1 + η)
 
= w0 + μY(ψ,0) −λw0
λ
+ s
λ
 pY(ψ,w0)(s)
1 −η
−1

= 1
λ

μY(ψ,0) + s
 pY(ψ,w0)(s)
1 −η
−1

.
⊓⊔
A.8 Proof of Proposition 6
1. Calculation of ∂VaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
: Using Proposition 5, we have
• For s ≥1, when FX(ψ)(s −1) < η, we have
s−1

k=0

λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
e−λ(l−ψ−VaRη) = η.
Let us deﬁne A = e−λ(l−ψ−V aRη) and ∂A
∂ψ = −λ

−1 −∂VaRη
∂ψ

e−λ(l−ψ−V aRη).
Then,
∂
∂ψ
(s−1

k=0

λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
A
)
= ∂η
∂ψ
123

32
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
⇒
s−1

k=0
∂
∂ψ
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
A
)
= 0
⇒
s−1

k=1
(
∂
∂ψ
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
)
A +
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
)  ∂A
∂ψ
)
+ ∂
∂ψ
((
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 0
0!
)
A
)
= 0
⇒
s−1

k=1
((
kλ

−1 −∂VaRη
∂ψ
 
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k−1
k!
)
A
+
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
) 
−λ

−1 −∂VaRη
∂ψ

A
)
−λ

−1 −∂VaRη
∂ψ

A = 0
⇒−λ

1 + ∂VaRη
∂ψ
 s−1

k=1
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k−1
(k −1)!
A
)
−
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
A
)
= 0
⇒−λ

1 + ∂VaRη
∂ψ
 (s−2

k=0
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
)
A
−
(s−1

k=1
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
)
A + A
))
= 0
⇒−λ

1 + ∂VaRη
∂ψ
 (s−2

k=0
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
)
A
−
(s−1

k=0
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 k
k!
)
A
))
= 0
⇒−λ

1 + ∂VaRη
∂ψ
 
FX(ψ,VaRη)(s −2) −FX(ψ,VaRη)(s −1)
 
= 0
⇒λ

1 + ∂VaRη
∂ψ
 
PX(ψ,VaRη)(s −1)
 
= 0.
Since PX(ψ,VaRη)(s−1) > 0, then 1+ ∂VaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
= 0 implies ∂V aRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
= −1 ≤0.
• When s = 0, then VaRη(s, ψ) = l −ψ, then VaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
= −1 ≤0.
• For s ≥1, when FX(ψ)(s −1) ≥η, we have VaRη(s, ψ) = 0. Hence, ∂VaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
=
0 ≤0.
Therefore, for any s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], η ∈(0, 1), the claim is proved for VaRη(s, ψ).
2. Calculation of ∂CVaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
: Using Proposition 5, we have
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
33
• For s ≥1, when FX(ψ)(s −1) < η, we have
CVaRη
= 1
λ

μY(ψ,0) −s +

s
1 −η

PY(ψ,VaRη)(s)

= 1
λ
(
μX(ψ) −s +

s
1 −η
 
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 s
s!
A
)
∂CVaRη
∂ψ
= 1
λ
(
∂μX(ψ)
∂ψ
+

s
1 −η
 ((
∂
∂ψ

λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 s
s!
)
A
+
(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 s
s!
)  ∂A
∂ψ
))
= 1
λ
(
−λ +

s
1 −η
 ((
s

λ

−1 −
∂VaRη
∂ψ
 (
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 s−1
s!
))
A
))
+ 1
λ
(
s
1 −η
 (
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 s
s!
) 
λ

1 +
∂V aRη
∂ψ

A
)
=

−1 +

s
1 −η
 
1 +
∂V aRη
∂ψ

(
λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 s
s!
A −s

λ

l −ψ −VaRη
 s−1
s!
A
))
.
Knowing ∂VaRη
∂ψ
= −1 leads to ∂CVaRη
∂ψ
= (−1 + 0) = −1 ≤0.
• When s = 0, then CVaRη(s, ψ) = l −ψ, then ∂CVaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
= −1 ≤0.
• For s ≥1, when FX(ψ)(s −1) ≥η, we have CVaRη = W(s,ψ)
1−η . According to Ahmadi
etal.(2020), ∂W(s.ψ)
∂ψ
= FY(ψ,0)(s, ψ)−1.Hence, ∂CVaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
= FY(ψ,0)(s)−1
1−η
.Forany
s ∈N0 and ψ ∈[0,l −ψ], FY(ψ,0)(s, ψ) ≤1 and 1−η > 0 lead to ∂CVaRη(s,ψ)
∂ψ
≤0.
Therefore, for any s ∈N0, ψ ∈[0,l], η ∈(0, 1), the claim for CVaRη(s, ψ) is proved.
A.9 Proof of Lemma 2
Given 1 −η ∈(0, 1) and p > h, we can write 1−(1−η)
1+(1−η) =
η
2−η < 1 and h
p < 1. Then, we
can write
η
2−η

h
p

< 1. By multiplying both sides of the inequality by 1 −η > 0, and then
adding +1 to both sides of the inequality, we get:
1 + (1 −η)

η
2 −η
  h
p

< 2 −η,
⇒1 −(1 −η) + (1 −η)

η
2 −η
  h
p

< 1,
⇒η

1 +
1 −η
2 −η
  h
p

< 1,
123

34
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
⇒1 +
1 −η
2 −η
  h
p

< 1
η,
⇒(2 −η)p + (1 −η)h
(2 −η)p
< 1
η,
⇒
(2 −η)p + (1 −η)h
(2 −η)p
−1
>
1
η
−1
,
⇒
(2 −η)p
(2 −η)p + (1 −η)h > η.
(21)
Also, given p > h > 0, we can write (2 −η)p < (2 −η)p + (1 −η)h and h + p < 2p.
This implies
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h < 1 and 1 <
2p
h+p . Hence,
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h < 1 <
2p
h+p. By
considering Inequality (21), we have
η <
(2 −η)p
(2 −η)p + (1 −η)h < 1 <
2p
h + p .
⊓⊔
A.10 Proof of Lemma 3
For any given s ∈N, without loss of generality, we assume FX(ψ)(s −1) ≤η (since for
FX(ψ)(s −1) ≥η, we have VaRη(s, 0)=0).
We show that for any ψ ∈[0, VaRη(s, 0)], the ﬁrst derivative of C1(s, ψ) < 0. Based on
Expression (9), we can write
d(C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ))
dψ
= (h + p)

s d
dψ FX(ψ)(s) −d
dψ

μX(ψ)FX(ψ)(s −1)
 
+ p d
dψ

μX(ψ) −s
 
+ λp dCVaRη(s, ψ)
dψ
+ λdK(ψ)
dψ
.
We know dK(ψ)
dψ
= φ(ψ). According to Ahmadi et al. (2019a), we know dFX(ψ)(s)
dψ
=
λPX(ψ)(s), dμX(ψ)
dψ
= −λ. Also, according to Proposition 6, dCVaRη(s,ψ)
dψ
= −1. Then, by
doing some algebra we get
d(C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ))
dψ
= λ(h + p)FX(ψ)(s −1) −2λp + λφ(ψ)
= λ(h + p)

FX(ψ)(s −1) + φ(ψ) −2p
p + h

.
Based on the assumption, we have p −h −φ(ψ) > 0 implying p −φ(ψ) > h;
hence 2p−φ(ψ)
p+h
> 1. Therefore, d(C1(s,ψ)+λK(ψ))
dψ
< 0. Thus, for any s ∈N and ψ ∈
[0, VaRη(s, 0)], C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ) is strictly decreasing in ψ. Also, by taking the second
derivative, we have
d2(C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ))
dψ2
= λ(h + p)

λPX(ψ)(s −1) +
1
p + h
dφ(ψ)
dψ

.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
35
Since φ(ψ) is differentiable and increasing, d2(C1(s,ψ)+λK(ψ))
dψ2
≥0. Therefore, for any
s ∈N and ψ ∈[0, VaRη(s, 0)], C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ) is convex in ψ.
⊓⊔
A.11 Proof of Lemma 4
For any s ∈N0, we can right
min
ψ∈[0,l] C(s, ψ) =

min
ψ∈[0,VaRη(s,0)]
C(s, ψ),
min
ψ∈[VaRη(s,0),l]
C(s, ψ)
*
=

min
ψ∈[0,VaRη(s,0)]
{C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ)} ,
min
ψ∈[VaRη(s,0),l]
{C2(s, ψ) + λK(ψ)}
*
(22)
According to Lemma 3, the term C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ) is strictly decreasing in ψ over

0, VaRη(s, 0)

.Therefore,ittakesitsminimumattheendoftheinterval,whichisVaRη(s, 0).
Since at VaRη(s, 0) both C1(s, ψ) + λK(ψ) and C2(s, ψ) + λK(ψ) have the same value
and VaRη(s, 0) is part of the domain of the second minimization, the ﬁrst minimization can
be ignored. Therefore,
min
ψ∈[0,l] C(s, ψ) =
min
ψ∈[VaRη(s,0),l]
{C2(s, ψ) + λK(ψ)}
(23)
⊓⊔
A.12 Proof of Lemma 5
First, for a given ψ ∈[0,l], we show that the second forward difference of C2(s, ψ) with
respect to s is non-negative. Let 2
s be the second forward difference operator. We can deﬁne
the second forward difference of C2(s, ψ) with respect to s according to Van Houtum and
Kranenburg (2015) as follows.
2
sC2(s, ψ) = C2(s + 2, ψ) −2C2(s + 1, ψ) + C2(s, ψ).
(24)
Analogous to Lemma 2 from Ahmadi et al. (2019a), we can compute each term as follows:
C2(s + 2, ψ) =

h +

1 +
1
1 −η

p
 
FX(ψ)(s + 1) + FX(ψ)(s)
 
−2

1 +
1
1 −η

p + C2(s, ψ),
(25)
C2(s + 1, ψ) =

h +

1 +
1
1 −η

p

FX(ψ)(s)
−

1 +
1
1 −η

p + C2(s, ψ).
(26)
By substituting Expressions (25) and (26) in Expression (24) and doing some algebra we
get
2
sC2(s, ψ) =

h +

1 +
1
1 −η

p

PX(ψ)(s + 1) ≥0.
(27)
123

36
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
This means that for given ψ ∈[0,l], C2(s, ψ) is convex in s.
Second, for a given s ∈N, we show that the second derivative of C2(s, ψ) with respect
to ψ is non-negative. Analogous to Lemma 1 from to Ahmadi et al. (2019a), we can write:
dC2(s, ψ)
dψ
= λ

h +

1 +
1
1 −η

p

FX(ψ)(s −1) −

1 +
1
1 −η

p

,
(28)
and
d2C2(s, ψ)
dψ2
= λ2

h +

1 +
1
1 −η

p

PX(ψ)(s −1)

.
(29)
Knowing PX(ψ)(s −1) ≥0 implies d2C2(s,ψ)
dψ2
≥0. Therefore, for a given s ∈N, C2(s, ψ)
is convex in ψ.
⊓⊔
A.13 Proof of Lemma 6
From Lemma 5, we know that for any ψ ∈[VaRη(s, 0),l], C2(s, ψ) is convex. Let sψ
be the optimal s corresponding to ψ, then we should have sC2(sψ −1, ψ) < 0 and
sC2(sψ, ψ) ≥0, where s is the ﬁrst forward difference operator. According to Van
Houtum and Kranenburg (2015), we can deﬁne the ﬁrst forward difference as
sC2(s, ψ) = C2(s + 1, ψ) −C2(s, ψ)
(30)
By instituting C2(s + 1, ψ) from Expression (26) in Expression (30), we can calculate
sC2(s, ψ) as
sC2(s, ψ) =

h +

1 +
1
1 −η

p

FX(ψ)(s) −

1 +
1
1 −η

p.
Thus, sC2(sψ −1, ψ) < 0 and sC2(sψ, ψ) ≥0 results in
sψ ∈

s ∈N0 :
FX(ψ)(s −1) <
(2 −η) p
(2 −η) p + (1 −η)h ≤FX(ψ)(s),
η ∈(0, 1)

.
⊓⊔
A.14 Proof of Proposition 7
According to Lemma 6, for any ψ ∈[VaRη(s, 0),l], the corresponding optimal base-stock
level, denoted as sψ, belongs to the singleton set:

s ∈N0 :
FX(ψ)(s −1) <
(2 −η) p
(2 −η) p + (1 −η)h ≤FX(ψ)(s),
η ∈(0, 1)

.
(31)
We show that the fraction
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h is decreasing in η. For this purpose, we show
∂

(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h

∂η
≤0. Then,
∂

(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h

∂η
= −p((2 −η)p + (1 −η)h) + (p + h)(2 −η)p
((2 −η)p + (1 −η)h)2
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
37
=
ph
((1 −η)p + (1 −η)h)2 > 0.
This implies that the expression
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h exhibits an increasing trend with respect to
η. As the functions FX(ψ)(s) and FX(ψ)(s −1), mentioned in both Inequalities (31), are non-
decreasing with respect to s (Ahmadi et al., 2019a), it follows that sψ shows a non-decreasing
behavior as η increases.
⊓⊔
A.15 Proof of Lemma 8
First, we show
d
 C2(s,ψ)
l−ψ

dψ
≥0:
d

C2(s,ψ)
l−ψ

dψ
=
1
(l −ψ)2

(l −ψ)
 d
dψ C2(s, ψ)

−
 d
dψ (l −ψ)

C2(s, ψ)

. (32)
Using Expression (28) and doing some algebra, we get
d

C2(s,ψ)
l−ψ

dψ
=
⎛
⎝
s

h +

1 +
1
1−η

p

(l −ψ)2
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝FX(ψ)(s) −

1 +
1
1−η

p
h +

1 +
1
1−η

p
⎞
⎠.
(33)
Based on Lemma 6, for any ψ ∈[0,l] we have FX(ψ)(sψ) ≥

1+
1
1−η

p
h+

1+
1
1−η

p . This implies
that C2(s,ψ)
l−ψ
is non-decreasing in ψ ∈[0,l]. Therefore, the minimum of the non-decreasing
function C2(sψ,ψ)
l−ψ
happens at the beginning of interval [0,l]. Hence, for any ψ ∈[0,l] and
their optimal base-stock level sψ, C2(sψ,ψ)
l−ψ
≥C2(s0,0)
l−0
= C2(s0,0)
l
. Then, we have C2(sψ, ψ) ≥
(l −ψ) C2(s0,0)
l
. By adding λK(ψ) to both side of the inequality, we have
C2(sψ, ψ) + λK(ψ)



C(sψ,ψ)
≥(l −ψ)C2(s0, 0)
l
+ λK(ψ)
= l −ψ
l
C2(s0, 0) + λK(ψ) = μX(ψ)
μX(0)
C2 (s0, 0) + λK(ψ)



C(ψ)
.
Therefore, for any ψ ∈[0,l], C(ψ) is a lower-bound for C(sψ, ψ) and C(s, ψ).
⊓⊔
A.16 Proof of Theorem 1
Let FX(ψ)(s) be the Poisson cumulative distribution function of X(ψ) evaluated at s, where
X(ψ) has a mean μX(ψ) = λ(l −ψ). According to Lemma 6, for given ψ ∈[0,l] and
η ∈(0, 1), and the corresponding optimal base-stock level, denoted as sψ, the following
inequalities hold.
FX(ψ)(sψ −1) <
(2 −η) p
(2 −η) p + (1 −η)h ≤FX(ψ)(sψ).
(34)
123

38
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
Let s0 ∈N0 be the base-stock level corresponding to ψ = 0. Hence,
FX(0)(s0 −1) <
(2 −η) p
(2 −η) p + (1 −η)h ≤FX(0)(s0).
According to Ahmadi et al. (2019a), for any s ∈N0 and λ > 0, FX(ψ)(s) and FX(ψ)(s−1)
are increasing in ψ, and for any ψ ∈[0,l], FX(ψ)(s) and FX(ψ)(s −1) are increasing in s.
Therefore, by increasing ψ from 0, both functions FX(ψ)(s −1) and FX(ψ)(s) increase until
a threshold 0 < ψs0,s0−1 such that FX(ψs0,s0−1)(s0 −1) =
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h . This means that for
any ψ ∈[0, ψs0,s0−1], Inequalities (34) hold for sψ = s0. So, for any ψ > ψs0,s0−1, Inequal-
ities (34) only hold if base-stock decreases from s0. Hence, considering s0 −1 and increasing
ψ from ψs0,s0−1, we reach another threshold ψs0−1,s0−2 such that ψs0,s0−1 < ψs0−1,s0−2 and
FX(ψs0−1,s0−2)(s0 −2) =
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h . Hence, for any ψ ∈[ψs0,s0−1, ψs0−1,s0−2], Inequal-
ities (34) hold for sψ = s0 −1. By continuing this process, sψ decreases and reaches 0 as ψ
increases and reaches l. As a result, the domain of ψ will be divided into ﬁnite sub-intervals
as follows:
sψ =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩

0, ψs0,s0−1
 
,
if
sψ = s0,

ψsψ+1,sψ , ψsψ,sψ−1
 
,
if
sψ = 1, 2, 3, . . . , s0 −1,

ψ1,0,l

,
if
sψ = 0,
where sψ represents a sub-interval for which the optimal base-stock level is sψ. The division
of the interval [0,l] into sub-intervals sψ has been illustrated in Fig.9.
⊓⊔
A.17 Proof of Lemma 7
To prove Lemma 7, ﬁrst, we need to prove the following lemma.
Lemma 9 For any positive values of p and h with h < p, the fraction
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h is a
strictly increasing function of η over the interval [0, 1].
Proof To establish Lemma 9, we demonstrate that the ﬁrst derivative of the fraction
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h with respect to η is positive. Thus,
∂
∂η

(2 −η)p
(2 −η)p + (1 −η)h

=

∂
∂η((2 −η)p)

((2 −η)p + (1 −η)h) −

∂
∂η((2 −η)p + (1 −η)h)

((2 −η)p)
((2 −η)p + (1 −η)h)2
= −p((2 −η)p + (1 −η)h)) + (h + p)(2 −η)p
((2 −η)p + (1 −η)h)2
= −p((h + p)(2 −η) −h) + (h + p)(2 −η)p
((2 −η)p + (1 −η)h)2
=
ph
((2 −η)p + (1 −η)h)2 > 0.
⊓⊔
Based on Lemma 9 and recognizing that the cumulative distribution function of Poisson,
denoted as FX(0)(n), is non-decreasing in n, considering that s0 belongs to

n ∈N0 :
FX(0)(n −1) <
(2 −η) p
(2 −η) p + (1 −η) h ≤FX(0)(n)

,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
39
we can reason, similar to Appendix A.16, that by increasing η, the value s0 stays constant
over a sub-interval and then jumps by one unit. It continues this pattern, staying constant over
the next sub-interval and then jumping by one unit, and so on, until it reaches its maximum
value when η converges to 1. Basically, the domain of η is partitioned into a ﬁnite number of
sub-intervals on which s0 stays constant. Additionally, the function s0 jumps by 1 unit from
one sub-interval to the next. Therefore, s0 either stays constant or increases by one unit as
η increases over the interval (0, 1), conﬁrming that s0 is a non-decreasing step function in η
over the interval of (0, 1).
⊓⊔
A.18 Proof of Theorem 2
Given that C(sψ, ψ) = mins C(s, ψ) and using Lemma 8, it is evident that for any ψ in the
range [0,l], we have C(s, ψ) ≥C(sψ, ψ) ≥C(ψ). Furthermore, employing Lemma 8, we
can show C(s0, 0) = C(0) and C(0,l) = C(l) = λK(l). For the start point of the interval
ψ = 0, we know K(0) = 0. Then:
C(0) = μX(0)
μX(0)
C2 (s0, 0) + λK(0) = C2 (s0, 0) .
(35)
Using Expression (12) and knowing λK(0) = 0, we get C2 (s0, 0) = C(s0, 0). Thus,
from Expression (35), we obtain C(0) = C(s0, 0). Similarly, knowing μX(l) = 0, for the
end point of the interval ψ = l, we have:
C(l) = μX(l)
μX(0)
C2 (s0, 0) + λK(l) = λK(l).
Since C(0,l) = λK(l), we have C(l) = C(0,l). As C(ψ) is a lower bound for C(s, ψ)
over the interval [0,l] and at the start and end of the interval [0,l], C(s, ψ) and C(ψ) yield
the same value. Therefore, the smallest value of C(s, ψ) is equal to the smallest value of
C(ψ) over the range [0,l]. Since C(ψ) is strictly increasing or decreasing in ψ, its smallest
value occurs either at the start or end of the range.
Referring to Lemma 6, when ψ = 0, the corresponding optimal base-stock level is s0, and
when ψ = l, the corresponding optimal base-stock level is zero. Consequently, the optimal
commitment lead time follows a bang-bang policy, and the optimal base-stock level follows
an all-or-nothing policy.
⊓⊔
A.19 Proof of Corollary 2
According to Theorem 2, ψ∗can be either 0 or l. Let’s assume the case ψ∗= 0 (i.e., s∗=
s0) has occurred, leading to C(0,l) > C(s0, 0). Considering the linear commitment cost,
λK(0) = 0 and λK(l) = λcl, along with Expression (11), we can express C(0,l) > C(s0, 0)
equivalently as follows:
cλl >

h +

1 +
1
1 −η

p
 
s0FX(0)(s0) −μX(0)FX(0)(s0 −1)
 
+ p

1 +
1
1 −η
 
μX(0) −s0
 
,
123

40
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
where s0 is deﬁned by s0 =

s ∈N0 : FX(0)(s −1) <
(2−η)p
(2−η)p+(1−η)h ≤FX(0)(s)

. By set-
ting μX(0) = λl, we obtain:
cμX(0) >

h +

1 +
1
1 −η

p
 
s0FX(0)(s0) −μX(0)FX(0)(s0 −1)
 
+ p

1 +
1
1 −η
 
μX(0) −s0
 
,
which is equivalent to
⇒c > (p + (1 −η)(p + h))

s0FX(0) (s0) −μX(0)FX(0) (s0 −1)
 
+ p(2 −η)

μX(0) −s0
 
(1 −η)μX(0)
.
By deﬁning c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
as:
c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
= (p + (1 −η)(p + h))

s0FX(0) (s0) −μX(0)FX(0) (s0 −1)
 
+ p(2 −η)

μX(0) −s0
 
(1 −η)μX(0)
,
we can conclude c > c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
. Therefore, if c > c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
, then
C(0,l) > C(s0, 0), and ψ∗= 0 with s∗= s0. Similarly, when the case ψ∗= l (i.e.,
s∗= 0) occurs, we have C(0,l) ≤C(s0, 0) and hence, c < c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
. When both
cases ψ∗= 0 (i.e., s∗= s0) and ψ∗= l (i.e., s∗= 0) happen simultaneously, we get
c = c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
.
⊓⊔
A.20 Proof of Corollary 3
In order to establish the validity of Corollary 3, it is necessary to ﬁrst construct and prove the
following lemma.
Lemma 10 Let FX(n) be the cumulative distribution function of a Poisson random variable
X with mean μX. Then, for any n ∈N0, the inequality nFX(n)−μX FX(n−1)+μX −n ≥0
holds.
Proof Let PX(n) be the mass probability function of the Poisson random variable X with
mean μX evaluated at n. Then, for any n ∈N, we have nPX(n) = μX PX(n −1). Therefore,
for any n ∈N0, we can write
nFX(n) −μX FX(n −1) + μX −n
= μX (1 −FX(n −1)) −n (1 −FX(n))
= μX
(
1 −
n−1

i=0
PX(i)
)
−n
(
1 −
n

i=0
PX(i)
)
= μX
∞

i=n
PX(i) −n
∞

i=n+1
PX(i)
=
∞

i=n
μX PX(i) −
∞

i=n+1
nPX(i)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
41
Fig. 11 The behavior of FX(0)(s0) at breaking points and s0 over the sub-intervals
=
∞

i=n
(i + 1)PX(i + 1) −
∞

i=n+1
nPX(i)
=
∞

i=n+1
i PX(i) −
∞

i=n+1
nPX(i)
=
∞

i=n+1
(i −n)PX(i).
Since i ≥n + 1, then +∞
i=n+1(i −n)PX(i) > 0. Therefore, nFX(n) −μX FX(n −1) +
μX −n > 0.
⊓⊔
Let ηn−1, ηn, and ηn+1 be three arbitrary consecutive breaking points, with ηn−1 <
ηn < ηn+1. In the sub-interval (ηn−1, ηn], the value of s0 is held constant at n, while in the
subsequent sub-interval (ηn, ηn+1], the value of s0 is held constant at n +1. This relationship
is depicted in Fig.11. Given that h, p, μX(0) > 0, the function c0(μX(0), h, p, η) exhibits
continuity and differentiability with respect to η over each sub-interval, deﬁned by these
three breaking points.
Therefore, for any η within the sub-interval (ηn−1, ηn) or (ηn, ηn+1), the ﬁrst derivative
of c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
with respect to η can be expressed as follows.
∂c0
∂η =
 ∂
∂η (p + (1 −η)(p + h))
 
s0 FX(0)

s0
 
−μX(0) FX(0)

s0 −1
 
+
 ∂
∂η (2 −η)

p

μX(0) −s0

(1 −η)μX(0)

(1 −η)μX(0)
2
−
 ∂
∂η

(1 −η)μX(0)
 
(p + (1 −η)(p + h))

s0 FX(0)

s0
 
−μX(0) FX(0)

s0 −1
 
+ (2 −η)p

μX(0) −s0


(1 −η)μX(0)
2
=

−(p + h)

s0 FX(0)

s0
 
−μX(0) FX(0)

s0 −1
 
−p

μX(0) −s0

(1 −η)μX(0)

(1 −η)μX(0)
2
+
μX(0)

(p + (1 −η)(p + h))

s0 FX(0)

s0
 
−μX(0) FX(0)

s0 −1
 
+ (2 −η)p

μX(0) −s0


(1 −η)μX(0)
2
= −
(1 −η)(p + h)

s0 FX(0)

s0
 
−μX(0) FX(0)

s0 −1
 
+ (1 −η)p

μX(0) −s0

(1 −η)2μX(0)
+
(p + (1 −η)(p + h))

s0 FX(0)

s0
 
−μX(0) FX(0)

s0 −1
 
+ (2 −η)p

μX(0) −s0

(1 −η)2μX(0)
123

42
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
=
p

s0 FX(0)

s0
 
−μX(0) FX(0)

s0 −1
 
+ p

μX(0) −s0

(1 −η)2μX(0)
=
p

s0 FX(0)

s0
 
−μX(0) FX(0)

s0 −1
 
+ μX(0) −s0

(1 −η)2μX(0)
.
DrawingonLemma10,wecanafﬁrmthattheexpressions0FX(0) (s0)−μX(0)FX(0) (s0 −1)+
μX(0) −s0
> 0. Hence, it is conclusive that
∂c0(μX(0),h,p,η)
∂η
> 0, indicating that
c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
is strictly increasing in η over an arbitrary sub-interval, formed by two
consecutive breaking points, with other parameters held constant.
Now, we demonstrate the continuity of c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
at an arbitrary breaking point,
ηn ∈(0, 1) by showing
lim
η→η−
n
c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
= lim
η→η+
n
c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
= c0

μX(0), h, p, ηn
 
.
Since ηn is a breaking point, then approaching ηn from the left, results in s0 = n; however,
approaching ηn from the right, results in s0 = n + 1. For simplicity, let deﬁne A(η) =
(p + (1 −η)(p + h)) and B(η) = (2 −η)p. Then for the left limit we have
lim
η→η−
n
c

μX(0), h, p, η
 
= A (ηn)

nFX(0)(n) −μX(0)FX(0)(n −1)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −n
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
.
Similarly, for the right limit we have
lim
η→η+
n
c

μX(0), h, p, η
 
= A (ηn)

(n + 1)FX(0)(n + 1) −μX(0)FX(0)(n)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −(n + 1)
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
= A (ηn)

nFX(0)(n + 1) + FX(0)(n + 1) −μX(0)

FX(0)(n −1) + PX(0)(n)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −n −1
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
= A (ηn)

n

FX(0)(n) + PX(0)(n + 1)
 
+ FX(0)(n + 1)
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
+ A (ηn)

−μX(0)

FX(0)(n −1) + PX(0)(n)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −n −1
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
= A (ηn)

nFX(0)(n) −μX(0)FX(0)(n −1)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −n
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
+ A (ηn)

nPX(0)(n + 1) + PX(0)(n + 1) + FX(0)(n) −μX(0) PX(0)(n)
 
−B (ηn)
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
= A (ηn)

nFX(0)(n) −μX(0)FX(0)(n −1)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −n
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
+ A (ηn)

(n + 1)PX(0)(n + 1) + FX(0)(n) −μX(0) PX(0)(n)
 
−B (ηn)
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
= A (ηn)

nFX(0)(n) −μX(0)FX(0)(n −1)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −n
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
+ A (ηn) FX(0)(n) −B (ηn)
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
= A (ηn)

nFX(0)(n) −μX(0)FX(0)(n −1)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −n
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
+
A (ηn)

FX(0)(n) −B(ηn)
A(ηn)

(1 −ηn) μX(0)
.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
43
Additionally, since ηn is a breaking point, according to Lemma 6, the relation FX(0)(n) =
B(ηn)
A(ηn) holds. This implies that
lim
η→η+
n
c

μX(0), h, p, η
 
= A (ηn)

nFX(0)(n) −μX(0)FX(0)(n −1)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −n
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
.
Hence, the left and right limits at ηn are equal. Also, the value of c

μX(0), h, p, η
 
at ηn
is equal to:
c

μX(0), h, p, ηn
 
= A (ηn)

nFX(0)(n) −μX(0)FX(0)(n −1)
 
+ B (ηn)

μX(0) −n
 
(1 −ηn) μX(0)
.
Therefore, for an arbitrary breaking point ηn ∈(0, 1), we obtained:
lim
η→η−
n
c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
= lim
η→η+
n
c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
= c0

μX(0), h, p, ηn
 
.
This conclude that function c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
is continuous at arbitrary breaking point
ηn. The continuity of the function c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
at an arbitrary breaking point ηn implies
that c0

μX(0), h, p, η
 
is continuous with respect to η over the interval (0, 1). Further, the
continuity at breaking points and the property of being strictly increasing between two con-
secutive breaking points lead to the conclusion that c0

μX(0), h, p, ηn
 
is an increasing
function in η within the interval (0, 1).
⊓⊔
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ahmadi, T., Atan, Z., de Kok, T., & Adan, I. (2019). Optimal control policies for an inventory system with
commitment lead time. Naval Research Logistics (NRL), 66(3), 193–212.
Ahmadi, T., Atan, Z., de Kok, T., & Adan, I. (2019). Optimal control policies for assemble-to-order systems
with commitment lead time. IISE Transactions, 51(12), 1365–1382.
Ahmadi, T., Atan, Z., de Kok, T., & Adan, I. (2020). Time-based service constraints for inventory systems
with commitment lead time. OR Spectrum: Quantitative Approaches in Management, 42(2), 355–395.
Alım, M., & Beullens, P. (2022). Improving inventory system performance by selective purchasing of buyers’
willingness to wait. European Journal of Operational Research, 300(1), 124–136.
Berk, E., & Toy, A. Ö. (2023). A serial inventory system with lead-time-dependent backordering: A reduced-
state approximation. IISE Transactions, 55(3), 259–270.
Bernstein, F., & DeCroix, G. A. (2015). Advance demand information in a multiproduct system. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management, 17(1), 52–65.
Chen, F., & Zheng, Y.-S. (1992). Waiting time distribution in (t, s) inventory systems. Operations Research
Letters, 12(3), 145–151.
123

44
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
Chiu, C.-H., & Choi, T.-M. (2016). Supply chain risk analysis with mean-variance models: A technical review.
Annals of Operations Research, 240(2), 489–507.
Dehlendorff, C., Kulahci, M., Merser, S., & Andersen, K. K. (2010). Conditional value at risk as a measure
for waiting time in simulations of hospital units. Quality Technology & Quantitative Management, 7(3),
321–336.
Figueira, G., van Jaarsveld, W., Amorim, P., & Fransoo, J. C. (2023). The impact of committing to customer
orders in online retail. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 25(1), 307–322.
Filippi, C., Guastaroba, G., & Speranza, M. G. (2020). Conditional value-at-risk beyond ﬁnance: A survey.
International Transactions in Operational Research, 27(3), 1277–1319.
Gallego, G., & Özer, Ö. (2001). Integrating replenishment decisions with advance demand information. Man-
agement Science, 47(10), 1344–1360.
Gallego, G., & Özer, Ö. (2003). Optimal replenishment policies for multiechelon inventory problems under
advance demand information. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 5(2), 157–175.
Gayon, J.-P., Benjaafar, S., & De Véricourt, F. (2009). Using imperfect advance demand information in
production-inventory systems with multiple customer classes. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management, 11(1), 128–143.
Giat, Y., & Dreyfuss, M. (2021). The window ﬁll rate in a periodic review inventory system with order
crossover. International Journal of Production Research, 59(22), 6791–6808.
Gotoh, J.-Y., & Takano, Y. (2007). Newsvendor solutions via conditional value-at-risk minimization. European
Journal of Operational Research, 179(1), 80–96.
Hariharan, R., & Zipkin, P. (1995). Customer-order information, leadtimes, and inventories. Management
Science, 41(10), 1599–1607.
Heskett, J. L., Jones, T. O., Loveman, G. W., Sasser, W. E., Schlesinger, L. A., et al. (1994). Putting the
service-proﬁt chain to work. Harvard Business Review, 72(2), 164–174.
Higa, I., Feyerherm, A. M., & Machado, A. L. (1975). Waiting time in an (s - 1, s) inventory system. Operations
Research, 23(4), 674–680.
Johansson, L., & Olsson, F. (2017). Quantifying sustainable control of inventory systems with non-linear
backorder costs. Annals of Operations Research, 259, 217–239.
Johansson, L., & Olsson, F. (2018). Age-based inventory control in a multi-echelon system with emergency
replenishments. European Journal of Operational Research, 265(3), 951–961.
Jun, S. Y., Kim, K. H., & Park, H. K. (2019). The effect of the preorder strategy on consumers’ product
choice: The moderating role of product experience and payment timing. Journal of Business Research,
99, 80–86.
Karaesmen, F., Liberopoulos, G., & Dallery, Y. (2004). The value of advance demand information in produc-
tion/inventory systems. Annals of Operations Research, 126, 135–157.
Khan, M.A.-A., Shaikh, A. A., Panda, G. C., Konstantaras, I., & Taleizadeh, A. A. (2019). Inventory system
with expiration date: Pricing and replenishment decisions. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 132,
232–247.
Kiesmüller, G., & de Kok, A. (2006). The customer waiting time in an (r, s, q) inventory system. International
Journal of Production Economics, 104(2), 354–364.
Kostecki, M. (1996). Waiting lines as a marketing issue. European Management Journal, 14(3), 295–303.
Kruse, W. K. (1980). Waiting time in an (s-1, s) inventory system with arbitrarily distributed lead times.
Operations Research, 28(2), 348–352.
Li, B., & Arreola-Risa, A. (2022). Minimizing conditional value-at-risk under a modiﬁed basestock policy.
Production and Operations Management, 31(4), 1822–1838.
Li, C., & Zhang, F. (2013). Advance demand information, price discrimination, and preorder strategies. Man-
ufacturing & Service Operations Management, 15(1), 57–71.
Mukherjee, A., Smith, R. J., & Burton, S. (2021). The effect of positive anticipatory utility on product pre-order
evaluations and choices. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 1–19.
Özer, Ö., & Wei, W. (2004). Inventory control with limited capacity and advance demand information. Oper-
ations Research, 52(6), 988–1000.
Peng, W., & Tian, Z. (2022). Information acquisition, selling effort and pre-order strategy. International
Journal of Production Economics, 249, 108538.
Prasad, A., Stecke, K. E., & Zhao, X. (2011). Advance selling by a newsvendor retailer. Production and
Operations Management, 20(1), 129–142.
Ralfs, J., & Kiesmüller, G. P. (2022). Inventory management with advance demand information and ﬂexible
shipment consolidation. OR Spectrum, 44(4), 1009–1044.
Rippe, C., & Kiesmüller, G. P. (2023). The repair kit problem with imperfect advance demand information.
European Journal of Operational Research, 304(2), 558–576.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:1–45
45
Rockafellar, R. T., & Uryasev, S. (2000). Optimization of conditional value-at-risk. Journal of Risk, 2(3),
21–41.
Sangeetha, N., Karthick, T., & Sivakumar, B. (2020). Optimal control of postponed demands in a contin-
uous review inventory system with two types of customers. International Journal of Information and
Management Sciences, 31(1), 1–14.
Sarkar, S., & Giri, B. C. (2022). Safety stock management in a supply chain model with waiting time and price
discount dependent backlogging rate in stochastic environment. Operational Research, 22, 917–946.
Shang, W., & Liu, L. (2011). Promised delivery time and capacity games in time-based competition. Manage-
ment Science, 57(3), 599–610.
Shi, Y., Alwan, L., Tang, C., & Yue, X. (2019). A newsvendor model with autocorrelated demand under a
time-consistent dynamic CVaR measure. IISE Transactions, 51(6), 653–671.
Silver, E. A., Pyke, D. F., & Thomas, D. J. (2016). Inventory and production management in supply chains.
CRC Press.
Tan, T., Güllü, R., & Erkip, N. (2007). Modelling imperfect advance demand information and analysis of
optimal inventory policies. European Journal of Operational Research, 177(2), 897–923.
Tempelmeier, H., & Fischer, L. (2010). Approximation of the probability distribution of the customer waiting
time under an (r, s, q) inventory policy in discrete time. International Journal of Production Research,
48(21), 6275–6291.
Tempelmeier, H., & Fischer, L. (2019). A procedure for the approximation of the waiting time distribution in
a discrete-time (r, s) inventory system. International Journal of Production Research, 57(5), 1413–1426.
Thonemann, U. W. (2002). Improving supply-chain performance by sharing advance demand information.
European Journal of Operational Research, 142(1), 81–107.
Tsai, S. C., & Ho, I.-Y. (2019). Sample average approximation for a two-echelon inventory system with
service-level constraints. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 70(4), 675–688.
van der Heijden, M. C., & De Kok, A. (1992). Customer waiting times in an (r, s) inventory system with
compound Poisson demand. Zeitschrift für Operations Research, 36, 315–332.
Van Houtum, G., & Kranenburg, B. (2015). Spare parts inventory control under system availability constraints,
vol. 227. Springer.
Wang, D., Dimitrov, S., & Jian, L. (2020). Optimal inventory decisions for a risk-averse retailer when offering
layaway. European Journal of Operational Research, 284(1), 108–120.
Wang, J., Zhao, L., & Huchzermeier, A. (2021). Operations-ﬁnance interface in risk management: Research
evolution and opportunities. Production and Operations Management, 30(2), 355–389.
Wang, T., & Toktay, B. L. (2008). Inventory management with advance demand information and ﬂexible
delivery. Management Science, 54(4), 716–732.
Wu, M., Zhu, S. X., & Teunter, R. H. (2013). Newsvendor problem with random shortage cost under a risk
criterion. International Journal of Production Economics, 145(2), 790–798.
Wu, M., Zhu, S. X., & Teunter, R. H. (2013). The risk-averse newsvendor problem with random capacity.
European Journal of Operational Research, 231(2), 328–336.
Wu, M., Zhu, S. X., & Teunter, R. H. (2014). A risk-averse competitive newsvendor problem under the CVaR
criterion. International Journal of Production Economics, 156, 13–23.
Xu, X., Chan, C. K., & Langevin, A. (2018). Coping with risk management and ﬁll rate in the loss-averse
newsvendor model. International Journal of Production Economics, 195, 296–310.
Yang, F., Niu, Q., Kong, J., & Ang, S. (2020). The impacts of advance-order discounts on a three-echelon
supply chain. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 145, 106498.
Yu, Q. (2020). When providing wait times, it pays to underpromise and overdeliver. Harvard Business Review.
Zhang, D., Xu, H., & Wu, Y. (2009). Single and multi-period optimal inventory control models with risk-averse
constraints. European Journal of Operational Research, 199(2), 420–434.
Zhao, X., & Stecke, K. E. (2010). Pre-orders for new to-be-released products considering consumer loss
aversion. Production and Operations Management, 19(2), 198–215.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123