TITLE: Measuring contextuality in investment preferences
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06630-8
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06630-8
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Measuring contextuality in investment preferences
Polina Khrennikova1
Received: 1 June 2024 / Accepted: 22 April 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
This study investigates the role of contextuality in investment preference formation, specif-
ically in global investments and major US stocks. Utilizing the "Contextuality by Default"
framework (Dzhafarov and Kujala in PLoS ONE 8:e61712, 2013; J Math Psychol 74:11–33,
2016), we measure contextuality within a cyclic system of random variables. Through
two experiments, each with four context stimuli, we assess contextuality across various
decision-making scenarios. Our results indicate the presence of "true" contextuality in global
investment decisions, but not in US stock selections. We investigate the determinants of
contextual preference formation, focusing on factors such as future return expectations, risk
perception, and familiarity with stock markets and individual US stocks. Employing logis-
tic regression analysis for the ﬁrst two contexts, we ﬁnd that preferences in foreign stock
markets exhibit instability, indicating context-speciﬁc drivers. On the other hand, familiarity
with individual companies and future return expectations consistently inﬂuence investment
preferences in speciﬁc US stocks.
Keywords Behavioural ﬁnance · Contextuality by default · Experimental ﬁnance ·
Financial decisions · Framing
JEL Classiﬁcation C90 · D8 · D81 · G11 · G41
1 Introduction
In behavioral ﬁnance and economics, preference reversals are largely explained through the
lens of two major contextual factors: framing effects and order effects, which can profoundly
affect agents’ decision-making states. One of the central axioms of Expected Utility Theory
is that preference should be description invariant, also known as context independence. That
is, the way the options are presented should not inﬂuence people’s choices. Starting with the
seminal works by Tversky and Kahneman (1981), and Kahneman and Tversky (1984), the
impact of framing effects on human choices was explored. Other studies documented that
the decision frame can also encapsulate visual and audio stimuli, as well as people’s internal
B Polina Khrennikova
p.khrennikova@utwente.nl
1
University of Twente Faculty of Behavioural Sciences: Universiteit Twente Faculteit Behavioural
Management and Social Sciences, Enschede, The Netherlands
123

Annals of Operations Research
frames, shaped by their personality, background, and emotions (Druckman & McDermott,
2008; Kühberger et al., 1999; Nabi et al., 2020). Framing effects are also immune to, for
example, monetary stimulation with real payoffs (Kühberger et al., 2002). Furthermore,
framing effects become more pronounced when decisions are made under time constraints,
as shown by Guo et al. (2017).
Our work contributes to the literature on contextual behavior in the following ways:
We are proposing a more uniﬁed statistical measurement of preference contextuality in
ﬁnancial decision-making via the analysis of the experimental statistics with the aid of the
CbD (Contextuality by Default) framework,1 to mathematically quantify the “disturbance”
that the various ﬁnancial choice contexts create.
Simultaneously, we enhance the scenarios in which the contextuality emergence is exam-
ined. Secondly, we broaden the scope of existing studies that have measured the contextuality
of random variables with the CbD model in more simulated settings. These settings include
scenarios such as selecting features of heroes in a fairy tale story (Cervantes & Dzhafarov,
2018), choosing among combinations of meals and gifts (Basieva et al., 2019) and recently,
making facial trait judgements (Bruza et al., 2023). We apply these methods to investment-
related decisions, particularly focusing on real choices about stock market investments as
part of portfolio creation.
To the best of our knowledge, our experimental studies represent the ﬁrst attempt to
measure contextual preferences in ﬁnancial decision-making within the framework of the
CbD model. Speciﬁcally, we assess the potential existence of contextuality (as deﬁned by
CbD) through two investment-related experiments. The ﬁrst experiment addresses a macro-
investment context, while the second focuses on domestic US investments, incorporating
pairs of stocks from the DJIA index into a portfolio.
In the ﬁrst study, participants engage with global investments, by choosing between port-
folio allocations of foreign countries’ index funds.2 The investment decisions concern a
selection of stock index funds from eight different countries presented across the contextual
cyclic system. Countries for investments are selected from various geographic regions and
are paired based on their 5-year historical stock market risk premiums, following the method-
ology outlined in Damodaran (2020). We follow up the experiment with a set of questions to
elicit the potential drivers for the speciﬁc investment patterns across contexts. These factors
include among others the perceptions of a region’s risk, expectations of country index returns
and risks, and the level of familiarity and information about the country’s ﬁnancial market.
In the second study, participants are instructed to pick stocks sampled from the Dow
Jones Index (DJIA) and matched according to the company’s sector, beta, and historical
returns. Participants make choices about investing in eight shares presented in four investment
(question) contexts.3 We also elicit respondents’ beliefs about the future performance of the
stocks, familiarity with these stocks, and expectations about the overall US stock market
performance in the future. After completion of both experiments, we administered a series of
1 Thisisamodiﬁedframeworkofanequationusedinquantumphysicstoobservethestrengthsofdependencies
between quantum systems. CbD is developed by Dzhafarov (2003) and Dzhafarov and Kujala (2013, 2016) to
quantify the statistical violations in cognitive data. We will provide a more formal background and deﬁnition
of this framework in the next sections of the paper.
2 From the perspective of US retail investors.
3 We select four investment-choice contexts, corresponding to a contextual system of rank four that is the
classical setup of CbD framework employed in earlier studies (Basieva, et al., 2019; Cervantes & Dzhafarov,
2018). The rank four system of measurements is also the most widely known form of the original, quantum
physical Bell inequality tests, due to Clauser et al. (1969).
123

Annals of Operations Research
questions aimed at understanding their ﬁnancial risk tolerance, ﬁnancial literacy, investment
experience, potential overconﬁdence, and cognitive reﬂection.
We designed the two experiments as macro and domestic investment scenarios, informed
by prior studies indicating a more pronounced emergence of contextuality in less familiar
and uncertain contexts (Busemeyer & Bruza, 2024; Haven & Khrennikova, 2018; Pothos
et al., 2017; Schwarz, 2007; White et al., 2014). Additionally, research on familiarity and
home bias suggests that investors exhibit stronger and more stable preferences for stocks
and markets with which they are more familiar and knowledgeable (Ackert & Church, 2009;
Ackert et al., 2005).
We recruited U.S.-based participants for our study via the M-Turk platform, and our
sample size was 837 participants.
Our analysis, conducted within the framework of the Contextuality by Default (CbD)
model, demonstrates that contextuality, extending beyond mere informational disturbance, is
apparent in the initial experiment concerning global investments. However, this contextuality
is absent in the experiment involving investments in stocks selected from the DJIA index,
where only informational disturbance is observed.
We conduct a binary logistic regression for the ﬁrst two contexts to identify potential
inﬂuencing variables (e.g., return expectations, risk attitudes, and certain personal variables)
and assess their stability across contexts. The results indicate that explanatory variables are
unstable in the ﬁrst experiment, while preferences for speciﬁc stocks in the second experi-
ment remain relatively consistent and are primarily driven by familiarity and higher return
expectations.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we survey the
current state of research on contextual preferences, notably framing and order effects, with a
focus on investment settings. We assess how models derived from quantum physical formal-
ism have the potential to quantify such manifestations of preference reversals. In Sect. 3 we
provide a more formal deﬁnition of the CbD framework. In Sect. 4 we detail our methodology
and experimental design. In Sect. 5 we present the ﬁndings of our contextuality analysis. We
conduct an additional analysis using binomial logistic regression to identify the main fac-
tors that could shape speciﬁc investment patterns and determine whether these factors differ
between contexts. This analysis is performed for the ﬁrst two contexts.
In Sect. 6 we stipulate a general discussion of the observed results and evaluate the possible
inﬂuential factors of contextual investment preferences. In Sect. 7 we conclude and offer some
recommendations and directions for further research on contextuality analysis in ﬁnancial
decision making.
2 Literature review
In the realm of ﬁnancial decision-making, investment preferences can be signiﬁcantly inﬂu-
enced by both external and internal frames of the decision-makers as demonstrated in the
studies by Kumar and Lim (2008) and Ross and Simonson (1991). These frames, acting as
cognitive lenses, can shape how decision-makers perceive and interpret information, thereby
affecting their ultimate choices. Kumar and Lim (2008) associate narrow frame adoption in
portfolio performance evaluation with less clustered trades giving rise to a disposition effect
type behavior and portfolio under-diversiﬁcation. De Martino et al. (2006) delve deeper into
the neuro-psychological processes underpinning preference formation under negative and
positive decision frames, showing that susceptibility to framing is jointly driven by personal
123

Annals of Operations Research
characteristics and the exogenous environment. It can encompass a broader range of factors,
including investors psychological state, market conditions, socio economic factors, and the
intricate interplay of these elements.
Another enduring manifestation of contextuality, known as order effects, has been exten-
sively explored in marketing research, opinion polls, and surveys (De Jong et al., 2012;
Hogarth & Einhorn, 1992). The statistics of preference reversals, when questions, or more
broadly random variables, are measured in a different order have been widely explained with
the aid of frameworks of constructive processes (Atmaspacher & Romer, 2012; White et al.,
2014). Decisions are not pre-stored in human cognition but are formed in the process of pos-
ing the question that acts akin to a “measurement” of the human cognitive system, thereby
altering the subsequent decision outcomes.
The manifestation of order effects in ﬁnancial settings has been examined in the context
of investors’ perceptions of a company’s earnings announcements (Alexander & Ang, 1998;
Frederickson & Zolotoy, 2016), as well as in evaluations of price charts featuring distinct
sequences of negative and positive returns (Grosshans & Zeisberger, 2018).
Another explanation for preference reversals in joint versus separate representation of
prospects (choices), as a form of exogenous framing, was proposed in the works by Hsee
(1996) and Hsee et al. (1999). The “evaluability hypothesis,” as formalized in these works,
offers an attention-based explanation for preference reversals. It suggests that a joint repre-
sentation of options reveals previously hidden salient feature “weights” that are assigned to
the attributes of the prospects. However, in separate evaluations, an underweighting of these
attributes occurs. This type of preference inconsistency can be documented as another man-
ifestation of contextual preference formation. This contextuality phenomenon has a close
link to the mathematical formalization of contextual preferences within the Contextual-
ity by Default Theory (Dzhafarov, 2003; Dzhafarov & Kujala, 2013, 2016), which will
be considered next. In the behavioral ﬁnance literature, there is ample evidence on how
preference reversals occur. However, uniﬁed analyses of the deviations between observed
statistical violations of choices and those predicted by classical probability theory (as pos-
tulated by Kolmogorov, 1950) remain limited. The CbD framework seeks to bridge this
gap by mathematically quantifying the impact of contextual inﬂuences on decision-making
statistics. To exemplify, in the Kolmogorovian set-theoretic approach, order effects would
not naturally occur, as the joint distribution of independent random variables can always
be attained. This means that the sequence of measurements does not alter their probabil-
ity distributions. Mathematically, this suggests that for a pair of random variable questions
(A, B) with dichotomous outcomes (+ /−), a joint probability can always be derived, such
that, p(A = +, B = −) = p(B = −, A = +). The presence of order effects, or “distur-
bance,” induced by the question context can be viewed as a deviation from the axioms of
classical probability that underpin neoclassical decision-making frameworks (Hogarth &
Einhorn, 1992; Wang et al., 2014). The ﬁndings on the existence of order effects in various
decision-making domains highlight the complex interplay between context and decision-
making, challenging traditional models and calling for a more nuanced understanding of
these processes.
In addition to extensive psychological research on these effects, an alternate body of
literature in mathematical psychology and economics has sought to quantify their impact on
human judgment and explain them through the lens of quantum measurement theory.
Research examining the contextuality of random variables through the CbD framework
aims to connect traditional quantum theory with experimental studies in human cognition
and decision-making. The core question these studies seek to address is: Can the contex-
tuality in decision-making statistics be captured with the aid of some (modiﬁed) models of
123

Annals of Operations Research
classical probability theory, or is its manifestation too strong, necessitating other (more gen-
eral) frameworks to depict its magnitude? Another important question is how to quantify
contextuality in decision-making statistics and identify any regularities in its emergence.
Some studies have approached contextuality in judgment and decision-making through
genuine quantum physical formalism, while others have quantiﬁed its emergence as a
violation of joint distributions based on classical probability theory. The ﬁrst stance of
behavioral research evaluates contextuality as a departure from ‘classicality’ with the aid
of the foundational tests of (non) satisfaction of Bell’s inequality in various setting such
as e.g., decision-making, visuals, semantics4 (Aerts et al., 2000; Bruza et al., 2015; Conte
et al., 2008; Khrennikov, 2000). Recent studies by Dzhafarov and Kujala (2013), Asano
et al. (2014), as well as generalized probability models of order and disjunction effects in
Wangand and Busemeyer (2013), Wang et al. (2014), Khrennikova (2014) formalize con-
textuality in various decision contexts, from voting behavior to investments, as a deviation
from classical probabilistic reasoning. Gallus et al. (2023) document that correlations vio-
lating Bell’s inequalities can be observed in the timeseries of various SandP500 stocks, with
certain industries exhibiting a more pronounced non-classical structure in stock return cor-
relations. This is consistent with recent research in risk management (e.g., Grundke & Polle,
2012), which identiﬁes speciﬁc patterns in the stochastic dependency structures between
asset returns across different industries and time periods.
The violation of Bell’s inequalities indicates that signiﬁcant connections exist between the
states of a system, pointing to the non-separability of these states. In psychological language,
it means that the interconnectedness between random variables within a system transcends
the classical bound, whereby they form an inseparable ‘whole’ with each other in a given
context. In this work, we do not delve into a deeper discussion of quantum mechanical inter-
pretation of entanglement and the emerging non-locality. Instead, our research follows a
different path that seeks to determine the level of non-decomposability in cognitive phenom-
ena represented by systems of random variables formalized as part of the CbD framework due
to Dzhafarov (2003), and subsequent developments in Dzhafarov and Kujala (2013, 2016,
and 2017). This framework extends the quantum mechanical concept of contextuality from
violations of the Bell’s inequality to psychological phenomena. Studies of contextuality are
not straightforward for cognitive systems because disturbances, also known as direct inﬂu-
ences, are difﬁcult to experimentally control. The CbD approach provides an extension to the
formalization of Bell’s inequality through the introduction of a parameter that distinguishes
the effects of direct inﬂuences from the genuine (non-classical) contextuality.5
In contextuality analysis, we can quantify the relative weight of information-driven or
causal disturbances across contexts and the remaining contribution of non-explainable con-
textuality. Put differently, the presence of non-classical contextuality implies an impossibility
to model the outcomes of the variables (decision-making tasks) within a single probability
space and points to the non-commutative nature of judgments. We will deﬁne the model for
evaluating the presence of contextuality and the relative impact of direct inﬂuences in the
next section.
Several behavioral studies have been conducted, many of which did not identify con-
textuality beyond the presence of direct inﬂuences. This observation is supported by the
meta-analysis conducted by Dzhafarov et al. (2015). It is noteworthy that recent studies have
4 Due to Bell (1964) and a generalization known as CHSH (Clauser, Horne, Shimony, Holt) inequality, named
after its founders (Clauser et al., 1969).
5 In quantum physics jargon, one would say that the correlations between particles (e.g., electrons) are
non-local and cannot be explained via the causal impact of some preexisting hidden variables if genuine
contextuality is present.
123

Annals of Operations Research
reported a signiﬁcant presence of contextuality in psychological data. For instance, the studies
conducted by Cervantes & Dzhafarov (2018, 2019), as well as the research by Basieva et al.
(2019), have provided evidence for the existence of ‘non-classical’ contextuality in decision
statistics. This suggests that while the presence of contextuality beyond direct inﬂuences may
not be a universal phenomenon, it remains signiﬁcant in speciﬁc decision-making contexts.
3 Theoretical framework
3.1 Contextuality by default model
We brieﬂy present the setup of the CbD framework that aims to mathematically quantify
contextuality as a dissimilarity of random variables. When the context changes, the vari-
able measuring some property (such as a decision-making question, or an investment task)
is replaced by another random variable measuring the same property. One can say that the
“frame” of the other random variable alters the context of measurement for the ﬁrst random
variable and the two random variables form a non-separable “whole” (Basieva et al., 2019;
Bruza et al., 2023). Thus, any single experiment occurs in its unique context, characterized by
its distinctive set of random variables. As articulated by Basieva et al. (2019), the main prob-
lem for the classical probability framework is that the measurements of the random variables
in different contexts become stochastically unrelated and no joint probability distribution of
these measurements can be found. The difference between the two random variables that
measure the same property in different contexts can be found by evaluating their maximal
coupling, as formalized in Dzhafarov and Kujala (2013). CbD serves as a generalization of
the original Bell inequality that can be applied to any cyclic system of random variables with
dichotomous realizations.
Following the formalization by Dzhafarov and Kujala (2016), we hypothesize that a given
context may affect the probability distribution of outcomes associated with a question or
decision-making task, thereby changing the identity of the random variable. More generally,
a random variable Rc
q is given by its content (q) and context (c). Following Basieva et al.
(2019), the content of the random variable can be a speciﬁc question with dichotomous
outcomes.6 When measuring two random variables jointly, we create a question context. To
measure the deviation from the joint distribution across some random variables, the system
of pairwise measurements of these random variables should be cyclical since the last context
contains a joint measurement of questions qn and q1.
For a system of some rank, Rn, we expect the joint probabilities of the pairwise measure-
ments of qn questions in cn contexts to satisfy the following probabilistic bounds (inequality)
to be considered as non-contextual.7 This is formalized mathematically in Eq. (1) and illus-
trated in Fig. 1.
We denote a random variable for the outcomes of the question qi by the symbol, Rqi .
Then, for expected values of their joint measurement across n contexts, we get:
E

Rq1 Rq2

+ E[Rq2 Rq3] + ...E[Rqn−1Rqn] −E[Rqn Rq1] ≤n −2
(1)
6 Analysis of random variables with more outcomes is also possible, see Cervantes and Dzhafarov (2019).
7 We allude to the joint probability distributions of the above random variables measured in different contexts,
forming a contextual system as depicted in Fig. 1. We omit the ‘conjunction’ sign for simplicity.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Pairwise measurements in a cyclic system of rank N
For a R4 system, widely explored in experimental settings (Basieva et al., 2019; Cervantes
& Dzhafarov, 2018), the required inequality for the system to be non-contextual is:
E

Rq1 Rq2

+ E

Rq2 Rq3

+ E

Rq3Rq4

−E[Rq4Rq1] ≤2
(2)
As noted, another important feature of CbD theory is that it separates between contextual
inﬂuences of a direct, casual nature (i.e., some news that changes the choice outcome or
the direct impact of the other jointly measured variable) and a true contextuality (i.e., no
new information, or disturbance of a decision-making state) as ﬁrstly discussed in Dzhafarov
(2003). When accounting for the possible impact of direct inﬂuences the inequalities in
Eqs. (1–2) would be modiﬁed to include the so-called “delta” term.“Delta” () captures the
contribution to the presence of contextuality of the direct inﬂuences due to, e.g., informational
disturbance. Since cognitive systems cannot be fully isolated from internal and external
disturbances, (in contrary to experiments on genuine quantum systems), some presence of
direct inﬂuences will be detected in cognitive experiments.
E

Rq1 Rq2

+ E

Rq2 Rq3

+ ...E

Rqn−1Rqn

−E

Rqn Rq1

− ≤n −2
(3)
To compute the maximum coupling in a rank N cyclic system and account for the effect
of direct inﬂuences, we can deﬁne a function D as the difference between the Sodd function
and the direct inﬂuences term. Following the deﬁnition of question-random variables in
Eqs. (1–3), the functions Sodd and  can be deﬁned through the expected values of random
variables across each measurement context, e.g., E

R1
1 R1
2

denoting the expected value of
c1 measurement. We also reverse the inequality if we would like to observe the presence of
genuine contextuality:
D = Sodd

E

R1
1 R1
2

, E[R2
2 R2
3], .., E[Rn
n Rn
1]) −(n −2) − > 0
(4)
As mentioned, the main contribution of CbD to the original CHSH inequality is the
consideration of the impact of informational disturbance (also called “direct inﬂuences”
or “signalling) that can be interpreted as causal impact of cross-inﬂuence of the jointly
measured random variables, plus other possible factors such as memory, and the external
123

Annals of Operations Research
frame. Mathematically, the term  (“delta”) measures the differences between the response
frequencies to the same question across n contexts. It is given as:
 =
E

R1
1

−E

Rn
1
 +
E

R1
2

−E

R2
2
+, .., |E

Rn−1
n

−E[Rn
n]|
(5)
Since we only considered R4 cyclic systems in our studies (the most widely analysed
system following the original CHSH inequality from quantum physics) we deﬁne following
special form of the Sodd function following Basieva et al. (2019):
D = Sodd(

R1
1 R1
2

, E[R2
2 R2
3], E

R3
3 R3
4

, E

R4
4 R4
1

) −(4 −2) − > 0
(6)
For four contexts we compute Sodd as the maximum real number over the following
combinations of correlations between 4 contextual measurements where the number of minus
signs appearing should be odd (in this case either 1 or 3 times), Sodd = max |[±c1 ± c2 ±
c3 ±c4]|. We note that to obtain this maximal coupling, i.e., Sodd(1,1, 1, −1) = 4, one needs
to have one contextual measurement with the opposite correlation sign to the other three
contextual measurements for R4 cyclic system.
Similarly,  is given by:
 =
E

R1
1

−E

R4
1
 +
E

R1
2

−E

R2
2
 +
E

R2
3

−E

R3
3
 +
E

R3
4

−E

R4
4

(7)
Online Appendix 1 (Eqs. A1.1—A1.4) details the computations of the cyclic combination
of correlations between the expected values of dichotomous variables across the four contexts.
These computations determine the maximum value of the previously deﬁned Sodd func-
tion.
3.2 An overview of different cyclic systems studied in recent experiments
Following the tradition of previous studies of contextuality analysis we depict below the
“content-context” matrix for a system,R4.
In the system from Table 1, we have 4 such pairwise measurements, where each measure-
ment is denoted as question context, i.e., c1..c4.
Recent experiments of contextuality by Cervantes and Dzhafarov (2018) and Basieva et al.
(2019) explored the systems of ranks R3 and R4, the latter, displayed in Table 1. One can
surely generalize such a system to a Qi × C j matrix, where the mathematics will become
more complex as one would need to compute the maximal couplings for exponentially many
contextual outcomes. Another issue pertains to the violation of the assumption of consistent
Table 1 General setup of a contextual system
R1
1
R1
2
c1
R2
2
R2
3
c2
R3
3
R3
4
c3
R4
1
R4
4
c4
q1
q2
q3
q4
System ε( R4)
Table 1 presents the context- content matrix for contextual measurements of rank-4 system (R4)
123

Annals of Operations Research
connectedness within the system. As the complexity of the system grows, direct inﬂuences
naturally emerge due to the increased level of information noise.
3.3 Order effects and R2systems
Order effects related to two questions asked in different order as well as joint evaluation of
choice problems can be depicted as a rank two (R2) contextual system. This is the simplest
form of a system of random variables. Order effects can emerge within preference formation,
judgments, and impressions (Khrennikova, 2014; Pothos et al., 2017; Wang & Busemeyer,
2013; White et al., 2014). The presence of order effects has been widely attributed to the
constructive processes in our cognition, when preferences are not pre-recorded in our memory
but constructed in the process of e.g., asking a question, deciding about investments, or
formingmoregeneralpreferencesaboutmatters(seealsoKahneman&Snell,1992).8 Against
this backdrop, Einhorn and Hogarth (1981) also speak of a so-called “problem space”, which
relates to different possible cognitive representations of the same decision-making tasks that
would yield a different perception of the problem.9
Another example of a frame is the jointversus separate evaluation of objects or alternatives,
as formalized in the evaluability hypothesis by Hsee (1996) and Hsee et al. (1999). These
contextual preferences between joint and case-by-case evaluations are explained through
attention shifting. The ‘weights’ placed on various attributes in terms of desirability are
different in case-by-case and simultaneous evaluation settings. Notably, in joint evaluation
lower weights might be attached to the same attributes that could be due to informational
disturbance or a negative interference of preferences for these attributes (Dzhafarov, 2003;
Haven & Khrennikova, 2018; Wang et al., 2014). Such an interference has been also observed
in time-separated judgements, as demonstrated by Waddup et al. (2023), where memory can
serve as an additional information channel, establishing a “recollection as a correlation
between queries at present and memories for past events” (p.1952).
Within the realm of ﬁnancial decision-making, CbD theory can serve as a unifying frame-
work for understanding and quantifying the sources of contextual preferences in portfolio
construction and diversiﬁcation choices. Evaluating investment preferences within the frame-
work of CbD could offer new insights into investor behavior and, consequently, improve
portfolio management strategies.
4 Methodology
To enrich the ﬁndings on contextuality in the stock investment domain we devised two exper-
iments, focused on global investments and domestic US investments. The ﬁrst experiment
pertained to the allocation of funds in global stock index funds. The second experiment
examined the implications of integrating stocks from the Dow Jones Industrial Index into a
well-diversiﬁed portfolio of U.S. stocks.
8 In the R2 system, only two contexts (c1, c2) are created by the order in which the random variables are
measured. As noted by Cervantes and Dzhafarov (2019), the choice of a sequential measurement, versus a
joint measurement of the two random variables doesn’t affect the results within CbD analysis.
9 The sequence and framing of information (or questions) can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence an individual’s perception
and interpretation. The frame can be external (how the questions are presented) or internal (the cognitive frames
of the decision-maker), which can sometimes be incompatible for different questions and decisions.
123

Annals of Operations Research
We utilized a cyclic system of rank four R4, corresponding to pairwise choices between
eight country index fund investments and eight pairwise stock selections from a major US
stock index. We maintained four contexts to align our setup with previous studies on contex-
tuality. The R4 cyclic system represents a more general case compared to the simplest system
of rank two. Basieva et al. (2019) employed R3 and R4 designs in their experiments, while
Bruza et al. (2023) recently investigated R3 systems. We considered, R4, the highest rank
system used to date, allowing for the collection of more comprehensive contextual statistics
for CbD analysis.10
4.1 Method and participants
Participants for our study were recruited via the M-Turk platform. Previous studies have
demonstrated that this platform provides a good balance between data quality and access
to target respondents, thereby enabling us to target the U.S. population (Goodman et al.,
2013; Kees et al., 2017). We approached participants from the U.S. due to the speciﬁc ﬁnan-
cial decisions they were required to make. The information sheet detailed that this would
be an investment study, thus potentially attracting participants with investment experience
or interest, who might ﬁnd participation more engaging.11 Participants were approached on
April 1st, 2022, and paid for completed experimental surveys a remuneration of $2.5 for the
between-group participation.12 The experimental survey took, on average, 9–10 min to com-
plete. The number of fully completed surveys was 837, with an average of 209 observations
per experimental context. We aimed to collect at least 200 responses per context-treatment
to attain a Cohen’s d effect size of 0.3 with a standard power of 80% and an alpha level of
5%. The average age of the participants was 40 years, with 58% identifying as male and 81%
indicating that they currently invest in ﬁnancial instruments.
Table 2 provides a summary of the demographic and personal characteristics of partici-
pants:
4.2 Experimental design and procedure
As mentioned, we designed 2 experiments with 4 context—treatments in each. Each par-
ticipant was randomly allocated into one of the 4 treatments in each experiment in the
between-group design. In both designs, participants were presented with experiment 1 and
experiment 2. We employed the setup of four contexts in our experiments following the design
of experiments 5–6 in the meta-study of Basieva et al. (2019). This involved the introduction
of a cyclic system rank four, resulting in a total of eight measurements of question-random
variables about investment options.13
At the beginning of the experiments, all participants were presented with a study infor-
mation sheet and informed consent form as well as given two attention check questions. We
outline the experimental setup for experiments 1–2, with the experimental ﬂow summarized
in Table 3.
10 This corresponds to tests of the original CHSH inequality, adjusted for direct inﬂuences.
11 We also used the following ﬁlters, when recruiting the participants: (1) US as geographical location; (2)
95% approval rate, (3) minimum of 100 completed tasks.
12 The survey was distributed on Friday afternoon.
13 To mitigate possible order effects from the presentation format, we implemented a random sequence of
presentations across the four conditions.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Main characteristics of
the sample
Sample
Between subjects (N = 837)
Gender
58% (m), 42% (f)
Average age
40 (st. dev., 12.4)
Current ownership of stocks/other
ﬁnancial instruments
81%
Trading experience (longer than
1 year)
88% (of those, who current
own ﬁn. assets)
Annual household income range for
majority of participants
25% $45,000–65,000
16% $95,000 +
“I consider myself to be above
average investor.”
71%
Other notes:
97% of participants conﬁrmed that they understood the questions of the
study well
70% of participants have studied ﬁnance or business at the university
level, with 28% of them also holding a Master’s, MBA, or PhD
100% of participants conﬁrmed that they currently reside in the U.S
Table 3 Experimental ﬂow
Experiment 1 
“Choosing between 
countries' stock 
markets in a global 
investment setting”. 
Experiment 2 
“Choosing stocks to add 
to a well- diversified 
portfolio of US stocks.” 
 
Financial literacy questions (8 
questions), CR questions (3 
questions), 
self-reported risk- taking, 
gender, age, trading experience, 
investments knowledge. 
Table3displaysthesetupofourexperimentaldesignconsistingof2blocks(experiments1and2)andadditional
questions related to ﬁnancial literacy, trading experience, cognitive reﬂection, personal and demographic
characteristics. Please consult Online Appendix 6 for highlights of survey questions
4.2.1 Experiment 1: Foreign country investments: selecting countries’ stock index
funds
Participants in each investment context were asked to imagine that they are playing the role
of a portfolio manager by managing a well-diversiﬁed portfolio of US stocks (mimicking the
major US index) on behalf of a client. They were next asked to allocate a small fraction of
funds into portfolios of major country stock index funds. Participants were presented with
instructions and asked to conﬁrm that they had read and understood these instructions.
In our study, we adopted a ‘preparation’ procedure following the study of Basieva et al.
(2019) intending to guide participants to simultaneously select country stock index funds
that carry relatively high and low risk as measured by the countries’ equity risk premiums.
For each condition (context), participants were presented with two possible scenarios in a
random order: investing in a pair of high-risk and low-risk ﬁnancial assets or investing in two
high/low-risk assets simultaneously. For the cyclic system design of maximal correlations,
we used the ( ±) investments statistics in the contexts 1–3, and (+ +) or (−−) statistics in
c4.
Before presenting the participants with speciﬁc country investment options, it was impor-
tanttoensurethattheywereengagingwithasettingthatcloselymirroredarealisticinvestment
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Content-context matrix experiment 1
environment. Given that our participants were based in the United States, we utilized it as
the benchmark country for evaluating the investment risk and return expectations associated
with other countries’ ﬁnancial markets.
Experiment 1: data sampling and experimental procedure
The relative risk associated with
investing in country stock index funds was determined by the stock market risk premiums of
these countries. Using the dataset and methodology of Damodaran (2020), we computed the
risk premiums for a variety of countries and regions.14
To promote diversiﬁcation, regions were presented in pairs, consisting of relatively high
and low-risk regions. The same approach was applied to the investment funds of the two
countries within each region. The selection of the choice sets in each context was based on
the ranking derived from the average of the countries’ default and equity risk premiums. In
terms of risk premium computation and country selection, we collected equity risk premiums
for various geographic regions as classiﬁed in Damodaran’s dataset, please consult Online
Appendix 2. After compiling the regional equity risk premiums for the years 2016–2020, we
ranked the nine regions based on the average 5-year risk premium. Regions with the highest
equity risk premium were subsequently excluded from consideration. This approach ensures
a balanced representation of risk across the investment options presented to participants. In
each investment context, participants were presented with a dichotomous choice between
two countries, one from each region. A pairing strategy, inspired by the methodology of
Kilka and Weber (2000), was implemented for the investment countries within each region,
to ensure that the paired countries within each region exhibited similar investment proﬁles
and economic scales.
Content—context matrix
Following the experimental setups in Dzhafarov and Kujala
(2016), and Basieva et al. (2019), we present a content-context matrix for this experiment
schematically in Fig. 2.
We considered four contexts or questions, where four geographic regions were presented
in pairs within each context. The region pairs within each context had dichotomous values (+
= H) and (−= L), corresponding to possible country investment options and their relative
14 Damodaran, A. Country Default Spreads and Risk Premiums. Available at: https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/
~adamodar/, accessed 28/06/2021.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Example of country investment questions given in c1
levels of riskiness. The setup of the dichotomous choice combinations followed a R4 system,
given by a 4 × 4 matrix with 4 contexts (questions) and 4 contents (regions), see Fig. 2.15
Before making their investment choices, participants were instructed to select their global
stock portfolios by combining one low-risk and one high-risk country fund in the ﬁrst three
contexts, and either two low-risk or two high-risk country funds in the fourth context.16 This
condition was explained to participants from the perspective of global diversiﬁcation and
their clients’ risk preferences, as the participants in the experiment acted as fund managers.
As such, the participants had always to select between two possible country investment
combinations as part of their global portfolio management strategy. In c4, the high and low-
risk investments were more correlated by the design. A degree of diversiﬁcation was still
present due to the selection of country investments from different geographic regions with
diverese investment risk proﬁles.
After each context the subjects were asked about their subjective perception of the riskiness
of the four regions relative to the U.S. stock market. This question was devised to account
for the possible impact of participants’ perception of the riskiness of the geographic regions.
Participants were also asked about the motivations behind their speciﬁc country investment
choices.17 In Fig. 3 we exemplify the investment questions from c1.
4.2.2 Experiment 2: adding DJIA shares to a well-diversiﬁed portfolio
The stock selection experiment had the same design as Experiment 1 in terms of question
structure and rank of the cyclic system. Instead of making investment decisions related to
15 The display of high and low-risk countries as well as the position of the regions on the display were
randomised.
16 For the background analysis we have collected all possible correlations (i.e., both negative and positive
correlations for choices in each context, presented in a random order). For CbD analysis, in c4 we used the
statistics on (++) and (–) investments.
17 Please refer to Online Appendix 6 for the types of questions asked.
123

Annals of Operations Research
foreign countries’ stock indexes, participants were instructed to add shares of two companies
from different sectors, part of the Dow Jones Industrial Index, to a well-diversiﬁed portfolio of
large, established US companies’ stocks. Participants were also informed that their portfolio
holdings were equivalent to $28,000 and an equal amount had been invested in each stock.
Upon adding the two chosen stocks, the total portfolio investment would consequently reach
the value of $30,000.
The relative riskiness of the displayed shares was assessed based on their 5-year historical
beta, sourced from the SandP Global Market Intelligence platform, from 2017 to 2021.
Participants who participated in investment contexts, c1 −c3, were instructed to select two
stocks from different sectors in such a manner that they always chose a pair of (H) and low
(L) risk stocks based on their relative betas. The ﬁnancial motivation for such “preparation”
was to avoid picking highly correlated shares and to maintain a sensible level of systemic
risk in their portfolio. In c4, we asked participants to simultaneously select either a pair of
low-risk or high-risk investments. Diversiﬁcation in this setting was achieved by selecting
stocks from different sectors. These instructions were part of the "preparation procedure"
aimed at maximizing correlations between the stock investment statistics.
Before participating in each investment context, participants were shown a table with all
companies, part of the DJIA, their stock ticker, and the sector, to which they belonged.18
As we only needed to select company stocks from four sectors for our experimental study,
we selected the largest sectors that comprise the index at the time of the experiment. The low
and high-beta companies were selected from the following sectors: Technology, Consumer
staples and Discretionary, Financials, and Industrials. Low beta companies had a beta below
one and vice versa for high beta companies.19 We also collected 5-year daily closing prices
for these companies for the period from 2017 to 2021, to get continuously compounded
yearly returns. Next, we excluded from the sample three companies that experienced negative
average returns over the past 5 years. The remaining 20 companies were double sorted
according to their beta and average historical return within each sector. Companies were
paired to have approximately the same betas for the low (L) and high (H) risk stock pairs.
The experimental questions were presented in a format consistent with the visualization
in the content-context matrix, along with a screenshot of the selection task for c1, as depicted
in Figs. 4, 5.
After making the selection of two stocks from the different sectors to add to their existing
portfolio holdings, the participants were asked some follow up questions, (i) their long-term
expectations of returns of the stocks in the choice set, shown on a -30%-30% slider, and
(ii) their self-reported familiarity with the shown companies on a scale of 1–7 stars, where
one star indicated “have never heard of this company” and seven stars indicated “feel very
familiar with the company, its brand/s, and products”. These follow-up questions were asked
to enhance our understanding of the potential determinants inﬂuencing participants’ choices,
particularly as they were required to make investment decisions involving real stocks. Given
that participants were exposed to the real names of these stocks, their decisions may have
been inﬂuenced by various factors identiﬁed in the literature. For instance, stock selection
may be based on perceived knowledge about the company and anticipated high future returns
(Barber & Odean, 2008).
18 Online Appendix 3 provides a detailed overview of the sampled companies from the DJIA sectors, including
their respective 5-year betas.
19 The healthcare sector was excluded from the choice set due to the heightened attention of newsmakers in
the year 2021.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Content-context matrix experiment 2
Fig. 5 Example of the selection task for experiment 2 in c1
Familiarityisalsoanelement,asparticipantsdealtwithlocalU.S.stocksofcompaniesthey
might know as customers, employees, or through intensive news and social media coverage
(Ackert & Church, 2009; Aspara, 2013; Huberman, 2001). Our aim was to observe if these
factors made preferences more deterministic across investment contexts.
4.2.3 Additional questions
After participating in both experiments, participants answered a set of demographic and
personal questions, such as their investment experience, household wealth, current holdings
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Experiment 1 choice statistics
of stocks and other ﬁnancial instruments as well as self-assessed risk-taking in a ﬁnancial
context, etc.
Subsequently, participants were presented with a triad of questions from the cognitive
reﬂection test, a format borrowed from Frederickson (2005), albeit slightly rephrased to cir-
cumvent any recognition effect. We asked participants ﬁnancial literacy questions following
Fernandes, et al. (2014). Finally, we also elicited their subjective perception of their invest-
ment knowledge and whether they consider themselves an above average investor. We used
the results to better understand the characteristics and ﬁnancial awareness of the sample, as
well as to identify potential contextual and universal drivers of investment preferences.20
5 Results
Below, we present the results of investment preference statistics across both experiments.
From the summary of choice statistics across contexts in Figs. 6, 7, we can see that contextual
differences in country investment preferences were more random than in the stock selection
settings. In last context, there is a discernible shift in preferences towards low-risk investment
pairs.
We conducted a X2 test for proportions on the between-group statistics to identify any
signiﬁcant changes in investment preferences across choice contexts. A comprehensive sum-
mary of the test statistics is provided in Table A4.3 (Online Appendix 4).
We can witness that the signiﬁcant differences in choice statistics across investment con-
texts could indicate that preference reversals were driven by contextual factors, i.e., a speciﬁc
20 Please refer to Online Appendix 6 for the formulation of the questions used in our descriptive and inferential
statistics.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Experiment 2 choice statistics
country was chosen more often if considered with some other country in the choice set.21
Marked preference reversals were observed concerning choices between c4 and c1. This phe-
nomenon could be attributed to the increased correlations between high- and low-risk pairs,
creating a disturbance in participants’ preference statistics in the last context.
To explore the existence of ‘contextuality proper’ beyond the statistical differences in
choice preferences across experimental contexts, we will next perform an analysis within the
CbD model.
5.1 Statistical analysis within the CbD framework
5.1.1 Contextual probabilities
We performed contextuality tests following the CbD framework introduced earlier.
For the ease of computations, we introduce probabilities to label the response outcomes for
each contextual answer, as summarised in Online Appendix 4, Tables A4.1–A4.2. Since we
imposed negative correlation constraints on the investment choices (except for last context),
the total probability of an answer j was always the same as its marginal probability. This
approach allowed us to eliminate the "noise" in our computations of response correlations.
The motivation for imposing selection constraints on participants’ investment choices
corresponds with the original study of Basieva et al. (2019), which aimed to: “make the value
of the Sodd as large as possible, increasing the chances of beating ” (p.1929).
21 An examination of frequency tables, A4.1- A4.2 (Online Appendix 4) from Experiment 1 reveals that the
favourite country preference pairs varied across contexts and the choices were relatively random in the ﬁrst
two contexts. Conversely, results of the second experiment demonstrated a more stable preference distribution,
with most participants consistently favoring certain companies, irrespective of the choice context (apart from
last context), where low-risk pair was selected by 52.2% of participants.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Summary of CbD model
computations of contextuality
values
Experiments
1. Country investment
2. DJIA stock selection
D = 2-
1.408
- 0.224
DM
1.42
- 0.228
DF
1.368
- 0.26
Table 4 summarizes the estimated values of D = 2- in experiment
1 and experiment 2. We also computed D values for male and female
participants across all experimental contexts, denoted as DM and DF
respectively. A negative value of D in experiment 2 implies lack of true
contextuality in decision-making statistics
We denote in context (c1) a measurement of random variables R1 and R2 as R1
1 and R1
2.
A value of +1 is assigned to H, and −1 to L. By analogy, we label the probabilities of
measurements in the contexts, c2 −c4. As such, the probability of a realizion of the pair of
choices is given as:
p1 = P

R1
1 = +1, R1
2 = −1

; 1 −p1 = P

R1
1 = −1, R1
2 = +1

p2 = P

R2
2 = +1, R2
3 = −1

; 1 −p2 = P

R2
2 = −1, R2
3 = +1

p3 = P

R3
3 = +1, R3
4 = −1

; 1 −p3 = P

R3
3 = −1, R3
4 = +1

p4 = P

R4
4 = +1, R4
1 = +1

; 1 −p4 = P

R4
4 = −1, R4
1 = −1

(8)
Now, the differences in response distributions (the ‘deltas’) for the same random variable
in different contexts can be expressed with the aid of the probabilities deﬁned above. As
noted earlier, the term  measures the differences between the response distributions for
the same question across the four contexts. If  = 0, then the cyclic system is consistently
connected, and the preference for a certain investment is not inﬂuenced by other investment
options co-presented within the same context. Put differently, there is no “context-sensitivity”
of causal nature in the response data.
 = 2|p1 + p4 −1| + 2|p2 −p1| + 2|p3 −p2| + 2|p4 −p3|
(9)
From Eqs. (6–7) introduced earlier and following Basieva et al. (2019), we introduce a
function “D” that is equal to: (Sodd −2) −. From here, CbD equation takes the simpliﬁed
form:
D = 2 −
(10)
Consequently, if D > 0, then genuine (non-classical) contextuality is present in the
experimental statistics. This indicates the impossibility of representing such data within a
classical probability space.
Our computations of values of D across each experiment are summarised in Table 4.
For Experiment 1, the values of D are positive, indicating a presence of contextuality in the
country investment choices. For Experiment 2, the value of D is negative, suggesting a lack
of contextuality proper across DJIA investment statistics. We further computed D values for
the subsamples of male and female participants to test for possible personal characteristics
that could inﬂuence the emergence of contextuality. We observed that females have a slightly
higher  value across both experiments.22 This result may be attributed to some background
22 We performed a χ2 test for proportions across all contexts and did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant differences
between the choice statistics of males and females.
123

Annals of Operations Research
factors, e.g., higher ﬁnancial literacy levels observed among men or less distraction from
contextual “noise” (Bucher-Koenen et al., 2017).
Following the study of Basieva et al. (2019) and Bruza et al. (2023) we also performed sta-
tistical analysis for the observed D values, with the null hypothesis, D = 0. We constructed
10,000 independent resamples for each experimental context to obtain 95% conﬁdence inter-
vals. For Experiment 1, the interval was [1.088; 1.492], and for Experiment 2, it was [−0.484;
0.072]. For Experiment 1, the conﬁdence interval for D indicates a signiﬁcant presence of
‘true’ contextuality beyond the effect of direct inﬂuences (i.e., the left endpoint is above
zero). In contrast, for Experiment 2, the right endpoints are above zero, indicating a lack
of signiﬁcance with respect to “non-contextuality” (direct inﬂuences approximately equal in
magnitude to the impact of true contextuality).
Contextuality existence in investment statistics can be interpreted through the lens of
“preference construction” and “recorded preferences” as articulated in White et al. (2014).
Contextuality is a complex phenomenon and Pothos et al. (2017) document that its mani-
festation is more pronounced for new, or less recognizable decision-making settings (as has
been documented in experiment 1).
For other choices (such as observed in some contexts of experiment 2), individuals may
possess more established and ﬁrm preferences that are not easily altered. These prefer-
ences are independent of other investments considered, meaning they are not inﬂuenced
by contextual frames, whether internal or external. At the same time, we should interpret
the determinism and stochasticity of preferences with caution when viewed through the lens
of CbD analysis. The unanimity versus heterogeneity of investment choices across a group
of investors, or the determinism versus randomness of choices of a particular investor are
inﬂuenced by two parameters: the Sodd and . These parameters are interconnected in a
complex manner and can be affected by direct (causal) inﬂuences and hidden contextual
factors, which introduce additional stochasticity into the investment statistics.
5.2 Possible drivers of investment preferences
The presence of contextuality can emerge due to hidden variables that inﬂuence preferences
underframesthatappearinformationallyequivalent.Itischallengingtodiscerntherichnessof
contextual factors, especially in the complex environment of investment choices concerning
real ﬁnancial assets. We aim to explore some possible causal variables discussed in earlier
behavioral ﬁnance literature. Due to the limited scope, we have conﬁned our analysis to the
ﬁrst two contexts, c1 −c2.
In experiment 1, we hypothesized that contextuality would be more pronounced in deci-
sions with a greater degree of uncertainty, such as investment choices into foreign markets.
As potential contextual investment drivers, we explored the perception of relative investment
risk across various regions, familiarity, perceived knowledge about the countries, and future
return and risk expectations, given that these countries’ stock indices were perceived as for-
eign investments by US-based participants. We devised a set of logistic regression model
speciﬁcations to investigate whether these factors could inﬂuence investment preferences in
speciﬁc choice contexts.
Concurrently, for experiment 2, we hypothesized that for domestic stocks (from the DJIA),
participants may have some pre-established and ﬁrm preferences, owing to their existing
investment experience, information from ﬁnancial news, or simply “familiarity” with the
company names and their products. Our hypothesis aligns with previous studies by Ackert
123

Annals of Operations Research
et al. (2005) and Aspara (2013), which found that familiarity with a company’s name, recog-
nition of its products and brand, and information on fundamentals can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence
stock preferences.
These preferences are expected to be ﬁrm and unaffected by context, as stocks subject
to familiarity will be perceived as superior investments, independent of other stocks added
to the portfolio. Not only can familiarity with the company and its products trigger a ﬁrm
preference for its shares (Ackert & Church, 2009; Aspara, 2013), but also a belief that the
future expected returns of this company will be higher and the risk lower (Huberman, 2001;
Kilka & Weber, 2000). Therefore, these preferences would likely be concentrated on “stock
picking” as opposed to pursuing, for instance, the beneﬁts of diversiﬁcation. This emphasis
on certain stocks may be attributed to the heightened prior attention towards these companies
and their stocks as ﬁrstly observed in Barber and Odean (2008).
Based on the preceding discussion, we formulated the following hypotheses for our anal-
ysis, which span the contextual statistics of c1 −c2 in experiments 1 and 2:
H1 Familiarity with foreign markets and speciﬁc stocks enhances the inclination to invest in
those assets.
H2 Expectations of increasing future returns positively impact the inclination to invest in
foreign country stock indexes and individual U.S. stocks.
5.2.1 Descriptive statistics of the investment drivers
The tables (Tables 5, 6, 7) below provide descriptive statistics for the possible investment
drivers that we considered for the two experiments. Table 5 shows that the mean and median
risk perceptions for certain regions, particularly the Middle East and Eastern Europe, are
relatively higher than for other regions. This observation aligns with historical regional risk
premiums. We also solicited country-speciﬁc risk and return expectations, along with other
variables, to inform possible factors behind the contextual investment choices.
From the frequency distributions presented in Table 6, participants primarily selected
country investments based on future return expectations and familiarity. To a lesser extent,
their decisions were inﬂuenced by future risk expectations and perceived knowledge about
the countries and their stock markets.
Table 7 summarizes the descriptive statistics for future return expectations and perceived
familiarity levels with each Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) stock, which formed part
of the selection set across the subset of contexts we explored.
Table 5 Experiment 1: summary statistics of risk perception for four geographic regions
Region
N
Min
Max
Mean
St. Dev
Median
Risk_Asia
837
0
10
6.17
2.433
6
Risk_Eastern Europe
837
0
10
6.75
2.266
7
Risk_Middle East
837
0
10
7.21
2.204
8
Risk_Western Europe
837
0
10
5.87
2.922
6
Descriptive statistics for the risk perception variable of the four regions (Asia, Eastern Europe, Middle East
and Western Europe) on a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 = not riskier than the US stock market and 10 = much
riskier than the US market
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 6 Experiment 1: Frequency table of the four dichotomous variables that were indicated as important by
participants in the country investment selection (c1-c2)
C1
C2
"Higher return expectation in the future"
88.3%
85.2%
"Lower risk expectation in the future"
75.2%
71.9%
"Feeling more informed about countries"
72.3%
70.0%
"I feel more familiar with the countries selected"
78.6%
82.3%
"Selection was completely random"
26.2%
26.1%
N
206
203
The percentages indicate the proportion of participants who answered ’yes’ to the above statements. Please
also consult Table A5.2 for deﬁnitions of these question variables and the original survey questions in Online
Appendix 6. Participants predominantly chose investments based on anticipated returns, which were linked to
their familiarity with country indexes. Additionally, an element of randomness inﬂuenced their selections
We observed high familiarity rankings for the same companies across both contexts that
we analysed, with high familiarity often associated with high future return expectations. This
pattern was evident for both high and low-beta stocks. It is evident that familiarity differed
among stocks in investment set, i.e., some stocks were more familiar to participants.23
5.2.2 Binary logistic regression analysis
We examined potential investment determinants across each context utilizing contextual
binary logistic regression models.24 The deﬁnitions of the main factors and control variables,
employed across both experiments, are speciﬁed in Tables A5.1–A5.2 of Online Appendix
5.
Tables 8, 9 present the two model speciﬁcations for experiment 1, highlighting factors
that could impact investment choices across the two contexts.
For the observed country index selection frequency, the impact of predictor variables was
largely unstable and context speciﬁc. We could witness that the risk associated with speciﬁc
regions was a major predictor for choice outcome in c1.25 Many of participants’ invest-
ment choices appeared to be random, as indicated by the signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence of the
‘country random’ variable in c2. Control variables, such as cognitive reﬂection in c1 (with
a positive beta) and investment knowledge in c2 (with a negative beta) reached signiﬁcance
at 0.05 and 0.01 level, respectively. Cognitive reﬂection was a positive factor for selecting
the most popular country investment pair (c1), while investment knowledge was a signiﬁ-
cant factor for selecting the less popular pair (c2). This potentially indicates the impact of
23 It is also possible that participants perceived "familiarity" as relative to other stocks within the choice set,
i.e., contextual. This is an interesting phenomenon to explore in future studies.
24 The dependent variable had a dichotomous outcome, corresponding to the more/less popular country pair
in each context. Context-speciﬁc model speciﬁcations were devised for the two contexts (both experiments).
As part of the logistic regression analysis, we computed a correlation matrix for the predictor variables for
each context analysis. No signiﬁcant multicollinearity was detected.
25 The risk perception of the regions was measured on a Likert scale, where a positive relationship indicated
higher odds of selecting countries from this region (i.e., a positive relationship between perceived riskiness and
investment propensity). The variable ‘country_risk_expectation’ was binary, having an inverse interpretation,
i.e., “yes” corresponding to lower risk perception. A positive beta value in this context denoted a greater
probability of investing in a speciﬁc country perceived as low risk.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 7 Experiment 2: Summary statistics for familiarity and future return expectations (c1-c2)
Context
DJIA companies in the choice set
N
Return expectations (in %)
Familiarity (score 0–7)
Min
Max
Mean
St. Dev
Min
Max
Mean
St. Dev
Median
C1
Apple
212
−30.00
30.00
14.56
8.57
3.00
7.00
5.92
1.12
6.00
Intel
212
−27.00
30.00
10.65
9.29
1.00
7.00
5.08
1.38
5.00
Home Depot
212
−16.00
30.00
9.67
9.11
1.00
7.00
5.35
1.36
5.00
Walmart
212
−21.00
30.00
12.56
7.94
1.00
7.00
5.82
1.22
6.00
C2
JP Morgan Chase
213
−22.00
30.00
12.09
8.73
1.00
7.00
5.26
1.48
6.00
Travelers
213
−19.00
30.00
8.66
9.86
1.00
7.00
4.16
1.75
4.00
Home Depot
213
−23.00
30.00
10.06
8.88
2.00
7.00
5.59
1.30
6.00
Walmart
213
−22.00
30.00
13.54
8.49
3.00
7.00
6.19
0.93
6.00
Participants exhibited higher return expectations for certain stocks, which correlated with their stated familiarity with these stocks
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 8 Panel A, country selection drivers – Binary logistic regression (C1). The dependent variable is taking
value 1 for the more popular country investment pair
Panel A
(I)
(II)
(III)
DV (Hungary (H) ∩China (L) = 1 )
Risk_Asia
0.141 (4.554)**
0.128 (3.419)*
−0.017 (0.014)
Risk_Eastern_Europe
0.042 (0.349)
−0.115 (0.573)
Interaction term risk Asia ×Eastern Europe
0.025 (1.355)
Country_familiar
−0.009 (0.001)
−0.030 (0.006)
−0.034 (0.008)
Country_return_expectation
0.210 (0.200)
0.176 (0.140)
0.139 (0.770)
Country_risk_expectation
−0.347 (1.028)
−0.327 (0.900)
−0.341 (0.969)
Country_informed
0.199 (0.310)
0.212 (0.348)
0.183 (0.258)
Country_random
0.479 (0.310)
0.463 (1.576)
0.416 (1.238)
Risk_attitude
−0.014 (0.030)
−0.013 (0.029)
−0.013 (0.027)
Investments_knowledge
0.008 (0.009)
0.001 (0.000)
−0.002 (0.000)
Fin. Lit
−0.102 (0.842)
−0.097 (0.756)
−0.100 (0.779)
Trading_experience
−0.264 (0.442)
−0.285 (0.513)
−0.286 (0.514)
CR
0.376 (5.772)**
0.375 (5.746)**
0.371 (5.639)**
Gender (m. = 1)
−0.198 (0.437)
−0.186 (0.385)
−0.214 (0.502)
Age
0.000 (0.001)
0.000 (0.001)
0.001 (0.005)
Constant
−0.895
−1.022
−0.055
Nagelkerke R2
0.076
0.078
0.086
Observations
206
206
206
The impact of the perception of the overall riskiness of the regions, where the investment countries were
located in relation to the U.S. market, familiarity with the countries, expectations about future return and risk
proﬁle of the countries, as well as overall risk attitude, CR score and other control variables. Wald test statistics
in parentheses„ *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01
Model (I) speciﬁcation includes risk perception of one region; Model (II) speciﬁcation includes risk perception
of both regions from which the countries’ stock indexes were selected; Model (III) introduces an additional
interaction term, to test for a possible interaction (ampliﬁcation) of joint risk attitude between these two regions
upon choice outcome. We observe that the risk perception of the "Asia" region is a primary driver of the choice
statistics in this context. This effect weakens when the risk perception of the "Eastern Europe" region is also
considered. Besides the positive impact of the CR score, no other signiﬁcant drivers were identiﬁed. This
could suggest hidden joint effects, such as cultural and social background, which we did not account for
hidden factors, such as job-related experience, previous investments, higher business news
coverage or attention to these countries. We recap that the distribution of choices between
the investment pairs in the ﬁrst experiment was largely diverse, suggesting that no group of
participants had a strong preference for speciﬁc investment countries.
The analysis results in Panels C-D for experiment 2, summarized in Tables 10, 11, indicates
that familiarity and future return expectations positively inﬂuenced the likelihood of selecting
the more popular stock pairs (e.g., Apple and Walmart in c1). This consistent pattern across
both contexts suggests the presence of some universal drivers for investment choices, i.e., a
higher degree of determinism.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 9 Panel B, country selection drivers – Binary logistic regression (C2). The dependent variable is binary,
taking the value of 1 for the more popular investment pair
Panel B
(I)
(II)
DV (Italy (H) ∩China (L) = 1)
Risk_Asia
−0.128 (2.817)*
−0.136 (0.091)*
Risk_Western_Europe
0.021 (0.094)
Country_familiar
0.040 (0.008)
0.051 (0.013)
Country_return_expectation
0.679 (1.926)
0.667 (1.841)
Country_risk_expectation
0.712 (4.176)**
0.706 (4.087)**
Country_informed
0.186 (0.264)
0.184 (0.258)
Country_random
−1.045 (7.025)***
−1.065 (7.088)***
Risk attitude
0.061 (0.614)
0.059 (0.581)
Investments_knowledge
−0.276 (8.684)***
−0.278 (8.750)***
Fin. Lit
0.159 (1.487)
0.163 (1.555)
Trading_experience
0.043 (0.010)
0.033 (0.006)
CR
−0.191 (1.363)
−0.176 (1.050)
Gender (m. = 1)
−0.040 (0.014)
−0.27 (0.006)
Age
−0.001 (0.009)
−0.001 (0.006)
Constant
1.116
1.044
Nagelkerke R2
0.189
0.190
Observations
203
203
The impact of the perception of the overall riskiness of the regions, where the investment countries were located
in relation to U.S. market, familiarity with the countries, expectations about future return and risk proﬁle of
the countries, as well as overall risk attitude, CR score and other control variables. Wald test statistics in
parentheses„ *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01
Model (I) speciﬁcation includes risk perception of one region. Model (II) speciﬁcation includes risk perception
ofbothregionsfromwhichthecountries’stockindexesareselectedinC2.Weomittedherethemodelconsisting
of the interaction between the countries’ risk attitudes, as no signiﬁcant impact was detected
6 General discussion
Building upon previous research that uncovered contextuality beyond the boundaries of
informational impact, we endeavored to quantify contextuality in pairwise investment choices
through the perspective of two experiments, concerning global investments and individual
stock selection.
In Experiment 1, we observed contextuality that extended beyond direct inﬂuences. How-
ever, in Experiment 2, the impact of direct inﬂuences was more pronounced, effectively
nullifying the maximum contextual correlations that would otherwise exist (i.e., when 
= 0). We hypothesized, and demonstrated through contextual logistic regression analysis,
that participants’ stock selections were predominantly inﬂuenced by their familiarity with
speciﬁc stocks and their expectations of these stocks’ future returns. The impact of these
predictors was largely consistent across the two contexts we considered in our analysis.
The behavior of participants in country index investments exhibited a higher degree of
randomness: individual choices were less deterministic and more diverse across the entire
sample of participants. This could be yet another element that affected the size of “D” function
in the CbD model as suggested by Basieva, et al. (2019).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 10 Experiment II: Binary logistic regression analysis on DJIA stock selection decision. (The dependent
variable is binary, taking the value of 1 for the more popular stock investment pair).Panel C, DJIA stock
selection drivers (C1)
Panel C
(1)
(2)
(3)
DV (Apple ∩Walmart = 1)
Apple_Return_expectation
0.077 (9.605)***
0.051 (3.669)*
Intel_Return_expectation
−0.058 (5.136)**
−0.046 (3.133)*
Home_Dep._Return_expectation
−0.055 (4.692)**
−0.043 (3.133)*
Walmart_Return_expectation
0.086 (7.562)***
0.084 (6.388) **
Apple_Familiarity
0.585 (10.860)***
0.517 (6.833)***
Intel_Familiarity
−0.446 (7.761)*
−0.397 (5.363)**
Home_Dep_Familiarity
−0.090 (0.342)
−0.008 (0.002)
Walmart_Familiarity
0.332 (4.071)**
0.131 (0.516)
Risk attitude
0.053 (0.391)
0.086 (1.038)
0.074 (0.702)
Investments_knowledge
−0.184 (2.989)*
−0.245 (4.560)**
−0.259 (4.381)**
Fin. Lit
0.081 (0.398)
0.165 (1.564)
0.153 (1.238)
Trading experience
0.635 (1.317)
0.588 (1.096)
0.742 (1.565)
CR
0.295 (2.678)
0.392 (4.783)**
0.365 (3.769)*
Gender (m. = 1)
−0.418 (1.413)
−0.296 (0.704)
−0.372 (1.011)
Age
0.015 (0.994)
0.009 (0.338)
0.014 (0.755)
Constant
−2.084
−0.304
−1.935
Nagelkerke R2
0.235
0.240
0.300
Observations
212
212
212
Model (I) includes the impact of familiarity with the companies in c1 choice set in upon choice statistics.
Model (II) speciﬁcation tests the impact of future return expectations of the choice companies upon selection
outcome. Model (III) includes both factors; future return expectations and familiarity with the companies.
Wald test statistics in parentheses, *p < 0.1; **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01. We observe that familiarity with
speciﬁc companies and expectations of higher future returns are signiﬁcant predictors of investments in these
stocks. Additionally, familiarity with less popular companies indicates a signiﬁcant propensity to choose these
companies, as evidenced by negative betas with respect to the more popular companies
Following the strand of literature on “constructive preferences” we can interpret settings
where contextuality is present as choices across questions/investments containing a degree
of uncertainty or indeterminism (Kahneman & Snell, 1992; Schwarz, 2007; White et al.,
2014; Pothos et al., 2017; and Bruza et al., 2023). Our ﬁndings are also qualitatively similar
to the accounts of “evaluation” studies, on joint versus separate evaluation of questions,
where certain hidden features gain prominence when presented in a joint frame (Hsee, 1996;
Hsee et al., 1999; McKenzie et al., 2002). For instance, in investment settings, the attributes
of individual stocks and the future return/risk expectations of these investments may be
perceived differently when considered in isolation versus in comparison to each other. These
contextual trading patterns can have implications for portfolio composition and equilibrium
asset prices, potentially leading to phenomena such as bubbles and subsequent corrections
(Khrennikova & Patra, 2019).
Our key contribution to the studies on contextual, frame-dependent decision-making is the
potential quantiﬁcation of the degree of these constructive inﬂuences and a deeper analysis
of their multidimensional nature within the Contextuality by Default (CbD) framework.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 11 Panel D, DJIA stock selection drivers (C2)
Panel D
(1)
(2)
(3)
DV (JP Morgan Chase ∩Walmart = 1)
JP Morgan_Return_expectation
0.064 (5.733)**
0.026 (0.706)
Travelers_Return_expectation
−0.093 (11.442)***
−0.050
(2.847)*
Home_Dep._Return_expectation
−0.080 (8.002) ***
−0.066
(4.256)**
Walmart_Return_expectation
0.046 (2.761)*
0.073 (5.401)
**
JP Morgan_Familiarity
0.676 (18.459)***
0.667
(12.979)***
Travelers_Familiarity
−0.793 (20.951)***
−0.751
(15.651)***
Home_Dep_Familiarity
−0.274 (2.533)
−0.230
(1.579)
Walmart_Familiarity
0.293 (2.010)
0.254 (1.283)
Risk attitude
−0.113 (1.156)
−0.130
(1.412)
Investments_knowledge
0.114 (0.734)
0.087 (0.564)
0.100 (0.509)
Fin. Lit
0.058 (0.212)
0.177 (1.940)
0.160 (1.346)
Trading_experience
0.067 (0.019)
0.083 (0.032)
0.306 (0.345)
CR
0.023 (0.14)
0.214 (1.407)
−0.025
(0.014)
Gender
0.119 (0.107)
0.309 (0.793)
0.196 (0.264)
Age
0.014 (0.807)
0.010 (0.487)
0.013 (0.647)
Constant
−0.085
0.107
−0.456
Nagelkerke R2
0.328
0.232
0.384
Observations
213
213
213
Model (I) only includes perceived familiarity with the stocks, model (II) includes future return expectations of
the stocks, and model (III) contains both of these variables. Wald test statistics in parentheses, *p < 0.1; **p <
0.05, ***p < 0.01. In this context, familiarity with certain stocks and higher return expectations are signiﬁcant
drivers of investment decisions. Model (III) shows that familiarity is a signiﬁcant predictor of investment
propensity in the more popular choice set of stocks
This includes a fundamental cognitive state change occurring upon the act of measurement,
preference formation, or investment decision.
We can also talk about the incompatibility of preferences across contexts, where joint
probability (frequency) distribution cannot be considered from the distributions across a
range of contexts (Atmaspacher & Romer, 2012). As highlighted by Bruza et al. (2023),
the indeterminacy of human cognition leads to incompatible decisions that are characteristic
of contextuality. This effect might be attributed to the perceived complexity and ambiguity
of the choices in experiment 1, stemming from limited information about the respective
countries and causing a more contextual perception of these decision tasks, as corroborated
by Venkatraman et al. (2006).
123

Annals of Operations Research
In experiment 2, the perception of uncertainty about the individual stock investments was
lower. The (perceived) knowledge or ‘liking’ of the companies, which is also considered a
manifestation of familiarity and home bias (Ackert & Church, 2009; Ackert et al., 2005),
was a signiﬁcant predictor of the choice statistics. In more familiar settings, investment
preferences exhibit greater determinism, unless other causal factors are introduced, such as
higher betas of the assets or a more familiar stock capturing attention within the investment
choice set. The inﬂuence of information and stock visibility on stock selection is evident in
the second experiment, leading to more stable preferences across contexts.
Investment preferences, like other, more general preferences, examined in earlier studies
on the emergence of contextuality, often don not pre-exist in the human cognitive state.
Instead, they are constructed during the measurement process (e.g., in investment settings)
and are inﬂuenced by a complex interplay of internal and external factors. It is of great interest
for future studies to perform a more granular analysis of such contexts within ﬁnancial market
decisions, both on an individual basis and with respect to aggregate market dynamics.
We also notice that in the present study we aimed to maintain a form of coherence in par-
ticipants’ initial preference states, via rigid contextual investment instructions, as to achieve
the maximal level of contextuality ‘proper’ in their investment choice statistics. Hence, in
our study, "context" served as an instructional device for participants, following previous
studies on CbD analysis in decision-making. Indeed, capturing the real social and ﬁnancial
context through precise instructions and "state preparation" is challenging. Economic agents
may interpret context differently, leading to more heterogeneous investment preferences.
7 Conclusion
This paper represents the ﬁrst attempt to quantify contextuality in a real investment setting.
Our ﬁndings contribute further theoretical and methodological insights, emphasizing the crit-
ical role of context in inﬂuencing decision-making processes, with implications for aggregate
market outcomes.
It is important to further explore and integrate such contextual factors into our economic
behavior models within investment contexts. By doing so, we can gain deeper insights into
the complex dynamics of ﬁnancial decision-making and develop more accurate predictive
models of contextual investment behavior (e.g., under ambiguity).
Ideally, contextuality should be assessed on a more comprehensive scale, for instance, by
considering all combinations of DJIA shares, which would correspond to a system of rank
ﬁfteen (assuming a selection from all composites of the index). Another generalization of the
CbD framework for random variables with multiple realizations was recently proposed by
Kujala and Dzhafarov (2021). Future studies could leverage this modiﬁed model to measure
contextuality in multiset portfolio constructions. A more detailed analysis of the nature of
the direct inﬂuences and their dynamics across different asset classes and investment settings
would also be of interest to shed more light on the distinction between ‘context-sensitive’
statistics and genuine (non-classical) contextuality of investment choices.
Our experimental ﬁndings are the ﬁrst to detect the existence of contextuality, quantify its
inﬂuence, and explore its role in ﬁnancial decision-making and investments. The experiments
were designed to highlight the role of contextuality in ﬁnancial decision-making and to
achieve a substantial violation of contextual inequalities that could surpass the effect of direct
inﬂuences (as asserted in Basieva et al., 2019). In our study, the investment instructions
were formulated to minimize the "noise" in contextual investment statistics as much as
123

Annals of Operations Research
possible. Future studies could investigate more diverse investment settings by relaxing the
initial "priming" to examine the interaction between agents’ heterogeneous investment states
and the external ﬁnancial investment context.
In conclusion, our ﬁndings suggest that further research, particularly in varied invest-
ment environments, could provide valuable insights into how narrow framing and contextual
information inﬂuence investment strategies, diversiﬁcation choices, and ﬁnancial outcomes.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-025-06630-8.
Funding The study is supported by the British Academy/Leverhulme Small Grant Scheme, 2019–2022,
Grant reference: SRG19\190732.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest None.
Ethicalapproval Allproceduresperformedinstudiesinvolvinghumanparticipantswereinaccordancewiththe
ethics standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration
and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Ethics approval from the University of Leicester was
obtained with the number, 24550-pk228-ss/bu:ﬁnance. Informed consent was obtained from all participants
before taking part in the study.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ackert, L. F., Church, B. K., Tompkins, J., & Zhang, P. (2005). What’s in a Name? An experimental examination
of investment behavior. Review of Finance, 9(2), 281–304. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10679-005-2985-7
Ackert, L. F., & Church, B. K. (2009). Home bias: Taking comfort in what you know? International Journal
of Behavioural Accounting and Finance, 1(2), 152–166. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJBAF.2009.026715
Aerts, D., Aerts, S., Broekaert, J., & Gabora, L. (2000). The violation of Bell inequalities in the macroworld.
Foundations of Physics, 30, 1387–1414. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010208819095
Alexander, J., & Ang, J. S. (1998). Do equity markets respond to earnings paths? Financial Analysis Journal,
54, 81–94. https://doi.org/10.2469/faj.v54.n6.2216
Asano, M., Hashimoto, T., Khrennikov, A., Ohya, M., & Tanaka, Y. (2014). Violation of contextual general-
ization of the Leggett-Garg inequality for recognition of ambiguous ﬁgures. Physica Scripta, 89(T163),
Article 014006. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-8949/2014/T163/014006
Aspara, J. (2013). The role of product and brand perceptions in stock investing: Effects on investment consid-
erations, optimism and conﬁdence. Journal of Behavioral Finance, 14(3), 195–212. https://doi.org/10.
1080/15427560.2013.819805
Atmanspacher, H., & Römer, H. (2012). Order effects in sequential measurements of non-commuting psycho-
logical observables. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 56, 274–280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.
2012.06.006
Barber, B. M., & Odean, T. (2008). All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the buying behavior of
individual and institutional investors. The Review of Financial Studies, 21(2), 785–818. https://doi.org/
10.1093/rfs/hhm079
123

Annals of Operations Research
Basieva, I., Cervantes, V. H., Dzhafarov, E. N., & Khrennikov, A. (2019). True Contextuality beats direct inﬂu-
ences in human decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 148(11), 1925–1937.
https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000511
Bell, J. S. (1964). On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics, 1, 195–200.
Bruza, P. D., Fell, L., Hoyte, P., Dehdashti, S., Obeid, A., Gibson, A., & Moreira, C. (2023). Contextuality
and context-sensitivity in probabilistic models of cognition. Cognitive Psychology, 140, Article 101529.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2023.101529
Bruza, P. D., Kitto, K., Ramm, B. J., & Sitbon, L. (2015). A probabilistic framework for analysing the
compositionality of conceptual combinations. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 67, 26–38.
Bucher-Koenen, T., Lusardi, A., Alessie, R. O. B., & Van Rooij, M. (2017). How ﬁnancially literate are
women? An overview and new insights. The Journal of Consumer Affairs, 51(2), 255–283. https://doi.
org/10.1111/joca.12121
Busemeyer, J. R., Bruza, P. D. (2024). Quantum Models of Cognition and Decision. Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge, UK, 2012; 2nd Edition.
Cervantes, V. H., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2019). True contextuality in a psychological experiment. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 91, 119–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2019.05.003
Cervantes, V. H., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2018). Snow Queen is evil and beautiful: Experimental evidence for
probabilistic contextuality in human choices. Decision, 5, 193–204. https://doi.org/10.1037/dec0000072
Clauser, J. F., Horne, M. A., Shimony, A., & Holt, R. A. (1969). Proposed experiment to test local hidden-
variable theories. Physical Review Letters, 23, 880–884. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.23.880
Conte, E., Khrennikov, A., Todarello, O., & Federici, A. (2008). A preliminary experimental veriﬁcation on
the possibility of Bell inequality violation in mental states. Neuroquantology, 6, 214–221. https://doi.
org/10.14704/nq.2008.6.2.181
Damodaran, A. (2020). Country Risk: Determinants, Measures and Implications – The 2020 Edition (July 14,
2020). NYU Stern School of Business. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3653512
De Jong, M. G., Lehman, D. R., & Netzer, O. (2012). State dependence effects in surveys. Marketing Science,
31, 838–854. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.1120.0714
De Martino, B., Kumaran, D., Seymour, B., & Dolan, R. (2006). Frames, biases, and rational decision-making
in the human brain. Science, 313(5787), 684–687. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1128356
Druckman, J. N., & McDermott, R. (2008). Emotion and the framing of risky choice. Political Behavior, 30(3),
297–321. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11109-008-9056-y
Dzhafarov, E. N. (2003). Selective inﬂuence through conditional independence. Psychometrika, 68, 7–26.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02296659
Dzhafarov, E. N., Kujala, J. V. (2017). Contextuality-by-Default 2.0: Systems with Binary Random Variables.
In: de Barros, J., Coecke, B., Pothos, E. (eds.) Quantum Interaction. QI 2016. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol 10106. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-52289-0_13
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2016). Context-content systems of random variables: The contextuality-
by-default theory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 74, 11–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2016.
04.010
Dzhafarov, E. N., Zhang, R., & Kujala, J. V. (2015). Is there contextuality in behavioral and social systems?
Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society A, 374, 20150099. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2015.0099
Dzhafarov, E. N., & Kujala, J. V. (2013). All-possible-couplings approach to measuring probabilistic context.
PLoS ONE, 8(5), Article e61712. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0061712
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. (1981). Behavioural decision theory: Processes of choice. Annual Review of
Psychology, 32, 53–88. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ps.32.020181.000413
Fernandes, D., Lynch, J. G., & Netemeyer, R. G. (2014). Financial literacy, ﬁnancial education, and downstream
ﬁnancial behaviors. Management Science, 60(8), 1861–1883. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2013.1849
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reﬂection and decision making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(4),
25–42. https://doi.org/10.1257/089533005775196732
Frederickson, J. R., & Zolotoy, L. (2016). Competing earnings announcements: Which announcements do
investors process ﬁrst? The Accounting Review, 91(2), 441–462. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr-51294
Gallus, C., Pothos, E. M., Blasiak, P., Yearsley, J. M., & Wojciechowski, B. W. (2023). Bell correlations outside
physics. Scientiﬁc Reports, 13(1), 4394. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-30489-4
Goodman, J. K., Cryder, C. E., & Cheema, A. (2013). Data collection in a ﬂat world: The strengths and
weaknesses of mechanical turk samples. Journal of Behavioural Decision Making, 26(3), 213–224.
https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.1753
Grosshans, D., & Zeisberger, S. (2018). All’s well that ends well? On the importance of how returns are
achieved. Journal of Banking and Finance, 87, 397–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankﬁn.2017.11.002
Grundke, P., & Polle, S. (2012). Crisis and risk dependencies. European Journal of Operations Research,
223(2), 518–528. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2012.06.003
123

Annals of Operations Research
Guo, L., Trueblood, J. S., & Diederich, A. (2017). Thinking fast increases framing effects in risky decision
making. Psychological Science, 28(4), 530–543. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797616689092
Haven, E., & Khrennikova, P. (2018). A quantum-probabilistic paradigm: Non-consequential reasoning and
state dependence in investment choice. Journal of Mathematical Economics, 78, 186–197. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmateco.2018.08.003
Hsee, C. K., Loewenstein, G. F., Blount, S., & Bazerman, M. H. (1999). Preference reversals between joint
and separate evaluations of options: A review and theoretical analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 125(5),
576–590. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.125.5.576
Hsee, C. K. (1996). The evaluability hypothesis: An explanation of preference reversals between joint and
separate evaluations of alternatives. Organizational Behaviour and Human Decision Processes, 67(3),
122–129. https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1996.0067
Hogarth, R., & Einhorn, H. J. (1992). Order Effects in belief updating: The belief-adjustment model. Cognitive
Psychology, 24, 1–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(92)90002-J
Huberman, G. (2001). Familiarity Breeds Investment. The Review of Financial Studies, 14(3), 659–680. https://
doi.org/10.1093/rfs/14.3.659
Kahneman, D., & Snell, J. (1992). Predicting a changing taste: Do people know what they will like? Journal
of Behavioural Decision Making, 5(3), 187–200. https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.3960050304
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values and frames. American Psychologist, 39(4), 341–350.
Kees, J., Berry, C., Burton, S., & Sheehan, K. (2017). An analysis of data quality: Professional panels, student
subject pools, and Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Journal of Advertising, 46(1), 141–155. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00913367.2016.1269304
Kilka,M.,&Weber,M.(2000).Homebiasininternationalstockreturnexpectations.TheJournalofPsychology
and Financial Markets, 1(3–4), 176–192. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327760JPFM0103and4_03
Khrennikov, A. (2000). Non-Kolmogorovian probability models and modiﬁed Bell’s inequality. Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 41(4), 1768–1777. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.533200
Khrennikova, P. (2014). Order effect in a study on US voters’ preferences: Quantum framework representa-
tion of the observables. Physica Scripta, T163, Article 014010. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-8949/2014/
T163/014010
Khrennikova, P., & Patra, S. (2019). Asset trading under non-classical ambiguity and heterogeneous beliefs.
Physica a: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 521, 562–577. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.
2019.01.067
Kolmogorov, A. (1950) [1933]. Foundations of the theory of probability. New York, US: Chelsea Publishing
Company.
Kujala, J. V., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (2021). Contextuality and dichotomizations of random variables. Foundations
of Physics, 52, 13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-021-00469-y
Kühberger, A., Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M., & Perner, J. (1999). The effects of framing, reﬂection, probability,
and payoff on risk preferences in choice tasks. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
78(3), 204–231. https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1999.2830
Kühberger, A., Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M., & Perner, J. (2002). Framing decisions: Hypothetical and real.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 89(2), 1162–1175. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0749-5978(02)00019-6
Kumar, A., & Lim, S. S. (2008). How do decision frames inﬂuence the stock investment choices of individual
investors? Management Science, 54(6), 1052–1064. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1070.0815
McKenzie, C. R. M., Lee, S. M., & Chen, K. K. (2002). When negative evidence increases conﬁdence:
Change in belief after hearing two sides of a dispute. Journal of Behavioural Decision Making, 15(1),
1–18. https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.400
Nabi, R. L., Walter, N., Oshidary, N., Endacott, C. G., Love-Nichols, J., Lew, Z. J., & Aune, A. (2020).
Can emotions capture the elusive gain-loss framing effect? A Meta-Analysis. Communication Research,
47(8), 1107–1130. https://doi.org/10.1177/0093650219832922
Pothos, E. M., Yearsley, J., Shiffrin, R. M., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2017). The rational status of quantum cognition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 146(7), 968–987. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000312
Ross, W. T., & Simonson, I. (1991). Evaluations of pairs of experiences: A preference for happy endings.
Journal of Behavioural Decision Making, 4(4), 273–282. https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.3960040406
Schwarz, N. (2007). Attitude construction: Evaluation in context. Social Cognition, 25(5), 638–656. https://
doi.org/10.1521/soco.2007.25.5.638
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, A. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science,
211(4481), 453–458. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7455683
Venkatraman, S., Aloysius, J. A., & Davis, F. D. (2006). Multiple prospect framing and decision behavior: The
mediational roles of perceived riskiness and perceived ambiguity. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 101(1), 59–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2006.06.005
123

Annals of Operations Research
Wang, Z., Solloway, T., Shiffrin, R. M., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2014). Context effects produced by question
orders reveal quantum nature of human judgments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
111(26), 9431–9436. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1407756111
Wang, Z., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2013). A quantum question order model supported by empirical tests of an a
priori and precise prediction. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5(4), 689–710. https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.
12040
Waddup, O. J., Yearsley, J. M., Blasiak, P., & Pothos, E. M. (2023). Temporal Bell inequalities in cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 30(5), 1946–1953. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-023-02318-4
White, L. C., Pothos, E. M., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2014). Sometimes it does hurt to ask: The constructive role
of articulating impressions. Cognition, 133(1), 48–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2014.05.016
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123