TITLE: Forward–reverse blockchain traceability: promoting electric vehicles with battery recycling in the presence of subsidy
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06108-z
---

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06108-z
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Forward–reverse blockchain traceability: promoting electric
vehicles with battery recycling in the presence of subsidy
Jizi Li1 · Fangbing Liu2 · Justin Z. Zhang3 · Longyu Li4 · João Ferreira5
Received: 9 January 2023 / Accepted: 6 June 2024 / Published online: 26 June 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Electric vehicles (EVs) and their battery recycling have recently garnered heightened atten-
tion from both ﬁrms and consumers, primarily driven by concerns related to environmental
sustainability. However, consumers often grapple with uncertainties regarding the green val-
uation of EVs. Integrating blockchain traceability technology presents a promising solution
to mitigate these ambiguities by providing traceable, immutable, and precise information.
Within this context, this research, grounded in a game-theoretical framework, delves into
the strategies involving blockchain traceability in the pre-purchase and post-purchase stages
of EVs. Speciﬁcally, the paper analytically studies the inﬂuence of three distinct strategies,
namely, non-blockchain traceability, forward blockchain traceability, and Forward–reverse
blockchain traceability, on the willingness of EV manufacturers to adopt blockchain tech-
nology. In addition, the study incorporates two prevalent government subsidies to scrutinize
and contrast their implications on optimal outcomes. The ﬁndings of this study uncover the
nuanced relationship between adopting blockchain traceability and its impact on EV sales.
Notably, the research shows that the positive impact on consumers’ surplus from blockchain
adoption depends on the cost coefﬁcient of green low-carbon levels not exceeding a par-
ticular threshold. Moreover, regarding the use of government subsidies to enhance overall
social welfare, it is shown that the forward blockchain traceability strategy should align with
consumer-oriented subsidies and the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy with
EV maker-oriented subsidies.
Keywords Electric vehicles · Blockchain technology · Forward–reverse traceability ·
Subsidy · Battery recycling
1 Introduction
The automobile industry’s sustainable development has gained growing attention in recent
years due to fossil energy depletion and climate change. Approximately 97% of energy in
the transportation sector originates from fossil sources, which accounts for over 25% of
global carbon emissions (Zhang and Zeng, 2021). As a result, electric vehicles (EVs) have
emerged as a desirable alternative to conventional fuel vehicles in the following lenses (EPA,
2022). First, electricity for accelerating EVs can be mainly generated from green renewable
sources, including solar and wind power, contributing to less reliance on fossil energy and
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
123

678
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
alleviating carbon emissions. Second, EVs have more energy conversion efﬁciency than fuel
vehicles, thus leading to more signiﬁcant energy savings (Sohu, 2020). Third, the lifespan of
EV batteries can be dramatically extended via the secondary use or recycling of retired EV
batteries, thus reducing environmental pollution (Gu et al., 2018).
With these beneﬁts combined with growing consumers’ environmental awareness and
government subsidies, the global EV market has dramatically expanded in recent years (Tora-
man et al., 2023). For example, in 2022, China’s EV sales reached 6.88 million, 1.9 times
of previous year’s sales. This tendency is aligned with the Ali research survey, revealing that
approximately 68% of consumers will purchase EVs in ﬁve years because of EVs’ green
and economic attributes (AliResearch, 2022). However, the whole EV production process
requires consuming a large colossal of energy, particularly in making EV battery electrodes;
this energy consumption primarily relies on ‘dirty’ coal. To deal with consumers’ low-carbon
and green concerns and to meet the government’s carbon-peak and carbon-neutralization
requirement, many EV makers transfer their focus from the green EV products alone to the
whole green supply chain involving EV design, EV manufacturing, battery recycling and
reuse technology, and logistics process (CITICS, 2022; Zhang, 2020).
Although EV makers have actively promoted their green EV products, some consumers are
still suspicious or uncertain about the EV low-carbon and green attributes due to information
asymmetry, mainly because these EV green attributes can not easily be observed in the
EV ex-ante-purchase stage (i.e., the forward manufacturing stage) and the post-purchase
stage (i.e., the reverse recycling stage). For example, in the ex-ante-purchase stage, BYD,
as the worldwide leading EV maker, has built its battery manufacturing plant in Yibin City
of Sichuan Province with green hydroelectricity instead of coal-powered electricity to cut
off carbon emissions (China Daily, 2022). Meanwhile, in the post-purchase stage, BYD has
cooperated with China Tower Corporation and Meituan Bike Sharing for the secondary use of
EV recycled batteries, thus extending battery lifespan and mitigating environmental pollution
(ChinaDaily,2020).Eco-friendlyconsumerswithlittleknowledgeaboutthisinformationwill
hesitate to purchase BYD EVs or will take time to search for EV-related green information,
incurring “non-trivial hassle cost” and deterring their purchase intention.
Blockchain as a digital traceability technology enhances consumers’ perception of EVs’
green attributes from ex-ante to post-purchase. A typical example is that Chery, another of
China’s famous EV makers, utilizes blockchain technology to monitor EV production, usage,
and recycling, ensure the whole process is monitored and any data related to each EV and bat-
tery production, driving, and recycling is encrypted and transferred on the blockchain system,
which guarantees that the source data is safe, reliable, untampered, and not abused (China
Daily, 2022). Consumers can use their own smartphones to scan the quick response code
and obtain traceability information; hence, this signiﬁcantly removes or abates consumers’
valuation uncertainty about EVs’ green attributes.
However, not all EV makers are willing to implement blockchain traceability because they
are unsure whether blockchain adoption could increase EV sales and improve proﬁtability.
Besides, it remains unclear if different types of subsidies offered by the government can
offset EV makers’ costs to encourage their blockchain adoption. Furthermore, EV makers
are uncertain how blockchain traceability implementation (from the ex-ante to the post-
purchase stage) can yield different outcomes. Answers to these questions are still obscure
due to insufﬁcient relevant research.
Against this backdrop, this research develops a game-theoretic model of an EV supply
chain in the presence of government subsidies to explore the optimal solutions and conditions.
The model considers three typical traceability strategies—non, forward, and Forward–reverse
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
679
blockchain traceability strategy—and captures different ex-ante and post-purchase stages.
Speciﬁcally, this study addresses the following research questions.
(1) Under which circumstances will the EV maker adopt blockchain traceability to mitigate
consumers’ uncertainties about EVs’ green and low-carbon values?
(2) What is the best strategy for the EV maker to implement blockchain traceability? Can
the market demand be enlarged or stabilized? Can the EV supply chain performance be
improved?
(3) How do government subsidies differ when offered to the EV maker versus consumers
for different blockchain traceability strategies? Which type of subsidies beneﬁts the EV
supply chain member’s performance and the adoption of blockchain technology? For
the three traceability strategies, how do the critical factors inﬂuence the EV supply chain
and social welfare?
The main novelties of this paper are as follows. First, prior work related to blockchain
adoption has rarely considered different blockchain traceability strategies, which is addressed
in this paper. Speciﬁcally, based on the practices in the EV industry, we examine three
typical blockchain traceability strategies—non, forward, and Forward–reverse blockchain
traceability strategy—in the ex-ante and post-purchase stages and analyze the conditions
to adopt blockchain technology. Second, we explore how two typical government subsidy
policies match different blockchain traceability strategies, which have seldom been studied.
The remaining of this study is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews relevant prior
research. In Sects. 3 and 4, we deﬁne our methodology and research problem. Section 5
describes three blockchain traceability models and presents the main results. In Sect. 6,
by comparing three traceability strategies, we illustrate the optimal blockchain traceability
selection and the related conditions. Section 7 investigates three traceability strategies in the
two subsidy policies and explores consumer surplus, social welfare, and proﬁts. Section 8
concludes the work with proposals for future research.
2 Literature review
Our paper features the impact of different blockchain traceability strategies on the EV maker’s
performance in the context of the supply chain. Thus, we review two streams of literature in
this section: (i) EV supply chains and (ii) blockchain traceability in operation management.
2.1 EV supply chains
A growing amount of literature studies EV supply chains, which are divided into three cate-
gories: EV manufacturing, EV battery recycling, and subsidies (Adnan et al., 2023). For EV
manufacturing, Fan and Chen et al. (2022) examine the outsourcing-manufacturing decision
by EV makers in a two-echelon supply chain. Zhu et al. (2022) analyze the EV manufac-
turing competition in supply chains consisting of a high-end encroachment manufacturer
and an incumbent manufacturer sourcing from the same battery supplier. Wang and Huang
(2021) study the EV manufacturing decision-making in a supply chain with a supplier and
an EV maker and explore how different cooperation modes affect the EV supply chain’s
energy-saving performance and proﬁtability. Addressing the EV battery recycling issue (Gu
and Zhou, 2021), Gu et al. (2018) investigate EV battery recycling in a reused closed-loop
supply chain and obtain the optimal pricing policy between the EV manufacturer and the
re-manufacturer. Zhang et al. (2023) examine three EV battery collection/recycling modes
123

680
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
and the echelon utilization in the context of carbon emission reduction, ﬁnding that when
the collection competition is above a threshold, the co-collection model is inferior, and a
single-channel collection model should be selected. Furthermore, Gong and Gao (2022) pro-
pose a dual-channel EV supply chain consisting of a formal and an informal EV battery
recycler under a subsidy-and-penalty policy. Comprehensively, Zhao et al. (2021) consider
a three-echelon EV supply chain, including a power battery manufacturer, an EV maker,
and a retailer, to study the optimal pricing strategies in three different EV battery recycling
channels.
To study subsidy, Pi (2023) develops three analytical models under the pure subsidy, pure
regulation, and hybrid subsidy-regulation policy, respectively, and examines an automaker’s
entry intention into the EV market under each policy. Chen et al. (2022) speciﬁcally explore
the optimal subsidy rate based on the government’s different goals, namely, social welfare
or governmental utility maximization. Fan and Cao (2020) design the optimal government
subsidy and tariff policies to improve the proﬁt of domestic EV makers and social welfare
in the market where domestic and imported EV makers exist. Additionally, Chen and Ulya
(2019) address the subsidy-penalty mechanism, revealing that the return rate and green efforts
can be improved in retired EV batteries.
Unlike prior studies focusing on EV manufacturing, EV battery recycling, and subsi-
dies, this paper highlights the impact of different EV-supply-chain blockchain traceability
strategies on the EV supply chain member’s performance.
2.2 Blockchain traceability in operation management
The literature on blockchain traceability in operational management mainly covers two
domains: forward and reverse traceability. The former typically involves product quality
(Júnior et al., 2022; Wu & Wang, 2023), counterfeit combat (Choi, 2019; Pun et al., 2021),
logistics process (Liu et al., 2022), information authenticity (Xu & Choi, 2021), while the
latter addresses the topic associated with recycling trace (Cheng et al., 2021).
In view of the forward blockchain traceability, Wu and Wang (2023) use the blockchain to
monitor quality in a supply chain under three modes (agency, reselling, and hybrid contract),
ﬁnd that the platform is most likely to adopt blockchain when the supplier with higher quality
prefers to use the agency contract and another supplier to use the reselling contract. Fan
et al., (2020a, 2020b) identify three factors: traceability awareness of consumers, production
costs, and ease of use, and conﬁrm their critical role in adopting blockchain traceability for
monitoring product quality. In addition, Júnior et al. (2022) reveal that blockchain traceability
has enabled ﬁrms to serve their customers well with a more reliable quality in the shortest
time.
In combating counterfeits, Choi (2019) explores the values of blockchain technology
against forgeries in the diamond industry by considering three models (traditional retail
operations, blockchain technology-supported selling platform, and blockchain technology-
supported certiﬁcation platform). Pun et al. (2021) consider a fake market with a manufacturer
and a deceptive counterfeiter, discovering that blockchain should be used only when the coun-
terfeit quality is intermediate or when customers have intermediate distrust about products
in the market.
Addressing logistics process and information authenticity, Liu et al. (2022) investigate
how blockchain traceability affects a producer’s decision to outsource delivery to a third-
party logistics ﬁrm, revealing that blockchain traceability can resolve the logistics ﬁrm’s
moral hazard and encourage the producer to improve production. Sun et al. (2023) examine
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
681
a blockchain introduction strategy for fresh agricultural enterprises in a competitive envi-
ronment considering consumer traceability preferences and show that when the blockchain
inﬂuencing power meets a speciﬁc range, introducing blockchain technique in the traceability
system could shift demand from traditional enterprises to blockchain enterprises. Xu and Choi
(2021) highlight the green production process under cap-and-trade regulation via blockchain
traceability. They ﬁnd that blockchain traceability’s aptitude to enhance the proﬁtability of a
manufacturer’s ofﬂine channel depends on the cross-channel effect.
Compared with forward blockchain traceability, very few studies have addressed the issue
of reverse blockchain traceability. Cheng et al. (2021) propose a blockchain traceability
platform to manage retired power batteries, thus effectively helping move more spent power
batteriesviaformalrecyclingchannels.Fengetal.(2023)exploretheimpactofvariouscarbon
emission reduction policies on blockchain technology adoption in recycling EV batteries;
three policies are considered—carbon tax, carbon cap-and-trade regulations, and both. Gong
et al. (2023) investigate a supply chain consisting of an OEM, a third-party re-manufacturer,
and a retailer to determine if the OEM should adopt blockchain technology and sell products
directly or indirectly through the retailer.
However, prior literature merely considers forward or reverse traceability disjointly; few
have combined both types of traceability and jointly taken them into account. Our study
involves the traceability in both the ex-ante-purchase stage (forward blockchain traceability)
and the post-purchase stage (reverse recycling blockchain traceability) and compares the
differences between three typical traceability strategies and two subsidy schemes.
3 Research methodology
We employ the Stackelberg game method in this paper because the dynamics of real-world
markets are not always steady and can result in unpredictable changes that exhibit various
ﬁrm’s behaviors. The duopoly Stackelberg model helps analyze such a dynamic competition
between ﬁrms where a leader decides while others follow, i.e., the leader ﬁrm is dominant,
and the follower ﬁrms are adaptable.
In the EV supply chain of this paper, the EV maker is a leader who has a dominant position
with the key green and low-carbon technologies, enabling its stronger price bargaining power
than the downstream retailer (i.e., the follower). Meanwhile, in reality, the EV maker actively
adopts blockchain technology to trace product information covering the ex-ante and post-
purchase stages, but the retailer has to passively respond to this move to strengthen the green
perception of EVs. Hence, a Stackelberg game model is established in our paper to capture
this decision-making process.
Such a game-theoretical frame is utilized to examine three traceability strategies (non,
forward, and Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy) in the EV supply chain with
the consideration of government subsidies. The leader (the EV maker) ﬁrst determines which
traceability strategy to adopt, the corresponding wholesale price, and a green, low-carbon
investment level. Observing the leader’s decision, the follower (the retailer) declares its
retailing price.
The consumer utility theory method is also introduced to yield the EV supply chain
market demand based on consumers’ perceived valuation of the EVs and the related retired
battery secondary use, along with the retailing price and consumers’ time cost for uncovering
EVs’ green, low-carbon values. Afterward, the market demand is utilized to formulate the
proﬁt functions of the EV maker and the retailer, respectively. Finally, we will obtain the
123

682
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
EV supply chain game-equilibrium outcomes with the backward induction method, thus
deducing meaningful insights under three traceability blockchain strategies.
4 Problem formulation
We consider an EV supply chain composed of an EV maker and a retailer, represented by
the superscript ‘M’ and ‘R,’ respectively. The EV maker produces EVs of only one type
and wholesales them to the retailer. Consumers have green preferences, so low-carbon EVs
may enhance their willingness to purchase. The EV maker will invest in both production
process innovation and product innovation to reduce carbon emissions, but the EVs’ green,
low-carbon investment also swells the EV maker’s production costs. The government may
offer subsidies to the EV maker or the consumers in different patterns to accelerate EV green
technology or product innovation.
Based on the Stackelberg game-theoretical framework, the event sequence of this paper
(4 stages) is shown in Fig. 1. In the ﬁrst stage, the government determines its subsidy poli-
cies—whether to offer subsidies to the EV maker or consumers. In the second stage, the EV
maker decides on adopting blockchain technology and traceability strategy, i.e., the non, for-
ward, and Forward–reverse traceability strategy, sub-scripted by ‘NB,’ ‘FB,’ and ‘FRB.’ Due
to the EV maker’s dominant role in the EV supply chain, the EV maker bears the operational
cost of information traceability in blockchain adoption. The unit operating cost under the
forward blockchain traceability strategy is denoted by cb and that under the Forward–reverse
traceability blockchain strategy is crb  δcb(δ > 1).
If the EV maker does not implement blockchain technology, EV consumers may be uncer-
tain about EVs’ green, low-carbon value with an uncertainty degree τ (0 ≤τ < 1). To
mitigate such uncertainties, consumers may spend time identifying EVs’ low-carbon and
green authenticity, resulting in a time cost ct. We use η to represent the consumer sensitivity
coefﬁcient with respect to this time cost. If the EV maker adopts blockchain technology,
consumers will have complete information about the green, low-carbon characteristics of
EVs; thus τ  0.
Furthermore, suppose the EV maker extends to Forward–reverse traceability from forward
traceability. In that case, consumers will know more green, low-carbon information related
to retired EV battery recycling and secondary use because these retired EV batteries for sec-
ondary use can still be utilized in home energy storage after being replaced by new ones due
to safety and environmental concerns (Gu and Zhou, 2021). The secondary use and recycling
of these retired batteries signiﬁcantly increase the total lifespan value of EV batteries, which
Fig. 1 Event sequence
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
683
enhances consumers’ utility of EV purchasing and reduces environmental pollution accord-
ingly (Gu et al., 2018). Without reverse blockchain traceability, the EV maker has to rely on
manual assessment to identify the retiring points and quality of EV batteries, thus leading
to reverse traceability inaccuracy. The manual assessment entails tracing and managing EV
batteries throughout their life span. A lower manual assessment level implies less accurate
retirement timing, inferior quality, and lower green values for consumers. Adopting reverse
blockchain traceability can dramatically diminish inaccuracy in the timings and preciseness
of information in EV supply chains.
As a result, we assume the consumer’s utility obtained from the retired batteries is
q(1 −e−λ), where λ is the EV maker’s manual assessment level of the retired batteries and
q is the reference quality level of retired batteries, which signiﬁes the fundamental bench-
mark for retired battery quality. When the EV maker adopts the Forward–reverse blockchain
traceability strategy, it can precisely identify the status of retired batteries, so the manual
assessment level λ →+ ∞, i.e., consumers’ utility is q. In contrast, if the reverse blockchain
traceability is not implemented, consumers’ utility is q(1 −e−λ), which is less than q.
In the third stage, displayed in Fig. 1, the EV maker determines its green and low-
carbon investment level l and wholesale price w. Following Gong et al. (2023), we assume
the EV maker’s green low-carbon investment cost is a quadratic function kl2
2, where k is
the cost coefﬁcient. To clear the models and not impact the outcomes, we assume that the
EV maker’s production cost is zero.
Finally, the retailer sells to consumers at a retail price p. The heterogeneous consumers’
perceived EV value contains two components: basic value v and green and low-carbon value
θl. Consumers’ basic value of EVs v is uniformly distributed over [0,1], and their green low-
carbon value θl relies on the green low-carbon investment level l and its sensitivity coefﬁcient
θ (Shen et al., 2020). The market size is normalized to 1, where consumers purchase one EV
at most. The main notations in this paper are summarized in Table 1.
5 Equilibrium analysis without subsidies
This section focuses on the basic models under three traceability strategies if the government
determines not to offer subsidies. First, we study the equilibrium of the EV maker and the
retailer for the three blockchain traceability strategies.
5.1 Model under the non-blockchain traceability strategy
Under the non-blockchain traceability strategy (Fig. 2), the EV maker does not adopt
blockchain technology. Thus, the consumer utility function is formulated as
UN B  (1 −τ)(v + θlN B) −pN B −ηct + ξN B
 (1 −τ)(v + θlN B) −pN B −ηct + q(1 −e−λ).
(1)
From Eq. (1), the consumer utility includes ﬁve components: EV basic valuation (v),
consumers’ perceived low-carbon value of EVs (θlN B), price, and information search cost
(i.e., hassle cost), and the perceived value obtained from the retired battery secondary use. τ
indicates the consumer’s uncertainty degree about EV value, including the basic and green
low-carbon value. Additionally, when the EV maker does not adopt blockchain technology,
consumers will spend more time searching for EV-related information, suppressing their
123

684
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
Table 1 The main notations in this paper
Parameters
τ
The degree of consumer uncertainty about the EV basic and green low-carbon value,
0 ≤τ < 1
v
The basic value of the EV
θ
The sensitivity coefﬁcient of consumer surplus,θ ≥0
η
The consumer sensitivity coefﬁcient with respect to time cost
ct
The time cost related to the search for green, low-carbon information on the EVs
ξ
The perceived value obtained from the retired batteries due to their secondary use
q
The reference quality level of retired batteries
λ
The EV maker’s manual assessment level of retired batteries
k
The cost coefﬁcient of green low-carbon level
cb
The unit operational cost under the forward blockchain traceability strategy
δ
The operational cost coefﬁcient under the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability
strategy,δ > 1
d
The demand for EVs
α
The proportion of green low-carbon production cost shared by the
government,0 ≤α < 1
β
The subsidy amount to consumers,0 ≤β < 1
r
The carbon reduction beneﬁt of purchasing an EV
Decision variables
w
The wholesale price of an EV
p
The retail price of an EV
l
The green low-carbon level of EVs
Fig. 2 The non-blockchain traceability strategy
purchase impulses, especially for those relatively sensitive to hassle cost. Meanwhile, a
higher retail price pN B reduces consumers’ desire to purchase EVs. Furthermore, consumers
also perceive the value ξN B of spent batteries after eight-to-ten-year renewals/recycling due
to the secondary use of retired EV power batteries, ξN B  q(1 −e−λ), where ξN B < q.
Consumers determine whether or not to purchase EVs depending on their utility. When
UN B > 0, i.e.,v ≥ˆv  pN B+ηct−q(1−e−λ)
1−τ
−θlN B, consumers will purchase EVs; otherwise,
consumers will quit. The demand is dN B 
 1
ˆv dv, owning to that v is uniformly distributed
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
685
over [0,1]. Thereby, the demand function is formulated as follows:
dN B 
1

pN B +ηct −q(1−e−λ)
1−τ
−θlN B
dv  1+θlN B −pN B + ηct −q(1 −e−λ)
1 −τ
(2)
Therefore, the retailer’s proﬁt function is formulated by
π R
N B(pN B)  (pN B −wN B)dN B
(3)
The EV maker’s proﬁt function is formulated as
π M
N B(wN B, lN B)  wN BdN B −1
2kl2
N B
(4)
Using the backward induction method to derive the equilibrium results by maximizing
the retailer’s and EV maker’s proﬁts, we obtain Lemma 1 as follows (the proof is presented
in the Appendix).
Lemma 1 Under the non-blockchain traceability strategy when k > θ2(1−τ)
4
, the equilibrium
can be obtained as follows:
(1) Retail price, wholesale price, and green low-carbon level:
p∗
N B  3k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)
4k−θ2(1−τ)
, w∗
N B  2k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)
4k−θ2(1−τ)
, l∗
N B  θ(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)
4k−θ2(1−τ)
;
(2) Demand for EVs: d∗
N B  k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)
(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ)) ;
(3) Proﬁts: π M∗
N B  k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)2
2(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ)) , π R∗
N B  k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)2
(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ))2 .
Lemma 1 demonstrates the equilibrium demand and proﬁts of the EV maker and the
retailer under the non-blockchain traceability strategy. Based on the ﬁrst-order condition,
it is implied that π M∗
N B and π R∗
N B decrease with τ and ct. This indicates that consumers’
uncertainty about the green, low-carbon attributes of EVs impairs the proﬁtability of both
the EV maker and the retailer. The rationale is that such uncertainty drives consumers to
search for related information and yields the corresponding hassle cost, particularly for the
more cost-sensitive consumers, so their purchase intention and demand will diminish. As a
result, the EV maker has to mark down the wholesale price, and the retailer lowers the retail
price, intending to lure more consumers to purchase.
5.2 Model under the forward blockchain traceability strategy
If the EV maker introduces the forward blockchain traceability strategy (Fig. 3), the
blockchain traceability merely covers the ex-ante-purchase stage without extending to the
post-purchase stage. In this context, consumers will be well informed of the basic and the
green low-carbon information in the ex-ante-purchase stage (i.e., the forward part). This
enhancesconsumers’purchaseconﬁdenceduetoblockchainensuringEV-relatedinformation
transparency, so consumer uncertainty regarding EV’s basic and green low-carbon informa-
tion will disappear; thus τ  0.
However, for the post-purchase stage (i.e., the reverse part), due to the lack of reverse
blockchain traceability, consumers perceive the same value of the retired batteries at the post-
purchase stage as that under the non-blockchain traceability strategy, i.e., ξFB  q(1 −e−λ).
123

686
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
Additionally, because of blockchain adoption, the EV maker bears an extra related operational
cost (cb). Therefore, the consumer utility function under the forward blockchain traceability
strategy is illustrated by
UFB  v + θlFB −pFB + ξFB
 v + θlFB −pFB + q(1 −e−λ).
(5)
With the same logic, the demand function is derived below:
dFB 
1

pFB−θlFB−q(1−e−λ)
dv  1+θlFB −pFB + q

1 −e−λ
(6)
The proﬁt functions of the retailer and the EV maker are shown as
π R
FB(pFB)  (pFB −wFB)dFB,
(7)
π M
FB(wFB, lFB)  (wFB −cb)dFB −1
2kl2
FB
(8)
Using the same method as that for the non-blockchain traceability strategy, we obtain
Lemma 2.
Lemma 2 Under the forward blockchain traceability strategy, when k > θ2
4 , the equilibrium
outcomes can be obtained as follows:
(1) Retail price, wholesale price, and low-carbon level:
p∗
FB  (k −θ2)cb + 3k(1 + q(1 −e−λ))
4k −θ2
, w∗
FB
 (2k −θ2)cb + 2k(1 + q(1 −e−λ))
4k −θ2
, l∗
FB  θ(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −cb)
4k −θ2
;
(2) Demand for EVs: d∗
FB  k(1+q(1−e−λ)−cb)
4k−θ2
;
(3) Proﬁts
of
the
EV
maker
and
the
retailer:
π M∗
FB  k(1+q(1−e−λ)−cb)2
2(4k−θ2)
,
π R∗
FB  k2(1+q(1−e−λ)−cb)2
2(4k−θ2)2
.
Lemma 2 shows the equilibrium outcomes under the forward blockchain traceability
strategy where the green low-carbon level and the demand decrease with the operational
cost of blockchain. Moreover, retail and wholesale prices are monotonic, along with the
Fig. 3 The forward blockchain traceability strategy
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
687
operational cost of blockchain. Meanwhile, the EV maker’s margin (w∗
FB −cb) and the
retailer’s margin (p∗
FB −w∗
FB) decrease with the operational cost of blockchain. This implies
that the EV maker should carefully balance the relationship between the operational cost of
blockchain and EV-related green information transparency.
5.3 Model under the forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy
When the EV maker leverages the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy (Fig. 4),
the traceability extends from the ex-ante purchase to the post-purchase stage. Hence,
blockchain technology not only eliminates consumers’ uncertainty related to the basic and
green low-carbon information in the ex-ante-purchase stage (the forward part), i.e., τ  0,
but also helps the EV maker precisely identify the optimal retired point and quality level
of EV batteries through the reverse traceability, thus increasing consumers’ utilities from
retired battery secondary use (the reverse part). Hence, for ξF RB  q(1 −e−λ), λ →+ ∞,
consumers’ utility from retired batteries is q. Additionally, because blockchain traceabil-
ity extends from the forward traceability to the reverse one, the operational cost under the
Forward–reverse traceability is higher than that under the forward traceability accordingly,
denoted by δcb(δ > 1). Thereby, under the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy,
the consumer utility function is given by
UF RB  v + θlF RB −pF RB + ξF RB
 v + θlF RB −pF RB + q.
(9)
The demand function can be expressed as follows:
dF RB 
1

pF RB−θlF RB−q
dv  1+θlF RB −pF RB + q.
(10)
The proﬁt function of the retailer and the EV maker is shown as
π R
F RB(pF RB)  (pF RB −wF RB)dF RB,
(11)
π M
F RB(wF RB, lF RB)  (wF RB −δcb)dF RB −1
2kl2
F RB.
(12)
Using the same method as those for the above two traceability strategies, we obtain
Lemma 3.
Lemma 3 Under the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy, when k > θ2
4 , the
equilibrium outcomes can be obtained as follows:
Fig. 4 The Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy
123

688
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
(1) Retail price, the wholesale price, and green low-carbon level:
p∗
F RB  (k −θ2)δcb + 3k(1 + q)
4k −θ2
, w∗
F RB
 (2k −θ2)δcb + 2k(1 + q)
4k −θ2
, l∗
F RB  θ(1 + q −δcb)
4k −θ2
;
(2) Demand for EVs: d∗
F RB  k(1+q−δcb)
4k−θ2
;
(3) Proﬁts of the EV maker and the retailer: π M∗
F RB  k(1+q−δcb)2
2(4k−θ2) , π R∗
F RB  k2(1+q−δcb)2
(4k−θ2)2
.
Lemma 3 illustrates the equilibrium demand and proﬁts of the EV maker and the retailer
under the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy, where the equilibrium decisions
mainly rely on the extra blockchain operational cost and the beneﬁt from the Forward–reverse
blockchain traceability. The following section further explores the decision on blockchain
traceability adoption and compares the performance of different traceability strategies. To
avoid trivial cases, we assume that the condtion, k > θ2
4 , always holds throughout the whole
paper.
6 Optimal blockchain traceability strategy selection
Although blockchain traceability can ease consumers’ uncertainty about EVs’ basic and green
low-carbon information and effectively enhance the precise assessment of near-retirement
battery quality for secondary usage, it inevitably increases the EV maker’s operational cost.
To this end, we next examine the circumstances under which the EV maker leverages the
blockchain technology and what kind of blockchain traceability strategy is optimal or more
suitable for the EV maker, the retailer, or consumers, and evaluate its impact on decision-
making with respect to price, demand, and green low-carbon level.
Proposition 1 The EV maker prefers to choose the non-blockchain traceability strategy if and
only if cb > max{cb, ˜cb}; The EV maker prefers to choose the forward blockchain traceability
strategy if and only if ˆcb < cb < cb; The EV maker prefers to choose the Forward–reverse
blockchain traceability strategy if and only if cb < min{ˆcb, ˜cb},
where ˆcb  qe−λ
δ−1 , cb  1 + q(1 −e−λ) −

4k−θ2
(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ))(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −ηct −τ)
and ˜cb  1
δ (1 + q −

4k−θ2
(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ))(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −ηct −τ)).
Proposition 1 implies the conditions for the EV maker to be proﬁtable when adopting
blockchain traceability strategies and choosing a speciﬁc blockchain traceability strategy.
Speciﬁcally, when the operational cost of blockchain is at a higher level, exceeding a certain
threshold, i.e., cb > max{cb, ˜cb}, the EV maker will not adopt the blockchain technology.
Based on this, if the operational cost of blockchain falls in a lower range, i.e., ˆcb < cb < cb,
the forward traceability strategy is the EV maker’s best choice, and if the operational cost of
blockchain is even lower, the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy is the optimal
strategy.
These outcomes are consistent with the implications in practice. The insight is that the
beneﬁts generated by blockchain adoption should cover the related incremental costs. In
particular, such a beneﬁt is not conﬁned to the EV maker but to social welfare. This is also
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
689
why governments expect to issue relevant policies to incentivize EV makers to adopt new
technology actively. For instance, governments offer tax reductions or direct subsidies to
lower the innovation pressure, including blockchain adoption.
We also derive the following propositions by comparing the optimal outcomes with and
without blockchain adoption.
Proposition2 Thecomparisonofretailer’sproﬁtandconsumersurplusunderthreestrategies
is as follows:
(1) The retailer’s proﬁt is better off for blockchain technology adoption when cb < max{cb,
˜cb}, while consumer surplus increases when cb < max{cb, ˜cb} and k < (2−τ)θ2
4
.
(2) The retailer and consumers beneﬁt more from the forward blockchain traceability strat-
egy than the Forward–reverse strategy if and only if cb > ˆcb. In contrast, they beneﬁt
more from the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy than the forward strat-
egy if and only if cb < ˆcb.
Proposition 2 illustrates that when the unit operating cost of blockchain technology falls in
the middle and lower range, blockchain enables the retailer and the consumers to be better off
if the cost coefﬁcient of green low-carbon level is below a certain threshold. The EV maker’s
adoption of blockchain traceability strategy has two different effects on the retailer. From
Lemmas 2 and 3 (Sect. 4), we observe that the EV maker’s operational cost of blockchain
reduces the retailer’s proﬁt. However, the retailer’s sales revenue increases when consumers
eliminate their valuation uncertainty due to the traceability and reliability of the information
via blockchain technology. When the latter effect dominates, the retailer’s proﬁt will increase
when the EV maker adopts the blockchain traceability strategy. Moreover, consumers beneﬁt
from blockchain adoption as blockchain traceability enables them to easily obtain basic and
green low-carbon information without hassle, thus enhancing their surplus.
Additionally, the retailer and consumers prefer the Forward–reverse over the forward
blockchain traceability when the unit operating cost of blockchain technology is lower, i.e.,
cb < ˆcb. The reason is that the incremental gains from the retired battery recycling and
secondary usage offset the additional blockchain operating cost under the Forward–reverse
traceability strategy. However, if the unit operating cost of blockchain technology is at a
higher level, i.e., cb > ˆcb, the retailer’s proﬁt and consumers’ surplus will decline under the
Forward–reverse traceability strategy. As a result, they will prefer the forward rather than the
Forward–reverse blockchain traceability.
Proposition 3 The comparison of retail prices under three strategies is as follows:
(1) When λ > ˆλp and τ < ˆτ p, p∗
N B > p∗
FB > p∗
F RB; when λ > ˆλp and ˆτ p < τ < τ p,
p∗
FB > p∗
N B > p∗
F RB; when λ > ˆλp and τ > τ p, p∗
FB > p∗
F RB > p∗
N B.
(2) When λ < ˆλp and τ < ˆτ p, p∗
N B > p∗
F RB > p∗
FB; when λ < ˆλp and ˆτ p < τ < τ p,
p∗
F RB > p∗
N B > p∗
FB; when λ < ˆλp and τ > τ p, p∗
F RB > p∗
FB > p∗
N B;
where
ˆτ p 
(4k−θ2)((3ηct+cb)k−cbθ2)
θ2(k−θ2)cb+3(1+q(1−e−λ))k+3(4k−θ2)k ,
ˆλp  ln

3kq
cb(δ−1)(θ2−k)
 
and
τ p  (4k−θ2)((k−θ2)δcb+3k(ηct+qe−λ))
θ2(k−θ2)cb+3(1+q)k+3(4k−θ2)k .
Proposition 3 shows that the retail prices under different strategies are affected by the
manual assessment level of retired batteries λ. When the EV maker implements blockchain
traceability, if the manual assessment level of retired batteries λ surpasses the value ˆλp,
123

690
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
Fig. 5 The retail price relations between the three strategies
the retail price for the forward traceability strategy is greater than that for the Forward–re-
verse strategy. Conversely, if the manual assessment level of retired batteries λ is below
the value ˆλp, the retail price for the forward traceability strategy is lower than that for the
Forward–reverse strategy. This implies that the lower manual assessment level induces the
retailer to increase its price with Forward–reverse traceability, but the higher manual assess-
ment level drives up the retailer’s price with forward traceability. The rationale of this result
is that when the high manual assessment level reaches the maximal level, it is unnecessary to
implement blockchain reverse traceability. Although reverse blockchain traceability signiﬁ-
cantly improves the assessment level of retired batteries, more related costs may be incurred
accordingly. In this way, the higher manual assessment level for the forward traceability strat-
egy could afford the retailer more capacity to increase its price. However, the lower manual
assessment level induces the retailer to implement blockchain reverse traceability to allevi-
ate consumers’ uncertainties about retired battery recycling. The related blockchain-adopted
cost inevitably leads to an increase in retail price.
To better illustrate Proposition 3, we apply a numerical example by setting k  10, q  10,
and η  5; thus, we have λ  3. Furthermore, we set τ  0.25 and τ  0.5, representing a
low and high value; the related parameter values, including those in the following numerical
analysis, are based on the work by Gu et al. (2021) and Liu et al. (2023). As illustrated in
Fig. 5, when adding the non-blockchain traceability strategy to comparing the retail prices,
although the prices for the two blockchain traceability strategies remain unchanged, the
retail price for the non-blockchain traceability strategy changes with the degree of consumer
uncertainties about the EV green low-carbon value τ (Fig. 5). Speciﬁcally, when the degree
of consumer uncertainty is at a lower level (τ < ˆτ p): p∗
N B > p∗
FB > p∗
F RB or p∗
N B >
p∗
F RB > p∗
FB, the retail price for the non-blockchain traceability strategy is always highest,
followed by the other two blockchain traceability strategies. When the uncertainty degree is
at a medium level (ˆτ p < τ < τ p): p∗
FB > p∗
N B > p∗
F RB or p∗
F RB > p∗
N B > p∗
FB, the retail
price for the non-blockchain traceability strategy is always in the middle among the three
strategies. When the uncertainty degree is at a higher level (τ > τ p): p∗
FB > p∗
N B > p∗
F RB
or p∗
F RB > p∗
FB > p∗
N B, the retail price for the non-blockchain traceability strategy is
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
691
invariably the lowest among the three strategies. It intuitively implies that when consumers
are more uncertain about the EV green low-carbon value for the non-blockchain traceability
strategy, it is prudent for the retailer to lower the retail price to attract consumers, thus
offsetting their green concerns.
Proposition 4 The comparison of wholesale prices under three strategies is as follows: (1)
When q < ˆqw and η < ˆηw, w∗
N B > w∗
FB > w∗
F RB; when q < ˆqw and ˆηw < η < ηw,w∗
FB >
w∗
N B > w∗
F RB; when q < ˆqw and η > ηw, w∗
FB > w∗
F RB > w∗
N B. (2) When q > ˆqw and
η < ˆηw, w∗
N B > w∗
F RB > w∗
FB; when q > ˆqw and ˆηw < η < ηw, w∗
F RB > w∗
N B > w∗
FB;
when q > ˆqw and η > ηw, w∗
F RB > w∗
FB > w∗
N B;
where
ˆqw  (δ−1)(θ2−2k)
2e−λk
,
ˆηw  θ2(2k(τ(q(e−λ−1)−cb)+3cb)−cbθ2(1−τ))−8k2(cb+τ)
2kct(4k−θ2)
and
ηw  2k(1+q(1−e−λ)−τ)(4k−θ2)−(4k−θ2(1−τ))((2k−θ2)δcb+2(1+q)k)
2kct(4k−θ2)
.
Proposition 4 reveals that when the reference quality of retired batteries q < ˆqw, the
wholesale price for the forward traceability strategy is higher than that for the Forward–re-
verse strategy, i.e., w∗
FB > w∗
F RB. On the contrary, when q > ˆqw, the wholesale price
for the forward traceability strategy is lower than that for the Forward–reverse one, i.e.,
w∗
FB < w∗
F RB. This indicates that setting a relatively higher reference quality for retired
batteries enables the EV maker to increase its wholesale price with the Forward–reverse
blockchain traceability strategy. In contrast, a relatively lower reference quality results in the
EV maker’s unwillingness to raise its price. The reason is that with a higher reference quality
in the absence of the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability, the unreliability and inaccu-
racy of the manual assessment could lead to consumers’ perceived value of retired batteries
being far less than the actual reference quality level, thus lowering consumers’ purchase
EV intention. Therefore, the EV maker has no choice but to leverage the Forward–reverse
blockchain traceability strategy, aiming to remove consumers’ green information ambiguity.
The corresponding blockchain adoption cost will also reﬂect the wholesale price increment.
Additionally, to better illustrate Proposition 4, we demonstrate a numerical example by
setting k  10, λ  2, and τ  0.3; thus, we have q  5.6. Furthermore, we set η  5.7 and
η  6.5, representing a low and high value. As illustrated in Fig. 6, when considering the
non-blockchain traceability strategy, the sensitivity coefﬁcient of time cost η plays a critical
role. When the time cost coefﬁcient η is at a lower level (η < ˆηw), the wholesale price for
the non-blockchain traceability strategy is always the highest among the three strategies.
When the time cost coefﬁcient η is at a medium level (ˆηw < η < ηw) and at a higher level
(η > ηw), the wholesale price under the non-blockchain traceability strategy is the second
and lowest among the three strategies, respectively. This implies that if consumers are less
sensitive to time costs, the EV maker may have more space to increase its wholesale price
for the non-blockchain traceability strategy than the two blockchain traceability strategies.
Proposition 5 The comparison of demand and the green low-carbon level for three strategies
is shown as follows:
(1) For the EV demand, (i) if cb > ˆcb and η < ˆηd, d∗
N B > d∗
FB > d∗
F RB; if cb > ˆcb and
ˆηd < η < ηd, d∗
FB > d∗
N B > d∗
F RB; if cb > ˆcb and η > ηd, d∗
FB > d∗
F RB > d∗
N B;
(ii) if cb < ˆcb and η < ˆηd, d∗
N B > d∗
F RB > d∗
FB; (iii) if cb < ˆcb and ˆηd < η < ηd,
d∗
F RB > d∗
N B > d∗
FB; if cb < ˆcb and η > ηd, d∗
F RB > d∗
FB > d∗
N B;
(2) For the green low-carbon level, (i) if cb > ˆcb and η < ˆηl, l∗
N B > l∗
FB > l∗
F RB; if cb > ˆcb
and ˆηl < η < ηl, l∗
FB > l∗
N B > l∗
F RB; if cb > ˆcb and η > ηl, l∗
FB > l∗
F RB > l∗
N B;
123

692
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
Fig. 6 The wholesale price relations between the three strategies
(ii) if cb < ˆcb and η < ˆηl, l∗
N B > l∗
F RB > l∗
FB; (iii) if cb < ˆcb and ˆηl < η < ηl,
l∗
F RB > l∗
N B > l∗
FB; if cb < ˆcb and η > ηl, l∗
F RB > l∗
FB > l∗
N B,
where
ˆηd  1 + q(1 −e−λ) −τ
ct
−(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −cb)(4k −θ2(1 −τ))(1 −τ)
(4k −θ2)ct
,
ηd  1 + q(1 −e−λ) −τ
ct
−(1 + q −δcb)(4k −θ2(1 −τ))(1 −τ)
(4k −θ2)ct
,
ˆηl  (ηct −(1 −τ)cb)θ2 + 4k(cb −τ −ηct)
θ2τ(1 −e−λ)
,
and
ηl  4k(δcb −τ) −(δcb(1 −τ) + qτ)θ2 −(4k −θ2)qe−λ
(4k −θ2)ct
.
Proposition 5 illustrates that, given the adoption of blockchain technology, when the unit
operational cost falls in a higher range (cb > ˆcb), the demand and the green low-carbon level
for the Forward–reverse traceability strategy are better than the forward traceability strategy,
i.e., d∗
F RB > d∗
FB and l∗
F RB > l∗
FB. When the unit operational cost falls in a lower range
(cb < ˆcb), the demand and the green low-carbon level for the forward traceability strategy
are higher than the Forward–reverse strategy, i.e., d∗
FB > d∗
F RB and l∗
FB > l∗
F RB.
To better illustrate Proposition 5, we show a numerical example by setting k  10,
q  10, and λ  2; thus, we have cb  1. Then, η  2.2 and η  5.3; η  3.7 and η  4.5,
representing a low and high value. As illustrated in Fig. 7, when comparing three strategies,
we should consider the inﬂuence of the time cost coefﬁcient η. Figure 7 illustrates that the
demand and the green low-carbon level are not always higher in the presence of blockchain
adoption. Speciﬁcally, adopting blockchain technology can increase demand and enhance the
green low-carbon level when the time cost coefﬁcient is relatively large. However, when the
time cost coefﬁcient is moderate or small, the adoption of blockchain leads to lesser demand
and a lower green, low-carbon level. The reason is evident; although blockchain traceability
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
693
Fig. 7 The demand and the low-carbon level relations between the three strategies
eliminates consumers’ time cost, it also triggers a higher retail price, but if the time cost
coefﬁcient falls in the moderate or small range, the positive effect of time–cost saving could
be eroded by the incremental retail price, thus leading to consumers’ demand decline, and in
turn, negatively impact the low-carbon level.
7 Analysis of models with subsidies
To promote EV sales and encourage EV makers to invest in EVs’ green, low-carbon innova-
tion related to the production process and products, the governments usually offer subsidies
to EV makers or consumers (Bian et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2018). In this paper, we do not con-
sider the subsidy to retailers because the government does not offer this in practice, owning
to retailers’ less critical role in EV development than other agents. Next, we examine the
impact of two typical subsidy policies on blockchain traceability.
7.1 Subsidies to the EV maker
We use the subscript ‘NM,’ ‘FM,’ and ‘FRM’ to denote three strategies for the subsidy-to-EV-
maker policy. The subsidy scheme for EV makers is widely adopted worldwide, including in
the EU, USA, and China (Bian et al., 2020). In this subsidy scheme, the governments bear a
portion of the cost of EV maker investment, which we assume the proportion as α.
Thereby, the EV maker’s proﬁt functions under three strategies are given by
π M
N M(wN M, lN M)  wN MdN M −1
2kl2
N M(1 −α),
(13)
π M
F M(wF M, lF M)  (wF M −cb)dF M −1
2kl2
F M(1 −α),
(14)
π M
F RM(wF RM, lF RM)  (wF RM −δcb)dF RM −1
2kl2
F RM(1 −α).
(15)
Using the same method as before, we obtain Lemma 5.
123

694
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
Lemma 5 With the subsidy to the EV maker, the EV maker will choose the forward
traceability strategy if and only if ˆcStoM
b
< cb < cStoM
b
and the Forward–reverse trace-
ability strategy if and only if cb < min{ˆcStoM
b
, ˜cStoM
b
}, where cStoM
b
 1 + q(1 −e−λ)
−

4k(1−α)−θ2
(1−τ)(4k(1−α)−θ2(1−τ))(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −ηct −τ), ˆcStoM
b
 qe−λ
δ−1 , and ˜cStoM
b
 1
δ (1 + q
−

4k(1−α)−θ2
(1−τ)(4k(1−α)−θ2(1−τ))(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −ηct −τ)).
Lemma 5 shows that the EV maker will adopt the forward traceability strategy if the
blockchain’s unit operational cost is at a medium level. If the unit operational cost is lower,
it will convert to the Forward–reverse traceability strategy. Since ˆcStoM
b
, cStoM
b
and ˜cStoM
b
are related with α, the proportion of government subsidy policy and the blockchain’s unit
operationalcostimpacttheEVmaker’sdecisiontoadoptblockchaintechnology.Itveriﬁesthe
robustness/validation of the blockchain traceability models and indicates that the government
should increase subsidies to encourage EV makers at the nascent stage of EV and blockchain
traceability development.
7.2 Subsidies to consumers
We use the subscript ‘NC,’ ‘FC,’ and ‘FRC’ to denote three strategies for the subsidy-to-
consumers policy (Yu et al., 2018). Assume that the government offers a subsidy ratio β
to consumers purchasing EVs. To this end, the utility functions of consumers under three
strategies are demonstrated by
UNC  (1 −τ)(v + θlNC) −pNC(1 −β) −ηct + ξN B,
(16)
UFC  v + θlFC −pFC(1 −β) + ξFB,
(17)
UF RC  v + θlF RC −pF RC(1 −β) + ξF RB.
(18)
Using the same method as before, we obtain Lemma 6.
Lemma 6 With the subsidy to consumers, the EV maker will select the forward trace-
ability strategy if and only if ˆcStoC
b
< cb < cStoC
b
and the Forward–reverse traceabil-
ity strategy if and only if cb < min{ˆcStoC
b
, ˜cStoC
b
}, where cStoC
b

1
1−β (1 + q(1 −e−λ)
−

4k(1−β)−θ2
(1−τ)(4k(1−β)−θ2(1−τ))(1+q(1 −e−λ)−ηct −τ)), ˆcStoC
b

qe−λ
(δ−1)(1−β), and ˜cStoC
b

1
δ(1−β)
(1 + q −

4k(1−β)−θ2
(1−τ)(4k(1−β)−θ2(1−τ))(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −ηct −τ)).
Like Lemmas 5, 6 shows that the government subsidy policy to consumers still inﬂu-
ences the EV maker’s decision to adopt blockchain technology and also veriﬁes the
robustness/validation of the blockchain traceability models. Further comparative analysis
of subsidies to consumers and EV makers, in terms of the member’s proﬁt, consumer sur-
plus, and social welfare for three strategies, are presented in the following subsection.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
695
7.3 Comparative analysis
7.3.1 Proﬁt and consumer surplus analysis
Proposition 6 For the non-blockchain traceability strategy, the relation of the optimal proﬁts
and consumer surplus under two subsidy policies are shown as follows:
(1) ProﬁtoftheEVmaker:ifα > β,π M∗
N M > π M∗
NC > π M∗
NB ;otherwise,π M∗
NC > π M∗
NM > π M∗
NB ;
(2) Proﬁt of the retailer: if α > αR
N B, π R∗
N M > π R∗
NC > π R∗
NB; otherwise, π R∗
NC > π R∗
NM > π R∗
NB.
(3) Consumer surplus: if α > β, CSN M > CSNC > CSN B; otherwise, CSNC > CSN M >
CSN B.
where αR
N B  (4k−θ2(1−τ))√1−β−θ2(1−τ)−4k(1−β)
4k(1−β+√1−β)+θ2(1−τ)
.
Proposition 6 shows that, for the non-blockchain traceability strategy, the proﬁt of both the
EV maker and the supply chain and consumer surplus are always higher than those without
subsidies, which is consistent with the ﬁndings by Gu et al., (2019 and Pi (2023). However,
there are differences between the two subsidy policies. From Proposition 6-(i), we can see
that when the subsidy proportion to the EV maker is higher than to the consumers, i.e., α > β,
the EV maker will gain higher proﬁts from the EV maker subsidy scheme, but if the subsidy
proportion to the consumer is greater than that to the EV maker, i.e., α < β, the EV maker
will gain more proﬁt from the subsidy-to-consumer policy.
Proposition 6-(ii) implies that only a higher subsidy to the maker can ensure the highest
proﬁts for the retailer under the EV maker subsidy scheme. Proposition 6-(iii) shows that
when the subsidy degree to the EV maker is greater than that to the consumers, i.e., α > β,
the consumer surplus will be higher in the subsidy-to-EV-maker scheme. Otherwise, the
consumer surplus will beneﬁt more from the subsidy-to-consumers program.
The ﬁndings reveal that the higher subsidy-to-EV-maker policy or lower subsidy-to-
consumer policy always beneﬁts the EV maker and consumers, but the retailer is better off
only with the higher subsidy-to-EV-maker policy, which is different from the prior work. This
interesting ﬁnding indicates that, under the non-blockchain traceability strategy, the higher
subsidy-to-EV-maker policy is the better choice for the government because it motivates the
EV maker, the retailer, and the consumers.
Proposition 7 For the forward traceability strategy (under the Forward–reverse traceability
strategy), the relation of optimal proﬁts and consumer surplus with two subsidy policies is
shown as follows:
(1) Proﬁt of the EV maker: if α >
4βk
4βk+θ2 and q > q M
FB(q > q M
F RB), π M∗
F M > π M∗
FC > π M∗
FB
(π M∗
F RM > π M∗
F RC > π M∗
F RB);otherwise,π M∗
FC > π M∗
F M > π M∗
FB (π M∗
F RC > π M∗
F RM > π M∗
F RB);
(2) Proﬁt of the retailer: if α > αR
FB(α > αR
F RB), π R∗
F M > π R∗
FC > π R∗
FB(π R∗
F RM > π R∗
F RC
> π R∗
F RB); otherwise, π R∗
FC > π R∗
F M > π R∗
FB(π R∗
F RC > π R∗
F RM > π R∗
F RB);
(3) Consumer surplus: if α > β and q > qCS
FB(q > qCS
F RB),CSF M > CSFC > CSFB
(CSF RM > CSF RC > CSF RB); otherwise, CSFC > CSF M > CSFB (CSF RC >
CSF RM > CSF RB);
where
q M
FB 
1
1 −e−λ (δcb −1 +
βδcb

4k(1 −α) −θ2
(1 −α)(4k(1 −β) −θ2) −

4k(1 −α) −θ2 ),
123

696
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
q M
F RB  δcb −1 +
βδcb

4k(1 −α) −θ2

(1 −α)(4k(1 −β) −θ2) −

4k(1 −α) −θ2 ,
αM
FB  1 −
θ2√1 −β(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −(1 −β)cb)
(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −cb)(4k(√1 −β −(1 −β)) + θ2) + 4kβ√1 −βcb
,
αR
F RB  1 −
θ2√1 −β(1 + q −(1 −β)δcb)
(1 + q −δcb)(4k(√1 −β −(1 −β)) + θ2) + 4kβ√1 −βδcb
,
qCS
FB  βcb(4k(1 −α) −θ2)(1 −β) −θ2(1 −cb)(α −β)
θ2(1 −e−λ)(α −β)
,
qCS
F RB  δcb −1 + βδcb(4k(1 −α) −θ2)(1 −β)
θ2(α −β)
.
Proposition 7-(i) reveals that, with blockchain traceability adopted, when the subsidy
proportion α and the reference quality of retired batteries q are greater than the threshold
values, the EV makers’ proﬁt in the subsidy-to-EV maker policy is much higher than that
in the subsidy-to-consumer policy. This means that if sufﬁcient subsidies are offered and
the higher reference quality level is reached, the subsidy-to-EV-maker policy is the optimal
choice for the EV maker and vice versa.
From Proposition 7-(ii), we can infer that when the subsidy proportion to the EV maker
exceeds a certain threshold value, the retailer can earn more proﬁt with the subsidy-to-EV
maker policy than in the subsidy-to-consumer policy, and vice versa.
Proposition 7-(iii) indicates that when the subsidy to the EV maker is greater than that to
the consumers, i.e., α > β, and the reference quality of retired batteries meets the condition
of q > qCS
FB(q > qCS
F RB), consumer surplus is higher in the subsidy-to-EV-maker program.
Otherwise, consumers will beneﬁt more from the subsidy-to-consumers program.
The ﬁndings interestingly indicate that, for the two blockchain traceability strategies, the
government should adequately determine the subsidy proportions based on the reference
quality of retired batteries; that is to say, if the EV maker has a higher level of retired battery
reference quality, the government should increase subsidies to the EV makers, vice versa. In
this regard, the subsidy policies can be effective and efﬁcient, which is aligned with the work
by Gu et al. (2019), Pi (2023).
7.3.2 Social welfare analysis
Next, we investigate the social welfare (SW), which comprises the EV maker’s proﬁt (π M),
the retailer’s proﬁt (π R), the consumer surplus (CS), the government subsidy (GS), and the
environmental beneﬁt (EB). The environmental beneﬁt here mainly considers the reduction of
carbon emission, i.e., E B  d ×r, where r is the carbon reduction beneﬁts due to purchasing
EVs. Therefore, the social welfare can be formulated as
SW j  π M
j + π R
j + CSj −GSj + E B j,
(19)
where j  N M, F M, F RM, NC, FC or F RC, denoted by two subsidy schemes under
the three traceability strategies.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
697
To better illustrate the social welfare under three strategies in the presence of subsidy, we
conduct numerical analysis to graph the trends of social welfare (Figs. 8, 9, and 10). Among
which, k represents the cost coefﬁcient of low-carbon level.
Observation 1 For the three strategies, the subsidy policies always improve social welfare
compared to the non-subsidy scheme.
Fig. 8 The social welfare under the non-blockchain traceability (q  10, η  5, τ  0.3)
Fig. 9 The social welfare under the forward blockchain traceability (q  10, η  5, τ  0.3)
123

698
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
Fig. 10 The social welfare under the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability (q  10, η  5, τ  0.3)
Observation 2 For the forward blockchain traceability strategy, the social welfare with the
subsidy-to-consumer policy is greater than that with the subsidy-to-EV maker policy. How-
ever, under the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy, the social welfare with the
subsidy-to-consumer policy is less than that with the subsidy-to-EV maker policy.
Observation 3 For the non-blockchain traceability strategy, when the cost coefﬁcient of the
low-carbon level is in the lower range, the social welfare with the subsidy-to-consumer policy
is less than that with the subsidy-to-EV maker policy; when the cost coefﬁcient of the low-
carbon level is in the higher range, the social welfare with the subsidy-to-consumer policy
is larger than that with the subsidy-to-EV maker policy.
Observations 1–3 imply that the subsidy schemes always enhance social welfare for the
three strategies. The outcomes are consistent with Propositions 6 and 7, which show that
the subsidies expand EV sales and bring dividends to the EV maker, the retailer, and the
consumers. This also veriﬁes the robustness/validation of the blockchain traceability models.
Therefore, it is wise for the governments to implement the subsidy policy.
Observations 2–3 interestingly reveal that the different subsidy policies situate the
different blockchain traceability strategies. Speciﬁcally, for the forward blockchain trace-
ability strategy, the government should adopt the subsidy-to-consumer policy, while for
the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy, the government should implement
the subsidy-to-EV maker policy rather than the subsidy-to-consumer policy. The plausible
explanation is that Forward–reverse blockchain traceability covers more stages than forward
blockchain traceability, which reduces more carbon emissions of each EV by means of the
secondary use of retired battery recycling. To this end, the government adopts the subsidy-to-
EV maker policy to encourage the EV maker to decrease the per unit carbon emission, while
the subsidy-to-consumer policy seems to stimulate the total EV sales. In this way, with the
forward blockchain traceability, the subsidy-to-consumer policy reduces carbon emission in
terms of the total amount of sales, thus yielding more social welfare.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
699
8 Conclusions
MotivatedbythegrowingEVconsumers’awarenessoftheenvironmentandtheapplicationof
blockchain traceability, we analytically discuss the optimal blockchain traceability decisions
of the EV maker and the retailer under three blockchain traceability strategies, i.e., the
non-blockchain traceability strategy, the forward blockchain traceability strategy, and the
Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy, and two government subsidy schemes (i.e.,
the subsidy-to-the EV maker scheme and the subsidy-to-consumer scheme), to explore their
impacts on the EV supply chain members.
(1) Main contributions and managerial implications
(i)
Different from previous ﬁndings that blockchain technology yields more market
demand (Niu et al., 2022; Xu & Choi, 2021), our results show that the adoption
of blockchain traceability does not necessarily beneﬁt the EV maker to promote
EV sales and further identify the condition under which the typical blockchain
traceability strategy the EV maker prefers to implement. We ﬁnd that when the
operational cost of blockchain falls in a moderately small range, the forward trace-
ability strategy is the EV maker’s best choice. If the blockchain’s operational cost
is even smaller, the Forward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy is the optimal
strategy. It suggests that the EV maker could adopt the Forward–reverse blockchain
traceability strategy when its sales volume is large or the EV marker is mature so
the larger sales scale can effectively share the blockchain operational cost.
(ii)
Consistent with prior studies (Gu et al., 2019; Pi, 2023), our ﬁndings reveal that
government subsidies increase consumer surplus and social welfare of the EV
supply chain, but it is also observed that, in the setting of the forward blockchain
traceability strategy, the social welfare under the subsidy-to-consumer policy is
larger than that under the subsidy-to-EV maker policy. Conversely, for the For-
ward–reverse blockchain traceability strategy, the subsidy-to-EV maker policy is
better than the subsidy-to-consumer policy. In this regard, policymakers should
adequately adjust the subsidy policies based on blockchain technology and EV
development; for example, at the infant stage of EV development and blockchain
application, subsidy policy may focus on consumers instead of EV makers. After-
ward, at the mature stage, the government should emphasize EV battery recycling
and secondary use, and the related subsidy policy can be turned to focus on EV
makers or both EV makers and consumers.
(iii) The results also illustrate that if the manual assessment level surpasses a thresh-
old value, the retail price under the forward traceability strategy is greater than
that under the Forward–reverse traceability strategy, and vice versa. Additionally,
the time cost coefﬁcient and the degree of consumer uncertainty play a crucial
role, but each can not alone determine the order in wholesale prices under the
forward/Forward–reverse traceability strategy. It means that EV supply chain man-
agers should pay attention to consumers’ purchase psychology and behaviors and
focus more on improving the EV makers’ manual assessment level of retired bat-
teries based on the different blockchain traceability strategies.
(2) Limitations and future directions
There are three main limitations. First, this study only examines an EV maker context,
not considering the scenario where two EV makers compete and determine whether to
adopt the blockchain traceability strategy. Second, the model merely addresses the EV
123

700
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
maker’s bearing the blockchain operational cost, not considering the blockchain cost
allocation between EV supply chain members. Finally, this paper assumes the subsidy
proportion as an exogenous rather than endogenous parameter. In reality, the subsidy
proportion may be a decision variable.
Meanwhile, four potential future research directions are listed below. First, it is worth
researching further the EV supply chain, which involves more carbon footprint echelons
under blockchain traceability. Second, considering the existence of the subsidy-penalty
policy in reality, further analysis of the impact of such a subsidy-penalty policy on
blockchain traceability would be an interesting extension. Third, given the fuel vehicle
domination in the current automobile market, the EV makers’ adoption of blockchain
traceability strategies in the competitive environment can also be a future research direc-
tion. Finally, because consumers are heterogeneous, some may be sensitive to privacy
concerns, while others may not due to blockchain adoption. Thus, this factor can be
incorporated into models for future research scope.
Appendix
ProofofLemma1 In stage 2, the retailer decides p∗
N B to optimize her proﬁt function in Eq. (3).
Since the proﬁt function is concave in pN B, we can obtain p∗
N B  1−τ+w−ηct+l(1−τ)θ+q(1−e−λ)
2
by the ﬁrst-order condition. Substituting p∗
N B  1−τ+w−ηct+l(1−τ)θ+q(1−e−λ)
2
into Eq. (4), we
can obtain the EV maker’s transformed proﬁt function.
In stage 1, the EV maker decides wN B and lN B concurrently. We use the Hessian matrix
to solve the problem of simultaneous decision-making. For constructing the Hessian matrix
of π M
N B, the following calculations are carried out to acquire the ﬁrst and second-order
derivatives of π M
N B to wN B and lN B.
HM 

−
1
1−τ
θ
2
θ
2
−k

The principal minor sequences of this matrix are shown as follows.
|HM|1  −
1
1 −τ < 0
|HM|2 
k
1−τ −θ2
4 > 0 when k > θ2(1−τ)
4
.
Therefore, π M
N B proves to be jointly concave to (wN B, lN B). And its ﬁrst-order partial
derivative characterizes the best-response function, which converges to unique Stackelberg
equilibrium. By setting ∂π M
N B
∂wN B and ∂π M
N B
∂lN B to zero simultaneously, the optimal results can be
obtained: w∗
N B  2k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)
4k−θ2(1−τ)
and l∗
N B  θ(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)
4k−θ2(1−τ)
.
Substituting w∗
N B and l∗
N B into p∗
N B  1−τ+w−ηct+l(1−τ)θ+q(1−e−λ)
2
, we can obtain the
retail price p∗
N B  3k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)
4k−θ2(1−τ)
. Then, by substituting w∗
N B, l∗
N B and p∗
N B into
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
701
Eqs. (2)–(4), we can obtain: d∗
N B  k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)
(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ)) , π M∗
N B  k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)2
2(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ))
and
π R∗
N B  k(1+q(1−e−λ)−ηct−τ)2
(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ))2 .
Proof of Lemmas 2 and 3 The proof is similar to that of Lemma 1 and will not be repeated
here.
Proof of Proposition 1 We prove Proposition 1 by comparing the proﬁts of the EV maker
in three models. By calculating the optimal results in Lemmas 1–3, the analysis results
shown in Proposition 1 can be easily derived by introducing three intermediate vari-
ables cb  1 + q(1 −e−λ) −

4k−θ2
(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ))(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −ηct −τ), ˆcb  qe−λ
δ−1 and
˜cb  1
δ (1 + q −

4k−θ2
(1−τ)(4k−θ2(1−τ))(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −ηct −τ)).
Proof of Proposition 2 We prove Proposition 2 by comparing the retailer’s proﬁts and con-
sumer surplus in three models. Similar to the proof of Proposition 1, we can easily obtain the
intermediate variables cb, ˜cb as well as the restriction k < θ2(2−τ)
4
.
Proof of Proposition 3 We prove Proposition 3 by comparing the retail prices in three models.
By calculating, we have p∗
FB −p∗
N B > 0 when τ > ˆτ p 
(4k−θ2)((3ηct+cb)k−cbθ2)
θ2(k−θ2)cb+3(1+q(1−e−λ))k+3(4k−θ2)k ,
otherwise, p∗
FB−p∗
N B < 0; p∗
F RB−p∗
N B > 0 when τ > τ p  (4k−θ2)((k−θ2)δcb+3k(ηct+qe−λ))
θ2(k−θ2)cb+3(1+q)k+3(4k−θ2)k ,
otherwise, p∗
F RB −p∗
N B < 0; p∗
F RB −p∗
FB > 0 when λ < ˆλp  ln(
3kq
cb(δ−1)(θ2−k)); otherwise,
p∗
F RB−p∗
FB < 0. Combining the above analysis, we can obtain the conclusion of Proposition
3.
Proof
of
Proposition
4 We
prove
Proposition
3
by
comparing
the
retail
prices
in
three
models.
By
calculating,
we
have
w∗
FB −w∗
N B
>
0
when
η > ˆηw  θ2(2k(τ(q(e−λ−1)−cb)+3cb)−cbθ2(1−τ))−8k2(cb+τ)
2kct(4k−θ2)
; otherwise, w∗
FB −w∗
N B
<
0;
w∗
F RB −w∗
N B > 0 when η > ηw  2k(1+q(1−e−λ)−τ)(4k−θ2)−(4k−θ2(1−τ))((2k−θ2)δcb+2(1+q)k)
2kct(4k−θ2)
,
otherwise, w∗
F RB −w∗
N B < 0; w∗
F RB −w∗
FB > 0 when q > ˆqw  (δ−1)(θ2−2k)
2e−λk
; otherwise,
w∗
F RB −w∗
FB < 0. Combining the above analysis, we can obtain the conclusion of
Proposition 4.
Proof of Proposition 5
(1) For
the
EV
demand,
by
calculating,
we
have
d∗
FB −d∗
N B
>
0
when
η > ˆηd  1+q(1−e−λ)−τ
ct
−(1+q(1−e−λ)−cb)(4k−θ2(1−τ))(1−τ)
(4k−θ2)ct
, otherwise, d∗
FB −d∗
N B < 0;
d∗
F RB −d∗
N B > 0 when η > ηd  1+q(1−e−λ)−τ
ct
−(1+q−δcb)(4k−θ2(1−τ))(1−τ)
(4k−θ2)ct
, otherwise,
d∗
F RB −d∗
N B < 0; d∗
F RB −d∗
FB > 0 when cb < ˆcb  qe−λ
δ−1 , otherwise, d∗
F RB −d∗
FB < 0.
Combining the above analysis, we can obtain the conclusion of Proposition 5-(1).
(2) For the green low-carbon level, by calculating, we have l∗
FB −l∗
N B
> 0 when
η > ˆηl  (ηct−(1−τ)cb)θ2+4k(cb−τ−ηct)
θ2τ(1−e−λ)
, otherwise, l∗
FB −l∗
N B < 0; l∗
F RB −l∗
N B > 0
when η > ηl  4k(δcb−τ)−(δcb(1−τ)+qτ)θ2−(4k−θ2)qe−λ
(4k−θ2)ct
, otherwise, l∗
F RB −l∗
N B < 0;
123

702
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
l∗
F RB −l∗
FB > 0 when cb < ˆcb  qe−λ
δ−1 ; otherwise, l∗
F RB −l∗
FB < 0. Combining the
above analysis, we can obtain the conclusion of Proposition 5-(2).
Proof
of
Lemma
5 The proof is similar to that of Proposition 1. We prove
Lemma 5 by comparing the proﬁts of the EV maker in three models under
the
subsidies
to
the
EV
maker.
By
calculating,
the
analysis
results
shown
in
Lemma
5
can
be
easily
derived
by
introducing
three
intermediate
vari-
ables
cStoM
b
 1 + q(1 −e−λ)−

4k(1−α)−θ2
(1−τ)(4k(1−α)−θ2(1−τ))(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −ηct −τ),
ˆcStoM
b
 qe−λ
δ−1 and ˜cStoM
b
 1
δ (1 + q −

4k(1−α)−θ2
(1−τ)(4k(1−α)−θ2(1−τ))(1 + q(1 −e−λ) −ηct −τ)).
Proof of Lemma 6 The proof is similar to that of Lemma 5 and will not be repeated here.
Proof of Proposition 6
(1) For the proﬁt of EV maker, by comparing π M∗
N M, π M∗
NC and π M∗
N B, we can deduce that
π M∗
N M > π M∗
N B and π M∗
NC > π M∗
N B are always hold; and π M∗
N M > π M∗
NC when α > β, other-
wise, π M∗
N M < π M∗
NC.
(2) For the proﬁt of retailer, by comparing π R∗
N M, π R∗
NC and π R∗
N B, we can deduce
that π R∗
N M > π R∗
N B and π R∗
N M < π R∗
N B are always hold; and π R∗
N M > π R∗
NC
when
α > αR
N B  (4k−θ2(1−τ))√1−β−θ2(1−τ)−4k(1−β)
4k(1−β+√1−β)+θ2(1−τ)
, otherwise, π R∗
N M < π R∗
NC.
(3) For the consumer surplus, by comparing CSN M, CSNC and CSN B, we can deduce that
CSN M > CSN B and CSNC > CSN B are always hold; and CSN M > CSNC when
α > β, otherwise, CSN M < CSNC.
Proof of Proposition 7 The proof is similar to that of Proposition 6 and will not be repeated
here.
Funding Open access funding provided by FCT|FCCN (b-on). National Natural Science Foundation of China
(71964023); and Key Project of Philosophy and Social Sciences of Hubei Province’s Education Department
(22D021).
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adnan, Z., Chakraborty, K., et al. (2023). Pricing and green investment strategies for electric vehicle supply
chain in a competitive market under different channel leadership. Annals of Operations Research. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05523-y
AliResearch. (2022). Future consumption report.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
703
Bian, J. S., Zhang, G. Q., & Zhou, G. H. (2020). Manufacturer vs. Consumer Subsidy with Green Technology
Investment and Environmental Concern. European Journal of Operational Research, 287(3), 832–843.
Chen, C., & Ulya, M. A. (2019). Analyses of the reward-penalty mechanism in green closed-loop supply
chains with product remanufacturing. International Journal of Production Economics, 210, 211–223.
Chen, S., Su, J., et al. (2022). Optimal production and subsidy rate considering dynamic consumer green
perception under different government subsidy orientations. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 168,
108073.
Cheng, Y., Hao, H., et al. (2021). Traceability management strategy of the EV power battery based on the
blockchain. Scientiﬁc Programming, 2021, 5601833.
China D. (2022). FAW, BYD jointly launch battery production project.
China D. (2020). BYD and china tower form strategic partnership.
Choi, T.-M. (2019). Blockchain-technology-supported platforms for diamond authentication andcertiﬁcation
in luxury supply chains. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 128,
17–29.
CITICS (2022). Special Research on New Energy Vehicle Industry: Smart Electric Vehicle Development Trend
from Disassembling Model
EPA. (2022). Electric vehicle myths. United States Environmental Proctection Agency.
Fan, J., Wang, J., et al. (2020a). An innovative subsidy model for promoting the sharing of Electric Vehicles
in China: A pricing decisions analysis. Energy (oxford), 201, 117557.
Fan, Z., Cao, Y., et al. (2020). Pricing strategies of domestic and imported electric vehicle manufacturers
and the design of government subsidy and tariff policies. Transportation Research Part E, Logistics and
Transportation Review, 143, 102093.
Fan, Z., Wu, X., et al. (2020b). Considering the traceability awareness of consumers: Should the supply chain
adopt the blockchain technology? Annals of Operations Research, 309(2), 837–860.
FAW, BYD jointly launch battery production project. Choi, T.-M. (2019). Blockchain-technology-supported
platforms for diamond authentication and certiﬁcation in luxury supply chains. Transportation Research
Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 128, 17-29.
Feng, Z., Luo, N., et al. (2023). The inﬂuence of carbon emission reduction instruments on blockchain tech-
nology adoption in recycling batteries of the new energy vehicles. International Journal of Production
Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2023.2175173
Gong, B., Gao, Y., et al. (2022). Cooperate or compete? A strategic analysis of formal and informal electric
vehicle battery recyclers under government intervention. International Journal of Logistics, 27, 1–21.
Gong, B., Zhang, H., et al. (2023). Blockchain adoption and channel selection strategies in a competitive
remanufacturing supply chain. Computers & Industrial Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.
108829
Gu, X., Ieromonachou, P., et al. (2018). Developing pricing strategy to optimise total proﬁts in an electric
vehicle battery closed loop supply chain. Journal of Cleaner Production, 203, 376–385.
Gu, X., Ieromonachou, P., et al. (2019). Subsidising an electric vehicle supply chain with imperfect information.
International Journal of Production Economics, 211, 82–97.
Gu, X., Zhou, L., et al. (2021). Electric vehicle battery secondary use under government subsidy: A closed-loop
supply chain perspective. International Journal of Production Economics, 234, 108035.
Júnior, C., Sanseverino, E. R., et al. (2022). Blockchain review for battery supply chain monitoring and battery
trading. Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, 157, 112078.
Liu, F., Li, J., et al. (2023). Optimal strategy for secondary use of spent electric vehicle batteries: Sell, lease,
or both. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05380-9
Liu, Y., Ni, Y., et al. (2022). Blockchain-enabled traceability and producer’s incentive to outsource delivery.
International Journal of Production Research, 61, 231–242.
Niu, B. and H. Xu, et al. (2022). Creating all-win by blockchain in a remanufacturing supply chain with
consumer risk-aversion and quality untrust.Transportation research. Part E, Logistics and Transportation
Review, 163, 102778. 4.
Pi, Z. (2023). Production and decarbonisation of conventional gasoline vehicle automakers under subsidy and
regulation policies. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2023.2220057
Pun, H., Swaminathan, J. M., & Hou, P. (2021). Blockchain Adoption for Combating Deceptive Counterfeits.
Production and Operations Management, 30(4), 864–882.
Sun, Y., Song, X., Jiang, Y., & Guo, J. (2023). Strategy analysis of fresh agricultural enterprises in a competitive
circumstance: The impact of blockchain and consumer traceability preferences. Mathematics. https://doi.
org/10.3390/math11051090
123

704
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:677–704
Toraman, Y., Bayirli, M., & Ramadani, V. (2023). New technologies in small business models: Use of electric
vehicles in last-mile delivery for fast-moving consumer goods. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise
Development. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSBED-08-2023-0375
Wang, J., & Huang, L. (2021). A game-theoretic analytical approach for fostering energy-saving innovation
in the electric vehicle supply chain. SAGE Open, 11(2), 215824402110215.
Wu, J., & Wang, X. (2023). Platform-leading blockchain adoption for traceability under upstream competition.
Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05147-8
Xu, X., & Choi, T. (2021). Supply chain operations with online platforms under the cap-and-trade regulation:
Impacts of using blockchain technology. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review, 155, 102491.
Yu, Y., Dong, Y., & Guo, X. (2018). Pricing for sales and per-use rental services with vertical differentiation.
European Journal of Operational Research, 270(2), 586–598.
Zhang, C., Chen, Y.-X., & Tian, Y.-X. (2023). Collection and recycling decisions for electric vehicle end-of-
life power batteries in the context of carbon emissions reduction. Computers & Industrial Engineering.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.108869
Zhang, J. and W. Zeng (2021). Environmental industry special research: carbon market policy gradually
improved, the market size may exceed 10 billion in 2022, Hwabao Securities.
Zhao, X., Peng, B., et al. (2021). Closed-loop supply chain pricing strategy for electric vehicle batteries
recycling in China. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 24(6), 7725–7752.
Zhu, X., Liu, K., et al. (2022). Is government R&D subsidy good for BEV supply chain? The challenge from
downstream competition. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 165, 107951.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
Authors and Aﬃliations
Jizi Li1 · Fangbing Liu2 · Justin Z. Zhang3 · Longyu Li4 · João Ferreira5
B João Ferreira
jjmf@ubi.pt
Jizi Li
jizi.li@wust.edu.cn
Fangbing Liu
834542199@qq.com
Justin Z. Zhang
justin.zhang@unf.edu
Longyu Li
3127825482@qq.com
1
School of Management, Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
School of Business, Jiangxi University of Science and Technology, Nanchang, China
3
Coggin College of Business, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL, USA
4
Department of Engineering Management, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China
5
Economics and Management Department and NECE – Research Unit in Business Sciences,
University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal
123