TITLE: Dynamic analysis of degradation thresholds for sustainable environmental management
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07166-1
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07166-1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Dynamic analysis of degradation thresholds for sustainable
environmental management
Fabio Lamantia1 · Davide Radi2,3
· Iryna Sushko2,4
Received: 29 April 2025 / Accepted: 12 March 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
We examine environmental protection in an oligopolistic setting in which a Pigouvian pol-
lution tax is levied whenever environmental degradation exceeds a certain threshold set by
a regulator. This threshold mechanism deﬁnes two scenarios, one with low environmental
degradation in which ﬁrms do not internalize pollution, and one with high degradation in
which ﬁrms are involved not only in production activities but also in abatement to ease the
burden of the environmental tax. The purpose of this paper is to examine how the periodic
dynamics of environmental degradation, described by a Lorenz map, are inﬂuenced by the
main policy parameters. Regarding policy implications, we show how to construct a careful
alignment between the border of the no-tax area and the level of taxation, which is crucial
for reducing environmental degradation and avoiding ﬂuctuations.
Keywords Thresholds · Pigouvian Tax · Environmental protection · Complex Economic
Systems · Economic Dynamics
JEL Classiﬁcation C62 · C73 · D21 · D43
1 Introduction
Environmental protection is a major concern in today’s world, as economic activity signiﬁ-
cantly contributes to pollution. Pollution is a typical example of a negative externality: the
main costs of pollution (say, health issues and damages to the environment) do not typically
fall on the polluters but on society in general. The main tools to alleviate pollution can be split
into two main categories: command-and-control instruments and market-based instruments.
B Davide Radi
davide.radi@unicatt.it
1
Department of Economics and Business, University of Catania, Catania, Italy
2
DiMSEFA, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy
3
Department of Finance, VŠB - Technical University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic
4
Institute of Mathematics, NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine
123

Annals of Operations Research
Command-and-control instruments rely on mandatory standards, such as prohibitions on
the use of certain substances or technologies, or emission thresholds set by regulators, which
directly prescribe the actions ﬁrms must take. These thresholds represent boundaries on
emissions and pollution levels, allowing industries and other institutions to operate within
environmentally secure ranges, see Bennett et al. (2008). In some cases, thresholds are set
not to go higher than concentrations of pollution deemed to be dangerous to health; in
other cases, thresholds are differentiated in reaction to the condition of the environment.
For instance, water quality standards might be differentiated for seasonal ﬂuctuations in
water consumption and ﬂow, Chidiac et al. (2023). Generally, agencies set thresholds in line
with national or international standards. Examples in question pertain to the activities of
the European Environment Agency (EEA) or the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).1 Such agencies report on the environment to help in sustainable development
and improve environmental standards. The EPA, for instance, deﬁnes the National Ambient
AirQualityStandards(NAAQS)bysettingthresholdsforpollutantssuchascarbonmonoxide,
lead, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, particulate matter, and sulfur dioxide.2 They are thresholds put
to safeguard public health and the environment through the lowering of the concentration of
pollutantsintheair.Eventhoughthereisnostandardsetworldwide,mostcountriesusesimilar
thresholdstosafeguardtheenvironment(Bennettetal.,2008).Imposingapollutionthreshold,
however, entails costs for both the industrial sector and society. Therefore, regulators must
assess the associated costs, such as monitoring and compliance costs, and set the threshold
on the basis of a cost–beneﬁt analysis. Economic models, such as the one developed in this
paper, help policymakers make informed decisions.
In contrast, market-based instruments use taxes or tradable permits to shape ﬁrms’ incen-
tives, letting the market determine the most efﬁcient way to reduce pollution, see Jørgensen
et al. (2010). Such measures are necessary because pollution, as a negative externality, rep-
resents a classic case of market failure: it imposes social costs that are not internalized in
the market prices of goods and services. Pigouvian taxes are a common market-based instru-
ment to force polluters to internalize such externalities, see Carlsson (2000), although their
effectiveness is sometimes questioned, see Manta et al. (2023). A prominent example of this
approach is carbon pricing, a regulatory policy designed to make polluters bear part of the
social cost of emissions. This form of taxation is levied on the carbon content of fossil fuels,
thereby assigning a price to carbon emissions. Another more sophisticated market-based
approach is applying cap and trade systems, whereby the regulator puts a cap (restriction) on
emissions, and ﬁrms can sell and purchase certiﬁcates to emit a certain amount of pollutants.
The EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) is an example of such a system. Recently, the
interest in understanding how market-rule compatible mechanisms can facilitate the adoption
of sustainable behavior has grown, see Ulph (1996); van der Ploeg and de Zeeuw (1992);
Marsiglio and Tolotti (2024); Buccella et al. (2024a) and references therein. Understanding
their effects over time is a central focus of research, as also emphasized in He et al. (2023).
A contribution in this direction is provided by Buccella et al. (2024b), where the abatement
game introduced in Buccella et al. (2021) is extended to account for oligopolistic competition
among heterogeneous ﬁrms. The analysis focuses on optimal tax regulation and the efﬁciency
of market outcomes, also from a dynamic perspective. A broad review of the literature on this
1 See https://www.eea.europa.eu/en/about/policy-corner-eu-policies-we-support and https://www.epa.gov/
environmental-topics
2 See
https://www.who.int/teams/environment-climate-change-and-health/air-quality-and-health/health-
impacts/types-of-pollutants
123

Annals of Operations Research
topic, with particular emphasis on the role of environmental taxation, can instead be found
in Jørgensen et al. (2010).
Regarding empirical assessment of their effectiveness, Ma et al. (2024) provide evi-
dence that different forms of environmental regulation–command-based, market-oriented,
and voluntary–stimulate technological innovation, with heterogeneous and short-run effects
across ﬁrms. Their ﬁndings conﬁrm that regulatory interventions can induce shifts in
ﬁrms’ behavior, consistent with the regime-switching mechanisms captured by a thresh-
old framework. Nevertheless, each regulatory scheme has its own side effects. For instance,
a market-oriented policy based on a green tax may jeopardize industrial competitiveness,
even when pollution levels are under control and below safeguard thresholds. Conversely,
command-based green policies can create market oscillations. Recent empirical research sup-
ports the existence of recurrent (quasi-cyclical) dynamics in environmental systems arising
from the interaction between regulatory pressure and ﬁrms’ strategic responses. Firm-level
evidence in Feng et al. (2025) shows self-reinforcing feedbacks among environmental reg-
ulation, technological innovation, and emissions, producing sequences of adjustments over
time consistent with oscillatory behavior.
To address the limitations of these two green policy approaches while retaining their
beneﬁts, we propose a hybrid regulatory scheme that combines a threshold-based command-
and-control rule with a Pigouvian tax once the threshold is exceeded. This allows us to
study how the interaction between these two regulatory instruments shapes the dynamics of
environmental degradation and may allow to overcome the side effects of both. As a ﬁrst
attempt to investigate this hybrid approach in a dynamic context, we propose a much simpler
industrial setup than Buccella et al. (2024b). The industry is served by one (monopolist) or a
ﬁnite number of homogeneous ﬁrms (oligopolists). Based on economic, social, and political
considerations, the regulator sets a threshold level of pollution beyond which environmental
degradation requires strong regulatory measures. Speciﬁcally, below the threshold, there is
a good perception of environmental quality, and no restriction is imposed on the industry; in
contrast, above the threshold level, a Pigouvian pollution tax is imposed. Above the environ-
mental threshold, each ﬁrm can take emission abatement measures and pays this tax based
on net emissions to the environment. In other words, following Segerson (1988), we assume
a combination of a command-and-control instrument (an environmental threshold) with a
market-based instrument (a Pigouvian tax). Our focus, from this point of view, is more on the
possible periodic dynamics that can be obtained from a simple on-off mechanism on the impo-
sition of stricter rules if certain thresholds of environmental degradation are crossed. Despite
the simplicity of the rule, our interest is precisely in studying the possible non-convergence
dynamics that follow from these policies. In particular, we study the bifurcations through
which these oscillatory dynamics arise, as this analysis provides policy-relevant insights on
how to prevent or mitigate them. To obtain analytical results and keep the setup as simple
as possible, we assume an economic context characterized by linear demands and quadratic
abatement costs, which are a common assumption in the literature, see Buccella et al. (2024b)
and Ulph (1996). The dynamics of environmental degradation can be modelled through a
discontinuous map of the Lorenz type, that is, a one-dimensional piecewise monotone map
with one discontinuity point, whose branches are deﬁned by linear functions. The dynamics
of these maps have been extensively studied, see Avrutin et al. (2019), with basic results
related to attractors and bifurcations useful for model dynamics. For this map, we present a
complete analysis focusing on the most relevant policy parameters, given by the threshold
level of environmental degradation that triggers additional measures and the amount of the
123

Annals of Operations Research
tax. The purpose of maintaining an extremely simple economic structure also relates to our
desire to exhibit the possible dynamics of environmental degradation that can be achieved
even with an extremely simpliﬁed economic and environmental system. Here we do not
focus on the optimality of the threshold, which, as we have seen, can be established by varied
considerations through cost-beneﬁt analysis or from a sustainability perspective. However,
we seek to clarify how major policy choices, in terms of threshold and amount of taxation,
contribute to the overall dynamics of environmental degradation. This is also a ﬁrst step in the
analysis of a more sophisticated system in which multiple thresholds for different pollutants
can be imposed.
Our main ﬁndings regarding policy implications indicate that there is a threshold level for
the no-tax area that makes taxation ineffective. We quantify this threshold analytically. Below
this threshold, an increase in taxation can lead to a reduction in environmental degradation.
However, if taxation is not properly aligned with the border of the no-tax region, an increase in
taxation may result in ﬂuctuations that can, on average, increase environmental degradation.
The key takeaway is that the border of the no-tax area and the level of taxation need to be
carefully aligned to achieve a reduction in environmental degradation and avoid persistent
oscillatory dynamics.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the economic setup with production
and abatement efforts. The dynamics of environmental degradation is modelled through a
discontinuous map, which arises because of the environmental threshold level above which
a stricter regulation is imposed. Section 3 presents a complete dynamic characterization of
the map, focusing in particular on the periodic attractors induced by its discontinuity. Section
4 draws upon the analysis of the map to present the main economic insights and policy
implications of the presence of an environmental threshold of taxation. Section 5 concludes
and presents some discussions on further developments of the model.
2 Model
We start by brieﬂy describing the economic setup for industrial activity. A homogeneous
good is sold in the market at price:
P (Q) = a −Q
(1)
where a is the reservation price and Q is aggregate supply. Assume n ≥1 ﬁrms serve the
market. When n = 1, a monopolist operates, whereas the market is oligopolistic for a ﬁxed
n > 1. We denote by qi the production sold in the market by ﬁrm i, with total industry
production n
i=1 qi = Q. A by-product of production is pollution, which ﬁrms can reduce
through abatement efforts, see van der Ploeg and de Zeeuw (1992) and Ulph (1996). This
activity is costly, and, analogously to Ulph (1996) and Buccella et al. (2021), ﬁrm i reduces
its emissions by ωi, incurring abatement costs given by
Ci (ωi) = γi
ω2
i
2
(2)
where γi measures the inefﬁciency of ﬁrmi’s abatementefforts. This is the simplestfunctional
form for an abatement cost function that captures increasing marginal costs of abatement, a
123

Annals of Operations Research
feature expected to arise in many contexts. Indeed, achieving each additional unit of pollution
reduction typically requires more advanced technologies, greater effort, or the adoption of
less efﬁcient production processes.3 As for production, we assume linear production costs
and, without loss of generality, we set a marginal cost equal to zero.
As said, pollution is a by-product of the industry production process. The environmental
degradation caused by production is modelled through a damage function, which we assume
is linear in net emissions, that is
D (q1, . . . , qn, ω1, . . . , ωn) =
n

i=1
(δiqi −ωi)
(3)
where δi denotes the units of pollution for a unit of production, so that δiqi represents
gross emissions from the production of good by ﬁrm i (after some appropriate choice of
units). We assume that ωi ∈[0, δiqi], that is ﬁrm i cannot abate more than its emissions.
Environmental abatement increases total costs but reduces emissions. Emissions by all ﬁrms
deﬁneacompositepollutionindex,whichisdynamicallyupdatedaccordingtobiodegradation
and pollution released over time. This index, which we refer to as the level of environmental
degradation at time t, is denoted by Nt. The environment can abate a part of pollution at a
constant rate μ for a unit of time. The dynamics of environmental degradation in discrete
time can be modelled by a map of the form
Nt+1 = (1 −μ) Nt + D

q1,t, . . . , qn,t, ω1,t, . . . , ωn,t

(4)
where qi,t and ωi,t are the levels of production and abatement of ﬁrm i, i = 1, . . . , n, at time
t.4
Following Segerson (1988), the regulator ﬁxes a threshold level of natural degradation ˜N,
above which a tax on the net emission is imposed. When natural degradation is low, namely
Nt < ˜N, ﬁrms set their production plans knowing that the regulator will not impose taxes
on emissions.5 Therefore, proﬁt-maximizing ﬁrms will not exert abatement efforts (ωi = 0).
When n = 1, the monopolist maximizes its proﬁt, whereas when n > 1, ﬁrms set their
production at a Cournot-Nash level. Hence, ﬁrm i solves the problem
q∗
i = arg max
qi∈[0,+∞)
πi (qi) = arg max
qi∈[0,+∞)
⎛
⎝a −qi −

j̸=i
q j
⎞
⎠qi.
(5)
3 Note that an alternative cost function with constant marginal costs would imply stronger incentives for
abatement, as pollution reduction would be relatively cheaper at the margin. Therefore, the current formulation
can also be interpreted as a worst-case benchmark relative to the linear speciﬁcation. Moreover, the assumption
of constant marginal abatement costs restricts the adjustment of the tax rate to two distinct regimes: values at
which ﬁrms ﬁnd it optimal to abate fully, in which case the map describing the model’s dynamics remains of
the same type, and values at which ﬁrms choose not to abate at all, in which case the map is linear.
4 Following, for instance, La Torre et al. (2025), a random additive term could be introduced into the pollution
dynamics (4) to account for the impact of natural disasters, such as volcanic eruptions, on environmental
quality. This extension is not considered here and is left for future work.
5 Note that the threshold-based command-and-control policy we consider is backward-looking: the current
level of environmental damage results from past production, and, if the threshold is exceeded, a pollution tax
affects the current optimal level of production, which in turn inﬂuences the environmental quality observed at
the beginning of the next period. Consequently, myopic, one-period proﬁt-maximizing ﬁrms cannot strategi-
cally avoid the threshold by adjusting current production.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Then,underhomogeneity,thatisq⋆
i = q⋆, ∀i = 1, . . . , n,eachﬁrmwillproducetheCournot-
Nash quantity q∗=
a
1+n , which coincides with the monopoly quantity when n = 1. When
ﬁrms are homogeneous also for emissions, that is δi = δ, ∀i = 1, ..., n, individual net
emissions are given by δq∗=
aδ
1+n . Summing up for all ﬁrms, total net emissions of the
industry are given by aδn
1+n whenever Nt < ˜N.
Now assume that Nt ≥˜N. The regulator will then set a tax on ﬁrms’ net emissions to
reduce environmental degradation. In this case, the proﬁt function of ﬁrm i becomes
˜qi = arg max
qi∈[0,+∞)
˜πi (qi, ωi; T ) = arg max
qi∈[0,+∞)
⎛
⎝a −qi −

j̸=i
q j
⎞
⎠qi −γi
ω2
i
2 −T (δiqi −ωi).
(6)
where the term T (δiqi −ωi) represents the taxation on ﬁrm’s i net emissions when Nt ≥˜N.
The solution concept we adopt is that of subgame perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE): each ﬁrm
optimizes in a two-stage fashion by setting optimal abatement and production plans. The last
decision is that of production, where each ﬁrm selects ˜qi = max

0, a−δi T
1+n

. Hence, optimal
production ˜qi is positive whenever T < ˆT = a
δi , see Buccella et al. (2024b) for a similar
speciﬁcation. At the ﬁrst stage of the game, each ﬁrm selects optimal emissions. Assuming
homogeneity across ﬁrms hereafter–namely, identical technologies, such that δi = δ, and
identical abatement cost functions, such that γi = γ –optimal abatement levels are deﬁned
as follows:
˜ω = arg max
ω∈[0,δ ˜q]
˜π (˜q, ω; T ) = arg max
ω∈[0,δ ˜q]
(a −δT )2
(n + 1)2 + T ω −γ ω2
2 = T
γ .
(7)
Employing the optimal production and abatement levels, we identify two threshold values
of the environmental tax, ¯T and ˆT . The ﬁrst threshold,
¯T =
aδ
δ2 + 1+n
γ
,
(8)
represents the minimum tax level at which a ﬁrm’s optimal emissions drop to zero. The
second threshold, previously introduced,
ˆT = a
δ ,
(9)
corresponds to the tax level above which a ﬁrm optimally chooses to cease production. Then,
individual net emissions are given by
δ ˜q −˜ω =

δ(a−δT )
1+n
−T
γ if
T ≤¯T
0
if
¯T < T
(10)
Summing up, if Nt < ˜N, the environmental damage is D = anδ
1+n . Instead, for Nt > ˜N,
the environmental damage is D = n (δ ˜q −˜ω). Hence, the damage function (3) assumes the
following form:
D =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
naδ
1+n
if
0 < Nt < ˜N
n max

0, δ(a−δT )
1+n
−T
γ

if
Nt ≥˜N
(11)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Following the construction of the model, the derivation of ﬁrms’ optimal strategies, and
the speciﬁcation of the damage function, a ﬁrst policy implication arises, as highlighted in
the following proposition.
Proposition 1 Optimal productions and proﬁts decrease in T , for T ∈

0, ˆT

. For T < ¯T ,
environmental damage remains positive. For T ∈

¯T , ˆT

, environmental damage is zero
while optimal production remains positive. For T > ˆT , environmental damage, optimal
production, and proﬁts are all zero. If the policymaker aims to reduce environmental damage
while preserving economic activity in the industry, taxation should never exceed ¯T .
Proof of Proposition 1 Note that the solution to problem (6) is either a linear function of T
with negative coefﬁcient −δ/(1+n) or zero. Therefore, optimal production declines as the tax
increases, or remains constant at zero. Hence, optimal proﬁt does so as well, being increasing
in the optimal level of production. Solving for the value of T for which the solution of problem
(6) becomes zero, namely ˜q = max

0, a−δT
1+n

, yields the threshold ˆT . Analogously, solving
for the value of T that sets the solution of problem (7) equal to zero yields the threshold ¯T .
Straightforward algebra shows that ¯T < ˆT . Assuming that the policymaker aims to balance
environmental damage with the preservation of economic activity, the policy implication
follows directly from the above arguments.
⊓⊔
Proposition 1 provides a ﬁrst policy guideline: the tax rate T should not be set above ¯T .
Indeed, when the regulator sets taxation equal to ¯T , ﬁrms no longer ﬁnd it proﬁtable to emit.
Any further increase in taxation would only reduce production, without generating additional
environmental beneﬁts. Since we assume that the regulator seeks to reduce environmental
damage while preserving economic activity, we henceforth restrict our attention to the case
T < ¯T .
The dynamics of environmental degradation when T < ¯T can be written as a piecewise-
linear discontinuous map (increasing-increasing) of the form:
Nt+1 =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
Nt (1 −μ) + naδ
n+1
if
0 < Nt < ˜N
Nt (1 −μ) + naδ
n+1 −nT

1
γ +
δ2
n+1

if
Nt ≥˜N
(12)
where μ is the natural abatement rate for a unit of time of the environmental degradation.
In the following, we set
A = 1 −μ ∈[0, 1] ;
B = naδ
1 + n ∈(0, +∞) ;
C = −T n
 1
γ +
δ2
1 + n

∈[−B, 0]
(13)
The aggregate parameter A captures the natural rate of pollution absorption, B measures
pollution generated by production in the absence of abatement activities, and C denotes the
level of optimal abatement induced by taxation. Hence, C ≥−B, as abatement cannot exceed
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Map G given in (14) for ˜N = 2.8, n = 7, a = 7.3, μ = 0.5, δ = 0.415, T = 0.7, γ = 1. Any trajectory
of the map G converges to the 2-cycle
pollution. Using these aggregate parameters, we rewrite (12) as follows:
G :
Nt+1 =
⎧
⎨
⎩
ANt + B
if
0 < Nt < ˜N
ANt + B + C if
Nt ≥˜N
(14)
with ˜N ∈[0, +∞).
In the following, we present a complete analysis of the map G and then we study the
inﬂuence of the policy parameters C and ˜N on the dynamics of environmental degradation.
3 Dynamics
This section summarizes the main properties of the proposed model by presenting a complete
characterization of the dynamics. Let us ﬁrst make a change of the variable, xt = Nt/B,
scaling out parameter B, so that map in (14) becomes the following one, denoted F:
F :
xt+1 =
⎧
⎨
⎩
FL(xt) = Axt + 1
if
0 < xt < ˜n
FR(xt) = Axt + 1 + c if
xt ≥˜n
(15)
where ˜n = ˜N/B and c = C/B. Since it has to be C ∈[−B, 0] (see (13)), for the parameter
c we have c ∈[−1, 0]. In (15), the symbols L and R refer to the left and right partitions
(intervals) separated by the discontinuity point x = ˜n, that is, L = [0, ˜n) and R = [˜n, +∞).
According to the change of variables adopted, the state variable x and the parameters c and
˜n are expressed in units of pollution generated by production in the absence of abatement;
123

Annals of Operations Research
in this formulation, x denotes environmental degradation, c the abatement level, and ˜n the
threshold level.
The global dynamics of the map F is investigated in the following. Before, however, we
present some preliminary results that offer policy implications and help to better interpret the
technical ﬁndings that follow. In the region below the threshold, that is, for x < ˜n, the tax does
not apply and ﬁrms do not undertake any abatement activity. This corresponds to a region
where the level of environmental degradation is considered tolerable by the policymaker, or
at least not severe enough to require ﬁscal intervention to contain it. Based on production
and the associated pollution level, this region admits the equilibrium
L∗=
1
1 −A.
(16)
By reducing ˜n to the point where ˜n < L∗, L∗is no longer an equilibrium of the model.
Furthermore, the model does not admit any equilibrium as long as R∗< ˜n < L∗, where
R∗= 1 + c
1 −A.
(17)
As we will see in the following, a threshold level ˜n ∈(R∗, L∗) is associated with persistent
ﬂuctuations, and the types of behaviors that may arise are discussed in the following.
By further reducing the threshold for ﬁscal intervention so that ˜n < R∗, we enter a region
in which a unique equilibrium exists, namely R∗. In this case, pollution taxation induces
ﬁrms to undertake abatement activities optimally, and the resulting level of environmental
damage reaches its minimum attainable value. Indeed, as we will show in the following, the
long-run environmental damage is always conﬁned in the range

R∗, L∗
.
Note that increasing taxation, i.e., decreasing c, lowers the lower bound R∗, while L∗
remains unchanged. Consequently, the invariant set within which ﬂuctuations occur becomes
wider. This implies that, whenever no equilibrium exists, the system may exhibit persistent
ﬂuctuations of greater amplitude when an equilibrium cannot be reached.
As discussed, the model exhibits different dynamic regimes. Identifying these regimes
is essential for designing an effective tuning of the proposed green policy, and this requires
an examination of the model’s bifurcations. Therefore, given this brief interpretation of the
possible scenarios, the remainder of this section is devoted to a detailed global analysis of
the map F, which belongs to a well-known class of Lorenz maps which are one-dimensional
discontinuous piecewise monotone maps with one discontinuity point (see Rand (1978);
Keener (1980); Homburg (1996); Berry and Mestel (1991); Gardini et al. (2010); Avrutin et
al. (2019), to cite a few). Many researchers from various theoretical and applied ﬁelds have
studied Lorenz maps from different perspectives, and today the dynamics of these maps has
been described in great detail. The map F is the simplest representative of the class of Lorenz
maps, since its branches are deﬁned by linear functions. Below we recall in short some basic
results related to the attractors of the map F and their bifurcations (see Avrutin et al. (2019)
for details), useful for the understanding dynamics of the model.
• Given that the functions FL and FR have the same positive slope which is less than 1,
0 < A < 1, it immediately follows that map F cannot have repelling cycles and, thus,
chaos is also not possible.
123

Annals of Operations Research
• The ﬁxed point L∗= 1/(1 −A) of the map FL is actual for map F if L∗< ˜n, and the
ﬁxed point R∗= (1 + c)/(1 −A) of the map FR is actual for map F if R∗> ˜n. Here we
assume that A ̸= 1; for A = 1, we have that the ﬁxed points of both maps are at inﬁnity.
If the ﬁxed point L∗or R∗exists, it is globally attracting. If R∗< ˜n < L∗, then both
ﬁxed points are virtual for F.
• The equalities L∗= ˜n and R∗= ˜n, leading to
ηL :
˜n =
1
1 −A
(18)
ηR :
˜n = 1 + c
1 −A
(19)
respectively, deﬁne border collision bifurcation6 boundaries of the existence regions of
the corresponding ﬁxed points in the parameter space of the map F.
• Map F cannot have two coexisting attracting ﬁxed points, since for their existence it has
to be L∗< ˜n < R∗, and thus, L∗< R∗, while for −1 < c < 0, it holds L∗> R∗.
• For R∗< ˜n < L∗, map F belongs to a class of gap maps: there exists an absorbing
interval I = [FR(˜n), FL(˜n)], and within this interval there is a ’gap’, which is the interval
Z = (FR(FL(˜n)), FL(FR(˜n))). Since points of Z have no preimages in I, an attractor
of the map F can have points neither in Z, nor in its images.
• A unique attractor of a gap map and, in particular, map F, is either an attracting cycle
(in a generic case) or a Cantor set attractor (in a non generic case). In fact, the rotation
number7, say ρ, which is the same for any point of the absorbing interval I, can either
be rational or irrational. If ρ is a rational number, ρ = k/m, then the ω-limit set of
any trajectory is an attracting cycle, while if ρ is irrational, then the ω-limit set of any
trajectory is a Cantor set attractor (a closure of quasiperiodic trajectories).
Now let us comment on the bifurcation structure of the parameter space of the map F. It is
well-known that in the parameter space of a gap map, periodicity regions related to attracting
cycles of different periods are organized in the so-called period-adding structure (see e.g.,
Keener (1980); Homburg (1996); Gardini et al. (2010); Avrutin et al. (2010)).
In Fig. 2(a), the period-adding structure is shown for map F in the (c, ˜n)-parameter plane
for ﬁxed A = 0.5. Note that for the parameter values as in Fig. 1, we have that B ≈2.6508,
C ≈−1.9385, so that c ≈−0.7313, ˜n ≈1.0563. One can see that parameter point (c, ˜n) =
(−0.7313, 1.0563) (marked by a black dot in Fig. 2(a)) belongs to the periodicity region
related to an attracting 2-cycle.
Note also that in the case presented in Fig. 2(a), the border-collision bifurcation boundaries
ηL and ηR of the existence regions of the ﬁxed points L∗and R∗are deﬁned by ˜n = 2 and
˜n = 2(1 + c) (see (18) and (19), respectively). An intersection point of these boundaries,
(c, ˜n) = (0, 2), is a codimension-two border-collision bifurcation point (often called the
6 This term, introduced in Nusse and Yorke (1992), denotes a qualitative change in the dynamics of a piecewise
smooth map occurring when its invariant set collides with a border separating different deﬁnition regions of
the map.
7 The rotation number of the map F can be deﬁned as ρ(x) = limn→∞1
n
 j=n
j=0 κ((F j(x))), where κ(x) = 1
in x ∈L and κ(x) = 0 in x ∈R, see e.g., Keener (1980). The rotation number of an m-cycle can be deﬁned
in a simpler way: it is an irreducible fraction ρ = k/m, where m is the period of the cycle and k is the number
of points in one partition, e.g. in the partition L.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 In (a), two-dimensional bifurcation diagram of the map F given in (15) in the (c, ˜n)-parameter plane for
ﬁxed A = 0.5. Different colors are associated with attracting cycles of different periods (see the middle panel
for the correspondence between colors and periods). In (b), one-dimensional bifurcation diagram related to the
crossection of the bifurcation structure shown in (a) along the vertical arrow. Here x = FL(˜n) and x = FR(˜n)
are the boundaries of the absorbing interval I
Fig. 3 Two-dimensional bifurcation diagram of the map F given in (15) in the (c, ˜n)-parameter plane for ﬁxed
A = 0.8 in (a), and A = 0.2 in (b)
organizing center) at which L∗= R∗and map F is continuous. Using the theorem proved
in Gardini et al. (2014), we can state that from this point the full period-adding bifurcation
structure does indeed emerge.
In Fig. 3, we present the same (c, ˜n)-parameter plane, but for larger and smaller values
of parameter A: it is A = 0.8 in (a) and A = 0.2 in (b). In fact, in both ﬁgures we still
observe the full period-adding structure which is only quantitatively modiﬁed. In particular,
the border-collision bifurcation boundaries ηL and ηR are deﬁned by ˜n = 5 and ˜n = 5(1+c),
respectively, in Fig. 3(a), and by ˜n = 1.25 and ˜n = 1.25(1 + c), respectively, in Fig. 3(b).
One can also notice that the larger A (i.e., the smaller μ), the closer the upper boundary
of each periodicity region is to its lower boundary. In fact, at A = 1 (or μ = 0), these
boundaries coincide. In this case, map F becomes the so-called circle map (gap Z is ’closed’:
FR(FL(˜n)) = FL(FR(˜n))). For a circle map, irrational rotation is a generic case, so that a
generic parameter point corresponds to quasiperiodic trajectories dense in the absorbing
interval I (see Avrutin et al. (2019) for details).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Border collision bifurcation boundaries of the m-periodicity regions of the ﬁrst complexity level in the
(c, ˜n)-parameter plane of the map F given in (15) for ﬁxed A = 0.5 in (a), and A = 0.8 in (b). Here the
m-periodicity regions for m = 1, ..., 7 are coloured
Let us recall in short how a period-adding structure is organized. It is formed by an
inﬁnite number of non-overlapping periodicity regions which are ordered according to the
Farey summation rule applied to the rotation numbers of the corresponding cycles. In this
way, the basic rule is the following: between any two regions related to cycles with rotation
numbers k1/m1 and k2/m2, such that |k1m2 −k2m1| = 1 (so-called Farey neighbors), there
exists a region related to cycles with rotation number (k1 + k2)/(m1 + m2). For example,
between 1/2- and 1/3-periodicity regions there is a 2/5-periodicity region.
To illustrate the period-adding structure, in Fig. 2(b), we show the one-dimensional bifur-
cation diagram x versus ˜n for ﬁxed c = −0.5 and increasing ˜n, 0.9 < ˜n < 2.1 (see the vertical
arrow in Fig. 2(a)). This parameter path crosses all the periodicity regions constituting the
period-adding structure.
The core of a period-adding structure is related to the periodicity regions of attracting
cycleshavingsymbolicsequences8 oftheso-calledﬁrstcomplexitylevel, L Rm−1 and RLm−1,
m ≥2, with rotation numbers ρ = 1/m and ρ = (1−m)/m, respectively. The corresponding
cycles are called basic cycles. The boundaries of all periodicity regions constituting the
period-adding structure are deﬁned by the conditions of the border collision bifurcations
of the corresponding cycles. Due to the linearity of the branches of the map F, all these
boundaries have analytical representation in terms of parameters. This representation can
be obtained iteratively, applying the so-called map replacement technique, starting from the
regions of the ﬁrst complexity level. For the complete set of formulas, we refer to Avrutin
et al. (2019) where the map replacement technique is described in detail and the formulas
for the boundaries of the higher complexity levels are obtained. In the following, we give
the analytical expressions for the ﬁrst complexity level boundaries. As an example, they are
plotted using their analytical expressions in Fig. 4 for A = 0.5 in (a) and A = 0.8 in (b). The
white regions in Fig. 4 are ﬁlled with the periodicity regions of higher complexity levels.
8 An m-cycle {xi}i=m−1
i=0
, m ≥2, can be represented by a symbolic sequence σ = σ0σ1...σm−1, where
σi = L if xi ∈L, and σi = R if xi ∈R.
123

Annals of Operations Research
To give an analytical representation for the boundaries of the periodicity regions associated
with the ﬁrst complexity level, it is convenient to introduce an auxiliary function
ψ(A, n) =
 An−1
A−1 , A ̸= 1
n,
A = 1
(20)
Consider ﬁrst a basic cycle {xi}i=m−1
i=0
, m ≥2, with symbolic sequence L Rm−1. This cycle
can undergo two border collision bifurcations occurring when its ﬁrst or last point, x0 or
xm−1, collides with the border x = ˜n. In terms of parameters, these conditions deﬁne two
corresponding border collision bifurcation curves denoted η0
L Rm−1 and ηm−1
L Rm−1:
η0
L Rm−1 :
˜n = −(1 + c)ψ(A, m −1) + Am−1
(A −1)(Am−1 + ψ(A, m −1))
(21)
ηm−1
L Rm−1 :
˜n = −(1 + c)(ψ(A, m −2) + Am−1) + Am−2
(A −1)(Am−2 + Am−1 + ψ(A, m −2))
(22)
These boundaries converge to the boundary ηR (see 19) as m →∞. See, for example, the
set of periodicity regions located below the 2-periodicity region in Fig. 4.
Now consider a basic cycle {xi}i=m−1
i=0
, m ≥2, with symbolic sequence RLm−1. Similarly,
it can undergo two border collision bifurcations that occur when x0 = ˜n or xm−1 = ˜n. In
terms of parameters these conditions deﬁne two corresponding border collision bifurcation
curves denoted η0
RLm−1 and ηm−1
RLm−1:
η0
RLm−1 :
˜n = −(1 + c)Am−1 + ψ(A, m −1)
(A −1)(Am−1 + ψ(A, m −1))
(23)
ηm−1
RLm−1 :
˜n = −(1 + c)Am−2 + ψ(A, m −2) + Am−1
(A −1)(Am−2 + Am−1 + ψ(A, m −2))
(24)
These boundaries converge to the boundary ηL (see 18) as m →∞. See the set of periodicity
regions located above the 2-periodicity region in Fig. 4.
For example, substituting m = 2 to (21)-(22), we get that for A ̸= 1, the equations for the
border collision bifurcation boundaries η0
L R and η0
L R of the 2-periodicity region are deﬁned
as follows:
η0
L R :
˜n =
1+c+A
1−A2
η1
L R :
˜n = (1+c)A+1
1−A2
(25)
The same equations can be obtained substituting m = 2 to (23)-(24), because the symbolic
sequence of the 2-cycle, which is L R ≡RL, belongs to both families, L Rm−1 and RLm−1.
The analytical results presented so far are essential to provide a rigorous mathematical
foundation for the policy implications of the threshold taxation system discussed in the next
section. Before turning to that analysis, we anticipate a few preliminary policy insights that
emerge from the graphical investigation of the two-dimensional bifurcations in Figs. 2–4
and that are grounded in the analytical results of this section. In particular, recall that the
policy parameter c can take values only in the range [−1, 0]. At c = 0, Pigouvian taxation
is set to zero, and R∗= L∗. Moreover, the map is smooth, upward-sloping, and always
converges to the unique equilibrium. It does not matter whether the equilibrium is R∗, when
123

Annals of Operations Research
˜n < 1/(1 −A), or L∗, when ˜n > 1/(1 −A), as they are both equal to 1/(1 −A) and this is
the long-run value of environmental damage.
At c = −1, and only for c = −1, Pigouvian taxation is set at a level such that R∗= 0. For
˜n = 0, again only for this value, R∗is also an equilibrium of the model, and total abatement
is achievable. Hence, the only conﬁguration of the policy parameters (c, ˜n) that allows full
abatement is (−1, 0).
Moreover, we know that increasing taxation (i.e., reducing c) raises the level of abatement
that can be achieved. Nevertheless, from the two-dimensional bifurcation diagrams in Figs. 2–
4, we observe that the risk of ﬂuctuations also increases. Indeed, the interval of values of the
threshold ˜n for which ﬂuctuations occur, namely (ηL, ηR), with ηL and ηR deﬁned in (18)
and (19), respectively, expands as taxation increases (c decreases).
Finally, for ˜n ≥1/(1 −A), there is no risk of ﬂuctuations: the system converges to
the unique equilibrium L∗, ﬁrms do not perform any abatement, and Pigouvian taxation is
ineffective regardless of its level.
4 Economic remarks and policy implications
This section focuses on the policy implications of the global dynamics of the system presented
in Section 3. Let us remark that there are two policy tools, summarized by the aggregate
parameters c and ˜n. Thus, it is crucial to understand the effect of tuning one of these two
parameters or both parameters at the same time. Let us recap that increasing the taxation T
is equivalent to a reduction of c, while a reduction of the threshold over which the taxation
applies is equivalent to a reduction of ˜n. Therefore, a more stringent environmental policy is
achieved through a reduction in either c or ˜n, or in both.
In addition to its stringency, the effectiveness of an environmental policy depends on how
it is implemented or design, in particular on the alignment between the Pigovian tax rate
c and the threshold ˜n above which the tax applies. Here, we evaluate which strategies for
implementing the green policy are effective and under what conditions. Before proceeding
with the investigation, let us recall a crucial aspect: regardless of the chosen policy strategy,
the long-term level of environmental degradation falls within the range

R∗, L∗
. Here, L∗
represents the maximum attainable level of environmental degradation, which is independent
of the policy parameters, while R∗denotes the minimum attainable level of environmental
degradation,whichdependsonthepolicyparameterc associatedwithenvironmentaltaxation.
Moreover, for R∗to be an equilibrium of the model, the other policy parameter, namely the
threshold ˜n, must be sufﬁciently low.
Aiming to determine which design of the green policy is most effective, we ﬁrst investigate
the effect of tuning a single policy parameter, and then assess the beneﬁts of coordinated
tuning of both policy parameters.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 One-dimensional bifurcation diagram of the map F given in (15) in the ˜n-parameter plane for ﬁxed
C = −0.1 in (a), C = −0.5 in (b) and C = −0.9 in (c). Remaining parameter A = 0.5
4.1 A policy strategy based on reducing the no-tax region
A ﬁrst policy parameter to consider is the reduction of the no-tax region, that is, a reduction
of ˜n. This policy is effective, as illustrated by the one-dimensional bifurcation diagrams in
Fig. 5, where, for each value of the policy parameter ˜n, the long-run average value of x is
shown in red, while the black points represent the possible values taken by x over time. By
starting in the region where L∗is a stable equilibrium (indicating the maximum level of
environmental degradation in the long run) and progressively reducing ˜n, we observe the
emergence of cyclical dynamics. These dynamics result in lower levels of environmental
degradation– not just in the average, but across all values. However, if we continue to reduce
the no-tax region further, we eventually reach a level where R∗becomes stable. At this stage,
the policy strategy loses its effectiveness, as further reductions in the no-tax region do not
lead to any changes in the levels of environmental degradation.
4.2 A policy strategy based on an increase of the environmental tax
A key point to emphasize is the impact and effectiveness of taxation, which depends on the
level of ˜n. As evident from the one-dimensional bifurcation diagrams of Fig. 6(a), due to the
presence of a no environmental-tax region

0, ˜n), an increase of the taxation (reduction of c)
does not have any impact on the equilibrium level of environmental abatement when L∗< ˜n.
In this scenario, for an increase in the environmental tax to be effective, the policymaker must
ﬁrst reduce the size of the no–environmental-tax region by lowering ˜n.
Conversely, the effects of an increase in environmental taxation are more interesting
when R∗> ˜n. In this case, increasing the environmental taxation (reducing c) reduces the
equilibrium value of environmental degradation (R∗reduces). However, a further increase in
the taxation may induce ﬂuctuations, that is, entering the parameter region where the map does
not admit any equilibrium (that is, R∗< ˜n < L∗), see, e.g., the two-dimensional bifurcation
diagrams in Figs. 2–4. In this region of the parameter space, the dynamics converge to an
attractor–either a periodic cycle or a Cantor set–as proven in the previous section, spanning
both the no-environmental-tax and the environmental-tax regions. Consequently, periods of
low environmental degradation are followed by periods of high environmental degradation.
Under this dynamic regime, it is interesting to examine the average value of environmental
degradation. As shown by the one-dimensional bifurcation diagrams in Fig, 6(b)–(c), the
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 One-dimensional bifurcation diagram of the map F given in (15) in the c-parameter plane for ﬁxed
˜n = 2.1 in (a), ˜n = 1.8 in (b) and ˜n = 1.4 in (c). Remaining parameter A = 0.5
average environmental degradation (in red) increases when periodic cycles emerge: higher
environmental taxation implies higher average environmental degradation. Further increasing
the environmental taxation (further reducing c), this relationship may eventually revert with
the environmental degradation, which begins to decrease again.9 This nonlinear relationship
between environmental taxation and environmental degradation underscores the potential
risksofimplementingagreenpolicybasedonacombinationofbothno-taxandenvironmental
tax regions. This risk can be avoided through a coordinated tuning of the policy parameters,
as shown below, where we provide a rule to adjust the threshold in response to a tightening
of Pigouvian taxation in order to prevent an increase in average environmental damage.
4.3 A policy strategy based on the tuning of the environmental tax level and the
no-tax region
To mitigate the negative effects of increased environmental taxation, a policy suggestion
arising from the global analysis presented in Section 3 is to employ a ﬁne-tuning between
environmental taxation and the deﬁnition of the region without taxation. Speciﬁcally, it is rec-
ommended to reduce the no-tax region (reduce ˜n) when the environmental taxation increases.
Starting from a generic set of policy parameter values

c+, ˜n+
, the recommendation is to
preserve at least the following relation if c is further reduced (which follows from (19)):
˜n = ˜n+ + θ
c
1 −A
(26)
with θ > 1. By following this guideline, if we are in the region of the parameter space where
theequilibrium R∗exists(equilibriumwithlowenvironmentaldegradation),weremaininthis
region by increasing the environmental taxation and adjusting, at the same time, the threshold
of the no-environmental-tax region. This means that c is reduced and ˜n is reduced as well
according to (26). The outcome is a reduction of the levels of environmental degradation, see
Fig. 7(a).
9 The counterintuitive result that an increase in taxation (i.e., a reduction in c) can lead to higher environmental
damage can be explained mathematically. Indeed, this occurs only when, by increasing taxation (reducing c),
we leave the parameter region where R∗is a stable equilibrium and enter the region where the model generates
ﬂuctuations. These ﬂuctuations occur within the range

R∗, L∗
. Hence, crossing the border between these
regions inevitably leads to an increase in average environmental damage. However, reducing c produces a
second effect: R∗decreases. Which of these two effects prevails determines whether the average damage
increases or decreases as c is further reduced. Despite the alternating increases and decreases, numerical
simulations conﬁrm an overall trend of decreasing environmental damage as taxation increases.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 One-dimensional bifurcation diagram of the map F given in (15) in the c-parameter plane for ﬁxed
˜n = 1.8 + 1.1
c
1−A in (a), ˜n = 2.2 + 1.1
c
1−A in (b) and ˜n = 2.2 + 1.2
c
1−A in (c). Remaining parameter
A = 0.5
Finally, let us consider the region of the parameters space where L∗is the equilibrium of
the model. Increasing the environmental taxation and adjusting the threshold of the no-
environmental tax region according to the policy rule (26) allow us to enter the region
characterized by cycles and (eventually) the region where R∗is the stable equilibrium of
the model. This shift requires that θ is sufﬁciently higher than one, leading to a progressive
decrease in the levels of average environmental degradation, as shown in Fig. 7(b)-(c).
An extensive numerical investigation, not reported here for the sake of space, conﬁrms
that adjusting the policy parameter according to rule (26) prevents an increase in average
environmental damage, as also observable from the one-dimensional bifurcation diagrams in
Fig. 7. Overall, we can conclude that this result is supported by the analytical investigation
of the global dynamics of the map conducted in the previous section. Indeed, observing an
increase in environmental damage in response to higher taxation would require leaving the
region of the parameter space where R∗is an equilibrium and entering the region where
ﬂuctuations occur. The mathematical analysis of the model’s dynamics, particularly with
respect to the parameter space, conﬁrms that this cannot happen when the policy is designed
following rule (26).
Allinall,thepolicyimplicationssupportedbytheglobaldynamicsanalysedintheprevious
section, together with the graphical evidence provided by the bifurcation diagrams, can be
summarized as follows:
1) By tuning (i.e. reducing) ˜n, it is possible to lower the level of environmental damage from
L∗(the highest attainable level) to R∗(the lowest attainable level). These two levels do
not depend on ˜n, and values of environmental degradation below R∗cannot be achieved
through this policy instrument alone.
2) By reducing c, that is, by increasing taxation, it is possible to lower the minimum attain-
able level of environmental damage R∗, while L∗remains independent of c. However, a
reduction in c alone does not guarantee that the level R∗can be reached. In such a case,
it is also necessary to reduce the threshold level ˜n. For sufﬁciently low values of ˜n, the
level R∗can always be attained.
3) Given a combination of policy parameters (c, ˜n), the following policy prescriptions apply,
depending on the observed level of environmental degradation:
(a) if the observed level is equal to L∗, the policy recommendation is to increase taxation
(i.e. reduce c) and adjust ˜n according to rule (26) with a very large value of θ;
123

Annals of Operations Research
(b) if persistent long–run ﬂuctuations are observed, the same policy should be imple-
mented, although a slightly lower value of θ may be adopted;
(c) If the observed level is R∗, further reductions in environmental degradation require
a decrease in c and the adoption of rule (26) with θ > 1, although it is sufﬁcient for
θ to be only slightly greater than 1.
As a ﬁnal remark, we underline that the one-dimensional bifurcation diagrams of Figs.
5-7 suggest that the average level of environmental degradation may follow a jump-like
process, while displaying a clear trend toward the equilibrium value reached after crossing a
bifurcation point as a policy parameter varies. Therefore, the average level of environmental
degradation is informative about the direction and the overall effect of the policy tuning
implemented by the policymaker. By contrast, the amplitude and the type of ﬂuctuations are
less informative about whether a bifurcation point is being approached as a policy parameter
is tuned. This is due to the non-smoothness of the model. Indeed, a key feature of such
dynamical systems is the possibility of abrupt transitions from equilibrium dynamics to large
ﬂuctuations.
5 Conclusions
This paper examines the problem of pollution regulation, focusing on a simple setup where
the industry is served by one or a ﬁnite number of homogeneous ﬁrms. The regulator sets a
threshold level of pollution beyond which environmental degradation requires strong regu-
latory measures. Below this threshold, no particular restrictions are imposed on the industry.
Above the threshold level, a Pigouvian pollution tax is imposed, and each ﬁrm takes emission
abatement measures and pays the tax based on net emissions to the environment. The dynam-
ics of environmental degradation can be modelled through a discontinuous map of the Lorenz
type, which has been extensively studied. We present a complete analysis focusing on the
most relevant policy parameters, given by the threshold level of environmental degradation
that triggers additional measures and the amount of the tax. By maintaining an extremely
simple economic structure, we can show analytically the possible dynamics of environmental
degradation. Regarding policy implications, we show the existence of a threshold level for
the no-tax area that makes taxation ineffective. Moreover, if taxation is increased without
proper alignment with the border of the no-tax region, ﬂuctuations can emerge, leading to
an increase in the average environmental degradation. Therefore, careful alignment between
the border of the no-tax area and the level of taxation is crucial to ensure an effective green
policy.
We think that this work can be a ﬁrst step toward understanding a more complex threshold
taxation system. There may be potential room for extensions of the basic model presented
here in various dimensions. First of all, it is possible to assume the presence of multiple
thresholds of progressive taxation, each of which implies that the model remains unidimen-
sional but with multiple piecewise branches of discontinuity. The economic setup can also
be made more general, although this extension seems fairly straightforward. An interesting
multidimensional reformulation of the model, on the other hand, may be obtained by incor-
porating more pollutants into the base model, thus introducing multidimensional thresholds,
123

Annals of Operations Research
that is, a threshold for each pollutant, see Bennett et al. (2008). We feel we should leave such
extensions to future work on the subject.
Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to the journal editors and the two anonymous referees for their
insightful comments and constructive suggestions, which greatly improved the quality of the manuscript. The
work of Fabio Lamantia is funded by the PRIN 2022 under the Italian Ministry of University and Research
(MUR) Prot. 2022YMLS4T – TEC – Tax Evasion and Corruption: theoretical models and empirical studies. A
quantitative-based approach for the Italian case. The work of Davide Radi and Iryna Sushko has been funded
by the European Union - Next Generation EU, Missione 4: "Education and Research" - Componente 2: "From
research to business", through PRIN 2022 under the Italian Ministry of University and Research (MUR).
Project: 2022JRY7EF - Qnt4Green - Quantitative Approaches for Green Bond Market: Risk Assessment,
Agency Problems and Policy Incentives - CUP: J53D23004700008. Davide Radi thank the European Union
(REFRESH Project-Research Excellence for Region Sustainability and High-Tech Industries of the European
Just Transition Fund, Grant CZ.10.03.01/00/22 003/000004). This paper was written with the ﬁnancial support
of the Student Grant Competition at the Faculty of Economics of the VSB - Technical University of Ostrava
within the project SP2026/003. Davide Radi thanks the Gruppo Nazionale di Fisica Matematica GNFM-
INdAM for ﬁnancial support.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore within the CRUI-CARE
Agreement.
Declarations
Conﬂicts of Interest All authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Avrutin, V., Gardini, L., Sushko, I., & Tramontana, F. (2019). Discontinuous Piecewise-Smooth One-
Dimensional Maps. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Avrutin, V., Schanz, M., & Gardini, L. (2010). Calculation of bifurcation curves by map replacement. Inter-
national Journal of Bifurcation & Chaos, 20(10), 3105–3135.
Bennett, E. M., Carpenter, S. R., & Cardille, J. A. (2008). Estimating the risk of exceeding thresholds in
environmental systems. Water, Air & Soil Pollution, 191, 131–138.
Berry, D., & Mestel, B. (1991). Wandering interval for lorenz maps with bounded nonlinearity. Bulletin of the
London Mathematical Society, 23, 183–189.
Buccella, D., Fanti, L., & Gori, L. (2021). To abate, or not to abate? a strategic approach on green production
in cournot and bertrand duopolies. Energy Economics, 96, Article 105164.
Buccella, D., Fanti, L., & Gori, L. (2024). Environmental policies in a polluting duopoly: a simple comparison.
Italian Economic Journal, 1–26.
Buccella, D., Fanti, L., Gori, L., & Sodini, M. (2024). The abatement game in a dynamic oligopoly: social
welfare versus proﬁts. Annals of Operations Research, 337, 1037–1065.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Carlsson, F. (2000). Environmental taxation and strategic commitment in duopoly models. Environmental and
Resource Economics, 15, 243–256.
Chidiac, S., El Najjar, P., El Rayess, Y., Ouaini, N., & El Azzi, D. (2023). A comprehensive review of water
quality indices (wqis): history, models, attempts and perspectives. Reviews in Environmental Science and
Bio/Technology, 22, 349–395.
Feng, L., Shi, Y., Yang, Z., Lam, J. F. I., Lin, S., Zhan, J., & Chen, H. (2025). Dynamic correlation of
environmental regulation, technological innovation, and corporate carbon emissions: Empirical evidence
from china listed companies. Scientiﬁc Reports, 15, 8433.
Gardini, L., Avrutin, V., & Sushko, I. (2014). Codimension-2 border collision bifurcations in one-dimensional
discontinuous piecewise smooth maps. International Journal of Bifurcation & Chaos, 24(2), 1450024.
Gardini, L., Tramontana, F., Avrutin, V., & Schanz, M. (2010). Border collision bifurcations in 1d pwl map
and Leonov’s approach. International Journal of Bifurcation & Chaos, 20(10), 3085–3104.
He, L., Yuan, B., Bian, J., & Lai, K. K. (2023). Differential game theoretic analysis of the dynamic emission
abatement in low-carbon supply chains. Annals of Operations Research, 324, 355–393.
Homburg, A. J. (1996). Global Aspects of Homoclinic Bifurcations of Vector Fields. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Jørgensen, S., Martín-Herrán, G., & Zaccour, G. (2010). Dynamic games in the economics and management
of pollution. Environmental Modeling & Assessment, 15, 433–467.
Keener, J. P. (1980). Chaotic behavior in piecewise continuous difference equations. Transactions of the
American Mathematical Society, 216, 589–604.
Ma, L., Ma, S., Tang, Q., Sun, M., Yan, H., Yuan, X., et al. (2024). Environmental regulation effect on the
different technology innovation-based: an empirical analysis. PLoS One, 19(1), Article e0296008.
Manta, A. G., Doran, N. M., B˘adîrcea, R. M., Badareu, G., & T˘aran, A. M. (2023). Does the implementation
of a pigouvian tax be considered an effective approach to address climate change mitigation? Economic
Analysis and Policy, 80, 1719–1731.
Marsiglio, S., & Tolotti, M. (2024). Complexity in low-carbon transitions: Uncertainty and policy implications.
Energy Economics, 138, Article 107803.
Nusse, H. E., & Yorke, J. A. (1992). Border-collision bifurcations including period two to period three for
piecewise smooth systems. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 57, 39–57.
Rand, D. (1978). Exotic phenomena in games and duopoly models. Journal of Mathematical Economics, 5(2),
173–184.
Segerson, K. (1988). Uncertainty and incentives for nonpoint pollution control. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 15(1), 87–98.
La Torre, D., Marsiglio, S., & Privileggi, F. (2025). A game of transboundary pollution under endogenous
ecological uncertainty. Environmental and Resource Economics, 88, 2885–2906.
Ulph, A. (1996). Environmental policy and international trade when governments and producers act strategi-
cally. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 30(3), 265–281.
van der Ploeg, F., & de Zeeuw, A. J. (1992). International aspects of pollution control. Environmental and
Resource Economics, 2, 117–139.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123