TITLE: OR and analytics for digital, resilient, and sustainable manufacturing 4.0
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04536-3
---

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 310:1–6
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04536-3
PREFACE
OR and analytics for digital, resilient, and sustainable
manufacturing 4.0
Tsan-Ming Choi1 · Alexandre Dolgui2 · Dmitry Ivanov3 · Erwin Pesch4,5
Accepted: 12 January 2022 / Published online: 3 February 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Today and looking into the near future, digital technologies, such as blockchain (Cai et al.,
2021; Choi, 2019, 2020; Fan et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2022), 3D printing (Arbabian &
Wagner, 2020), artiﬁcial intelligence (Cui et al., 2021; Grover et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2021),
digital twins (Burgos & Ivanov, 2021; Ivanov & Dolgui, 2021), big data analytics (Ban &
Rudin, 2019; Choi et al., 2018), augmented reality (Li et al., 2020), cyber-physical systems
(Battaia et al., 2018; Panetto et al., 2019) are playing a critical role in production operations.
In fact, manufacturing systems will be more and more efﬁcient with the advance of digital
technologies (Olsen & Tomlin, 2020). At the same time, increased uncertainty, complexity,
and vulnerability of global supply chains and operations have highlighted the importance
of further research in operations resilience. Finally, the focus of companies on increased
sustainability poses new challenges in designing and managing manufacturing systems in
the age of Industry 4.0 (Choi et al., 2022; Fragapane et al., 2022; Ivanov et al., 2021; Jiang
et al., 2021; Rai et al., 2021).
This special issue publishes contributions from the operations research (OR) community
in the following areas and at the intersections of those areas, namely manufacturing and
supply chain digitalization, resilience, and sustainability. The application areas of OR and
analytics to digital, resilient, and sustainable manufacturing systems may contain descriptive
and diagnostic analyses, predictive simulation and prescriptive optimization, real time con-
trol, and adaptive learning. Examples of OR and analytics applications include logistics and
supply chain control with real-time data, inventory control and management using sensing
data, dynamic resource allocation in Industry 4.0 customized assembly systems, improving
forecasting models using big data, machine learning techniques for process control, network
visibility and risk control, optimizing systems based on predictive information (e.g., pre-
dictive maintenance), combining optimization and machine learning algorithms, and supply
chain risk analytics.
B Erwin Pesch
erwin.pesch@uni-siegen.de
1
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2
IMT Atlantique, Nantes, France
3
Berlin School of Economics and Law, Berlin, Germany
4
University of Siegen, Siegen, Germany
5
HHL Leipzig Graduate School of Management, Leipzig, Germany
123

2
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 310:1–6
With the advance of computational technologies and digital systems, success in modern
manufacturing systems design and control will become more and more dependent on ana-
lytics algorithms, combining optimization and simulation modelling. Initially intended for
process automation, business analytics techniques now disrupt markets and business models
and have a signiﬁcant impact on manufacturing systems development. Digitalization and
Industry 4.0 would signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the optimization techniques in the manufacturing
domain as well as the performance of manufacturing systems. With the help of optimization
and simulation approaches, current research generates new knowledge on manufacturing
systems design and control. However, new digital technologies create new challenges for the
applications of quantitative analysis techniques to manufacturing and open new ways and
problem statements for these applications.
In the digital age, operations functions such as sourcing, manufacturing, and logistics as
well as sales data are distributed among very different systems, such as enterprise resources
planning (ERP) systems, radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID), 5G, sensors for Internet of
Things (IoT), and blockchain (Choi et al., 2022; Dolgui et al., 2020; Dolgui and Ivanov
2022). Big data analytics would help process the raw data and convert it to be meaningful
information used by artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms in the cyber systems and managers in
the physical systems. As such, a new generation of simulation and optimization models is
arising and evolving into decision-support systems that combine simulation, optimization,
and data analytics. This also relates to the future development of metaverse.1
BetweenAugust28–30,2019,the9thIFACConferenceMIMconferencewasorganizedby
the third author of this preface at the Berlin School of Economics and Law in Germany. The
participants very much appreciated the wonderful atmosphere and excellent organization.
The goal of this regularly scheduled conference is to present and discuss current topics
in analytics, manufacturing technologies, supply chain management and the plentitude of
applications and opportunities in a changing digital environment.
The papers featured in this special issue present some of the results of this conference.
Out of the numerous high-quality submissions, only 11 papers remained after a thorough
and rigorous review process. The articles are listed below in alphabetical order of the corre-
sponding ﬁrst authors. As a remark, the length of each summary does not reﬂect relevance
or importance.
The paper A real-time integrated optimization of the aircraft holding time and rerouting
under risk area by Linlin Chen, Shuihua Han, Chaokan Du, and Zongwei Luo presents
a real-time optimization method to cope with ﬂight delays caused by, e.g., bad weather
conditions or other disruptions. The idea of their proposed method is to allow rerouting
and updating positions every few minutes, introducing intermediate target points. They also
consider factors such as the relative position and relative velocity.
In the paper Refurbished products and supply chain incentives by Zhixin Chen, Shijian
Hong, Xiang Ji, Ruixia Shi, and Jie Wu, the key research question is on how online retail
platforms and new retail technologies have enabled retailers to sell remanufactured products
in multiple markets. This study examines supply chain members’ incentives for remanufac-
tured products in a two-channel supply chain. The authors analytically examine the conditions
under which the retailer is willing to sell remanufactured products and the impact of reman-
ufactured products on proﬁts in three different cases, i.e., selling in the local market, selling
across markets, and selling in two markets. The manufacturer controls the sales of reman-
ufactured products through a wholesale price contract if the retailer is limited to its local
1 The popular social media platform Facebook changed its name to be Meta recently because of its ambition
in metaverse.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 310:1–6
3
market. The authors uncover that if the retailer has access to a cross-border market, supply
chain members have different incentives for remanufactured products.
Bo Feng, Jixin Zhao, and Zheyu Jiang describe in their paper Robust pricing for airlines
with partial information the dynamic pricing optimization problem with residual capacity of
air cargo by the regionally dominating airline as a leader–follower game where the smaller
airlines follow the dominating one. The authors develop a robust two-period dynamic pricing
OR model to minimize the maximum possible regret.
The paper Designing dynamic reverse logistics network for post-sale service by Shraddha
Mishra and Surya Prakash Singh examines a multi-country production–distribution network
that also provides services such as repairs and remanufacturing focusing on the warranty-
driven post-sale services. Their mixed-integer nonlinear model formulation considers hybrid
facilities that can serve both as a warehouse for forward supply chain operations and as
a collection and repair center for the reverse supply chain function. The product can also
be repaired by a manufacturer. Under this setting, the developed model allows managers
to ﬁnd the optimal network conﬁguration comprised of the optimal locations/allocations of
the existing/new facilities, the distribution of returned products for refurbishing and reman-
ufacturing, and the capacity expansion of the existing plants and warehouses to facilitate
remanufacturing and repair services.
Ruilin Pan, Qiong Wang, Zhenghong Li, Jianhua Cao, and Yongjin Zhang in their paper
Steelmaking-continuous casting scheduling problem with multi-position reﬁning furnaces
under time-of-use tariffs examine the production scheduling problem of energy-intensive
enterprises with multi-position reﬁning furnaces under time-of-use tariffs. They ﬁrst formu-
late a mixed-integer nonlinear programming optimization model that aims to minimize jobs
completion time, machines idle time, and total electricity costs subject to the double-position
characteristics and some additional process constraints. Their proposed model is solved by a
Lagrangian relaxation algorithm based on a subgradient algorithm. Further, an interior point
algorithm is adopted to solve sub-problems obtained by job-level and batch-level decompo-
sition. The authors prove computationally the performance of the job-level decomposition
and demonstrate its superiority compared to a commercial solver.
In Measuring and eliminating the bullwhip in closed loop supply chains using control the-
ory and Internet of Things, the author Christos I. Papanagnou considers a closed-loop supply
chain system including the customers, retailer, distributor, and manufacturer. Customers
are allowed to return products to the retailer. The ordering policy is decentralized based
on inventory levels and demand. The objective is to determine the relationship between the
replenishment policy, return rates, and reasons for triggering the Bullwhip effect by the order-
ing policy. Moreover, the author studies the impact of using IoT on inventory variance and
Bullwhip effect. One key ﬁnding is that the use of IoT can effectively dampen the Bullwhip
effect.
Sustainability performance predictions in supply chains: grey and rough set theoretical
approaches is the title of the paper by R. Rajesh where he formulates a periodic prediction
model based on grey theory. The author estimates a company’s indicators based on historical
sustainability performance of supply chains. He applies the rough set theory to evaluate the
results and generates important insights.
Silvestro Vespoli, Guido Guizzi, Elisa Gebennini, and Andrea Grassi study in their paper A
novel throughput control algorithm for semi-heterarchical industry 4.0 architecture produc-
tion control in a semi-hierarchical manufacturing environment that is typical in the Industry
4.0 era. The authors propose a cascade control algorithm considering the work-in-progress
inventory as the primary control lever for achieving a speciﬁc throughput target. In particular,
123

4
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 310:1–6
their proposed approach allows managers to enhance the throughput that is controlled on the
basis of order arrivals.
In the paper An effective multi-objective whale swarm algorithm for energy-efﬁcient
scheduling of distributed welding ﬂow shop, Guangchen Wang, Xinyu Li, Liang Gao, and
Peigen Li consider the welding ﬂow shop optimization problem that can be considered as a
form of permutation ﬂow shop. As an increase in the number of machines may reduce the
makespan but also increases the energy consumption, the major research question is to ﬁnd
the right balance of these two objectives. The problem is decomposed into three subproblems,
namely the allocation of jobs to different factories, the scheduling in each factory, and the
determination of the number of machines for it. A swarm algorithm is used to minimize the
energy consumption and the makespan.
The paper Differential game analysis of carbon emissions reduction and promotion in
a sustainable supply chain considering social preferences by Liangjie Xia, Yongwan Bai,
Sanjoy Ghose, and Juanjuan Qin examines the impact of consumer low-carbon awareness
and social preferences, including relationship and status preferences, on emissions reduction
and promotion. In the setting with one manufacturer and one retailer, the authors analytically
conduct a differential game analysis for several scenarios. Their key ﬁndings are related to
the beneﬁts of the cost-sharing contracts for the overall supply chain.
An increasing number of companies are selling their products not only in the traditional
way but through third-party sellers on online platforms. In the resale mode, the platform buys
products from the manufacturer at a wholesale price and then resells them to consumers.
In the marketplace mode, the platform gives the manufacturer access to sell directly to
consumers and charges the manufacturer a commission. Quite obviously, online sales also
have an impact on ofﬂine sales. Yugang Yu, Xue Li, and Xiaoping Xu look in their paper
Reselling or marketplace mode for an online platform: the choice between cap-and-trade
and carbon tax regulation on cap-and-trade and carbon tax schemes as a measure to control
emissions. In their study, the government provides carbon credits to businesses at no cost,
and businesses can buy carbon credits, buy or sell at an emissions trading price through an
emissions trading market. In this case, the environmental policy thus inﬂuences production
decisions. The authors reveal the inﬂuence of resale and marketplace operations on proﬁts,
carbon emissions and social welfare of the corresponding supply chain system.
It is our great honor and pleasure to have guest-edited this important special issue in Annals
of Operations Research (ANOR). Before closing, we would like to thank Professor Endre
Boros, the Editor-in-Chief of ANOR, as well as the publications managers of AOR Katie
D’Agosta and Ann Pulido for supporting us in organizing this special issue. We sincerely
thank all the ad-hoc reviewers for providing critical reviews. We also thank all the authors
for their excellent contributions. Tsan-Ming Choi would like to acknowledge the support by
Yushan Fellow Program (NTU-110VV012).
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 310:1–6
5
References
Arbabian, M. E., & Wagner, M. R. (2020). The impact of 3D printing on manufacturer–retailer supply chains.
European Journal of Operational Research, 285(2), 538–552.
Ban, G. Y., & Rudin, C. (2019). The big data newsvendor: Practical insights from machine learning. Operations
Research, 67(1), 90–108.
Battaia, O., Otto, A., Pesch, E., & Sgarbossa, F. (2018). Future trends in management and operation of assembly
systems: From customized assembly systems to cyber-physical systems. Omega, 78, 1–4.
Burgos, D., & Ivanov, D. (2021). Food retail supply chain resilience and the COVID-19 pandemic: A digital
twin-based impact analysis and improvement directions. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 152, 102412.
Cai, Y. J., Choi, T. M., & Zhang, J. (2021). Platform supported supply chain operations in the blockchain era:
Supply contracting and moral hazards. Decision Sciences, 52(4), 866–892.
Choi, T. M. (2019). Blockchain-technology-supported platforms for diamond authentication and certiﬁcation
in luxury supply chains. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 128,
17–29.
Choi, T. M. (2020). Supply chain ﬁnancing using blockchain: Impacts on supply chains selling fashionable
products. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03615-7
Choi, T. M., Kumar, S., Yue, X., & Chan, H. L. (2022). Disruptive technologies and operations management
in the Industry 4.0 era and beyond. Production and Operations Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/
poms.13622
Choi, T. M., Wallace, S. W., & Wang, Y. (2018). Big data analytics in operations management. Production
and Operations Management, 27(10), 1868–1883.
Cui, R., Li, M., & Zhang, S. (2021). AI and procurement. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management.
https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.0989
Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., Potryasaev, S., Sokolov, B., Ivanova, M., & Werner, F. (2020). Blockchain-oriented
dynamic modelling of smart contract design and execution control in the supply chain. International
Journal of Production Research, 58(7), 2184–2199.
Dolgui, A., & Ivanov, D. (2022). 5G in digital supply chain and operations management: Fostering ﬂexibility,
end-to-end connectivity and real-time visibility through internet-of-everything. International Journal of
Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.2002969.
Fan, Z. P., Wu, X. Y., & Cao, B. B. (2020). Considering the traceability awareness of consumers: Should the
supply chain adopt the blockchain technology? Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-020-03729-y
Fragapane, G., Ivanov, D., Peron, M., Sgarbossa, F., & Strandhagen, J. O. (2022). Increasing ﬂexibility and
productivity in Industry 4.0 production networks with autonomous mobile robots and smart intralogistics.
Annals of Operations Research, 308, 125–143.
Grover, P., Kar, A. K., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2022). Understanding artiﬁcial intelligence adoption in operations
management: Insights from the review of academic literature and social media discussions. Annals of
Operations Research, 308, 177–213.
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2021). A digital supply chain twin for managing the disruptions risks and resilience
in the era of Industry 4.0. Production Planning and Control, 32(9), 775–788.
Ivanov, D., Tang, C. S., Dolgui, A., Battini, D., & Das, A. (2021). Researchers’ perspectives on Industry
4.0: Multi-disciplinary analysis and opportunities for operations management. International Journal of
Production Research, 59(7), 2055–2078.
Jiang, Z., Yuan, S., Ma, J., & Wang, Q. (2021). The evolution of production scheduling from Industry 3.0
through Industry 4.0. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2021.1925772
Li, H., Gupta, A., Zhang, J., & Flor, N. (2020). Who will use augmented reality? An integrated approach based
on text analytics and ﬁeld survey. European Journal of Operational Research, 281, 502–516.
Olsen, T. L., & Tomlin, B. (2020). Industry 4.0: Opportunities and challenges for operations management.
Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 22(1), 11–122.
Panetto, H., Iung, B., Ivanov, D., Weichhart, G., & Wang, X. (2019). Challenges for the cyber-physical
manufacturing enterprises of the future. Annual Reviews in Control, 47, 200–213.
Rai, R., Tiwari, M. K., Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2021). Machine learning in manufacturing and Industry 4.0
applications. International Journal of Production Research, 59(16), 4773–4778.
Sun, X., Xu, W., Jiang, H., & Wang, Q. (2021). A deep multitask learning approach for air quality prediction.
Annals of Operations Research, 303, 51–79.
Zheng, K., Zhang, Z., & Gauthier, J. (2022). Blockchain-based intelligent contract for factoring business in
supply chains. Annals of Operations Research, 308, 777–797.
123

6
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 310:1–6
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123