TITLE: Predicting negotiation behavior to support decision making in civil dispute resolution
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06711-8
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 29 December 2022 / Accepted: 12 June 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Predicting negotiation behavior to support decision making 
in civil dispute resolution
Wen Zhang1
 · Jingwen Shi2
 · Xiaojun Wang3
 · Henry Wynn4
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06711-8
Abstract
Despite the advocacy of leveraging data analytics to improve operational efficiency, there 
is a paucity of research on how analytical technologies afford professional service inno­
vation and enhancement. We propose a data-driven decision support framework for civil 
litigation negotiation, which is a routine business activity in legal service firms. It is typi­
cally conducted in a traditional manner with the conflicting parties drawing on their past 
experiences and prior knowledge to guide decision-making. This model predicts human 
negotiation behavior based on historical records and incorporates the behavioral insights 
into the decision-making process. We introduce a sequential directed acyclic graph to 
characterize the causal relationships between offers and employ different approaches to 
predicting the opponent’s next moves. By integrating utility analysis, each player can de­
cide whether to accept the opponent’s offer or counter back. The proposed framework is 
illustrated through a field experiment based on the UK MoJ Portal for handling low-cost 
injury claims and 88 cases with complete negotiation history. We find that better outcomes 
for both parties can be delivered by implementing the proposed model. The analysis result 
also represents convincing evidence that low-cost cases should ideally be settled out of 
the court via negotiation to maximize shared benefits. This paradigm could be easily gen­
eralized to other types of civil dispute resolutions negotiation to enhance both operational 
efficiency and service quality.
Keywords  Behavior operations · Decision support systems · Negotiation · Insurance 
claims · Civil litigation
1  Introduction
The time and financial cost of civil litigations have been receiving growing attention in 
many countries. For instance, while this issue has been highlighted by the famous Woolf 
report (Woolf, 1995) and the more recent Jackson report (Jackson, 2010) in the United 
Kingdom (UK), the problem is further accentuated by the long-tail of funding cuts by the 
government such as the ending of legal aid for civil cases and the ongoing need for better 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
utilization and allocation of scarce legal resources at the aggregate level. In order to expe­
dite dispute resolution processes and encourage collaborative approaches between conflict­
ing parties to reach out-of-court settlements, several online Pre-Action Protocols have been 
introduced in the UK since 1998 (Justice, 2017) to provide the platform for information 
exchange, and the negotiation is required prior to the filing of a claim if the possibility of 
later cost sanctions is to be avoided.
One typical Pre-Action Protocol is the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) Road traffic accident 
(RTA) Portal (hereinafter referred to as Portal). Initially introduced in 2010, Portal is a 
“Pre-Action Protocol for Low Value (up to £25,000) Personal Injury Claims in RTA from 31 
July 2013” (Justice, 2017). Portal attempts to facilitate the dispute resolution by negotiating 
toward attaining the ideal outcome that the defendant pays damages and costs as agreed 
upon by both parties before the claimant starts proceedings. Within the UK legal system, 
Portal probably presents the most structured environment for negotiation in resolving liti­
gation-based disputes, with strict rules governing the timing and order of negotiation offers. 
The Portal process involves three stages: Stage one, within which the liability is investigated 
and evaluated; Stage two, where conflicting parties seek to negotiate a settlement agree­
ment; and Stage three, where an oral or paper hearing will be issued if two parties cannot 
come to a final agreement through negotiation. A significant portion of decision-making 
within the Portal process occurs during Stage two, as highlighted with the red box in Fig. 1, 
and both parties need to decide whether to accept the current offer, or counter back, or leave 
the bargaining table in rare cases.
Negotiation conducted in Portal adopts a sequential bargaining game with both players 
taking turns to make their moves, and the final outcomes can be either agreements reached 
by the involved parties or decisions made by judges in court cases when negotiations fail. 
The defendant has 15 days to consider the claimant’s initial offer, which is followed by 20 
Fig. 1  MoJ RTA portal process negotiation stage decision tree
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
days that allow for an iterative two-way communication between the conflicting parties, 
yielding a rough estimate of 35 days in total. Considering the time spent evaluating current 
offers and deciding next moves, i.e. accepting or making a counteroffer, this time window 
can be interpreted as three or four rounds of negotiation, seldom exceeding six runs. In 
RTA cases, the scope of negotiation is usually narrowed down to two fundamental cost 
components: the general cost that is primarily associated with the claimant’s injury char­
acteristics, including type and severity, and the special cost that takes into account other 
explicit or implicit costs incurred, such as income loss, repairs cost, physiotherapy cost, etc. 
With the special cost largely driven by idiosyncratic factors, we focus on negotiations over 
the general cost and seek to exploit the predictive value of claimants’ injuries to improve 
cost-benefit analysis and inform negotiation decision-making. Specifically, a crucial figure 
behind a negotiation decision is the reserve that indicates the resistance points where nego­
tiators are indifferent between reaching an agreement and walking away (Walton & McK­
ersie, 1991), in other words the minimum to accept for claimants and the maximum to pay 
for defendants. The negotiation is complicated by the fact that reserves are usually treated 
as confidential and thus both parties have to bargain under incomplete information. Having 
a good sense of opponents’ reserves empowers bargainers to make more effective decisions, 
and one way to estimate opponents’ reservation values is to learn from their previous offers.
While Portal has put a structured negotiation infrastructure in place, the negotiation itself 
still needs to be conducted in its traditional sense, via back-and-forth proposals. So far, 
lawyers still draw heavily on individual experiences and have not fully realized the benefits 
of the growing data availability for more efficient settlements. According to our fieldwork 
within a top 50 UK legal service company, lawyers are constantly questioning themselves 
throughout the negotiation process: “Should we accept the opponent’s offer or make a coun­
teroffer now?”. Despite that Portal guides the joint efforts from both parties to avoid pro­
longed haggling processes (Fisher et al., 2011), the legal service community still has a long 
way to go in unleashing the tremendous potentials of decision science tools to inform their 
decision-making processes and to maximize both sides’ interests, such as the utility-based 
perspective (Kuster, 2017).
There has been an ongoing discussion in the operation management community on how 
to leverage data analytics to improve the operation efficiency and service quality with the 
growing accessibility of big data in the recent years (McAfee, 2002; Hendricks et al., 2007; 
Choi et al., 2018). However, there is relatively little research about how innovative analyt­
ics approaches are changing the service industry, especially professional service (Lewis & 
Brown, 2012; Dobrzykowski et al., 2016), both theoretically and practically. Although alter­
native dispute resolution (ADR) is encouraged from the extant literature (Shavell, 1995) and 
our interaction with the key stakeholders in the legal service sector to avoid the costs of the 
issuing legal proceedings in civil disputes, there are rare applications of innovative analytics 
models to support legal dispute settlement. To fill this gap, this research addresses some key 
questions: how to unlock the data potential in civil dispute negotiation, an issue that legal 
service firms face on a daily basis; how to use innovative analytics models to help legal 
professionals make a more informed decision in a civil disputes negotiation.
To address the above questions, we propose a sequential Negotiation Decision Support 
Framework (Fig. 2) to enhance negotiator engagement in the Portal process or to promote 
utility-based decision-making by incorporating behavioral elements (Gino & Pisano, 2008; 
Roels & Staats, 2021). The proposed framework learns patterns by observing behavior from 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
historical records, establishes estimates of negotiation costs, and approaches a utility-max­
imizing combination of choices. On the individual level, the lawyer/claim handler can then 
combine the system’s recommendations with their own experience and expertise into final 
decisions for specific cases. At an organizational level, it will improve the operational effi­
ciency as well as the service quality of legal service companies in dealing with broader civil 
litigation negotiation problems, especially for low-value claims which are straightforward 
and well suited for analytical modeling. On the societal level, the system will contribute 
towards meeting national objectives of reducing the amount of time and expense spent on 
civil litigations, including better allocation of judicial resources with smaller-value cases 
being settled out of courts. This study is therefore not only beneficial to the insurance or 
legal companies, but also to the social welfare, hence contributes to the increasing discus­
sion of AI/data science for social good (Taddeo & Floridi, 2018; Tomašev et al., 2020).
The decision support framework consists of two parts: a Directed acyclic graph (DAG) 
model that characterizes the iterative exchange of proposals in historical records and a 
sequential decision-making process that builds on cost-utility evaluations of current situa­
tions. Overall, the paper introduces a protocol for exploiting data-driven and model-based 
approaches in a civil litigation context, grounding the negotiation in a behavioral model, but 
one within which actual decisions (offer or settle) can still be freely made. The game then 
amounts to Player 1 using the model to predict Player 2’s future behavior, conditional on 
Player 1’s action and vice versa. An ideal version would be for Player 1 to predict the entire 
future behavior, but we restrict to the prediction of the Player 2 action at the next stage only. 
Part of a useful protocol should be to study the transition from fixing the reserves to the first, 
and critical, offer and counteroffer, but this is empirically difficult to achieve in incomplete 
information bargaining where reserves are highly confidential. The obstacles to adopting 
the Bayesian estimation method in practice, the commonly adopted approach to estimating 
reserves (Zeng & Sycara, 1998), lie in the following constraints: lack of prior knowledge 
and the limited number of iterations (six to the maximum).
Therefore, this research contributes to the literature by proposing a practical data-driven 
sequential decision framework for negotiation under incomplete information, which takes 
players’ behavior into account and thus overcomes the assumptions required for Bayes­
Fig. 2  Overview of the proposed decision support system in the context of legal negotiation
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ian-based approaches. The application of this proposed framework is demonstrated with 
88 real-world portal cases with full negotiation paths collected from the partner company. 
We further illustrate how better negotiation outcomes could have been delivered with the 
system, which identifies behavioral patterns, forms reasonable predictions, and performs 
utility-based decision-making. Our approach facilitates more informed decision-making 
in litigation negotiation promoting efficient dispute resolution and effective use of legal 
resources, and therefore maximizing the collective benefit of the negotiation parties and 
reducing unnecessary and adversarial litigation at public expense.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 reviews the related studies, 
namely negotiation with incomplete information and negotiation in the legal context. Sec­
tion 3 describes the formulation of the system while Sect. 4 demonstrates the practical appli­
cation via a field experiment. Section 5 discusses the reserve, Bayesian learning and other 
related topics and Sect. 6 summarizes our main findings and potential directions for future 
research.
2  Literature review
As one of the three main ADR processes for settling legal disputes without litigation, nego­
tiation (Goldberg et al., 2014) is one of the most routine activities of legal service firms. 
Since negotiation has been extensively studied by researchers from different areas in the 
past several decades (Nash, 1950; Rubinstein, 1982; Raiffa, 1982), we mainly focus on stud­
ies closely related to ours: namely negotiation with incomplete information and negotiation 
in the legal service context.
2.1  Negotiation with incomplete information
Most theoretical negotiation research assumes that negotiators have complete information 
about each other and then gives pre-computed solutions to specific problems (Rosenschein 
& Zlotkin, 1994). However, this perfect information assumption in many domains is not 
realistic, and many negotiations are conducted without complete information in prac­
tice such as the uncertainty of the opponent’s reserves (Chatterjee & Samuelson, 1983). 
To address the issue of information unavailability, much research has been done to better 
understand the opponent through the negotiation history, for example to infer the opponent’s 
utility (Nielsen & Jensen, 2004). According to Baarslag et al. (2016), there are roughly four 
types of methods for learning the opponent, i.e., Bayesian learning, non-linear regression, 
kernel density estimation, and artificial neural network. More recent work includes rein­
forcement learning for negotiating team formation (Bachrach et al., 2020). For comprehen­
sive literature of negotiation with incomplete information, we refer to Baarslag et al. (2016) 
and Kiruthika et al. (2020).
Among the methods described above, Bayesian sequential decision is one of the most 
popular methods in the literature. For example, Zeng and Sycara (1998) design a sequen­
tial decision-making model capable of characterizing the opponent’s reserve via Bayesian 
learning. Lin et al. (2008) apply the Bayes theorem to update their beliefs of the opponent’s 
type. However, a proper prior distribution should be held to form a Bayesian learning, which 
is not easy in practice. What’s more, in our problem, it is difficult to estimate the opponent’s 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
reserve or negotiation strategies since each party usually only has three or four opportuni­
ties to propose a new offer. Instead, the approach proposed in this study is closer to the 
non-linear regression approach, where the opponent’s future behavior is estimated from 
the negotiation history, with the difference being that we predict the behavior based on the 
aggregate preferences drawn from similar historical records rather than the specific indi­
vidual’s negotiation path. The idea is in line of Cohen (2018)’s suggestions of predicting 
future outcomes with the great volume of available data collected by firms to inform future 
operational decisions. In other words, negotiation patterns derived from the study of groups 
will help estimate the behavioral patterns of the opponent, which is particularly suitable for 
the automatic processing of similar, low-valued and structured cases.
2.2  Negotiation in the legal context
Litigation can be viewed as a “bargaining under the shadow of the law”, and the lawyer 
resolves the dispute by convincingly recommending what would happen if the court con­
siders and decides on this issue (Mnookin & Kornhauser, 1979). The economic analysis of 
litigation and settlement decisions can be traced back to Landes (1971) and Gould (1973), 
which investigate the problem mainly from a legal perspective without explicitly modeling 
the bargaining process nor considering the possibility of informational asymmetry between 
the parties. Png (1983) and Ordover and Rubinstein (1983) thereby provide several bargain­
ing models of settlement decisions in the presence of asymmetric information. Bebchuk 
(1984) argues that the strict assumption held by these models that parties are not free to 
choose their settlement terms presents some limitations. He therefore proposes a model in 
which parties are free to determine the size of their settlement offers.
Nonetheless, in Bebchuk (1984)’s model, the claimant knows the actual harm while the 
defendant knows only the probability distribution of possible harm, which cannot properly 
represent the concept of incomplete information. In practice, the actual harm in this type of 
claim is estimated from the doctor’s opinion (or that of another relevant expert) which is (1) 
usually a range rather than an accurate number that is known exactly by either party and (2) 
not authoritative, in that a judge in a subsequent hearing may diverge from the estimated 
value. A more practical definition of incomplete information could be the “reserve” of each 
party as discussed before. Therefore, to understand and approach the opponent’s reserve, 
it seems natural to spend time on negotiating to reveal more information. However, this 
assumption may not always be true due to different situations or the high cost of information 
discovery (Bone, 2003). For detailed economic analysis of legal procedure, see Cooter and 
Rubinfeld (1994) and Bone (2003). Thus, how to negotiate by efficiently utilizing available 
information, either from estimating the opponent’s reserve or employing other proxy meth­
ods, has not been fully exploited.
Computer scientists have also shown great interest in analyzing and resolving legal dis­
putes via negotiation, and these systems are usually categorized as Negotiation Support 
Systems (NSS)s. Depending on different negotiation theories, NSSs can be developed based 
on rules reasoning, cases reasoning and so forth (Zeleznikow, 2021). Carneiro et al. (2013) 
establish the UMCourt that attempts to explore the potential of the combined use of different 
technologies such as case-based reasoning and multi-agent system to solve legal disputes in 
the context of the Portuguese labor law. Zeleznikow (2021) provides an extensive state-of-
the-art survey of NSSs. Nevertheless, most existing research is theoretical and few of them 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
really “make the move from the laboratory to the world of user” (Leith, 2016). Hence, we 
believe it is valuable to analyze practical data and develop an applicable paradigm that satis­
fies needs and desires of legal practitioners.
3  Methodology
3.1  Mathematical formulation
Assuming constant reserve for the sake of simplification, we let R(c) denote the claim­
ant’s reserve, and xs denote her offer at the negotiation stage s; similarly, the defendant’s 
reserve and offer are given by R(d) and ys, respectively. We further assume R(d) > R(c) 
to ensure the existence of a zone of possible agreement (ZOPA) (Raiffa, 1982), as graphi­
cally depicted in Fig. 3. At each negotiation stage s, both parties establish bottom lines 
(i.e. reserves) that signify the worst acceptable outcomes, the minimal amount to accept 
for claimants and the maximum amount to pay for defendants, while attempting to benefit 
as much as possible from negotiations. Accordingly, the reserve figures are determined in 
advance of discussions based on their respective anticipation of the case’s general cost using 
the information set available at time t, while the actual offers at each stage tend to be more 
ambitious, higher than reserves for claimants and lower for defendants. The negotiation will 
not proceed further when either side pushes too much at the negotiating table, such as claim­
ants asking higher than the defendants’ bottom lines and vice versa.
Since the claimant takes the first move by making claims, we naturally assume that her 
first offer x1 reflects various considerations that combine her most optimistic expectation, 
the room for concessions, and her bottom line R(c). As illustrated in Fig. 4, if x1 is not 
accepted, the defendant re-offers it with a counter-offer of y2 based on his own reserve R(d) 
and his estimates ˆR(c)
1 of the claimant’s reserve R(c) based on the updated information set 
expanded by the extra variables x1, signaling the negotiation stage s = 2. In practice, we 
observe substantial gaps between x1 and y2, which leaves a wide negotiation space except 
in cases where y2 drops below the walkaway positions of claimants R(c). In subsequent 
rounds before settlement, as exemplified in stage s = 3 in Fig. 4, both parties make counter­
offers drawing on insights from the realized negotiation path and their own reserves while 
Fig. 3  Relationship among R(c), xs, R(d) and ys at stage s
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
attempting to guess their counterpart’s bottom lines to make a more “effective” offer that 
approaches their opponents’ reserves without violating them.
3.2  Prediction
Our proposed negotiation flow involves two fundamental components: the prediction of 
negotiation behavior and decision-making support. Understanding and anticipating the 
behavioral patterns of specific opponents would be difficult in the absence of track records. 
However, this cognitive process can be performed at the group level rather than at the 
individual level. With the increasing availability of data, participants can weave together 
data records from multiple cases in similar negotiation situations to identify and exploit 
behavioral patterns. Further accounting for the stage of negotiation allows greater accuracy 
in behavior recognition as negotiators may respond differently across negotiation phases 
(Faratin et al., 1998; Cao et al., 2015). To put it into practice, both parties can integrate the 
well-learned knowledge to better estimate the opponent’s moves and/or counteroffers based 
on the realized negotiation path. Figure 5 summarizes the model with a DAG and illustrates 
how both parties’ counteroffers are linked to the negotiation path, for example, their previ­
ous offers plus their opponent’s latest offer, with b and c specifying the weighting for each 
of the decision drivers. Further, to highlight the sequential nature of the negotiation process, 
the different phases can be marked by either the physical time t or the negotiation stage s, 
as depicted in Fig. 6.
To be more specific, the negotiation behavior consists of the accept/reject decision and 
the proposing of counter-offers in rejection scenarios. Negotiation participants can refer to 
Fig. 5  Negotiation DAG
 
Fig. 4  Negotiation example
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
historical records at the corresponding stage s to evaluate the acceptance rate Ps of the can­
didate counter-offer figures under consideration. Following the essence of the Markov pro­
cess, we illustrate the implementation assuming that Pi,s of a specific case i is determined 
by his/her counter-offer to make pi,s, the opponent’s latest offer qi,s, and the estimated true 
cost zi, which can be calculated with the logistic regression:
 
Pi,s =
eϕ0+ϕ1pi,s+ϕ2qi,s+ϕ3zi
1 + eϕ0+ϕ1pi,s+ϕ2qi,s+ϕ3zi ,
(1)
where ϕ0, ϕ1, ϕ2, ϕ3 are regression coefficients
3.3  Utility-based decision making
Negotiation is not frictionless as costs will be incurred; players in this game are impatient 
(Fatima et al., 2014) as they have to balance incremental costs against the incremental ben­
efits of a lengthy negotiation process. Adopting a conventional utility-based approach, both 
parties seek to maximize their utility, the most straightforward approximations of which are 
the expected compensation net of costs for claimants and the negative of total payments 
including case compensation and various costs incurred during the process. Despite the 
complexity of accurately identifying all occurrences of costs in practice, various costs can 
be categorized into three types: fixed costs Cf paid by defendants that are constant irrespec­
tive of the trial result (about £500 on average in this case study according to the fieldwork), 
time-dependent costs Ct that accumulate over time Ct = f(t), and result-dependent costs 
Cr beared by the unsuccessful party (around £800).
To keep costs down, disputes ideally should end in settlement or compromise before 
being taken to court proceedings. If a quick resolution is not achieved, the court becomes 
involved and reaches its verdict by considering the evidence, primarily the medical report in 
the road accident dispute cases, and both parties’ first offers, the only available offers to the 
court. In our general cost injury case, the defendant wins when the trial decision exceeds the 
defendant’s first offer, the probability of which P d can be predicted with logistic regression 
given that the court decision is binary in nature. In real-world cases, as shown in Fig. 14, 
notable discrepancies between court decisions and defendants’ expectations are empirically 
observed, marked by low values of P d. To account for the impact of both parties’ first offers 
xi,1, yi,2 and the court decision zi proxied by the model-implied intrinsic injury cost on the 
winning probability P d, similar with Pi,s, P d can be expressed as
Fig. 6  Sequential DAG
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
P d =
eθ0+θ1xi,1+θ2yi,2+θ3zi
1 + eθ0+θ1xi,1+θ2yi,2+θ3zi ,
(2)
where θ0, θ1, θ2, θ3 are regression coefficients
Let U denote the utility function that quantifies the payoff for each party, where E(U) 
represents its expected value. For claimants, the utility function U c measures the net benefit 
considering compensation received minus costs incurred, while for defendants, U d repre­
sents the negative of total payments including compensation and costs. Assuming that we 
are dealing with N full rounds of negotiations that begin from the claimants’ asking and end 
with defendants’ offerings, following which the claimant will decide whether to accept the 
final offer or not. Adopting a utility-based analytical framework, we can evaluate their utili­
ties at stage s (s = 1 . . . N) and time t (t = 1 . . . 2N) after incorporating the cost consider­
ations and apply backward induction reasoning to guide decision-making in each iteration, 
as explained below. In the last round of offer proposals N, both parties’ decisions are affected 
by their anticipation of the judge’s perception. After the final offer from the defendant has 
been extended, the claimant evaluates her expected utility at stage s = N + 1 and time 
t = 2N + 1 to make the final “Accept or Court” decision:
 
E(U c
N+1) =
{
E(yN) −C2N := E(U c
N+1,1),
Accept yN,
G −C2N −E(Cc,r) := E(U c
N+1,2),
Reject yN and go to court, 
(3)
where G represents the expected court decision and E(Cc,r) denotes the cost dependent 
on the expected result of the claimant. While both parties can estimate the expected court 
decision based on medical reports and similar historical cases, their estimates may differ 
due to information asymmetry and different interpretations of available evidence. There­
fore, if E(U c
N+1,1) > E(U c
N+1,2), where E(·) denotes the expected value operator, that is, 
G < yN + E(Cc,r), the claimant should accept yN.
Similarly, taking one further step backward, the expected utility function for the defen­
dant at stage s = N, t = 2N is given by
 
E(U d
N)
=
{
−(xN + C2N−1 + Cf) := E(U d
N,1),
Accept xN,
−[PN · (yN + C2N + Cf) + (1 −PN) · (G + C2N + Cf + E(Cd,r))] := E(U d
N,2),
Counter with yN,

(4)
where PN is the probability that the claimant will accept yN. When E(U d
N,1) > E(U d
N,2), 
i.e. G > xN −m−(1−PN )E(Cd,r)−PN yN
1−PN
, she should accept xN. The defendant’s decision at 
this step relies on the predictive tool, which uses trained regression models to estimate PN 
based on historical patterns. These probability estimates help evaluate the expected utilities 
of two options: accepting xN immediately or making a counter-offer yN. Moving further 
backward, the utility for the claimant at t = 2N −1 is
 
E(U c
N) =
{
yN−1 −C2N−1 := E(U c
N,1),
Accept yN−1,
PN · (xN −C2N) + (1 −PN) · E(U c
N+1) := E(U c
N,2),
Counter with xN. 
(5)
Similar analysis applies when s = N −1 with U d
N−1 for the defendant
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
E(U d
N−1)
=
{
−(xN−1 + C2N−2 + Cf) := E(U d
N−1,1),
Accept xN−1,
−[PN−1 · (yN−1 + C2N−1 + Cf) + (1 −PN−1) · E(U d
N)] := E(U d
N,2),
Counter with yN−1,

(6)
and U c
N−1 for the claimant
 
E(U c
N−1)
=
{
yN−2 −C2N−3 := E(U c
N−1,1),
Accept yN−2,
PN−1 · (xN−1 −C2N−2) + (1 −PN−1) · E(U c
N) := E(U c
N−1,2),
Counter with xN−1.

(7)
4  Field experiment
In this section, we seek to investigate the practical implications of our proposed prototype 
and explore how the real world cases, either balanced or imbalanced, can be harnessed to 
generate insights. Portal process is chosen due to its structured format of negotiation in 
litigation-based dispute resolution mechanism, which means similar results can be rela­
tively easily replicated.
4.1  Background
Negotiation conducted in the Portal is a sequential process within which the claimant and 
the defendant will make an offer in turn and each party will have three or four opportuni­
ties to make an offer. There are four possible results at the end of a negotiation as shown in 
Fig. 7: 
1. Claimant and defendant reach an agreement by the end of Stage two.
2. Claimant and defendant fail to reach agreements at Stage two, and the judge’s final deci­
sion is lower than the defendant’s final offer after court.
3. Claimant and defendant go to court, and the judge’s final decision is between two the 
parties’ final offer at Stage two.
4. The judge’s final decision is higher than the claimant’s final offer after trial.
From the defendant’s point of view, result 1 and 2 are preferred as they will lead to lower 
cost compared with result 3 and 4, while which one is better requires weighing the final 
Fig. 7  Possible results of Portal negotiation process
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
verdict plus trial cost against the agreed offer of result 1. Result 3 is the most common 
result when two parties go to court hence is regarded as a neutral result to the defendant, 
which is worse than result 2. The outcome that appeals least to the defendant is result 4, 
under which situation the defendant will pay not only more compensation compared with 
accepting the claimant’s offer during the negotiation but also issue fees and other overheads 
incurred along with certain penalties. In short, the defendant pays differently for different 
outcomes and his ultimate goal is to minimize the payment, and a similar analysis applies 
to the claimant.
4.2  Tests on case data
To investigate the negotiation pattern and validate the proposed negotiation support model, 
88 cases with full negotiation paths and final court decisions are collected within a UK legal 
service firm from 2018 to 2020 (data in the legal service with highly confidential informa­
tion is difficult to obtain). Figures 8 and 9 visualize the claimants’ and defendants’ conduct 
by displaying the offers they made (y-axis) at each stage (x-axis). Not surprisingly, both par­
ties make compromises for the majority of time with claimants lowering expectations and 
defendants increasing counteroffers before reaching a settlement. The length of iterations, 
i.e. the x-axis range, varies across cases and is often influenced by the time spent on each 
round within the negotiation time window (35 days in this case).
Adopting the DAG negotiation model shown in Fig. 5, we assume that the defendant’s 
first counter-off at s = 2 would be influenced to a certain degree by the claimant’s first offer 
even in the absence of an immediate agreement. Both the graphical representation in Fig. 10, 
which displays the defendant’s first offer against the claimant’s first offer, and the simple 
linear regression in Table 1,which reveals the statistical significance of the relationship, 
lend empirical support to the argument (Fig. 11). Examining the Residuals versus Fits plot, 
as shown in Fig. 12, further detects the presence of nonlinearity. This could be attributed to 
the fact that only one observation is available to the claimant to base his judgment on at this 
stage, which might lead to claimants’ first counter-offers varying significantly across cases.
Fig. 8  Claimant’s offer for general cost records
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Common non-linear models such as cubic splines including B-Splines and natural 
splines, as well as quadratic functions, can be employed to characterize the non-linear asso­
ciations, as demonstrated in Fig. 13 that displays the fitting of different models versus the 
plain linear regression and Table 2 that quantifies the model performance. As implied in 
Fig. 13, the relationship seems to change around £6,000 and £8,000 and knots in B-splines 
and natural splines models are specified to reflect the locality.
As shown in Table 2, B-splines with the baseline interior knot (default to the median) and 
with the specified knots (£6,000 and £8,000) outperform the other models, exhibiting lower 
AIC (Akaike Information Criterion) (Akaike, 1974) and BIC (Bayesian Information Crite­
rion) (Schwarz, 1978) values, which assess model performance by balancing goodness of fit 
with model complexity, as well as higher R2 values, both adjusted and unadjusted. Combing 
Variable
Coefficient
t value
Pr(> |t|)
Intercept
817.89
3.78
0.00∗∗∗
Claimant’s first offer
0.48
11.09
< 2.2e−16***
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05
Table 1  Simple linear regression 
of the defendant’s first offer on 
the claimant’s first offer
 
Fig. 10  Relationship between the defen­
dant’s first offer and the claimant’s first 
offer
 
Fig. 9  Defendant’s offer for general cost records
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
these performance evaluation metrics, we select the B-spline with specified knots on the 
basis of its lowest AIC and RMSE (Root Mean Squared Error) as well as highest R2 values. 
In practical applications, expert knowledge can be exploited to locate these pre-specified 
interior knots to better account for the bargaining styles of negotiators. Accordingly, the 
model to predict the defendant’s first offer y2 based on the information set at stage s = 2 
from the claimant’s perspective i is
 
yi,s =
K+d+1
∑
k=1
βkBd
k(xi,s−1),
(8)
Fig. 12  Residuals versus Fits plot of defendant’s first offer and the claimant’s first offer
 
Fig. 11  Simple linear regression of the defendant’s first offer on the claimant’s first offer
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
where Bd
k(xi,s−1) denote the B-spline basis functions of degree d (d = 3) based on K 
knots (K = 4 in our model) with corresponding spline coefficient βk, with i = 1, ..., n 
referring to each of the sample case n = 88 in this research. Table  3 reports the esti­
mate model parameters ˆβk, based on which we project the model-implied offer value 
ˆyi,s = ∑K+d+1
k=1
ˆβkBd
k(xi,s−1).
Table 3  B-spline regression results for predicting defendant’s first offer from claimant’s first offer
Variable
Intercept
bs1
bs2
bs3
bs4
bs5
coefficient
1379.9
1965.7
1032.1
4281.4
2235.7
7380.9
t-value
3.734***
2.851**
2.230*
4.912***
2.252*
10.040***
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05
Model
AIC
BIC
R2
R2 (adj.) RMSE
B-splines (baseline)
1395.68 1408.07 0.65 0.64
635.39
B-splines (specified knots) 1393.33 1410.67 0.68 0.66
612.86
Natural splines (specified 
knots)
1399.82 1412.21 0.64 0.63
650.53
Quadratic function
1404.70 1414.61 0.61 0.60
676.44
Table 2  Non-linear model per­
formance comparison
 
Fig. 13  Different non-linear models of the defendant’s first offer and the claimant’s first offer compared 
with linear regression
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
From the claimant’s viewpoint, the information set expands with the arrival of the latest 
offer from her counter-party while her response will likely influence the decision-making 
of her opponent at the next stage. As indicated by Figs. 8 and 9, when countering back and 
forth, both parties display reluctance to deviate from their own latest expectations while 
making compromises towards their opponents’ offers. To understand the role played by 
these two elements, we perform similar data visualization as in the first step and seek to 
characterize the relationships using multiple linear regressions. To be more specific, the 
defendant’s offer at stage s(s > 2) based on current information set in case i is given by
 
yi,s = bs,0 + bs,1xi,s−1 + bs,2yi,s−1 + ϵi,s,
i = 1, · · · , 88.
(9)
Similarly, when the defendant’s counter-off comes out, it can be fed into the regression to 
predict the claimant’s offer at s(s > 1)
 
xi,s = cs,0 + cs,1xi,s−1 + cs,2yi,s + ϵi,s,
i = 1, · · · , 88.
(10)
Table  4 reports the performance of the one-step-ahead predictive regressions at differ­
ent stages. According to the coefficients, offers from both parties at the second round are 
predominantly driven by their own latest offers, as marked by the coefficients over 90%, 
which reveals the stickiness of their counteroffers and reluctance to compromise much at 
early stages of negotiation. The reluctance fades only to a limited extent as time evolves, 
as indicated by the 6% (95–89%) reduction in the regression coefficients when predicting 
the defendant’s counteroffers, which suggests the defendant’s intention to settle when the 
negotiation period has to come to an end.
To measure the prediction performance of models described above, we calculate the 
predicted R2, Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and RMSE with Leave One Out Cross Valida­
tion (LOOCV). Results in Table 5 show that prediction works reasonably well with a high 
predicted R2 value except for the first model, which predicts y2 via a B-spline model with 
two specified interior knots. The inferior performance stems from the difficulty of predicting 
y2 solely based on x1 in the absence of information about defendants’ preferences, while the 
other prediction models derive insights from both claimants’ and defendants’ preferences. 
Dependent 
variable
Independent variable
Coefficient
Coefficient 
value
Claimant’s 
second offer
Constant
ˆc2,0
−105.61
Claimant’s first offer
ˆc2,1
0.90***
Defendant’s first offer
ˆc2,2
0.11***
Defendant’s 
second offer
Constant
ˆb3,0
77.90
Claimant’s second offer
ˆb3,1
0.04
Defendant’s first offer
ˆb3,2
0.95***
Claimant’s 
third offer
Constant
ˆc3,0
88.65
Claimant’s second offer
ˆc3,1
0.89***
Defendant’s second offer ˆc3,2
0.07
Defendant’s 
third offer
Constant
ˆb4,0
296.65
Claimant’s third offer
ˆb4,1
0.04
Defendant’s second offer ˆb4,2
0.89***
Table 4  Summary of linear 
regression results for the claim­
ant’s and defendant’s offers at 
different stages
***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, 
*p < 0.05, .p < 0.1
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Should some prior information on defendants’ preferences be accessible, the predictability 
will be further enhanced.
As neither party accepted the other’s offer in all the cases, we are not able to train Pi,s 
for utility analysis. Instead, we try to overcome this limitation with scenario analysis in the 
next section while we believe extra valuable insights will be gained when a more balanced 
data set is available. Next, to predict Pd, although the data set is quite imbalanced as Fig. 14 
demonstrated, we tend to train the classification model without resampling to build a more 
balanced data set because in most situations, the judge’s decision is between the claimant 
and the defendant offer, i.e., the defendant will pay Cr, according to lawyers’ opinions. In 
other words, the model trained from an artificial balanced data set may be misleading by 
providing a fake higher P d.
The regression result presented in Table 6 indicates that the defendant’s offer is the most 
significant variable compared with the others. This is reasonable since it is mainly the defen­
dant’s decision rather than the claimant’s that affects whether the defendant’s offer is lower 
or higher than the judge’s decision. With the probability P d trained by historical data, Cd,r, 
the result-dependent cost paid by the defendant is calculated as Cr(1 −P d), i.e., the cost 
paid by the defendant if his offer is defeated; and Cc,r, the result-dependent cost paid by the 
claimant is calculated as CrP d, i.e., the cost paid by the claimant if her offer is beaten. Note 
Fig. 14  Cases that the defendant wins versus the claimant wins
 
Model
R2
MAE
RMSE
Defendant’s first offer prediction
0.57
475.84
724.17
Claimant’s second offer prediction
0.98
185.51
239.10
Defendant’s second offer prediction
0.97
125.38
182.28
Claimant’s third offer prediction
0.98
146.43
217.58
Defendant’s third offer prediction
0.91
209.52
313.64
Claimant’s third offer prediction
0.98
145.01
211.60
Table 5  Prediction performance 
of different models
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
that the result-dependent cost is affected by both parties’ first offer, rather than the final offer 
by the end of the negotiation, which means in practice, the judge would expect that reason­
able offers are proposed by both sides from the start. Unreasonable offers will increase the 
probability of penalties and other additional costs.
4.3  Scenario analysis
Since the data set in this field experiment is imbalanced with all cases unsettled, to illustrate 
how the proposed model can facilitate decision-making under a more generalized condition, 
we extend the analysis with 87 cases (one high-cost case with permanent injury is removed 
due to the incapability of predicting true cost) and artificial offers for a typical three-stage 
negotiation with six decision-makings in total. Specifically, we adopt the initial offer made 
by the claimant and predict the opponent’s next offer with the regression models if one 
party’s current offer is rejected. Due to the absence of data on accepted offers, we assume 
that the probability of the opponent accepting the current offer varies with time, i.e. the 
closer to the deadline, the higher the acceptance probability, by assuming Ps = γs
ys
xs where 
γs = 0.3, 0.4, 0.5 for s = 1, 2, 3. To simulate a more general negotiation process, inspired 
by the coefficients from the true negotiation records listed in Table 4 and the experts’ opin­
ions, we assume that the claimant/defendant’s counter offer could be 15%, 10% or 5% 
higher/lower than the defendant/claimant’s current offer, given the true record is not avail­
able. Finally, the negotiation cost (specifically, we assume the time-dependent cost Ct is 
f(t) = 50t + 50 in this analysis based on real cost) are included in the utility analysis.
Under the above assumptions, Table 7 demonstrates how the negotiator should counter 
or accept the opponent’s current offer in different scenarios. For convenience, we denote 
defendant’s decision at t under scenario S as DS
t and claimant’s as CS
t . Especially, the 
claimant’s decision at t = 6 will be either accepting the defendant’s offer or rejecting it 
without being able to propose a new offer since this is the last decision both parties can make 
during the negotiation. It can be observed that as the deadline approaches, the number of 
cases where decision makers should accept the opponent’s offer rather than countering back 
is increasing. This is in stark contrast to both sides’ decisions during the initial negotiation 
rounds where parties prefer countering rather than accepting out of the belief that countering 
will bring higher benefits.
This scenario analysis explains why parties are reluctant to accept offers in reality, i.e. 
they believe countering will bring larger economic gains. However, what is overlooked by 
decision-makers in reality, at least in these 87 cases, is that accepting offers earlier during 
the negotiation may actually yield higher utilities. For instance, as shown in Table 8, the 
utility for the claimant to accept the defendant’s offer earlier is always higher than later in 
Variable
Intercept
claimant’s 
first offer
defen­
dant’s first 
offer
predict­
ed injury 
cost
coefficient
0.7182
−0.0099
0.0029
−0.0024
z-value
0.309
−1.324
2.541
−2.020
p-value
0.7572
0.1857
0.0110*
0.0434*
Table 6  Logistic regression for 
P d
*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * 
p < 0.05,. p < 0.1
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
all of the three scenarios; while it may not be the best choice for the defendant to accept the 
claimant’s first offer immediately, he should accept the offer after one round of negotiation 
rather than keeping countering. Further, regardless of scenarios, settling via negotiation 
yields higher utilities for both parties than going to court in most cases under the same cost 
assumption, except for the situation that the defendant accepts an offer at t = 5 in scenario 
three. The reason for the slightly lower utility for the defendant to accept the offer at t = 5 
in scenario three is that both sides are reluctant to concede under this scenario and benefits 
brought by negotiation are not significant.
In summary, the scenario analysis reveals that an early negotiated settlement is more 
beneficial to both parties than ongoing negotiation, and even more so than going to court. 
Therefore, we argue that by implementing the proposed predicting and utility analysis, the 
negotiation will be conducted more rationally, which may lead to an earlier settlement. In 
this way, the claimant’s compensation will be paid in time, which is important in the legal 
realm since “Justice delayed is justice denied”.
Table 8  Decision making at different t in different scenarios
Defendent(Def.)’s deci­
sion at t
Claimant(CLMT)’s 
utility
Def.’s utility
CLMT’s decision at t CLMT’s 
utility
Def.’s 
utility
D1
1 = Accept(same for 
all SCNs)
4545.38
−5245.38
C1
2 = Accept
3798.57
−4598.57
D1
3 = Accept
4340.86
−5240.86
C2
2 = Accept
4030.84
−4830.84
D2
3 = Accept
4398.93
−5298.93
C3
2 = Accept
4263.11
−5063.11
D3
3 = Accept
4433.77
−5333.77
C1
4 = Accept
3787.42
−4787.42
D1
5 = Accept
4165.34
−5265.35
C2
4 = Accept
3972.65
−4972.65
D2
5 = Accept
4261.30
−5361.29
C3
4 = Accept
4174.14
−5174.14
D3
5 = Accept
4323.29
−5423.29
C1
6 = Accept
3751.61
−4951.61
–
–
–
C2
6 = Accept
3906.52
−5106.52
–
–
–
C3
6 = Accept
4084.10
−5284.10
–
–
–
C6 = Reject
3384.00
−5384.00
Defendant’s 
decision at t
Reject and 
counter
Accept
Claim­
ant’s 
Decision 
at t
Reject and 
counter
Ac­
cept
D1
1
87
0
C1
2
87
0
D2
1
87
0
C2
2
87
0
D3
1
87
0
C3
2
87
0
D1
3
87
0
C1
4
87
0
D2
3
85
2
C2
4
87
0
D3
3
79
8
C3
4
74
13
D1
5
39
48
C1
6
23
64
D2
5
45
42
C2
6
8
79
D3
5
40
47
C3
6
1
86
Table 7  Decision making at dif­
ferent t in different scenarios
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
5  Discussion
5.1  Reserve and Bayesian learning
Reserves are important in the negotiation since both parties cannot offer beyond each other’s 
reserve and either party is able to opt out of the negotiation if this rule is violated as Fig. 3 
depicts. Both players therefore should provide reasonable offers if they want to continue 
negotiating, which can also be reflected from Eqs. (9) and (10) as each party can drag the 
next turn’s offer arbitrarily by changing their own offer at the current stage if there is no con­
straint. We can form a simple linear relationship between the reserve and offers from both 
parties. When s ⩾2, the claimant’s offer is affected by her own reserve and her estimation 
of the defendant’s reserve
 
xi,s = αR(c)
i
+ (1 −α) ˆR(d)
i,s ;
(11)
where 0 < α < 1. Similarly, when s ⩾2, the defendant’s offer is affected by her own 
reserve and her estimation of the claimant’s reserve in the previous round
 
yi,s = βR(d)
i
+ (1 −β) ˆR(c)
i,s−1;
(12)
where 0 < β < 1. Here, α and β denote how much each party is willing to gain from this 
negotiation. The higher α and β are, the less willing they are to concede. Since Bayesian 
learning is one of the most studied learning techniques in automatic negotiation to under­
stand the opponent’s reserve, we demonstrate below how Bayesian learning can be imple­
mented in our problem.
In line with Figs. 8 and 15 demonstrates that the claimant’s final offer is usually slightly 
lower than her first offer, and the average rate of difference is around 7%. Without further 
information, it is reasonable to assume that the final offer represents the claimant’s bottom 
line to a certain extent. We can therefore form a priori that claimants will firstly make an 
offer that is 7% higher than their reserve, and the defendant can update his knowledge of the 
claimant through Bayesian learning. Figure 16, on the other hand, displays the relationship 
Fig. 15  Relationship between the claim­
ant’s first and final offer (with 45-degree 
line)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
between the claimant’s final offer and the result general cost after court, which shows that 
the claimant’s final offer is about 20% higher than the result on average. Combining the 
views that the result after trial reveals the actual value of general cost and the claimants’ final 
offer is the lowest value that they are willing to accept in order to reach an agreement, the 
prior knowledge will be “claimant’s reserve is about 20% higher than the judge’s decision”. 
A similar analysis applies to the defendant as well. Equations (11) and (12) are constraint 
equations with new parameters α and β which are not yet harmonized with the proposed 
negotiation model. Each contains two elements: a known reserve and a guess or estimate 
of the opponent’s reserve. A fully-fledged model would be a Bayesian dynamic model with 
α and β compatible with the time changing parameters of the dynamic model. A key point 
is whether we consider that, or better have evidence for whether the reserves are adjusted 
during negotiations. For example, are reserves of a claimant adaptable to allow the claim to 
be lowered as negotiations proceed, or are the reserves “set in stone” and remain constants? 
Should the defendant assume whether the claimant adjusts their reserve? Currently, these 
issues are not sufficiently settled, or too complex to venture deep into a Bayesian model.
We feel more confident with models with a fixed reserve but in which a Bayesian model 
is applied to guess the reserve using only the first claim x1 and the first offer y2. Then the 
change in the dynamic model parameter gives estimations for the change in the α and β in 
our simple empirical model. We consider this approach practical because the importance 
attached to reserves as part of company reserve portfolios would, over time, attributes extra 
meaning to α and β, in the same way that an “initial stake” may affect the bets in various 
games of chance.
5.2  Rule-based negotiation?
The central point of this paper is that negotiation can be cast as a predictive model-based 
decision process or, with the more challenging terminology, a predictive model-based 
sequential game. The conundrum central to such problems is that the modeling is based on 
passive observation, whereas the decision making (game) involves intervention. We only 
have to think of the tension between the massive government interventions during the pan­
Fig. 16  Relationship between the claim­
ant’s final offer and the result general cost 
(with 45-degree line)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
demic, with the huge role played by epidemiological modeling. It is frequently observed 
that predictions are conditional on the strategy adopted.
A related question is whether the behavior is subject to rules, either well-established 
or discovered via the modeling. Our own view, and in fact one could immodestly call it a 
discovery, is that in the early stages of the negotiation it seems very much as if there are 
some rules, perhaps one could say “rules of thumb”. For example, as shown in Table 4, the 
second claim is always more than 90% of the first offer. Interviews with senior lawyers to 
some extent confirm this. For instance, one senior lawyer stated “Most lawyers will stick 
within about 90% of their initial offer in the early stages of Portal negotiation. The offers 
made should be pitched accurately, i.e., we will not make very low offers just to give our­
selves room for maneuver later. Accurate initial offers only allow minimal room for later 
negotiation, but most will feel that they need to make a concession to try and bring about the 
settlement before the additional cost of Stage three.”
A question that we have pondered is whether there is some kind of “tipping point” at 
which the claimant and defendant, in a sense, are liberated from the early rules to become 
freer in negotiation. There is some evidence that this takes place around t = 4. Specifi­
cally, the defendant tends to negotiate with a Boulware strategy (Fatima et al., 2005), i.e., 
maintaining the initial price until the deadline is approaching. Table 4 demonstrates that 
the defendant sticks 95% of his previous offer on the second offer but then this ratio is low­
ered to 89% later, indicating his desire to reach an agreement before trial. By contrast, the 
claimant insists on her offer throughout the whole negotiation, confirming the anchor effect, 
which is extensively studied in psychology.
5.3  Sequential games based on causal model
Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), on which the modeling in this paper is based, are at the 
foundation of modern causal modeling (Pearl, 2009). In addition, within this framework, the 
B-spline model and the first-order linear models of the type we fit here occupy an important 
place in the theory. That is to say for any node the model is represented by the edge (arrows) 
into that node.
There is considerable literature on sequential games under Markov assumptions, so it is 
worth mentioning that our model is indeed Markovian with respect to time, but second order 
Markov. Thus if the sequence is {x1, y2, x2, y3 . . .} with time sequence {1, 2, 3, 4 . . .} then 
in say, predicting x3 at time 5, we use x2 and y3 at times 3 and 4. The two-step prediction 
would be to use y2 and x2 at time points 2 and 3 to predict x3.
Research issues in complex DAG models are associated with the relationship between 
intervention allowing forward conditioning to remove feedback and how to learn from 
purely observational studies. Here we simply build conditional regression models based on 
observed offer values and make the standard assumption that, mathematically, the condi­
tional distribution is the same whether a passive observation study or an active, purposive 
offer. However, there cannot be anything more purposive than playing a game, and as we 
have suggested above, that game “gets serious” as time goes on. This paper shows one way 
of combining the DAG-based model with a game, namely, using a one-step-ahead approach 
for the modeling, the utility structure and the decision making. A full theory will be devel­
oped in further work and will cover at least the issues mentioned above.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
6  Conclusion and future work
This study presents a novel decision support framework for insurance and civil litigation 
negotiations by focusing on the UK Ministry of Justice’s RTA Portal process. Leveraging 
88 real-world cases from a legal service company, we first demonstrate that predicting the 
defendant’s initial offer from the claimant’s initial offer is particularly challenging, though 
B-splines provide a certain level of predictive capability. Subsequently, our findings indicate 
that each party’s new offer is primarily influenced by its own previous offer and, to a lesser 
extent, by the opposing party’s most recent offer. Notably, the defendant tends to make 
more pronounced concessions in later negotiation rounds. Integrating utility analysis into 
this framework enables both sides to systematically decide whether to accept the current 
proposal or continue negotiating.
Moreover, scenario-based analyses suggest that all cases could have been resolved 
through negotiation rather than incurring high legal costs by proceeding to court. This 
observation underscores the practical importance of rational and data-driven negotiation 
strategies, aligning with broader policy objectives to reduce litigation expenses and con­
serve judicial resources for more complex disputes. While our empirical work focuses on 
the Portal process, the proposed negotiation and utility analysis framework readily gener­
alizes to other Pre-Action Protocols or small-value compensation cases. In addition, the 
sequential negotiation model introduced here provides a novel lens for decision-making 
under incomplete information, contributing to the broader negotiation literature (Baarslag 
et al., 2016; Kiruthika et al., 2020).
Despite its promise, this research also has certain limitations that suggest potential direc­
tions for future inquiry. First, we focus solely on the general cost in traffic accident claims. 
In practice, special costs—such as case-specific medical expenses or property damage—
must also be negotiated. Unlike general costs, which largely depend on injury type and 
severity, special costs are highly case-dependent and often more challenging to predict in 
a structured manner. Incorporating special costs would transform the single-issue negotia­
tion into a multi-issue negotiation, extending the applicability of our framework. Second, 
we treat the negotiation as a two-player process-claimant versus defendant-primarily for 
simplicity. However, in reality, both sides often involve solicitors. While claimants/defen­
dants and their solicitors usually share common interests, solicitors may benefit financially 
from protracted negotiations or court proceedings. Analyzing these potential conflicts of 
interest among four parties would offer valuable insights into negotiation dynamics and out­
comes. Third, our predictive models currently rely on the most recent offers, aligning with 
the Markov property for computational tractability and robustness given the maximum of 
six negotiation rounds. Still, incorporating the complete negotiation history might capture 
more nuanced behavioral patterns, especially in cases involving prolonged or more complex 
negotiations. Future research could explore the balance between increased model complex­
ity and predictive performance when integrating full historical data, potentially leading to 
more refined negotiation support tools.
While this paper focuses on predictive modeling and decision analysis, future research 
could explore how negotiators actually learn and adapt their strategies through bargaining 
interactions. This includes investigating sequential learning processes during negotiations, 
different learning mechanisms between parties, and how historical bargaining experiences 
shape future negotiation behaviors. Of particular interest is understanding how negotiators 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
adapt their strategies through active learning during the bargaining process, and how rein­
forcement learning approaches could leverage historical case outcomes for real-time strat­
egy adjustments. Such learning-based perspectives could provide deeper insights into the 
dynamic nature of legal negotiations while maintaining practical applicability. Collectively, 
these directions open up new possibilities for advancing negotiation analytics and decision-
making, both within the RTA Portal context and in broader legal or business negotiation 
environments.
Acknowledgments  We dedicate this work to the memory of our colleague Professor Henry Wynn, who 
passed away before this research was completed. His foundational contributions to experimental design and 
his mentorship will be deeply missed.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors declare no conflict of interest related to this work.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at the statistical model identification. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Con­
trol,196, 716–723.
Baarslag, T., Hendrikx, M. J., Hindriks, K. V., & Jonker, C. M. (2016). Learning about the opponent in auto­
mated bilateral negotiation: A comprehensive survey of opponent modeling techniques. Autonomous 
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems,305, 849–898. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10458-015-9309-1
Bachrach, Y., Everett, R., Hughes, E., Lazaridou, A., Leibo, J. Z., Lanctot, M., & Graepel, T. (2020). Negoti­
ating team formation using deep reinforcement learning. Artificial Intelligence,288, 103356.
Bebchuk, L. A. (1984). Litigation and settlement under imperfect information. The RAND Journal of Eco­
nomics,15, 404–415.
Bone, R. G. (2003). Agreeing to fair process: The problem with contractarian theories of procedural fairness. 
BUL Rev.,83, 485.
Cao, M., Luo, X., Luo, X. R., & Dai, X. (2015). Automated negotiation for e-commerce decision making: 
A goal deliberated agent architecture for multi-strategy selection. Decision Support Systems,73, 1–14.
Carneiro, D., Novais, P., Andrade, F., Zeleznikow, J., & Neves, J. (2013). Using case-based reasoning and 
principled negotiation to provide decision support for dispute resolution. Knowledge and Information 
Systems,363, 789–826.
Chatterjee, K., & Samuelson, W. (1983). Bargaining under incomplete information. Operations Research,315, 
835–851.
Choi, T.-M., Wallace, S. W., & Wang, Y. (2018). Big data analytics in operations management. Production 
and Operations Management,2710, 1868–1883.
Cohen, M. C. (2018). Big data and service operations. Production and Operations Management,279, 
1709–1723.
Cooter, R. D., & Rubinfeld, D. L. (1994). An economic model of legal discovery. The Journal of Legal 
Studies,23S1, 435–463.
Dobrzykowski, D. D., McFadden, K. L., & Vonderembse, M. A. (2016). Examining pathways to safety and 
financial performance in hospitals: A study of lean in professional service operations. Journal of Opera­
tions Management,421, 39–51.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Faratin, P., Sierra, C., & Jennings, N. R. (1998). Negotiation decision functions for autonomous agents. 
Robotics and Autonomous Systems,24(3–4), 159–182.
Fatima, S., Kraus, S., & Wooldridge, M. (2014). Principles of automated negotiation. Cambridge University 
Press.
Fatima, S. S., Wooldridge, M., & Jennings, N. R. (2005). Bargaining with incomplete information. Annals 
of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence,443, 207–232. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10472-005-4688-7
Fisher, R., Ury, W. L., & Patton, B. (2011). Getting to yes: Negotiating agreement without giving in. London: 
Penguin.
Gino, F., & Pisano, G. (2008). Toward a theory of behavioral operations. Manufacturing & Service Opera­
tions Management,104, 676–691.
Goldberg, S. B., Sander, F. E., Rogers, N. H., & Cole, S. R. (2014). Dispute resolution: Negotiation, media­
tion and other processes. Netherlands: Wolters Kluwer.
Gould, J. P. (1973). The economics of legal conflicts. The Journal of Legal Studies,22, 279–300.
Hendricks, K. B., Singhal, V. R., & Stratman, J. K. (2007). The impact of enterprise systems on corporate 
performance: A study of ERP, SCM, and CRM system implementations. Journal of Operations Man­
agement,251, 65–82.
Jackson, R. M. (2010). Review of Civil Litigation Costs (Vol. 2). London: The Stationery Office.
Justice (2017). Pre-action protocol for low value personal injury claims in road traffic accidents from 31 july 
2013. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​j​u​s​t​i​c​e​.​g​o​v​.​u​k​/​c​o​u​r​t​s​/​p​r​o​c​e​d​u​r​e​-​r​u​l​e​s​/​c​i​v​i​l​/​p​r​o​t​o​c​o​l​/​p​r​e​-​a​c​t​i​o​n​-​p​r​o​t​o​c​o​l​-​f​o​r​-​l​o​w​-​v​a​l​
u​e​-​p​e​r​s​o​n​a​l​-​i​n​j​u​r​y​-​c​l​a​i​m​s​-​i​n​-​r​o​a​d​-​t​r​a​f​f​i​c​-​a​c​c​i​d​e​n​t​s​-​3​1​-​j​u​l​y​-​2​0​1​3. Accessed 10 Jan 2021.
Kiruthika, U., Somasundaram, T. S., & Raja, S. (2020). Lifecycle model of a negotiation agent: A survey of 
automated negotiation techniques. Group Decision and Negotiation,296, 1239–1262.
Kuster, R. (2017). Utility function and rational choice as support mechanisms to maximize mediation and 
legal negotiation settlement output. Pepp. Disp. Resol. LJ,17, 263.
Landes, W. M. (1971). An economic analysis of the courts. The Journal of Law and Economics,141, 61–107.
Leith, P. (2016). The rise and fall of the legal expert system. International Review of Law, Computers & 
Technology,303, 94–106.
Lewis, M. A., & Brown, A. D. (2012). How different is professional service operations management? Journal 
of Operations Management,301–2, 1–11.
Lin, R., Kraus, S., Wilkenfeld, J., & Barry, J. (2008). Negotiating with bounded rational agents in environ­
ments with incomplete information using an automated agent. Artificial Intelligence,1727–7, 823–851. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2007.09.007
McAfee, A. (2002). The impact of enterprise information technology adoption on operational performance: 
An empirical investigation. Production and Operations Management,111, 33–53.
Mnookin, R. H., & Kornhauser, L. (1979). Bargaining in the shadow of the law: The case of divorce. The Yale 
Law Journal,885, 950–997. https://doi.org/10.2307/795824
Nash, J. F. (1950). Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences,361, 48–49. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.36.1.48
Nielsen, T. D., & Jensen, F. V. (2004). Learning a decision maker’s utility function from (possibly) inconsis­
tent behavior. Artificial Intelligence,1601–2, 53–78.
Ordover, J. A., & Rubinstein, A. (1983). On bargaining, settling, and litigating: A problem in multistage 
games with imperfect information. CV Starr Center for Applied Economics, New York University.
Pearl, J. (2009). Causality. Cambridge University Press.
Png, I. P. (1983). Strategic behavior in suit, settlement, and trial. The Bell Journal of Economics. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​
.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​3​0​7​/​3​0​0​3​6​5​5​
Raiffa, H. (1982). The art and science of negotiation. Harvard University Press.
Roels, G., & Staats, B. R. (2021). Om forum people-centric operations: Achievements and future research 
directions. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management,234, 745–757.
Rosenschein, J. S., & Zlotkin, G. (1994). Rules of encounter: Designing conventions for automated negotia­
tion among computers. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Rubinstein, A. (1982). Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric 
Society. https://doi.org/10.2307/1912531
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model. The Annals of Statistics,6, 461–464.
Shavell, S. (1995). Alternative dispute resolution: An economic analysis. The Journal of Legal Studies,24(1), 
1–28.
Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2018). How AI can be a force for good. Science,3616404, 751–752.
Tomašev, N., Cornebise, J., Hutter, F., Mohamed, S., Picciariello, A., Connelly, B., Belgrave, D. C., Ezer, D., 
Haert, F. C., Mugisha, F., & Abila, G. (2020). AI for social good: Unlocking the opportunity for positive 
impact. Nature Communications,111, 1–6.
Walton, R. E., & McKersie, R. B. (1991). A behavioral theory of labor negotiations: An analysis of a social 
interaction system. New York: Cornell University Press.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Woolf, H. (1995). Access to justice: Interim report to the lord chancellor on the civil justice system in Eng­
land and Wales (Vol. 1). Lord Chancellor’s Department.
Zeleznikow, J. (2021). Using artificial intelligence to provide intelligent dispute resolution support. Group 
Decision and Negotiation,30(4), 1–24.
Zeng, D., & Sycara, K. (1998). Bayesian learning in negotiation. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies,481, 125–141. https://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.1997.0164
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Wen Zhang1
 · Jingwen Shi2
 · Xiaojun Wang3
 · Henry Wynn4
 
 Wen Zhang
wen.zhang@bristol.ac.uk
Jingwen Shi
phd15js@mail.wbs.ac.uk
Xiaojun Wang
x.wang.18@bham.ac.uk
Henry Wynn
H.Wynn@lse.ac.uk
1 
Business School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
2 
State Street Global Advisors, London, UK
3 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
4 
London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK
1 3