TITLE: Investigation of key performance indicators for performance management of the manufacturing industry in the era of the COVID-19 pandemic
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05717-4
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05717-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Investigation of key performance indicators for performance
management of the manufacturing industry in the era
of the COVID-19 pandemic
Sajneen Akter Munmun1 · Md. Abdul Moktadir1
· Sunil Tiwari2
·
Mohammad Zoynul Abedin3
· Charbel Jose Chiappetta Jabbour4
Received: 14 October 2022 / Accepted: 8 November 2023 / Published online: 11 December 2023
© Crown 2023
Abstract
The execution of constructive Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) is a critical tool for the
Performance Management (PM) of the manufacturing industry to regulate operations. The
companies rely on the PM strategies grounded on conventional KPIs assessment to achieve
sustainability although the current dynamic manufacturing environment is undergoing com-
plexities. The KPIs used in the past for PM are not mutually dependent, as they have not been
adequately measured and updated to address emergency situations like the COVID-19 pan-
demic, particularly for the Leather Products Industry (LPI). Monitoring of plentiful KPIs is
inconceivable and literature is also not available. Realizing these gaps, this study accumulates
suggestions from a wide-ranging context of 25 experts’ feedback. Initially, a set of KPI was
identiﬁed through literature review and experts survey. Later, employing a Pareto analysis,
15 KPIs were identiﬁed from 48 KPIs. Then the ﬁnalized KPIs investigated utilizing lin-
guistic Z-digits and Decision-Making Trial and Evaluation Laboratory (DEMATEL) to ﬁnd
the “Cause-Effect” relationship. An industrial chronology is conferred to demonstrate the
B Mohammad Zoynul Abedin
m.z.abedin@swansea.ac.uk
Sajneen Akter Munmun
sajneenakter-2016914935@ilet.du.ac.bd
Md. Abdul Moktadir
abdul.moktadir@du.ac.bd
Sunil Tiwari
sunil.tiwari047@gmail.com; sunil.tiwari@essca.fr
Charbel Jose Chiappetta Jabbour
c-j.chiappetta-jabbour@neoma-bs.fr
1
Institute of Leather Engineering and Technology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka 1209, Bangladesh
2
Department of Operations Management and Decision Science, ESSCA School of Management, 4
Pont Pasteur, 69007 Lyon, France
3
Department of Accounting and Finance, School of Management, Swansea University, Bay Campus,
Fabian Way, Swansea SA1 8EN, UK
4
Department of Information Systems, Supply Chain Management and Decision Support, NEOMA
Business School, 1 rue du Maréchal Juin - BP 215, 76130 Mont-Saint-Aignan Cedex, France
123

2480
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
potency and functionality of the suggested method. The upshot signiﬁes the “Target fulﬁll-
ment within the delivery time during COVID-19” as the most important KPI for the studied
case. The outcomes will assist the LPI managers to dictate crucial KPIs suitably and ﬂourish
the PM in attaining the goals and objectives.
Keywords Key performance indicators · COVID-19 · Performance management · Leather
products industry · Manufacturing · DEMATEL · Linguistic Z-digit
List of symbols
KPIs
Key performance indicators
LPI
Leather products industry
PM
Performance management
COVID-19
Coronavirus disease of 2019
SDGs
Sustainable development goals
DEMATEL
Decision making trial and evaluation laboratory
LZPWG
Linguistic Z-digit power weighted geometric operator
ze
cd
The linguistic Z-digit
Ze
Linguistic straight impacting matrix (LSIM)
λ
Bunching threshold value (BTV)
Cx
xth bunch
Y x  (yx
cd)t×t
Bunch straight impacting matrix (BSIM)
px
Weight of xth bunch
Z
Overall straight impacting matrix (OSIM)
Y l
Mean matrix of the V bunches (MMB)
Z′
Crisp straight impacting matrix (CSIM)
N
Normalized straight impacting matrix (NSIM)
J
Total impacting matrix (TIM)
I
Identity matrix (IM)
jcd
Full direct and indirect inﬂuence
ac
The sum of cth row elements in matrix J
bd
The sum of dth column elements in matrix J
1 Introduction
According to the “The Business Standard” report on July 2021, the total exports of leather
and leather products expanded from $321.77 million to $495.56 million by 54% in 2020.
Due to COVID-19, the Leather Products Industry (LPI) business worldwide evolved in an
unprecedented position and is facing affairs in tasks of the departments such as Production,
Research, and Development (R&D), Human Resource and Compliance, Accounts or store,
Business Development, etc. The LPI is recognized as one of the government’s prime con-
cerned sectors in Bangladesh and emerging as a substantial prospective because of easily
available lower-cost labor, raw material, huge growth, and funding. Under those circum-
stances, managers require close and thoughtful concentration on Performance Management
(PM) to estimate the appraisal of manufacturing operation exercises and to assess the efﬁcacy
of manufacturing operations (Froehlich FF, 1970). A systematic, well-structured, and planned
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2481
PM system can enhance leather products’ quality, lessen operational costs, increase produc-
tivity, and improve employee morale and satisfaction. LPI has to accomplish and conserve
high productivity and quality, with reactivity, adequate variability, and compact lead times to
satisfy the fast-changing and dynamic requisitions of customers. PM helps the LPI managers
by providing the necessary information for decision-making and taking action (Gunasekaran
& Kobu, 2007). Operational regulation and excellence can be secured through PM which
is a crucial function in the manufacturing industry (Kassaneh & Workalemahu, 2018), par-
ticularly in the LPI of Bangladesh. After determining the strategic goals for achieving the
success of the LPI, each goal will be substantiated by a set of speciﬁc indicators aiding to
attain the goals. These indicators are quoted as Key Performance Indicators (KPIs). Alongside
reﬂecting the crucial factors of an organization, KPIs deﬁne a set of quantitative and strategic
measurements in a PM of the manufacturing industry. For accomplishing the required busi-
ness objectives, the suitable choice and progressing realization of the KPIs is compulsory
(Kang et al., 2016). To boost organizational performance, good PM and matrices like KPIs
will assist in the progress of more accessible and clear communication between managers
and workers directing to collaborative supportive work (Gunasekaran & Kobu, 2007).
According to Eberl & Schwaiger (2005), a conventional PM system is carried out by giving
importance to the ﬁnancial KPIs without paying heed to non-ﬁnancial KPIs. But concurrent
performance measurement embraced both the use of ﬁnancial as well as non-ﬁnancial KPIs
(Cao et al., 2015). The KPIs have mutual interdependency since various characteristics of PM
are not independent and cannot be segregated from each other. Clear insight into the positive
or negative relationships between KPIs is of utmost importance for improving organizational
performancecontinuously.TheinquiryofKPIrelationsdependsonobservationalquantitative
perspectives until now. However, detecting genuine relations and managerial insights might
fail. Alongside this, the information obtained from various manufacturing ﬁrms may generate
extensively diverse outcomes. Consequently, a new proposition to detect the relationships
between KPIs via genuine involvement needs to be established.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, pointing out condemnatory elements in the sector of
LPI can be obtained via the Decision-Making Trial and Evaluation Laboratory (DEMATEL)
method. The DEMATEL method was developed by the ‘Science and Human Affairs Program’
of the battle memorial institute of Geneva in 1971 (Hsu & Lee, 2014). Envisioning the
composition of the tough process through establishing correlation and interrelation potency
between KPIs can be acquired through DEMATEL (Si et al., 2018; Asan et al., 2018).
With the aid of this method, PM can be assessed in the LPI by setting up a matrix linking
inﬂuencing factors because of its straightforwardness, efﬁcacy, and potency (Abdullah et al.,
2019; Chauhan et al., 2020; Dinçer et al., 2019). When experts ascertain the interrelationship
between KPIs, they frequently face trouble in giving quantitative value to the level of inﬂuence
(Ding & Liu, 2018; Jiang et al., 2020). In the case of emergency PM, experts are habituated
to utilizing linguistic expression (Si et al., 2017) because of growing complications in the
leather products design and manufacturing systems. Due to the lack of grasp and proﬁciency
in the organization, experts are not acquainted with the given performance indicators (Jiang
et al., 2020). For this reason, linguistic expression, as well as reliability of experts’ appraisal,
are necessary (J. qiang Wang et al., 2017). Putting Z-digits in general perspectives like the
leather products sector’s PM is foremost to mark out uncertain linguistic expression. Z-
linguistic numbers constitute two modules: the ﬁrst one is restriction and the second one is
reliability (Peng & Wang, 2017).
The emergence of the COVID-19 outbreaks and its severe impacts on LPI have created
difﬁculties in making strategic decisions. But Z-digit numbers are widely used and considered
not only because of their advantageous application over other methods but also for their global
123

2482
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
or absolute deliberation, undoubtedly expressible mood, and the capability of keeping the
actualinformationwithoutanykindofdeformation(Peng&Wang,2017;J.QiangWangetal.,
2017). For identifying the KPIs and inspecting the connection between KPIs under wide-
ranging scenarios, an integrated appraisal approach was proposed in hospital management
combining Z-number and DEMATEL methods (Jiang et al., 2020). This proposed study
merges Pareto, linguistic Z-digit, and the DEMATEL technique which is completely new in
the literature. In PM of the LPI, applying this integrated model, crucial KPIs can be identiﬁed
and assessed with linguistic Z-digit.
By focusing on the context of COVID-19, it is possible to gain a more in-depth compre-
hension of the inﬂuence that the pandemic has had on a conﬂict that was already complex and
was still going on. The epidemic caused by the COVID-19 virus has had an effect on every
facet of society, including healthcare, economics, and politics (Choudhary et al., 2022).
To understand the impact and know the current operational performance of LPI, this study
considered LPI as a case example. For a variety of reasons, the LPI in Bangladesh has been
investigated as a research object. The LPI is a signiﬁcant component of the Bangladeshi
economy. Bangladesh is one of the top exporters of leather goods in the world, making it one
of the most important sectors. This Industry is responsible for the employment of a sizeable
number of people and contributes to the GDP of the country. However, the LPI in Bangladesh
has also been subjected to criticism and scrutiny due to environmental and social issues. The
LPI has been accused of having deplorable working conditions and of violating workers’
rights.
As a result, the LPI in Bangladesh provides scholars with an interesting case example
to identify and assess the KPI towards improving the operational performance of the man-
ufacturing operations. Additionally, researchers have the opportunity to investigate ways
to enhance working conditions, promote sustainable development, and lessen the industry’s
negative inﬂuence on the environment when they examine the industry. In addition, this study
can help inform policymakers and industry stakeholders on ways to improve the KPIs and
create a future that is more sustainable operations and equitable for workers, communities,
and the environment. This can be accomplished by providing information gained from the
study.
Consequently, this study was directed by the succeeding research questions:
RQ1 Which KPIs should be selected for PM during the era of the COVID-19 pandemic?
RQ2 How managers and decision-makers will appraise KPIs for identifying the most
crucial KPIs during COVID-19?
RQ3 What are the conclusions of executing KPIs?
Alongside answering the aforementioned questions, this study synchronizes the subse-
quent research objectives:
1. To identify and select crucial KPIs for PM using Pareto analysis and under wide-ranging
scenarios, apply the integrated approach of linguistic Z-digit and the DEMATEL tech-
nique.
2. To deal with the fuzziness and unpredictability of experts’ unreliable evaluation of the
straight interdependence between indicators.
3. To enhance group uniformity, by bunching the appraisal of large-scale experts through
the use of maximizing consensus approach and scrutinizing the interconnection between
KPIs with the use of an extended DEMATEL method to boost PM in the LPI.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2483
2 Literature review
2.1 Performance management and COVID-19
PM acts towards sustainable organizational performance data through quantiﬁcation and
declaration.Acompany’soverallperformance,operationalexcellence,growth,andexpansion
depend on the right PM system. Both PM and sustainability affect the long-term and short-
term efﬁcacy of the company. KPIs targeting is one of the complex tasks but detecting KPIs in
PM offers sustainability to the company. To support long-term indicators are mainly targeted
andassessedthroughmonitoringandcontrollinginsomeareasofthecompany.Foraddressing
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), managers pick out the right PM strategies. KPIs
are considered benchmarks that operate PM and furnish the point of convergence for global
company calibration, cooperation, and harmonization (Bauer et al., 2016). Upgradation in the
supply chain, the accomplishment of sustainable competitiveness, and balancing production
efﬁcacy and delivery time can be achieved through the correct execution of KPIs.
In the growing convolution of business, managers of the companies are facing trouble
in keeping steadiness between manufacturing planning and delivery time; increasing proﬁts
by promoting output on bottleneck resources; decreasing inventories through harmonizing
supply with demand; permitting data-operated decision making, etc.
Assurance of employee health and safety during the crisis of COVID-19 depends on
managers in decision-making to merge their ability and sense of information (Schippers &
Rus, 2021). Managers are also facing complex and uncertain situations in the COVID-19
pandemic. To secure a positive result, good quality decision-making acts as a precondition.
For this, Kahn and Wolak (2013) suggest optimizing the decision-making system in the era
of COVID-19 applying reﬂexivity to counteract information processing failures. Decision-
making for identifying crucial KPIs has a considerable effect on the PM system as well as
on the company’s overall performance. Further, Alam et al. (2021) integrate the DEMA-
TEL method with intuitionistic fuzzy sets in the supply chain of the vaccine manufacturing
companies to implicate SDGs. Identifying 15 challenges, the study discloses the 5 most crit-
ical challenges. To alleviate the outbreaks in the supply chain of manufacturing companies,
caused by the COVID-19 endemic, managers need to systemize the PM system. Govindan
et al. (2020) proposed an actual decision-bearing system combining experts’ knowledge and
a Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) in the healthcare supply chain. The study deployed risk lev-
els and two indicators dividing community residents. Ivanov and Dolgui (2021) adopted OR
(Operational Research) methods with novel categorizations and classiﬁcations to cope with
the ripple effect of COVID-19, through pandemic stages from managerial insights. LPIs sup-
ply chains are operating under high risk in the act of the COVID-19 pandemic. Because they
spare in opposition to leather wastage, health threats, product life cycle cost, etc. Assessment
of credit risk for SMEs during industry 4.0 adopting wrapper and binary opposite whale opti-
mization algorithm for KPIs selection contributed in identifying the crucial default features
(Lu et al., 2022). Kumar et al. (2021) embraced the Fuzzy Best–Worst approach from the
context of perishable food supply chains to enhance socio-economic performance and meet
SDGs.
A study analyzed supply chain diversiﬁcation by sampling 1434 Chinese manufacturing
ﬁrms. According to ILO, 25 million people become jobless due to the crisis of COVID-19.
During the era of COVID-19, like many other countries, Bangladesh has implemented prac-
tices of home quarantine, social distance, and lockdown to mitigate the risk of spreading the
123

2484
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
deadly coronavirus. Due to the loss of jobs in various sectors, the employee faces social sus-
tainability challenges. Majumdar et al. (2020) proposed appropriate redressal for the socially
sustainable supply chain in the context of the South Asian clothing industry. In the COVID-19
pandemic, to improve organizational performance, the manufacturing industry faces contin-
ual provocation from stakeholders for stabilizing economic welfare with sustainable growth
in their supply chain (Goodarzian et al., 2021; Jain & Singh, 2020; Severo et al., 2021). To
obtain expected performance from the manufacturing company sustainable supplier selec-
tion (SSS) is considered by powerful mood to ensure supply chain sustainability (Hendiani
et al., 2020; Orji & Wei, 2015). In the Nigerian manufacturing context, Orji and Ojadi (2021)
investigated the impression of COVID-19 on SSS. The ﬁnancial impacts of COVID-19 inter-
rupted the stock markets, making it difﬁcult to the investors and policymakers to implement
sustaining prosperity. A study found that the volatility of stock market can be assessed in a
better way than the returns with interventions made by the government during COVID-19
(Yang et al., 2023).
In summary, PM and KPIs are important tools for evaluating organizational success, but
COVID-19 had signiﬁcant impacts on society. Studying these topics can provide insights
into best practices for managing performance, selecting appropriate KPIs, and responding to
global events. Additionally, research can inform policy decisions and improve outcomes for
individuals and organizations. It is clear that effective PM practices are critical in respond-
ing to the uncertainties of the pandemic and improving the resilience of the manufacturing
industry.
2.2 Key performance indicators and their necessity in the leather products industry
Identifying, analyzing, scanning, and upgrading performance arise as a necessity for busi-
ness enterprises. A signiﬁcant amount of research must be supervised for detecting better
performance measurement and improvement, managing remarkable combative matters of
dynamic management implementation, enlarging development, and product distinction (Kas-
saneh & Workalemahu, 2018). According to New (1994), when there is a deprivation of PM,
it becomes difﬁcult for decision-makers for deciding on complex situations. Concerning
different parameters like size, schedule, and standard the performance of products can be
quantiﬁed (Hedrick, 2004). As Bangladesh’s LPI has an immense possibility for uplifting
the country’s economy, government grants it as one of the supreme preferences. The differ-
ent processes of performance measurement and improvement bring inadequate adjustment
in the PM system due to the low consideration of the personal intention of employees (Kas-
saneh & Workalemahu, 2018). For this, organizational as well as personal KPIs must be
selected for the right PM. The COVID-19 pandemic can inﬂuence buyers’ behavioral com-
mitment. Besides this, the pandemic hits businesses like the LPI with opportunities to explore
real-world marketing strategies (Alshaketheep et al., 2020). Hoque et al. (2022) investigated
the readymade garments sector’s buyer–supplier relationship from the Bangladeshi context.
Group decision-making for managing performance, and appraisal of KPI for the PM system
of the company is compulsory in an emergency for sustainability (Amiri et al., 2011). LPI is
not attaining comparable development in business because of negligence to direct the whole
spectrum of their PM system. The linguistic Z-DEMATEL approach is a company-in-line tool
that can resolve external factors through KPI appraisal. Assessment of KPI is the prerequisite
during the time of COVID-19 to act on the quality of LPI.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2485
2.3 Key performance indicators for performance management in the era
of the COVID-19 pandemic
COVID-19 has stroke Bangladesh’s LPI badly. It is compulsory to identify KPIs to lessen the
epidemic’s impression, construct a ﬂexible as well as ruthless sector, and achieve sustainable
industrial development. The impact of COVID-19 brought the biggest challenge to manufac-
turing operations and PM of LPI, growth, and expansion of business ﬁrms, and proﬁtability
of ﬁrms due to a decline in sales and reduced demand. To overcome those challenges, pin-
pointing the KPIs and implementing them properly in various departments of LPI are the
demands of time. Aside from that, KPIs provide a transparent measurement to detect, inspect
and optimize production process parameters concerning their size, and standard in different
cost aspects. To increase proﬁt, all companies endeavor in enlarging the top line of their
business seeking to penetrate the market. KPIs play a vital role in increasing the bottom line
of the company without having an expansion threat. To determine the overall performance of
an organization, the categorization of similar KPIs under the same objectives is mandatory.
Every single KPI exposes the speciﬁc requirement and purpose to line up business objectives
and boost organizational performance. KPIs for LPI can be analyzed under the following 6
segments.
2.3.1 Production and quality control related KPIs
Production and quality control KPIs relate to the product life cycle to aid in the fruitful assess-
ment of the product in some aspects like product management, ergonomics, quality control,
equipment management to product packaging and dispatch. To meet customer requirements
or expectations continual improvement of the manufacturing process with proper supervision
is compulsory. Measuring the actual performance, comparing the performance with standard
requirements, and acting according to the requirement are the tasks of quality control man-
agers. Reducing cost, improving productivity, keeping the brand value standard are the targets
of quality control. Making the structure of production timeline; tracking and measuring man-
ufacturing alongside production efﬁciencies; improving organizational processes; reducing
waste; ensuring the synchronization of quality; safety and cost of the resources; allocat-
ing and governing work to employees; appraising performance; gratifying and disciplining
employees; controlling absence rate of employees; addressing complaints and solving out
the problems; avoiding the loss during manufacturing number of deviation are some of the
objectives of managers from this department. Decision-makers set production and quality
control KPIs keeping consideration of those objectives.
2.3.2 Research and development related KPIs
‘Research and development’ also known as ‘Sampling’ in the leather products sector, develop
designs and construct prototypes whichever is vitally a prime step in the product develop-
ment process. This department allows companies to design profoundly operative marketing
strategies. To retain full control over the manufacturing process, encounter buyer’s spe-
ciﬁc requirements, meet quality standards, understand the end-users, products competition,
improve the efﬁciency of the existing designing process, ensure the proper use of company
resources “Research and Development” department plays an important role. “Sampling” is an
important aspect of the manufacturing process of leather products and will act as a safeguard
of the company from any unpleasant surprises when the products will arrive. The company
123

2486
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
wants its ﬁnal product to meet exact speciﬁcations, which is why sampling is a critical com-
ponent of the proper manufacturing process. Sampling prevents full production from starting
until the sample approval process has taken place.
2.3.3 Human resources and compliance related KPIs
Human resources and compliance play a key role in helping the LPI deal with a hyper-
competitive business environment. To experience organization-wide improvement, human
resources, and compliance track critical KPIs. Arranging better training programs, bringing
improvement in the hiring process, providing compensation beneﬁts, PM of employees,
ensuring social compliance, occupational safety, and health, assessing risk, employing safety
practices, adopting employee welfare, applying corrective action plan, testing and calibrating
the company resources are some of the key targets of human resources and compliance to
achieve organizational goals. Human resources and compliance professionals recognize and
negotiate different laws and regulations controlling the employee relationship to improve the
organization’s reputation.
2.3.4 Financial and economic related KPIs
Financial and economic KPIs act for driving business strategy, designating ﬁnancial results,
tracking the progress of the company to achieve speciﬁc business objectives. COVID-19
instigatesfearininvestorsintheglobalmarket(Dharanietal.,2023).Inthatcase,ﬁnancialand
economic KPIs take a critical role in allocating resources and planning for investment. Setting
growth targets over time for the company; improving the decision-making process; providing
statistics about company sales, cash ﬂow, expenses, proﬁts are some of the objectives met
through ﬁnancial and economic KPIs. Apart from that, the selection of KPIs is critical for
picking more proﬁtable opportunities as well as handling negotiations.
2.3.5 Account/store related KPIs
Inventory management is considered the main task for the accounts/store department of the
LPI. Keeping a sufﬁcient stock of leather and related accessories, thread, zipper at the right
levels in the proper place are the chores of the Accounts department. To prevent the business
from falling through unseen cracks, inventory management lets the LPI attain orders up-
to-date and in the perfect way; increases buyer’s satisfaction, ensures a well-structured and
planned warehouse, reduces the possibility of obstruction of company resources.
2.3.6 Business development related KPIs
Coordinating with suppliers, manufacturers, and stores to ensure correct implementation of
plans, receiving “Tech-pad” or sample from the buyer, directing layout plans of the store
and maintaining the inventory of products, developing the sample of the product in the
sample section with time study, consumption and costing, conﬁrmation with order quantity,
assembling information on market trends and reactions of buyers to products, inspecting
sales ﬁgures—delineating growth and change in markets are some of the tasks performed by
business development section of LPI. This department undertakes plans or projects which
point out activities to construct a business successfully on top of time. Alongside this, the
department aids in the utilization of customers and markets, the accomplishment of strategical
collaboration with Buyers, the establishment of the leather products company’s recognition.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2487
2.4 Existing works on KPI, PM, and DEMATEL
KPIs allow critical modiﬁcation in performing business operations and aligning the business
goals and objectives. Tasks like keeping an eye on company performance, quantifying the
progression of the company, and handling problems can be accomplished through KPIs iden-
tiﬁcation. According to Moktadir et al. (2020), KPIs signify the prosperity of a company by
setting up the objectives and issues the path for further improvement. Besides, KPI reduces
the study gap and helps the company to take immediate action about the arising, focusing on
morale and company performance. KPIs are regarded as a constructive tool to point out the
area of the company for improvement. They smooth out the company’s performance through
product recognition and remodeling. During the investigation of KPIs, company managers
face trouble as KPIs comprise substantial components and set out conclusive ﬁgures. The
productivity and proﬁtability of the company can be acquired through the acquisition of
KPIs, which can generate improvements. The supply chain of LPI is heavily disrupted dur-
ing COVID-19. For mitigating a disrupted supply chain and avoiding negative results from
PM Manupati et al. (2022) constructively integrate pre as well as post-disruption scenarios to
provide decision-support. According to Cao et al. (2015) indicators are considered the trans-
porter of strategy. For implementing strategy and enhancing organizational performance, the
use of PM is recommended frequently.
Though many studies have been conducted on KPI and PM systems, unexpectedly LPI
allied study was absent yet. Studies have been initiated in the zone of information manage-
ment, improving the supply chain, higher education, management data systems, shop ﬂoor,
ﬁnance service, hospital management, functional automation, transportation, bank, construc-
tion industry, etc. Moktadir et al. (2020) performed an analysis of the KPIs for operational
excellence regarding sustainability in the LPI. The study identiﬁed KPIs by employing the
best–worst method, developing a performance index, and lastly instigating managerial and
policy implications. The results reported that KPIs under the “Management” category are
acknowledged as the highest preference. Besides this, in Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs),
13 KPIs were identiﬁed based on Speciﬁc, Measurable, Economic, Attainable, Relevant,
Time-speciﬁc, Explainable or Evaluated, and Relative or reviewed shortly SMARTER crite-
ria applying analytical hierarchy process (AHP) (Kaganski et al., 2018). Further, Zairy (2013)
explored practices with logistics PM in the supply chain of textiles identifying the best prac-
tices and barriers. They found barriers to establishing a collaborative culture. In research
work, a conceptual framework was proposed by Kagioglou et al. (2001) by adopting the Bal-
ancedScorecard(BS)method.TheyvalidatetheprocessPerformanceConceptualFramework
(PCF) in several areas. Previously in the medical area, PM set off a functional theme and was
accepted by scholars. By adopting the BS method, Behrouzi & Ma’aram (2019) furnished
a technique for identifying and ranking feasible and relevant performance indicators. With
the help of the path analytical model perspective, Cinaroglu and Baser (2018) inspected the
relationship between the effectiveness of indicators for the improvement in health care per-
formance. In Palestinian food manufacturing companies, to improve company performance.
Hassan and Jaaron (2021) investigated the connection uniting total quality management and
intensity of green manufacturing. In the supply chain, Cai et al. (2009) initiated a framework
for decision-makers or managers of the organization by identifying and analyzing the inter-
dependency of KPIs in a large retail company scenario. Many studies have been conducted
using the DEMATEL method. In India, to assess the external barriers in e-waste manufac-
turing, Bhatia and Srivastava (2018) embraced a grey-DEMATEL method. In the case of
logistics provider enterprises, key success factors (CSFs) were investigated by Ahmad et al.
(2018) approaching the DEMATEL technique from the Iranian perspective. A two-dimension
123

2488
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
uncertainty in the linguistic DEMATEL model was suggested by Ding and Liu (2018), for the
assessment of CSFs in the context of emergency management. Yadegaridehkordi et al. (2018)
explored the hybrid technique of DEMATEL and neuro-fuzzy inference system on manufac-
turing company’s performance, through a large amount of data adoption. For diminishing the
gaps like a wide-ranging of decision-makers, lack of interactions among performance indi-
cators, absence of interdependency of factors, incapability of demonstrating the reliability of
the information, and inefﬁcient in handling the data from a wide-ranging perspective, Jiang
et al. (2020) recommended linguistic Z-DEMATEL approach.
2.5 Research gap and contribution
StudiesaboutPMsystemshavebeencarriedoutinareasofhospitalmanagement,construction
industry, bank, higher education, management data system, shop ﬂoor, ﬁnance service, etc.
As mentioned in the previous sections of the literature review, it was substantiated that
study about KPIs for PM in the COVID-19 pandemic on the domain of LPI approaching
the integrated method of Pareto, and combined large-ranging linguistic Z-DEMATEL has
not been conducted. Though some studies are found in PM using KPIs in manufacturing
industries, the focal point was not on the integration of the company’s overall PM. Besides
this, no study assessed the KPIs for PM grounded on six themes (production and quality
control, research and development, human resource and compliance, ﬁnancial and economic,
accounts/store, and business development) of companies for the LPI using an integrated
dynamic decision support model. To drive the company proﬁtably, the identiﬁcation of crucial
KPIs in strenuous situations is of major importance. Scrutinizing the consequences of various
KPIs is compulsory. To cope with the challenges in a complex situation like COVID-19, a
well-established methodology for the identiﬁcation of KPIs and implementation of them for
the PM to attain the goals and objectives of the company is required. The authors of this
present study mark out the aforesaid research gaps and integrated the Pareto-based linguistic
Z-DEMATEL model by applying it to the ﬁeld of the LPI from a Bangladeshi perspective in
the context of a wide-ranging. The contribution of this research is listed below:
(a)
KPIs for PM in COVID-19 are pinpointed, from literature review and taking qualitative
suggestions and recommendations from experts.
(b) Pareto analysis was performed to select the most crucial KPIs for further assessment.
(c)
Using the linguistic Z-DEMATEL approach, inﬂuencing and reliability factors between
KPIs are determined and the interdependencies among KPIs are established to navigate
PM in the era of COVID-19.
(d) To determine the PM system in COVID-19, feedback and quantitative measures from
experts were captured from LPI.
3 Research design and methodology
3.1 Research design
Constructing a PM system using KPIs and approaching the linguistic Z-DEMATEL tech-
nique for the LPI in Bangladesh is the goal of this study. Firstly, KPIs were identiﬁed from
the literature review and experts’ feedback respectively for various departments of the LPI.
Secondly, by developing a survey questionnaire, identiﬁed the most critical KPIs employing
Pareto analysis. Thirdly, another questionnaire was developed for KPIs appraisal. Expert
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2489
appraisal matrices were collected from 25 industrial experts. The data analysis and calcula-
tion were performed approaching the extended lingual Z-DEMATEL method. Identiﬁcation
of the most relevant interdependent KPIs for PM of the LPI was accomplished using the
proposed research Framework illustrated in Fig. 1. Steps 1–6 are followed before applying
Z-DEMATEL.
Fig. 1 Applied extended linguistic Z-DEMATEL
123
Stage:1 
(Literature Review) 
Step:1 Literature Review on KPIs
Step:2 Literature Review on PM
Stage:2 
(Data Collection)
Step:3 Selecting almost 45 KPIs from Literature Review
Step:4 Preparing questionnaire to select most relevant
KPIs from industrial experts
Step:5 Pareto Analysis for selecting KPIs
Step:6 Again, developing questionnaire to collect data 
from industrial experts with the help of influencing 
factors and reliability factors to compute the 
interdependency among KPIs
Stage:3
(Data 
Calculation 
and analysis) 
Phase:1 Grounding on the 
resemblance level method, 
experts are bunched up into 
subclasses
Phase:2 With the aid 
of maximizing 
consensus approach, 
bunches are 
aggregated
Phase:3 Employing 
extended DEMATEL 
method, KPIs are 
pinpointed
Step:7 Determination of Resemblance 
Level (RL) among experts’ appraisal
Step:8 Confirming with the bunching 
thresholds, experts are bunched up into 
subclasses
Step:9 The Bunch Straight Impacting 
Matrix (BSIM) is established
Step:10 The importance weight of each 
bunch is acquired
Step:11 The Overall Straight Impacting
Matrix (OSIM) is initiated
Step:12 The Crisp Straight Impacting 
Matrix (CSIM) is secured
Step:13 The Normalized Straight
Impacting Matrix (NSIM) is computed
Step:14 The Total Impacting Matrix
(TIM) is obtained
Step:15 The Dominant Correlational 
Diagram (DCD) is established
Step:16 The structure of the performance 
indicators is examined to point out KPIs

2490
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
3.2 Solution methodology
KPIs are utilized in the LPI to assess the efﬁcacy and potency of each department. The current
study represents 15 KPIs from the suggestion of experts and a literature review in the LPI sce-
nario. Based on the department of the LPI, 15 KPIs are codiﬁed under 6 segments, which are
presented in Table 1 along with references. To identify the KPIs for PM, a systematic litera-
ture review was performed. Several keywords such as “KPIs for performance management”,
“KPIs for performance management during COVID-19”, “Operational performance man-
agement during COVID-19 pandemic”, “KPI” AND “COVID-19”, were utilized to search
the relevant work in the scholarly databases such as the Scopus, ScienceDirect, and Google
Scholar. The identiﬁed KPIs from the literature review are presented in Table 1.
For examining the interrelationship between KPIs of the LPI, the lingual Z-DEMATEL
approach in the context of a wide-ranging is proposed which was initiated by Jiang et al.,
(2020); Labella et al., (2018). The proposed framework comprises three phases. They are:
Phase-1: Grounding on the Resemblance Level (RL) method, experts are bunched up into
compact sub-classes.
Phase-2: With the aid of maximizing consensus approach, bunches are aggregated.
Phase-3: Employing the extended DEMATEL method, KPIs are pinpointed.
Let, the set of PM indicators be, F  {F1, F2, ..., Ft}.
In the case of wide-ranging decision-making, the experts’ extent must overpass 20 (H. C.
Liu et al., 2018). So, the experts’ numbers can be illustrated as, E  {E1, E2, ..., Ev} where
v > 20
Let, linguistic term sets are denoted by, S  {s0, s1, ..., s2g} and S′  {s0′, s1′, ..., s2g′}
So, we can write ze
cd, the lingual Z-digit is given by the expert Ee as, ze
cd  (Ae
φcde, Be
ϕcde)
If Ze denotes the linguistic straight impacting matrix of the eth expert then, Ze  (ze
cd)t×t
3.2.1 Phase-1
In this phase, by dint of resemblance level method, the wide-ranging extent of experts are
bunched up into compact subclasses.
Step-7 Determination of RL between experts’ appraisal matrices
Calculation of the RL among the appraisal matrices of experts is done in this step. If Ze
and Z f are the LSIMs then RL will be:
RL

Ze, Z f 
 1 −d

Ze, Z f 
 1 −
1
t × t
t
c1
t
d1
d

ze
cd, z f
cd

(1)
Step-8 Conﬁrming with the Bunching Threshold Values (BTV), experts are bunched up into
subclasses.
For detecting BTV, the Expert’s appraisal matrices are bunched up.
λ 
min
e, f 1, 2, ..., y, e̸d RL

Ze, Z f 
+ 2
3

max
e, f 1, 2, ..., y, e̸d RL

Ze, Z f 
−
min
e, f 1, 2, ..., y, e̸d RL

Ze, Z f 
(2)
here, 0 ≤λ ≤1
Ze and Z f can be put down into the same bunch only if RL(Ze, Z f ) ≥λ.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2491
Table 1 List of KPIs selected from Literature Review
Segment of KPIs
Indicator
References
Production
Productivity
Jovan and Zorzut (2006)
Handling of tasks
Nara et al. (2019)
Quality of work
Fung (2020), Joppen et al.
(2019), Jovan and Zorzut
(2006), Scafà et al. (2019)
Arrangement of Tasks
Nara et al. (2019)
Taking security measures
Scafà et al. (2019)
Relationship with colleagues
Scafà et al. (2019)
Layout planning
Scafà et al. (2019)
Delegation in management
Scafà et al. (2019)
Employee turnover rate
Pinna et al. (2018)
Target Fulﬁlment within the delivery
time
Siedler et al. (2020)
Maintenance Delivery
Lima et al. (2021)
Individual Layout of the worker in the
workplace
Scafà et al. (2019)
Worker’s perception of work
Scafà et al. (2019)
Research and Development
Time management
Ahmad et al. (2012)
Human resource and
compliance
Monitoring the mean time between
failure
Siedler et al. (2020)
Asset Management Policy
Lima et al. (2021)
Corrective Action Plan Application
Scafà et al. (2019)
Risk mitigation strategies application
Lima et al. (2021)
Technical standards and legislation
Lima et al. (2021)
Management, Review, Audit, and
Assurance
Lima et al. (2021)
Assurance of Occupational Health and
Safety (OSH)
Amrina and Vilsi (2015),
Liu et al. (2021)
Gender Equity
Amrina and Vilsi (2015)
Compliance with institution privacy and
security policies
Fung (2020)
Financial and Economic
Gross and net proﬁt margin
(Proﬁtability)
Bilal and Oyedele (2020)
Capital Investment Decision Making
Lima et al. (2021)
Application of Technology
Nudurupati et al. (2021),
Siedler et al. (2020)
Net Sales Value
Bilal and Oyedele (2020)
Retention of Sales
Bilal and Oyedele (2020)
Total Cost (Inventory, Labor, Material)
Amrina and Vilsi (2015),
Bilal and Oyedele (2020);
Jovan and Zorzut (2006)
123

2492
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Table 1 (continued)
Segment of KPIs
Indicator
References
Resource Costing and Valuation
Lima et al. (2021)
Accounts/Store
Identiﬁcation of company’s resources
Scholarios and Taylor
(2014)
Governing and Utilizing
Inventory/Resource
Fung 2020), Lima et al.
(2021), Lindberg et al.
(2015), Scafà et al. (2019)
Business Development
Monitoring and controlling core
Competencies
Lima et al. (2021)
Buyer Satisfaction
Lima et al. (2021), Pinna
et al. (2018)
If v denotes the number of appraisal matrices stated by experts and V dictates the number
of bunches then we can split the v matrices into V bunches where Cx(x  1, 2, ..., V ).
Provided in the xth bunch, the number of experts is lx(lx ≥2), validating the condition
V
x1lx  y
3.2.2 Phase-2
The formation of an OSIM can be achieved by combining all the LSIMs.
Ze(e  1, 2, ...., v)
Step-9 The BSIM is established.
If Y x denotes the BSIM then, Y x  (yx
cd)t×t here,
yx
cd  1
lx
lx
e1ze
cd
(3)
Here, the RLs between experts’ appraisal matrices are noticeably high.
Step-10 The importance weight of each bunch is acquired.
Resting on the consensus strategy, expert weights are retained from the popular maximiz-
ing consensus approach (Zhang & Xu, 2015; Zhang et al., 2014).
Based on the maximizing consensus approach, additional weight needs to allocate to the
bunch Cx when the consensus measure of, Y x > Y s where Y s  (ys
cd)t×t
Consequently, the subsequent constrained optimization model for gaining the weights of
bunches can be established.
maxF(px) 
V
x1

1
t × t × (V −1)
V
s1, s̸x
t
c1
t
d1(1 −d(yx
cd, ys
cd))

px
(4)
s.t.
⎧
⎨
⎩
V
x1 px  1
px ∈P
px ≥0
Here, P  the partial familiar weighting information.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2493
The bunch weight px(x  1, 2, ..., V ) can be prevailed through resolving the above-
constrained optimization model.
Step-11 The OSIM is initiated.
If matrix Z signiﬁes the OSIM then,
Z  (zcd)t×t
where zcd can be calculated by applying the LZPWG operator,
(5)
zcd  L Z PWG(y1
cd, y2
cd, ..., yV
cd)

⎛
⎝f ∗−1
⎛
⎝
V

x1
f ∗(x
cd)
px (1+J(yx
cd ))
V
x1 px (1+J(yx
cd ))
⎞
⎠, g∗−1
⎛
⎝g∗(∇x
cd)
px (1+J(yx
cd ))
V
x1 px (1+J(yx
cd ))
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
In which, J(yx
cd)  V
x  1
x ̸ s
Sup(yx
cd, yl
cd)  V
x  1
x ̸ s
1 −d(yx
cd, yl
cd)
Here, Y l  (yl
cd)t×t indicates the Mean Matrix of V bunches (MMB).
3.2.3 Phase-3
For clarifying the interdependencies and pointing out KPIs of LPI, the traditional DEMATEL
approach is expanded concerning linguistic Z-digits.
Step-12 The CSIM is secured.
If f ∗and g∗refers to the feasible linguistic scale function, by evaluating the scoring rate
of an individual element in Z, the CSIM Z′ can be computed as Z′  (zcd′)t×t. Here,
zcd′  S(zcd)  f ∗(Aαcd ) × g∗(Bβcd )
(6)
Step-13 The normalized straight impacting matrix is computed.
Ifh  max

max
1≤c≤t
t
d1zcd′, max
1≤d≤t
t
c1zcd′

(7)
then the NSIM N  (ncd)t×t will be,
N  Z′
h
(8)
Step-14 The TIM is obtained.
If J  ( jcd)t×t signiﬁes the TIM then regarding the NSIM N, the value of J will be,
J  lim
w→∞(N + N 2+, ..., +N w)  N(I −N)−1
(9)
In which, I  Identity matrix.
jcd full primary and secondary impact endeavored from Fc to Fd.
Step-15 The DCD is established.
Let, ac the entire inﬂuence endeavored by Fc from all the other indicators.
bd the entire inﬂuence endeavored by Fd from all the other indicators
A  total sum of rows from the J
B total sum of columns from the J
123

2494
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Then,
A  (ac)t×1 
 t
d1
jcd

t×1
(10)
B  (bc)t×1 
 t
c1
jcd

1×t
(11)
If c  d and c, d  1, 2, ..., t; then for developing a DCD calculation of (ac + bc)
denoting the signiﬁcance level and (ac −bc) denoting exclusive impact level can be done.
Step:16 The structure of the performance indicators is examined to point out KPIs
“Prominence” (ac + bc); c  (1, 2, ..., t) is the term that signiﬁes the potency of the
inﬂuences and is placed on the horizontal axis. On the vertical axis of the graph, (ac −bc);
c  (1, 2, ..., t) is placed which signiﬁes the “relation” displaying the net effect exerted by
the indicators.
The gross prominence of the indicator Fc will be increased when the value of (ac + bc)
will be increased.
The cause-and-effect group can be analyzed as follows:
When, ac + bc > 0, the Fc has an exclusive impact on the other KPIs.
When, ac −bc < 0, the Fc is an exclusive consequence of the other KPIs.
3.2.4 Conceptualization of Z-numbers
Functions related to linguistic scales
Let g represents a non-negative whole number and si
is a thinkable value of the linguistic variable. Then, a deﬁned, limited, and perfectly arranged
linguistic expression coupled with odd cardinality will be:
S  {s0, s1, s2, ........., s2g}
According to Herrera et al. (2000) and Ding and Liu (2018), S must assure the subsequent
possessions:
(a)
si ≤s j if and only if i ≤j
(b) neg(si)  s j, assuring j  2g −i
Here, ‘neg’ denotes the negation operator.
An uninterrupted set is embraced to conserve entire data. In consequence, a discrete
linguistic expression set must be extended Xu, Z. (2006) to a continual form.
If si > s j,i > j and τ(τ > 2g) then,
∼
S  {si|i ∈[0, τ]}
S  {s0, s1, s2, ........., s2g} will be considered as a virtual linguistic term until θi ∈[0,
1]. When, θi ∈[0, 1],0 ≤θ0 ≤θ1 ≤.......... ≤θ2g will be a real linguistic expression.
Virtual linguistic expressions become visible in the performance activity to escape
information deprivation and deformation. Designating non-identical semantic values into
linguistic expression in various circumstances is very difﬁcult. For this, linguistic scale func-
tions were suggested by Wang et.al. (2014) to show up semantic values rapidly and introduce
information under various situations constructively.
Concept 1 Functions (Wang et.al. 2014).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2495
Considering, 0 ≤θ0 ≤θ1 ≤.......... ≤θ2g; the linguistic scale function can be recognized
as a mapping from si to θi,
f : si →θi(i  0, 1, ......., 2g)
(12)
where θi ∈[0, 1] and f1(θi)  θi 
i
2g (0 ≤i ≤2g) represents repetitiously growing
function concerning i.
Function:1 Grounded on i, the ﬁrst function can be deﬁned as,
f1(θi)  θi  i
2g ; (0 ≤i ≤2g)
(13)
Function:2 Concerning, the exponential scale the second function can be explained as,
f2(θi)  θi 

ag−ag−i
2ag−2 (0≤i≤g),
ag+ai−g−2
2ag−2
(g+1≤i≤2g).
(14)
According to Liu et al. (2019), the parameter f3(θi)  θi  {
gα−(g−i)α
2gα
(0≤i≤g),
gβ −(i−g)β
2gβ
(g+1≤i≤2g), will be
acquired in the range [1.36,1.4].
Function:3 Regarding prospect theory, the third function can be obtained,
f3(θi)  θi 

gα−(g−i)α
2gα
;
(0≤i≤g),
gβ −(i−g)β
2gβ
;
(g+1≤i≤2g).
(15)
Here, α, β ∈[0, 1]. Based on Jiang et al. (2020),α  β  0.88.
3.2.5 Principles of linguistic Z-numbers
Considering human cognitive information, Wang et al. (2014) suggested Z-numbers to
express the information precisely and smoothly.
Concept 2 Set of linguistic Z-numbers (Wang et al. 2017).
Allowing, S′  {s′
0, s′
1, s′
2, ......, s′
2g′}
S′  {s′
0, s′
1, s′
2, ......, s′
2g′}
And X represents a domain of expression, we can deﬁne a linguistic Z-number set Z in
X by:
Z  {(x, Aφ(X), Bϕ(X))
x ∈X},
(16)
Here, Aφ(x)  Fuzzy restriction taken by the uncertain variable X.
Bϕ(x)  Reliability measure of Aφ(x).
Concept 3 Operational rules of linguistic Z-numbers (Wang et al. 2017).
Let, f ∗and g∗be the distinct linguistic scale function and linguistic Z-numbers be,
zi  (Aφ(i), Bϕ(i))
z j  (Aφ( j), Bϕ( j))
(a)
Direct
Summation
rule:zi
⊕
z j

( f ∗−1( f ∗(Aφ(i))
+
f ∗(Aφ( j))),
g∗−1( f ∗(Aφ(i))×g∗(Bϕ(i))+ f ∗(Aφ( j))×g∗(Bϕ( j))
f ∗(Aφ(i))+ f ∗(Aφ( j))
));
(b) Constant multiplication rule:
123

2496
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
λzi  ( f ∗−1(λf ∗(Aφ(i))), Bϕ(i)), where λ ≥0;
(c) Exponential rule:
zλ
i  ( f ∗−1( f ∗(Aφ(i))λ), g∗−1(g∗(Bϕ(i))λ)), here λ ≥0.
Concept 4 Score function and Accuracy function of Linguistic Z-numbers (Wang et al.
2017).
Score function of linguistic Z-number zi  (Aφ(i), Bϕ(i)) can be represented as S(zi) and
is calculated by:
S(zi)  f ∗(Aφ(i)) × g∗(Bϕ(i))
(17)
In the same way, the Accuracy function of zi can be represented as,
A(zi)  f ∗(Aφ(i)) × (1 −g∗(Bϕ(i)))
(18)
Concept 5 Comparison method (Wang et al. 2017).
Let, two distinct values of linguistic Z-numbers be,
zi  (Aφ(i), Bϕ(i)) and z j  (Aφ( j), Bϕ( j)).
(1) When zi is greater than z j, zi > z j, if Aφ(i) > Aφ( j) and Bϕ(i) > Bϕ( j);
(2) If S(zi) > S(z j) or S(zi)  S(z j) and A(zi) > A(z j); then zi will be larger than z j.
(3) If S(zi)  S(z j) and A(zi)  A(z j); then zi  z j, zi ∼z j.
(4) If S(zi) < S(z j) or S(zi)  S(z j) and A(zi) < A(z j); then zi will be smaller than z j.
Concept 6 Distance between linguistic Z-numbers (Wang et al. 2017).
Let, two distinct values of linguistic Z-numbers be, zi  (Aφ(i), Bϕ(i)) and z j  (Aφ( j),
Bϕ( j)).
The distance between the numbers will be:
(19)
d(zi, z j)  1
2(
 f ∗(φ(i)) × g∗(ϕ(i)) −f ∗(φ( j)) × g∗(ϕ( j))

+ max{
 f ∗(φ(i)) −f ∗(φ( j))
 ,
g∗(ϕ(i)) −g∗(ϕ( j))
})
Concept 7 LZPWG operator in Z-linguistic numbers (Jiang et al., 2020).
Let,w  (w1, w2, w3, ......., wn) be the weight vector of zi  (Aφ(i), Bϕ(i)) (i  1, 2,
......., n) concerning wi ∈[0, 1] and n
i1 wi  1.
LZPWG operator is the abbreviation form of Linguistic Z-number Power Weighted Geo-
metric operator.
(20)
L Z PWG(z1, z2, z3, ........, zn)  z
w1(1+T (z1))
n
i1 wi (1+T(zi ))
1
⊗z
w2(1+T (z2))
n
i1 wi (1+T (zi ))
2
⊗z
w3(1+T (z3))
n
i1 wi (1+T (zi ))
3
⊗.............. ⊗z
wn(1+T (zn))
n
i1 wi (1+T (zi ))
n
Here, T (zi)  n
i1
i̸ j
Sup(zi, z j) and Sup(zi, z j)  1 −d(zi, z j).
LZPWG operator aggregates the values and exhibits a linguistic Z-number,
(21)
L Z PWG(z1, z2, z3, ......, zn) 
⎛
⎜⎝f ∗−1
 n

i1
f ∗(Aφ(i)

wi (1+T (zi ))
n
i1 wi (1+T (zi ))
⎞
⎟⎠,
g∗−1
 n

i1
f ∗(Bϕ(i))
wi (1+T (zi ))
n
i1 wi (1+T (zi )) )

123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2497
Table 2 Selection of KPIs from suggestions of Experts
Segment/section
Indicator
References
Production
Initiating the right call
Expert
Knowledge of every operation and Momentum of
work
Expert
Recognition of work
Expert
Identiﬁcation of sequence of operation
Expert
Wrong signals and inappropriate action
Expert
Research and
Development
Lack of coordination between R&D and Production
Department
Expert
Accuracy in making the pattern of the sample
(Expert)
Expert
Human
Resource and
Compliance
Controlling absence rate of employee
Expert
The implication of maternal leave and payment
(Expert)
Expert
Ensuring proper training
Expert
Certiﬁcations and System Appraisal
Expert
Financial and Economic
Seasonality
Expert
Accounts/store
Formulation of detailed plans and budgets
Expert
Business Development
Digital Marketing
Expert
4 An industrial case study
As the COVID-19 delineate wide-ranging interruption in PM of LPI, decision-makers are
rethinking about KPI investigation process. In this section, the outcomes regarding the pin-
pointed KPIs are examined as a path for moving forward in these situations.
4.1 Data collection
Data is collected via inspection, survey questionnaire, and conversation with company
experts. The details of data collection protocol are given in online Appendix-A and Appendix-
B.
4.1.1 Selection of KPIs from industrial experts
Almost 14 KPIs were chosen from discussion with the experts from various departments
of the LPI by collecting data according to Table A3 shown in online Appendix-A and are
represented in Table 2.
4.1.2 Preparing a questionnaire to select most relevant KPIs from industrial experts
feedback
A survey questionnaire was developed given in online Appendix-A in Table A2 for selecting
KPIs from industrial experts. The main objective of this selection was to acquire the most
important KPIs that affect the company’s PM system.
123

2498
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Fig. 2 Pareto Chart for identifying KPIs
4.1.3 Pareto analysis for selecting relevant KPIs
In a wide-ranging data analysis with a causes and effect group containing KPIs, a Pareto
Analysis (PA) has been picked out. A PA chart is a bar chart that administrates the industrial
case and the quality of data. PA is used tremendously for the PM system. This PA uniﬁed the
“80–20 Rule” or “70–30 Rule” for constructing the level of effort that occurs in a speciﬁc
proposal. Here, the rule states that 80% or 70% of the “Effect” indicators emerge from 20%
or 30% of the “Cause” indicators. A chart is made for PA in Fig. 2 to select the most relevant
KPIs from total 48 KPIs. Here, the chart dictates the areas that are accepted by most experts
as the KPIs selected from the literature survey and suggested by the experts. Based on the PA
of the survey questionnaire of experts, the highest priority list of 15 KPIs was selected from
48 KPIs (Hepatis, 1844). This study pursues divergent relationship of 67/33 for KPIs of PM
in LPI. Most important 15 KPIs {F1, F2, ..., F15} for PM in LPI considering the COVID-19
based on Pareto analysis are selected and represented in Table 3.
4.1.4 Developing another questionnaire to collect data from industry experts
with the help of inﬂuencing factors and reliability factors
With the help of two rating scales of inﬂuencing and reliability factors, another survey
questionnaire was developed to compute the interdependency among KPIs. Matrices were
collected from 25 experienced experts {E1, E2, ..., E25} in the LPI. The designation, years
of experience, and the number of experts is displayed in Table 4. Detailed information of
experts was collected by Table A1 given in online Appendix-A and details of expert’s proﬁles
are given in Table 4.
123
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Arrangement of Tasks considering COVID-19
Taking of security measures considering COVID-19
Proper layout planning
Identification of sequence of operation
Target Fulfillment within delivery time during COVID-19
Lack of coordination between R&D and Production…
Corrective Action Plan Application during COVID-19
COVID-19 pandemic Risk mitigation strategies application
Technical standards and legislation considering COVID-…
Timely Management, Review, Audit, and Assurance
Gross and net profit margin (Profitability), Net Sales…
Application of Modern Technology
Governing and Utilizing Inventory/Resource
Buyer Satisfaction during COVID-19
Digital Marketing During COVID-19
Initiating the right call
Productivity
Knowledge of every operation and Momentum of work
Handling of tasks
Quality of work
Relationship with colleagues
Recognition of work
Delegation in management
Employee turnover rate
Wrong signals and inappropriate action
Maintenance Delivery
Individual Layout of the worker in the workplace
Worker’s perception of work
Time management
Accuracy in making the pattern of the sample (Expert)
Controlling absence rate of employee
The implication of maternal leave and payment (Expert)
Ensuring proper training
Monitoring the mean time between failure
Certifications and System Evaluation
Asset Management Policy
Technical standards and legislation
Assurance of Occupational Health and Safety (OSH)
Gender Equity
Compliance with institution privacy and security policies
Seasonality
Capital Investment Decision Making
Net Sales Value
Retention of Sales
Total Cost (Inventory, Labor, Material)
Resource Costing and Valuation
Formulation of detailed plan and budgets
Identification of company’s resources
Monitoring and controlling core Competencies
Value
Percentage Value
KPIs

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2499
Table 3 Selected 15 KPIs based on Pareto Analysis with description
Segment
Code of KPI
Key performance indicators
Description
Production and quality
control
F1
Arrangement of tasks considering COVID-19
Proper task arrangement is helpful to improve efﬁciency and
reduce hazards in the COVID-19 pandemic (Nara et al.,
2019)
F2
Taking of security measures considering COVID-19
How Safety and Security Regulators like hand sanitizing,
wearing masks, keeping distance in the workplace address
challenges during the COVID-19 epidemic (Scafà et al.,
2019)
F3
Proper layout planning
Within a provision, proper layout planning is marking on the
best physical conformation of all resources that utilize
space. The production rate of a company depends on
layout planning to a great extent (Scafà et al., 2019)
F4
Identiﬁcation of sequence of operation
The sequence of operation relates to design, speciﬁcation,
and construction. So, identiﬁcation of the sequence of
operation is compulsory to improve the productivity and
quality of the LPI (Expert)
F5
Target Fulﬁllment within the delivery time during
COVID-19
The challenge for success in target fulﬁllment within the
delivery time during the COVID-19 pandemic relies on the
company’s ability to compete with the other company.
Different strategies are involved in assuring successful
delivery and target fulﬁllment Siedler et al., (2020)
Research and development
F6
Lack of coordination between R&D and production
department during COVID-19
R&D and production interact with each other in attaining the
business goal of the LPI. But COVID-19 pandemic
situation is harming coordination between the departments
(Expert)
123

2500
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Table 3 (continued)
Segment
Code of KPI
Key performance indicators
Description
Human resource and
compliance
F7
Corrective action plan application during COVID-19
To boost the operations of the business and task associated
affairs, well-structured exchanges are carried out by
assigned manpower like administrator, manager to develop
a corrective action plan. In the COVID-19 pandemic
condition, proper application of CAP is useful to eliminate
the problem that occurred during the manufacturing
process to avoid the risk of loss Scafà et al., (2019)
F8
COVID-19 pandemic risk mitigation strategies application
Risk mitigation strategies are designed to eradicate, decrease
or monitor the consequences of known threats inherent
with a designated commitment, before any kind of
offence. With these implementations, threats occurring in
the COVID-19 pandemic can be foreseen and dealt with
Lima et al., (2021)
F9
Technical standards and legislation considering COVID-19
pandemic
A technical standard is constructed based on measures or
demand for a reproducible high-tech responsibility. Health
and Safety Legislation in the LPI considering the
COVID-19 pandemic involves many rules and regulations
Lima et al., (2021)
F10
Timely management, review, audit, and assurance
Audit and assurance are a planned inquiry, appraisal of
details. and are an executive maintenance to affect the
aspect and clarity of information. Management, Review,
Audit, and Assurance evaluates the PM system of an
industry Lima et al., (2021)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2501
Table 3 (continued)
Segment
Code of KPI
Key performance indicators
Description
Financial and economic
F11
Gross and net proﬁt margin (proﬁtability), net sales value
and retention of sales
Gross and net proﬁt margin examines proﬁt and
manufacturing costs, predicting future revenues or costs,
and identifying gross proﬁt will assist to dictate on the
whole proﬁtability. They are important as the starting
point toward achieving a healthy proﬁt Bilal and Oyedele,
(2020)
F12
Application of modern technology
Technology has increased the productivity of the LPI all
over the world. It can impart higher-standard leather
products, increase consumer service and the buyer
experience, and decrease wastage (Nudurupati et al., 2021;
Siedler et al., 2020)
Accounts or store
F13
Governing and utilizing inventory/resource
Utilizing inventory incurs reserving, warehousing, and
utilizing the inventory of organization. Alongside this,
incorporates the management of raw materials,
components, and ﬁnal assembled products, and also the
warehousing and processing of these components.
Continuous governing of inventory/resources has
signiﬁcant effects on company performance (Fung, 2020;
Lima et al., 2021; Lindberg et al., 2015; Scafà et al., 2019)
123

2502
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Table 3 (continued)
Segment
Code of KPI
Key performance indicators
Description
Business development
F14
Buyer satisfaction during COVID-19
Buyer satisfaction indicates the fulﬁllment that they derive
from doing business with a leather products company.
Buyer satisfaction is crucial as it helps companies
understand what they need to do to retain buyers for
long-term business growth. With more people spending
more time on social media due to COVID-19, brands need
to use social media to connect with buyers. The user
experience has to be smooth, and the navigation easy in
websites so that buyers can ﬁnd whatever they need within
a few clicks (Lima et al., 2021; Pinna et al., 2018)
F15
Digital marketing during COVID-19
For intercepting emergency environmental and social
challenges, COVID-19 pandemic suggests businesses a
wonderful possibility to move to actual and
honest marketing (Expert)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2503
Table 4 Designation and years of experience of experts
Code of
experts
Designation
Years of
experience
Types of
organization
E1
Production Leader
8 + years
Manufacturing
E2
Assistant Manager
7 + years
Manufacturing
E3
Managing Director
7 + years
Manufacturing
E4
Quality Assurance Executive
6 + years
Manufacturing
E5
Owner
7 + years
Manufacturing
E6
Assistant Manager
8 + years
Manufacturing
E7
Professor
15 + years
Manufacturing
E8
Senior Lecturer
13 + years
Manufacturing
E9
Deputy Manager, Product Development
8 + years
Manufacturing
E10
Lecturer
2 + years
University
E11
Ofﬁcer- Merchandising
7 + years
Manufacturing
E12
P.D. Manager
10 + years
Manufacturing
E13
Senior Merchandiser
6 + years
Manufacturing
E14
Production Planning & Quality Assurance
Manager
5 + years
Manufacturing
E15
Owner
7 + years
Manufacturing
E16
Assistant Lecturer
7 + years
University
E17
Head of Leather Goods, Accessories Buyer
7 + years
Manufacturing
E18
Executive, Pattern Engineering
6 + years
Manufacturing
E19
Ofﬁcer (Research & Development)
8 + years
Manufacturing
E20
Senior Ofﬁcer (Research & Development)
8 + years
Manufacturing
E21
Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
10 + years
Manufacturing
E22
Senior Ofﬁcer Human Resource
7 + years
Manufacturing
E23
Deputy Manager Compliance
11 + years
Manufacturing
E24
Assistant Manager
10 + years
Manufacturing
E25
Production Manager
22 + years
Manufacturing
4.2 Data calculation and analysis
After completing data collection, calculation and analysis of the expert appraisal matrices
were performed employing the wide-ranging lingual Z-DEMATEL method. Two different
functions are applied for inﬂuencing and reliability factors. Appraisal of the chosen per-
formance indicators by experts was performed adopting two linguistic term sets which are
mentioned below:
S 

s8  ExtremelyGood, s7  V eryGood, s6  Good, s5  SlightlyGood, s4  Fair,
s3  SlightlyPoor, s2  Poor, s1  V eryPoor, s0  ExtremelyPoor,
S′ 

s′8  StronglySure, s′7  V erySure, s′6  Sure, s′5  SomewhatSure, s′4  Neutral,
s′3  SlightlyPoor, s′2  Uncertain, s′1  V eryUncertain, s′0  StronglyUncertain,
Here, S is the set of interrelation between indicators and S′ is the set of reliability of
the assessed value given by the experts. The two factors with numerical value are given in
123

2504
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Table B2 and Table B3 in online Appendix-B. Two different functions, f ∗ f3(φi) and
g∗ f1(ϕi) were used for inﬂuencing factors and reliability factors respectively. Evaluation
of experts were assessed by matrix given in Table B4 in online Appendix-B. The LSIM of
expert E1 is given below in Table 5. Other experts’ LSIM is provided in online Appendix-B
from Table B5 to Table B29.
4.2.1 Determination of RL among experts’ appraisals
RL stands for resemblance level between experts’ assessment matrices. According to the
mathematical statement (1), the RL(Ze, Z f ) (e, f  1, 2, ..., 25) between experts’ appraisal
matrices is determined. For instance, if Z1 and Z2 are the 1st and 2nd experts then the RL
between their matrices will be calculated as follows:
RL(Z1, Z2)  1 −d(Z1, Z2)
Here, d(Z1, Z2) 
1
15×15
15
i1
15
j1d(z1
i j, z2
i j) 
1
225 × 79.92  0.3552
So, RL(Z1, Z2)  1 −0.3552  0.6448. The Similarity Degree between Expert 1 and
other experts is represented in Table 6.
4.2.2 Conﬁrming the bunching thresholds, experts are bunched up into subgroups
With the help of the mathematical statement (2), ﬁrstly bunching threshold λ  0.4936 is
constructed. Secondly, as per this value λ, 25 experts are bunched up into 3 subgroups as
follows:
C1  {E3, E6, E7, E8, E9, E10, E12, E13, E14, E15, E16, E17, E18, E20, E21, E22, E23, E24},
C2  {E1, E4, E5, E11, E19}, C3  {E2, E25}
4.2.3 Establishment of the BSIM
Straight impacting matrices of those three bunches Y x(x  1, 2, 3) are established with the
help of the mathematical statement (3). The straight impacting matrices of the 1st bunch are
shown in the following Table 7. Other BSIMs are provided in online Appendix-B in Table
B30 and Table B31.
4.2.4 Acquirement of the importance weight of each bunch
A constrained optimization model is constructed by dint of the mathematical statement (4).
maxF(px)  0.981266105p1 + 0.9425989055p2 + 0.8814027855p3
s.t.
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
0.5 ≤p1 ≤0.7; 0.05 ≤p3 ≤0.1;
p3 ≤p2 ≤p1; p1 ≤9p3
p1 + p2 + p3  1
p1, p2, p3 ≥0
Here, the bunch’s investigated weighting information was acquired grounding on the
experience of experts as follows: P  {0.3 ≤p1 ≤0.7, 0.05 ≤p3 ≤0.1, p3 ≤p2 ≤p1,
p1 ≤9p3}
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2505
Table 5 LSIM given by the 1st Expert
KPIs
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
F7
F8
F9
F10
F11
F12
F13
F14
F15
F1
0
(s8, s′
2)
(s6, s′
8)
(s7, s′
2)
(s8, s′
8)
(s5, s′
2)
(s7, s′
2)
(s5, s′
7)
(s8, s′
5)
(s6, s′
2)
(s6, s′
7)
(s6, s′
7)
(s8, s′
3)
(s5, s′
8)
(s4, s′
6)
F2
(s3, s′
3)
0
(s2, s′
5)
(s8, s′
4)
(s7, s′
6)
(s8, s′
4)
(s6, s′
2)
(s2, s′
4)
(s2, s′
5)
(s5, s′
5)
(s3, s′
5)
(s7, s′
7)
(s4, s′
6)
(s5, s′
7)
(s4, s′
6)
F3
(s6, s′
5)
(s2, s′
4)
0
(s6, s′
3)
(s6, s′
4)
(s7, s′
6)
(s2, s′
3)
(s6, s′
4)
(s4, s′
3)
(s7, s′
5)
(s7, s′
2)
(s3, s′
4)
(s3, s′
7)
(s6, s′
5)
(s2, s′
2)
F4
(s3, s′
4)
(s7, s′
6)
(s3, s′
6)
0
(s5, s′
5)
(s6, s′
5)
(s3, s′
5)
(s4, s′
2)
(s5, s′
8)
(s5, s′
6)
(s4, s′
4)
(s7, s′
8)
(s5, s′
5)
(s5, s′
3)
(s5, s′
8)
F5
(s5, s′
5)
(s2, s′
3)
(s3, s′
4)
(s5, s′
8)
0
(s5, s′
5)
(s6, s′
8)
(s4, s′
7)
(s3, s′
8)
(s8, s′
8)
(s3, s′
2)
(s7, s′
8)
(s3, s′
8)
(s8, s′
4)
(s8, s′
3)
F6
(s7, s′
4)
(s3, s′
5)
(s4, s′
5)
(s6, s′
7)
(s6, s′
3)
0
(s5, s′
2)
(s5, s′
8)
(s7, s′
3)
(s8, s′
3)
(s7, s′
6)
(s4, s′
6)
(s8, s′
6)
(s6, s′
3)
(s6, s′
8)
F7
(s5, s′
2)
(s3, s′
3)
(s8, s′
6)
(s5, s′
5)
(s8, s′
2)
(s2, s′
4)
0
(s5, s′
5)
(s5, s′
4)
(s4, s′
6)
(s6, s′
6)
(s5, s′
4)
(s6, s′
2)
(s2, s′
2)
(s7, s′
5)
F8
(s4, s′
4)
(s4, s′
8)
(s2, s′
8)
(s6, s′
7)
(s2, s′
7)
(s5, s′
6)
(s7, s′
7)
0
(s8, s′
6)
(s8, s′
7)
(s4, s′
4)
(s7, s′
3)
(s5, s′
3)
(s6, s′
2)
(s5, s′
5)
F9
(s2, s′
4)
(s3, s′
5)
(s8, s′
2)
(s3, s′
4)
(s7, s′
7)
(s4, s′
3)
(s4, s′
7)
(s7, s′
8)
0
(s3, s′
3)
(s7, s′
8)
(s5, s′
3)
(s5, s′
3)
(s3, s′
8)
(s8, s′
4)
F10
(s6, s′
3)
(s3, s′
2)
(s8, s′
5)
(s7, s′
7)
(s3, s′
8)
(s7, s′
3)
(s7, s′
4)
(s5, s′
3)
(s7, s′
4)
0
(s3, s′
6)
(s4, s′
6)
(s5, s′
7)
(s2, s′
6)
(s7, s′
6)
F11
(s8, s′
7)
(s7, s′
5)
(s8, s′
3)
(s8, s′
7)
(s2, s′
5)
(s2, s′
3)
(s4, s′
7)
(s4, s′
4)
(s5, s′
2)
(s7, s′
2)
0
(s3, s′
7)
(s5, s′
7)
(s8, s′
5)
(s6, s′
7)
F12
(s3, s′
5)
(s4, s′
4)
(s5, s′
4)
(s6, s′
3)
(s6, s′
6)
(s4, s′
5)
(s6, s′
7)
(s8, s′
7)
(s5, s′
5)
(s2, s′
2)
(s5, s′
3)
0
(s3, s′
2)
(s8, s′
3)
(s6, s′
3)
F13
(s6, s′
2)
(s3, s′
8)
(s6, s′
4)
(s7, s′
6)
(s4, s′
6)
(s8, s′
8)
(s3, s′
7)
(s8, s′
4)
(s3, s′
3)
(s4, s′
5)
(s8, s′
8)
(s3, s′
6)
0
(s4, s′
8)
(s7, s′
8)
F14
(s6, s′
8)
(s2, s′
2)
(s5, s′
2)
(s8, s′
5)
(s6, s′
3)
(s3, s′
3)
(s2, s′
7)
(s2, s′
6)
(s2, s′
7)
(s7, s′
3)
(s7, s′
5)
(s5, s′
2)
(s4, s′
4)
0
(s2, s′
5)
F15
(s3, s′
7)
(s5, s′
6)
(s3, s′
4)
(s3, s′
6)
(s2, s′
5)
(s7, s′
7)
(s5, s′
7)
(s4, s′
5)
(s2, s′
2)
(s8, s′
2)
(s6, s′
2)
(s4, s′
5)
(s5, s′
7)
(s7, s′
8)
0
123

2506
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Table 6 RL between Expert 1 and other experts
Coding of
Experts
E2
E3
E4
E5
E6
E7
E8
E9
E10
E11
E12
E13
Similarity
Degree
Between
Expert 1
and
others
0.645
0.487
0.531
0.505
0.434
0.491
0.482
0.439
0.476
0.502
0.487
0.472
Coding of
Experts
E14
E15
E16
E17
E18
E19
E20
E21
E22
E23
E24
E25
Similarity
Degree
Between
Expert 1 and
others
0.418
0.441
0.449
0.456
0.436
0.504
0.461
0.45
0.449
0.435
0.419
0.449
After working out the above-mentioned optimization model, each bunch’s weight is
obtained as follows: p1  0.700, p2  0.222 and p3  0.078.
The optimization model is illustrated at Table B32 in online Appendix-B.
4.2.5 Initiation of the OSIM
The OSIM Z  (zcd)15×15 of the bunches is initiated as the mathematical statement (5) and
is represented in Table 8.
4.2.6 Securing the CSIM
The CSIM Z′  (zcd′)15×15 of the bunches is calculated with the help of the mathematical
statement (6) and is displayed in Table 9.
4.2.7 Computation of the NSIM
The NSIM N  (Ncd)15×15 is computed as the mathematical statement (7) and (8) is repre-
sented in Table 10.
4.2.8 Obtaining the TIM
Putting in the mathematical statement (9), the TIM J  [ jcd]15×15 is obtained and shown in
Table 11.
4.2.9 Obtaining the DCD
If A and B signify the sum of rows and the sum of columns respectively, then with the
help of the mathematical statements (10) and (11), A and B can be obtained. (ac + bc) and
(ac −bc) are also computed where (ac + bc) and (ac −bc) denotes the “signiﬁcance level”
and “exclusive impact level” sequentially. The levels are represented in Table 12. DCD is
represented in Fig. 3 containing 15 indicators constructed utilizing the data from Table 12.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2507
Table 7 1st BSIM
KPIs
F1
F2
F3
F4
…………………………
F13
F14
F15
F1
0
(s4.5, s′
5.278)
(s4.778, s′
5.278)
(s5.333, s′
3.722)
…………………………
(s5.056, s′
4.222)
(s3.889, s′
3.444)
(s3.722, s′
4.389)
F2
(s5.167, s′
4.222)
0
(s5.000, s′
5.333)
(s4.000, s′
5.278)
…………………………
(s5.000, s′
5.167)
(s4.556, s′
4.000)
(s4.333, s′
4.333)
F3
(s5.000, s′
5.333)
(s4.667, s′
4.278)
0
(s4.056, s′
4.722)
…………………………
(s4.111, s′
4.667)
(s5.056, s′
5.333)
(s5.167, s′
4.722)
F4
(s4.778, s′
4.833)
(s5.278, s′
4.444)
(s5.333, s′
4.167)
0
…………………………
(s5.000, s′
4.111)
(s4.833, s′
5.556)
(s5.611, s′
5.222)
F5
(s4.778, s′
4.778)
(s5.833, s′
4.444)
(s5.500, s′
5.167)
(s4.000, s′
4.944)
…………………………
(s4.833, s′
3.833)
(s5.611, s′
5.500)
(s5.167, s′
4.167)
F6
(s4.333, s′
4.056)
(s4.278, s′
4.389)
(s5.167, s′
4.5)
(s4.444, s′
5.722)
…………………………
(s4.944, s′
4.333)
(s3.556, s′
4.389)
(s4.667, s′
4.278)
F7
(s3.899, s′
5.222)
(s5.000, s′
4.944)
(s5.111, s′
5.278)
(s3.944, s′
4.889)
…………………………
(s3.722, s′
4.222)
(s5.611, s′
4.722)
(s3.500, s′
4.833)
F8
(s4.167, s′
5.222)
(s4.944, s′
5.444)
(s4.778, s′
5.389)
(s4.611, s′
5.056)
…………………………
(s4.889, s′
4.667)
(s5.167, s′
5.056)
(s5.444, s′
5.056)
F9
(s4.8333, s′
4.833)
(s5.167, s′
3.833)
(s4.889, s′
4.333)
(s5.222, s′
4.944)
…………………………
(s4.500, s′
4.778)
(s3.778, s′
3.278)
(s5.056, s′
4.889)
F10
(s4.611, s′
5.667)
(s5.000, s′
4.889)
(s4.889, s′
4.833)
(s5.389, s′
4.278)
…………………………
(s5.278, s′
3.833)
(s4.889, s′
5.667)
(s4.833, s′
4.167)
F11
(s5.778, s′
5.056)
(s3.944, s′
4.778)
(s3.111, s′
5.167)
(s6.722, s′
4.944)
…………………………
(s4.500, s′
4.222)
(s5.222, s′
3.778)
(s4.611, s′
4.333)
F12
(s4.333, s′
4.778)
(s4.167, s′
5.111)
(s4.722, s′
4.778)
(s4.778, s′
4.111)
…………………………
(s4.167, s′
4.722)
(s3.944, s′
4.833)
(s3.889, s′
5.000)
F13
(s4.000, s′
3.889)
(s4.389, s′
4.389)
(s4.833, s′
5.056)
(s5.000, s′
4.444)
…………………………
0
(s5.500, s′
5.111)
(s4.778, s′
4.111)
F14
(s5.833, s′
5.222)
(s4.611, s′
5.000)
(s4.833, s′
5.333)
(s4.500, s′
4.944)
…………………………
(s4.500, s′
4.444)
0
(s4.389, s′
5.667)
F15
(s4.611, s′
3.667)
(s3.667, s′
4.111)
(s3.333, s′
4.333)
(s4.389, s′
4.889)
…………………………
(s4.167, s′
4.278)
(s5.444, s′
3.944)
0
123

2508
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Table 8 The OSIM of the three bunches
KPIs
F1
F2
F3
F4
…………………………
F13
F14
F15
F1
0
(s4.829, s′
5.569)
(s4.989, s′
5.523)
(s5.304, s′
5.067)
…………………………
(s5.195, s′
5.258)
(s4.445, s′
4.949)
(s4.546, s′
5.371)
F2
(s5.044, s′
5.327)
0
(s4.999, s′
5.744)
(s4.553, s′
5.620)
…………………………
(s5.027, s′
5.759)
(s4.883, s′
5.192)
(s4.741, s′
5.427)
F3
(s5.091, s′
5.753)
(s4.892, s′
5.145)
0
(s4.628, s′
5.359)
…………………………
(s4.623, s′
5.530)
(s5.127, s′
5.734)
(s5.091, s′
5.511)
F4
(s4.936, s′
5.509)
(s5.192, s′
5.487)
(s5.206, s′
5.363)
0
…………………………
(s5.049, s′
5.217)
(s5.026, s′
5.839)
(s5.374, s′
5.832)
F5
(s4.940, s′
5.561)
(s5.298, s′
5.412)
(s5.238, s′
5.746)
(s4.643, s′
5.687)
…………………………
(s4.815, s′
5.195)
(s5.335, s′
5.875)
(s5.171, s′
5.302)
F6
(s4.847, s′
5.218)
(s4.642, s′
5.347)
(s5.177, s′
5.491)
(s4.802, s′
6.077)
…………………………
(s5.005, s′
5.346)
(s4.514, s′
5.405)
(s4.902, s′
5.366)
F7
(s4.526, s′
5.832)
(s5.008, s′
5.649)
(s5.220, s′
5.854)
(s4.620, s′
5.592)
…………………………
(s4.437, s′
5.211)
(s5.294, s′
5.538)
(s4.443, s′
5.600)
F8
(s4.671, s′
6.079)
(s4.982, s′
5.838)
(s4.891, s′
5.842)
(s4.819, s′
5.804)
…………………………
(s4.947, s′
5.459)
(s5.133, s′
5.684)
(s5.238, s′
5.748)
F9
(s4.984, s′
5.626)
(s5.108, s′
5.159)
(s5.040, s′
5.302)
(s5.138, s′
5.635)
…………………………
(s4.785, s′
5.625)
(s4.529, s′
4.890)
(s5.167, s′
5.687)
F10
(s4.960, s′
5.972)
(s5.066, s′
5.591)
(s4.968, s′
5.569)
(s5.213, s′
5.297)
…………………………
(s5.241, s′
5.103)
(s4.985, s′
5.985)
(s5.004, s′
5.349)
F11
(s5.458, s′
5.712)
(s4.540, s′
5.590)
(s4.265, s′
5.713)
(s5.813, s′
5.774)
…………………………
(s4.753, s′
5.402)
(s5.139, s′
5.003)
(s4.929, s′
5.386)
F12
(s4.803, s′
5.561)
(s4.767, s′
5.701)
(s4.911, s′
5.490)
(s4.967, s′
5.206)
…………………………
(s4.712, s′
5.606)
(s4.667, s′
5.663)
(s4.646, s′
5.584)
F13
(s4.568, s′
5.126)
(s4.767, s′
5.478)
(s5.012, s′
5.771)
(s5.112, s′
5.478)
…………………………
0
(s5.230, s′
5.803)
(s5.008, s′
5.345)
F14
(s5.429, s′
5.808)
(s4.836, s′
5.659)
(s4.844, s′
5.820)
(s4.908, s′
5.733)
…………………………
(s4.846, s′
5.311)
0
(s4.743, s′
5.915)
F15
(s4.957, s′
4.968)
(s4.458, s′
5.276)
(s4.265, s′
5.413)
(s4.613, s′
5.720)
…………………………
(s4.643, s′
5.435)
(s5.363, s′
5.302)
0
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2509
Table 9 The CSIM
KPIs
F1′
F2′
F3′
F4′
F5′
F6′
F7′
F8′
F9′
F10′
F11′
F12′
F13′
F14′
F15′
F1′
0
.473
.485
.472
.491
.492
.459
.510
.516
.519
.503
.430
.48
.385
.428
F2′
.473
0
.505
.449
.467
.543
.521
.423
.502
.427
.504
.476
.509
.446
.452
F3′
.515
.443
0
.435
.548
.525
.440
.457
.437
.486
.470
.435
.449
.517
.494
F4′
.478
.501
.491
0
.518
.424
.446
.429
.451
.516
.525
.520
.464
.516
.551
F5′
.483
.504
.529
.464
0
.431
.469
.448
.449
.476
.489
.441
.440
.551
.482
F6′
.445
.436
.500
.513
.489
0
.490
.498
.405
.492
.464
.472
.471
.427
.463
F7′
.463
.498
.537
.453
.466
.529
0
.577
.493
.476
.478
.404
.404
.515
.435
F8′
.499
.512
.503
.492
.509
.518
.448
0
.482
.449
.471
.468
.475
.513
.530
F9′
.493
.464
.47
.509
.504
.455
.460
.438
0
.409
.474
.406
.473
.388
.517
F10′
.521
.498
.487
.486
.539
.500
.431
.472
.580
0
.500
.451
.470
.525
.471
F11′
.548
.445
.424
.588
.488
.390
.513
.488
.455
.519
0
.515
.451
.452
.467
F12′
.470
.478
.474
.455
.446
.431
.450
.516
.451
.496
.454
0
.464
.464
.455
F13′
.411
.459
.509
.493
.480
.448
.446
.393
.463
.425
.444
.452
0
.534
.471
F14′
.554
.481
.496
.495
.560
.481
.444
.514
.460
.477
.458
.519
.453
0
.493
F15′
.433
.412
.401
.463
.521
.416
.460
.452
.528
.449
.492
.440
.443
.500
0
123

2510
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Table 10 The NSIM
KPIs
F1′
F2′
F3′
F4′
F5′
F6′
F7′
F8′
F9′
F10′
F11′
F12′
F13′
F14′
F15′
F1′
.000
.067
.069
.067
.070
.070
.065
.073
.073
.074
.072
.061
.068
.055
.061
F2′
.067
.000
.072
.064
.066
.077
.074
.060
.071
.061
.072
.068
.072
.063
.064
F3′
.073
.063
.000
.062
.078
.075
.063
.065
.062
.069
.067
.062
.064
.074
.070
F4′
.068
.071
.070
.000
.074
.060
.063
.061
.064
.073
.075
.074
.066
.073
.078
F5′
.069
.072
.075
.066
.000
.061
.067
.064
.064
.068
.070
.063
.063
.078
.069
F6′
.063
.062
.071
.073
.070
.000
.070
.071
.058
.070
.066
.067
.067
.061
.066
F7′
.066
.071
.076
.065
.066
.075
.000
.082
.070
.068
.068
.058
.058
.073
.062
F8′
.071
.073
.072
.070
.072
.074
.064
.000
.069
.064
.067
.067
.068
.073
.075
F9′
.070
.066
.067
.072
.072
.065
.065
.062
.000
.058
.067
.058
.067
.055
.074
F10′
.074
.071
.069
.069
.077
.071
.061
.067
.083
.000
.071
.064
.067
.075
.067
F11′
.078
.063
.060
.084
.070
.056
.073
.069
.065
.074
.000
.073
.064
.064
.066
F12′
.067
.068
.067
.065
.064
.061
.064
.073
.064
.071
.065
.000
.066
.066
.065
F13′
.058
.065
.072
.070
.068
.064
.063
.056
.066
.060
.063
.064
.000
.076
.067
F14′
.079
.068
.071
.070
.080
.068
.063
.073
.065
.068
.065
.074
.064
.000
.070
F15′
.062
.059
.057
.066
.074
.059
.065
.064
.075
.064
.070
.063
.063
.071
.000
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2511
Table 11 The TIM
KPIs
F1′
F2′
F3′
F4′
F5′
F6′
F7′
F8′
F9′
F10′
F11′
F12′
F13′
F14′
F15′
F1′
1.192
1.224
1.260
1.251
1.297
1.223
1.202
1.231
1.241
1.232
1.248
1.19
1.199
1.235
1.236
F2′
1.263
1.169
1.271
1.256
1.302
1.237
1.217
1.228
1.247
1.229
1.257
1.204
1.211
1.251
1.247
F3′
1.262
1.222
1.197
1.248
1.306
1.228
1.201
1.226
1.232
1.23
1.246
1.192
1.197
1.253
1.246
F4′
1.287
1.258
1.292
1.219
1.333
1.244
1.23
1.251
1.263
1.263
1.282
1.231
1.227
1.283
1.283
F5′
1.259
1.231
1.268
1.253
1.235
1.218
1.206
1.226
1.235
1.23
1.25
1.194
1.197
1.258
1.246
F6′
1.239
1.207
1.249
1.243
1.283
1.145
1.193
1.217
1.214
1.217
1.231
1.183
1.186
1.228
1.228
F7′
1.269
1.242
1.282
1.264
1.31
1.243
1.155
1.254
1.253
1.242
1.261
1.202
1.204
1.267
1.253
F8′
1.295
1.265
1.299
1.29
1.338
1.262
1.236
1.199
1.273
1.26
1.281
1.23
1.234
1.288
1.286
F9′
1.226
1.192
1.226
1.224
1.266
1.187
1.172
1.191
1.141
1.188
1.214
1.157
1.168
1.204
1.216
F10′
1.309
1.274
1.308
1.301
1.353
1.27
1.244
1.273
1.296
1.211
1.296
1.239
1.244
1.3
1.289
F11′
1.282
1.238
1.270
1.283
1.315
1.227
1.225
1.245
1.25
1.25
1.199
1.218
1.212
1.261
1.259
F12′
1.232
1.202
1.236
1.226
1.268
1.193
1.178
1.209
1.21
1.207
1.22
1.111
1.175
1.222
1.217
F13′
1.211
1.187
1.226
1.217
1.258
1.182
1.165
1.18
1.198
1.185
1.205
1.158
1.1
1.218
1.206
F14′
1.306
1.265
1.302
1.294
1.347
1.261
1.239
1.271
1.273
1.267
1.283
1.24
1.234
1.223
1.285
F15′
1.211
1.178
1.210
1.211
1.260
1.175
1.164
1.185
1.203
1.186
1.208
1.154
1.157
1.21
1.14
123

2512
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Table 12 Every indicator’s stated and encountered inﬂuences
Code of KPIs
A
B
A + B
Ranking order
A–B
Cause/effect
F1
18.461
18.842
37.303
8
−0.381
Effect
F2
18.589
18.355
36.944
9
0.234
Cause
F3
18.484
18.895
37.380
7
−0.411
Effect
F4
18.946
18.781
37.727
3
0.165
Cause
F5
18.504
19.469
37.973
1
−0.965
Effect
F6
18.263
18.295
36.558
11
−0.032
Effect
F7
18.702
18.027
36.728
10
0.675
Cause
F8
19.037
18.384
37.421
5
0.652
Cause
F9
17.970
18.529
36.500
12
−0.559
Effect
F10
19.206
18.397
37.602
4
0.809
Cause
F11
18.733
18.680
37.413
6
0.053
Cause
F12
18.106
17.904
36.010
14
0.202
Cause
F13
17.897
17.945
35.842
15
−0.049
Effect
F14
19.090
18.700
37.790
2
0.390
Cause
F15
17.854
18.637
36.491
13
−0.783
Effect
Fig. 3 DCD of KPIs
123
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
F7
F8
F9
F10
F11
F12
F13
F14
F15
-1.2000
-1.0000
-0.8000
-0.6000
-0.4000
-0.2000
0.0000
0.2000
0.4000
0.6000
0.8000
1.0000
35.5000
36.0000
36.5000
37.0000
37.5000
38.0000
38.5000
A-B
A+B

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2513
4.2.10 Examining the structure of the performance indicators
As per the values (ri −ci) (i  1, 2, ..., 15), 15 indicators are split up into an effect cause
and a cause group. From the graph, it is seen that the effect group incorporates indicators
namely F1, F3, F5, F6, F9, F13, F15 and the cause group encompasses indicators namely
F2, F4, F7, F8, F10, F11, F12, F14.
5 Results and discussions
This section lays down the outcomes obtained from the Z-DEMATEL approach alongside
some observations simultaneously. The acquired overall sequence of KPIs is given as follows:
F5 > F14 > F4 > F10 > F8 > F11 > F3 > F1 > F2 > F7 > F6 > F9 > F15 > F12 >
F13. From the rank, F5 (Target Fulﬁllment within the delivery time during COVID-19) is
the most dominant KPI that affects the PM system of LPI. It signiﬁes that F5 concerning
the overall ranking of the KPIs and importance exhibits as the highest important indicator.
Considerable observation needs to pay to F5 by managers or decision-makers of the LPI by
judiciously executing proper management of time within tentative delivery time irrespective
of the effect generated from COVID-19. The large-ranging linguistic Z-DEMATEL “Cause”
group KPIs rank is obtained as F10 > F7 > F8 > F14 > F2 > F12 > F4> F11. The ranking of
the effect group KPIs is as follows: F6> F13> F1> F3> F9> F7> F5.
From the IRD and Table 12, it is clear that F4, F8, F10, F11, F14 has the highest (ac −bc)
value. So, these KPIs have a greater impact on other indicators conﬁscated to possess con-
siderable preference over other indicators. F5 has the supreme inﬂuence on other indicators
despite the fact it is an effect group indicator because of its value (ac + bc) is as high as
37.97291 and (ac −bc) as low as −0.96470. So, LPI’s PM system must be directed to pay
heed to these 6 KPIs for inspecting, guiding, and enhancing the overall performance of the
company. Using the LZPWG operator in the suggested Z- linguistic DEMATEL method
results in consideration of each expert’s assessed information. As a result, the correlations
of different expert appraisal statistics are anticipated in the aggregation process through the
LZPWG operator.
The conventional DEMATEL method ﬂourishes on the foundation of “Cause Vs Effect”.
The KPIs grounded in the “Cause” group are accounted crucial as those indicators have a
dominant impulse of permitting an upsurge to the “Effect” group KPIs (Addae et al., 2021).
Engaging the general sustainable perspective for the PM system during the era of COVID-19
permits experts to cordially cooperate in the decision-making process which will inﬂuence
their working environment and the success of the company greatly. The principal target of this
study is to statistically codify KPIs which are responsible for the PM system of the LPI in the
decision-making process. Implementing the large-ranging linguistic Z-DEMATEL approach,
results are obtained which reveal the opinion of the experts in the leather products sector of
Bangladesh.
More(ac+bc)valueKPIscanbeconcludedasextremelycriticalKPIsasthesetransmitboth
importance and cause a degree of impact on the entire PM system. Wide-ranging linguistic
Z-DEMATEL “Cause” group KPIs signify that these 8 KPIs have the overall inﬂuence of
giving rise to 7 KPIs on the entire system. This lets the experts make an important decision
in emergency PM. From the “Effect” group it is seen that the KPIs of F1, F3, F6,F7, F9,
F13 can be ignored though there are such KPIs like F1 and F3 which have moderate (ac + bc)
values in the entire KPIs. Expert suggests “Identiﬁcation of sequence of operation” as the
123

2514
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
task of production manager to monitor PM system in LPI. Varisco et al. (2018) proposed
a framework with 778 KPIs for operation management which in our case “Identiﬁcation
of sequence of operation”. This study concluded that operation management in Production
contains a large amount of KPIs initiated by ISO 22400 to maintain operational sequence.
After regression analysis, Ishaq Bhatti and Awan (2014) explored the standardized coefﬁ-
cient for delivering reliability which is in our case “Target fulﬁllment within the delivery time
during COVID-19” which is highest as 0.591 and has a supplementary effect on the overall
performance measures. Alongside this, that study got “Customer satisfaction” which in our
case “Buyer satisfaction during COVID-19” with the second-highest standardized coefﬁcient
of 0.443. But the standardized co-efﬁcient value of ﬁnancial term was 0.119 which in our
case is “Gross and net proﬁt margin (Proﬁtability), net sales value and retention of sales”
from the ﬁnancial dimension. According to Whicker et al. (2009), the industry’s supply chain
performance can be increased by reducing time and optimizing the value of the product. So,
F10 “Timely Management, Review, Audit, and Assurance” with the highest (ac + bc) and
(ac −bc) value exhibits great inﬂuence on the other indicators.
In the context of the semiconductor industry, Hsu and Lee (2014) assessed sustainabil-
ity with the help of 25 criteria and inaugurated that “Customer satisfaction” is the fourth
important factor. Also, for manufacturing SMEs, a study constructed a model to evaluate
the sustainability and spotted “Customer satisfaction” as the most dominant measure. In our
case, for LPI “Customer” can be regarded as “Buyer” and “Consumer”. De Andrade and
Sadaoui (2017) discussed the risk mitigation strategy application in the case of the supply
chain and proposed a decision-oriented framework. Ivanov (2019) in another study suggested
“Audit” all the updates in the database as 66% responsible for the overall Business Indicator
Management (BIM). From this study, it is clear that “Timely management, review, audit, and
assurance” can be considered an effective KPI. Besides this, Due to COVID-19, all over the
world manufacturing industry has slowed down, and the presented economic crisis affects
the LPI most. According to Velimirovi et al. (2011), “Gross and net proﬁt margin (Proﬁtabil-
ity), Net Sales Value and Retention of Sales” can be inﬂuenced by market slowdown and
even gross proﬁt can be affected negatively. In accordance with Nalewaik and Mills (2016),
to review the efﬁciency, effectiveness, and economy of an organization utilizing available
resources a performance audit can be used. Kagioglou et al. (2001) discussed the customer
perspective that affects the performance of the internal and external business and opera-
tional process which is in our case “Buyer Satisfaction during COVID-19”. Alongside this,
after reviewing relevant market literature Mone et al. (2013) got “Customer Satisfaction”
has a strong inﬂuence on purchase intentions because of its constructional and worldwide
applicability.
6 Implications of the study
As LPI is appraised for being one of the extensive export-credited sectors of the country, the
introduced large-ranging linguistic Z-DEMATEL method is absolutely practical and con-
venient for decision-makers or managers to govern KPIs, observe and boost performance.
This advantageous method of KPIs assessment is distinctive because of its strength in com-
bining linguistic Z-digits and the DEMATEL technique based on a wide-ranging scheme.
This newly proposed method has subsequent supremacy in the ﬁeld of the LPI’s PM system
during the era of COVID-19. The presented method can perform constructively with the
actual PM system that entails interdependent indicators in today’s complex business model
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2515
context. Coupling fundamental and dominance indicators for enhancing performance mod-
erately alongside ﬁnite resources, this method furnishes feasible and conceptual instruction
for LPI. This proposed study inspected the case companies’ PM through KPIs for achieving
sustainability in LPI.
(a)
Target fulﬁlment within the delivery time during the emergency As COVID-19 have
disrupted the communication between countries closing the air, shipping and land routes,
the supply chain of LPI is interrupted badly. In this case, attention must be paid to timely
deliverybyLPImanagersthroughtheapplicationofproperPMandevaluationoffocused
KPIs.
(b) Buyer Satisfaction For achieving success and increasing proﬁt, buyer satisfaction plays
an important role in an organization. Conformation of the quality products to the end
consumers can be obtained through better buyer satisfaction. So, buyer satisfaction
should be the focal point in the case of policy implication of LPI.
(c)
Maintenance of operational sequence For getting the supply material lately during
COVID-19 the LPI needs to maintain the operational sequence by adapting to the ﬂuc-
tuated lead time. Without proper sequence, the product will lack dimensional quality
which will subsequently decrease customer satisfaction. Because of having an extensive
impact on the supply chain across the world, severe problems like the ﬂow of goods,
shortage of products, and increase in fuelling costs have occurred. Decision makers of
LPI must make allowances for such problems in PM evaluation.
(d) Risk Mitigation strategies application COVID-19 has brought risk and economic
destruction across the world. Manufacturing industries like LPI are facing risks to their
workers, supply chain, PM, operations, and assets globally. Risk mitigation strategies
should be implemented in a planned way for operational excellence to recover the con-
sequences of COVID-19.
(e)
Timely Management COVID-19 revealed the delicacy of supply chains as well as PM and
the weakness of manufacturing policies, lean inventories, and timely replenishing. This
study will contribute to enhancing adaptability to modify supply chains and inaugurate
duplicate resourcing.
(f)
Proﬁt, Sales Value, and Retention of Sales Because of having an impact on interest rates,
COVID-19 has brought a larger proportion of liability to Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
which is ultimately increasing extended interest rates. Afterward, the prices of fuels,
foods and various commodities enhanced globally, deteriorating inﬂation and imposing
budgetary deprivation on people. Greater attention of policymakers on the calculation
of company assets, supply sources, and inventory management can maximize proﬁt and
retention of sales.
7 Conclusions, limitations, and future research avenues
This section is outlined grounded on the ﬁnding that can be executed to ensure the viability
of PM because of the COVID-19 outbreak.
7.1 Conclusions
Due to the absence of proper aspects, PM Systems are not satisfactory in Bangladesh. An
appropriate PM system can minimize internal and external level problems. For observing
company performance in genuine time, the execution of PM using KPIs can be coupled
123

2516
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
with the knowledge of the PM system (Selviyanti et al., 2021). For the PM system of the
LPI, this study pointed out KPIs conferring a large-ranging linguistic Z-DEMATEL method.
Grounding on linguistic Z-digits assessment of 25 experts were collected with two scales
of inﬂuencing and reliability factors. Afterward, 25 experts of large V bunched in three
subgroups employing similarity degree assumed bunching threshold value. Subsequently,
a maximizing consensus approach was implemented to obtain a comprehensive straight
impacting matrix. Lastly, with the help of an elongated DEMATEL approach, KPIs for PM
of the LPI during the era of the COVID-19 pandemic are settled terminating the interrela-
tionship between indicators. A descriptive model was presented to substantiate the relevancy
of the suggested KPI assessment method. From the outcome, it is clear that the represented
model will consistently assist decision-makers to identify bounded KPIs which are crucial
for enhancing the PM system of the LPI, to scan and administer the company performance.
The 6 KPIs are regarded as critical for PM during the era of covid-19. The outcomes are
sophisticated with signiﬁcance because the method measures the KPI quantitatively which is
directed towards the views of the PM system for the decision-maker for ranking and selecting
effective KPIs.
7.2 Limitations and future research avenues
The assessment of KPI for improving the PM system has acquired prominence in worldwide
research. Even so, this study is comprehensive but fortuities for future research direction are
present over there.
(a)
Professional expertise and bordered intellect affect the experience of the experts. In this
study,LPIexpertsgaveintroductorydataintuitively.So,inthesucceedingresearchwork,
it is recommended to ﬂourish an upgraded DEMATEL approach positioning instinctive
as well as unbiased and objective data.
(b) Buyers, government, and training institutions act as stakeholders for the LPI and are
engaged in the LPI’s PM system. In this study, data is collected only from company
employees and academicians. Future inquiry is suggested for accumulating data from
various stakeholders and ascertaining more operative KPIs for PM in the LPI.
(c)
Furthermore, the suggested method was applied only to LPI (mainly small and big
leather goods) PM systems during COVID-19 for determining KPIs in Bangladesh. The
relevance of the introduced method is to provide superior unbiased data. Subsequent
investigations may utilize studies of various leather footwear companies. Hence, the
method will be able to demonstrate its potency and functionality for leather products as
well as footwear companies’ PM systems.
(d) The personal desire of employees and related KPIs aren’t taken into consideration in
the literature review of this work. According to Kassaneh and Workalemahu (2018)
absence of personal KPIs acts as an obstacle to improving the PM system for any
organization. Besides this, the KPIs aren’t selected with a great focus on “Supply Chain
Management”. So, future research work may be directed toward contemplating personal
KPIs and “Supply Chain Management”.
(e)
To administer technologies and other resources, LPI can promote cooperation with
research organizations and prospective opponents.
(f)
Discovering experimental and complex issues in the COVID-19 pandemic, which is
effective and attaining the LPI’s sustainability is in the hand of the government and
inspection agencies. Government can construct various institutes that will assist the
industry in bringing development for the PM system. Future research could explore the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2517
role of government policies in supporting the PM of the LPI including the effectiveness
of policies such as subsidies, tax incentives and investment in research and development.
(g) Managers must give focus on potential planning to control the repetitive disruptions
caused by the sequential impacts of COVID-19. As COVID-19 has a negative inﬂuence
on the supply chain as well as PM, managers should implement potential planning of
monitoring KPIs one after another.
(h) The unpredictability and uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic have highlighted the
importance of agile PM practices. Future research could investigate the effectiveness
of agile practices, such as real-time monitoring and decision-making, in improving the
resilience and performance of the LPI.
(i)
The unpredictability and uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic have highlighted the
importance of agile PM practices. Future research could investigate the effectiveness
of agile practices, such as real-time monitoring and decision-making, in improving the
resilience and performance of the LPI.
(j)
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to changes in consumer preferences and behaviour,
which may have a lasting impact on the LPI. Future research could explore the impact
of these changes on the PM of the industry, including the effectiveness of strategies to
adapt to changing consumer needs and preferences.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-023-05717-4.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to acknowledge the leather products industry stakeholders who
helped during data collection.
Data availability Data available on request from the authors.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declared no potential conﬂicts of interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdullah, L., Zulkiﬂi, N., Liao, H., Herrera-Viedma, E., & Al-Barakati, A. (2019). An interval-valued intuition-
istic fuzzy DEMATEL method combined with Choquet integral for sustainable solid waste management.
Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 82(April 2018), 207–215. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
engappai.2019.04.005
Addae, B. A., Wang, W., Xu, H., & Feylizadeh, M. R. (2021). Sustainable evaluation of factors affecting energy-
resource conﬂict in the western region of Ghana using large group-DEMATEL. In Group Decision and
Negotiation (Vol. 30, Issue 4). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10726-021-09737-y
123

2518
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Ahmad Alinejad, E., Pishvaee, M. S., & Bonyadi Naeini, A. (2018). Key success factors for logistics provider
enterprises: An empirical investigation in Iran. Kybernetes, 47(3), 426–440. https://doi.org/10.1108/K-
10-2015-0269
Ahmad, N. L., Mohd. Yusuf, A. N., Mohamed Shobri, N. D., & Wahab, S. (2012). The relationship between
time management and job performance in event management. Procedia—Social and Behavioral Sciences.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.11.223
Alam, S. T., Ahmed, S., Ali, S. M., Sarker, S., Kabir, G., & ul-Islam, A. (2021). Challenges to COVID-19 vac-
cine supply chain: Implications for sustainable development goals. International Journal of Production
Economics, 239(April), 108193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2021.108193
Alshaketheep, K. M. K. I., Salah, A. A., Alomari, K. M., Khaled, A. S. D., & Jray, A. A. A. (2020). Digital
marketing during COVID 19: Consumer’s perspective. WSEAS Transactions on Business and Economics,
17(November), 831–841. https://doi.org/10.37394/23207.2020.17.81
Amiri, M., Salehi Sadaghiyani, J., Payani, N., & Shaﬁeezadeh, M. (2011). Developing a DEMATEL method
to prioritize distribution centers in supply chain. Management Science Letters, 1(3), 279–288. https://
doi.org/10.5267/j.msl.2010.04.001
Amrina, E., & Vilsi, A. L. (2015). Key performance indicators for sustainable manufacturing evaluation in
cement industry. Procedia CIRP. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2014.07.173
Asan, U., Kadaifci, C., Bozdag, E., Soyer, A., & Serdarasan, S. (2018). A new approach to DEMATEL based
on interval-valued hesitant fuzzy sets. Applied Soft Computing Journal, 66, 34–49. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.asoc.2018.01.018
Bauer, M., Lucke, M., Johnsson, C., Harjunkoski, I., & Schlake, J. C. (2016). KPIs as the interface between
scheduling and control. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 49(7), 687–692. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.07
.258
Behrouzi, F., & Ma’aram, A. (2019). Identiﬁcation and ranking of speciﬁc balanced scorecard performance
measures for hospitals: A case study of private hospitals in the Klang Valley area, Malaysia. International
Journal of Health Planning and Management, 34(4), 1364–1376. https://doi.org/10.1002/hpm.2799
Bhatia, M. S., & Srivastava, R. K. (2018). Analysis of external barriers to remanufacturing using grey-
DEMATEL approach: An Indian perspective. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 136(December
2017), 79–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.03.021
Bilal, M., & Oyedele, L. O. (2020). Big Data with deep learning for benchmarking proﬁtability performance
in project tendering. Expert Systems with Applications. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.113194
Cai, J., Liu, X., Xiao, Z., & Liu, J. (2009). Improving supply chain performance management: A systematic
approach to analyzing iterative KPI accomplishment. Decision Support Systems, 46(2), 512–521. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2008.09.004
Cao, Y., Zhao, K., Yang, J., & Xiong, W. (2015). Constructing the integrated strategic performance indicator
system for manufacturing companies. International Journal of Production Research, 53(13), 4102–4116.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2014.994715
Chauhan, A., Kaur, H., Yadav, S., & Jakhar, S. K. (2020). A hybrid model for investigating and selecting a
sustainable supply chain for agri-produce in India. Annals of Operations Research, 290(1–2), 621–642.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-019-03190-6
Choudhary, O. P., Saied, A. R. A., Priyanka, Ali, R. K., & Maulud, S. Q. (2022). Russo-Ukrainian war:
An unexpected event during the COVID-19 pandemic. Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease, 48(3),
102346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmaid.2022.102346
Cinaroglu, S., & Baser, O. (2018). Understanding the relationship between effectiveness and outcome indica-
tors to improve quality in healthcare. Total Quality Management and Business Excellence, 29(11–12),
1294–1311. https://doi.org/10.1080/14783363.2016.1253467
De Andrade, P. R. M., & Sadaoui, S. (2017). Improving business decision making based on KPI management
system. In 2017 IEEE international conference on systems, man, and cybernetics, SMC 2017, 2017-
Janua(October) (pp. 1280–1285). https://doi.org/10.1109/SMC.2017.8122789
Dharani, M., Hassan, M. K., Huda, M., & Abedin, M. Z. (2023). Covid-19 pandemic and stock returns in
India. Journal of Economics and Finance, 47(1), 251–266. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12197-022-09586-8
Ding, X. F., & Liu, H. C. (2018). A 2-dimension uncertain linguistic DEMATEL method for identifying critical
success factors in emergency management. Applied Soft Computing Journal, 71, 386–395. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.asoc.2018.07.018
Dinçer, H., Yüksel, S., & Martínez, L. (2019). Interval type 2-based hybrid fuzzy evaluation of ﬁnancial services
in E7 economies with DEMATEL-ANP and MOORA methods. Applied Soft Computing Journal, 79,
186–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2019.03.018
Eberl, M., & Schwaiger, M. (2005). Corporate reputation: Disentangling the effects on ﬁnancial performance.
European Journal of Marketing, 39(7–8), 838–854. https://doi.org/10.1108/03090560510601798
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2519
FROEHLICH FF. (1970). Percussion welding and its applications, (Ueber das Perkussionsschweissen und
seine Anwendungen). In Schweisstechnik (Berlin) (Vol. 20, Issue 9).
Fung, A. W. S. (2020). Utilizing connectivity and data management system for effective quality management
and regulatory compliance in point of care testing. Practical Laboratory Medicine. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.plabm.2020.e00187
Goodarzian, F., Taleizadeh, A. A., Ghasemi, P., & Abraham, A. (2021). An integrated sustainable medical sup-
ply chain network during COVID-19. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 100(November
2020), 104188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2021.104188
Govindan, K., Mina, H., & Alavi, B. (2020). A decision support system for demand management in healthcare
supply chains considering the epidemic outbreaks: A case study of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19). Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 138(May), 101967. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2020.101967
Gunasekaran, A., & Kobu, B. (2007). Performance measures and metrics in logistics and supply chain man-
agement: A review of recent literature (1995–2004) for research and applications. International Journal
of Production Research, 45(12), 2819–2840. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207540600806513
Hassan, A. S., & Jaaron, A. A. M. (2021). Total quality management for enhancing organizational performance:
The mediating role of green manufacturing practices. Journal of Cleaner Production, 308(April), 127366.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.127366
Hedrick, C. (2004). Performance improvement. Journal of Infusion Nursing, 27(6), 379–380. https://doi.org/
10.1097/00129804-200411000-00002
Herrera, F., Herrera-Viedma, E., & Martínez, L. (2000). A fusion approach for managing multi-granularity
linguistic term sets in decision making. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 114(1), 43–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0165-0114(98)00093-1
Hendiani, S., Mahmoudi, A., & Liao, H. (2020). A multi-stage multi-criteria hierarchical decision-making
approach for sustainable supplier selection. Applied Soft Computing Journal, 94, 106456. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106456
Hepatis, A. (1844). Page numbers followed by “f ” indicate ﬁgures, “t” indicate tables, and “b” indicate
boxes. 1, 836–844. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-373717-5.00029-4
Hoque, I., Hasle, P., & Maalouf, M. M. (2022). Buyer–supplier role in improving ergonomics in garment sup-
plier factories: empirical evidence from the garment industry of bangladesh. Sustainability (Switzerland),
14(1). https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010
Hsu, C. C., & Lee, Y. S. (2014). Exploring the critical factors inﬂuencing the quality of blog interfaces using
the Decision-Making Trial and Evaluation Laboratory (DEMATEL) method. Behaviour and Information
Technology, 33(2), 184–194. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2012.695395
Ishaq Bhatti, M., & Awan, H. M. (2014). The key performance indicators (KPIs) and their impact on overall
organizational performance. Quality and Quantity, 48(6), 3127–3143. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-
013-9945-y
Ivanov, D. (2019). Supply chain risk management and resilience : A decision-oriented introduction to the
creation of value this is an author version of the chapter “ Supply chain risk chapter 15 supply chain
risk management and resilience. January. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94313-8
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2021). OR-methods for coping with the ripple effect in supply chains during
COVID-19pandemic:Managerialinsightsandresearchimplications.InternationalJournalofProduction
Economics, 232, 107921. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107921
Jain, N., & Singh, A. R. (2020). Sustainable supplier selection under must-be criteria through Fuzzy inference
system. Journal of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119275
Jiang, S., Shi, H., Lin, W., & Liu, H. C. (2020). A large group linguistic Z-DEMATEL approach for identifying
key performance indicators in hospital performance management. Applied Soft Computing Journal,
86(xxxx), 105900. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2019.105900
Joppen, R., von Enzberg, S., Gundlach, J., Kühn, A., & Dumitrescu, R. (2019). Key performance indicators
in the production of the future. Procedia CIRP. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2019.03.190
Jovan, V., & Zorzut, S. (2006). Use of key performance indicators in production management. In 2006 IEEE
conference on cybernetics and intelligent systems. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCIS.2006.252343
Kaganski, S., Majak, J., & Karjust, K. (2018). Fuzzy AHP as a tool for prioritization of key performance
indicators. Procedia CIRP, 72, 1227–1232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.03.097
Kagioglou, M., Cooper, R., & Aouad, G. (2001). Performance management in construction: A conceptual
framework. Construction Management and Economics, 19(1), 85–95. https://doi.org/10.1080/01446190
010003425
Kahn, M. E., & Wolak, F. A. (2013). Using information to improve the effectiveness of nonlinear pricing:
Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment. Working Paper, 1–43.
123

2520
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Kang, N., Zhao, C., Li, J., & Horst, J. A. (2016). A Hierarchical structure of key performance indicators for
operation management and continuous improvement in production systems. International Journal of
Production Research, 54(21), 6333–6350. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2015.1136082
Kassaneh, T. C., & Workalemahu, R. N. (2018). Performance measurement and improvement method for
leather footwear industries. Journal of Engineering, Project, and Production Management, 8(2), 97–104.
https://doi.org/10.32738/jeppm.201807.0005
Kumar, A., Mangla, S. K., Kumar, P., & Song, M. (2021). Mitigate risks in perishable food supply chains:
Learning from COVID-19. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 166(January), 120643. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120643
Labella, Liu, Y., Rodríguez, R. M., & Martínez, L. (2018). Analyzing the performance of classical consensus
models in large scale group decision making: A comparative study. Applied Soft Computing Journal, 67,
677–690. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2017.05.045
Lima, E. S., McMahon, P., & Costa, A. P. C. S. (2021). Establishing the relationship between asset management
and business performance. International Journal of Production Economics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.
2020.107937
Lindberg, C. F., Tan, S., Yan, J., & Starfelt, F. (2015). Key performance indicators improve industrial perfor-
mance. Energy Procedia. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.07.474
Liu, H. C., You, X. Y., Tsung, F., & Ji, P. (2018). An improved approach for failure mode and effect analysis
involving large group of experts: An application to the healthcare ﬁeld. Quality Engineering, 30(4),
762–775. https://doi.org/10.1080/08982112.2018.1448089
Liu, P., & Zhang, X. (2019). A Multicriteria Decision-Making Approach with Linguistic D Numbers Based
on the Choquet Integral. Cognitive Computation, 11(4), 560–575. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-019-
09641-3
Liu, X., Li, L., Wang, L., Herr, K., & Chen, Q. (2021). Implementation and evaluation of a pain management
core competency education program for surgical nurses. International Journal of Nursing Sciences.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnss.2020.09.008
Lu, Y., Yang, L., Shi, B., Li, J., & Abedin, M. Z. (2022). A novel framework of credit risk feature selection for
SMEs during industry 4.0. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04849-3
Majumdar, A., Shaw, M., & Sinha, S. K. (2020). COVID-19 debunks the myth of socially sustainable supply
chain: A case of the clothing industry in South Asian countries. Sustainable Production and Consumption,
24, 150–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.07.001
Manupati, V. K., Schoenherr, T., Ramkumar, M., Panigrahi, S., Sharma, Y., & Mishra, P. (2022). Recovery
strategies for a disrupted supply chain network: Leveraging blockchain technology in pre- and post-
disruption scenarios. International Journal of Production Economics, 245, 108389. https://doi.org/10.
1016/J.IJPE.2021.108389
Moktadir, M. A., Dwivedi, A., Rahman, A., Chiappetta Jabbour, C. J., Paul, S. K., Sultana, R., & Madaan, J.
(2020). An investigation of key performance indicators for operational excellence towards sustainability
in the leather products industry. Business Strategy and the Environment, 29(8), 3331–3351. https://doi.
org/10.1002/bse.2575
Mone, S., Pop, M. D., & Paina, N. (2013). The “ What ” AND “ HOW ” OF MARKETING PERFORMANCE
Sorina-Diana MONE Faculty of Economics and Business Faculty of Economics and Business Nicoleta-
Dorina RACOL ¸T A-PAINA Faculty of European Studies. Management and Marketing, 8(1), 129–146.
Nalewaik, A., & Mills, A. (2016). Project performance review: Capturing the value of audit, oversight, and
compliance for project success. In Project performance review: Capturing the value of audit, oversight,
and compliance for project success, July 2016, (pp. 1–90). https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315602424
Nara, E. O. B., Sordi, D. C., Schaefer, J. L., Schreiber, J. N. C., Baierle, I. C., Sellitto, M. A., & Furtado, J.
C. (2019). Prioritization of OHS key performance indicators that affecting business competitiveness—A
demonstration based on MAUT and Neural Networks. Safety Science. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2019.
06.017
New, S. (1994). Modeling and analysis of manufacturing systems. Journal of the Operational Research Society,
45(6), 725–726. https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.1994.112
Nudurupati, S. S., Garengo, P., & Bititci, U. S. (2021). Impact of the changing business environment on
performance measurement and management practices. International Journal of Production Economics.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107942
Orji, I. J., & Ojadi, F. (2021). Investigating the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on sustainable supplier selection
in the Nigerian manufacturing sector. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 160, 107588. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cie.2021.107588
Orji, I. J., & Wei, S. (2015). An innovative integration of fuzzy-logic and systems dynamics in sustainable
supplier selection: A case on manufacturing industry. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 88, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2015.06.019
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
2521
Peng, H. gang, & Wang, J. qiang. (2017). Hesitant Uncertain Linguistic Z-Numbers and Their Applica-
tion in Multi-criteria Group Decision-Making Problems. International Journal of Fuzzy Systems, 19(5),
1300–1316. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40815-016-0257-y
Pinna, C., Demartini, M., Tonelli, F., & Terzi, S. (2018). How soft drink supply chains drive sustainability:
Key performance indicators (KPIs) identiﬁcation. Procedia CIRP. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.
04.008
Scafà, M., Papetti, A., Brunzini, A., & Germani, M. (2019). How to improve worker’s well-being and company
performance: A method to identify effective corrective actions. Procedia CIRP. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.procir.2019.03.029
Schippers, M. C., & Rus, D. C. (2021). Optimizing decision-making processes in times of COVID-19: Using
reﬂexivity to counteract information-processing failures. Frontiers in Psychology, 12(June), 1–14. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.650525
Scholarios, D., & Taylor, P. (2014). “Decommissioned vessels”—Performance management and older workers
in technologically-intensive service work. Technological Forecasting and Social Change. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.techfore.2014.08.004
Selviyanti, E., Sardjono, W., Mukhlis, M., Tohir, M., Maswar, M., & Fariz, A. (2021). Model of developing
key performance indicator to increase the quality of education during the Covid-19 pandemic. Journal
of Physics: Conference Series. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1832/1/012030
Severo, E. A., De Guimarães, J. C. F., & Dellarmelin, M. L. (2021). Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
environmental awareness, sustainable consumption and social responsibility: Evidence from generations
in Brazil and Portugal. Journal of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124947
Si, S. L., You, X. Y., Liu, H. C., & Huang, J. (2017). Identifying key performance indicators for holistic hospital
management with a modiﬁed DEMATEL approach. International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health, 14(8). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14080934
Si, S. L., You, X. Y., Liu, H. C., & Zhang, P. (2018). DEMATEL Technique: A Systematic Review of the
State-of-the-Art Literature on Methodologies and Applications. Mathematical Problems in Engineering,
2018(1). https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/3696457
Siedler, C., Langlotz, P., & Aurich, J. C. (2020). Modeling and assessing the effects of digital technologies on
KPIs in manufacturing systems. Procedia CIRP. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2020.04.008
Varisco, M., Johnsson, C., Mejvik, J., Schiraldi, M. M., & Zhu, L. (2018). KPIs for manufacturing opera-
tions management: Driving the ISO22400 standard towards practical applicability. IFAC-PapersOnLine,
51(11), 7–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.08.226
Velimirovi, D., Velimirovi, M., & Stankovi, R. (2011). 1452–48641101063V. 6(1), 63–72.
Wang, J. Q., Wu, J. T., Wang, J., Zhang, H. Y., & Chen, X. H. (2014). Interval-valued hesitant fuzzy linguistic
sets and their applications in multi-criteria decision-making problems. Information Sciences, 288(1),
55–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.INS.2014.07.034
Wang, J. qiang, Cao, Y. xi, & Zhang, H. yu. (2017). Multi-Criteria Decision-Making Method Based on Distance
Measure and Choquet Integral for Linguistic Z-Numbers. Cognitive Computation, 9(6), 827–842. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12559-017-9493-1
Whicker, L., Bernon, M., Templar, S., & Mena, C. (2009). Understanding the relationships between time
and cost to improve supply chain performance. International Journal of Production Economics, 121(2),
641–650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2006.06.022
Xu, Z. (2006). An approach based on the uncertain LOWG and induced uncertain LOWG operators to group
decision making with uncertain multiplicative linguistic preference relations. Decision Support Systems,
41(2), 488–499. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2004.08.011
Yadegaridehkordi, E., Hourmand, M., Nilashi, M., Shuib, L., Ahani, A., & Ibrahim, O. (2018). Inﬂuence of big
data adoption on manufacturing companies’ performance: An integrated DEMATEL-ANFIS approach.
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 137(March), 199–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.
2018.07.043
Yang, C., Abedin, M. Z., Zhang, H., Weng, F., & Hajek, P. (2023). An interpretable system for predicting the
impact of COVID-19 government interventions on stock market sectors. Annals of Operations Research.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05311-8
Zairy, M. (2013). The TQM Legacy-Gurus’ contribution and theoretical impact. TQM Journal, 25(6), 659–676.
Zhang, G., Dong, Y., & Xu, Y. (2014). Consistency and consensus measures for linguistic preference relations
based on distribution assessments. Information Fusion, 17(1), 46–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.
2012.01.006
Zhang, X., & Xu, Z. (2015). Soft computing based on maximizing consensus and fuzzy TOPSIS approach to
interval-valued intuitionistic fuzzy group decision making. Applied Soft Computing Journal, 26, 42–56.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2014.08.073
123

2522
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2479–2522
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123