TITLE: Preface: recent developments in financial modelling and risk management
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-03958-9
---

Vol.:(0123456789)
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:1–5
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-03958-9
1 3
 SI: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN FINANCIAL MODELING AND RISK 
MANAGEMENT
Preface: recent developments in financial modelling and risk 
management
Roy Cerqueti1,2 · Rita Laura D’Ecclesia1 · Susanna Levantesi1
Accepted: 18 January 2021 / Published online: 17 March 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
In the last decade, a wide range of innovative financial instruments has taken by storm 
the financial markets. In 2015 for instance, the European Commission (EC) introduced the 
definition of “innovative financial instruments” as instruments that are complementary to 
grants or subsidies and as part of a move towards a smarter “funding mix”. Loans, equity 
and quasi-equity instrument and guarantees are considered as a particularly effective way 
to increase and enhance the impact of EU funding while compared to the traditional grant-
based system (EC, 2015), therefore, they represent a way to further promote a more respon-
sible, result-oriented use of European funds by the corporate world.
Cryptocurrencies can actually be considered electronic funding while virtual payment 
services are showing an impressive growth pattern. Such phenomenon is certainly due to a 
rapidly growing public interest that creates strong market demand and limits supply. Thou-
sands of developers and dozens of companies are widely involved both in the creation and 
the use of BlockChain technology. Banks have invested widely in this technology. Research 
firms expect the user base to grow at an average annual rate of 17.5% over the next decade, 
with up to 28.1 billion IoT installed devices by 2020, and revenues exceeding 7 trillion 
USD the same year (2020). The “new paradigm” for payment systems will bring people to 
rent a house in just a few minutes: sign the renting contract, perform the payment and get 
the (digital) keys on their mobile phone.
The willingness and the necessity to implement a more responsible financial market 
and/or a sustainable economy have strongly affected the dynamics of commodity markets 
in the last decade. Energy and commodities markets as a whole have represented a key 
investment tool.
The potential of innovative instruments and the impact of responsible standards ought 
to be fully exploited while their influence on the markets must be properly and precisely 
assessed. In addition, an update of portfolio selections methods, an adequate tool for 
risk measurement and a selection of efficient risk management strategies are all top pri-
orities. Most scholars in the field have been studying and modelling the dynamics of new 
 * Rita Laura D’Ecclesia 
 
rita.decclesia@uniroma1.it
1 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
2 
London South Bank University,  London, UK

2 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:1–5
1 3
investment and financing instruments and have provided interesting contributions in the 
area of financial modelling.
This special issue gathers a selection of refereed papers submitted by the participants 
to the Stream of Commodities and Financial Modelling at the 29th Euro Conference, held 
in Valencia, Spain, on July 8–11, 2018. Many scholars, from different countries and with 
diverse experiences, attended the conference and contributed new insights on some of the 
most recent developments in Financial Modelling and Risk Management. We received 89 
contributions of which 55 have been accepted after two rounds of peer reviews. We have 
grouped them in five different thematic areas: (1) portfolio selection; (2) pricing; (3) bank-
ing; (4) insurance risk management; (5) risk management in commodities and financial 
markets.
The first section, portfolio selection, integrates twelve papers.
Beraldi, Violi, Ferrara, Ciancio and Pansera address a portfolio optimization problem 
with rebalancing decisions in response to new market conditions, including transaction 
costs. Lassance and Vrins propose a higher-moment criterion for portfolio selection based 
on the exponential Renyi entropy. Corsaro, De Simone and Marino deal with a multi-
period portfolio selection problem by presenting a model based on a fused Lasso approach 
and introducing two norm penalty terms into the objective function to reduce the costs of 
the investment strategy. Clemente, Grassi and Hitaj use the network topology to catch the 
interconnectedness of each asset through the clustering coefficient, thus extending the clas-
sical Markowitz mean–variance approach by considering different dependency networks. 
Naccarato, Pierini and Ferraro consider a pair trading cointegrated strategy exploiting the 
information from the cointegration between the two price series. Colaneri, Herzel and 
Nicolosi analyze the expected utility maximization in continuous time and examine how 
the access to more accurate information regarding market price of risk affects the optimal 
strategy and estimates what the investor would be willing to pay to receive such informa-
tion. The importance of the information level owned by investors in determining the mar-
ket price of risk is also discussed by Altay, Colaneri and Eksi within a dynamic portfolio 
optimization problem for an investor with a logarithmic utility function.
The increasing availability of big data allows a more efficient asset allocation as sug-
gested by Maggi and Uberti who explored the relationships between web searches (Google 
search) and some specific social choices that allow the assessment of the role of bad news 
and measures the risk impact. Flori, Lillo, Pammolli and Spelta deal with a complex net-
work model that is able to describe the behavior of funds’ managers and the trading fre-
quency. Barucci, Marazzina and Mastrogiacomo consider a minimum guarantee as a 
constraint for a fund performance and deal with an optimal investment procedure. Kopa 
and Rusý offer an asset-liability management model based on a stochastic programming 
approach, in which a randomness of decision-dependent nature is also taken into account. 
Vitali and Moriggia set up an Asset/Liability Management model compliant with long-
term sustainability using a multi-stage stochastic programming problem.
Section two includes nine papers that provide new insights on pricing.
Few papers try to investigate the pricing features in a behavioral finance framework. 
Thomann introduces a methodology for improving the performance of trend-following 
trading strategies. Archibald and Possani focus on the analysis of the actors involved in the 
investments, by presenting a non-zero sum game between entrepreneurs and investors. Cas-
tellano, Mancinelli, Ponsi and Tieri focalize on the neuroscientific aspects of investments, 
hence pointing to the relevant theme of behavioral finance. In the same behavioral per-
spective, Kathiravan, Selvam, Venkateswar and Balakrishnan present a study on the effects 
of the weather variables over the investors’ mood, hence on the investment strategies; 

3
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:1–5 
1 3
differently, Herteliu, Jianu, Jianu, Bobb, Dhesi, Ceptureanu, Ceptureanu and Ausloos dis-
cuss the role played by religiosity on how people perceive the importance of money.
In the context of derivative pricing, Antonelli, Ramponi and Scarlatti deal with the pric-
ing of European options subject to counter-party credit risk, quantifying the credit event in 
the presence of wrong-way risk. Morelli studies the influence of the multi-curve approach 
on the interest rate derivative pricing.
Understanding the pricing features of cryptocurrencies is the aim of two papers: Giu-
dici and Polinesi propose a model for the crypto-asset price dynamics based on the cor-
relation matrix between the observed returns that is filtered from noise and employed to 
derive a clustering structure among prices; Cretarola and Figà-Talamanca model Bitcoin 
price dynamics in continuous time using a market attention factor that is proven to boost in 
a bubble under suitable conditions.
Section three includes eight papers that address the recent debate on banking perfor-
mance and the role of the ongoing updating of the regulatory framework.
Flori, Giansante, Girardone and Pammolli discuss how the classification of banks in 
terms of their business provides banks’ distresses forecast. du Jardin deals with a bank-
ruptcy forecasting model for firms obtained through a biclustering method. Interestingly, 
the author discusses the existing models for bankruptcy prediction on the basis of the dif-
ferent natures of bankruptcy. Girardi and Ventura use an econometric model to understand 
the credit crunch in Italy and analyze the economic and financial implications on institu-
tions and regulations. The analysis of the interconnections with the economic content is 
studied by Cinelli, Ficcadenti and Riccioni; the role of risk sharing-based reform of the 
Eurozone—with a new role for the European Stability Mechanism—is suggested by Dosi, 
Minenna, Roventini and Violi. Yan, Zhang and Wang study the allocation problem for 
banks under regulations on uncertain migration risk of credit ratings and capital adequacy 
ratios, while Morelli analyses the role of liquidity in the framework of the Basel III regu-
lation. The network of interbank exposures is the focus of Cinelli, Ferraro, Iovanella and 
Rotundo who deal with the issue of robustness against failure cascades. They formulate 
a model of financial contagion in a framework of incomplete information to estimate the 
width and length of the cascades.
Section four addresses the issue of risk management in the insurance business taking 
into account for the changing framework. Four papers provide interesting insights in this 
area.
The capital allocation model under Solvency II Directive 2009/138/EC is proposed in 
Baione, DeAngelis and Granito while Devolder, Levantesi and Menzietti deal with the 
exploration of the automatic balance mechanisms for the Notional Defined Contribution. 
D’Amato, Di Lorenzo, Haberman, Sibillo and Tizzano conceptualize a contract based 
on real estate rights for having a life annuity in exchange of a single premium. Altuntas, 
Berry-Stölzle and Cummins discuss the implications of the employment of the enterprise 
risk management approach in the German property-liability insurance companies.
Section five, risk management in commodities and financial markets, integrates twenty-
two papers of which six deal with energy risk management.
Benedetti, Biffis, Chatzimichalakis, Fedele and Simm capture the potential impact of car-
bon pricing on fossil fuel stocks, then used to create Smart Carbon Portfolios according to 
Bayesian and Black–Litterman methodologies. Lucheroni and Mari propose a scheme for 
hedging and managing production costs of a risky electricity generation portfolio, initially 
assumed to be dispatchable, to which intermittent electricity generation from non-dispatch-
able renewable sources is further added. Cerqueti and Fanelli discuss the usefulness of the 

4 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:1–5
1 3
long-term memory properties in price prediction of commodities portfolios. Maier evaluates 
natural resource investments under uncertainty by re-visiting the well-known example of a 
copper mine project under different commodity price models using the influence diagram 
simulation-and-regression approach. Franzoni and Pelizzari use weather derivatives to man-
age rainfall risk of the hospitality industry. They propose an innovative pricing model for such 
instruments. Jotanovic and D’Ecclesia study the European natural gas market and its recent 
developments showing how it is converging toward a single market as requested by the Euro-
pean Community.
Shanker and Satir concentrate on the management of foreign exchange risk modelling, the 
optimal choice of the terms of a risk-sharing supply contract between the buyer and the sup-
plier of a product, who are located in different countries. Alexander and Chen address the 
model risk inherent in the assumptions that are made for the decision in real option valuation. 
Lai, Chen and Sun using comonotonicity tests show that expected stock returns do not increase 
monotonically with lower volatility, but volatility increases with specific risks. D’Ecclesia and 
Clementi propose an Artificial Neural Network approach to track stock returns implied volatil-
ity showing how it provides a more efficient tool in terms of tracking error. Browne, Hofmann, 
Richter, Roth and Steinorth analyze peer effects in risk preferences using data from the Ger-
man Socio-Economic Panel, shedding light on the determinants of economic preferences.
Within a complex networks setting, Cerqueti, Clemente and Grassi propose a novel meas-
ure of systemic risk that is defined according to the structure of clustered neighbors around 
the nodes of the network, thus incorporating the generalized concept of high order clustering 
coefficient.
Ceptureanu, Ceptureanu and Herteliu explore the role of networking with stakeholders in 
facilitating medium-sized enterprises’ access to external financing and international markets.
Under a purely statistical-econometric point of view, financial time series show peculiari-
ties, regularities and relevant properties. Mamatzakis and Tsionas introduce Bayesian infer-
ence procedures based on a Sequential Monte Carlo approach for observing financial stability. 
Benedetto, Mastroeni and Vellucci deal with the connection between the information content 
of two different financial time series by the introduction of two new entropic metrics. Fal-
lahgoul and Loeper compare the performance of some parametric models driven by stable 
and tempered stable distributions and investigate the behaviour of assets returns on the tails 
of their distribution. Norton, Khokhlov and Uryasev present formulas for the buffered prob-
ability of exceedance and the superquantile for a large set of univariate probability distribu-
tions and apply their outcomes to density estimation and portfolio optimization. Guidolin and 
Pedio implement a stepwise regression procedure for assessing whether the predictive power 
for commodity futures can be improved by using commodity-specific variables instead of 
macroeconomic ones. A new suggestion to cluster financial series is proposed by Cappelli, Di 
Iorio, Maddaloni and D’Urso, and by D’Urso, De Giovanni and Massari. The first presents a 
procedure based on Atheoretical Regression Trees for identifying groups of firms on the basis 
of their risk profiles, while the latter deals with multivariate financial time series and employ a 
clustering distance able to neutralize the effects of the outliers.
Dhesi, Shakeel and Ausloos perform forecasting exercises on assets returns by employ-
ing a modified version of the Brownian motion that is also able to include an irrationality 
component. Brigo, Pisani and Rapisarda offer a generalization of the Multi Variate Mixture 
Dynamics model, by also providing a definition of correlation skewness under the proposed 
perspective.

5
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 299:1–5 
1 3
Funding  Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza within the CRUI-
CARE Agreement. 
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.