TITLE: Managing buyer experience in a buyer–supplier relationship in MSMEs and SMEs
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04954-3
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Accepted: 29 August 2022 / Published online: 16 September 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Managing buyer experience in a buyer–supplier relationship 
in MSMEs and SMEs
Prashant Kumar2 · Amit Kumar Kushwaha2 · Arpan Kumar Kar2 · Yogesh K. Dwivedi3,4 · 
Nripendra P Rana1
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04954-3
Abstract
Monitoring buyer experience provides competitive advantages for suppliers as buyers ex­
plore the market before reaching a salesperson. Still, not many B2B suppliers monitor 
their buyers’ expectations throughout their procurement journey, especially in MSMEs and 
SMEs. In addition, the inductive research on evaluating buyer experience in buyer–sup­
plier relationships is minimal, leaving an unexplored research area. This study explores 
antecedents of buyer experience during the buyer–supplier relationship in MSMEs and 
SMEs. Further, we investigate the nature of the influence of extracted precursors on the 
buyer experience. Firstly, we obtain the possible antecedents from the literature on buyer–
supplier experience and supplier selection criteria. We also establish hypotheses based on 
transaction cost theory, resource-based view (RBV), and information processing view. 
Secondly, we employ an investigation based on the social media analytics-based approach 
to uncover the antecedents of buyer experience and their nature of influence on MSMEs 
and SME suppliers. We found that buyer experience is influenced by sustainable orienta­
tion, management capabilities (such as crisis management and process innovation), and 
suppliers’ technology capabilities (digital readiness, big data analytical capability).
Keywords  Buyer experience · Buyer–supplier relationship · Big data analytics · Small 
and medium enterprises · Social media · Machine learning · Text mining
1  Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic caused an unprecedented global supply chain crisis, creating a 
considerable challenge for micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs)1 to sustain themselves in the competitive market (Baral et al., 
2021). Under such conditions, MSMEs’ suppliers face many operation challenges (Bianchi 
& Abu Saleh, 2020), disrupting demand fulfillment. So, the buyer–supplier relationship has 
immense value for MSMEs as intra-firm resources impact their power and operational bal­
1  From this point onwards the abbreviation MSMEs are assigned for signifying both MSMEs and SMEs.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
ance (Kanyoma et al., 2018). However, the link between buyer and supplier is evitable and 
estrangement upon various issues (e.g., contract breach, transaction costs). Approximately 
80% of business-to-business (B2B) leaders have changed their suppliers (Michaels & Doo­
han, 2019). In essence, MSMEs require a strategic plan for a long-term fruitful buyer–sup­
plier relationship during an uncertain market environment. One such strategy is to improve 
the buyer experience, which indicates that buyers’ perception before and after selecting their 
supplier plays a critical role in providing suppliers with competitive advantages over others 
(Bianchi & Abu Saleh, 2020).
Furthermore, ensuring a better buyer experience impacts business functionalities such 
as increased satisfaction, and reduces the negative influence on supplier trust (Hawkins 
& Gravier, 2014) and communication elements between buyer and supplier (Claycomb & 
Frankwick, 2004), as well as contract-related details such as compliance with laws and reg­
ulations (Hawkins & Muir, 2014), behavioral and performance-based contractual complex­
ity (Broekhuis & Scholten, 2018). Despite the advantage of buyer experience, there is a rift 
between buyers’ expectations and suppliers’ precedented understanding of buyers’ expecta­
tions in MSMEs with minimal resources and higher expectations from suppliers (Arend & 
Wisner, 2005). In addition, previous studies suggested a lack of research exploring buyer 
experience within the buyer–supplier relationship (Hawkins & Gravier, 2014), especially in 
MSMEs. There is a need for research that explores antecedents of buyer experience within 
buyer–supplier throughout the suppliers’ touchpoints. However, many MSMEs lack the 
resources to conduct a broad survey or market research to know their suppliers and buyers 
(Alshawi et al., 2011). Therefore, a solution necessitates minimal resources and a financial 
budget. Also, analytical capabilities provide MSMEs with a pathway for success and inno­
vativeness by empowering their information-accessing capabilities. Looking towards a need 
for buyer experience research, we have formulated our research questions as follows:
RQ1: What antecedents impact buyer experience during buyer–supplier encounters in 
the MSME sector?
RQ2: How do these antecedents impact buyer experience during buyer–supplier service 
encounters in the MSME sector?
Since MSMEs face competition in terms of their product supply and have a challenge 
regarding resources, under such conditions the resource-based view (RBV) theory is the 
suitable choice to access the buyer experience or to gain a competitive advantage. To ana­
lyze these research questions, we use an inductive research approach. We first extract the 
factors associated with buyer experience from supply selection criteria and buyer–supplier 
literature, then develop hypotheses for model validation. Such an inductive approach helps 
to overcome saturation in theory in an established area of research (Kar & Dwivedi, 2020). 
We adopt a social media (SM) method for data collection and extraction of antecedents. The 
conversational exchange of experiences (Kushwaha & Kar, 2021) by buyers and suppliers 
of MSMEs posted on neutral social media platforms (SMP) such as Twitter contributed to 
creating user-generated content (UGC). Furthermore, the unbiased signals (themes or text 
clusters) are captured through exploration and assigned to theoretical factors in line with 
antecedents tested on their significance for driving the buyer experience through the lasso 
regression method.
Further, we contribute to literature on buyer experience during buyer–supplier relation­
ships by extending factors associated with three themes based on RBV theory: management 
capabilities, technology capabilities, and sustainable orientation. Also, we explain the nature 
1 3
754

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
of the influence of factors related to these three dimensions on the buyer experience. In addi­
tion, we implement a more robust topic extraction method by implementing Latent Dirichlet 
Allocation (LDA)-based topic modeling on top of the hierarchical clustering approach.
From this point forward, the paper progresses as follows: Sect.2 represents the literature 
review of buyer experience in MSMEs. Section3 describes the methodology and data col­
lection procedure adopted for this study. Section4 presents the exploratory analysis of col­
lected data, followed by Sect.5, which provides the confirmatory analysis. Section6 presents 
the discussion, implications, and limitations. Finally, Sect.7 concludes this study.
2  Literature review
This work extends previous research on customer experience (CX) and service operations, 
which argues that CX (buyer experience in this work) is essential for gaining a competitive 
advantage in the market. However, this study adopts an inductive approach to extract factors 
from existing buyer experience research relevant to the buyer–supplier context. To elaborate 
on the context first, we discuss the role of CX in maintaining an effective buyer–supplier 
relationship. Following this, we explain the importance of the buyer–supplier relationship in 
MSMEs. Lastly, to set the methodological context to extract the buyer experience informa­
tion, we discuss the different technical solutions to measure buyer experience.
2.1  Buyer experience for improving the buyer–supplier relationship
Based on various contexts (pre-, present, and post-engagement interaction), literature indi­
cates buyer experiences differently. For example, some researchers believe accumulated 
knowledge or understanding is gained by a buyer from prior buyer–supplier interaction 
(Hawkins & Muir, 2014). Some researchers consider buyers’ hedonic and utilitarian expe­
riences during the buyer–supplier relationship (Broekhuis & Scholten, 2018). Experience 
comes from the manager’s tendency to apply tacit knowledge based on prior buyer–supplier 
interactions (Hawkins & Gravier, 2014), pointing towards management quality. Further, 
looking from supplier perspectives, understanding the buyer characteristics helps suppli­
ers understand the building blocks of the relationship (Claycomb & Frankwick, 2004); in 
essence, it signifies customer orientation (i.e. considering customers’ needs first).
Considering sustainable competitive strategies and predictive outcomes, RBV indicates 
a framework incorporating organizations’ intangible and tangible resources (Kozlenkova 
et al., 2014; Zahra, 2021). Given that MSMEs have scarce resources and various commit­
ments, Zahra (2021) indicated RBV as a convenient framework for accessing resources that 
may help with gaining competitive advantages. Managing functional and buyer experience 
requirements may be difficult; still, the strategic advantage of improving buyer experience 
makes 39% of MSMEs consider it a top priority, even more important than raising profits or 
cutting expenses (Moyo, 2020). MSME literature considers buyer experience as a cause of 
measured phenomena or a mediating variable between two variables. For example, experi­
ence facilitates entrepreneurs to seek inter-firm ties and the involvement of suppliers in the 
product development process (Lipparini & Sobrero, 1994); buyer experience is a predictor 
of disengagement behavior during buyer–supplier contract conflict (Mpeera Ntayi, 2012); 
1 3
755

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
experience is a moderating variable between buyers’ perceived cultural similarities and rela­
tionship commitment (Bianchi & Saleh, 2020).
Conversely, the literature indicates the importance of buyer experience in success and 
improved firm performance (Adams et al., 2012; Feng et al., 2021). However, the literature 
review found that research on buyer experience assessment for sustainable buyer–supplier 
is shallow. So, we formulated our first question: which criteria link with buyer experience 
in MSMEs, as finding these major themes (discussed in the following subsection) help to 
organize buyer experience more efficiently? Therefore, there is a need to extract the factors 
influencing the buyer experience, which is not yet tracked despite the importance of buyer 
experience.
The second question regards the nature of the impact, such as how the extracted factors 
influence buyer experience. This is important for suppliers’ MSMEs to gain competitive 
advantages in the market, which we cover in this study.
So, firstly we need to explore which resources (organizational, financial, human, and 
physical) have a higher impact on gaining a better buyer experience. In this context, Kozlen­
kova et al., (2014) indicated using the VRIO lens of RBV incorporating valuable, rare, and 
inimitable organizational resources confer strategic benefits. Extending these perspectives, 
we borrowed from supply chain literature to further elaborate on the buyer experience and 
its associated factors. Visiting the sustainable suppliers’ management, buyers select the sup­
pliers based on various criteria such as financial performance, external perception, service 
capabilities, commitment (Igarashi et al., 2013; Zimmer et al., 2016), technological capa­
bilities, flexibility, innovation (Kar & Pani, 2014), and collaborative routing (Konstantako­
poulos et al., 2021).
2.2  Managing buyer–supplier relationships for MSMEs
The buyer–supplier relationship involves different marketing and exchange activities 
between two parties. Especially for MSMEs, which face many constraints in their business 
activities, their resource occupation strategies include outsourcing from multiple sources, 
where larger firms mostly choose a single source. The main question, therefore, is how 
MSMEs maintain better buyer–supplier relationships to strengthen their business function­
alities (Mudambi & Schründer, 1996; Tam et al., 2007) where the connection deteriorates 
due to different reasons such as their individual expectations or opportunistic behavior 
(Adams et al., 2012), or the influence of economic and social factors on the ex-post trans­
actional cost (Shahzad et al., 2018). Transactional cost and relationship commitment are 
central ingredients in maintaining a sustainable buyer–supplier relationship in MSMEs. So, 
the above argument points towards a better execution capability for a fruitful buyer–supplier 
relationship. Considering the RBV’s central construct, capabilities as “an organizationally 
embedded non-transferable firm-specific resource” (Kozlenkova et al., 2014, p.5) increase 
productivity by deploying stretched resources more efficiently. So the management capa­
bilities of SME managers help in cost-saving, responsiveness, and contract management as 
many MSMEs face limited capacities and resources, increasing competitive and unfavor­
able business environments, and the creation of operations supply risk (Chowdhury et al., 
2019).
Sometimes, the buyer–supplier relationship for MSMEs depends on demographics, 
awareness, and business heterogeneity. The small business’s procurement behavior, nature, 
1 3
756

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
size (Morrissey & Pittaway, 2006), and cross-cultural relationships (Andersen et al., 2009; 
Cooray & Ratnatunga, 2001) influence the buyer–supplier relationship. However, the asso­
ciation is derived from trustworthiness, quality (Bianchi & Abu Saleh, 2020), communi­
cation linkage, planning horizons, understanding of effort-reward or requirement of each 
entity, and the effective use of link-pin (Thakkar et al., 2007). So, broadly specifying these 
features is associated with the stockholders present during the buyer–supplier relationship. 
So, we consider stakeholder’s orientation a critical facet of the sustainable buyer–supplier 
relationship in MSMEs.
Furthermore, real-time interactivity and information exchange in the supply chain 
and buyer–supplier relationship influence MSMEs to adopt new technological solutions 
(Deepu & Ravi, 2021; Ghobakhloo et al., 2011). For example, using Information and Com­
munication Technologies (ICT)-enabled supply chain interaction (Mirkovski et al., 2016) 
or electronic markets (Scuotto et al., 2017) as facilitators in the buyer–supplier relation­
ship. However, while they benefit from technology-enabled value-added participation and 
increase the reach of suppliers, the coordination cost during supply chain management is 
high (Mirkovski et al., 2019). So, technical capabilities help MSMEs improve their perfor­
mance, though they need to consider environmental uncertainty before integrating technical 
solutions.
Moreover, management capabilities improvise the selection of resources; stakeholders’ 
orientation makes them categorize buyers, and technology helps MSMEs reduce their com­
munication gaps; understanding customers’ preferences before making any major decision 
can establish a better buyer–supplier relationship (Lancastre & Lages, 2006). Looking at the 
broad literature, we analyzed those studies linked with the central themes shown in Fig.1. 
Moreover, these studies focused on quantitative aspects relating to management capabil­
ity, technical capabilities, and sustainable orientation with SMEs’ success or performance. 
However, these themes affect MSMEs’ buyer–supplier relationships has been studied signif­
icantly less. In essence, understanding how elements of these three themes influence buyer 
experience is essential for MSMEs, especially when considering a long-term sustainable 
buyer–supplier relationship.
2.3  Prior literature on the approach used to access the buyer experience by MSMEs
During our investigation, we did not find any study to assess buyer experience in MSMEs. 
So, we borrowed the methodology to measure buyer experience in buyer–supplier and the 
Fig. 1  Themes associated with buyer experience in the literature
 
1 3
757

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
supply chain literature. We analyzed that most studies utilize the survey (Claycomb & Frank­
wick, 2004; Hawkins & Gravier, 2014; Hawkins & Muir, 2014) or case study (Broekhuis & 
Scholten, 2018) to extract the buyer experience. Besides traditional methodologies, many 
researchers pointed toward the potential use of available data and analytical capabilities 
in supply chain management (Chae, 2015). For example, we accessed customer dynamics 
(Ram & Zhang, 2021) and the challenges and criticality of SM and analytics in the supply 
chain (Choi et al., 2020). A few researchers considered utilizing SMA to build strategies 
to manage the supply chain (Mishra & Singh, 2018). Besides, SM literature for MSMEs 
suggests branding strategies to improve buyers’ satisfaction and confidence (Hsiao et al., 
2020). A few studies suggest the super-additive value of SMA in functional complementary 
in MSMEs (Dong & Yang, 2020).
Furthermore, SM platforms and big data analytics have been extensively used in various 
streams such as disaster management (Akter & Wamba, 2019; Kavota et al., 2020), service 
operations (Wamba et al., 2019), and organizational sensing capabilities (Wamba et al., 
2020), to reduce the time complexity of collecting data. Looking towards such extensive 
use of SM and SMA in supply chains and MSMEs, this study bridges the gap of connecting 
buyer experience factors from the data generated by users on an open platform. MSMEs can 
cost-effectively avail the buyer experience information.
3  Research Methodology
For the analysis methodologies, we followed the analysis methodology suggested by Berente 
et al. (2019), indicating the data-driven theory-building approach, which incorporates four 
stages: ‘sample observation’, ‘generate a taxonomy’, ‘identify qualitative and quantitative 
relationships’, and ‘generate structural and process models’. For this study, we undertake 
an SM data-based unbiased inductive learning approach (Kar & Dwivedi, 2020; Liu et al., 
2021) in which we first drive the factors from the literature; with by the help of data, we 
further shape the factors closely interlinked with buyer experience. We present the frame­
work used for this study in Fig.2. We select Twitter for data collection, allowing owners of 
all-scale organizations (start-ups to large-scale production houses) to share their buyer and 
supplier experiences. At times, these owners even tag specific operation partners (delivery 
partners, supplier partners) to advocate and share good experiences and, on the other hand, 
share bad experiences for another owner to learn.
3.1  Data collection
We considered extracting the tweets using the hashtags related to SMEs and MSMEs based 
on the suggestion of Oh et al., (2015). They indicated that data from hashtags indicate all 
thematically relevant tweets, represent the multifaceted views, and can be used to access 
the collective behaviors. Initially, we collected around 10,000 tweets and analyzed data sig­
nals to understand the trending topics related to operation analytics in MSMEs worldwide. 
This exercise objectively bestowed 10 top trending operation analytics hashtags, which 
were controlled for MSMEs by filtering only for the hashtags that co-occur with #SME and 
#MSME, the first data control mechanism.
1 3
758

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
We proceeded to actual data collection with the imperative data collection strategy as 
part of the inductive framework’s first step. We collected the UGC data (tweets) from Janu­
ary 2020 till August 2020. We executed the data collection scripts on the Python tool using 
the streaming tokens of Twitter. This exercise gave us a sample of 347,145 tweets posted by 
59,451 users. We then deployed the second data control mechanism to remove the market­
ing and promotional tweets, followed by the tweets posted by bots, to drop the unnecessary 
noise from the data and ensure that the inferences were drawn from the data unbiased.
The raw UGC data contained much noise in terms of special characters, HTML, and 
URLs, which had to be cleaned. Tweets posted from automated bots and major official 
accounts that had followers and were following greater than 10,000 other accounts were 
dropped from the dataset to ensure there was no structural bias and low promotional content 
in the data. Finally, we used stemming and lemmatization to arrive at the root words giv­
ing us the right sentiment and emotion from a text (Paice, 1994). This control mechanism 
was fine-tuned by designing a key that was a combination of the hour when tweets were 
posted, the number of tweets posted each day, and the overall volume of tweets, to further 
ensure that the unwanted noise was dropped from the data. The collected sample contained 
accurate signals on the MSMEs. At the end of this exercise, the resulting sample size was 
212,345 tweets posted by 52,707 users.
Besides, social media data faces challenges in terms of reliability and validity because 
data generated from crowdsourcing may contain fake information. We deployed the third 
control mechanism to create a specific sample by restricting user accounts from which the 
tweets were posted. The list that was used to limit the accounts had designations such as 
‘head’, ‘owner’, ‘line head’, ‘vertical head’, ‘supply head’, ‘supply manager’, ‘delivery 
manager’, ‘logistics manager’, ‘operations manager’, and ‘operations head’. This mecha­
nism helped us to be unbiased and reliable, yet only appropriate user-generated data were 
created by operations decision-makers in respective organizations on active MSME topics. 
The final sample for the analysis was reduced to 116,123 tweets posted by 47,135 users. 
Fig. 2  The methodology selected for this study
 
1 3
759

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Here, users are unique users extracted by considering a user counted only once, regardless 
of how many times they tweeted in the final 116,123 tweets.
4  Study 1: exploratory analysis
4.1  Content analysis
The text-mining-based content analysis method (Kumar et al., 2021; Kushwaha et al., 
2021a, b) consists of four unique steps to uncover truthful signals within social media con­
versations. In the first step, we start the content analysis by calculating each cleaned tweet’s 
polarity and subjectivity score (de-noised from the previous step) (Chae, 2015) using the 
Stanford Natural Language Processing Library, as it is updated constantly and represents 
fine-grained sentiment labels for words, sentences, and phrases. The Python tool provides 
open-source libraries such as scikit-learn to achieve this task by taking cleaned tweets as 
inputs and generating various output scores. These scores can help classify the tweets into 
negative, positive, and neutral sentiment groups. We summarize the data algorithmically 
in the second step to understand the prominent and frequently occurring topics. We use 
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Tirunillai & Tellis, 2014), also known as topic model­
ing, for text summarization. This text summarization step also helps inductively uncover the 
data’s inherent themes of operation analytics. We identify the factors supported by opera­
tions management theories based on these themes. The LDA model developed at this stage 
consists of 20 words to summarize the overall data better.
In the third step of content analysis, we now create a network diagram of the LDA model 
topics to learn the words’ co-occurrence through a visual representation. The topic net­
work diagram applies network science, which treats the issues as nodes and the relation­
ship among these topics as edges connecting these nodes. The number of connecting edges 
represents how strongly a topic co-occurs with the rest of the model’s topics and helps 
create a community of topics. Furthermore, deploying the inductive learning approach, this 
community diagram allows us to validate a few assumptions and hypotheses as a simple 
correlation among the topics by visually validating if the topic co-occurs. We first create a 
network diagram at an overall level and deep-dive into understanding the signals from data; 
we repeat the same exercise for the respective sentiment groups created in step 1 of the con­
tent analysis. As part of the fourth step of content analysis, the co-occurrences of the topics 
identified from LDA are extended to establish each topic’s co-occurrence with other words 
in the respective sentiment groups. This is achieved through the decision tree approach, 
which shows the relationship between factors (Brusco et al., 2012).
For the validity, we incorporate a two-stage process, in which first we include LDA, 
which provides topics and their associated words. These words are then mapped with the 
help of WordNet, a lexical database of English (Fellbaum, 2005), for a better representa­
tion of each topic, leading to a valid representation of topics and their associated words 
(Alkhodair et al., 2018). As for the reliability, we employ inter-coder reliability, in which 
one author has assigned each topic to its closely associated constructs, followed by other 
authors who mark the given relations. Lastly, we calculate the inter-coder reliability score, 
which is found to be 0.87, greater than the 0.70 criterion indicated for exploratory research 
(Rust & Cooil, 1994).
1 3
760

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
4.2  Results
Firstly, we applied topic modeling using LDA to extract the optimal number of themes or 
factors. In our dataset, we found 45 optimal topics that could be extracted without getting 
similar words in two or more topics. So, a network diagram of terms present in 45 topics 
is presented in Fig.3. The network diagram helps cluster the associated themes into closely 
occurring factors. Literature and theories must address these factors to connect with the 
research objectives. So, Fig.3 highlights all the topics with their words, and if one tries to 
look back into existing literature to connect these factors with likely names, possible con­
structs could be defined. For example, a word in the topic such as ‘customer-value-propose’, 
‘help’, or ‘guidelines’ (light green color in Fig.3) is related to customer-specific factors, so 
when we look at the dataset samples from which these words are mapped, we find these 
words fall in customer-orientation-related factors.
Similarly, words like ‘reward’, ‘employee’, ‘consulting’, ‘friendly’, and ‘respond’ (dark 
green color) incline more towards the employee-specific entity. Therefore, we have mapped 
these words to employee orientation. All extracted topics are mapped through this process, 
with 14 factors related to buyer experience within a buyer–supplier relationship in MSMEs. 
Lastly, we attempted to identify the factors through topic association to formulate the rela­
tionship with existing literature and theories. A team of two researchers also assessed 20 
Fig. 3  45-Topics and association between topics extracted using Latent Dirichlet Allocation
 
1 3
761

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
random snippets of the dataset independently during this process of topic mapping for all 14 
factors to ensure content and linguistic validity.
Secondly, we have presented the result of the decision tree in Fig.4, which shows the 
decision points and a histogram illustrating the distribution. Using a decision tree, an inter­
pretable model can be analyzed efficiently, as presented in Fig.4, indicating that big data 
analytics is the starting point of the tree from where branches have been formed further.
5  Study 2: confirmatory analysis
Once we complete the four steps of content analysis, starting with summarization and end­
ing with clustering of the words in each sentiment group, we can establish the theoretical 
factors that have emerged through an inductive analysis method without bias. Operation 
theories back these factors; however, we must validate these factors (hypotheses) through 
inferential data analysis. Traditional exploration methods of the inductive learning of signal 
capturing, if not tested, might have a scope of error when used by management scholars for 
theory building, as many relationships may emerge, which otherwise may not be statisti­
cally significant.
Fig. 4  Decision tree showing the evolution and relationship between factors
 
1 3
762

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Lasso regression is the statistical method to validate the current research hypothesis. The 
linear regression analysis examines the connection between the dependent and estimated 
variables while minimizing gradient descent, such square residuals. Conversely, in the big-
data case, the nonlinear technique outperforms the linear method (Hastie et al., 2009). As 
a result, nonlinear approaches such as lasso might aid in solving the variable optimization 
procedure (Varian, 2014), as their analysis focuses on standardizing all non-constant predic­
tors to get a mean of 0 and a variance of 1. The sum of the residual squares with the regu­
larization term is minimized to limit other factors’ influence. The lasso regression approach 
reduces the most negligible square regression value to 0, making the statistical process more 
efficient and viable.
5.1  Hypotheses development
Initially, inductive research starts with observations and identifying the pattern in the data­
set, followed by prior theories and observation, which helps develop new approaches. Based 
on the content analysis of SM data, we have observed 14 factors associated with buyer expe­
rience in MSMEs, further categorized into four different themes. In addition, we elaborated 
on the relationship between these factors and buyer experience based on transaction cost 
theory (TCT), RBV, and information processing theory (IPT). We used RBV to build the 
framework consisting of stakeholder orientation, management capabilities, and technical 
capabilities, followed by IPT and TCT to reorganize the factors and establish the relation­
ship with the buyer experience. Based on these 14 factors and literature, we have argued 14 
hypotheses.
5.1.1  Stakeholder orientation
IPT incorporates the organizational strategies of using information-processing capabilities 
to gain competitive advantages and deliver exemplary service at the right time. Information 
sharing and utilization are directly correlated with customer orientation, mediating the rela­
tionship between future customer information sharing and purchase/repurchase behavior 
(Ghouri et al., 2021). Besides, VRIO assumes that SMEs have resources that will be touch­
points from which the firm can gain information. So, the manager needs to consider their 
customers’ mindset, employees, and sustainable performance opportunities to better access 
their experience.
Customer orientation (CO) specifies the strategy where suppliers deeply understand buy­
ers’ preferences and expectations (Shin et al., 2000). So, creating a CO strategy is advan­
tageous for SMEs compared to larger firms due to restricted and localized buyers in a 
considerably shorter line of contact. Further, Jones & Rowley (2011) found that close inter­
action relationships facilitate benefits such as buyers’ loyalty and satisfaction. In addition, 
SMEs’ quick response to customer queries is key to establishing a long-term relationship 
between the SMEs’ suppliers and customers. Furthermore, the expectancy theory (Laffineur 
et al., 2020; Manolova et al., 2007) suggests that one’s behavioral choice when making 
any decision is a function of expectation about fulfilling their desired objective. If a SME’s 
buyer feels redundancy in fulfilling their goal, they will move toward other suppliers. We 
have also observed that users use words associated with customer orientation for a better 
experience in the dataset. We argue that a supplier could provide a better buyer experience 
1 3
763

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
by maintaining a better customer orientation. Hence, we formulate our first hypothesis as 
follows:
H1  Customer orientation is positively associated with buyer experience in MSMEs.
Literature suggests that many MSMEs lack human or skilled human resources due to finan­
cial capabilities or other constraints (Kim et al., 2006). In many cases, MSMEs face the 
challenges of dealing with their buyers during the contract negotiation or providing optimal 
customer service. So, employee orientation (EO), which represents the organizational pro­
cess of nurturing employees for their business functionalities, plays a significant role. EO 
helps firms achieve better performance by enhancing trust between themselves and employ­
ees, resulting in lower employee turnover (Vaitoonkiat & Charoensukmongkol, 2020). 
Especially from SMEs’ perspectives, EO helps them reduce the constant search for skilled 
employees and helps them preserve firms’ knowledge, behavior towards customers, and 
extra financial burdens (Caputo et al., 2021). Besides, core customer experience literature 
suggests that an organization with a skilled customer touchpoint employee provides a better 
customer experience. So, we have formulated our next hypothesis as follows:
H2  Employee orientation positively influences buyer experience with MSMEs.
Sustainability contributes significantly to the economic development of countries and 
MSMEs (Malesios et al., 2020). Sustainable orientation (SO) infers “the overall proactive 
strategic stance of firms towards the integration of environmental concerns and practices 
into their strategic, tactical, and operational activities” (Roxas & Coetzer, 2012, p.464). 
The highly sustainable supplier improvises their efficiency through product innovation 
(Abdelaziz et al., 2020). Their employees are oriented towards new product designs, unique 
product attributes, and manufacturing processes (Roxas & Coetzer, 2012). On looking at 
these initiatives within supplier firms, buyers’ firms sometimes get motivated to implement 
sustainable orientation into their operations, further affecting the buyer experience. So, our 
next hypothesis would be as follows:
H3  Sustainable orientation positively influences buyer experience with MSMEs.
5.1.2  Technological capabilities
RBV studies highlight VRIO’s ongoing advantage, suggesting enterprises have flexibility 
when picking and deploying resources. MSMEs lack credibility and do not always have the 
most significant functional capabilities. They may purchase equipment from failed firms and 
personalize it based on their ‘make do’ strategies with little resources (Zahra, 2021). How­
ever, the cognitive roots of inventiveness become a deliberate resource that helps MSMEs 
bypass conventional resource limits. So, technological innovation could allow MSMEs to 
access the global market and overcome competitiveness. While investigating multiple dis­
count problems, Muk & Chung (2015) found that technological innovation helps suppliers 
provide their buyers with pre-announced price cuts and an existing product at lower costs. 
However, customer experience research suggests that buyers’ choice to utilize a technologi­
1 3
764

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
cally innovative solution such as artificial intelligence adoption (Grover et al., 2020; Kar & 
Kushwaha, 2021) for demand forecasting depends on their expertise in using technology. 
Like buyers with better digital readiness (DR), they are more susceptible to innovative tech­
nology than those who are not experienced. Therefore, we hypothesize:
H4: Digital readiness is positively associated with buyer experience during the buyer–
supplier relationship in MSMEs.
In a crisis or pandemic situation, technological innovation (TI) (Tan et al., 2017) in 
the supply chain provides a breakthrough path for buyers and suppliers. Besides, when 
the relationship moves towards the long-term and corporate, both parties must frequently 
coordinate, especially when adopting innovative technologies (Hausman & Stock, 2003). 
However, considering the limitations (lack of skill, financial constraint in implementing 
advanced technology) faced by MSME’s buyers, sudden changes in supplier strategies for 
adopting technological solutions may create a challenge for buyers. So, the risk and benefits 
of implementing technical innovation overlap and must be balanced against one another. So, 
we propose our hypothesis as follows:
H5: Technological innovation may positively influence buyer experience with MSMEs.
Information retrieval and sharing explain the buyer’s perception of the supplier’s ability 
to provide information accurately (Yang, 2014). We have previously argued that suppliers 
must fulfill demand during a crisis. So, predicting the impending crisis could help SME sup­
pliers to manage the resources for orders effectively. However, the solution of the product 
needs to be accurate and up to the optimal level. So, big data analytic capabilities (BDAC) 
within firms could help organize the information and intelligence for various purposes such 
as demand forecasting and innovation. Customer satisfaction research suggests that reli­
ability and associated factors such as homogeneity and test time affect customer satisfaction 
(Kar, 2020), influenced by information-retrieving capability, further impacting customer 
experience. So, we hypothesize:
H6: Big data analytics capability positively influences buyer experience with MSMEs.
We found many users who talked about artificial intelligence (AI) during data analysis. 
Even marketing research suggests AI adoption (AIA) as the leading driver for a better cus­
tomer experience. In a buyer–supplier relationship, AI adoption could help in the procure­
ment process and track complaints raised by buyers (Allal-Chérif et al., 2021). AI could help 
buyers identify the opportunity to bring bottom-line impacts and improve internal function­
alities, influencing the buyer experience. Therefore, we hypothesize:
H7: Supplier’s AI adoption positively influences buyer experience with MSMEs.
5.1.3  Management capabilities
The dynamic capability approach mainly draws on RBV and argues that enterprises must 
restructure their available resources to react to new surroundings, or collapse. RBV might 
describe resource distribution; meanwhile, the TCT (Brouthers & Nakos, 2004) perspective 
explains resource value, arrangement, and coordination. In this context, we first consider 
financial stability, which infers a state where a business can sustain economic shocks and 
provide its offering smoothly, even with its essential function (Lin et al., 2018). For a sus­
tainable buyer–supplier relationship, financial stability is one of the key factors as it reduces 
management risks and intermediates third-party financial providers. However, maintaining 
better financial stability is a challenge for many MSMEs as they face financing constraints 
1 3
765

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
and have trouble getting optimal resources for their business functionalities, which is gener­
ally not an issue for the more prominent firm, especially during a crisis or global pandemics 
(Brei et al., 2020; Queiroz et al., 2020) like COVID-19. So, MSME suppliers with better 
financial stability may provide a better experience to their buyers to fulfill the designated 
time assignment. Also, financial stability helps suppliers cater to their customers better as 
financial problems make entrepreneurs show negative emotional expressions (Yoo et al., 
2019). Therefore, we formulate the next hypothesis as follows:
H8: Financial stability positively influences buyer experience with MSMEs.
Further, TCT indicates two costs (Brouthers & Nakos, 2004), which are control and 
market transaction costs. By integrating its business activities, a firm may secure its unique 
know-how and reduce financial transaction costs. Moreover, it must combine consolida­
tion with the expenses of regulating the hierarchical system while maintaining operational 
flexibility. Flexibility (FY) in operation refers to when suppliers can respond to buyers’ 
demand and fluctuation from within the supply chain (Chan et al., 2017). Sometimes, buy­
ers increase the demand for raw materials from the supplier or, in some situations, decrease 
their order due to not consuming the previous primary products. Under such conditions, 
suppliers could build a positive relationship by actively monitoring the buyers’ demand 
behavior and providing FY in operation. However, FY requires proactive monitoring of 
market orientation, acquisition, and assimilation of customer information (Celuch & Mur­
phy, 2010), which is more optimal for MSMEs due to their smaller size and close line of 
communication with their customer than the larger firms. Such imperatives can help SMEs 
implement strategic advantages. Further, borrowing the relation between FY and customer 
experience from service literature, which considers FY as one of the dimensions of experi­
ence (Medberg & Grönroos, 2020), we propose our next hypothesis as follows:
H9: Flexibility in operation positively influences buyer experience with MSMEs.
Process innovation (PI) infers the creative and improved way of processing business 
functionalities to increase production while decreasing costs (Lee & Schmidt, 2017). 
Research suggests that PI plays a significant role in value creation in the commoditized 
market, as there is less opportunity for product innovation (Krolikowski & Yuan, 2017; 
Wagner & Bode, 2014). So, removing the risk through PI suppliers can ease the business for 
MSME and SME buyers. Also, through PI, a supplier can provide product information and 
collect demand information from buyers in a more collaborative, responsive, and participa­
tive manner (Lee & Schmidt, 2017), which may further affect the buyer experience as they 
get information more easily. So, we propose the following hypothesis:
H10: Process innovation positively influences buyer experience with MSMEs.
In their investigation, Mukherjee (2018) found that many MSMEs have barriers with 
less infrastructural capability, storage issues, limited cash flow, and deficiency in planning. 
Under crisis conditions, when demand suddenly goes up, considering MSME buyer condi­
tions, raw materials are required with a shorter turnaround time. In such a crisis situation, if 
the supplier cannot provide raw materials or plans according to the crisis, SME buyers lose 
business from their track. For example, a report by American Express indicated the cancel­
lation of planned purchases due to poor service provided by suppliers (Express, 2017). Sec­
ond, during the pandemic (unexpected crisis), MSME suppliers faced the dual challenge of 
lacking human resources and working capital. If they cannot provide products to their buyer 
in time, this may affect the buyer–supplier relationship. So, managing the crisis and plan­
1 3
766

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
ning could help SMEs’ suppliers prevent customer churn and promote long-term customer 
loyalty (Burhan et al., 2021). So, we propose our following hypothesis:
H11: There is a positive relationship between crisis management and buyer experience 
with MSMEs.
Many MSMEs deal with management corruption during their external and internal sup­
ply chain integration investigations. Many employees use unfair means and resources for 
their own benefit, affecting the interfirm relationship (Kanyoma et al., 2018). If buyers face 
any situation with such an employee, there may be a chance of having a bad deal, affecting 
the buyer’s awareness of the problem. So, management quality (MQ) needs to be substantial 
to build a fairer and quality deal with buyers. So, the following hypothesis is formulated as 
follows:
H12: There is a positive relationship between management quality and buyer experience 
with MSMEs.
Service assurance (SA) (Pitt et al., 1995) comprises quality control, quality assurance, 
and service-level management. It represents how suppliers ensure that the offering meets the 
desired quality level as promised during contract formation. Literature suggests that firms 
can generate a positive reputation and sustain themselves in a competitive market by ensur­
ing consistent quality levels in their offerings. So, maintaining quality and promising better 
service to the buyer could be better strategies to provide a fruitful relationship. So, we have 
presented the following hypothesis as:
H13: Service assurance positively influences the buyer experience in MSMEs.
Perceived fairness (PF) refers to an individual or collective expectation regarding fairness 
in the deal between two or more parties (Luo et al., 2018). In the buyer–supplier relation­
ship, both parties expect fairness in the deal from each party (Jokela & Söderman, 2017). 
However, the whole relationship depends upon each party’s trust and commitment; doing 
contract formulation without fairness may challenge the building of a fruitful relationship. 
Especially for MSMEs, if they feel unfair means or contract breach, buyers may affect the 
buyer experience towards the supplier. Even in the SM dataset, we have found consistent 
user talk on fairness in the quality. So, we have presented our following hypothesis:
H14: Perceived fairness is positively associated with the buyer experience in MSMEs.
So, the final model consisting of the factors related to buyer experience is presented in 
Fig.5.
5.2  Empirical analysis
This section further verifies the relationship between independent and dependent variables 
using regression analysis. We have defined the target variable, leading to testing the hypoth­
eses statements through two different models. However, the hypotheses statements remain 
the same across both models; it becomes essential to try these on sentiments leading to 
forming a polarized opinion (positive, negative, or neutral) or subjectivity scores leading 
to developing an emotion towards the buyer experience. We capture the contextual buyer 
experience through these two dependent variables portrayed by each user while writing the 
tweet. This contextual experience is represented by the respective models’scores (sentiment 
and emotion) representing experiential or satisfaction scores. Using these models estab­
lishes the drivers’ empirical relationship (hypotheses statements) with the buyer experience 
in each other’s presence. We conclude our analysis with one multivariate model and validate 
1 3
767

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
each construct’s significance in the buyer experience. First, we have presented the model’s 
correlation matrix (Table1) between independent variables to establish their interconnec­
tion. Table1 shows that the relationship between independent variables varies with a minor 
deviation expected for the direct connection (red colored box, Table1).
We perform a lasso regression analysis to verify the proposed hypothesis. The 14 hypoth­
eses have been confirmed based on the Chi-square test and p-value. We accept the hypoth­
esis with a p-value greater than 0.05 while rejecting others. Table2 presents regression 
analysis results, showing that hypothesis-sounding sustainable orientation, digital readiness, 
technological innovation, big data analytics, AI adoption, financial stability, process innova­
tion, crisis management, and management quality have been accepted, as their respective 
p-values are greater than 0.05. The hypotheses surrounding customer orientation, employee 
orientation, flexibility, service assurance, and perceived fairness have been rejected because 
their significance level is less than 0.05. So, nine hypotheses have been accepted out of 14, 
while five have been rejected.
The results support crisis management, customer orientation, digital expertise, flexibil­
ity, financial stability, innovation, perceived fairness, regulatory norms, information shar­
ing, and sustainability orientation, while rejecting the dependency of buyer experience in 
MSMEs on employee orientation, management quality, process innovation, and service 
assurance. The final model for evaluating buyer experience after removing the rejected fac­
tors is presented in Fig.6.
6  Discussion
This study aimed to extract the antecedents of buyer experience in the buyer–supplier rela­
tionship in MSMEs. We used LDA-based topic modeling on the Twitter data of 47,135 
users to extract the topics, followed by applied strategies suggested by Liu et al., (2021) to 
map topics with the antecedents of buyer experience extracted from literature. After topic 
Fig. 5  A framework to evaluate the buyer experience with MSMEs
 
1 3
768

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Table 1  Correlation matrix presenting the relationship between each factors
Factor
AIA
BDA
CM
CO
DR
EO
FS
FY
MQ
PF
PI
SA
SO
TI
AIA
1
BDA
-0.012
1
CM
0.000
0.001
1
CO
0.056
0.007
0.005
1
DR
0.023
0.006
-0.004
0.001
1
EO
0.024
0.004
0.006
0.011
-0.006
1
FS
0.028
-0.003
0.015
-0.008
0.000
0.058
1
FY
-0.009
-0.003
0.002
0.002
-0.008
0.003
-0.003
1
MQ
-0.011
-0.006
-0.024
0.000
-0.003
-0.003
-0.015
-0.003
1
PF
-0.001
-0.004
0.003
-0.003
0.002
-0.005
0.000
-0.007
0.000
1
PI
0.019
-0.009
0.002
0.007
0.007
-0.005
-0.006
-0.005
-0.050
0.0018
1
SA
0.052
0.010
-0.006
0.089
0.003
0.000
0.030
-0.004
-0.001
0.0015
-0.004
1
SO
0.006
-0.001
0.001
0.004
-0.003
-0.004
-0.003
-0.007
-0.006
-0.0017
0.001
-0.002
1
TI
0.011
0.002
-0.001
0.059
0.003
-0.001
-0.001
0.001
0.002
0.0061
-0.002
-0.003
-0.001
1
1 3
769

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
modeling, we adopted regression analysis to empirically examine the effect of these ante­
cedents on the buyer experience. We contributed towards building a fruitful and sustainable 
buyer–supplier relationship in MSMEs by providing the crucial precursors of buyer experi­
ence. We have found 14 antecedents that could influence the buyer experience following 
our analysis. Some factors are even implied for measuring the buyer experience when con­
sidering the more prominent firms; few factors such as financial stability, flexibility, crisis 
management, management quality, and perceived fairness are more related to the MSME 
context. Out of the 14 factors, 10 show an impact relationship with buyer experience.
Moving towards this study’s second aim, to investigate the impact of extracted antecedent 
on buyer experience under stakeholders’ sustainable orientation (i.e., ‘climate risk’, ‘envi­
ronment’, and ‘eco-friendly’) shows positive influence on buyer experience in MSMEs, 
which is in line with Ramirez’s (2013) analysis of customers’ views on the sustainably 
oriented supplier, and the perseverance of stability and a mutually beneficial relationship. 
Second, following literature, many MSMEs are adopting technology-associated solutions 
due to global crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic and worldwide lockdowns (Ali et al., 
Factors
Coefficient
Stan­
dard 
error
p-value
Status
Result
Constant
0.1709
0.001 0.000
Significant*
Accepted
AI 
adoption
-0.0437
0.004 0.000
Significant*
Accepted
Big data 
Analytics
0.249
0.023 0.000
Significant*
Accepted
Crisis 
manage­
ment
-0.0553
0.01
0.000
Significant*
Accepted
Customer 
orientation
0.0064
0.004 0.080
Non 
significant
Rejected
Digital 
readiness
-0.2792
0.024 0.000
Significant*
Accepted
Employee 
orientation
-0.0005
0.018 0.976
Non 
significant
Rejected
Financial 
stability
-0.0367
0.006 0.000
Significant*
Accepted
Flexibility
-0.077
0.062 0.217
Non 
significant
Rejected
Manage­
ment 
quality
0.0743
0.035 0.034
Significant** Accepted
Perceived 
fairness
0.0017
0.002 0.282
Non 
significant
Rejected
Process 
innovation
-6.7119
1.347 0.000
Significant*
Accepted
Service 
assurance
0.0125
0.011 0.232
Non 
significant
Rejected
Sustain­
able 
orientation
0.0303
0.019 0.013
Significant** Accepted
Techno­
logical 
innovation
-0.0808
0.033 0.015
Significant** Accepted
Table 2  Coefficient and sig­
nificance of variables on buyer 
experience in the buyer-supplier 
relationship
Significance level: * 99%, ** 
95%
 
1 3
770

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
2021; Chowdhury et al., 2021). So, users on SM are talking more about different informa­
tion technology (IT) solutions such as cloud-based infrastructures and video conferencing, 
which also impacts the buyer–supplier relationship (Azyabi, 2021). The current study on 
this literature expands the influence of MSMEs suppliers’ technological capability on the 
buyer experience. For example, results support the positive influence of AI adoption (i.e., 
‘chatbot’, ‘machine learning’ ‘automatic’, ‘forecasting’) and big data analytics capabilities 
(i.e., ‘analytics’, ‘data science’, ‘information’, ‘assessability’) on buyer experience, indi­
cating the reduced impact of disruption and supply chain agility (Chowdhury et al., 2021; 
Kushwaha et al., 2021a, b).
Studies from service literature argue that service providers’ customer orientation strategy 
could influence customers’ perceived performance (La et al., 2009). Moderating the cus­
tomer orientation relationship with product performance followed by borrowing the con­
cept of perceived performance from marketing literature and applying it to customers, a 
relationship between customer orientation and buyer experience could be established. This 
was reflected in Hypothesis H1, where the supplier’s focus on customer orientation could 
positively influence the buyer experience, but the result does not support this relationship.
Nevertheless, the relationship between employees’ orientation (i.e., ‘employee-motiva­
tion’ ‘recognition’, ‘customer-friendly’) and buyer experience is not supported (Hypothesis 
H2). This could be because the nature of the B2B transaction is more volatile than the B2C 
transaction (Tiwary et al., 2021), and the employee’s orientation concept is drawn from 
the internal organizational structure, which may not have a significant impact on the buyer 
experience. The positive relationship between crisis management (i.e., ‘lockdown’, ‘covid’, 
‘pandemic’, ‘crisis-management’) and buyer experience (Hypothesis H11) was supported 
in terms of service context. This is not surprising as most MSMEs are not opposed to crises 
and pandemics. So, in a situation like the COVID-19 pandemic, if the supplier can provide 
their support and manage the product demand of buyers efficiently (Kurschus et al., 2017) 
by forecasting the order, this could build a loyal relationship with buyers.
Fig. 6  Validated buyer experience evaluation model for MSME sectors
 
1 3
771

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Further, the positive influence of perceived fairness (i.e., ‘tracking’, ‘lead generation’, 
‘share’) on buyer experience (Hypothesis H14) was not supported. Meanwhile, the influ­
ence of management quality on buyer experience (Hypothesis H12) was accepted. While 
supporting Hypothesis H8, the positive impact of the financial stability (i.e., ‘working 
funds’, ‘capital risk’, ‘cash-flow’) and buyer experience was also accepted. For the buyers 
to comprehend the supplier SMEs’ challenges and for suppliers to understand their buy­
ers, SMEs’ preferences and motivation provide further in-depth research opportunities in 
this area (Chowdhury et al., 2019; Malesios et al., 2020). Our research has focused on 
understanding SMEs’ buyer experience and antecedents that impact the buyer experience. 
In many cases, buyers’ knowledge is considered customer experience, but the two are dif­
ferent. Likewise, the buyer experience is focused on revenue-oriented objectives and cost-
effective solutions. For example, resource dependence theory (Hillman et al., 2009; Prasad 
et al., 2018) points to buyers’ dependency on suppliers and how it could benefit small firms. 
Further resource dependency creates marred touchpoints for buyer experience, and on-time 
resource fulfillment may provide a positive experience for the suppliers. So, providing on-
time resources when buyers are in crisis creates a positive synergy in the buyer–supplier 
relationship (Azyabi, 2021; Kurschus et al., 2017).
6.1  Theoretical contributions
MSMEs face many challenges during their business processes, due to which their business 
objective is very oriented and differs from buyer to buyer. So, understating the customer 
(i.e., buyer) orientation and providing them with solutions could help suppliers generate a 
better buyer experience (Feng et al., 2021). In the buyer–supplier relationship, the buyers’ 
and suppliers’ roles and strategies for maintaining a fruitful relationship are well discussed 
in terms of operations in supply chain management literature. What is less understood is 
what factors influence the buyer experience, especially when dealing with MSMEs. This 
study’s two critical aspects signify our contribution towards methodology to access buyer 
experience. First, looking toward MSMEs’ limitations in their market research, we have 
integrated analytical techniques and statistical methods to draw an SM-based framework to 
extract the buyer experience. This study integrates the antecedents of buyer experience in 
MSMEs through the data collected from SMP using the content analysis method. Second, 
this study expanded the data-driven-based inductive approach in supply chain management 
research beyond the factor and theme extraction using content analytics (Chae, 2015) and 
moved towards econometric analysis on top of content analytics for empirical validation. 
Further, we provide theoretical implications in the literature through content analysis and 
practical proof of buyer experience.
This paper indicates that RBV explains MSMEs’ strategic planning. Focusing on this 
procedure could provide MSMEs with competitive strategies for a better buyer experience. 
By examining the resource process flow more exhaustively and integrating RBV with TCT 
and IPT, researchers can obtain powerful and rich perspectives to enhance our comprehen­
sion of buyer experience during buyer–supplier interactions. From a contextual standpoint, 
we contribute towards extending the buyer experience research for MSMEs. Firstly, we 
considered the factors associated with three themes, stakeholder capabilities, technological 
capabilities, and management capabilities. Secondly, considering the MSMEs’ perspectives, 
we extracted four elements under these themes, financial stability, crisis management, flexi­
1 3
772

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
bility, and perceived fairness, as essential facets of buyer experience. For example, pandem­
ics like COVID-19 change buyer preference and behavioral patterns; under such conditions, 
our findings support the previous study of managers’ prior experience and accumulated 
knowledge to help overcome the crisis and extends to a positive association between man­
agement quality and buyer experience in the buyer–supplier relationship in MSMEs. Even 
the words associated with management quality, namely, ‘unprecedented planning’, ‘cus­
tomer-value-proposal’, and ‘lead generation’ are consistent with previous literature on sup­
ply chains and crisis-related strategies.
Thirdly, other factors such as customer orientation, employee orientation, and manage­
ment quality are also inclined towards generating buyer experience. However, larger firms 
have more advantages over MSMEs as they have more information acquisition and absorp­
tion capabilities. The results reinforce previous studies on suppliers’ sustainable orientation, 
leading to customers’ attention and indicating its influence on generating a positive buyer 
experience. Lastly, this research also expands supplier technology capability beyond the 
procurement process and technological innovation in supply chain agility, especially by 
confirming the positive association of big data analytics capability and AI adoption with 
buyer experience in MSMEs. However, the influence of digital readiness is negative on 
buyer experience; still, it is in line with Scuotto et al.’s (2017) findings of the negative 
impact of increased supply chain management costs within MSMEs.
6.2  Managerial implications
In this research, antecedents of buyer experience are extracted through SM data, and based 
on existing literature, the relationship between the ancestors and buyer experience is estab­
lished. First, SME suppliers face more limitations than large enterprises. So, the supplier 
must understand the strategies to compete in a competitive market (Zimmer et al., 2016). 
Suppliers can provide a better experience for their buyers, which will help them gain a long-
term relationship with them and support them in building a better relationship with buyers’ 
peer networks for future business endeavors. The supplier needs to understand buyer expec­
tations and the buyer’s business functionalities (customer orientation). They need to moni­
tor the situation for when there will be a sudden demand for supply. Under such conditions, 
managers must adequately manage the buyers’ crisis and buy from their internals. As crisis 
management influences buyer experience, suppliers could forecast the demand by which 
they can efficiently overcome the problem (Kurschus et al., 2017).
Literature suggests that buyer–supplier relationships are often stressed due to contract 
breaches or the self-motivation of any party (Hawkins & Muir, 2014; Morrissey & Pittaway, 
2006). Considering this situation, managers must follow fairness during contract formula­
tion and service fulfillment. Besides, suppliers should also carefully plan before implement­
ing an innovative solution into their operations. If buyers are large enterprises, the supplier 
has a minor issue. Still, if buyers are MSMEs and are not well familiar with technological 
innovation, they will complain about the new implementations. So, before implementing 
any technical solution, suppliers’ managers should consider the issue from buyers’ points 
of view by efficiently operating within the supply chain. For a sustainable buyer–supplier 
relationship, managers should consider four factors for generating a better buyer experi­
ence: financial stability, flexibility in operation, sustainable orientation, and information 
retrieval capabilities.
1 3
773

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
6.3  Limitations and Future Research Scope
This study has some limitations, which we present in three terms, and based on those limita­
tions, we suggest possible future directions. Firstly, considering the contextual perspective, 
we only examined the buyer experience from the MSME’s supplier perspective. Research 
indicates that customers’ or buyers’ understanding of experience differs from the suppliers’ 
experience. So, researchers may formulate separate experience models from suppliers’ and 
buyers’ perspectives and compare them to find the difference in their beliefs and associated 
factors. Also, mapping buyers’ feedback and suppliers’ experience assessment could more 
accurately moderate the model.
Secondly, from a methodological point of view, we have only used data from the micro­
blogging platform Twitter. We have not considered other SM platforms like Facebook or 
Instagram. In addition, we have used content analysis using LDA followed by a decision 
tree to showcase the relationship. The factors extracted from SM data are only mapped 
with buyer experience. Considering the case of MSMEs, we have specific data limitations, 
such as the nature of Twitter data in which most tweets do not contain geolocation; in this 
dataset, implementing country- or state-wise constraints is not optimal. So, county-wise 
data will further shape the buyer experience model in the buyer–supplier relationship due to 
country-wise or state-wise regulatory norms or cultural influence on MSMEs. We believe 
that considering different SMPs could enrich the data and associate analysis.
Lastly, some factors correlate directly or indirectly to extend this study’s limitations 
toward the research domain’s scope. For example, management quality may be interrelated 
with service assurance or employee orientation. In this paper, we did not consider these 
linkages. So, considering these linkages may change the significance level of the relation­
ship of those factors (e.g., customer orientation, employee orientation, service assurance), 
which were found to be non-significant in this study. Also, the elements extracted during 
the process will be more oriented towards buyer experience and reduce the standards error.
7  Conclusion
This study explores the antecedents of buyer experience for MSME suppliers using SMA 
from user-generated content. We have used topic modeling for factor extraction, and a deci­
sion tree for relationship formation, followed by 14 hypotheses, were formulated through 
existing literature. Our results suggest a significant positive impact of sustainable orienta­
tion on buyers’ experience. Further, suppliers must also improve their management quality 
and innovate the process more impudently as management quality and process innovation 
significantly affect buyer experience. Due to MSMEs’ limited capabilities, governments 
have introduced different guidelines to protect buyers’ rights in many countries, positively 
impacting the buyer experience. As businesses regularly update their channels and present 
innovative solutions to gain a sustainable advantage, innovation (technological innovation 
and digital readiness) significantly impacts buyer experience. However, our data do not sup­
port the effect of perceived fairness on the buyer experience. MSMEs are continually look­
ing for sustainable operations by which they can maintain their business in a competitive 
market. So, fulfilling the objective or perception of a sustainable supply chain may create a 
better buyer experience.
1 3
774

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Author statement  All contributors are listed as coauthors, and all coauthors have contributed.
Funding  This research received no specific grant from any funding agency.
Open Access funding provided by the Qatar National Library.
Declarations
Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest  The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Research involving human participants and/or animals  This article does not contain any studies with human 
participants performed by any of the authors.
Informed consent  None.Acknowledgement: Qatar National Library has provided the open access funding 
for this research.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, 
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the 
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is 
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory 
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdelaziz, F., Ben, Alaya, H., & Dey, P. K. (2020). A multi-objective particle swarm optimization algo­
rithm for business sustainability analysis of small and medium sized enterprises. Annals of Operations 
Research, 293(2), 557–586. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-2974-0
Adams, J. H., Khoja, F. M., & Kauffman, R. (2012). An Empirical Study of Buyer-Supplier Relationships 
within Small Business Organizations. Journal of Small Business Management, 50(1), 20–40. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1540-627X.2011.00342.x
Akter, S., & Wamba, S. F. (2019). Big data and disaster management: a systematic review and agenda 
for future research. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 939–959. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-017-2584-2
Ali, M. H., Chung, L., Kumar, A., Zailani, S., & Tan, K. H. (2021). A sustainable Blockchain framework for 
the halal food supply chain: Lessons from Malaysia. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 
170, 120870. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120870
Alkhodair, S. A., Fung, B. C. M., Rahman, O., & Hung, P. C. K. (2018). Improving interpretations of topic 
modeling in microblogs. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 69(4), 
528–540. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23980
Express, A. (2017). Customer service steps up.American Express Service Barometer. https://templatelab.
com/american-express-study/
Alshawi, S., Missi, F., & Irani, Z. (2011). Organisational, technical and data quality factors in CRM adoption 
— SMEs perspective. Industrial Marketing Management, 40(3), 376–383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indmarman.2010.08.006
Andersen, P. H., Christensen, P. R., & Damgaard, T. (2009). Diverging expectations in buyer–seller relation­
ships: Institutional contexts and relationship norms. Industrial Marketing Management, 38(7), 814–
824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2008.04.016
Arend, R. J., & Wisner, J. D. (2005). Small business and supply chain management: is there a fit? Journal of 
Business Venturing, 20(3), 403–436. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2003.11.003
Azyabi, N. (2021). How do information technology and knowledge management affect SMEs’ 
responsiveness to the coronavirus crisis? Business Informatics, 15(2), 75–90. https://doi.
org/10.17323/2587-814X.2021.2.75.90
1 3
775

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Baral, M. M., Singh, R. K., & Kazançoğlu, Y. (2021). Analysis of factors impacting survivability of sus­
tainable supply chain during COVID-19 pandemic: an empirical study in the context of SMEs. The 
International Journal of Logistics Management, ahead-of-p(ahead-of-print)https://doi.org/10.1108/
IJLM-04-2021-0198
Bianchi, C., & Abu Saleh, M. (2020). Investigating SME importer–foreign supplier relationship trust and com­
mitment. Journal of Business Research, 119, 572–584. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.07.023
Brei, M., Gadanecz, B., & Mehrotra, A. (2020). SME lending and banking system stability: Some mecha­
nisms at work. Emerging Markets Review, 43, 100676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ememar.2020.100676
Berente, N., Seidel, S., & Safadi, H. (2019). Research Commentary—Data-Driven Computationally Inten­
sive Theory Development. Information Systems Research, 30(1), 50–64. https://doi.org/10.1287/
isre.2018.0774
Broekhuis, M., & Scholten, K. (2018). Purchasing in service triads: the influence of contracting on con­
tract management. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 38(5), 1188–1204. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-12-2015-0754
Brouthers, K. D., & Nakos, G. (2004). SME Entry Mode Choice and Performance: A Transac­
tion Cost Perspective. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 28(3), 229–247. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1540-6520.2004.00041.x
Brusco, M. J., Steinley, D., Cradit, J. D., & Singh, R. (2012). Emergent clustering methods for empiri­
cal OM research. Journal of Operations Management, 30(6), 454–466. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jom.2012.06.001
Burhan, M., Salam, M. T., Hamdan, A., O., & Tariq, H. (2021). Crisis management in the hospitality sector 
SMEs in Pakistan during COVID-19. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 98, 103037. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhm.2021.103037
Caputo, F., Magni, D., Papa, A., & Corsi, C. (2021). Knowledge hiding in socioeconomic settings: Matching 
organizational and environmental antecedents. Journal of Business Research, 135, 19–27. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.06.012
Celuch, K., & Murphy, G. (2010). SME Internet use and strategic flexibility: the moderating effect 
of IT market orientation. Journal of Marketing Management, 26(1–2), 131–145. https://doi.
org/10.1080/02672570903574296
Chae, B. (2015). Insights from hashtag #supplychain and Twitter analytics: Considering Twitter and Twitter 
data for supply chain practice and research. International Journal of Production Economics. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.12.037
Chan, A. T. L., Ngai, E. W. T., & Moon, K. K. L. (2017). The effects of strategic and manufacturing flex­
ibilities and supply chain agility on firm performance in the fashion industry. European Journal of 
Operational Research, 259(2), 486–499. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2016.11.006
Choi, T. M., Guo, S., & Luo, S. (2020). When blockchain meets social-media: Will the result benefit social 
media analytics for supply chain operations management? Transportation Research Part E: Logistics 
and Transportation Review, 135, 101860. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2020.101860
Chowdhury, P., Lau, K. H., & Pittayachawan, S. (2019). Operational supply risk mitigation of SME and its 
impact on operational performance. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 
39(4), 478–502. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-09-2017-0561
Chowdhury, P., Paul, S. K., Kaisar, S., & Moktadir, M. A. (2021). COVID-19 pandemic related supply chain 
studies: A systematic review. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 
148, 102271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2021.102271
Claycomb, C., & Frankwick, G. L. (2004). A Contingency Perspective of Communication, Conflict Resolu­
tion and Buyer Search Effort in Buyer-Supplier Relationships. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 
40(1), 18–34. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-493X.2004.tb00253.x
Cooray, S., & Ratnatunga, J. (2001). Buyer–Supplier Relationships: A Case Study of a Japanese and Western 
Alliance. Long Range Planning, 34(6), 727–740. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0024-6301(01)00102-9
Deepu, T. S., & Ravi, V. (2021). Supply chain digitalization: An integrated MCDM approach for inter-organi­
zational information systems selection in an electronic supply chain. International Journal of Informa­
tion Management Data Insights, 1(2), 100038. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjimei.2021.100038
Dong, J. Q., & Yang, C. H. (2020). Business value of big data analytics: A systems-theoretic approach and 
empirical test. Information & Management, 57(1), 103124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2018.11.001
Feng, C., Sun, J., Fang, Y., & Hasan, I. (2021). Executives with customer experience and firm performance 
in the B2B context. European Journal of Marketing, 55(7), 1805–1840. https://doi.org/10.1108/
EJM-06-2020-0449
1 3
776

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Fellbaum, C. (2005). WordNet and wordnets. In: Brown, Keith et al. (eds.), Encyclopedia of Language and 
Linguistics, Second Edition, Oxford: Elsevier, 665–670
Fosso Wamba, S., Edwards, A., & Akter, S. (2019). Social media adoption and use for improved emergency 
services operations: the case of the NSW SES. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 225–245. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2545-9
Fosso Wamba, S., Queiroz, M. M., Wu, L., & Sivarajah, U. (2020). Big data analytics-enabled sensing capa­
bility and organizational outcomes: assessing the mediating effects of business analytics culture. Annals 
of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03812-4
Ghobakhloo, M., Arias-Aranda, D., & Benitez‐Amado, J. (2011). Adoption of e‐commerce appli­
cations in SMEs. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 111(8), 1238–1269. https://doi.
org/10.1108/02635571111170785
Ghouri, A. M., Akhtar, P., Haq, M. A., Mani, V., Arsenyan, G., & Meyer, M. (2021). Real-time informa­
tion sharing, customer orientation, and the exploration of intra-service industry differences: Malay­
sia as an emerging market. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 167, 120684. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120684
Grover, P., Kar, A. K., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2020). Understanding artificial intelligence adoption in operations 
management: insights from the review of academic literature and social media discussions. Annals of 
Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03683-9
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, E. (2009). The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Infer­
ence, and Prediction (2nd editio). Springer-Verlag
Hausman, A., & Stock, J. R. (2003). Adoption and implementation of technological innovations within 
long-term relationships. Journal of Business Research, 56(8), 681–686. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0148-2963(01)00313-7
Hawkins, T. G., & Gravier, M. J. (2014). Individual manager experience influences on reverse auc­
tion use. International Journal of Procurement Management, 7(6), 719. https://doi.org/10.1504/
IJPM.2014.064985
Hawkins, T. G., & Muir, W. A. (2014). An exploration of knowledge-based factors affecting procurement com­
pliance. Journal of Public Procurement, 14(1), 1–32. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOPP-14-01-2014-B001
Hillman, A. J., Withers, M. C., & Collins, B. J. (2009). Resource dependence theory: A review. Journal of 
Management. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206309343469
Hsiao, S. H., Wang, Y. Y., Wang, T., & Kao, T. W. (2020). How social media shapes the fashion industry: 
The spillover effects between private labels and national brands. Industrial Marketing Management, 86, 
40–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.02.022
Igarashi, M., de Boer, L., & Fet, A. M. (2013). What is required for greener supplier selection? A literature 
review and conceptual model development. Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 19(4), 
247–263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pursup.2013.06.001
Jokela, P., & Söderman, A. (2017). Re-examining the link between fairness and commitment in buyer-
supplier relationships. Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 23(4), 268–279. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pursup.2017.08.003
Jones, R., & Rowley, J. (2011). Entrepreneurial marketing in small businesses: A conceptual exploration. 
International small business journal, 29(1), 25–36. https://doi.org/10.1177/0266242610369743
Kanyoma, K. E., Agbola, F. W., & Oloruntoba, R. (2018). An evaluation of supply chain integration across 
multi-tier supply chains of manufacturing-based SMEs in Malawi. The International Journal of Logis­
tics Management, 29(3), 1001–1024. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-10-2017-0277
Kar, A. K. (2020). What Affects Usage Satisfaction in Mobile Payments? Modelling User Generated Content 
to Develop the “Digital Service Usage Satisfaction Model. Information Systems Frontiers. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10796-020-10045-0
Kar, A. K., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2020). Theory building with big data-driven research – Moving away from the 
“What” towards the “Why.“. International Journal of Information Management, 54, 102205. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102205
Kar, A. K., & Pani, A. K. (2014). Exploring the importance of different supplier selection criteria. Manage­
ment Research Review, 37(1), 89–105. https://doi.org/10.1108/MRR-10-2012-0230
Kavota, J. K., Kamdjoug, J. R. K., & Wamba, S. F. (2020). Social media and disaster management: Case of 
the north and south Kivu regions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. International Journal of 
Information Management, 52, 102068. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102068
Kim, P. H., Aldrich, H. E., & Keister, L. A. (2006). Access (Not) Denied: The Impact of Financial, Human, 
and Cultural Capital on Entrepreneurial Entry in the United States. Small Business Economics, 27(1), 
5–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-006-0007-x
1 3
777

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Konstantakopoulos, G. D., Gayialis, S. P., Kechagias, E. P., Papadopoulos, G. A., & Tatsiopoulos, I. P. (2021). 
An algorithmic approach for sustainable and collaborative logistics: A case study in Greece. Inter­
national Journal of Information Management Data Insights, 1(1), 100010. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jjimei.2021.100010
Kozlenkova, I. V., Samaha, S. A., & Palmatier, R. W. (2014). Resource-based theory in marketing. Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science, 42(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-013-0336-7
Krolikowski, M., & Yuan, X. (2017). Friend or foe: Customer-supplier relationships and innovation. Journal 
of Business Research, 78, 53–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.04.023
Kumar, S., Kar, A. K., & Ilavarasan, P. V. (2021). Applications of text mining in services management: A 
systematic literature review. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights, 1(1), 
100008. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjimei.2021.100008
Kurschus, R. J., Šarapovas, T., & Pilinkienė, V. (2017). The Concept of Crisis Management by Intervention 
Model for SMEs. Engineering Economics, 28(2), https://doi.org/10.5755/j01.ee.28.2.16667
Kushwaha, A. K., Kar, A. K., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2021a). Applications of big data in emerging management 
disciplines: A literature review using text mining. International Journal of Information Management 
Data Insights, 1(2), 100017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jjimei.2021a.100017
Kar, A. K., & Kushwaha, A. K. (2021). Facilitators and Barriers of Artificial Intelligence Adoption in Busi­
ness – Insights from Opinions Using Big Data Analytics. Information Systems Frontiers. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10796-021-10219-4
Kushwaha, A. K., & Kar, A. K. (2021). MarkBot – A Language Model-Driven Chatbot for Interactive 
Marketing in Post-Modern World | SpringerLink. Information Systems Frontiers, 1–18. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10796-021-10184-y
Kushwaha, A. K., Kumar, P., & Kar, A. K. (2021b). What impacts customer experience for B2B enterprises 
on using AI-enabled chatbots? Insights from Big data analytics. Industrial Marketing Management, 98, 
207–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2021b.08.011
La, V., Patterson, P., & Styles, C. (2009). Client-perceived performance and value in professional B2B ser­
vices: An international perspective. Journal of International Business Studies, 40(2), 274–300. https://
doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8400406
Laffineur, C., Dubard Barbosa, S., Fayolle, A., & Montmartin, B. (2020). The unshackled entrepreneur: 
Occupational determinants of entrepreneurial effort. Journal of Business Venturing, 35(5), 105983. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2019.105983
Lancastre, A., & Lages, L. F. (2006). The relationship between buyer and a B2B e-marketplace: Coopera­
tion determinants in an electronic market context. Industrial Marketing Management, 35(6), 774–789. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2005.03.011
Lee, H. L., & Schmidt, G. (2017). Using Value Chains to Enhance innovation. Production and Operations 
Management, 26(4), 617–632. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12665
Lin, E. M. H., Sun, E. W., & Yu, M. T. (2018). Systemic risk, financial markets, and performance of 
financial institutions. Annals of Operations Research, 262(2), 579–603. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-016-2113-8
Lipparini, A., & Sobrero, M. (1994). The glue and the pieces: Entrepreneurship and innovation in small-firm 
networks. Journal of Business Venturing, 9(2), 125–140. https://doi.org/10.1016/0883-9026(94)90005-1
Liu, F., Lai, K. H., Wu, J., & Duan, W. (2021). Listening to online reviews: A mixed-methods investigation 
of customer experience in the sharing economy. Decision Support Systems, 149, 113609. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.dss.2021.113609
Luo, B., Wang, C., & Li, T. (2018). Inequity-averse agents’ deserved concerns under the linear contract: a 
social network setting. Annals of Operations Research, 268(1–2), 129–148. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-017-2436-0
Malesios, C., Dey, P. K., Abdelaziz, F., & Ben (2020). Supply chain sustainability performance measure­
ment of small and medium sized enterprises using structural equation modeling. Annals of Operations 
Research, 294(1–2), 623–653. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-3080-z
Manolova, T. S., Carter, N. M., Manev, I. M., & Gyoshev, B. S. (2007). The Differential Effect of Men and 
Women Entrepreneurs’ Human Capital and Networking on Growth Expectancies in Bulgaria. Entre­
preneurship Theory and Practice, 31(3), 407–426. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6520.2007.00180.x
Medberg, G., & Grönroos, C. (2020). “Value-in-use and service quality: do customers see a difference?“. 
Journal of Service Theory and Practice, 30(4/5), 507–529. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSTP-09-2019-0207
Michaels, J., & Doohan, K. (2019). SERVICE IS THE NEW SALES, The through line for B2B growth. https://
www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/interactive/service-new-sales-b2b-growth
Mirkovski, K., Davison, R. M., & Martinsons, M. G. (2019). The effects of trust and distrust on ICT-enabled 
information sharing in supply chains. The International Journal of Logistics Management, ahead-of-
p(ahead-of-print). https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-06-2017-0155
1 3
778

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Mirkovski, K., Lowry, P. B., & Feng, B. (2016). Factors that influence interorganizational use of information 
and communications technology in relationship-based supply chains: evidence from the Macedonian 
and American wine industries. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 21(3), 334–351. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-08-2015-0343
Mishra, N., & Singh, A. (2018). Use of twitter data for waste minimisation in beef supply chain. Annals of 
Operations Research, 270(1–2), 337–359. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2303-4
Morrissey, W. J., & Pittaway, L. (2006). Buyer-Supplier Relationships in Small Firms. Interna­
tional Small Business Journal: Researching Entrepreneurship, 24(3), 272–298. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0266242606063433
Moyo, D. (2020). How SMEs can Build Great Customer Experiences. SAP. https://news.sap.com/
africa/2020/09/how-smes-can-build-great-customer-experiences/
Mpeera Ntayi, J. (2012). Emotional outcomes of Ugandan SME buyer-supplier contractual conflicts. Inter­
national Journal of Social Economics, 39(1/2), 125–141. https://doi.org/10.1108/03068291211188901
Mudambi, R., & Schründer, C. P. (1996). Progress towards buyer-supplier partnerships. European Journal of 
Purchasing & Supply Management, 2(2–3), 119–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/0969-7012(96)00001-9
Muk, A., & Chung, C. (2015). Applying the technology acceptance model in a two-country study of SMS 
advertising. Journal of Business Research, 68(1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2014.06.001
Mukherjee, S. (2018). Challenges to Indian micro small scale and medium enterprises in the era of globaliza­
tion. Journal of Global Entrepreneurship Research, 8(1), 28. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40497-018-0115-5
Oh, O., Eom, C., & Rao, H. R. (2015). Research Note —Role of Social Media in Social Change: An Analysis 
of Collective Sense Making During the 2011 Egypt Revolution. Information Systems Research, 26(1), 
210–223. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2015.0565
Paice, C. D. (1994). An Evaluation Method for Stemming Algorithms. In In: Croft B.W., van Rijsbergen C.J. 
(eds) SIGIR ’94. (pp.42–50). Springer London. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-2099-5_5
Pitt, L. F., Watson, R. T., & Kavan, C. B. (1995). Service quality: A measure of information systems effective­
ness. MIS Quarterly: Management Information Systems. https://doi.org/10.2307/249687
Prasad, S., Zakaria, R., & Altay, N. (2018). Big data in humanitarian supply chain networks: a resource 
dependence perspective. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1–2), 383–413. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-016-2280-7
Queiroz, M. M., Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Fosso Wamba, S. (2020). Impacts of epidemic outbreaks on sup­
ply chains: mapping a research agenda amid the COVID-19 pandemic through a structured literature 
review. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03685-7
Ram, J., & Zhang, C. (2021). Examining the Role of Social Media Analytics in Providing Competitive 
Intelligence. Journal of Global Information Management, 29(6), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.4018/
JGIM.20211101.oa15
Ramirez, E. (2013). Consumer-defined sustainably-oriented firms and factors influencing adoption. Journal 
of Business Research, 66(11), 2202–2209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2012.01.012
Roxas, B., & Coetzer, A. (2012). Institutional Environment, Managerial Attitudes and Environmental 
Sustainability Orientation of Small Firms. Journal of Business Ethics, 111(4), 461–476. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10551-012-1211-z
Rust, R. T., & Cooil, B. (1994). Reliability Measures for Qualitative Data: Theory and Implications. Journal 
of Marketing Research, 31(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.2307/3151942
Scuotto, V., Caputo, F., Villasalero, M., & Del Giudice, M. (2017). A multiple buyer – supplier relationship 
in the context of SMEs’ digital supply chain management. Production Planning & Control, 28(16), 
1378–1388. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2017.1375149
Shahzad, K., Ali, T., Takala, J., Helo, P., & Zaefarian, G. (2018). The varying roles of governance mecha­
nisms on ex-post transaction costs and relationship commitment in buyer-supplier relationships. Indus­
trial Marketing Management, 71, 135–146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2017.12.012
Shin, H., Collier, D. A., & Wilson, D. D. (2000). Supply management orientation and supplier/buyer perfor­
mance. Journal of Operations Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0272-6963(99)00031-5
Tam, F. Y., Moon, K. L., Ng, S. F., & Hui, C. L. (2007). Production sourcing strategies and buyer-supplier 
relationships. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management: An International Journal, 11(2), 297–
306. https://doi.org/10.1108/13612020710751446
Tan, F. T. C., Tan, B., Wang, W., & Sedera, D. (2017). IT-enabled operational agility: An interdependencies 
perspective. Information & Management, 54(3), 292–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2016.08.001
Thakkar, J., Kanda, A., & Deshmukh, S. G. (2007). Evaluation of buyer-supplier relationships using 
an integrated mathematical approach of interpretive structural modeling (ISM) and graph theo­
retic matrix. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 19(1), 92–124. https://doi.
org/10.1108/17410380810843471
1 3
779

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:753–780
Tirunillai, S., & Tellis, G. J. (2014). Mining Marketing Meaning from Online Chatter: Strategic Brand Analy­
sis of Big Data Using Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Marketing Research, 51(4), 463–479. 
https://doi.org/10.1509/jmr.12.0106
Tiwary, N. K., Kumar, R. K., Sarraf, S., Kumar, P., & Rana, N. P. (2021). Impact assessment of social media 
usage in B2B marketing: A review of the literature and a way forward. Journal of Business Research, 
131, 121–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.03.028
Vaitoonkiat, E., & Charoensukmongkol, P. (2020). “Stakeholder orientation’s contribution to firm perfor­
mance: The moderating effect of perceived market uncertainty”. Management Research Review, 43(7), 
863–883. https://doi.org/10.1108/MRR-07-2019-0296
Wagner, S. M., & Bode, C. (2014). Supplier relationship-specific investments and the role of safeguards 
for supplier innovation sharing. Journal of Operations Management, 32(3), 65–78. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jom.2013.11.001
Yang, J. (2014). Supply chain agility: Securing performance for Chinese manufacturers. International Jour­
nal of Production Economics, 150, 104–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.12.018
Yoo, M., Lee, S., & Ha, T. (2019). Semantic network analysis for understanding user experiences of bipolar 
and depressive disorders on Reddit. Information Processing & Management, 56(4), 1565–1575. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2018.10.001
Zahra, S. A. (2021). The Resource-Based View, Resourcefulness, and Resource Management in Startup 
Firms: A Proposed Research Agenda. Journal of Management, 47(7), 1841–1860. https://doi.
org/10.1177/01492063211018505
Zimmer, K., Fröhling, M., & Schultmann, F. (2016). Sustainable supplier management – a review of models 
supporting sustainable supplier selection, monitoring and development. International Journal of Pro­
duction Research, 54(5), 1412–1442. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2015.1079340
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Prashant  Kumar2 · Amit Kumar  Kushwaha2 · Arpan Kumar  Kar2 · 
Yogesh K.  Dwivedi3,4 · Nripendra P  Rana1
 
 Nripendra P Rana
nrananp@gmail.com
Prashant Kumar
prashant@dms.iitd.ac.in
Amit Kumar Kushwaha
kushwaha.amitkumar@gmail.com
Arpan Kumar Kar
arpan.kumar.kar@gmail.com
Yogesh K. Dwivedi
y.k.dwivedi@swansea.ac.uk
1 
College of Business and Economics, Qatar University, DohaP.O. Box 2713, Qatar
2 
Department of Management Studies, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India
3 
Emerging Markets Research Centre (EMaRC), School of Management, Room #323, Swansea 
University, Bay Campus, Fabian Bay, Swansea, SA1 8EN Wales, UK
4 
Department of Management, Symbiosis Institute of Business Management, Pune & 
Symbiosis International (Deemed University), Pune, Maharashtra, India
1 3
780