TITLE: Traditional versus fast fashion supply chains in the apparel industry: an agent-based simulation approach
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03703-8
---

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03703-8
S.I.: SIMULATING COMPLEX SYSTEMS
Traditional versus fast fashion supply chains in the apparel
industry: an agent-based simulation approach
Sabrina Backs1
· Hermann Jahnke1 · Lars Lüpke1 · Mareike Stücken1 ·
Christian Stummer1
Published online: 21 July 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
In the past, most companies in the European apparel industry focused on minimizing man-
ufacturing costs in the design of supply chains in conjunction with long-distance shipping
from production sites in the Far East and relatively long production cycles. Today, for some
market segments, the speed of production cycles is more important than the cost because short
throughput time allows the ﬂexibility to adjust to rapidly changing fashion trends in these mar-
ket segments. Accordingly, choosing the most beneﬁcial supply chain strategy has become
an established research topic. However, apparel markets are complex systems. Therefore,
attempts to reduce the underlying complexity in order to model these markets have limited
existing research to the consideration of only selected aspects of markets (e.g., considering
only homogeneous buyers, a single period, a single product, or a single manufacturer in the
absence of competition) rather than taking a more comprehensive view. These limitations can
be overcome by applying an agent-based simulation approach—an approach that can account
for a wider range of factors, including several competing manufacturers utilizing different
supply chain strategies, individual consumer preferences and behavior, word-of-mouth com-
munication, normative social inﬂuence, and ﬁrst-hand experience, as well as advertising. In
this paper, the capability potential of such agent-based market simulation is demonstrated by
investigating two supply chain strategies (fast fashion vs. traditional fashion) with varying
product and communication strategies (product attributes and advertising) in several market
scenarios.
Keywords Agent-based simulation · Supply chain management · Apparel industry · Fast
fashion
1 Introduction
What is the supply chain strategy of choice for the apparel industry? Over the last two
decades, this question has become more and more important for managers of fashion man-
B Sabrina Backs
sbacks@uni-bielefeld.de
1
Department of Business Administration and Economics, Bielefeld University, Universitätsstr. 25,
33615 Bielefeld, Germany
123

488
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
ufacturers as well as for scientists in the ﬁeld of business administration. The question calls
for understanding the differences between the established traditional strategy and the fast
fashion strategy.
The traditional strategy (which rose to prominence in the 1960s in Europe) is characterized
bysourcingproductionfromlow-wagecountries,leadingtolowerlaborcostsaswellaslonger
transportation times, and thus, to a reduction in the ﬂexibility of the logistical processes.
Therefore, in the traditional system, sales forecasts must be made well in advance of the
selling season, resulting in rather high demand uncertainty. Usually, large quantities of each
item are procured, covering the estimated demand for the full sales period and including
sufﬁcient safety stocks. This way, manufacturers attempt to prevent stock-outs so that as
many items as possible can be sold during the season, including through end-of-season sales
at reduced prices. Overall, the focus of the traditional strategy is on producing standardized
clothes at the lowest possible cost.
The fast fashion strategy, in contrast, differentiates between two separate product cate-
gories: basic products (e.g., plain t-shirts), which are procured analogously to those in the
traditional supply chain strategy, and fashion clothes, which are sourced from producers
located closer to the point of sale (mostly in European countries). The latter approach incurs
higher labor costs and thus higher production costs, but it also provides increased ﬂexibility
due to shorter transportation distances. Consequently, demand forecasts can be made much
closer to the selling season and can even be driven by real-time data from the points of sale.
This approach, therefore, beneﬁts from lower demand uncertainty. Fashion products are pro-
duced in smaller quantities and are offered to the consumer for only a few weeks. Stock-outs
are artiﬁcially generated to create a sense of scarcity and exclusiveness, and there are no
classic end-of-season sales. To summarize, the focus of the fast fashion strategy is on react-
ing more ﬂexibly to consumer demand and offering more fashionable products. The strategy
of fast fashion has come to the fore in recent years driven by increasing globalization and
digitization, both responsible for a faster spread of trends. Companies like Zara—the world’s
largest fast fashion manufacturer and part of the Inditex group—serve as prime examples of
the beneﬁts of such a strategy.
When choosing between these two supply chain strategies, several factors must be con-
sidered, including the preferences and purchasing behavior of consumers and the nature
and strategies of competitors. The interplay of these factors gives rise to a complex market
structure, requiring an appropriate tool for the evaluation of such strategies.
Agent-based modeling and simulation allows the consideration of individual consumer
preferences, communication from consumers within social networks, and competition
between manufacturers. By modeling the behavior of various stakeholders at the micro-level,
the emergent behavior of the system (i.e., the market) can be observed at the macro-level.
While agent-based simulations are already popular in several ﬁelds of business administra-
tion, such as in marketing (e.g., Rand et al. 2018; Sonderegger-Wakolbinger and Stummer
2015) or in innovation management (e.g., Kiesling et al. 2012; Negahban and Jeffrey 2018),
this approach is novel for investigating supply chain strategies in the apparel industry.
The contribution of this paper is threefold. First, we introduce an agent-based model
of an apparel market with consumers and manufacturers as relevant stakeholders who act
according to their beliefs and desires as well as interact with others. Second, we demonstrate
the strengths of a corresponding market simulation in comparison with an analytic approach
by accounting for the heterogeneity of consumers as well as word-of-mouth communication.
Third, we study the effectiveness of the two main supply chain strategies (i.e., traditional and
fast fashion) in combination with four management measures.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
489
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: we provide an overview of apparel supply
chain strategies and discuss the applicability of agent-based simulations in this context in
Sect. 2. Section 3 introduces the agent-based model, which is compared to an analytical
approach in Sect. 4. In Sect. 5, the model is applied to a ﬁctitious apparel market. The paper
concludes in Sect. 6.
2 Background
2.1 Supply chain strategies in the apparel industry
The topic of choosing a proper supply chain strategy has been addressed in literature reviews,
case studies, conceptual papers, quantitative empirical studies, and theoretical model-based
approaches (for a literature overview, see Backs et al. 2020). To summarize, in the context
of the apparel industry, a number of articles applying qualitative research methods mainly
focus on the ﬁelds of corporate social responsibility and sustainability (e.g., Li et al. 2014b;
Joy et al. 2012; Turker and Altuntas 2014), supply chain management (e.g., Barnes and
Lea-Greenwood 2006; Christopher et al. 2004; Ferdows et al. 2004; Tang et al. 2019), and
the concept of fast fashion, mostly contrasted with the traditional supply chain strategy (e.g.,
Caro and Martínez-de-Albéniz 2015; MacCarthy and Jayarathne 2010; Runfola and Guercini
2013). The focus of quantitative empirical studies has mostly been on consumer behavior in
the context of apparel supply chain strategies (e.g., Byun and Sternquist 2008; Choi et al.
2010; Morgan and Birtwistle 2009). Previous papers utilizing theoretical models have mainly
focused on communication via contracts between different supply chain members (e.g., Li
et al. 2014a; Wang et al. 2013) and supply chain management (e.g., Cachon and Swinney
2011; Caro and Gallien 2007, 2010). In an attempt to reduce complexity and dynamic of
interaction between market participants, most authors focus on a one-dimensional analysis
of the apparel supply chain, thus ignoring a number of other aspects of importance.
2.2 Prior work by Cachon and Swinney (2011)
A particularly noteworthy and prominently published analytical approach for studying sup-
ply chain management in the apparel industry has been introduced by Cachon and Swinney
(2011), who compare four systems—a traditional system, a quick response system, an
enhanced design system, and a fast fashion system. These four systems have different impli-
cations for the consumer’s strategic purchasing behavior. Following Cachon and Swinney,
this behavior consists of an intentional delay in purchasing an item while it is offered at the
full price with the purpose to buy it during an end-of-season clearance at a lower price.
In the traditional system, lead times are assumed to be long and product design is standard-
ized. Therefore, the ﬁrm must design the product and choose inventory levels well before the
selling season. Quick response, as deﬁned by Cachon and Swinney (2011), differs from the
traditional system in that the ﬁrm can procure inventory at two time instances—ﬁrst, a long
time before the selling season begins, as in the traditional system, and second, after receiving
a forecast update closer to the beginning of the selling season. This forecast is assumed to be
perfectly informative but ordering the second time comes with additional production costs.
The product design remains standardized. In the enhanced design system, production lead
times are long, but the design of the products gets improved, resulting in greater product value
to consumers as well as additional costs for each produced unit. In the fast fashion system,
123

490
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
ﬁnally, the characteristics of quick response and enhanced design are combined so that a
second inventory decision is made using better information and transferring higher product
value to consumers via the enhanced design. Both measures result in additional costs, but
fast fashion entails higher additional costs than these separated systems.
Cachon and Swinney (2011) assume that a ﬁrm sells a single product over a ﬁnite season.
Prior to the selling season, the ﬁrm chooses its inventory level and selling price to maximize
its expected proﬁt. Consumers decide whether to buy at the full price or wait for a potential
clearance sale. The consumers are assumed to be homogeneous in their needs and preferences
so that they ultimately all expect the same consumption value for a given product. Owing to
the homogeneity, they either all purchase early or all wait for the clearance period. As proﬁts
for the four systems under investigation are difﬁcult to determine analytically, Cachon and
Swinney resort to a numerical study with, as stated by the authors, realistic scenarios from
the fashion apparel industry. Based on the outcomes for several thousand parameter combi-
nations, they concluded that fast fashion is the strategy of choice with respect to proﬁtability
in roughly three quarters of these instances.
An obvious limitation of their approach is the assumption of homogeneous consumers—
this implies that consumers always attribute the same value to a product and only increase
that value to the same extent in the case of an enhanced design, and that all consumers behave
strategically in the same way. A second limitation relates to the assumed type of market—
only a single company is considered that only offers a single product. Furthermore, word of
mouth and normative social inﬂuence are not considered in this approach. Apparently, these
assumptions are necessary to make the game-theoretic approach tractable.
2.3 Suitability of an agent-based simulation approach
Agent-based simulation is well-suited to overcoming these limitations. Hence, it is useful for
modeling the apparel market with its heterogeneous consumers and their individual prefer-
ences for products, as well as different competing manufacturers following different supply
chain strategies. In their guidelines on when to use an agent-based simulation approach,
Rand and Rust (2011) list the following factors: (i) medium-sized numbers; (ii) local and
potentially complex interactions; (iii) heterogeneity; (iv) a rich environment; (v) temporal
aspects; and (vi) adaptive agents. The ﬁrst indicator refers to the number of agents represent-
ing individual stakeholders in simulation runs. If we have only two agents or players—for
example, one manufacturer and one “average consumer”—game theory would be the better
approach. In contrast, if we need to model hundreds of thousands of stakeholders, a statistical
regression would likely lead to better results. However, in our application case, we have a
medium number of agents—a few agents representing manufacturers and several hundred or
thousand agents representing (groups) of consumers. As for the second indicator mentioned
by Rand and Rust—local and potentially complex interactions—our case concerns consumer
agents that make decisions to purchase clothes while being inﬂuenced by peers within their
social network, which may result in direct or indirect interactions impacting the purchas-
ing decision. The third indicator concerns heterogeneity, which is obviously applicable in
our case as we are considering several manufacturer agents following different supply chain
strategies, resulting in several products, and heterogeneous consumer agents that differ in
terms of their preferences for product attributes, their socio-demographics, and their pur-
chase and communication behavior. The fourth indicator refers to rich environments that are
present in our model in the form of interactions between stakeholders through their social
networks. While these factors indicate the potential applicability of agent-based simulation,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
491
the penultimate indicator—a temporal aspect—is necessary. In our application case, we want
to analyze changes in the market resulting from the changing behavior of manufacturer agents
and changes in consumer agents’ behavior over time. The last (sufﬁcient) indicator refers to
the adaptiveness of agents. To some degree, this is also met in our model as consumer agents
may change their attitudes (i.e., their evaluated perception) toward product attributes based
on the inﬂuence of their social networks or by gaining ﬁrst-hand experience with products.
3 Agent-based model of an apparel market
As we are primarily interested in comparing alternative supply chain strategies, we accord-
ingly focus on two types of products, namely, basic products and fashion products, as well as
two groups of stakeholders: manufacturer agents and consumer agents. Both groups of agents
are characterized by parameters (e.g., a consumer’s communication habits and behavior) and
variables (e.g., a consumer’s attitudes toward a product’s attributes). Manufacturer agents
produce clothing and decide (i) what kind of product to create at a production site (e.g., in
Europe or in the Far East), (ii) at what time the product should be available in stores, (iii)
in what quantity, and (iv) at what price it is to be offered to consumer agents. Furthermore,
manufacturer agents can advertise their products in order to increase the level of awareness
among consumers. Products are offered at points of sale (e.g., online or stationary trade),
which may or may not be accessible to speciﬁc consumer agents. For example, online shops
are accessible to all consumer agents, whereas some local shops are accessible primarily to
consumer agents located within a reasonable geographic distance. Consumer agents purchase
products based on their individual preferences and learn about product attributes through ﬁrst-
hand experience. Interaction (e.g., word-of-mouth communication) among the agents occurs
within the social networks in which they are embedded. Figure 1 provides an overview of
the entities and dynamics in our agent-based model of an apparel market.
purchase
point of sale
traditional
fast fashion
advertise
communicate
manufacturer
first-hand experience
consumer
Fig. 1 Agent-based market model
123

492
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
3.1 Model entities
3.1.1 Product and manufacturer
The simulation accounts for a set P of products (i.e., clothes) indexed by i = 1, . . . , I,
where I represents the total number of products (i.e., I = |P|). Products have attributes
indexed by j = 1, . . . , J, whereby J is the total number of attributes within the set of
attributes A (J = |A|). Every product Pi is associated with a manufacturer agent indexed
by k = 1, . . . , K within the set M (K = |M|). For the sake of simpliﬁcation, we do not
distinguish between manufacturers and retailers in this basic model, that is, manufacturer
agents both produce and sell their products directly to consumers. From the viewpoint of
the manufacturer agents, products are characterized by cost per unit, which depends on the
chosen production site. In each simulated period, a given volume of products is produced
and made available for consumer agents until the product is either sold out or removed from
the market by the manufacturer agent.
3.1.2 Point of sale
Points of sale (POS), indexed by s = 1, . . . , S within the set R, have speciﬁc geographical
positions and are individually characterized, for example, by product assortment and storage
volume (S = |R|). Each point of sale receives a certain number of different products, each
of which may have its own individual price. Furthermore, a point of sale can engage in
individual advertising campaigns. Regarding stationary trade, a physical point of sale is
available to consumer agents within a certain geographical radius. In contrast, online points
of sale make all products available regardless of the consumer’s geographic position, as is
the case for the customary online trading platform.
Our research focuses on comparing the traditional fashion strategy and the fast fashion
strategy, and we do not want to impact this decision with the issue of the availability of
one type of fashion item or another to only a subset of consumers. Therefore, we opted to
implement a single online shop having all products offered by all manufacturers. Hence,
every product is accessible to every consumer.
3.1.3 Consumer
We consider a set C of heterogeneous consumer agents indexed by n = 1, . . . , N (N = |C|),
which are assigned to a speciﬁc geographical position. Consumer agents have individual
awareness awareprod
i,n of products; awareprod
i,n
= 0 if consumer n is not aware of the existence
of product i, otherwise awareprod
i,n
= 1. The same holds for the consumer agents’ awareness
of product attributes awareattr
i, j,n ∈{0, 1} and awareness of points of sale awarepos
n,s ∈{0, 1}.
Consumer agents become aware of products by word of mouth, advertising, or while strolling
through the (online) shop.
Consumer agents have individual attitudes regarding the corresponding attributes
(attitudeattr
i, j,n) of each known product. Their heterogeneous preferences are represented by
individual part-worth utility functions u j,n(). The attitudes are formed over time by word of
mouth, ﬁrst-hand experience, and advertising. Finally, consumer agents are also characterized
by their individual purchase and communication behavior (see Sect. 3.2).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
493
3.1.4 Social network
The social network used in this model is based on an adapted Barabási-Albert network
(Barabási and Albert 1999), which exhibits strong clustering and several network hubs, both
of which are characteristic of social networks (see Barabási and Bonabeau 2003; Squazzoni
et al. 2014). Our variant of this social network-generating algorithm considers agents that
are located close to each other to have a higher probability of being connected than agents
that are separated by large distances (following a suggestion by Stummer et al. 2015).
Technically, the probability that an agent a is connected with another agent b is propor-
tional to d(a, b)α·deg(b)β, where the function d() represents the Euclidean distance between
agent a and agent b (normalized to an interval [0,1]). The exponent α is typically negative
so that a smaller distance leads to a higher probability of a connection between two agents.
Function deg(b) gives the number of connections that agent b already has with other agents
(once again normalized to an interval [0,1] with respect to the minimum number and the
maximum number of connections for any agent that is already part of the network). Param-
eter β is typically positive so that agents with many existing connections are chosen with
a higher probability for a new connection. Thus, a few consumer agents have a particularly
high number of connections. These agents can be used to analyze the role of inﬂuencers in
apparel markets.
The social network-generating algorithm produces the weighted and directed graph G =
(C, L), where C is the set of consumer agents and L is the set of communication links.
Several alternative variants of social networks (one for each random seed) are generated in
advance by iteratively adding agents one by one and deciding on the connections for each
of them. A particular social network is then imported during the initialization of each run of
the agent-based simulation.
3.2 Model dynamics
In our model, consumer agents can gain information about products and product attributes by
communicating with other consumer agents, from advertising, as well as through normative
social inﬂuence. Furthermore, consumer agents purchase products and thereby, gain ﬁrst-
hand experience.
3.2.1 Communication
Consumer agents communicate with their peers in the social network about products and
product attributes. Procedurally, a set of possible topics (i.e., product–attribute pairs) is gen-
erated. The corresponding algorithm follows intuitive communication behavior, that is, peers
might communicate about a speciﬁc product and all its attributes, or about a speciﬁc product
attribute and its value in all products, or about one explicit product–attribute pair (see Algo-
rithm 1). The selection of actual communication topics is based on the following assumptions
(also used by Stummer et al. 2015): (i) consumer agents tend to talk after obtaining new infor-
mation that change their individual utility of a product attribute; (ii) the larger the change in
the estimated partial utility, the higher the probability of communication; (iii) consumers are
more likely to pass on information that causes a negative change in the estimated utility; (iv) a
basic requirement for talking about a product–attribute pair is that at least one of the agents is
aware of that attribute. We implement these principles by making use of a speciﬁed function
that assigns the probability of a product–attribute pair being selected to the list of possible
123

494
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
communication topics. Finally, the two consumer agents communicate about topics on that
list and inform each other about their own current attitude with respect to the respective
product–attribute pair.
Algorithm 1 communicate(a,b)
Parameters:
a
Agent spreading information
b
Agent receiving information
A
Set of attributes (indexed by j)
P
Set of products (indexed by i)
wb,a
Weighting factor determining the impact of information received from agent a by agent b
Variables:
attitudesattr
i, j,n
Attitude of consumer n toward attribute j of product i
awarenessattr
i, j,n
Binary variable indicating the awareness of consumer n of attribute j of product i
awarenessprod
i,n
Binary variable indicating the awareness of consumer n of product i
(a,b)attitudesattr
i, j,a Change in the attitude of consumer a for attribute j of product i since the last time
of communication with agent b
ˆi
Uniformly chosen random index i for which awarenessprod
i,a
= 1
ˆj
Uniformly chosen random index j for which awarenessattr
i, j,a = 1
T
List of topics in a consumer communication event
X
Uniformly distributed random number chosen from [0,1]
Y
Uniformly distributed random number chosen from [0,1]
Functions:
pselect(a,battitudesattr
i, j,a)
Function that assigns a word-of-mouth propagation probability
based on a given change in attribute utility valuation with an asym-
metric U-shaped form to illustrate that the larger the change in the
estimated partial utility, the higher the probability that the agent
will pass on the information
processInformation(b, i, j, value, w)
Function that processes the incoming information value for
attribute j of product i into attitudesattr
i, j,b with weight w
1: T ←∅
2: if Y ≤1
3 then
3:
for all A j ∈A for which awarenessattr
ˆi, j,a = 1 do
4:
if X < pselect(a,battitudesattr
ˆi, j,a) then T ←T ∪(Pˆi, A j)
5:
end if
6:
end for
7: else if Y ≤2
3 then
8:
for all Pi ∈P for which awarenessprod
i,a
= 1 do
9:
if X < pselect(a,battitudesattr
i, ˆj,a) then T ←T ∪(Pi, A ˆj)
10:
end if
11:
end for
12: else
13:
if X < pselect(a,battitudesattr
ˆi, ˆj,a) then T ←T ∪(Pˆi, A ˆj)
14:
end if
15: end if
16: for all

Pi, A j

∈T do processInformation(b, i, j, attitudesattr
i, j,a, wb,a)
17: end for
Manufacturer agents may advertise their products, thereby informing selected consumer
agents about the products and their attributes through mass media (e.g., print and TV) and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
495
social media (e.g., inﬂuencers). Our research is primarily concerned with comparing fash-
ion supply chain strategies, and modeling consumers’ inducement toward purchasing a new
fashion item is not in the foreground of our research objectives. Therefore, we did not dis-
tinguish between speciﬁc advertising measures, but subsumed the possible measures to an
overall generic advertising measure with which a manufacturer agent could inform consumer
agents.
Technically, advertising is a form of one-way communication. A randomly chosen number
of consumer agents is reached by an advertising event only within a speciﬁc geograph-
ical position or speciﬁc consumer segment. The selected agents are then—with a given
probability—inﬂuenced by advertising. As in the case of communication between two con-
sumer agents, two cases can be distinguished: (i) a consumer agent is already aware of the
product, and the advertising event inﬂuences the agent’s current attitudes; or (ii) the con-
sumer agent is made aware of the product by the advertising event. The procedure dictating
the information inﬂow is similar to the one that has been described above. The information
gained by each consumer agent from the advertising event is weighted by the agent’s trust
in advertising. The manufacturer agent decides on what is communicated to the consumer
agents, although this information may not necessarily reﬂect the true (attribute) value. For
the corresponding algorithm, see Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 advertise(r)
Parameters:
r
Advertising activity
C
Set of consumer agents (indexed by n)
iadv
Advertised product
jadv
Advertised attribute of product iadv
Padv
r
Probability that an agent is exposed to advertising activity r
vadv
r
Avertised attribute value of attribute jadv of product iadv
wadv
Weighting factor determining the impact of advertising on consumer n
Variables:
Ctarget
r
Speciﬁc target group out of consumers C
X
Uniformly distributed random number chosen from [0,1]
Functions:
processInformation(b, i, j, value, w)
Function that processes the incoming information value for
attribute j ofproducti intoattitudesattr
i, j,b withweightw [adescrip-
tion is provided in Algorithm 3]
1: for all Cn ∈Ctarget
r
do
2:
if X < Padv
r
then processInformation(n, iadv, jadv, vadv
r
, wadv
n
)
3:
end if
4: end for
The obtained information is weighted to represent the varying credibility of informa-
tion sources. When agents a and b exchange information, the weighted information on the
product–attribute pair (i, j) of agent b is updated. We deﬁne Vi, j,b as the weighted informa-
tion that agent b has before talking to agent a about the product–attribute pair (i, j). Wi, j,b is
the sum of the current weights. The current attitude of agent b about attribute j of product i is
calculatedasattitudesattr
i, j,b = Vi, j,b/Wi, j,b.Afterexchanginginformationwithagenta, Vi, j,b
and Wi, j,b are updated as Vi, j,b := Vi, j,b +attitudesattr
i, j,a ·wb,a and Wi, j,b := Wi, j,b +wb,a.
If we assume that agent b is unaware of the product–attribute pair (i, j), then agent b
receives the current attitude about the attribute of agent a: Vi, j,b := attitudesattr
i, j,a · wb,a
123

496
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
and Wi, j,b := wb,a. For a formal description of the algorithm underlying this communica-
tion process, see Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 processInformation(b,i,j,value,w)
Parameters:
b
Agent receiving information
i
Index of product
j
Index of attribute
w
Weighting factor determining the impact of information received
Variables:
attitudesattr
i, j,n
Attitude of consumer n toward attribute j of product i
awarenessattr
i, j,n
Binary variable indicating the awareness of consumer n of attribute j of product i
awarenessprod
i,n
Binary variable indicating the awareness of consumer n of product i
Vi, j,b
Sum of all weighted information on each attribute j of product i obtained so far by
agent b
value
Received attribute value of attribute j of product i
Wi, j,b
Sum of weights for attribute j of product i obtained so far by agent b
1: awarenessprod
i,b
←1
2: awarenessattr
i, j,b ←1
3: Vi, j,b ←Vi, j,b + value · w
4: Wi, j,b ←Wi, j,b + w
5: attitudesattr
i, j,b ←Vi, j,b
Wi, j,b
3.2.2 Normative social inﬂuence
Consumers might also be affected by “social inﬂuence” exerted through their immediate
peers in the social network (especially, friends and family)—they consider the attitudes of
others and keep in mind the products owned by their peers. The impact of normative social
inﬂuence increases over time, not least because of social media and direct communication
opportunities (see Aral and Walker 2014; Risselada et al. 2014).
The actual effect of normative social inﬂuence is based on group size, importance of
group afﬁliation, and spatial and temporal proximity of other group members, according to
the social impact theory of Latané (1981). In our model, normative social inﬂuence is based
on the proportion of peers—that is, the directly connected agents—owning the respective
type of product (following Delre et al. 2007). It affects the purchase decisions (as suggested
by Butcher et al. 2002; Cialdini and Goldstein 2004; Delre et al. 2010), as can be seen in the
utility function described in the succeeding subsection.
3.2.3 Purchase
Consumer agents seek to purchase clothes at individual temporal intervals, randomly chosen
from a triangular distribution based on external (given) data. Accordingly, the model accounts
for both ﬁxed individual purchase intervals and spontaneous purchases. When at a shop, a
consumer considers all known products available at the shop in their decision.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
497
Next, the utility of each of these products is calculated. By summing up the part-worth
utility of each attribute j, the utility of the product i is determined as
ui,n = u1,n(pricei,t) +
J

j=2
u j,n

attitudesattr
i, j,n

· awarenessattr
i, j,n + normi,n · wnorm
n
+ ϵprod.
We assume that the price (i.e., the attribute with index j = 1) is perfectly visible to the
consumer agent. Hence, the real price is used in the part-worth utility function. The impact
of normative social inﬂuence (normi,n) on consumer n regarding the product i is represented
by the weighting factor (wnorm
n
). Possible mistakes and additional minor factors that are not
explicitly considered by the model are subsumed in an error term ϵ.
Ultimately, the consumer agent purchases the product that maximizes the total utility (the
agent’s ﬁrst choice). For a formal description, see Algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4 purchase(n)
Parameters:
n
Consumer
P
Set of products (indexed by i)
vtrue
i, j
True value of product i’s attribute j
ϵprod
Product utility evaluation error term
wnorm
n
Weighting factor determining the impact of normative social inﬂuence
Variables:
attitudesattr
i, j,n
Attitude of consumer n toward attribute j of product i
awarenessattr
i, j,n
Binary variable indicating the awareness of consumer n of attribute j of product i
awarenessprod
i,n
Binary variable indicating the awareness of consumer n of product i
Eevo
n
Consumer n’s evoked set during the purchasing process
normi,n
Normative social inﬂuence on consumer n for product i
Puse
Selected product in the purchasing process
ui,n
Consumer n’s utility of product i
Functions:
u j,n()
Consumer n’s utility function for attribute j
1: Eevo
n
←∅
2: for all Pi ∈P for which awarenessprod
i,n
= 1 do
3:
Eevo
n
←Eevo
n
∪(Pi)
4: end for
5: for all Pi ∈Eevo
n
do
6:
for all A j ∈A for which awarenessattr
i, j,n = 1 do
7:
if A j = ‘price’ then ui,n+ = u j,n(vtrue
i, j )
8:
else ui,n+ = u j,n(attitudesattr
i, j,n)
9:
end if
10:
end for
11:
ui,n+ = normi,n · wnorm
n
12:
ui,n+ = ϵprod
13: end for
14: choose Puse for which ui,n = max(ui,n)
15: return Puse
123

498
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
3.2.4 First-hand experience
After purchasing a product, the consumer agent obtains “true” information about the product
attributes through ﬁrst-hand experience at a certain point in time after the purchase and before
making subsequent product purchases. The information about the product is updated in the
same way as in the case of gaining information from another consumer agent (see Sect. 3.2.1).
For a formal description of the algorithm underlying ﬁrst-hand experience, see Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 ﬁrstHandExperience (n,˜i)
Parameters:
n
Consumer
A
Set of attributes (indexed by j)
˜i
Index of purchased product
vtrue
˜i, j
True attribute value of attribute j of product ˜i
wfhx
n
Weighting factor determining the impact of ﬁrst-hand experience on consumer n
Variables:
aattr
j,n
Binary variable indicating the awareness of consumer n of attribute j
existattr
˜i, j
Binary variable indicating j is an attribute of product ˜i
Functions:
processInformation(b, i, j, value, w)
Function that processes the incoming information value for
attribute j of product i into attitudesattr
i, j,b with weight w
1: for all A j ∈A for which existattr
˜i, j = 1 do
2:
processInformation(n, ˜i, j, vtrue
˜i, j , wfhx
n
)
3: end for
3.3 Differentiation of the agent-based model from an earlier approach
Our agent-based model of an apparel market was inspired by the work of Stummer et al.
(2015), who introduced an agent-based model for studying the diffusion of a new product
in the fuel market. As the apparel market obviously differs from the fuel market, we had to
extend this earlier model in several important respects. First, in the model by Stummer et al.
(2015), no supply side limitations are considered, whereas in our apparel market model every
manufacturer can decide on order times and order quantities following the chosen supply
chain strategy and, thus, stock-outs are possible. Second, end-of-season clearance sales are
prevalent in the fashion industry and therefore considered in our model. Third, normative
social inﬂuence is a factor to be considered in the consumer agents’ purchasing decision, as
wearing apparel can be observed publicly and can therefore inﬂuence the purchasing behavior
of consumers. In contrast, social inﬂuence does not play a role in the fuel market model by
Stummer et al. (2015)—they assumed that other consumers could hardly recognize which
type of fuel has been purchased by just seeing a consumer driving their car.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
499
4 Analytical versus agent-based model
We choose the prominent paper by Cachon and Swinney (2011) as a benchmark for our efforts
to demonstrate the advantages of our agent-based simulation model for evaluating supply
chain strategies in the apparel industry. In the initial baseline scenario, we show that the
agent-based simulation model can replicate the core results obtained by Cachon and Swinney,
provided we restrict the complexity of our model appropriately. Subsequently, in Scenarios
A and B, we demonstrate the effect of consumer heterogeneity on the market results of the
supply chain strategies under scrutiny. To this end, we make consumer agents heterogeneous
with respect to both their preferences for fashion attributes and their initial attitudes toward
these attributes. The reason for this is that both (i.e., preferences and attitudes) together
determine the consumers’ utility value determining their purchasing decision between fast
fashion and traditional fashion (see Algorithm 4).
The parameterization and initialization of our agent-based simulation in this comparison
are throughout based on the corresponding values established by Cachon and Swinney (2011).
Accordingly, the two products (a traditional and a fast fashion product) are characterized
by the product price, value, and cost, all calculated according to the work by Cachon and
Swinney. As for the consumers’ (average) needs and preferences, we test the same 12,150
alternative parameter combinations.
In the baseline scenario, the simulation model is strictly constrained to closely reﬂect the
model by Cachon and Swinney (2011). Especially, all consumers considered in this scenario
are assumed to be homogeneous with respect to their preferences, attitudes, and behavior.
We still allow word-of-mouth communication between them but this does not show any
effect since every individual attitude is set to be identical from the beginning. In the two
other scenarios, preferences regarding product value and price vary among the consumers.
In Scenario A, the individual part-worth utilities for the product value and the product price
of each consumer are randomized within a 25% range ( = ± 25%), while in Scenario
B, the consumers are distinctly more diverse and the part-worth utilities are randomized
within a 50% range ( = ± 50%). However, the average consumer behavior still equals
the representative consumer envisioned by Cachon and Swinney, as parameterized in the
baseline scenario. In both scenarios with heterogeneous consumers, individual initial attitudes
are drawn from a triangular distribution with the true product value as the expected value,
with the minimum value being set at 75% (50%) of the true value, and the maximum value
being set at 125% (150%) of the true value. Since the product price is observable before the
purchase, the consumers’ attitudes toward the product price are always set to the true product
price in our simulation. The purchasing and the communication behavior of the consumer
agents are initialized based on data from our empirical study on consumer behavior, which
is described in the succeeding section (an overview of consumer characteristics is depicted
in Fig. 2 in Sect. 5.1).
Each scenario is simulated with 1000 interacting consumer agents. We simulated a period
of ten years, with multiple purchase processes and several communication events for each
consumer. It is noteworthy that Cachon and Swinney (2011), in contrast, modeled only a
single purchase of one average consumer in each of their 12,150 instances.
In the ﬁrst set of simulation runs (i.e., in the baseline scenario with homogeneous consumer
agents), fast fashion was the more proﬁtable choice in 9039 out of 12,150 instances (74.4%)
with respect to both market shares and proﬁts. The calculation of proﬁts again followed the
approachproposedbyCachonandSwinney(2011).Oursimulationresultscorrespondclosely
with the results reported by Cachon and Swinney where fast fashion was the better choice
123

500
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
Table 1 Homogeneous consumers versus heterogeneous consumers
Homogeneous consumers
Heterogeneous consumers
Scenario A
Scenario B
 = 0%, ϵ = 0%
 = ± 25%, ϵ = 5%
 = ± 50%, ϵ = 5%
Share of instances, in which fast fashion is the better choice ...
(i) Based on market share (%)
74.4
66.6
56.6
(ii) Based on proﬁts (%)
74.4
75.4
69.9
in 9046 cases (74.5%). This correspondence is unsurprising, as we speciﬁcally intended to
replicate the market behavior of their model through our agent-based simulation.
In the second set of simulation runs, we assume that consumers are heterogeneous in
their preferences for product value and price as well as their initial attitudes (while all other
parameters and instances remain unchanged). In other words, in contrast to Cachon and
Swinney’s assumption, some consumer agents, for example, prefer products with a higher
(lower) product value or price and vice versa.
The results from the two sets of simulation runs are shown in Table 1. It should be
remembered that heterogeneity in Scenario B is larger than in Scenario A, while in the
baseline scenario, there is no heterogeneity among consumers at all. The epsilon is used as
an error term in the additive utility function to represent the remaining minor factors for the
purchasing decision.
In terms of proﬁts, the advantage of the fast fashion strategy remains nearly unaffected,
that is, it is not strongly affected by small variances in the individual part-worth utilities of
consumer agents. However, with respect to market shares, it can be observed that accounting
for heterogeneity among consumers yields simulation results which suggest that the fast
fashion strategy is advantageous in fewer instances than when assuming identical consumers
(i.e., in the baseline scenario). Most notably, this is the case in Scenario B, in which fast
fashion is deemed favorable in only 6,876 out of 12,150 instances (56.6%), down from 9,039
instances (74.4%).
The observation on market shares may at ﬁrst sight appear surprising or even counterintu-
itive, but one has to keep in mind the mechanics of how heterogeneity works in the simulation
model. For the majority of consumer agents, the changes in their preferences and attitudes
due to an increasing heterogeneity do not impact their ﬁnal decision behavior, and, thus,
they purchase the same product as before. The other consumer agents—that is, consumer
agents whose preferences and attitudes deviate more substantially from the representative
consumer envisioned by Cachon and Swinney—are more interesting. In these cases, the
deviation might either cause an even more pronounced desire for fast fashion (traditional
fashion) or push them toward traditional fashion (fast fashion). For our results this means the
following: As nearly three quarters of homogeneous consumer agents have opted for the fast
fashion product, the number of consumer agents switching from fast fashion to traditional
fashion after introducing heterogeneity is larger than vice versa. In a nutshell, in a market, in
which the representative consumer is, in terms of preferences and attitudes, positioned near
the brink of purchasing a different type of product (as is the case in the market parameter-
ized by Cachon and Swinney), increasing the heterogeneity of consumers will reduce the
dominance of the strategy favored in the homogeneous scenario. Note that these mechanics,
depending on whether the parameterization in the homogeneous scenario favors fast fashion
or traditional products, might work in two different directions. For the parameter setting
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
501
in our approach, the representative consumer in the homogeneous case favors fast fashion
products. Therefore, increasing heterogeneity makes the fast fashion strategy less attractive
for the supplier. In contrast, once in the homogeneous scenario traditional products are pre-
ferred, increasing heterogeneity would lead to growing numbers of consumer agents buying
fast fashion products. However, since one intention of this paper is to compare the simulation
approach with the analytical approach by Cachon and Swinney (2011), we started with the
parameters being used by Cachon and Swinney and, thus, we situated this simulation in a
market that is characterized by an already dominating—and with respect to this dominance
maybe even overshooting—fast fashion strategy. Our simulation results indicate that, in such
a setting, it is even more important to suitably consider the heterogeneity of consumers.
5 Sample application
To study in a more general setting whether the traditional or fast fashion strategy is the more
suitable one, we model a simpliﬁed (ﬁctitious) apparel market that initially comprises two
manufacturers. A third manufacturer enters the market later, thus increasing the competition
and shifting the balance in the market. One of the preexisting manufacturers has established a
traditional supply chain and accordingly offers a basic product produced in the Far East that is
available at the point of sale for the entire season. As it is common practice, this manufacturer
features two collections—one for the summer season and another for the winter season.
Moreover, each collection of products is offered at reduced sale prices at the end of each
season. The other initial manufacturer follows a fast fashion strategy and hence offers two
types of products—a fashion product commonly produced near the points of sale and a basic
product. This manufacturer changes its collection regularly every few weeks. Fast fashion
merchandise is not offered at sale prices, and unsold products are simply withdrawn from
the point of sale, which is associated with additional costs. Both the traditional manufacturer
and the fast fashion manufacturer can advertise their own products.
In our simpliﬁed market, all basic and fashion products are differentiated by only three
attributes: (i) the trendiness factor, (ii) quality, and (iii) price. While quality and price are
the most relevant criteria for fashion purchases (Hayllar et al. 2019), basic products are
differentiated from fashion products by the trendiness factor, which indicates how well a
product matches the latest fashion trend(s). By deﬁnition, a fast fashion product has a higher
trendiness factor. The quality factor relates to the craftsmanship and the type of material used
in the product. The price is the in-store purchase price. Moreover, each product type has
unique production costs, which are higher for fashion products.
Every consumer has individual attitudes and preferences regarding these attributes which
are described by utility functions for each attribute (see Sect. 3.1.3). Consumer agents’
attitudes can be inﬂuenced by communication within their social network, manufacturer
advertising, and, of course, by their own ﬁrst-hand experience following a purchase. The
obtained information is weighted individually depending on how much the agent trusts the
information source—ﬁrst-hand experience is the most trustworthy, followed by word-of-
mouth communication, while advertising is deemed to be the least trustworthy. Consumer
agents purchase a new product and communicate with others in their social network at
individual time intervals.
Asweareprimarilyinterestedincomparingalternativesupplychainstrategies,welimitthe
diversity of agents and agent behavior in this sample application with respect to the shopping
behavior of consumers, the points of sale, and the marketing measures being applied, because
123

502
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
Fig. 2 Consumer characteristics from empirical study
more diversity in these respects does not contribute toward answering our research question.
However, the agent-based model could still cover other characteristics of the apparel market
(e.g., shopping as a favorite pastime for consumers, various types of brick-and-mortar outlets
on speciﬁc geographical positions, and inﬂuencer marketing) once these aspects play a role
in investigating further research questions.
5.1 Parameterization
The parameterization of consumers, products, and manufacturers, as well as other dynamics
of our simpliﬁed apparel market is based on aforementioned literature (esp. Cachon and
Swinney 2011), data from research on manufacturer websites and online shops (e.g., Zara
and H&M), and data from an empirical study we carried out in preparation to our simulation
experiments.
This survey was answered by a total of 100 participants (for some descriptive statistics, see
Fig.2).Weusedtherespondents’answerstoderivetheparametersforconsumerbehavior,that
is, communication frequency, purchase interval, and trust in communication and advertising.
Consumer preferences—that is, the (part-worth) utilities for the attributes—were determined
by a conjoint analysis as part of the empirical study. Although this sample is obviously not
representative, it serves to demonstrate the potential of our approach to model apparel markets
more realistically.
The consumer agents are geographically distributed according to the population based on
German postal code areas. To parameterize 1,000 consumers in our simulation, we used each
of the 100 participants from our survey as a role model for 10 consumer agents and assigned
them corresponding—although slightly varied—parameter settings.
The attributes of products vary depending on the scenario, the manufacturers’ chosen
strategy, and the additional measures applied by the management (e.g., increasing the product
quality). Table 2 provides the values for Scenario 1, with no additional measures applied.
The quality of products is set within a range from 0 to 1, where 0 represents the lowest
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
503
Table 2 Products and product attributes in Scenario 1
Products
basicT
basicF
fashionF
basicF+
fashionF+
Product attributes
Trendiness factor
0.05
0.25
0.75
0.25
0.70
Quality
0.37
0.50
0.50
0.43
0.50
Price
e40.95
e40.95
e59.95
e44.95
e54.95
quality. Likewise, the trendiness factor is set between 0 and 1, with 1 indicating that the
product perfectly matches the latest fashion trend. Note that the superscripts T and F refer
to existing traditional or fast fashion manufacturer, while the superscripts T+ and F+ refer to
the respective new competitor as introduced in the succeeding subsection.
In the apparel market modeled for this sample application, all products are available in an
online store. Thus, the geographical location of consumer agents (in Germany) only plays a
role in setting up the social network.
Furthermore, manufacturers are responsible for all aspects of the introduction of their
products to the market. Depending on their supply chain strategy, manufacturers act as tra-
ditional or fast fashion manufacturers. A traditional manufacturer replaces the assortment of
fashion goods twice a year. Each of the two seasons ends with a two-week sale where products
are offered at a 20% discount on the original product price. The fast fashion manufacturer, in
contrast, changes its collection every four weeks and does not offer any sale. Both manufac-
turers generate revenues for all sold products and carry production costs that are dependent
on their choice of strategy. For calculating proﬁts, we follow Cachon and Swinney (2011),
who suggest a proﬁt margin of 48.7% for basic products and 27.7% for fashion products.
5.2 Scenarios and management measures
In this sample application, we test six scenarios that differ in terms of the market shares of
the two initially existing manufacturers T and F at the beginning of the simulation runs and
the supply chain strategy of the new competitor T+ or F+ entering the market (the scenarios
are listed in Table 3). The agent-based simulation at hand might help this new manufacturer
decide which strategy to adopt.
Table 3 Market scenarios
Manufacturer T
Manufacturer F
New competitor T+ or F+
Market share (%)
Products
Market share (%)
Products
Products
Scenario 1
33.3
basicT
66.6
basicF, fashionF
basicF+, fashionF+
Scenario 2
50.0
basicT
50.0
basicF, fashionF
basicF+, fashionF+
Scenario 3
66.6
basicT
33.3
basicF, fashionF
basicF+, fashionF+
Scenario 4
33.3
basicT
66.6
basicF, fashionF
basicT+
Scenario 5
50.0
basicT
50.0
basicF, fashionF
basicT+
Scenario 6
66.6
basicT
33.3
basicF, fashionF
basicT+
123

504
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
In each scenario, manufacturer T offers only a basic product basicT, while manufacturer
F offers a basic product basicF and a fashion product fashionF. The market shares of the
two manufacturers differ in each scenario, as does the supply chain strategy adopted by the
new market entrant. In Scenarios 1–3, a new competitor F+ moves into the market, offering
a basic product basicF+ and a fashion product fashionF+—following a typical fast fashion
strategy. In contrast, in Scenarios 4–6, the new competitor T+ follows a traditional supply
chain strategy and offers only a basic product basicT+.
In addition, we test the effectiveness of four management measures that are applied by the
new competitor. In practice, these measures might be combined. Our simulation can simulate
any portfolio of measures, but we test them separately for the sake of analyzing the effect
of each measure. In Measure 1, the price of the new competitor’s products is reduced by
10%, while all other parameters remain unchanged. In Measure 2, the quality is increased
by 10%, while in Measure 3 the new products have a higher trendiness factor—for example,
because of better market research in advance. Market entry in Measure 4 is accompanied by
a comprehensive advertising campaign regarding the new products—the campaign reaches
20% of the consumers, who are informed several times about the outstanding quality of the
new competitor’s products.
5.3 Results
The model was implemented in AnyLogic (www.anylogic.com), a widely used Java-based
software program for agent-based simulation. We performed 100 simulation runs for the
application of each measure to each scenario over a simulation horizon of ﬁve years using
different seeds (a robustness analysis indicates that 100 replications with different random
seeds sufﬁce for obtaining stable results; for an example see “Appendix A”). The outcome was
averaged over all runs. Each single simulation run requires a runtime of about three seconds;
hence, each complete simulation of all six scenarios, ﬁve measures, and 100 replications
requires a total of 150 min of runtime on a standard notebook system (2.3 GHz, 8 GB RAM,
SSD).
Figure 3 shows the market shares for the four or ﬁve products available on the market for
each combination of scenario and potential management measure (note that the number of
products depends on the type of the new competitor, i.e., T+ vs. F+). The new competitor’s
market shares differ under the two alternative supply chain strategies; for a formal test with
respect to the difference’s statistical signiﬁcance, see “Appendix B”.
For this ﬁrst analysis, we have assumed that in all scenarios, products are available in
the demanded quantity—here, supply is exactly in line with demand. The simulation results
suggest that reducing the price by 10% (Measure 1) has nearly no effect on the market share
in any scenario because our consumer agents are rather price-insensitive. Furthermore, a 10%
increase in the quality of a product (Measure 2) has a considerably more positive effect on
the market share captured by the new product than a 10% increase in the trendiness factor
(Measure 3). The reason for this is that the consumers are parameterized—based on our
(conjoint) study—as seeking high quality over high fashion.
By contrasting the fast fashion and the traditional supply chain strategies—for example, by
comparing the corresponding Scenarios 1 and 4—it is noteworthy that the new basic product
captures market shares from not only the existing basicT and basicF products but also the
fashionF product due to individual consumer behavior and product characteristics. It should
be remembered that the market characteristics in Scenarios 1 and 4 are identical; these two
scenarios only differ in the strategy implemented by the new competitor: the new market
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
505
Fig. 3 Strategies and measures (market shares)
actor follows a fast fashion strategy in Scenario 1 and a traditional supply chain strategy in
Scenario 4. The same applies to Scenarios 2 versus 5 and Scenarios 3 versus 6, respectively.
Overall, the new competitor’s total market share is lower if the newcomer enters the market
as a traditional manufacturer rather than as a fast fashion manufacturer. This ﬁnding suggests
that in our ﬁctitious apparel market, a fast fashion supply chain strategy might be the better
option for a new competitor entering the market.
123

506
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
Fig. 4 Comparing market shares and proﬁts in Scenario 1
We also analyzed the results with respect to proﬁts. Figure 4 provides an example: it
depicts the results for one speciﬁc scenario—Scenario 1—and compares the outcomes when
no additional measure is applied against either lowering the price or increasing the trendiness
factor. With respect to market share, increasing the trendiness factor by 10% seems to be the
best option, as it results in a surplus of 14.2% in market share for the products basicF+ and
fashionF+ of the new fast fashion manufacturer in Scenario 1. However, the proﬁts decrease
by 22.7% compared to the situation wherein the trendiness factor is not raised. This is owing
to cannibalization of the new manufacturer’s own high-margin basicF+ product by the lower-
margin fashionF+ product. The alternative measure of reducing the product price by 10% does
not substantially change the market share (13.3% vs. 12.5%), given the price-insensitivity of
consumers, but it reduces proﬁts by nearly 14.5%. With respect to proﬁts, the results conﬁrm
that a fast fashion supply chain strategy in this scenario might still be the best option—this
results in higher proﬁts for the new competitor for all strategy measures.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
507
Table 4 Relative reduction of proﬁts for the new competitor due to unsold products
Basis
Measure 1 (%)
Measure 2 (%)
Measure 3 (%)
Measure 4 (%)
Scenario 1
51.7
53.8
22.3
96.7
24.0
Scenario 2
> 100
> 100
26.2
99.7
> 100
Scenario 3
20.7
20.7
21.9
36.5
19.7
Scenario 4
40.3
43.0
0.1
> 100
14.0
Scenario 5
> 100
> 100
3.4
> 100
> 100
Scenario 6
0.6
0.6
0.0
10.4
0.3
fashionF+
Fig. 5 Stocks and shortages of product fashionF+ in Scenario 3 with Measure 1
Our simulation results are impacted by the deﬁnition of proﬁts. For example, if the pro-
duction costs of unsold products at the end of each selling season are included, the proﬁts
of the new competitor decrease and may even become negative (i.e., reduction of proﬁts is
more than 100%), see Table 4.
Our agent-based simulation approach also allows us to identify lost sales when consumers
switch to another product because their ﬁrst-choice product is out of stock, resulting in loss
of market share and consequently loss of proﬁts for the manufacturer. For example, a detailed
analysis of product fashionF+ in Scenario 3 with application of Measure 1 shows that there
are periods with stock-outs (see Fig. 5).
Regarding proﬁts, these results are only examples intended to demonstrate our agent-based
model. Quite obviously, outcomes in practice depend largely on production volumes. In our
application case, all manufacturers expect a growing market and, as a rule of thumb, restock
their inventory by +15% of the number of products sold in the previous season.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we introduced an agent-based model of an apparel market that takes into account
relevant stakeholders (i.e., manufacturers and consumers) as well as their actions and inter-
actions. The corresponding simulation tool can be used to study the beneﬁt of a fast fashion
supply chain strategy over a traditional strategy (and vice versa). Furthermore, we demon-
strated the strengths of the simulation approach in comparison with the analytic approach by
Cachon and Swinney (2011) in a more realistic market setting that also allows for heterogene-
ity of consumers along with word-of-mouth communication. Results suggest that accounting
for these market characteristics indeed makes a difference. Finally, we analyzed the effec-
tiveness of the two supply chain strategies in combination with four management measures,
thus, exemplifying possible support for decision-makers in exploring what-if questions to
aid the identiﬁcation of the most convenient individual strategy.
123

508
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
The model and its application are still subject to limitations and remaining challenges.
First, we have modeled a ﬁctitious environment, so it is impossible to derive managerial
implications for a speciﬁc apparel market from this sample application. However, our appli-
cation case shows that it could be worthwhile to collect empirical data from a real market and
run the simulations with a corresponding parameterization. Next, the consumer side of our
market model could be extended to investigate further research questions. Such extensions
may concern consumer purchasing behavior (e.g., modeling shopping as a favorite pastime
for some consumers that might result in spontaneous purchases), consumer communication
behavior (e.g., the type of topics on which peers exchange their attitudes and how often they
choose which type of topic), the availability of diverse points of sale with various character-
istics and their efforts to attract consumers, and additional marketing measures (e.g., running
campaigns through social media inﬂuencers), all of which constitute promising starting points
for future research. Modeling the effects of stock-outs beyond lost sales is another example
for an extension of our market model: corresponding effects might be positive because the
product is perceived as rare and consumers are prompted to immediately purchase an item
they are interested in without postponing the purchase in order to look for a similar items in
other stores, or these effects might be negative because stock-outs damage a store’s (brand’s)
reputation. Then, it might be interesting to analyze the effects of combining marketing mea-
sures into strategy portfolios to identify the potential strengthening or cannibalization effects
of the various measures. The procedure for calculating proﬁts could be reﬁned to consider
certain realities—for example, a gain in quality is related to higher production costs or a
“trendier” product is linked with cost-intensive market research. Finally, the model could be
extended to consider several competitors with a more reﬁned strategy and perhaps even with
the ability to ﬁne-tune their strategies with respect to market developments (e.g., responding
to unsold items or stock-outs of items). In this context, also brands as well as brand image
or brand reputation could be added to the simulation.
Overall, this work represents the ﬁrst agent-based simulation of an apparel market. It
demonstrates the ability of such an approach to capture the emergent behavior in this market,
thereby showing the opportunity for additional work in this ﬁeld.
Acknowledgements Open Access funding provided by Projekt DEAL.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
A Testing for suﬃcient number of simulation runs
Exemplary comparison of two sets of runs (with different seeds) for Scenario 1 with no
measures applied.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
509
123

510
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
B Testing for signiﬁcant diﬀerences among the outcomes of alternative
strategies
For testing whether the differences in the market shares of the new competitor are signiﬁcant
in case of application of the two alternative supply chain strategies, we ﬁrst compared the
combined market shares from products basicF+ and fashionF+ in Scenario 1 with the market
share of the product basicT+ in Scenario 4. Next, we proceeded in an analogous way for
Scenarios 2 versus 5 and Scenarios 3 versus 6, respectively.
The corresponding t-values are listed in the table below. All the differences are signiﬁcant
for a p-level threshold of 0.01. Moreover, we checked for ﬁrst-order stochastic dominance
of the most successful strategy (for an overview of stochastic dominance, see Levy 1992)
and found stochastic dominance in all instances but one. The exception occurs in case of the
application of Measure 1 in Scenarios 1 and 4—but even in this instance, the overlap of the
simulation results is very small.
Scenarios
No measure
Measure 1
Measure 2
Measure 3
Measure 4
1 versus 4
36.727∗
31.270∗
205.901∗
173.906∗
55.979∗
2 versus 5
67.562∗
64.321∗
133.608∗
197.805∗
93.171∗
3 versus 6
106.069∗
106.423∗
89.793∗
150.205∗
126.131∗
∗Signiﬁcant differences (p = 0.01, d f = 198)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
511
References
Aral, S., & Walker, D. (2014). Tie strength, embeddedness, and social inﬂuence: A large-scale networked
experiment. Management Science, 60(6), 1352–1370.
Backs, S., Jahnke, H., Lüpke, L., Stücken, M., & Stummer, C. (2020) Supply chain strategies of the apparel
industry in research: A literature review. Working paper. SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3558419.
Barabási, A., & Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286(5439), 509–512.
Barabási, A., & Bonabeau, E. (2003). Scale-free networks. Scientiﬁc American, 288(5), 50–59.
Barnes, L., & Lea-Greenwood, G. (2006). Fast fashioning the supply chain: Shaping the research agenda.
Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management, 10(3), 259–271.
Butcher, K., Sparks, B., & O’Callaghan, F. (2002). Effect of social inﬂuence on repurchase intentions. Journal
of Services Marketing, 16(6), 503–514.
Byun, S. E., & Sternquist, B. (2008). The antecedents of in-store hoarding: Measurement and application in
the fast fashion retail environment. International Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer Research,
18(2), 133–147.
Cachon, G. P., & Swinney, R. (2011). The value of fast fashion: Quick response, enhanced design, and strategic
consumer behavior. Management Science, 57(4), 778–795.
Caro, F., & Gallien, J. (2007). Dynamic assortment with demand learning for seasonal consumer goods.
Management Science, 53(2), 276–292.
Caro, F., & Gallien, J. (2010). Inventory management of a fast-fashion retail network. Operations Research,
58(2), 257–273.
Caro, F., & Martínez-de-Albéniz, V. (2015). Fast fashion: Business model overview and research opportunities.
In N. Agrawal & S. A. Smith (Eds.), Retail supply chain management (pp. 237–264). New York: Springer.
Choi, T. M., Liu, N., Liu, S. C., Mak, J., & To, Y. T. (2010). Fast fashion brand extensions: An empirical study
of consumer preferences. Journal of Brand Management, 17(7), 472–487.
Christopher, M., Lowson, R., & Peck, H. (2004). Creating agile supply chains in the fashion industry. Inter-
national Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 32(8), 367–376.
Cialdini, R. B., & Goldstein, N. J. (2004). Social inﬂuence: Compliance and conformity. Annual Review of
Psychology, 55, 591–621.
Ferdows, K., Lewis, M. A., & Machuca, J. A. D. (2004). Rapid-ﬁre fulﬁllment. Harvard Business Review,
82(11), 104–117.
Delre, S. A., Jager, W., Bijmolt, T. H., & Janssen, M. A. (2007). Targeting and timing promotional activities:
An agent-based model for the takeoff of new products. Journal of Business Research, 60(8), 826–835.
Delre, S. A., Jager, W., Bijmolt, T. H., & Janssen, M. A. (2010). Will it spread or not? The effects of social
inﬂuences and network topology on innovation diffusion. Journal of Product Innovation Management,
27(2), 267–282.
Hayllar, W., Sorensen, D., & Carall-Green, S. (2019) A generation without borders: Embracing generation
Z. OC&C Strategy Consultants. Retrieved February 06, 2020 from https://www.occstrategy.com/media/
1806/a-generation-without-borders.pdf.
Joy, A., Sherry, J. F, Jr., Venkatesh, A., Wang, J., & Chan, R. (2012). Fast fashion, sustainability, and the ethical
appeal of luxury brands. Fashion Theory, 16(3), 273–295.
Kiesling, E., Günther, M., Stummer, C., & Wakolbinger, L. M. (2012). Agent-based simulation of innovation
diffusion: A review. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 20(2), 183–230.
Latané, B. (1981). The psychology of social impact. American Psychologist, 36(4), 343–356.
Levy, H. (1992). Stochastic dominance and expected utility: Survey and analysis. Management Science, 38(4),
555–593.
Li, J., Choi, T. M., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2014a). Mean variance analysis of fast fashion supply chains with
returns policy. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 44(4), 422–434.
Li, Y., Zhao, X., Shi, D., & Li, X. (2014b). Governance of sustainable supply chains in the fast fashion industry.
European Management Journal, 32(5), 823–836.
MacCarthy, B. L., & Jayarathne, P. G. S. A. (2010). Fast fashion: Achieving global quick response (GQR) in
the internationally dispersed clothing industry. In T. C. E. Cheng & T.-M. Choi (Eds.), Innovative quick
response programs in logistics and supply chain management (pp. 37–60). New York: Springer.
Morgan, L. R., & Birtwistle, G. (2009). An investigation of young fashion consumers’ disposal habits. Inter-
national Journal of Consumer Studies, 33(2), 190–198.
Negahban, A., & Jeffrey, S. S. (2018). A joint analysis of production and seeding strategies for new products:
An agent-based simulation approach. Annals of Operations Research, 268(1–2), 41–62.
Rand, W., & Rust, R. T. (2011). Agent-based modeling in marketing: Guidelines for rigor. International
Journal of Research in Marketing, 28(3), 181–193.
123

512
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:487–512
Rand, W., Rust, R. T., & Kim, M. (2018). Complex systems: Marketing’s new frontier. AMS Review, 8(3–4),
111–127.
Risselada, H., Verhoef, P. C., & Bijmolt, T. H. (2014). Dynamic effects of social inﬂuence and direct marketing
on the adoption of high-technology products. Journal of Marketing, 78(2), 52–68.
Runfola, A., & Guercini, S. (2013). Fast fashion companies coping with internationalization: Driving the
change or changing the model? Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management, 17(2), 190–205.
Sonderegger-Wakolbinger,L.M.,&Stummer,C.(2015).Anagent-basedsimulationofcustomermulti-channel
choice behavior. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 23(2), 459–477.
Squazzoni, F., Jager, W., & Edmonds, B. (2014). Social simulation in the social science: A brief overview.
Social Science Computer Review, 32(3), 279–297.
Stummer, C., Kiesling, E., Günther, M., & Vetschera, R. (2015). Innovation diffusion of repeat purchase
products in a competitive market: An agent-based simulation approach. European Journal of Operational
Research, 245(1), 157–167.
Tang, L., Jin, Z., Qin, X., & Jing, K. (2019). Supply chain scheduling in a collaborative manufacturing mode:
Model construction and algorithm design. Annals of Operations Research, 275(2), 685–714.
Turker, D., & Altuntas, C. (2014). Sustainable supply chain management in the fast fashion industry: An
analysis of corporate reports. European Management Journal, 32(5), 837–849.
Wang, K., Gou, Q., Yang, L., & Shan, S. (2013). Coordination of a fast fashion supply chain with proﬁt-
loss sharing contract. In T.-M. Choi (Ed.), Fast fashion systems: Theories and applications (pp. 77–92).
London: CRC Press.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123