TITLE: Impacts of epidemic outbreaks on supply chains: mapping a research agenda amid the COVID-19 pandemic through a structured literature review
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03685-7
---

Vol.:(0123456789)
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03685-7
1 3
S.I.: DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT OF HUMANITARIAN SUPPLY 
CHAINS
Impacts of epidemic outbreaks on supply chains: 
mapping a research agenda amid the COVID‑19 pandemic 
through a structured literature review
Maciel M. Queiroz1   · Dmitry Ivanov2   · Alexandre Dolgui3   · 
Samuel Fosso Wamba4 
Published online: 16 June 2020 
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
The coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak shows that pandemics and epidemics can seriously 
wreak havoc on supply chains (SC) around the globe. Humanitarian logistics literature has 
extensively studied epidemic impacts; however, there exists a research gap in understand-
ing of pandemic impacts in commercial SCs. To progress in this direction, we present a 
systematic analysis of the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on SCs guided by a structured lit-
erature review that collated a unique set of publications. The literature review findings sug-
gest that influenza was the most visible epidemic outbreak reported, and that optimization 
of resource allocation and distribution emerged as the most popular topic. The streamlining 
of the literature helps us to reveal several new research tensions and novel categorizations/
classifications. Most centrally, we propose a framework for operations and supply chain 
management at the times of COVID-19 pandemic spanning six perspectives, i.e., adap-
tation, digitalization, preparedness, recovery, ripple effect, and sustainability. Utilizing 
the outcomes of our analysis, we tease out a series of open research questions that would 
not be observed otherwise. Our study also emphasizes the need and offers directions to 
advance the literature on the impacts of the epidemic outbreaks on SCs framing a research 
agenda for scholars and practitioners working on this emerging research stream.
Keywords  Supply chain · COVID-19 · Influenza · Resilience · Epidemic outbreaks · 
Pandemic · Structured literature review · Adaptation · Digitalization · Preparedness · 
Recovery · Ripple effect · Sustainability
 * Dmitry Ivanov 
 
divanov@hwr‑berlin.de
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

1160
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
1  Introduction
The contemporary world has been challenged by unprecedented disease outbreaks (Chew 
et al. 2004; Lin et al. 2020; Nigmatulina and Larson 2009), whith significant negatively 
effects on the society as a whole, but also on the efficiency of operations and supply chain 
(SC) management (OSCM) business models. Such disruptive impacts frequently yield the 
ripple effects (Ivanov 2020a; Ivanov et al. 2018; Pavlov et al. 2019b). While SCs across 
the globe have been already suffering from epidemics and pandemic, they have recently 
been seriously hit by an unprecedented, far-reaching disruptive epidemic outbreak, namely 
COVID-19 (Boccaletti et al. 2020), which is considered as a new type of extremely conta-
gious coronavirus, with destructive impacts (Choi 2020; Ivanov 2020a; Ivanov and Dolgui 
2020b).
The COVID-19 was first reported in Wuhan, Hubei province, China, in the late 2019. 
As noted by the Johns Hopkins University on May 27, 2020, the number of confirmed 
cases reported around the world have been steadily growing, reaching 5.69 millions with 
355,575 deaths (Johns Hopkins University & Medicine 2020). In view of this exponential 
growth, the COVID-19 was declared a world pandemic by the World Health Organiza-
tion—WHO (2020) on March 11.
The impacts of the COVID-19 on SCs have already gained attention of scholars (Choi 
2020; Govindan et al. 2020; International Journal of Production Research 2020a, 2020b; 
Journal of Operations Management 2020; Ivanov 2020a; Lin et al. 2020; Sarkis et al. 2020) 
and industry experts (Business Insider 2020; Deloitte 2020; Forbes 2020a, b; Fortune 2020; 
Harvard Business Review 2020; Institute for Supply Chain Management—ISM 2020). The 
COVID-19 epidemic is already impacting the OSCM at a large scale (Lin et al. 2020). 
Fortune (2020), in a report published on 21 February 2020, indicated that 94% of the com-
panies listed in the Fortune 1000 list were facing SC disruptions due to the COVID-19. As 
for Deloitte (2020), the publication highlighted that the whole effect of the pandemic on 
SCs remained uncharted. The past epidemic outbreaks offer valuable lessons in relation to 
the SCs. The World Economic Forum—WEF (2020a, b) emphasized the need for firms and 
organizations to reengineer and adapt SCs to their future trade challenges. For instance, the 
short-term priority may be ‘transport and production’ and ‘worker movement’, while in the 
long term, capabilities and strategies related to ‘digital readiness & data sharing’ would be 
developed and implemented for SCs (World Economic Forum—WEF 2020a, b).
In a context where severe disruptions (e.g., manufacturers closed or partially closed, air-
ports operating with harsh restrictions, shortages of medical equipment and supplies) are 
recorded in the global SCs (Ivanov 2020a; McKinsey & Company 2020; World Economic 
Forum—WEF 2020a), a good number of industries (automotive, electronics, medical 
equipment, consumer goods, etc.) also experience ripple effects (Dolgui et al. 2018; Ivanov 
2020a, b). For example, as China is considered a world’s factory, the pandemic’s disrup-
tions to SCs around the world started there before spreading elsewhere (Deloitte 2020). The 
severe ripple effects from this challenge requires different strategies and actions, includ-
ing robust SC resilience strategies (Chen et al. 2019; Ivanov and Sokolov 2019; Pournader 
et al. 2020). Moreover, responses from the OSCM to such outbreaks by should consist in 
rendering global SCs more integrated and digitally ready (Choi et al. 2020; World Eco-
nomic Forum—WEF 2020a, b). The digitalization of the SCs could improve the quality 
of the response to outbreak-related disruptions by enhancing the OSCM flexibility (Ivanov 
et al. 2019) in such circumstances.

1161
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
It should be noted that the OSCM literature has approached studies on different types of 
epidemic outbreaks, with various objectives. For instance, outbreaks of influenza (Mamani 
et al. 2013), Ebola (Büyüktahtakın et al. 2018), Cholera (Anparasan and Lejeune 2017) 
and malaria (Parvin et al. 2018), among others, have been thoroughly studied. The major-
ity of these papers have devoted particular attention to resource allocation, distribution of 
the medicaments, vaccines procurement policies, and emergency health response. It is true 
that recent advances have been made by the literature concerning SC response (Aldrighetti 
et al. 2019; Banomyong et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2017; Song et al. 2018; Shen and Li 2017) 
and epidemic outbreaks operations (Anparasan and Lejeune 2019; Chick et al. 2008; Long 
et al. 2018; Paul and Venkateswaran 2020), but the effects of epidemic outbreaks on SCs 
(Ivanov 2020a; Sarkis et al. 2020) are still to be adequately investigated. In this regard, 
operations research (OR) and operations management (OM) approaches such as network 
and complexity theories (e.g., Bayesian networks, Markov chains, network theory, eco-
logical modeling) (Demirel et al. 2019; Hosseini and Ivanov 2019; Li and Zobel 2020), 
simulation (agent-based simulation, discrete-event simulation, systems dynamics) (Ghadge 
et al. 2013; Zhao et al. 2019; Ivanov 2020a), optimization (stochastic programming, robust 
optimization, mixed-integer linear programming, heuristics, dynamic programming) (Yoon 
et al. 2018; Amiri-Aref et al. 2019; Sawik 2019) could bring interesting insights to address 
this complex pandemic context. Moreover, empirical theories such resources based view 
(RBV), dynamic capabilities, contingency theory, organizational information processing 
theory (OIPT) with applications to resilience (Bode et al. 2011; Dubey et al. 2019b, c, 
2020) could be employed jointly with OR/OM approaches to frame empirically-grounded 
analytics and to examine the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on SCs.
However, the literature reporting the application areas of these methods in a systematic 
way remains scarce. The results remain scattered across different sources and rather unsys-
temized. We could identify only one paper covering the literature review on the impacts 
of epidemic outbreaks on logistics (Dasaklis et al. 2012). Considering the paucity of the 
literature on the effects of epidemic outbreaks on SCs (Ivanov 2020a; Ivanov and Dol-
gui 2020b), our study intends to unlock and shed more light in this discussion, provid-
ing valuable insights that will enable decision-makers and policy-makers to develop their 
response plans for SCs. In contrast to Dasaklis et al. (2012), our study analyses the latest 
articles published by March 2020 and offers a broader picture by covering different areas of 
OSCM. Moreover, our ultimate objective goes beyond a pure literature review to identify 
what happended in the past, but we rather use the literature review results to project future 
research agenda for OSCM under the conditions of COVID-19 pandemic.
For the moment, this topic is still at a nascent stage, even though it is promising and 
crucial research area (Haren and Simchi-Levi 2020; Ivanov 2020a; World Economic 
Forum—WEF 2020a, b). Therefore, this work aims to help bridge the gap by investigating 
the available OSCM literature on the impact of epidemic outbreaks on SCs and logistics 
while proposing avenues for improvements. We seek to provide a robust research agenda 
that will contribute to advancing the extant relevant literature, feeding decision- and pol-
icy-makers with significant insights for the OSCM-related fields. Once again, the extant 
literature remains silent on the disruptive impacts of epidemic outbreaks on SCs, and this 
study is committed to help bridging this gap. More specifically, we are taking the lead of 
research by attempting to answer the following research questions (RQs).
RQ1:  How does the OSCM literature address issues related to epidemic outbreaks in terms 
of their impact on logistics and SCs?

1162
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
RQ2:  What are the main problem settings and methods used?
RQ3:  What are the open questions and future research opportunities framing OSCM at the 
times of COVID-19 pandemic?
The following contributions are expected from this study. The first and main contribu-
tion of our study is to map out an emergent research agenda for OSCM at the times of 
COVID-19 pandemic. The second contribution is a systematization of the literature inves-
tigating the interplay between epidemic outbreaks and SCs. The third contribution is an 
identification of several open research questions to be explored in very near future.
In terms of organization, Sect. 2 of this paper highlights the SLR methodology, sup-
ported by its findings and the content analysis in Sect. 3. Section 4 elaborates on a research 
agenda for OSCM at the times of COVID-19 pandemic. Section 5 serves as a conclusion 
and underscores other key considerations.
2  Systematic literature review
Systematic literature review (SLR) has a long tradition, mainly in medical sciences 
(Cochrane Library 2018). The SLR is briefly defined as: “[…] an efficient technique for 
hypothesis testing, for summarising the results of existing studies, and for assessing con-
sistency among previous studies; these tasks are clearly not unique to medicine.” (Petticrew 
2001, pp. 99–100).
The SLR has been recently used successfully in the SC context (Mustafa Kamal and 
Irani 2014; Queiroz et al. 2019b; Roberta Pereira et al. 2014; Tachizawa and Wong 2014), 
which is eloquent evidence that, due to its systematic approach, the SLR is considered a 
rigorous method to conduct literature reviews. At the first stage of our approach, we there-
fore started with defining the scope and delimitating the subjects (Tranfield et al. 2003), 
taking into account their interdisciplinary nature. For the sake of objectivity and reliability 
in the whole process, we designed a research protocol (Table 1) (Tranfield et al. 2003).
At the second stage, we performed the search to identify the relevant papers. Following 
the recommendations (Tranfield et al. 2003), we considered only documents that met the 
full research protocol criteria. To comply with internal validity, we retained only journals 
indexed by Scopus. Moreover, to extract data and explore the papers, we used the quantita-
tive software MAXQDA (Queiroz et al. 2019b; Schanes et al. 2018), and the Bibliometrix, 
an R-tool for science mapping and analysis (Aria and Cuccurullo 2017). At the third and 
last stage of the SLR, we reported the main findings from the analysis of papers. This led 
to unveiling several insights into both the knowledge literature and a number of research 
topics (Tranfield et al. 2003). Figure 1 highlights the main schematical flow of the review 
process.
Remark 1  We note that our search was specifically designed in light of two aspects, i.e. (i) 
focus on commercial SCs and logistics (and not on humanitarian logistics) and (ii) focus 
on the evident and tangible logistics, production and SC contexts (i.e., it shoud be evident 
from the paper that it explicitly deals with an epidemic and SC issues; for example the 
papers that just mention epidemics as a possible risk were not considered).

1163
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
*Remark 2  In this query, due to the search considered title, abstract and keywords, we pre-
selected only the first potential papers that met the Remark 1. Besides, forthcoming papers 
were also considered.
3  Findings from the literature review
3.1  Basic informations from the papers selected
As signalized in the previous section, we used an R-tool software application called Bib-
liometrix (Aria and Cuccurullo 2017; Zhou et al. 2019). The Bibliometrix is open-source 
application that has the potential to import data from different sources (Scopus, Clarivate 
Analytics’ Web of Science, among others). It has been used successfully in various litera-
ture review works (Bernardet et al. 2019; Demiroz and Haase 2019; Purba et al. 2019; Zhou 
et al. 2019), providing support for robustness and reliability in science mapping. Although 
we initially used the year 2003 in our searches, the first paper that met our research proto-
col dates back to 2008. However, with 12 years of time horizon, only 32 documents were 
selected considering all the inclusion criteria.
Table 1   Research protocol
Research protocol
Details description
Research databases:
Scopus Database, ScienceDirect (Elsevier), Emeral-
dinsight (Emerald), Wiley Online Library (Wiley), 
Taylor & Francis Online (Taylor & Francis), 
Springer Link (Springer), Inderscience, and Informs 
PubsOnline
Publication type:
Peer-review journals (indexed by Scopus)
Language:
We considered only papers written in English
Date range:
The range period for consideration was 2003–2020 
(March 22)
Search fields:
Titles, abstracts, and keywords
Search terms: applied in Titles in Scopus Database 
and in Titles, Abstracts, and Keywords in the 
other databases
(“outbreak*” OR “pandemic*” OR “epidemic*” 
OR “disease*” AND “humanitarian operati*” OR 
“humanitarian relief*” OR “suppl* Chain*” OR 
“logistic*”)
Criteria for inclusion
Papers that presented some outbreak in a logistics/
SC context
Criteria for exclusion
Papers that presented outbreak discussion purely 
without protagonism of the logistics/SC, and review 
papers
Data extraction
We used an R-tool software Bibliometrix and the 
qualitative software MAXQDA
Data analysis and synthesis
Supported by the Bibliometrix and MAXQDA, we 
performed a content analysis approach

1164
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
3.2  Publications by journals
Table 2 shows the number of papers published in the course of each journal. The jour-
nals devoted to operations research (OR) topped the chart. Moreover, OR, operations 
management (OM) and logistics journals represent the majority of publications. They 
include publications such as Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, Production and 
Operations Management, Transportation Research Part E, among others. However, 
there are also influential medical/interdisciplinary journals such as the case of Lancet 
and CHEST.
Moreover, our SLR identified the protagonism of the OR/OM journals while discov-
ering that the number of papers on epidemic outbreaks was very limited. In the same 
light, journals dedicated to logistics and SCs were also in small number. Therefore, 
it becomes necessary to bridge this gap by producing more studies on the epidemic 
issues, including the COVID-19.
The top journals with regular papers published on these topics are European Jour-
nal of Operational Research (EJOR), Annals of Operations Research (ANOR), Journal 
of the Operational Research Society (JORS), and Manufacturing and Service Opera-
tions Management (M&SOM). These journals accounted for 34.38% of the publica-
tions. Concerning the different behaviors of these journals over time, it appears that 
Fig. 1   Research protocol to the SLR

1165
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
the EJOR leads in terms of output, while the ANOR makes proof of a steady engage-
ment, with one yearly publication over the last 3 years. It is noteworthy highlighting 
the recent interest for production research, SC and logistics by some dedicated jour-
nals, such as the International Journal of Production Research, the International Jour-
nal of Integrated Supply Management and Transportation Research Part E (with one 
paper in 2020* until March 18).
3.3  Word TreeMap dynamics
Figure 2 displays a Word TreeMap dynamics, based on keywords plus. It means that these 
words were not necessary given by the authors; instead, these were acquired from the titles 
of references from our dataset (32 papers). In addition, the frequency of the keywords 
determines the size of the rectangles, while the colors emphasize the relationship with the 
keyword. The role of word segments such as “epidemic outbreak,” “humanitarian logis-
tics”, “influenza”, “optimization”, “resource allocation” and “supply chain” is quite iden-
tifiable. In the other rectangles (smaller sizes), we have various related words, but also 
emerging topics that are being already highlighted, such as “COVID 19”, “coronavirus”, 
“decentralized logistics systems”, “digital twin”, and “data-driven models.”
Table 2   Articles published by the journal
Sources
Articles
European Journal of Operational Research
4
Annals of Operations Research
3
Journal of the Operational Research Society
2
Manufacturing and Service Operations Management
2
American Journal of Medicine
1
CHEST
1
Computers and Industrial Engineering
1
Computers and Operations Research
1
Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses
1
International Journal of Integrated Supply Management
1
International Journal of Mathematics in Operational Research
1
International Journal of Production Research
1
International Journal of Systems Science: Operations and Logistics
1
Journal of Applied Poultry Research
1
Journal of Emergency Management
1
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management
1
Management Science
1
Networks and Spatial Economics
1
Operations Research
1
PLOS Computational Biology
1
Production and Operations Management
1
Promet - Traffic - Traffico
1
Socio-Economic Planning Sciences
1
The Lancet
1
Transportation Research Part E
1

1166
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Fig. 2   Word dynamics (keywords plus) per year

1167
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Moreover, there is a tendency for Coronavirus and COVID-19 to outperform each other 
over time, but we can also notice the growth of other interesting topics related to “Corona-
virus and COVID-19”, such as “optimisation”, “epidemic outbreak”, humanitarian logis-
tics” and “resource allocation”. In the other rectangles (smaller sizes) we have various 
related words.
Other related emerging topics can be unveiled using words and groups of words such 
as “COVID-19”, “coronavirus”, “decentralized logistics systems”, “digital twin”, and 
“data-driven models”. Taking into account the word dynamics, we can see that “emergency 
response” is a well-explored topic due to its variations (e.g., disaster response, disaster 
management, emergency management, emergency SC management, and emergency logis-
tics). Therefore, with regard to our research questions and objectives, it clearly appears that 
related impact themes as indicated through the words ‘risks’ and ‘resilience’ (the most fre-
quent words) are scarse. Therefore, our study advocates the use of these two words in order 
to see through the literature and investigate more deeply the impact of epidemic outbreaks 
on SCs.
3.4  Multiple correspondence analysis
In Fig. 3, we point out the conceptual structure map by employing a multiple correspond-
ence analysis (MCA) method. The MCA is a data reduction technique that builds a map 
of the scientific conceptual structure (Aria and Cuccurullo 2017). Thus, in summary, the 
MCA plots a robust two-dimensional graphical map while taking into account the similari-
ties of the distribution of the words used in its representation (Aria and Cuccurullo 2017; 
Cuccurullo et al. 2016). The more such words are similar and closer in the map, the better 
they will be represented.
In this regard, a concentration of optimization techniques is essential to provide an 
adequate response to epidemic outbreaks (e.g., optimization, Markov decision processes, 
Fig. 3   Conceptual structure map

1168
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
stochastic programming, health care operations, mixed integer and non-linear program-
ming, explicit optimization). Another interesting concentration is related to the susceptible 
exposed infectious removed (SEIR) model, epidemic diffusion rule, genetic algorithm, and 
latent period.
Also, the efforts related to epidemic response are represented by a significant concentra-
tion of “pandemic response management”, “emergency OSCM”, “public health emergen-
cies”, “healthcare management”, “resource allocation”, and “vaccine distribution”, inter 
alia. Besides, there are other interesting concentrations related to “network modeling”, 
“transportation”, “demand forecast”, “data-driven models”, and “options contract”. Finally, 
blue words represent an emerging, challenging and unexplored topic (Ivanov 2020a, b) 
related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In this landscape, important words appear in this con-
centration, like “resilience”, “digital twin”, “risk management”, and “pandemic plan”.
3.5  Categorization of epidemic and outbreaks in SCM
To synthesize our main findings from the literature review, we employed a content analysis 
technique (Kache and Seuring 2014; Queiroz et al. 2019b; Brandenburg and Rebs 2015) 
that could provide validity, objectivity and reliability through a coding-scheme approach, 
as recommended by previous studies (Queiroz et al. 2019b; Spens and Kovács 2006). The 
categories considered during the analysis of papers were Outbreak/Disease reported, Pur-
pose, Main method/Theoretical approach, and Supply chain/Logistics/Operations implica-
tions. Table 3 highlights the findings from the content analysis.
3.6  Discussion of findings
The categorization of the selected papers by the content analysis unlocked exciting find-
ings. Firstly, we identified that the majority of papers were devoted to the Influenza epi-
demic outbreak (43.75%), followed by papers without any particular focus on a specific 
epidemic/outbreak, but with some insights into epidemic/outbreak control (18.75%). Then, 
Cholera and Ebola held the third and fourth rank (12.5%), followed by COVID-19 (9.38%), 
Malaria, and Smallpox, with one paper dedicated to these epidemics.
Furthermore, the selected papers mostly presented optimization models for resource 
allocations (medicaments and vaccines distribution, vaccines procurement contracts, 
patient allocation, facilities location, etc.). However, some studies approached these epi-
demic outbreaks for other purposes. This is the case of Bogoch et al. (2015), which consid-
ered the impact of Ebola diffusion on international air travelers and on the logistics infra-
structure network that is required to minimize the spread. It is also the case of a paper by 
Ivanov (2020a, b) that addressed the COVID-19 impacts on SCs and how to predict it by 
employing simulation techniques (Ivanov 2020a; Ivanov and Das 2020; Ivanov and Dolgui 
2020b).
Regarding the “Main Method/Theoretical Approach” reported by the papers, it should 
be recalled that most papers were related to optimization models, and therefore, they used 
different mathematical models and approaches. They included mixed integer program-
ming (Liu and Zhang 2016; Büyüktahtakın et  al. 2018), linear programming (Dasaklis 
et al. 2017), game theory (Shamsi et al. 2018; Chick et al. 2008), case study and simulation 
(Ivanov 2020a, b), case study and SIR model (Rachaniotis et al. 2012), case study and sto-
chastic programming/Markov (Parvin et al. 2018), among others. Table 4 shows the distri-
bution of papers by type of epidemic outbreak.

1169
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Table 3   Content analysis categorization
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Rachaniotis et al. (2012)
Influenza
Proposing a deterministic 
scheduling model for resources 
allocation
Simple deterministic SIR model/
Case study
Management of the scarce resources 
considering multiple member’s 
demands is too complicated. A 
deterministic model can support 
the strategies and policies to man-
age limited resources
Liu and Zhang (2016)
Influenza
Development of a logistics model 
to medical resources allocation 
considering different members 
of the SCs
Mixed-integer programming/FPEA 
model/Susceptible-exposed 
infectious-removed (SEIR)/
Numerical example
The authors integrated a time-series 
demand approach model with 
logistics planning considering 
orders, shipping, and resource 
allocation. Thus, it found a signifi-
cant minimization of the forecast 
error, reflecting improvements in 
the SCs
Mamani et al. (2013)
Influenza
Analysis of the vaccine alloca-
tion inefficiency and contractual 
mechanism model proposing 
(vaccine procurement decisions) 
in SCs
Hybrid epidemic model/Game 
theory/Numerical experiments
Imbalance in the integrated and 
coordinated global SCs vac-
cines impacts on the shortfall 
or excess, and thus on the SC 
costs. Therefore, the utilization 
of the coordinated contract could 
generate benefits (e.g., costs and 
shortages reduction)

1170
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Büyüktahtakın et al. (2018)
Ebola
Proposing a logistics epidemic 
model to controlling Ebola epi-
demic, considering the location 
of the resource
Mixed-integer programming (MIP) 
model/Case study/Secondary 
data (WHO)
Introduction and validation of an 
optimized epidemics logistics 
model to resource allocation in the 
SCs, considering the constraints of 
the treatment centers. In addition, 
the model provides useful informa-
tion while taking into considera-
tion the geographical parameters, 
the dynamics of the infected in 
different regions and the impact on 
resources allocation
Majić et al. (2009)
Influenza
Analysis of the airport infrastruc-
ture and logistics procedures for 
the distribution of medicaments
Secondary data analysis (WHO)
The logistics infrastructure plays a 
fundamental role to refrain the epi-
demic, but the infrastructure has 
huge challenges. Besides, rigorous 
quality control is needed to handle 
the medicaments safely
Shamsi et al. (2018)
Epidemic/outbreak control Development of a model based on 
an option contract to enhance 
supply vaccines (procurement) 
and minimize the social costs
SIR epidemic model/Stackelberg 
game model/Non-linear pro-
gramming/Numerical experi-
ments
The option contract model can 
help the suppliers to establish the 
optimal values of the vaccines 
demanded, as well as the buyer’s 
forecasting, thus leading to the 
minimization of procurement and 
social costs
Anparasan and Lejeune (2017)
Cholera
Proposing a novel Haddon Matrix 
to support the response to the 
epidemics
Literature review/Haddon Matrix
A framework that provides useful 
insights into humanitarian logistics 
operations at all stages (pre-event/
response/post-event

1171
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Bogoch et al. (2015)
Ebola
Analysis of the Ebola diffusion by 
international air travelers and the 
airport’s infrastructure role to 
combat it
Secondary data analysis (WHO, 
World Bank, US Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention)
Executing the passengers screen-
ing in the airport of origin seems 
an efficient method; however, the 
logistics infrastructure can be a 
limitation
Anparasan and Lejeune (2018)
Cholera
Development of a data-driven 
model based on data set to sup-
port epidemic control policies 
and emergency health response
Secondary data analysis (WHO, 
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), and Ministry 
of Health and Population of Haiti 
(MSPP))/Integer linear program-
ming
The data-driven analysis enables 
robust SC models for resource 
allocations and emergency 
response, while empowering the 
medical staff in an integrated and 
coordinated chain
Muggy and Heier Stamm (2020) Cholera
Proposing two models for humani-
tarian SCs response, considering 
the distance and congestion to 
individual decisions related to 
facility locations to supplies/
services
Beneficiary decision model/Cen-
tralized planner’s model/Network 
congestion games/Player-facility-
specific congestion weights 
problem (PFSCWP)/Secondary 
data
The authors showed that the 
proposed models could support 
post-disaster response (cholera 
control in this case) by supporting 
the public health SC’s, especially 
in the resource allocation. The 
models showed the importance to 
consider the effects of the indi-
viduals’ behavior in humanitarian 
SCs to pursue the optimality of the 
network

1172
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Parvin et al. (2018)
Malaria
Development of a methodology for 
the distribution of drugs while 
considering the strategic and 
tactical aspects of a three-tiers 
health system
Stochastic programming/Cluster/
Markov decision/Case study
The models showed that efficient 
transportation planning can 
contribute to significantly reduc-
ing costs and shortages. How-
ever, implementation is severely 
impeded by challenges like the 
lack of communication, weak gov-
ernment efforts and engagement, 
and poor logistics infrastructure
Savachkin and Uribe (2012)
Influenza
Proposing a drug distribution 
model by considering dynamic 
strategies (redistribution of the 
resources, considering the pan-
demic behavior)
Simulation/Optimization model
The proposed model can redistribute 
medicaments in a dynamic way, 
taking into account the progress 
of the outbreak. The model also 
considers logistics factors (costs, 
distance, resources availability 
etc.) and the progression of the 
pandemic
Dasaklis et al. (2017)
Smallpox
Proposing a model for responding 
to smallpox through SC emer-
gency, considering a large-scale 
vaccination scenario
Linear programming/Numerical 
experiment
The configuration and operationali-
zation of howemergency network 
response impacts directly on the 
outbreak control, and conse-
quently, in the entire activities 
(social and economics). A model 
was developed, taking into con-
sideration two stages (i. pandemic 
progress; ii. the distribution 
model). The authors point out the 
influence of the resources available 
to control the epidemics

1173
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Bóta et al. (2017)
Epidemic/outbreak control Proposing a network structure 
to vehicle trip considering the 
patterns of the number of pas-
sengers
Simulation/Secondary data/Case 
study/SIR model
Identification of the infectious 
vehicle trip network could sup-
port logistics and SC strategies 
for planning the distribution and 
avoiding risky trips. The authors 
proposed a model that promotes 
the identification of a public sys-
tem that is the most propensity to 
transport passengers contaminated
Liu et al. (2019)
Influenza
Proposing an epidemic logistics 
model for controlling H1N1, 
based on the Büyüktahtakın et al. 
(2018) model
Mixed-integer non-linear program-
ming model (MINLP)/Case 
study
The proposed model found similari-
ties and contrasts with the model 
proposed by Büyüktahtakın et al. 
(2018). The model support deci-
sions about when the isolated and 
unused wards may be open or 
closed
Tao et al. (2018)
Epidemic/outbreak control Development of a vaccination dis-
tribution model, considering an 
intermediate optimal solution
Stochastic-SIR model/Simulation
The logistics resources available 
can determine an intermediate 
solution as the “best”, in view of 
the high constraints of the logistics 
resources

1174
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Ekici et al. (2014)
Influenza
Modeling food distribution plan-
ning to combat the influenza 
pandemic
Agent-based continuous-time 
stochastic model/Mixed integer 
linear programming/Heuristics 
development
The model showed proof of robust-
ness to support food demand 
planning in the network, facility 
location and resource allocation/
distribution. Also, the authors 
found that voluntary quarantine 
can help several industries to cope 
with capacity issues. For instance, 
food distribution facilities and SCs 
could operate by almost half of 
their capacity
Sun et al. (2014)
Influenza
Development of optimization 
models for patient and resources 
allocation
Optimization models/Case study
The proposed models can help the 
logistics and SC health-care sys-
tems to plan and manage resources 
efficiently. Besides, the models 
can help decision-makers to avoid 
resources shortage
Enayati and Özaltın (2020)
Influenza
Proposing a vaccine distribution 
model considering the minimiza-
tion of the vaccines necessary to 
contain the pandemic and equity 
criteria to coverage subgroups
Mathematical programming 
model/Exact discretization with 
multiparametric disaggregation 
method
The proposed model can support 
public health decision-makers con-
cerning vaccine storage logistics 
to control outbreaks. The policies 
to vaccine allocation reflect 
directly in the resource allocation 
efficiency. Moreover, policies for 
an equitable vaccination coverage 
can positively influence outbreak 
elimination

1175
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Cruz et al. (2015)
Influenza
Reporting the logistics challenges 
in the public health response, 
while considering international 
cooperation and support to 
response to the outbreak
Case study
The logistics activities play an 
essential role in providing an 
effective intervention in epidemic/
outbreaks control. While logistics 
can fundamentally contribute to 
response quality, international 
logistics cooperation plays an 
essential role in the response 
process
Anparasan and Lejeune (2019)
Cholera
Proposing a model for epidemic 
response, considering the 
resources constraints (size, 
number, location of the facilities, 
staff, transportation, etc.)
Secondary data (Ministry of 
Health and Population of Haiti, 
WHO, Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention)/Algorithm/
Integer linear programming/
Framework
The proposed model is capable of 
capturing the particularities of the 
country’s limited supply resources 
and to better help decision-makers 
to configure resource allocation to 
respond effectively to an epidemic. 
The model can also establish sev-
eral types of resources (number of 
facility location, staff, transporta-
tion, patients to treatment, etc.)
Long et al. (2018)
Ebola
Development of an optimized 
model that operates at two levels: 
i) assign treatment units in 
regions; ii) compare four strate-
gies to programming the units 
the affected locals
Heuristic/Myopic linear program-
ming/Estimation–optimization/
Approximate dynamic program-
ming algorithm
Resource optimization contributes 
directly to epidemic control and 
thus to saving more lives. The 
authors highlight a resource 
allocation strategy that relies on 
anticipating future cases, known 
as forward-looking. Based on data, 
this strategy can render resource 
allocation dynamically attractive

1176
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Chick et al. (2008)
Influenza
Proposing an optimized model for 
SC vaccines dynamics, consider-
ing the coordination between 
contractual actors
Game theory/Optimization
The lack of coordination between 
the actors (government and 
manufacturers) can undermine 
the entire system and bring about 
vaccines shortfalls. According 
to the authors, while the global 
social optimum is hard to achieve, 
a contract based on cost-sharing 
between the parties (government 
and manufacturers) can impulse an 
optimum social accomplishment
Einav et al. (2014)
Epidemic/outbreak control Development of insights to support 
efficient response to pandemic 
and disasters
Panel
The OSCM capabilities are critical 
for an effective care response. 
Resource distribution strategies 
are fundamental for an adequate 
response due as the demand seems 
higher than the available capacity. 
Besides, distance may appear as a 
barrier to logistics
Orenstein and Schaffner (2008)
Influenza
Presentation of the lessons learned 
about the Influenza logistics and 
SC management, considering the 
vaccines production, distribution, 
and management
Conceptual
The logistics and SCs are decisive in 
supporting public health humani-
zation. However, these activities 
need full ownership by policymak-
ers to avoid shortages

1177
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Wang et al. (2009)
Epidemic/outbreak control Development of an emergency 
model for supply networks that 
takes into account the latent 
period influence in the demand 
during the epidemic
Multi-objective stochastic pro-
gramming model/SEIR epidemic 
diffusion model/Optimization/
Genetic algorithm/Monte Carlo 
simulation/Numerical example
To develop optimal solutions for the 
emergency medicine distribu-
tion, latent periods exert a huge 
constraint, causing delays and 
amplifying the uncertainty. One 
strategy to be considered is the 
allocation of the materials by 
employing collaboration between 
areas, in an integrated way
Hessel (2009)
Influenza
Discussion for vaccines SC plan-
ning, production and distribution, 
with related challenges
Conceptual
The fight against the pandemic 
requires a high-level involvement 
of policymakers in the entire SCs 
to plan and develop the required 
logistics capabilities at all stages. 
Thus, all members of the OSCM 
should operate in an integrated 
model with the governments
Paul and Venkateswaran (2020)
Epidemic/outbreak control Proposing policies for mitigating 
the effects of the epidemic while 
considering deep uncertainty
Exploratory modelling and 
analysis (EMA) methodology/
Machine learning/Scenario dis-
covery/Supply shortage model
The SC plays a fundamental role in 
the epidemic’s control by ensuring 
an adequate flow of medicaments 
and minimizing shortages. In this 
regard, the period covered by the 
epidemic can be influenced by the 
SC activities, especially in relation 
to resources shortages

1178
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Khokhar et al. (2015)
Influenza
Analysis of the SC distribution of 
the chicken meat and its influ-
ence on the spreading of H7N9
Secondary data (China Animal 
Industry Yearbook/China’s 
Center for Disease Control 
and Prevention/China National 
Health and Family Planning 
Commission)
The suppliers and retailers need to 
work in a more integrated model. 
Cutting-edge technology systems 
can cope with this challenge. For 
instance, all SC members (includ-
ing governments) can put in more 
traceability measures
Ivanov (2020a)
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Prediction of the impacts of epi-
demic outbreak on SCs
Case study/Simulation
The epidemic outbreaks exert a 
destructive effect on SCs. The 
development of strategies to pre-
dict such impacts in different time 
horizons can support the perfor-
mance of the SC and mitigate any 
adverse effects. A simulation is a 
powerful approach as it enables us 
to compare wrong and successful 
elements in the SC response plan
Ivanov and Dolgui (2020b)
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Discussion and analysis of the 
intertwined supply network, 
considering survivability and 
resilience in the COVID-19 
context
Conceptual/Game-theoretical 
model
The COVID-19 outbreak is forcing 
supply networks operate with 
different and robust resilience 
approaches. The paper indicates 
that intertwined supply networks 
(highly interconnected and resil-
ient networks) need to be viable to 
guarantee long-term survivability 
effects, especially in exceptional 
events

1179
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
References
Outbreak/disease reported
Purpose
Main method/Theoretical approach
Supply chain/Logistics/Operations 
implications
Ivanov and Das (2020)
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Investigation of the SC resilience 
in a COVID-19 disruption 
scenario
Simulation
The full range of COVID-19 disrup-
tions in SCs remains unknown. 
In this paper, the auhtors provide 
valuable and unique insights to 
better mitigate risks related to the 
COVID-19 and reinforce resilience 
to the pandemic. They further 
highlight the value of creating 
flexible, redundant and real-time 
SCs in order to dynamically realo-
cate demand and supply

1180
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Lastly, concerning the “Supply chain/Logistics/Operations implications”, several inter-
esting points were raised. For example, resource management is a great preoccupation 
(Rachaniotis et al. 2012; Savachkin and Uribe 2012; Long et al. 2018). In this regard, it 
should be noted that logistics and SCs play an essential role in coordinating and integrating 
the multiple members’ activities (Mamani et al. 2013), including manufacturers, transpor-
tation, hospitals, government, etc. Moreover, in a recent study, Paul and Venkateswaran 
(2020) emphasized the impact of the SC in order to control epidemic outbreaks. The 
authors pointed out that the SCs should provide an adequate flow of medicaments and 
other products to avoid materials shortage. Thus, SCs can influence the duration of an epi-
demic outbreak.
Recent studies by Govindan et al. (2020) and Ivanov (2020a) also presented the devast-
ing impact of the COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2 on global SCs. This does not mean that inter-
esting and new findings on the impact of COVID-19 on SCs have not been obtained. For 
instance, SCM decision-makers are henceforth well equipped to make use of the available 
technologies and relevant techniques (including simulation) to predict impacts on their 
organizations/firms’ SCs. Besides, analytics techniques to support decision-making in 
logistics operations (Griffith et al. 2019; Dubey et al. 2019b), and social media analytics 
to support emergency operations decisions (Fosso Wamba et al. 2019), play an essential 
role in order to minimize the epidemic impacts on SCs. Moreover, it is well demonstrated 
that the SC performance response relies on the scale and timing of the disruption spreading 
and not on the upstream disruption duration. Ivanov (2020a) went on identifying a positive 
effect of disruptions on SCs responses (upstream and downstream sides) to an epidemic, 
when the disruption is simultaneous.
4  Research agenda for operations and supply chain management 
at the times of COVID‑19 pandemic
This section deals with the main theoretical and managerial implications of our study with 
the objective to tease out a research agenda for OSCM at the times of COVID-19 pan-
demic. To start, Table 5 synthesizes open research questions following the identified litera-
ture gaps and makes important suggestions to scholars and practitioners.
We organized the literature gaps and open questions in three clusters, namely: the mod-
eling cluster, the organizational cluster, and the technology cluster. The modeling cluster 
covers optimization, simulation or other OR methods. In the organizational cluster, we 
Table 4   Analysis of papers by a 
content analysis approach
Epidemic/outbreak reported
Number of 
papers
Percentage
Influenza
14
43.75
Epidemic/outbreak control
6
18.75
Cholera
4
12.50
Ebola
3
9.38
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
3
9.38
Malaria
1
3.13
Smallpox
1
3.13
Total
32
100.00

1181
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Table 5   Proposed research agenda for investigating the effects of epidemic outbreaks on SCs
Literature gap
Open research questions (ORQ) 
and opportunities
Related literature
Cluster
Examples of OR/OM/miscellaneous 
approaches to support the ORQ
Models for sustainable operations 
in vulnerable SCs due to the 
epidemic outbreak. Development 
of sustainable SCs and produc-
tion systems
How can sustainable operations 
models assist vulnerable SCs, 
especially in the developing 
economies, to minimize the 
supply effects (e.g., shortages, 
abusive prices)?
Sarkis (2012), Sarkis et al. (2020) 
and de Camargo et al. (2019)
Modeling
Mixed-integer linear programming
Game theory
Dynamic capabilities
Circular economy (CE) to mitigate 
the insufficient supply and pro-
duction capacities
How could CE contribute to 
minimizing the effects of the 
production and supply shortages 
in global SCs?
Chiappetta Jabbour et al. (2020) 
and Sarkis et al. (2020)
Modeling
Complexity theory
Systems dynamics
New optimization models for 
resource allocations in dynami-
cally changing environments 
with consideration of smart cities
How can smart cities promote new 
resource allocation models to 
support the dynamic allocation 
in epidemic epicenters?
Israilidis et al. (2019) and Qi and 
Shen (2018)
Modeling
Robust optimization
Stochastic programming
Optimized response of humanitar-
ian operations
How can the global SCs prepare 
and maintain a flexible humani-
tarian operation response plan to 
a pandemic crisis anywhere in 
the world?
Baidya and Bera (2019), Çankaya 
et al. (2019), Fosso Wamba 
(2020), Rodríguez-Espíndola 
et al. (2018) and Turrini et al. 
(2019)
Modeling
Systems dynamics
Mixed-integer linear programming
Sociotechnical systems
Home care drones to minimize 
the transportation lead-time in 
essential medical supplies
How can drones be used to provide 
a prompt response in the supply 
network (distribution cent-
ers, hospitals, home) so as to 
transport medical samples and 
medicaments to quarantined 
people?
Pulver and Wei (2018) and The 
Ebola Gbalo Research Group 
(2019)
Modeling
Bayesian networks
Markov chains
Petri nets
Dynamic capabilities
New and severe disruption effects 
on SCs
What are the worst and most 
severe disruption effects on 
SCs that lead to a ripple effect 
amplification?
Ivanov (2019a, 2019b, 2020a) and 
Pavlov et al. (2019b)
Modeling/organizational
Agent-based simulation
Discrete-event simulation
Organizational information process-
ing theory

1182
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Table 5   (continued)
Literature gap
Open research questions (ORQ) 
and opportunities
Related literature
Cluster
Examples of OR/OM/miscellaneous 
approaches to support the ORQ
Co-benefits generated from the 
harmful effects of the epidemic 
outbreaks in SCs
What co-benefits can be brought 
from negatively impacted SCs 
within the society and within 
organizations? For instance, 
water pollution minimization, 
CO2 emissions, etc.
Cao et al. (2019) and Giordano 
et al. (2020)
Organizational
Agent-based simulation
Discrete-event simulation
Knowledge-based systems
Cannibalization of global SCs 
(e.g., countries fighting for medi-
cal supplies)
How does the cannibalization of 
global SCs create an impact in 
the short and long-term perspec-
tives? What is the role of resil-
ience in minimizing the impact 
of cannibalization?
Euronews (2020), NZ Herald 
(2020), The Wall Street Journal 
(2020) and Vatican News (2020)
Organizational
Systems dynamics
Discrete-event simulation
Contingency theory
Relocalization of manufactur-
ing firms and the impact on 
outsourcing strategies
What are the effects of relocating 
manufacturing firms (e.g., com-
ing back to or leaving China)?
Forbes (2020a) and United Nations 
Conference on Trade and Devel-
opment—UNCTAD (2020)
Organizational
Discrete-event simulation
Systems dynamics
Dynamic programming
Resource-based view
Investigation of the blockchain’s 
contribution in the minimiza-
tion of the impacts of epidemic 
outbreaks on SCs
How can blockchain technologies 
support a responsive traceability 
system to avoid or mitigate the 
effects of shortages on SCs?
Dubey et al. (2020) and Wamba 
and Queiroz (2020)
Technology
Complexity theory
Reliability theory
Dynamic capabilities
Review of artificial intelligence 
(AI) techniques to support SC 
models in epidemic contexts
How can AI techniques contribute 
to developing responsive SC 
models in epidemics scenarios?
Fragapane et al. (2020), Bag et al. 
(2020) and Dwivedi et al. (2019)
Technology
Systems dynamics
Discrete-event simulation
Organizational resilience
3D printing to replace the missing 
suppliers
What are the main applications 
of 3D printing to replace urgent 
missing supplies during an epi-
demic outbreak? e.g., Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE), 
mechanical ventilators to combat 
COVID-19, among others
Beltagui et al. (2020) and Tatham 
et al. (2015)
Technology
Complexity theory
Systems dynamics
Diffusion of innovation theory

1183
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
consider different forms of SC organisation, including intertwined supply networks (Ivanov 
and Dolgui 2020b), to improve collaboration with SCs and their interrelation with the 
society, etc. For example, the co-benefits generated by epidemic outbreaks are practically 
unknown, along with the cannibalization of global SCs and the relocalization of manufac-
turing firms. The technology cluster is dedicated to digital technologies, additive manufac-
turing, and data analytics. For instance, it addresses the question of how to use disruptive 
technologies to manage SC disruptions during epidemic crises.
Besides, in the last column of Table 5, we highlighted some suggested and adher-
ent theories of operations (OR/OM) and miscellaneous theories to support the exami-
nation of the challenging open research questions (ORQ). In this vein, we identified 
from our literature analysis suitable OR/OM approaches such as network and com-
plexity theories (e.g., Bayesian networks, complexity theory, reliability theory, petri 
nets, and Markov chains), mathematical optimization (e.g., mixed-integer linear pro-
gramming, stochastic programming, metaheuristics, robust optimization, and dynamic 
programming), and simulation (e.g., agent-based simulation, discrete-event simulation, 
and systems dynamics). Moreover, these approaches could be integrated with empiri-
cal theories in exploring operations such as dynamic capabilities, absorptive capacity, 
organizational resilience, sociotechnical systems, organizational information process-
ing  theory, knowledge-based systems, contingency theory, resource-based view, and 
diffusion of innovation theory.
In that context, these theories could bring valuable support in exploring the impact 
of epidemic outbreaks on SCs. For instance, the mathematical optimization theories 
can be used develop optimized plan and schedules to avoid shortages, and also deal 
with ramp-up demands (e.g., toilet paper manufacturers ramping up production due to 
COVID-19). Simulation techniques allow to develop robust resilience plans, consider-
ing new and severe disruptions (e.g., agent-based simulation allows to examines opera-
tions behaviours taking into account simultaneous interactions of multiple agents, dur-
ing and after the COVID-19). Furthermore, due to the complexity of the COVID-19, 
these approaches could be integrated with some network and complexity theories (e.g., 
combining some simulation theory with reliability analysis, decision-makers could 
develop complex scenarios to cope with resource scarcity and simultaneous supply and 
demand substitutions required at each stage of a pandemic).
In Fig. 4, we summarise the results of our analyses as an emerging research agenda 
on OSCM under pandemics and epidemic outbreaks.
The research agenda in Fig.  4 is teased out the Tables  3 and 5. It shows open 
research questions as an extension of our findings during a systematic literature review. 
Now we discuss the individual components presented in Table 5 and Fig. 4 in detail.
4.1  Preparedeness focus
Pre-allocation of resources and emergency distribution planning have been identified 
in our our SLR as the most visible topics with the preparedeness focus whereas opti-
mization methods dominate this area. In this sense, the research opportunities relate 
not only to optimization models, but also to the need to implement more sophisticated 
simulation techniques (Currie et al. 2020). In addition, queuing theory, scheduling and 
forecasting approaches need to be explored in pandemic contexts. Our study sheds 
more light on the importance of managing and allocating resources in an adequate 

1184
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
way (Pavlov et al. 2019a). This means that decision-makers and policy-makers should 
improve their organizations’ SC resilience and response capacity by employing not 
only optimization techniques but also simulations (Paul et  al. 2019). First, an in-
depth understanding of status quo in SC responsiveness and resilience can be achieved 
through simulations (Currie et al. 2020; Ivanov 2020a; Ivanov and Das 2020). Second, 
simulation is essential to predict massive disruption scenarios and the required perfor-
mance capacities.
4.2  Digital focus
Questions related to cutting-edge technologies like blockchain and AI techniques, for 
improved response traceability, are fundamental to provide robust, resilient SC models. On 
the other hand, there is an urgent need to explore the 3D printing/additive manufactur-
ing to efficient and timely deployment of medical equipment. Moreover, the first analy-
ses of COVID-19 pandemic impacts on SCs and production systems suggest that Industry 
4.0 and digital manufacturing can play a critical role for SC resilience and ripple effect 
control (Ivanov and Dolgui 2019; Hosseini et al. 2019). In terms of visibility and digital 
control, the firms that are successful in digital manufacturing networks seem to be better 
positioned in crisis times and in the coordination of future recovery processes (Choi et al. 
2020; Dubey et al. 2019a; Ivanov et al. 2019; Panetto et al. 2019; Ivanov 2020a, b; Ivanov 
and Dolgui 2020a, b; Ivanov and Das 2020; Ni 2020).
Fig. 4   Emerging research agenda on OSCM under pandemics and epidemic outbreaks

1185
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
4.3  Adaptation and recovery focus
We found several tensions related to SC responses to past disruptions caused by epi-
demic outbreaks. From the theoretical perspective, we found that the OSCM litera-
ture has addressed the past disruptions caused by the epidemic outbreaks by employ-
ing mainly optimization approaches, especially in relation to resources allocation 
(Büyüktahtakın et al. 2018; Liu and Zhang 2016; Parvin et al. 2018; Rachaniotis et al. 
2012). Managers and practitioners need to continuously monitor SCs, as no stage of 
epidemics’ impacts should be left unturned before any recovery plan is properly imple-
mented and managed. To this end, one of the main lessons from the extant literature 
is that the OSCM field exerts a great influence on the duration of epidemics (Paul and 
Venkateswaran 2020). Therefore, the OSCM should operate from the resilience per-
spective (Dubey et al. 2019c; Dolgui et al. 2020), avoiding medicament and equipment 
shortages, providing a dynamic and responsive operation model at the different stages of 
the outbreak. In addition, recent studies on the disruptions of SCs provoked by epidemic 
outbreaks showed that simulation is an important technique to predict and develop plans 
to respond to such impacts on OSCM (Currie et al. 2020; Ivanov 2020a; Ivanov and Das 
2020; Ivanov and Dolgui 2020b).
4.4  Ripple effect focus
Our next finding is that epidemic outbreaks could significantly impact the SCs trigger-
ing a highly and unexplored ripple effect (Ivanov 2020a). The main important theoreti-
cal implication resides in reinforcing the need to deepen the understanding of the simul-
taneous deployment of the ripple effects and epidemic outbreaks on SCs (Ivanov and 
Das 2020; Ivanov and Dolgui 2020b). The ripple effect is a very strong stressor to SCs 
and their ongoing collapses amid pandemic coming from the disruption propagations 
through the networks. Adversely, the situation is stimulated by simultaneous disruptions 
and uncertainties in demand and supply. The existing knowledge in modelling the SC 
ripple effect (Dolgui et al. 2018) is multi-faceted and deserves to be analysed for the 
unique set of factors shaping SC adaptations during and after a global pandemic.
4.5  Sustainability focus
The sustainability focus builds around consideration of SC ecosystems and viability. 
An SC can be considered viable if it is able to maintain itself and an ecosystem balance 
(i.e., achieve homeostasis) (Ivanov and Dolgui 2020b). Sarkis et al. (2020) point to the 
potentials of the circular economy to ensure long-term SC survivability. Moreover, there 
are multiple feedback cycles in the SC ecosystems, including both positive and negative 
feedbacks. As pointed in Ivanov (2020b), the interactions of the SC and nature are con-
cerned with a positive cycle of using natural resources and a negative cycle of emissions 
as potential contributors to climate change. The interaction with society results in posi-
tive feedbacks such as technological innovations and workforce development although 
negative feedbacks in terms of possible labor strikes (disruptions at SC resilience level) 
or global pandemics (disruptions at SC survivability level) also exist. In this vein, the 

1186
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
analysis can be brought to the levels of intertwined supply networks (ISN), i.e., “the 
entirety of interconnected supply chains which, in their integrity secure the provision of 
society and markets with goods and services” (Ivanov and Dolgui 2020b). Finally, the 
issues of humanitarian logistics and SCs build a central perspective in the sustainability 
focus (Besiou and van Wassenhove 2020; Dubey et al. 2020; Fosso Wamba 2020). From 
this perspective, additional research is essential to address concerns of process improve-
ment in humanitarian operations (Larson and Foropon 2018).
4.6  A discussion note on SC resilience at the pandemic times
Based on our findings, we propose a classification of relevant aspects of SC resilience, in 
view of the particularities of some epidemic outbreaks and global pandemics. The results 
of our analysis show that the traditional SC risk and resilience understanding (Tang 2006; 
Govindan et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019; Dolgui et al. 2018; Ivanov et al. 2018; DuHadway 
et al. 2019) is restrictive in tackling long-term, global pandemic disruptions. Therefore, we 
call for new approaches (Ivanov 2020a; Ivanov and Das 2020; Ivanov and Dolgui 2020b) 
or for the extension of the existing ones. Based on the categorization proposed by Ivanov 
and Dolgui (2019), we therefore propose to categorize the SC resilience actions in the con-
text of pandemic disruptions, using four main categories, namely: systems, process, con-
trol, and recovery, as reported in Table 6.
A set of critical components of SC resilience can be selected for each category. Besides, 
it should be noted that all the categories coming into play in the epidemic outbreak are 
interralated and correlated (e.g., preparedness, response, recovery). As such, faced with 
important disruptions caused by epidemics, SCs need to reinforce their resilience, includ-
ing throught increased SC viability (Ivanov and Dolgui 2020b).
The available systems are considered a critical aspect of resilience performance by the 
literature (Aven 2017; Ivanov and Dolgui 2019). They encompass physical and digital 
components when it comes to SCs (Queiroz et al. 2019a), and support the various interac-
tions of the epidemic outbreak.
The process category is focused on the interplay between flexibility and product man-
agement (Dolgui and Proth 2010; Ivanov and Dolgui 2019), as acknowledged by the rel-
evant literature. This category calls for a detailed network for the flow of products while 
avoiding shortages. One efficient strategy for coping with these is related to the process 
redundancy (Ivanov and Dolgui 2019).
The control theory is a well-established conceptualization scheme that has been suc-
cessfully used in the area of SC disruption and resilience (Ivanov et al. 2016, 2017; Spie-
gler et al. 2016). Severe epidemic outbreaks, including the COVID-19, fall in this category 
Table 6   Categorization for SC resilience to epidemic outbreaks
Category
Components
Systems
Structures, resources, capacities, interactions (responses, coordination)
Process
Distribution, transportation, procurement, production, resources allocation, flexibility
Control
Inventory control, sourcing control, manufacturing control, resilience as KPI in optimization 
models
Recovery
Manufacturing production, human labor, transportation network, suppliers, production flex-
ibility

1187
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
and are amplified, more than ever, by the complexities of the system’s dynamics. Conse-
quently, new control policies to inventory, sourcing and manufacturing, coupled with the 
resilience of the KPI’s in optimization models, are required.
The recovery stage plays a fundamental role in SC resilience (Ivanov and Dolgui 2019; 
Elluru et al. 2019). It includes different policies for network reconfiguration (Ivanov et al. 
2016), with the engagement and interaction of internal and external resources (e.g., manu-
facturing production, human labor, transportation network, suppliers, and production flex-
ibility). It should be noted that because of shortages (human labor, products) and restric-
tions on the transportation network (World Economic Forum—WEF 2020a), recovering 
from disruptions caused by the pandemic vary according to regional policies and may face 
some delays. The recovery process could be accelerated by relying on alternative sources, 
along with the adoption of production flexibility strategies (World Economic Forum—
WEF 2020a). For instance, by streamlining their production systems, manufacturing firms 
could produce more medical supplies to shorten the impacts of epidemics on SCs (World 
Economic Forum—WEF 2020a).
5  Conclusion
The coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak shows that pandemics and epidemics can seriously 
wreak havoc on supply chains (SC) around the globe. In this study, we presented a system-
atic analysis of the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on SCs guided by a structured literature 
review that collated a unique set of publications on epidemic outbreak impacts on SCs. 
Utilizing the outcomes of our analysis, we tease out a series of open research questions that 
would not be observed otherwise.
In terms of findings and contributions, this study showed that the interplay between 
SCs and epidemic outbreaks has so far traditionally focused on resource allocation prob-
lems and supply medicals distribution, using optimization approaches and epidemic mod-
els (Büyüktahtakın et al. 2018; Mamani et al. 2013; Rachaniotis et al. 2012). It has also 
revealed that such an interplay has been dominated by the influenza epidemic, though other 
relevant epidemic outbreaks are being reported in the SC context.
In this respect, the COVID-19 pandemic is already devastating global SCs. It should be 
recalled that investigating the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on SCs is a new but robust 
research stream (Ivanov 2020a). This study ended up providing an insightful and challeng-
ing research agenda to scholars and practitioners interested in exploring more deeply the 
effects of epidemic outbreaks on SCs. In this vein, we identified robust literature gaps and 
open question opportunities, which we classified in three clusters (modeling, technology, 
and organizational).
Most centrally, we proposed a framework of OSCM at the times of COVID-19 pan-
demic that spans six perspectives, i.e., adaptation, digitalization, preparedness, recovery, 
ripple effect, and sustainability. Despite the development of novel classifications and cate-
gorizations as well as articulation of novel theoretical tensions, our study harbors a number 
of limitations. The query used to search the keywords on the databases could be a barrier in 
exploring other SC-related themes. In the future, additional studies could adopt and extend 
our protocol for much better results. In addition, this work has been limited by the scarcity 
of research about the effects of epidemic outbreaks on SCs. Only 32 documents were found 
to fully meet our research protocol. Furthermore, as the COVID-19 effects on SCs are 
still going on and look increasingly devastating, there is not much room for comparative 

1188
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
analysis. Considering such limitations, especially in the literature gap related to the effects 
of epidemic outbreaks on SCs, we have proposed research agenda for future studies.
In future, one promising research avenue is to frame the analyses of SC behaviors during 
and after the pandemic in the vein of viability. Viability nicely integrates resilience, adap-
tation, and sustainability views the importance of which in the analysis of SCs under pan-
demic conditions has been noted and reported (Ivanov 2020b; Ivanov and Dolgui 2020b; 
Sarkis et al. 2020). Another interesting research avenue is to enrich the OSCM methodical 
variety by the methods from other disciplines; e.g., to investigate the application of SEIR 
and epidemic diffusion models to the analysis of SC ripple effect or to study the appli-
cations of ecological modelling to SC viability. These and other directions open new, at 
times unforeseen research avenues where the OSCM can make substantial contributions to 
theory and practice in order to help firms to remain impactful and relevant during and after 
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Acknowledgements  Open Access funding provided by Projekt DEAL. The authors thank Associate Editor 
and two anonymous reviewers for their invaluable comments which helped to improve this paper immensely.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat​iveco​mmons​.org/licen​ses/by/4.0/.
References
Aldrighetti, R., Zennaro, I., Battini, D., & Finco, S. (2019). Healthcare supply chain simulation with disrup-
tion considerations: A case study from Northern Italy. Global Journal of Flexible Systems Manage-
ment, 20, 81–102. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s4017​1-019-00223​-8.
Amiri-Aref, M., Farahani, R. Z., Hewitt, M., & Klibi, W. (2019). Equitable location of facilities in a region 
with probabilistic barriers to travel. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation 
Review, 127, 66–85.
Anparasan, A. A., & Lejeune, M. (2017). Analyzing the response to epidemics: Concept of evidence-based 
Haddon matrix. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 7(3), 266–283. 
https​://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSC​M-06-2017-0023.
Anparasan, A. A., & Lejeune, M. (2019). Resource deployment and donation allocation for epidemic out-
breaks. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 9–32. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-016-2392-0.
Anparasan, A. A., & Lejeune, M. A. (2018). Data laboratory for supply chain response models during epidemic 
outbreaks. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1–2), 53–64. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-017-2462-y.
Aria, M., & Cuccurullo, C. (2017). bibliometrix : An R-tool for comprehensive science mapping analysis. 
Journal of Informetrics, 11(4), 959–975. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2017.08.007.
Aven, T. (2017). How some types of risk assessments can support resilience analysis and management. Reli-
ability Engineering and System Safety, 167, 536–543. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2017.07.005.
Bag, S., Wood, L. C., Mangla, S. K., & Luthra, S. (2020). Procurement 4.0 and its implications on business 
process performance in a circular economy. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 152, 104502. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.resco​nrec.2019.10450​2.
Baidya, A., & Bera, U. K. (2019). New model for addressing supply chain and transport safety for disas-
ter relief operations. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 33–69. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​
9-018-2765-7.
Banomyong, R., Varadejsatitwong, P., & Oloruntoba, R. (2019). A systematic review of humanitarian 
operations, humanitarian logistics and humanitarian supply chain performance literature 2005–2016. 
Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 71–86. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-017-2549-5.

1189
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Beltagui, A., Kunz, N., & Gold, S. (2020). The role of 3D printing and open design on adoption of socially 
sustainable supply chain innovation. International Journal of Production Economics, 221, 107462. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.07.035.
Bernardet, U., Fdili Alaoui, S., Studd, K., Bradley, K., Pasquier, P., & Schiphorst, T. (2019). Assessing 
the reliability of the Laban movement analysis system. PLoS ONE, 14(6), e0218179. https​://doi.
org/10.1371/journ​al.pone.02181​79.
Besiou, M., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2020). Humanitarian operations: A world of opportunity for relevant 
and impactful research. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 22(1), 135–145.
Boccaletti, S., Ditto, W., Mindlin, G., & Atangana, A. (2020). Modeling and forecasting of epidemic 
spreading: The case of Covid-19 and beyond. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 135, 109794. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chaos​.2020.10979​4.
Bode, C., Wagner, S. M., Petersen, K. J., & Ellram, L. M. (2011). Understanding responses to supply chain 
disruptions: Insights from information processing and resource dependence perspectives. Academy of 
Management Journal, 54(4), 833–856.
Bogoch, I. I., Creatore, M. I., Cetron, M. S., Brownstein, J. S., Pesik, N., Miniota, J., et al. (2015). Assessment 
of the potential for international dissemination of Ebola virus via commercial air travel during the 2014 
west African outbreak. The Lancet, 385(9962), 29–35. https​://doi.org/10.1016/S0140​-6736(14)61828​-6.
Bóta, A., Gardner, L. M., & Khani, A. (2017). Identifying critical components of a public transit system for 
outbreak control. Networks and Spatial Economics, 17(4), 1137–1159. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1106​
7-017-9361-2.
Brandenburg, M., & Rebs, T. (2015). Sustainable supply chain management: A modelling perspective. 
Annals of Operations Research, 229(1), 213–252. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-015-1853-1.
Business Insider. (2020). The coronavirus outbreak is disrupting supply chains around the world—Here’s 
how companies can adjust and prepare. Retrieved March 30, 2020, from https​://www.busin​essin​sider​
.com/covid​-19-disru​pting​-globa​l-suppl​y-chain​s-how-compa​nies-can-react​-2020-3.
Büyüktahtakın, E., des-Bordes, E., & Kıbış, E. Y. (2018). A new epidemics–logistics model: Insights into 
controlling the Ebola virus disease in West Africa. European Journal of Operational Research, 
265(3), 1046–1063. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.08.037.
Çankaya, E., Ekici, A., & Özener, O. Ö. (2019). Humanitarian relief supplies distribution: An applica-
tion of inventory routing problem. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 119–141. https​://doi.
org/10.1007/s1047​9-018-2781-7.
Cao, C., Cui, X. Q., Cai, W., Wang, C., Xing, L., Zhang, N., et al. (2019). Incorporating health co-benefits 
into regional carbon emission reduction policy making: A case study of China’s power sector. Applied 
Energy, 253, 113498. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.apene​rgy.2019.11349​8.
Chen, H. Y., Das, A., & Ivanov, D. (2019). Building resilience and managing post-disruption supply chain 
recovery: Lessons from the information and communication technology industry. International Jour-
nal of Information Management, 49, 330–342. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinf​omgt.2019.06.002.
Chew, D. S. H., Choi, K. P., Heidner, H., & Leung, M. Y. (2004). Palindromes in SARS and other corona-
viruses. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 16(4), 331–340. https​://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.1040.0087.
Chiappetta Jabbour, C. J., Seuring, S., de Lopes de Sousa Jabbour, A. B., Jugend, D., De Camargo Fiorini, 
P., Latan, H., et al. (2020). Stakeholders, innovative business models for the circular economy and 
sustainable performance of firms in an emerging economy facing institutional voids. Journal of Envi-
ronmental Management, 264(February), 110416. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvm​an.2020.11041​6.
Chick, S. E., Mamani, H., & Simchi-Levi, D. (2008). Supply chain coordination and influenza vaccination. 
Operations Research, 56(6), 1493–1506. https​://doi.org/10.1287/opre.1080.0527.
Choi, T.-M. (2020). Innovative “Bring-service-near-your-home” operations under corona-virus (COVID-19/
SARS-CoV-2) outbreak: Can logistics become the messiah? Transportation Research Part E: Logis-
tics and Transportation. (Forthcoming).
Choi, T. Y., Rogers, D., & Vakil, B. (2020). Coronavirus is a wake-up call for supply chain management. 
Retrieved March 30, 2020, from https​://hbr.org/2020/03/coron​aviru​s-is-a-wake-up-call-for-suppl​
y-chain​-manag​ement​.
Cochrane Library. (2018). Cochrane database of systematic reviews. Retrieved July 15, 2018, from https​://
www.cochr​aneli​brary​.com/.
Cruz, M. A., Hawk, N. M., Poulet, C., Rovira, J., & Rouse, E. N. (2015). Public health incident manage-
ment: Logistical and operational aspects of the 2009 initial outbreak of H1N1 influenza in Mexico. 
Journal of Emergency Management, 13(1), 71–77. https​://doi.org/10.5055/jem.2015.0219.
Cuccurullo, C., Aria, M., & Sarto, F. (2016). Foundations and trends in performance management. A 
25 years bibliometric analysis in business and public administration domains. Scientometrics, 108(2), 
595–611. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1119​2-016-1948-8.

1190
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Currie, C. S. M., Fowler, J. W., Kotiadis, K., Monks, T., Onggo, B. S., Robertson, D. A., et al. (2020). How 
simulation modelling can help reduce the impact of COVID-19. Journal of Simulation. https​://doi.
org/10.1080/17477​778.2020.17515​70.
Dasaklis, T. K., Pappis, C. P., & Rachaniotis, N. P. (2012). Epidemics control and logistics operations: A 
review. International Journal of Production Economics, 139(2), 393–410. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijpe.2012.05.023.
Dasaklis, T. K., Rachaniotis, N., & Pappis, C. (2017). Emergency supply chain management for controlling 
a smallpox outbreak: The case for regional mass vaccination. International Journal of Systems Sci-
ence: Operations and Logistics, 4(1), 27–40. https​://doi.org/10.1080/23302​674.2015.11263​79.
de Camargo, J. A., Mendonça, P. S. M., de Oliveira, J. H. C., Jabbour, C. J. C., & de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. 
L. (2019). Giving voice to the silent: A framework for understanding stakeholders’ participation in 
socially-oriented initiatives, community-based actions and humanitarian operations projects. Annals 
of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 143–158. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-017-2426-2.
Deloitte. (2020). COVID-19: Managing supply chain risk and disruption. Retrieved March 30, 2020, from 
https​://www2.deloi​tte.com/globa​l/en/pages​/risk/artic​les/covid​-19-manag​ing-suppl​y-chain​-risk-and-
disru​ption​.html.
Demirel, G., MacCarthy, B. L., Ritterskamp, D., Champneys, A., & Gross, T. (2019). Identifying dynami-
cal instabilities in supply networks using generalized modeling. Journal of Operations Management, 
65(2), 133–159.
Demiroz, F., & Haase, T. W. (2019). The concept of resilience: A bibliometric analysis of the emer-
gency and disaster management literature. Local Government Studies, 45(3), 308–327. https​://doi.
org/10.1080/03003​930.2018.15417​96.
Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2018). Ripple effect in the supply chain: An analysis and 
recent literature. International Journal of Production Research, 56(1–2), 414–430. https​://doi.
org/10.1080/00207​543.2017.13876​80.
Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2020). Reconfigurable supply chain: The X-network. Interna-
tional Journal of Production Research. https​://doi.org/10.1080/00207​543.2020.17746​79.
Dolgui, A., & Proth, J. M. (2010). Supply chain engineering: Useful methods and techniques. London: 
Springer.
Dubey, R., Altay, N., & Blome, C. (2019a). Swift trust and commitment: The missing links for humani-
tarian supply chain coordination? Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 159–177. https​://doi.
org/10.1007/s1047​9-017-2676-z.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Bryde, D. J., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Papadopoulos, T. (2020). Blockchain 
technology for enhancing swift-trust, collaboration and resilience within a humanitarian sup-
ply chain setting. International Journal of Production Research. https​://doi.org/10.1080/00207​
543.2020.17228​60.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Fosso Wamba, S., Roubaud, D., & Foropon, C. (2019b). 
Empirical investigation of data analytics capability and organizational flexibility as comple-
ments to supply chain resilience. International Journal of Production Research. https​://doi.
org/10.1080/00207​543.2019.15828​20.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Papadopoulos, T., Blome, C., & Luo, Z. (2019c). Antecedents 
of resilient supply chains: An empirical study. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
66(1), 8–19. https​://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2017.27230​42.
DuHadway, S., Carnovale, S., & Hazen, B. (2019). Understanding risk management for intentional sup-
ply chain disruptions: Risk detection, risk mitigation, and risk recovery. Annals of Operations 
Research, 283(1–2), 179–198. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-017-2452-0.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Hughes, L., Ismagilova, E., Aarts, G., Coombs, C., Crick, T., et al. (2019). Artificial 
intelligence (AI): Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging challenges, opportunities, and 
agenda for research, practice and policy. International Journal of Information Management. https​
://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinf​omgt.2019.08.002.
Einav, S., Hick, J. L., Hanfling, D., Erstad, B. L., Toner, E. S., Branson, R. D., et  al. (2014). Surge 
capacity logistics: Care of the critically ill and injured during pandemics and disasters—Chest 
consensus statement. Chest, 146, e17S–e43S. https​://doi.org/10.1378/chest​.14-0734.
Ekici, A., Keskinocak, P., & Swann, J. L. (2014). Modeling influenza pandemic and planning food 
distribution. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 16(1), 11–27. https​://doi.
org/10.1287/msom.2013.0460.
Elluru, S., Gupta, H., Kaur, H., & Singh, S. P. (2019). Proactive and reactive models for disaster resilient 
supply chain. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 199–224. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​
9-017-2681-2.

1191
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Enayati, S., & Özaltın, O. Y. (2020). Optimal influenza vaccine distribution with equity. European Jour-
nal of Operational Research, 283(2), 714–725. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2019.11.025.
Euronews. (2020). Medical supply shortage spurs global scramble for materials. Retrieved April 5, 
2020, from https​://www.euron​ews.com/2020/04/04/medic​al-suppl​y-short​age-spurs​-globa​l-scram​
ble-for-mater​ials.
Forbes. (2020a). COVID-19 undermines China’s run as the world’s factory, but Beijing has a plan. 
Retrieved April 7, 2020, from https​://www.forbe​s.com/sites​/wades​hepar​d/2020/03/26/covid​-19-
under​mines​-china​s-run-as-the-world​s-facto​ry-but-beiji​ng-has-a-plan/#11f64​0c459​a9.
Forbes. (2020b). The coronavirus’ impact on the global automotive supply chain. Retrieved March 30, 
2020, from https​://www.forbe​s.com/sites​/lauri​eharb​our1/2020/03/13/the-coron​aviru​s-impac​t-on-
the-globa​l-autom​otive​-suppl​y-chain​/#2f607​02144​4e.
Fortune. (2020). 94% of the Fortune 1000 are seeing coronavirus supply chain disruptions: Report. 
Retrieved March 30, 2020, from https​://fortu​ne.com/2020/02/21/fortu​ne-1000-coron​aviru​s-china​
-suppl​y-chain​-impac​t/.
Fosso Wamba, S. (2020). Humanitarian supply chain: A bibliometric analysis and future research direc-
tions. Annals of Operations Research. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-020-03594​-9.
Fosso Wamba, S., Edwards, A., & Akter, S. (2019). Social media adoption and use for improved emer-
gency services operations: the case of the NSW SES. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 
225–245. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-017-2545-9.
Fragapane, G., Ivanov, D., Peron, M., Sgarbossa, F., & Strandhagen, J. O. (2020). Increasing flexibility 
and productivity in Industry 4.0 production networks with autonomous mobile robots and smart 
intralogistics. Annals of Operations Research. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-020-03526​-7.
Ghadge, A., Dani, S., Chester, M., & Kalawsky, R. (2013). A systems thinking approach for model-
ling supply chain risk propagation. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 18(5), 
523–538.
Giordano, R., Pluchinotta, I., Pagano, A., Scrieciu, A., & Nanu, F. (2020). Enhancing nature-based solu-
tions acceptance through stakeholders’ engagement in co-benefits identification and trade-offs 
analysis. Science of the Total Environment. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.scito​tenv.2020.13655​2.
Govindan, K., et al. (2020). A decision support system for demand management in healthcare supply 
chains considering the epidemic outbreaks: A case study of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19). Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review. (Forthcoming).
Govindan, K., Fattahi, M., & Keyvanshokooh, E. (2017). Supply chain network design under uncer-
tainty: A comprehensive review and future research directions. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 263(1), 108–141.
Griffith, D. A., Boehmke, B., Bradley, R. V., Hazen, B. T., & Johnson, A. W. (2019). Embedded ana-
lytics: Improving decision support for humanitarian logistics operations. Annals of Operations 
Research, 283(1–2), 247–265. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-017-2607-z.
Haren, P., & Simchi-Levi, D. (2020). How coronavirus could impact the global supply chain by mid-
March. Retrieved March 30, 2020, from https​://hbr.org/2020/02/how-coron​aviru​s-could​-impac​
t-the-globa​l-suppl​y-chain​-by-mid-march​.
Harvard Business Review. (2020). Coronavirus is proving we need more resilient supply chains. 
Retrieved April 5, 2020, from https​://hbr.org/2020/03/coron​aviru​s-is-provi​ng-that-we-need-more-
resil​ient-suppl​y-chain​s.
Hessel, L. (2009). Pandemic influenza vaccines: Meeting the supply, distribution and deployment 
challenges. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses, 3(4), 165–170. https​://doi.org/10.111
1/j.1750-2659.2009.00085​.x.
Hosseini, S., & Ivanov, D. (2019). Resilience assessment of supply networks with disruption propaga-
tion considerations: A Bayesian network approach. Annals of Operations Research. https​://doi.
org/10.1007/s1047​9-019-03350​-8.
Hosseini, S., Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2019). Review of quantitative methods for supply chain resil-
ience analysis. Transportation Research Part E, 125, 285–307.
Institute for Supply Chain Management—ISM. (2020). Coronavirus impact on supply chain. Retrieved 
March 29, 2020, from https​://weare​ism.org/coron​aviru​s-ism.html.
International Journal of Production Research. (2020a). Special issue: Production of healthcare under 
epidemic outbreaks. Retrieved April 5, 2020, from https​://techj​ourna​ls.wixsi​te.com/techj​ourna​ls/
produ​ction​-healt​hcare​-epide​mic.
International Journal of Production Research. (2020b). Special issue: Viability of supply networks and 
ecosystems—Lessons learned from COVID-19 outbreak. Retrieved April 5, 2020, from https​://
techj​ourna​ls.wixsi​te.com/techj​ourna​ls/viabi​lity-suppl​y-netwo​rks-ecosy​stem.

1192
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Israilidis, J., Odusanya, K., & Mazhar, M. U. (2019). Exploring knowledge management perspectives 
in smart city research: A review and future research agenda. International Journal of Information 
Management. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinf​omgt.2019.07.015.
Ivanov, D. (2019a). ‘A blessing in disguise’ or ‘as if it wasn’t hard enough already’: Reciprocal and 
aggravate vulnerabilities in the supply chain. International Journal of Production Research. https​
://doi.org/10.1080/00207​543.2019.16348​50.
Ivanov, D. (2019b). Disruption tails and revival policies: A simulation analysis of supply chain design 
and production-ordering systems in the recovery and post-disruption periods. Computers and 
Industrial Engineering, 127, 558–570.
Ivanov, D. (2020a). Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on global supply chains: A simulation-
based analysis on the coronavirus outbreak. Transportation Research Part E, 136(March), 101922. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2020.10192​2.
Ivanov, D. (2020b). Viable supply chain model: Integrating agility, resilience and sustainability per-
spectives. Lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Annals of Operations 
Research. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-020-03640​-6.
Ivanov, D., Das, A., & Choi, T. -M. (2018). New flexibility drivers in manufacturing, service, and supply 
chain systems. International Journal of Production Research, 56(10), 3359–3368.
Ivanov, D., & Das, A. (2020). Coronavirus (COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2) and supply chain resilience: A 
research note. International Journal of Integrated Supply Management, 58(10), 2904–2915.
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2019). Low-certainty-need (LCN) supply chains: A new perspective in man-
aging disruption risks and resilience. International Journal of Production Research, 57(15–16), 
5119–5136. https​://doi.org/10.1080/00207​543.2018.15210​25.
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2020a). A digital supply chain twin for managing the disruptions risks and resil-
ience in the era of Industry 4.0. Production Planning and Control. https​://doi.org/10.1080/09537​
287.2020.17684​50.
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2020b). Viability of intertwined supply networks: Extending the supply chain 
resilience angles towards survivability. A position paper motivated by COVID-19 outbreak. Interna-
tional Journal of Production Research, 58(10), 2904–2915.
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2019). The impact of digital technology and Industry 4.0 on the 
ripple effect and supply chain risk analytics. International Journal of Production Research, 57(3), 
829–846. https​://doi.org/10.1080/00207​543.2018.14880​86.
Ivanov, D., Pavlov, A., Dolgui, A., Pavlov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2016). Disruption-driven supply chain (re)-
planning and performance impact assessment with consideration of pro-active and recovery poli-
cies. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 90, 7–24. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tre.2015.12.007.
Ivanov, D., Pavlov, A., Pavlov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2017). Minimization of disruption-related return flows 
in the supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 183, 503–513. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2016.03.012.
Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2019). Simultaneous structural–operational control of supply chain dynamics 
and resilience. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 1191–1210. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​
9-019-03231​-0.
Johns Hopkins University & Medicine. (2020). Coronavirus COVID-19 global cases by the center for systems 
science and engineering (CSSE). Retrieved April 22, 2020, from https​://coron​aviru​s.jhu.edu/map.html.
Journal of Operations Management. (2020). Special issue of the Journal of Operations Management—
The effects of COVID-19 on global supply chains: responsiveness, resilience, and restoration (3Rs). 
Retrieved April 5, 2020, from https​://onlin​elibr​ary.wiley​.com/pb-asset​s/asset​s/18731​317/JOMCF​
P-COVID​-19and​globa​lsupp​lycha​ins-15856​01180​383.pdf.
Kache, F., & Seuring, S. (2014). Linking collaboration and integration to risk and performance in sup-
ply chains via a review of literature reviews. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 
19(5/6), 664–682. https​://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-12-2013-0478.
Khokhar, S. G., Min, Q., & Su, C. (2015). Bird flu (H7N9) outbreak and its implications on the supply 
chain of poultry meat in China. Journal of Applied Poultry Research, 24(2), 215–221. https​://doi.
org/10.3382/japr/pfv00​7.
Larson, P. D., & Foropon, C. (2018). Process improvement in humanitarian operations: An organisational 
theory perspective. International Journal of Production Research, 56(21), 6828–6841. https​://doi.
org/10.1080/00207​543.2018.14243​74.
Li, Y., & Zobel, C. W. (2020). Exploring supply Chain network resilience in the presence of the ripple 
effect. International Journal of Production Economics. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.10769​3.

1193
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Lin, Q., Zhao, S., Gao, D., Lou, Y., Yang, S., Musa, S. S., et al. (2020). A conceptual model for the coro-
navirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in Wuhan, China with individual reaction and govern-
mental action. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 93, 211–216. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijid.2020.02.058.
Liu, M., Xu, X., Cao, J., & Zhang, D. (2019). Integrated planning for public health emergencies: A modi-
fied model for controlling H1N1 pandemic. Journal of the Operational Research Society. https​://doi.
org/10.1080/01605​682.2019.15825​89.
Liu, M., & Zhang, D. (2016). A dynamic logistics model for medical resources allocation in an epidemic 
control with demand forecast updating. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 67(6), 841–852. 
https​://doi.org/10.1057/jors.2015.105.
Long, E. F., Nohdurft, E., & Spinler, S. (2018). Spatial resource allocation for emerging epidemics: A com-
parison of greedy, myopic, and dynamic policies. Manufacturing and Service Operations Manage-
ment, 20(2), 181–198. https​://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2017.0681.
Lu, Q., Goh, M., & De Souza, R. (2017). An empirical investigation of swift trust in humanitarian logistics 
operations. The Palgrave Handbook of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management. https​
://doi.org/10.1057/978-1-137-59099​-2_9.
Majić, Z., Jukić, I., & Pavlin, S. (2009). Air transport and logistics in pandemic outbreak of influenza A 
(H1N1) virus. Promet-Traffic & Traffico, 21(6), 425–434. https​://doi.org/10.7307/ptt.v21i6​.258.
Mamani, H., Chick, S. E., & Simchi-Levi, D. (2013). A game-theoretic model of international influenza vacci-
nation coordination. Management Science, 59(7), 1650–1670. https​://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1120.1661.
McKinsey & Company. (2020). Coronavirus and technology supply chains: How to restart and rebuild. 
Retrieved April 5, 2020, from https​://www.mckin​sey.com/busin​ess-funct​ions/opera​tions​/our-insig​
hts/Coron​aviru​s-and-techn​ology​-suppl​y-chain​s-How-to-resta​rt-and-rebui​ld?cid = other​-eml-alt-mip-
mck&hlkid​ = 1100d​1a33f​ec400​eaddd​db25a​2144b​77&hctky​=99849​60&hdpid​=584c1​e34-bc36-4cf4-
9bc5-cfa73​6b619​.
Muggy, L., & Heier Stamm, J. L. (2020). Decentralized beneficiary behavior in humanitarian supply chains: 
Models, performance bounds, and coordination mechanisms. Annals of Operations Research, 284(1), 
333–365. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-019-03246​-7.
Mustafa Kamal, M., & Irani, Z. (2014). Analysing supply chain integration through a systematic literature 
review: A normative perspective. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal. https​://doi.
org/10.1108/SCM-12-2013-0491.
Ni, J. (2020). How China can rebuild global supply chain resilience after COVID-19. Retrieved April 4, 
2020, from https​://www.wefor​um.org/agend​a/2020/03/coron​aviru​s-and-globa​l-suppl​y-chain​s/.
Nigmatulina, K. R., & Larson, R. C. (2009). Living with influenza: Impacts of government imposed and 
voluntarily selected interventions. European Journal of Operational Research, 195(2), 613–627. https​
://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2008.02.016.
NZ Herald. (2020). Covid 19 coronavirus: Countries compete for masks, medical supplies amid global 
pandemic. Retrieved April 5, 2020, from https​://www.nzher​ald.co.nz/world​/news/artic​le.cfm?c_
id=2&objec​tid=12322​431.
Orenstein, W. A., & Schaffner, W. (2008). Lessons learned: Role of influenza vaccine production, distribu-
tion, supply, and demand—What it means for the provider. American Journal of Medicine, 121(7 
Suppl. 2), S22–S27. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjme​d.2008.05.004.
Panetto, H., Iung, B., Ivanov, D., Weichhart, G., & Wang, X. (2019). Challenges for the cyber-physical 
manufacturing enterprises of the future. Annual Reviews in Control, 47, 200–213.
Parvin, H., Beygi, S., Helm, J. E., Larson, P. S., & Van Oyen, M. P. (2018). Distribution of medication con-
sidering information, transshipment, and clustering: Malaria in Malawi. Production and Operations 
Management, 27(4), 774–797. https​://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12826​.
Paul, S., & Venkateswaran, J. (2020). Designing robust policies under deep uncertainty for mitigating epi-
demics. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 140(October 2019), 106221. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cie.2019.10622​1.
Paul, S. K., Sarker, R., Essam, D., & Lee, P. T. W. (2019). A mathematical modelling approach for manag-
ing sudden disturbances in a three-tier manufacturing supply chain. Annals of Operations Research, 
280, 299–335. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-019-03251​-w.
Pavlov, A., Ivanov, D., Pavlov, D., & Slinko, A. (2019a). Optimization of network redundancy and con-
tingency planning in sustainable and resilient supply chain resource management under conditions 
of structural dynamics. Annals of Operations Research. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-019-03182​-6.
Pavlov, A., Ivanov, D., Werner, F., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2019b). Integrated detection of disruption 
scenarios, the ripple effect dispersal and recovery paths in supply chains. Annals of Operations 
Research. https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-019-03454​-1.

1194
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Petticrew, M. (2001). Systematic reviews from astronomy to zoology: Myths and misconceptions. British 
Medical Journal, 322(7278), 98–101. https​://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.322.7278.98.
Pournader, M., Kach, A., & Talluri, S. (2020). A review of the existing and emerging topics in supply chain 
risk management literature. Decision Sciences. https​://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12470​.
Pulver, A., & Wei, R. (2018). Optimizing the spatial location of medical drones. Applied Geography, 90, 
9–16. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeo​g.2017.11.009.
Purba, N. P., Handyman, D. I. W., Pribadi, T. D., Syakti, A. D., Pranowo, W. S., Harvey, A., et al. (2019). 
Marine debris in Indonesia: A review of research and status. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 146, 134–
144. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpo​lbul.2019.05.057.
Qi, W., & Shen, Z.-J. M. (2018). A smart-city scope of operations management. SSRN Electronic Journal. 
https​://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.31774​96.
Queiroz, M. M., Pereira, S. C. P., Telles, R., & Machado, M. C. (2019a). Industry 4.0 and digital supply chain 
capabilities. Benchmarking: An International Journal. https​://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-12-2018-0435.
Queiroz, M. M., Telles, R., & Bonilla, S. H. (2019b). Blockchain and supply chain management integration: 
A systematic review of the literature. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal. https​://
doi.org/10.1108/SCM-03-2018-0143.
Rachaniotis, N. P., Dasaklis, T. K., & Pappis, C. P. (2012). A deterministic resource scheduling model in 
epidemic control: A case study. European Journal of Operational Research, 216(1), 225–231. https​://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2011.07.009.
Roberta Pereira, C., Christopher, M., & Lago Da Silva, A. (2014). Achieving supply chain resilience: The 
role of procurement. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 19(5/6), 626–642. https​://
doi.org/10.1108/SCM-09-2013-0346.
Rodríguez-Espíndola, O., Albores, P., & Brewster, C. (2018). Decision-making and operations in disas-
ters: Challenges and opportunities. International Journal of Operations and Production Manage-
ment, 38(10), 1964–1986. https​://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM​-03-2017-0151.
Sarkis, J. (2012). Models for compassionate operations. International Journal of Production Economics, 
139, 359–365. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2012.06.018.
Sarkis, J., Cohen, M. J., Dewick, P., & Schr, P. (2020). A brave new world: lessons from the COVID-
19 pandemic for transitioning to sustainable supply and production. Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.resco​nrec.2020.10489​4.
Savachkin, A., & Uribe, A. (2012). Dynamic redistribution of mitigation resources during influ-
enza pandemics. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 46(1), 33–45. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.
seps.2011.05.001.
Sawik, T. (2019). Two-period versus multi-period model for supply chain disruption management. Inter-
national Journal of Production Research, 57(14), 4502–4518.
Schanes, K., Dobernig, K., & Gözet, B. (2018). Food waste matters—A systematic review of household 
food waste practices and their policy implications. Journal of Cleaner Production, 182, 978–991. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclep​ro.2018.02.030.
Shamsi, N. G., Ali Torabi, S., & Shakouri, G. H. (2018). An option contract for vaccine procurement 
using the SIR epidemic model. European Journal of Operational Research, 267(3), 1122–1140. 
https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.12.013.
Shen, B., & Li, Q. (2017). Market disruptions in supply chains: A review of operational models. Interna-
tional Transactions in Operational Research, 24, 697–711.
Song, J. M., Chen, W., & Lei, L. (2018). Supply chain flexibility and operations optimisation under 
demand uncertainty: A case in disaster relief. International Journal of Production Research, 
56(10), 3699–3713.
Spens, K. M., & Kovács, G. (2006). A content analysis of research approaches in logistics research. 
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 36(5), 374–390. https​://
doi.org/10.1108/09600​03061​06762​59.
Spiegler, V. L. M., Potter, A. T., Naim, M. M., & Towill, D. R. (2016). The value of nonlinear con-
trol theory in investigating the underlying dynamics and resilience of a grocery supply chain. 
International Journal of Production Research, 54(1), 265–286. https​://doi.org/10.1080/00207​
543.2015.10769​45.
Sun, L., Depuy, G. W., & Evans, G. W. (2014). Multi-objective optimization models for patient alloca-
tion during a pandemic influenza outbreak. Computers & Operations Research, 51, 350–359. https​
://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2013.12.001.
Tachizawa, E. M., & Wong, C. Y. (2014). Towards a theory of multi-tier sustainable supply chains: A 
systematic literature review. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 19(5/6), 643–
663. https​://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-02-2014-0070.

1195
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196 
1 3
Tang, C. S. (2006). Perspectives in supply chain risk management. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 103(2), 451–488.
Tao, Y., Shea, K., & Ferrari, M. (2018). Logistical constraints lead to an intermediate optimum in out-
break response vaccination. PLoS Computational Biology, 14(5), 1–20. https​://doi.org/10.1371/
journ​al.pcbi.10061​61.
Tatham, P., Loy, J., & Peretti, U. (2015). Three dimensional printing – a key tool for the humanitarian 
logistician? Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 5(2), 188–208.
The Ebola Gbalo Research Group. (2019). Responding to the Ebola virus disease outbreak in DR 
Congo: When will we learn from Sierra Leone? The Lancet, 393(10191), 2647–2650. https​://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140​-6736(19)31211​-5.
The Wall Street Journal. (2020). 3M, under attack from White House, pushes back. Retrieved April 5, 2020, 
from https​://www.wsj.com/artic​les/3m-under​-attac​k-from-white​-house​-pushe​s-back-11585​92268​7.
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed 
management knowledge. British Journal of Management, 14(3), 207–222.
Turrini, L., Besiou, M., Papies, D., & Meissner, J. (2019). The role of operational expenditures and mis-
alignments in fundraising for international humanitarian aid. Journal of Operations Management. 
https​://doi.org/10.1002/joom.1072.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development—UNCTAD. (2020). Global trade impact of the 
coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemic. Retrieved April 8, 2020, from https​://uncta​d.org/en/Publi​catio​
nsLib​rary/ditci​nf202​0d1.pdf.
Vatican News. (2020). Countries fight over medical supplies amid Covid-19 pandemic. Retrieved April 
5, 2020, from https​://www.vatic​annew​s.va/en/world​/news/2020-04/europ​e-unite​d-state​s-covid​-19-
medic​al-suppl​ies.html.
Wamba, S. F., & Queiroz, M. M. (2020). Blockchain in the operations and supply chain management: Ben-
efits, challenges and future research opportunities. International Journal of Information Management, 
52, 102064. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinf​omgt.2019.10206​4.
Wang, H., Wang, X., & Zeng, A. Z. (2009). Optimal material distribution decisions based on epidemic dif-
fusion rule and stochastic latent period for emergency rescue. International Journal of Mathematics 
in Operational Research, 1(1–2), 76–96. https​://doi.org/10.1504/IJMOR​.2009.02287​6.
World Economic Forum—WEF. (2020a). How China can rebuild global supply chain resilience after 
COVID-19. Retrieved April 5, 2020, from https​://www.wefor​um.org/agend​a/2020/03/coron​aviru​
s-and-globa​l-suppl​y-chain​s/.
World Economic Forum—WEF. (2020b). What past disruptions can teach us about reviving supply chains 
after COVID-19. Retrieved March 30, 2020, from https​://www.wefor​um.org/agend​a/2020/03/covid​
-19-coron​aviru​s-lesso​ns-past-suppl​y-chain​-disru​ption​s/.
World Health Organization—WHO. (2020). WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media brief-
ing on COVID-19—11 March 2020. Retrieved March 29, 2020, from https​://www.who.int/dg/speec​
hes/detai​l/who-direc​tor-gener​al-s-openi​ng-remar​ks-at-the-media​-brief​ing-on-covid​-19—11-march​
-2020.
Yoon, J., Talluri, S., Yildiz, H., & Ho, W. (2018). Models for supplier selection and risk mitigation: A holis-
tic approach. International Journal of Production Research, 56(10), 3636–3661.
Zhao, K., Zuo, Z., & Blackhurst, J. V. (2019). Modelling supply chain adaptation for disruptions: An empir-
ically grounded complex adaptive systems approach. Journal of Operations Management, 65(2), 
190–212.
Zhou, B. B., Wu, J., & Anderies, J. M. (2019). Sustainable landscapes and landscape sustainability: A tale 
of two concepts. Landscape and Urban Planning, 189, 274–284. https​://doi.org/10.1016/j.landu​rbpla​
n.2019.05.005.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.

1196
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1159–1196
1 3
Affiliations
Maciel M. Queiroz1   · Dmitry Ivanov2   · Alexandre Dolgui3   · 
Samuel Fosso Wamba4 
 
Maciel M. Queiroz 
 
maciel.queiroz@docente.unip.br
 
Alexandre Dolgui 
 
alexandre.dolgui@imt‑atlantique.fr
 
Samuel Fosso Wamba 
 
s.fosso‑wamba@tbs‑education.fr
1 
Postgraduate Program in Business Administration, Paulista University - UNIP, 
São Paulo 04026‑002, Brazil
2 
Supply Chain and Operations Management, Berlin School of Economics and Law, 10825 Berlin, 
Germany
3 
IMT Atlantique, LS2N ‑ CNRS, La Chantrerie, 4 rue Alfred Kastler, 44307 Nantes, France
4 
Information, Operations and Management Sciences, TBS Business School, 1 Place Alphonse 
Jourdain, 31068 Toulouse, France