TITLE: AI-powered decision-making in facilitating insurance claim dispute resolution
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05631-9
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05631-9
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
AI-powered decision-making in facilitating insurance claim
dispute resolution
Wen Zhang1
· Jingwen Shi2
· Xiaojun Wang3
· Henry Wynn4
Received: 30 November 2022 / Accepted: 28 September 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Leveraging Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques to empower decision-making can promote
social welfare by generating signiﬁcant cost savings and promoting efﬁcient utilization of
public resources, besides revolutionizing commercial operations. This study investigates
how AI can expedite dispute resolution in road trafﬁc accident (RTA) insurance claims,
beneﬁting all parties involved. Speciﬁcally, we devise and implement a disciplined AI-driven
approach to derive the cost estimates and inform negotiation decision-making, compared to
conventional practices that draw upon ofﬁcial guidance and lawyer experience. We build the
investigation on 88 real-life RTA cases and detect an asymptotic relationship between the
ﬁnal judicial cost and the duration of the most severe injury, marked by a notable predicted
R2 value of 0.527. Further, we illustrate how various AI-powered toolkits can facilitate
information processing and outcome prediction: (1) how regular expression (RegEx) collates
precise injury information for subsequent predictive analysis; (2) how alternative natural
language processing (NLP) techniques construct predictions directly from narratives. Our
proposed RegEx framework enables automated information extraction that accommodates
diverse report formats; different NLP methods deliver comparable plausible performance.
This research unleashes AI’s untapped potential for social good to reinvent legal-related
decision-making processes, support litigation efforts, and aid in the optimization of legal
resource consumption.
Keywords Professional service operation · Insurance claim · Civil litigation · AI · Natural
language processing
Wen Zhang and Jingwen Shi have contributed equally to the manuscript.
The expressed opinions and views are solely those of the author and do not reﬂect the views or positions of
SSGA.
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
123

Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
1.1 A motivational case
Litigation decision-making relies on cost–beneﬁt analysis, weighing the terms of settlement
against the expected outcome of litigation, considering transaction costs. Despite its com-
plexity, predicting the true value of a case as accurately as possible can help participants
make informed decisions and increase efﬁciency at the individual level, the corporate level,
and the community level. We can translate this problem into estimating the “intrinsic value”
of the personal injury cost in a road trafﬁc accident (RTA) insurance claim. In such situ-
ations, both claimants and defendants must balance the resultant beneﬁts versus the costs
involved, which encompass a multitude of elements including the likely legal ramiﬁcations
and the legal billings such as claims fees and attorney charges (see GOV.UK, 2021 for more
cost details). Both parties can risk encountering more loss or costs, both money-wise and
time-wise, if the amount of claim they initially seek or offer does not justify the fair val-
uation of the injury damage. From the claimant’s perspective, this establishes expectations
for recovery so that he would not claim an unreasonably high amount and would be better
informed of whether the ultimate recovery justiﬁes the time and expenditure spent on the
matter. Consider a real-world case in which the claimant set out his initial claim to be £6000,
following which the defendant responded with a counteroffer of £3400. No compromise had
been reached before proceeding to court, and by the time a ﬁnal order was made at £3800,
the costs encountered far exceeded the incremental gain in recovery: the claimant could have
obtained more by accepting the plea bargain at earlier stages. Similarly for the defendant,
she might end up paying even more in settlement including costs had inaccurate assessments
been made, or even worse, she could risk more serious convictions at trials. This is the case
in another real-world scenario: the defendant insisted on offering £3000 while the claimant
compromised from £4000 to £3750, with the ﬁnal verdict being £4000.
Reasonable assessments regarding settlement prospects, enabled by automated trial out-
come prediction, greatly contribute to informed decision-making and effective settlement
negotiations for individuals, considering the uncertainties of legal outcomes as well as the
costs in terms of time, money, effort, and trouble (Molot, 2009). The savings could be enor-
mous when aggregated at the societal level, questioning the efﬁcient use (Woolf, 1995) and
distribution of the limited legal resources, a long-standing national demand (Jackson, 2010).
According to our ﬁeldwork, if no agreement has been reached through settlement negotia-
tions, 2 years’ awaiting a ﬁnal court decision counting from the date of the incident would
be an underestimate. This not only entangles both individual parties in the matter but also
takes up valuable resources that the trial needs to command. This consideration is especially
important for low-value RTA disputes, which do not involve intricate interactions and could
have been resolved through negotiation before being brought to court.
The legal service industry has many routine and repetitive processes (Avgerinos, 2018)
that can be streamlined with AI-powered solutions, improving productivity and efﬁciency.
However, despite the growing attention and interest in professional service operations (PSO)
(Lewis, 2012) such as legal and insurance industries, the implementation of AI into the
functioning of PSO represents a less-explored research avenue compared to the extensive
discussions on its applications in other operational management realms such as operational
risk management (Araz, 2020) and procurement (Cui, 2022). For RTA insurance claim service
discussed in this paper, a staggering volume of documents needs to be reviewed for each
individual case to assess the cost of insurance. These needs can be catered to with the
123

Annals of Operations Research
uncovering of the potential of AI in terms of automating document processing, delivering
reasonable valuations, and driving informed decision-making, to fully exploit AI’s pattern
recognition capability with structured or unstructured data (Abrahams, 2015).
Through examining 88 cases UK Ministry of Justice (MoJ) RTA Portal-deﬁned as the “Pre-
Action Protocol for Low Value (up to £25,000) Personal Injury Claims in RTA from 31 July
2013”(Justice,2017)-providedbyaleadinglegalservicecompanybasedinLondon,wefound
that the claimant and the defendant (or their insurance representatives) will negotiate over
different issues via this online platform, among which one of the primary issues is the injury
cost. The injury cost, also known as the general cost, is closely associated with the claimant’s
injury type and severity (rather than other human characteristics such as age, gender, etc.) as
stated in the medical report provided by the claimant’s medical expert, usually a disinterested
third party like GP. According to interviews with lawyers (as summarized in the “Appendix”),
most practitioners rely heavily on personal experience and conventional qualitative legal
analysis when assessing the potential legal outcomes and consequences, which are subject to
inaccuracy and ineffectiveness at tailoring recommendations to speciﬁc individuals and legal
practitioners show great interest in how technology can help in decision-making. This makes
it particularly conducive to leveraging the advances in machine learning-based tools coupled
with the increasing availability and digitalization of data. Despite the promising prospects to
shed new light on decision-making, proper exploitation in the context of a speciﬁc practical
scenario as well as the investigation into its real-world economic rationale and societal impact
is absent in existing research.
1.2 Research framework and contributions
To address this gap, we identify and quantify the relationship between the general cost and
injury attributes and illustrate the automated extraction of injury information from medical
reports via RegEx (Thompson, 1968), one of the most widely used information extraction
techniques in the realm of natural language processing (NLP). We also examine various
mining methods that process medical text directly, such as the linear method of Stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) linear regression and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) (Kim,
2014). While these methods can achieve superior predicted R2 values of around 0.8, their
lack of interpretability and transparency is a critical barrier to modelling accountability
and widespread adoption. In contrast, with the infusion of domain knowledge, the RegEx-
powered method that extracts precisely pertinent injury information and makes projections of
the general cost, guarantees an unbeatable level of interpretability and traceability. With the
rapid development of AI, growing attention has been paid to the interpretability issue (Samek,
2019) out of scientiﬁc, ethical, commercial, and regulatory considerations, especially in the
context of formal decision-making such as legal reasoning where rigorous justiﬁcation is
necessary (Atkinson, 2020).
Concretely, the most signiﬁcant novel aspect of this study is to leverage both practitioners’
perspectives and state-of-the-art AI-powered techniques to establish a data-driven framework
for enhanced informed decision-making in the context of civil litigation/insurance, as exhib-
ited in Fig. 1. The study further demonstrates speciﬁcally the prediction of the general cost
in RTA insurance claims. The key technical and practical contributions of this article are
delineated below.
Technical Contributions comprise three areas: (i) AI/NLP-Driven Architecture for PSO,
(ii) Information Extraction Procedure, and (iii) Text Mining for Cost Prediction. First, we
contribute to the service operation literature on AI adoption (Huang, 2021; Kumar, 2018) by
123

Annals of Operations Research
introducing an AI/NLP-powered structure for PSO, designed to streamline processes, har-
ness digitalized information sources, and expedite informed decision-making. Our focus is on
explainable rule-based AI solutions integrated with domain expertise, ensuring transparency
in decision-making logic. We also explore the incorporation of advanced text mining tech-
niques to fully unleash the potential of AI. Second, we put forth an interpretable methodology
for automated text processing in legal settings, where there is the widespread call for explain-
able and interpretable AI approaches (Atkinson, 2020). This involves practical extraction of
injury information from medical reports using RegEx. The process amalgamates keyword
labels, numerical markers, and semantic context to precisely pinpoint injury attributes. Third,
we delve into text mining techniques, including SGD linear regression and CNN, to predict
costs directly from medical reports. Our comparisons highlight the superior model, achieving
an R2 value surpassing 0.8. Moreover, we demonstrate the application of learning-based data
augmentation to enhance training sets with limited samples, which is a common challenge
faced in industries like healthcare and legal (Perez, 2017).
Practical Contributions also consist of three aspects: (i) Decision-making Pipeline Pro-
posal, (ii) Relevance to Legal Services, and (iii) Vision for Social Good. First, we advocate
for an exhaustive decision-making pipeline, which introduces enhancements in text informa-
tion processing methodologies. This breakthrough is pivotal for industries such as law and
insurance. It furnishes them with pragmatic recommendations to capitalize on automation
for improved operational efﬁciency. Second, by leveraging the AI-enhanced workﬂow, legal
service entities can derive intrinsic case valuations. Utilizing domain expertise, historical
datasets, and predictive analytics, they can realize better decision-making and heightened
efﬁciency in litigation expenditures. This is paramount at individual, corporate, and soci-
etal scales. It forms the bedrock for the social good—ensuring efﬁcient dispute resolutions,
optimized legal resource utilization, and accessibility of litigation tools for all, especially
the working class and those with lower incomes. Third, beyond revolutionizing industry ser-
vices, the power of AI for societal good (Taddeo, 2018) extends to wider disciplines and
we are moving towards a future where more informed and cost-effective decision-making is
achievable by harnessing historical data and technological solutions.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the theoretical
background and related work and Sect. 3 describes the proposed framework in the context
of the practical case. Section 4 illustrates how to extract the information automatically via
RegEx, and Sect. 5 further explores the possibility of predicting from the medical report
directly without manual feature selections. Section 6 demonstrates the ﬁnancial beneﬁts
Fig. 1 Proposed AI-driven decision-making framework
123

Annals of Operations Research
of applying the proposed model, and we summarize our main ﬁndings, limitations of this
research, and future research directions in Sect. 7.
2 Literature review
Information technology has the transformational power to unlock immense economic bene-
ﬁts that were previously inaccessible, and the professional service industry is not lagging in
participating in digitalization and harnessing the potential of data. The OM community has
been actively engaged in discussions on how to leverage information technology/information
systems to improve the efﬁciency, effectiveness, and productivity of PSO (Boone, 2001; Ray,
2005). For example, how call center technologies, Electronic Medical Record (EMR), and
alternative databases tap into new sources of insights constitutes compelling evidence to
support such statements in a wide-ranging branch of professional service industries includ-
ing legal ﬁrms (Lewis, 2012), hospitals (Dobrzykowski, 2016) and public sector operations
(Karwan, 2006).
Revitalizing the landscape of information technology, AI and big data analytics present
newopportunitiestogaincompetitiveadvantages.Alongwiththeacceleratingpaceofinnova-
tion in the development of AI technologies, the adoption of AI to enhance the broader service
operation management (Huang, 2021; Kumar, 2018) is receiving growing attention in recent
years. Despite the increasing interest, most studies on AI in service operations expand around
conceptualizing AI-based service ecosystems or proposing research agenda (Kumar, 2018).
Utilizing AI for effective decision-making and its empirical execution, however, remains
less explored with a paucity of research literature and lack of established approaches. To ﬁll
in the gap, one highlight of this research is to illustrate how the AI implementation, more
speciﬁcally NLP technologies, enhances service practices and quantiﬁes PSO decision mak-
ing through a case study with a UK legal service ﬁrm, as an example of a representative
professional service industry that features knowledge intensity and customization (Lewis,
2012). This paper takes on a new perspective considering the practical merits of NLP in the
legal realm, compared to those adopted by the computer science community.
AI in service applications can be categorized into three dimensions including mechanical
AI for service standardization (i.e., AI for routine and repetitive service), thinking AI for ser-
vice personalization (i.e., uncovering meaningful patterns from large data sets and making
predictions) and feeling AI for service rationalization (i.e., virtual agents delivering mechan-
ical service at the low level and advanced AI detecting emotions at the high end) (Huang,
2021). Most existing research on “Legal AI/NLP” caters more to the ﬁrst two aspects, such as
predicting judicial decisions by performing Support Vector Machine (SVM), CNN and Fast-
Text on court proceedings (Medvedeva, 2020; Xiao, 2018) and the settlement or dismissal
of the US Federal Court cases from processed corresponding dockets (Vacek, 2019). After
accounting for case heterogeneity, these NLP models bring on the leverages of mechanical
AI or thinking AI to streamline legal processes and operations, unlock the beneﬁts from data,
and contribute to accelerated and informed decision-making.
Takingaslightlydifferentpathway,thisresearchparticularlyacknowledgestheimportance
of human-interpretable explanations and leans towards deploying Explainable-AI solutions
that ensure visibility into the decision logic by design. Different from manufactured prod-
ucts, service provision architecture recognizes the challenges involved with an appropriate
and comprehensive combination of materials, skills, and processes to yield the “planned”
123

Annals of Operations Research
or “designed” services (Goldstein, 2002). To put this into context, beyond the common efﬁ-
ciency and productivity considerations in OM, this research emphasizes the effectiveness
or “doing the right thing” (Karwan, 2006) and aims to enhance the explainability with the
infusionofdomainknowledge,whichisofparticularimportanceinPSOduetoitsknowledge-
intensive nature. The concerns about the effectiveness of information technology in OM are
not unfounded in the real world: a corporate partner expressed similar concerns (Lewis, 2012)
that “you cannot do the job in an efﬁcient manner unless you distil down the knowledge that
lawyers have in a form which is able to be reproduced and used by others”, highlighting the
necessity of “effective” utilization of precedent knowledge.
Accordingly,ratherthanrelyingsolelyon“blackboxNLP”modelssuchasCNNtoprocess
every single particle of legal documents, we ﬁrst incorporate domain knowledge that helps
narrow down the scope to illuminating the relationship between trial outcomes and injury
information and then illustrate how these supporting data can be collected from medical (or
clinical) records using NLP techniques in an automated manner. As mentioned above, this
respects the widespread preferences for explainable and interpretable AI approaches which
are particularly pronounced in the decision-making process in legal settings which calls
for more rigorous reasoning and justiﬁcation (Atkinson, 2020). This not only arises out of
scientiﬁc, ethical, and commercial considerations but also has been backed up by regulatory
requirements. For example, the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) (https://
gdpr-info.eu/) has highlighted the importance of human-understandable interpretations of
machine-derived decisions. In this regard, the second aim of this study is to address the
importance of explainable AI in PSO through a practical example.
In this study, we examine medical reports to support the claimant’s insurance claim, which
usually are narrative documents that describe the patient’s demographic information, accident
details, treatment records, doctor’s opinions, and recommendations, etc. (see Sect. 4). These
documents provide a valuable information source to investigate and exploit the associations
between injury attributes and the general cost as suggested by the Judicial College Guidelines
(refer to JCG later) (Lexis, 2020). To this end, we demonstrate the use of a powerful pattern-
searching language, that is the regular expression (RegEx) (Thompson, 1968), which has been
widely applied in clinical textual information extraction for its ﬂexibility and convenience.
To tackle the speciﬁc task here, we deploy a combination of label-based (Turchin, 2006),
numeric-oriented (Murtaugh, 2015), and semantic-driven logics, while explicitly addressing
the long-range context dependencies (Jagannatha, 2016) in a traceable and interpretable
manner.
Complementary to the above explainable rule-based approach, we also illustrate an archi-
tecture using text mining techniques that are grounded in more advanced machine learning
models, which apply feature extraction by directly transforming raw text into word represen-
tations to be fed into predictive models. We demonstrate how greater ﬂexibility and capability
are possible with two common supervised learning models CNN and SGD regression, the
former selected for its proven performance in text classiﬁcation and regression problems (Bit-
vai, 2015) and the latter for its suitability to large-scale and sparse scenarios (Smith, 2008).
Contrary to the rule-based approach that relies on pre-speciﬁed dictionaries or patterns deter-
mined by domain knowledge, machine learning methods “automatically” learn features from
the annotated training set after processing text through word vectorization or word embed-
dings, which convert the textual vocabulary into real-value vectors. Common vectorization
techniques employed include bag-of-words model (BOW), which simply represents docu-
ments as multisets of words but ignores the context (Harris, 1954), and its variants such
as frequency, one-hot, and TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse document frequency) (Salton,
123

Annals of Operations Research
1988). Word embedding techniques such as the word2vec (Mikolov, 2013), GloVe (Pen-
nington, 2014), and FastText (Joulin, 2016) take a step forward by more efﬁciently learning
sparse vectors from large-scale text, better preserving semantic and syntactic relations, and
thereby producing more contextualized word representations. To recap, the third objective
of this paper is then to show how the NLP-driven architecture rooted in a wider range of AI
modelling options and ﬂexible implementation brings out the fuller potential of AI.
3 An integrated textual analytic framework for insurance claim dispute
resolution
Leveraging both practitioners’ perspectives and state-of-the-art AI-powered techniques, we
establish an integrated textual analytic framework to promote informed decision-making in
the context of civil litigation/insurance, as exhibited in Fig. 2. The framework investigates
and exploits the informational value of the textual resources to derive quantitative insights
and determine the cost of insurance claims.
Diverse perspectives and approaches can be adopted to fully utilize textual resources, as
summarized in the upper and lower panels in Fig. 2. The choice of analysis method depends
on the implementability and practicality that are permitted or limited by data availability,
sample size, problem complexity, method efﬁciency, and many other considerations. In the
ﬁrst approach (Fig. 2), with the acquisition of solid domain knowledge that associates the
objectives (such as claim cost) to some underlying quantitative items, these speciﬁc attributes
are identiﬁed, extracted and translated into machine-interpretable representations that con-
ventional statistical modelling can take as data feeds. To this end, we take advantage of text
processing techniques such as regular expression, which greatly contribute to operational
effectiveness by automating pattern-identiﬁcation and information-extraction tasks.
In the absence of representational guidance and prior knowledge while sample size allows,
text mining techniques present an alternative that performs text-driven information extraction
and retrieval. In this regard, features can take a variety of forms that characterize textual
information, including but not limited to text frequency, relative importance, or other learned
representations that encode word semantics and reveal hidden patterns. Though less effort
Fig. 2 Integrated textual analytic framework
123

Annals of Operations Research
is spent to build the prior domain knowledge and establish the speciﬁc purpose for model-
training, this type of approach typically tends to be computationally intensive for routine use
and requires expertise in model tuning.
We further illustrate the practical implementation of the framework based on real-life
UK RTA insurance cases and demonstrate how this enhanced efﬁciency can translate into
economic beneﬁts, for defendants and claimants alike. In the ﬁrst approach, we focus on elu-
cidating the relationship between the injury severity and the general cost out of the view that
the injury type-attribute carries important predictive information, according to the insights
drawn from lawyers’ combined experience. To extract the injury information from medical
reports of various formats, we construct regular expressions solutions in a ﬂexible and prac-
tical way to address some potential real-world challenges in automated text processing. The
workﬂow presented here can be conveniently applied in similar scenarios while ensuring
interpretability, regardless of sample size. In the second approach, we explore the feasibility
and effectiveness of text mining methods that formulate cost predictions directly from textual
databases, which tend to perform better with large sample sizes. To demonstrate the imple-
mentation of the second approach, we perform learning-based data augmentation to enrich
and diversify the existing training set with limited samples while we believe the utility poten-
tials can be better unleashed with larger datasets. To our best knowledge, this work presents
the analytical framework in lawsuit settlement that explores textual resources in diverse ways
and compares their effectiveness and appropriateness in different scenarios with real-world
case applications. The relationship between the general cost and injury attribute revealed
here can be conveniently incorporated and exploited to guide decision making.
4 Predict injury cost with structural injury information
In this section, we describe the data employed in this research and demonstrate the develop-
ment and testing of different predictive models for estimating the general cost with the injury
information.
4.1 Domain knowledge infusion
A ﬁeldwork was conducted within a legal professional service company in the UK from
2018 to 2020 to explore applying AI and statistical predictive models in civil litigation. As an
exploratory study, for the sake of ease of research, we started with a relatively straightforward
business of handling low value (up to £25,000) cases of personal injury from the RTA, which
requires the lawyers’ professional knowledge to value the case while the legal documents are
less complex compared with those high-cost cases at the same time.
In an RTA insurance claim, two types of cost need to be evaluated and negotiated between
claimants and defendants: the general cost that is solely decided by the claimant’s injury type
and severity and the special cost which includes other costs such as income loss, repairs cost,
physiotherapy cost and so on. According to our ﬁeldwork, special cost is particularly case
dependent, lacking internal characteristics for large-scale automated processing and causing
little controversy if sufﬁcient evidence (such as a receipt for repairing a car) is available,
therefore we focus on the general cost only in this research (as discussed in the “Appendix”).
Currently, the valuation is conducted by the lawyers/claim handlers manually, by referring
to the JCG and their experience, which leads to a time-consuming process and varied results
123

Annals of Operations Research
depending on the individual’s subjective judgement. The growing volume of case data is not
being put to good use.
For each case, there is a corresponding medical report documenting the claimant’s injuries
(usually multiple, such as neck and back) and this report is the primary evidence of the general
cost. The lawyers interviewed mainly focus on the most serious injuries and then consider
other injuries as appropriate. However, this discretion is very subjective and there is no
uniform standard, which allows us to explore whether a statistical analysis could be used
to ﬁnd the relationship between injury and cost so that we could automatically and quickly
predict the value of a new case when it comes in.
4.2 Data
This research is based on 88 low-cost RTA Portal cases that occurred between 2013 and 2019
and were provided by a UK legal service company. Figure 3 illustrates that the general cost
of most cases is between £2000 and £5000, with a few cases higher than £6000, and detailed
statistics are summarized in Table 1.
Since the general cost is mostly associated with the trafﬁc accident injuries according to
our interviews, we process the civil litigation proceedings manually to extract the speciﬁc
injury information on each case. Summary statements of injuries are available for all cases,
Fig. 3 General cost histogram
Table 1 Descriptive statistics
summary for general cost
Descriptive statistics
Value
Descriptive Statistics
Value
Obs
88
Mean
3772
Median
3500
Mode
3000
Std. Dev
1259
Minimum
1350
Maximum
7750
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Injury frequency
Injury type
Frequency
Injury type
Frequency
Neck
74
Back
66
Shoulder
50
Spine
19
Chest
10
Lumbar
8
Hip (s)
8
Cervical
7
Arm
4
Wrist
4
Fig. 4 Medical reports word cloud
with detailed medical reports available for 24 of them. There are 28 types of physical injuries
in total and the top 10 most frequent injuries are listed in Table 2. It can be noted that the
most common injuries are the neck, back, and shoulder(s) injuries. This is due to the nature
of low-cost trafﬁc accidents, which usually result in upper body injuries also called whiplash.
The word frequency of the summary description of the symptoms is further visualized as a
word cloud in Fig. 4.
4.3 Predictive modelling
When estimating a personal injury in practice, legal professionals combine the approximate
range of compensation based on injury information by referring to JCG with insights from
their own experience to arrive at a general cost proxy. They usually place special attention
on the most severe injury and consider the rest injuries to some extent. However, this process
counts heavily on individual experiences and there are no well-established or readily available
analytical methods to follow.
Inspired by lawyers’ beliefs on the relationship between the cost and injury, we take a step
further and test this hypothesis by adopting various predictive approaches. The ﬁrst model
predicts the general cost based on the most severe injury, i.e., months to recover from the
most severe injury, and the corresponding injury type. For the convenience of the study, we
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Linear regression of the general cost on the most severe injury with injury type indicated
Coefﬁcient
Estimation
Std err
t-value
p-value
Intercept (a0)
2448.54
230.42
10.626
< 2e −16∗∗∗
Injury severity (a1)
119.62
13.27
9.015
5.53e −14∗∗∗
Dummy variable (a2)
76.08
222.39
0.342
0.733
Dummy variable (a3)
387.40
671.81
0.577
0.566
∗∗∗p < 0.001, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗p < 0.05
classify the human body into three categories of head-neck, torso, and limbs based on all
possible injuries listed on JCG, and then set two dummy variables to indicate which part
of the body the most serious injury belongs to. For example, the injury will be indicated
as “limbs” if the most severe injury in one case is a hand injury. Further, if more than one
type of injuries shares the same longest months, such as that both neck and hand require ten
months to resolve, we will seek assurance from the third-ranked injury. This means, if there
also exists a nine-month headache for instance, then the most severe injury will be labelled
as “head-neck”; otherwise, either “head-neck” or “limbs” will be adopted randomly. This is
done to consider that if the injury is severe, the area adjacent to it may also be injured. With
the two dummy variables indicating the injury category, the linear regression model is
yi  α0 + α1xi + α2 + α3 + ϵi,
(1)
where i  1, 2, ..., n (n  88 in this research), yi and xi are the general cost and months
to resolve from the most severe injury of casei. α0 and α1 represent the intercept and the
coefﬁcient of xi and ϵi denotes the error term. α2 and α3 are dummy variables for torso and
limbs respectively, i.e., when α2  1, the injury belongs to the torso or limbs when α3  1,
otherwise head-neck. The regression result summarized in Table 3 reveals a statistically
signiﬁcantrelationshipbetweenthegeneralcostandinjuryseveritywhilethecostfordifferent
types of injuries is not signiﬁcantly different. One possible reason for this is that in these
low-cost RTA cases, the JCG’s range of compensation for each type of injury is relatively
close.
Therefore, we will only consider the injury severity in the predictive model and ﬁrst model
will use the most severe injury to estimate the cost based on the principle of parsimony. By
observation, there exists a nonlinear relationship between the injury severity and cost, and
the cost tends to stabilise with the increase of the severity as demonstrated in Fig. 5. This
is reasonable in practice because this suggests that a plateau in general costs should occur
after a period of time, e.g., if the most serious injury takes 2 or 2.5 years to recover, it
should not make a signiﬁcant difference. To this end, we test and compare the performance
of four common non-linear models. The ﬁrst two are Quadratic and Cubic regression models
within which second-degree polynomials (x2) and third-degree polynomials (x3) are included
respectively to capture the non-linear patterns. However, since neither of them can describe
the asymptotic processes (i.e., a stable cost with increased injury severity) and polynomial
models are prone to overﬁtting due to the introduction of higher order polynomials, we also
investigate two asymptotic regression models which we believe should be more suitable to
this problem. Speciﬁcally, we test the logarithmic transformation and (take natural log of
the input x) square root transformation (take the square root of the input x) in the linear
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Injury severity and general cost relationship
regression, both of which have slopes that asymptotically decrease to a constant. Figure 6
demonstrate the model ﬁttings.
All models ﬁt the data to some extent by observation and to further assess their predictive
performances, we calculate and demonstrate the R2 value, MAE (Mean Absolute Error), and
RMSE (Root Mean Square Error) with Leave One Out Cross Validation (LOOCV) since
LOOCV is a fairer and more reliable measurement, especially when the dataset is small,
as well as the AIC and BIC values to measure model performance that account for model
complexity in Table 4.
Although the Cubic model has the largest R2 value, smallest MAE and RMSE, it tends
to overﬁt by showing a declining trend to ﬁt a severe case. Together with the context of the
question, we recommend using the square root transformation linear regression model to
Fig. 6 Different non-linear model ﬁttings
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Predictive performance of different nonlinear models
Model
R2
MAE
RMSE
AIC
BIC
Quadratic model
0.521
534.964
868.193
1442.024
1451.933
Cubic model
0.530
517.315
859.074
1442.371
1454.757
Logarithmic model
0.462
625.663
918.552
1451.745
1459.177
Square root transformation
0.527
537.031
860.910
1441.249
1448.681
Table 5 Square root transformation linear regression of the general cost on the most severe injury
Coefﬁcient
Estimation
Std err
t-value
p-value
Intercept
717.05
312.92
2.291
0.0244∗
Injury severity square root
978.79
95.95
10.201
< 2e −06∗∗∗
∗∗∗p < 0.001, ∗∗p < 0.01,∗p < 0.05
predict the general cost and the regression model is
yi  β0 + β1x
1
2
i + ϵi,
(2)
where i  1, 2, ..., n (n  88 in this research), yi and xi are the general cost and months to
resolve from the most severe injury of casei, β0 is the constant and β1 is the coefﬁcient of
the square root ofxi. As can be seen from Table 5, all coefﬁcients are signiﬁcant.
While adopting the most severe injury solely could achieve a good prediction performance,
we notice that there are several high value cases (4, 69 and 74) with less severe injury. We
further inspect them and ﬁnd that the value of cases with multiple injuries can also be high.
For example, the general cost in case 74 is particularly high, mainly because the claimant
suffered multiple injuries from the neck, shoulder, lower back, and right hand, all of which
took ﬁve months to recover from.
Hence, rather than predicting the general cost only with the most severe injury, we also
examine the utility of extending the feature space by including more inputs such as the top
two and three most severe injuries. One basis for these tests is that with the increased number
of injury types, the general cost displays an increasing trend as shown in Fig. 7. It is worth
noting that we will not predict with the full range of injuries as injuries to other areas, such
as thighs and ankles, only appear in one or two cases compared to the common RTA injuries
to the neck and back. If a stepwise or Lasso regression model is applied to remit overﬁtting
by features selection (28 injury types for 88 cases), these injuries may be dropped due to
insigniﬁcance. The model trained in this manner, however, is biased since it is incapable of
predicting the compensation if the claimant only suffers the leg injury for instance.
Following a similar procedure for predicting the cost with single injury severity, we test the
cost prediction via the top two and top three most severe injuries with both a linear regression
model and non-linear models tested before. Since most predictors in nonlinear models are
shown to be non-signiﬁcant, we only report the linear regression results (also with LOOCV)
in Table 6. The lower values for each of the evaluation metrics indicate that involving the top
two and top three injuries does not contribute to improved predictive performance compared
to a single injury prediction model.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Relationship between the general cost and number of injury types
Table 6 Performance of linear regression models with top two and three injuries
Model
R2
MAE
RMSE
AIC
BIC
Linear model with top two injuries
0.479
547.728
907.434
1446.105
1456.014
Linear model with top three injuries
0.486
563.412
904.594
1444.998
1457.384
In summary, we test different prediction models in this section and prefer the square root
transformation linear regression, as it both performs very well and better suits to address this
research question. However, this proposal is limited by the amount of data available, and we
believe that the full injury model would have provided more insight with more data. In the
next section, we will demonstrate how to extract the full injury information automatically
from the medical report.
4.4 Extract injury information with regular expression
While existing literature largely focuses on algorithm development in isolation from practical
applications, this research seeks to not only evaluate the feasibility of RegEx in extracting and
structuring medical information but also to demonstrate the usefulness of NLP structured out-
put in a real-world litigation setting, in particular, its utilization in conjunction with decision
support systems. Among various information retrieval approaches, the regular expression is
chosen here over other syntactic and semantic parsers for its own advantages: a powerful
metalanguage that is convenient, interpretable, transferable, customizable, and accessible.
Flexibility and generalizability can be enhanced by further reﬁnement of RegEx rules. In this
section, we will explain the exploitation of RegEx with some of the most observed formats
of clinic reports. For conﬁdentiality reasons, only the structure and narratives of the medical
documents are inherited while the identity and case-speciﬁc information is all made up for
illustrative purposes only.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 Extracting entity-attribute information
Automated RegEx-based Learning of Information from Free Text in Medical Documents.
To serve the speciﬁc purpose described in earlier sections, the primary objective of the med-
ical information extraction in this research is to identify the injury category-severity pair so
as to convert unstructured medical narratives into structured machine-interpretable represen-
tations. To illustrate, the piece of text “… expect steady improvement with full resolution of
her neck symptoms approximately within 11 months…” ideally should be compressed onto
a lower-dimensional fragment, consisting of the primary illness information (injury name
“neck”) along with its respective attributes (injury severity “11 months”).
Asubstantialchallengehereisthat,duetoalackofstandardandconsistentlexicalstructure
and constraints, the interaction between injury category and attribute may appear in any form,
seldom corresponding perfectly with a transparent semantic interpretation. As shown in the
following examples, the sentences can be composed in a variety of ways, i.e., the syntax,
while the lexical and grammatical structure coalesces to communicate similar semantics,
i.e., what injury takes how long to heal. To put it into predicate-argument context, “resolve”
can either be the predicate in “injury-resolve-time” or the argument in “expect-resolution in
time” or even the attribute of a noun as in “expect steady improvement with full resolution”.
These variations make identiﬁcation and interpretation of the sentences based on function
features ambiguous and difﬁcult.
To cope with all this variety and uncertainty, RegEx with speciﬁc designment, imple-
mented via Python re (Van Rossum, 2020), allows great ﬂexibility and bandwidth in locating
entities and capturing patterns. This section seeks to explore its potentials in extracting infor-
mation from medical reports where standardized syntactic structure and format are absent.
More speciﬁcally, the injury category, along with injury duration, can be abstracted using
a combination of number-oriented, label-based, and semantics-driven approaches, which is
performed using the following algorithm exhibited in Fig. 8.
With the RegEx module, this is achieved by exploiting a combined use of re.search()
and re.findall(), regular expressions for pattern matching. Here we’ll ﬁrst demon-
strate the working of these two RegExs with the simplest scenario, to illustrate how
123

Annals of Operations Research
re.search() locates target information and how re.findall() returns matched
instances, while the entire workﬂow will be presented in later sections. The re.search(),
re.search(r’.*((?<=resolve)\w*|(?<=recover)\w*|(?<=continue
)\w*|(?<=prognosis)\w*|(?<=suffer)\w*)|(?<=persist)\w*).*\d
+ .*’,line), searches for the pre-deﬁned pattern within each line, which is
immediately followed by the if-statement “if match:”. When successful, the search
results will be held in the match object ‘match’, with match.group() produc-
ing the fully matched string. Once the sentence with “semantics” ﬂag that indicates
the
expected
healing
time
is
identiﬁed
by
re.search(),
re.findall()
takes this further and derives the injury category and severity respectively via
inj_type  re.findall(r’\b(’+’|’.join([injury+’s?’ for injury
in injury_list])+r’)\b’,line)
and
inj_t=re.findall(r’(\d+)
mon\w*’,line). For the former, the meta character \b performs a whole-words
search for injury type. The OR operator, i.e., pipe character |, matches alternatives among
the list of injuries, with sub-patterns enclosed by parenthesis to establish a logical group.
For the latter, \d+ﬁnds a sequence of one or more digits preceding the timeframe keyword
\mon\w* and picks out a list of strings corresponding to the group (\d+), i.e., the count of
months. Applying the operations on the Example: Word patterns to identify. C (“Appendix”)
gives the following ouput: Injury Type:[‘back’] Injury Severity:[‘9’].
Contextual Dependency. The approach described above, though easy-to-implement and
straightforward, is only applicable to scenarios where the injury attribute appears as an
immediate neighbor of the injury instance (see Example: Long-term contextual dependencies.
A in “Appendix”). For lack of rigid structure and uniform formatting in medical reports,
however, this keyword-based blocking is not as appropriate on some occasions due to its
incapability to capture contextual dependencies over longer word intervals. For some, the
injury type stands a short distance away from its attribute that could be located across multiple
boundaries such as phrases, sentences, or even paragraphs, in which case only weak linkages
existthroughpersonalpronouns(it/they/etc.)ordemonstrativepronouns(this/that/these/etc.).
As shown in Example: Long-term contextual dependencies. B (“Appendix”), the speciﬁc
object “neck” leads the whole paragraph as a stand-alone opening line (split from the rest by
\.) and is substituted by the demonstrative pronoun “this” in subsequent references, taking
another four sentences and nearly ﬁfty words to arrive at the healing period “2 months” to
be extracted.
Forsome,thetargetinformationislaidoutinincompletesentencesorcase-speciﬁcformats
such as tables, the structure, and style of which cannot be fully parsed in the multiple layers
of ﬁle transformations, as is the case exhibited by Example: Case-speciﬁc formats. C in
“Appendix”. It’s technically demanding, beyond the capability of established parsers, to keep
track of the report structure with the medical records scanned into PDF and the PDF then
converted to text, in which processes the links between “Symptom” and “Attributable” are
broken. Theoretically, the headers can be identiﬁed based on the text properties, coordinates,
or relative positionings, but in practice, substantial loss of these locating information is
inevitable during the transfer processes.
More complex algorithms handle these problems by explicitly utilizing contextualized
word representations to capture the surrounding contextual information, which requires care-
ful validation of the context window size parameter. This study seeks to practically address
these challenges and explore real-world applications for the particular task, i.e., to extract
injury entity-attribute pairs from narrative medical documents, rather than to develop rig-
orous pattern recognition algorithms in more complicated domains. Accordingly, to tackle
this speciﬁc problem of surrounding context, we adopt a feasible and easy-to-implement
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 9 Addressing long-term contextual dependency
approach by establishing a “content group” that associates the earlier occurrence of the “con-
text word”, i.e., injury type in this case, to the sentences that follow. The intuition behind
is straightforward: instead of wishfully expecting the NLP techniques to exercise sufﬁcient
intelligence itself to appreciate the syntax, we can build the content group by identifying the
aforementioned concept of interest and intentionally appending it to the following sentences.
By doing this, variable context range has been implicitly accounted for to adaptively learn the
long-term dependencies and combine information from multiple sentences. A simple way to
achieve this is that, as illustrated in the following algorithm in Fig. 9.
This can be more selectively executed by putting an end when the timeframe keyword
“month” is encountered. As seen in the Example:Output generated in “Appendix”, the context
label “back” has been created and assigned to the relevant text to reﬂect the logical structure,
allowing the explicit linkage between the symptom “back” and timeframe “2 months” to be
constructed.
Workﬂow and Other Considerations. Combining all the above considerations, the ﬂow of
the information extraction procedure can be summarized in the following chart in Fig. 10.
Post-accident reference date. On top of the above considerations, one point deserving
special attention here is the reference date for the expected recovery time. The following
two scenarios represent the two most common medical narrations regarding the timeline
description. Example: Without Gap (“Appendix”) covers the majority of cases where the
expected healing time is gauged and reported with respect to the date of the accident. On
some occasions as in Example: With Gap in “Appendix”, the medical professional might
anchor the judgment as of the examination date, resulting in a time gap between accident and
diagnosis to be ﬁlled.
The “With gap” case can be ﬂagged by identifying key adjectives indicative of relative
positionings, such as “further/following/next/future/another/additional/extra/extend”, or the
explicit reference of “from the date of examination”. Accordingly, this time gap needs to
be considered when such a match occurs around the “injury-time” pattern. Applying the
same logic, we specify two approaches to extracting the time gap details. The ﬁrst approach
searches for the “accident-prognosis” pattern by locating simultaneous appearance of “post-
accident”/ “time since accident” and “prognosis”/ “examination”, and capturing the time
period adjacent to the keywords. The other approach tackles the time interval directly by
recognizing the exact dates of the accident and the report respectively, based on which
the discrepancies are assessed. Usually, both dates are accurately reported in the ﬁrst few
pages of documents, oftentimes on the ﬁrst page. This date information can be extracted
by means of partition() method, which returns three elements, i.e., before “match”,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 10 Flow of the information extraction procedure
“match” and after “match”. We can use \Date of accident as the keyword to locate
the segments that contain the dates of accident and examination, and further identify the dates
from the afterkeyword part via datefinder() method, based on which the time gap
is calculated and injury duration is adjusted accordingly.
4.5 Predict injury cost with medical report via SGD linear regression and CNN
Instead of predicting injury cost by employing features manually selected by experts, i.e.,
injury type and severity caused by the corresponding accident, we also investigate the pos-
sibility of predicting the injury cost directly from the medical report via other text mining
techniques such as SGD linear regression and CNN. SGD model is trained by updating its
parameters iteratively using the gradient of the loss function with respect to those parameters.
Stochastic gradient descent differs from regular gradient descent in that it updates the model
parameters using a randomly selected subset of the training data at each iteration, rather than
the entire dataset. This random sampling helps to speed up the optimization process and can
help the algorithm avoid getting stuck in local minima. SGD linear regression is adopted
since it has been proved to be an efﬁcient optimizer that is suitable for large-scale and sparse
machine learning problems such as NLP (Smith, 2008). Similarly, a CNN is preferred as it
is reported to be one of the best performing algorithms in tackling both the text classiﬁcation
and regression problems (Bitvai, 2015), and the CNN used in this research is similar to the
previous work using CNN for NLP task (Dereli, 2019; Kim, 2014). On the input layer, the
texts will be padded as the same length and the embedding layer will set the vocabulary size
and represent each word as k-dimensional real-valued representations (k depends on the word
embeddings applied). The subsequent layer consists of a convolutional layer with ﬁlters and
a kernel size set to the number of words processed at once. A Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU)
is usually employed as the non-linear activation function at the output. Following this, a max
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 11 Document analysis framework
pooling layer is set to merge the output from the convolutional layer, while a ﬂatten layer is
used to reduce the three-dimensional output to two dimensions, enabling concatenation. The
speciﬁc structure and parameters of the CNN are explained in Sect. 5.3 and implemented with
Python Keras api. Also, as only 24 full medical reports are available out of these 88 cases,
which is insufﬁcient to train and validate the model, we generate some artiﬁcial cases with
the text data augmentation technique (Wei, 2019). The performance of different methods is
compared.
To be speciﬁc, we explore how to make predictions in the three steps summarized in
Fig. 11. First, we augment the original data set for training and testing. Then, we pre-process
the raw text data and extract features with different methods to represent the text and lastly,
we build various predictive models and evaluate their performance.
4.6 Data preparation
One of the main challenges in this research, like many other practical exploratory research
problems, is the scarcity of data sources. In this research, although we collected 88 cases
123

Annals of Operations Research
with brief injury descriptions and the corresponding general cost, only 24 of these cases have
accompanying full medical reports. To better evaluate the different models with reasonably
adequate samples, we adopt the text data augmenter from the EDA package (Wei, 2019).
Explicitly, we solely utilize the word-level augmenter which substitutes words with their
synonyms from WordNet (Miller, 1995) because the main purpose of augmentation for this
task is to generate more medical reports without changing the meaning of the original words
(at least similar), there would otherwise be little point in predicting costs from medical reports
consisting of many unimportant words. In this research, we generate ten new cases for each
original case by substituting 50% of the words with synonyms so that we get 264 cases in
total. The 50% similarity is chosen because, on the one hand, new cases should be different
from the original cases otherwise they will result in overﬁtting; on the other hand, too much
variation will cause the meaning of the new cases to be so different from the original cases
that it would not make sense to relate the general cost to the new cases. We will further
discuss this issue in Sect. 7.
4.7 Pre-processing and feature extraction
After applying general text data pre-processing techniques such as lower cases, punctuation,
and stop words removal, we extract different features with TfidfVectorizer from the
scikit-learn package. We choose the TF-IDF vectorizer as it is an efﬁcient represen-
tation of text that not only focuses on the frequency of words present in the corpus, but also
provides the importance of the words. By employing the TF-IDF vectorizer, we can dismiss
less important words and build a less complex model by reducing the input dimensions. To
be speciﬁc, we test the TF-IDF models and n-grams (we use n  4 and n  5 to represent a
reasonable term) TF-IDF models at both the word level and character level.
Top ten terms exclude those with names (for privacy reasons) obtained from these feature
representation approaches are listed in Table 7. While the word-level representations make
sense to some extent as they involve some terms such as “score”, “explanation”, it is difﬁcult
to interpret the character-level features like “a”, “e”. Another approach to symbolize text
features is using word embeddings such as word2vec (Mikolov, 2013), GloVe (Pennington,
2014), and FastText (Joulin, 2016), which represents each unique word with a speciﬁc vector
of numbers. The advantage of word embeddings is that they are dense vectors that retains
Table 7 Top ten terms identiﬁed by different vectorizer
Text vectorizer
Top ten terms
Word level TF-IDF
“Reputation”, “score”, “pretermit”, “neglect”, “lack”, “escape”, “billings”,
“explanation”, “overleap”, “ﬁlle”
Word n-grams TF-IDF
“Convention come face uncomfortableness”, “convention look causa soreness”,
“rule come drive soreness”, “rule look causa soreness”, “convention come cru-
sade uncomfortableness”, “formula come campaign uncomfortableness”, “index
number chance event”, “pattern appear reason irritation”,
“60 normal appeared cause discomfort”, “medical checkup news”
Char level TF-IDF
“1”, “o”, “n”, “r”, “0”, “i”, “t”, “a”, “e”,“”
Char n-grams TF-IDF
“Fire”, “ g wom”, “mr gr”, “mr g”, “iss”, “mr wo”, “g lad”, “ung l”, “ shaw”,
“oley”
123

Annals of Operations Research
the semantics of different words compared to the BOW models and has been widely utilized
in the sentiment analysis and text regression with different neural networks (Bitvai, 2015).
4.8 Model building and testing
With the different features described above, we train and test an SGD linear regression model
(with 80% of the total data as training set and 20% as the testing set) and the result is reported
in Table 8.
Models with word-level TF-IDF and character n-grams TF-IDF as features per-
form much better than others, achieving a predicted R2 value of around 0.8. One
possible reason why these two models perform better than others may be that
the n-grams character expressions are more word-like, which seems to suggest that
representation by words is more applicable to this problem. Also, with the pre-
trained word embeddings of word2vec (GoogleNews-300d-1 M.vec), FastText
(wiki-news-300d-1 M.txt), and GloVe (glove.6B.100d.txt), we test the pre-
dicting performance of a classic CNN (Kim, 2014) using the same data partitioning of the
SGD linear regression model. Here, the ﬁrst hidden layer is the embedding layer. Depend-
ing on the chosen pre-trained word embeddings, the embedding dimension could be 300
(word2vec and FastText) or 100 (GloVe). Then, on the convolutional layer, the conﬁguration
adapted is used with 32 ﬁlters/channels and a kernel size of 8 with a ReLU activation func-
tion. Following a max-over-time pooling layer, a ﬂatten layer and a fully connected layer,
the output layer provides a predicted value of the general cost. Table 9 demonstrates that the
CNN with different word embeddings performs similarly around 0.74–0.79, which is slightly
worse than the best result of predicting with SGD linear regression though the difference is
not obvious. Therefore, both the SGD linear regression model and the CNN appear to predict
the cost from the medical report well, although the fact that augmented data is employed in
the experiment should not be ignored.
Table 8 SGD linear regression
prediction results with different
features
Text vectorizer
MAE
RMSE
R2
Word level TF-IDF
359.01
533.59
0.76
Word n-grams TF-IDF
798.91
1243.39
−0.29
Char level TF-IDF
727.92
1085.87
0.01
Char n-grams TF-IDF
263.51
393.02
0.87
Table 9 Prediction results
comparison with different models
Model
MAE
RMSE
R2
CNN with word2vec embedding
308.97
476.23
0.78
CNN with FastText embedding
340.72
465.16
0.79
CNN with GloVe embedding
389.86
511.50
0.74
SGD linear regression
263.51
393.02
0.87
123

Annals of Operations Research
4.9 Economic gains
The improved efﬁciency of applying the proposed method can translate into monetary values
in our case study with the 88 cases. Table 10 provides a comparative analysis among the
discrepancy (absolute difference) between the “intrinsic costs” (proxied by judges’ ﬁnal
verdicts) and offers from both parties (C is short for the Claimant and D is short for the
Defendant in the table) at various phrases and the difference between the “intrinsic costs”
and square root transformation model implied values.
Comparing the intrinsic costs, model-implied values, and both parties’ ﬁrst offers (the only
offers accessible to the judges) reveals that, the model-implied values better reﬂect the judges’
perceptions than claimants’ or defendants’ expectations, reducing the expectation-reality
discrepancies by over 40%/30% on average for claimants/defendants, respectively. Had the
proposed framework been adopted across the board, both parties would immediately arrive at
a consensus monetary number that represents a more sensible estimate of the intrinsic value,
which leads to the efﬁcient resolution of disputes without incurring unnecessary expenses
or consuming legal resources. If only one party embraces the practice, he would be in a
more advantageous and informed position with more accurate estimates and a better chance
of winning. On top of that, automation facilitated by IT tools unlocks opportunities for a
more cost-effective, time-saving, and productive workﬂow by replacing routine and repetitive
manual operations and activities.
As we could reasonably expect, both parties make concessions as the negotiation pro-
gresses, as suggested by the ﬁrst and ﬁnal offers from both parties. If we consider the ﬁnal
offers as the negotiators’ “bottom lines” that represent their most precise and conﬁdent val-
uations, these ﬁgures are by no means closer to the actual outcomes than the model-implied
ones. In summary, this section demonstrates how the AI-architecture enhances the evaluation
of claims, increases efﬁciency of service processes, and thereby leads to substantial economic
gains.
Table 10 Comparative analysis among offers
Statistic
C’s ﬁrst offer
D’s ﬁrst offer
C’s ﬁnal offer
D’s ﬁnal offer
Predicted
value
Cumulative
difference
82,223.10
69,675
53,686
56,155
46,105.711
Mean
934.35
791.76
689.61
655.17
523.93
SD
906.70
737.97
882.68
721.49
663.03
Bold is used to emphasize the advantages of using the model
123

Annals of Operations Research
5 Discussion and conclusion
Despite the growing discussion of applying AI/data science in the ﬁnancial realm and insur-
ance especially from both the academia (Hendershott, 2021) and industry (Balasubramanian,
2018), little prior research has been conducted that meets the genuine needs of the industry
and utilizes primary data. In this research, we demonstrate a practical application of AI in the
insurance or legal professional service sector. We argue that this is a valuable topic since it not
only brings beneﬁts to the involved companies such as insurance or legal professional service
companies but also to ordinary people and the whole society. Speciﬁcally, we examine the
relationship between the injury symptoms listed in the medical report and injury cost and
process the medical documents to predict the injury cost automatically via NLP techniques.
We make several research contributions and identify implications for practice.
First, we demonstrate the viability of using AI effectively and efﬁciently to improve the
decision-making process in the professional service sector in which many tasks are essentially
repetitive, with a speciﬁc case of a UK legal service ﬁrm. Depending on the data availability,
we propose a general framework to deal with different situations, i.e., those with a small or
large amount of data. In the ﬁrst situation, we build features manually with expert knowledge
and conduct more traditional statistical analysis accordingly. Since the increase in injury
types indicates an increasing general cost as Fig. 7 demonstrates, we further examine the
prediction of the general cost with the top two and three most severe injuries as discussed
in Sect. 4, whereas none of them outperforms the single injury regression model. Based on
the existing data, it appears the square root transformation regression using the most severe
injury can predict the cost well, while we don’t rule out the possibility that a full injury model
might be suitable for more general situations. The biggest advantage of this approach is its
interpretability, which is of particular importance in the context of professional service where
knowledge is the treasure.
Second, to showcase how automation can be achieved in this context, we explore extracting
the features with RegEx. To obtain more reliable results from the second approach, many
cases are required thus better suited to this era of big data. Rather than adopting the predictions
of these models directly, we take advantage of them as a quick reference to help lawyers make
initial judgements. We develop a rule-based NLP workﬂow by exploiting and leveraging a
collection of keywords, rules, and logic. Though dependent on a set of pre-deﬁned features,
the rule-based frame- work well leverages domain-speciﬁc knowledge, fully reﬂects task-
speciﬁc objectives, and achieves great interpretability and transparency. To be more speciﬁc,
we combine the use of label-based, numeric-oriented, and semantic logic. Towards the last
point, we address the long-range semantic dependencies by proposing an implementable and
traceable procedure that explicitly deals with the semantic context.
Last, we investigate how to apply different machine learning techniques to predict the
general cost from medical reports directly without manual feature selection. Using the char-
acter level n-grams (n  4, 5) TF-IDF values as input features, the SGD linear regression
model achieves a predictive R2 value of 0.8 and a CNN utilizing different word embeddings
performs similarly, with the highest predictive R2 of 0.79. It is worth noting that the testing
result is from augmented data (50% synonym substitution) and may suffer from overﬁtting
problems. In machine learning and computer vision research, data augmentation is commonly
used in deep learning tasks such as image recognition and object detection (Shorten, 2019)
because it is a powerful technique that can improve the model performance, especially when
the availability training data is limited (Perez, 2017). The scarcity of data is a common chal-
lenge faced in various sensitive industries, such as in healthcare where data access is strictly
123

Annals of Operations Research
protected due to privacy concerns (Perez, 2017). Likewise, this study is encountering data
limitations that are even more challenging as the data involved is not only affected by patient
privacy issues but also heightened concerns regarding legal data conﬁdentiality. At the same
time, NLP is still in its early stages of applying data augmentation compared to computer
vision (Shorten, 2021) and there is a lack of a researcher-proven, widely accepted approach
to NLP augmentation. Therefore, we believe that augmenting NLP data in this study based
on existing research (i.e., the EDA package) is a reasonable endeavour, which may provide
some insights for other researchers in conﬁdential industries, such as insurance and legal,
who are also grappling with data limitations.
Despite the contributions highlighted above, there are some limitations of this study and
how to address them points out several important future research avenues. As discussed
above, a natural progression of this work is to analyze more predictive models if a larger data
set is available. The scarcity of data makes it tricky to test the full injury model and validate
the machine learning algorithms that require a much larger data set. In this research, we try
to overcome the difﬁculty of data obtaining via NLP data augmentation, but it is possible
that this augmentation will cause overﬁtting by introducing too many similar cases or lead
to underﬁtting since the newly generated cases do not relate well to the cost. Studying this
issue is undoubtedly an interesting topic for future research.
Also, the use of rule-based NLP procedures relies on pre-identiﬁed expressions and struc-
tures as well as pre-deﬁned logical rules, which are not perfectly readily applicable in other
situations and need to be reﬁned with additional knowledge bases and development efforts.
Future directions for research may include enhanced exploitation of existing well-curated
clinical resources and domain-speciﬁc ontologies, and a simpler approach to adapting regular
expressions to other tasks. For example, Murtaugh et al. (2015) presented a learning algo-
rithm that automates the process of designing and developing regular expressions. Besides
this learning approach that automatically identiﬁes and reﬁnes patterns to be fed into the
rule-based system, machine learning or deep learning techniques can also be exploited to
either establish the pre-determined logic rules or provide supplementary information. So far,
this study has been pursuing the rule-based or learning-based branches in a separate manner
to extract pertinent information from the text and then characterize its informational value for
claim costs. In a broader application context, outputs of one approach can serve as inputs of
the other to combine the advantages of both. More speciﬁcally, machine learning algorithms
can aid the recognition of patterns that account for complex semantic lexicon or dependence,
while rule-based methods can produce explicit and interpretable features to enhance machine
learning performance. This provides appealing directions for future research.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Appendix
A Interview
The following is a summary from the interviews and workshops within and outside the
cooperated legal service company to clarify the legal background related to the RTA claims
from 2018 to 2020. These interviews are taken as part of the research project of exploring
AI and statistical predictive models in civil litigation. It is worth noting that these interviews
came from different lawyers of different levels. We refer to them collectively as the lawyer
for convenience.
Author: May I know what are the key decision questions you are interested in?
Lawyer: An important part of the cases we deal with daily are of low value (up to £25,000)
cases of personal injury from the motor accident. Before choosing to go to court, we will
negotiate with the other party on compensation for the case. Our lawyers/claim handlers run
tasks on the Portal system and duplicate them on our company’s case management systems.
Author: Could you explain the Portal system in detail?
Lawyer: The Portal is a tool for processing personal injury claims up to the value of
£25,000. A road trafﬁc accident (RTA) Portal was introduced in 2010 (£10,000 claims limit)
and vertically extended to include motor claims up to £25,000 and horizontally extended to
include Employers’ Liability/Public liability (EL/PL) claims £1000 to £25,000. It is a web
based claims platform where all communication is via electronic means. All information
must be sent via www.claimsportal.org.uk. Both sides will negotiate and seek to settle claim
and oral or paper hearing will be issued when damages cannot be agreed.
Author: We suppose that there will be costs incurred during the negotiation, is that true?
Lawyer: Yes, there will be cost, and the cost is a little complicated. Firstly, there is the
ﬁxed cost which is paid by the defendant such as the stage cost, medical report cost, etc. The
detailed stage cost can be found on PART 45—FIXED COSTS. Secondly, the miscellaneous,
which is usually different in different cases. Generally speaking, the longer the negotiation
takes, the more parties need to pay. There are also result depended fees if parties fail to reach
an agreement during the negotiation and go to court. For example, the stage three cost and
issue fee will be paid by the defendant if his/her offer will be beaten.
Author: Thanks for clariﬁcation. We browsed the litigation documents and ﬁnd that it
basically takes at least two years from the occurrence of the accident to the ﬁnal judgment
of the court. Is this too long for both parties, especially considering that they are low-cost
cases?
Lawyer: That’s a good point. There are many reasons for the delay or even the inability
to resolve through negotiation. One of the important reasons is that the two parties cannot
reach an agreement on the amount of the ﬁnal compensation.
Author: Does that mean that if we look up the results of a large number of historical
cases and use these results to predict the compensation of a similar case, it will help us better
estimate and avoid some unnecessary losses?
Lawyer: Yes, I think so. It will be very helpful if we can build some kind of systems to
systematically analyze a large amount of historical data and draw certain conclusions.
Author: Great. Another thing we found is that two types of damage costs are negotiated,
the general cost and special cost. What is the difference between them?
Lawyer: Basically, the general cost is entirely decided by the claimant’s injury type and
severity, which will be estimated by the lawyers/claim handlers with the Judicial College
Guidelines. On the other hand, the special cost includes costs such income loss, repairs cost,
123

Annals of Operations Research
physiotherapy cost caused by the accident and so on. The special cost is quite case-based,
and we can talk about general cost ﬁrst.
Author: Thanks for that. I can see that there is a corresponding compensation for each
type of injury based on the severity. But what if the claimant suffered two or more injuries?
Will you add up all the injury compensation?
Lawyer: I don’t think we will add up the compensation for all injuries, but will focus on
the most serious injury, and then consider the others as appropriate. As for the discretion, it is
based on the solicitor/claim handler’s experience. It will be very interesting to get an insight
of the relationship between injury and compensation.
B code
Entity-attribute information retrieval
Long-term contextual dependency
123

Annals of Operations Research
Gap between accident and prognosis
C Text example
Word patterns to identify
Long-term contextual dependencies
123

Annals of Operations Research
Case-speciﬁc formats
Time gap
Output
123

Annals of Operations Research
References
Abrahams, A. S. (2015). An integrated text analytic framework for product defect discovery. Production and
Operations Management, 6(24), 975–990.
Araz, O.M.-M. (2020). Role of analytics for operational risk management in the era of big data. Decision
Sciences, 51, 1320–1346.
Atkinson, K.A.-C. (2020). Explanation in AI and law: Past, present and future. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2989,
103387.
Avgerinos, E. A. (2018). Task variety in professional service work: When it helps and when it hurts. Production
and Operations Management, 27, 1368–1389.
Balasubramanian, R. A. (2018). Insurance 2030—the impact of AI on the future of insurance. McKinsey &
Company.
Bitvai, Z., & Cohn, T. (2015, July). Non-linear text regression with a deep convolutional neural network. In
Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th
InternationalJointConferenceonNaturalLanguageProcessing,(Volume2:ShortPapers)(pp.180–185).
Boone, T. A. (2001). The effect of information technology on learning in professional service organizations.
Journal of Operations Management, 19, 485–495.
Cui, R. A. (2022). AI and procurement. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 24(2), 691–706.
Dereli, N. A. (2019). Convolutional neural networks for ﬁnancial text regression. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop.
Dobrzykowski, D. D. (2016). Examining pathways to safety and ﬁnancial performance in hospitals: A study
of lean in professional service operations. Journal of Operations Management, 42, 39–51.
Goldstein, S. M. (2002). The service concept: The missing link in service design research? Journal of Oper-
ations Management, 20, 121–134.
GOV.UK. (2021). Payment of court fees in road trafﬁc accident related personal injury claims under the new.
Retrieved November 2021, from https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/whiplash-reform-prog
ramme-information-and-faq/payment-of-court-fees-in-road-trafﬁc-accident-related-personal-injury-cl
aims-under-the-new-small
Harris, Z. S. (1954). Distributional structure. Word, 10, 146–162.
Hendershott, T. A. (2021). FinTech as a game changer: Overview of research frontiers. Information Systems
Research, 32, 1–17.
Huang, M.-H.A. (2021). Engaged to a robot? The role of AI in service. Journal of Service Research, 24, 30–41.
Jackson, R. M. (2010). Review of civil litigation costs. The Stationery Ofﬁce.
Jagannatha, A. N., & Yu, H. (2016, June). Bidirectional RNN for medical event detection in electronic health
records. In Proceedings of the conference. Association for Computational Linguistics. North American
Chapter. Meeting (Vol. 2016, p. 473). NIH Public Access.
Joulin, A. A. (2016). Fasttext. zip: Compressing text classiﬁcation models. arXiv:1612.03651.
Justice. (2017). Pre-action protocol for low value personal injury claims in road trafﬁc accidents from 31
july 2013. Retrieved January 10, 2021, from https://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/civil/prot
ocol/pre-action-protocol-for-low-value-personal-injury-claims-in-road-trafﬁc-accidents-31-july-2013.
Karwan, K. R. (2006). Integrating service design principles and information technology to improve delivery
and productivity in public sector operations: The case of the South Carolina DMV. Journal of Operations
Management, 24, 347–362.
Kim, Y. (2014a). Convolutional neural networks for sentence classiﬁcation. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Kumar, S. A. (2018). Research in operations management and information systems interface. Production and
Operations Management, 27, 1893–1905.
Lewis, M. A. (2012). How different is professional service operations management? Journal of Operations
Management, 30(1–2), 1–11.
Lexis. (2020). Valuing general damages—checklist. Retrieved May 2021, from https://www.lexisnexis.com/
uk/lexispsl/personalinjury/document/393875/5N4N-02G1-F18H-M3GD-00000-00/Valuing_general_
damages_checklist.
Medvedeva, M. A. (2020). Using machine learning to predict decisions of the European Court of Human
Rights. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Law, 28, 237–266.
Mikolov, T. (2013). Efﬁcient estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv:1301.3781.
Miller, G. A. (1995). WordNet: A lexical database for English. Communications of the ACM, 11, 39–41.
Molot, J. T. (2009). A market in litigation risk. The University of Chicago Law Review, 76, 367.
Murtaugh, M.A.-T. (2015). Regular expression-based learning to extract bodyweight values from clinical
notes. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 54, 186–190.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Pennington, J. (2014). Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference
on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP).
Perez, L. (2017). The effectiveness of data augmentation in image classiﬁcation using deep learning. arXiv:
1712.04621.
Ray, G., Muhanna, W. A., & Barney, J. B. (2005). Information technology and the performance of the customer
service process: A resource-based analysis. MIS quarterly, pp. 625–652.
Salton, G. (1988). Term-weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval. Information Processing and Man-
agement, 24, 513–523.
Samek, W. (2019b). Explainable AI: Interpreting, explaining and visualizing deep learning. Springer.
Shorten, C. (2019). A survey on image data augmentation for deep learning. Journal of Big Data, 6(1), 1–48.
Shorten, C. T. (2021). Text data augmentation for deep learning. Journal of Big Data, 8, 1–34.
Smith, D. A., & Eisner, J. (2008, October). Dependency parsing by belief propagation. In Proceedings of the
2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (pp. 145–156).
Taddeo, M. (2018). How AI can be a force for good. Science, 361, 751–752.
Thompson, K. (1968). Programming techniques: Regular expression search algorithm. Communications of
the ACM, 11(6), 419–422.
Turchin, A. (2006). Using regular expressions to abstract blood pressure and treatment intensiﬁcation infor-
mation from the text of physician notes. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 13,
691–695.
Vacek, T. (2019). Litigation analytics: Case outcomes extracted from US federal court dockets. In Proceedings
of the Natural Legal Language Processing Workshop.
Van Rossum, G. (2020). The Python Library Reference, release 3.8.2. Python Software Foundation, 16.
VonNordenﬂycht,A.(2010).Whatisaprofessionalserviceﬁrm?Towardatheoryandtaxonomyofknowledge-
intensive ﬁrms. Academy of Management Review, 35(1), 155–174.
Wei, J. (2019). Eda: Easy data augmentation techniques for boosting performance on text classiﬁcation tasks.
arXiv:1901.11196.
Woolf, H. (1995). Access to Justice: Interim report to the Lord Chancellor on the civil justice system in England
and Wales. Lord Chancellor’s Department.
Xiao, C. (2018). Cail2018: A large-scale legal dataset for judgment prediction. arXiv:1807.02478.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
Authors and Aﬃliations
Wen Zhang1
· Jingwen Shi2
· Xiaojun Wang3
· Henry Wynn4
B Wen Zhang
phd14wz@mail.wbs.ac.uk
Jingwen Shi
phd15js@mail.wbs.ac.uk
Xiaojun Wang
x.wang.18@bham.ac.uk
Henry Wynn
H.Wynn@lse.ac.uk
1
Business School, University of Bristol, 11-13 Tyndall’s Park Road, Clifton, Bristol BS8 1PY, UK
2
State Street Global Advisors, London, UK
3
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
4
London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK
123