TITLE: A Network-DEA model to evaluate the impact of quality and access on hospital performance
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05362-x
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05362-x
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A Network-DEA model to evaluate the impact of quality
and access on hospital performance
G. P. Afonso1
· D. C. Ferreira1
· J. R. Figueira2
Accepted: 14 April 2023 / Published online: 10 May 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
The relationship between efﬁciency, quality, and access in healthcare is far from being well
deﬁned. In particular, there is no consensus on whether there is a trade-off between hospital
performance and its social dimensions, such as the care appropriateness, safety, and access
to proper health care. This study proposes a new approach based on the Network Data
Envelopment Analysis (NDEA) to evaluate the existence of potential trade-offs between
efﬁciency, quality, and access. The aim is to contribute for the heated debate around this topic
with a novel approach. The suggested methodology combines a NDEA model with the weak
disposability of outputs to handle with undesirable outputs related to the poor quality of care
or the lack of access to appropriate and safe care. This combination results in a more realistic
approach that has not yet been used to investigate this topic. We utilised data of the Portuguese
National Health Service from 2016 to 2019, with four models and nineteen variables selected
to quantify the efﬁciency, quality, and access to public hospital care in Portugal. A baseline
efﬁciency score was calculated and compared with the performance scores obtained under
two hypothetical scenarios to quantify the impact of each quality/access-related dimension on
efﬁciency. The ﬁrst scenario considers that each variable, individually, is at its best situation
(for example, absence of septicaemia cases), and the second one, at its worst (e.g., all seen
inpatients had a septicaemia case). The ﬁndings suggest that there might exist meaningful
trade-offs between efﬁciency, quality, and access. Most variables exhibited a considerable
and negative impact on the overall hospital efﬁciency. That is, we may expect a trade-off
between efﬁciency and quality/access.
Keywords Network Data Envelopment Analysis · Efﬁciency · Quality · Access · Trade-offs
B D. C. Ferreira
diogo.cunha.ferreira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
1
CERIS, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida Rovisco Pais, 1, 1049-001
Lisbon, Portugal
2
CEG-IST, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Avenida Rovisco Pais, 1, 1049-001
Lisbon, Portugal
123

2170
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
1 Introduction
Measuring the efﬁciency in the healthcare sector has been brought to attention due to the
high pressure of private providers as well as governments to achieve good quality care with
the least expenditure possible. Over the last years, several authors, including Mitropoulos et
al. (2013b) and Pereira et al. (2021), have been reinforcing the importance of measuring the
efﬁciency of healthcare systems due to their high weight in the national budget as well as to
meet ﬁnancial objectives of providers to maintain economic viability.
However, as stated by Varabyova et al. (2017), efﬁciency cannot be the only focus in
the healthcare sector. Quality and availability of resources are other two critical factors that
impact the functioning of any National Health Service (NHS). As coined by Ferreira et al.
(2020), these are the main social dimensions of hospital care, so we refer to both quality and
access as social dimensions henceforward. Nevertheless, the impact that quality and access
may have on performance is unclear (Ferreira et al., 2020; Kittelsen et al., 2015; Varabyova
et al., 2017). There is no assurance that improving efﬁciency will reduce quality or access,
neither the contrariwise case (Chatﬁeld, 2014; Gorgemans et al., 2018; Ferreira & Marques,
2019).
Furthermore, over the last years, some authors have reached opposite conclusions con-
cerning this issue. On the one hand, several studies concluded that it is possible to improve
efﬁciency without jeopardising quality and access. This is the case of van Ineveld et al.
(2016), Onder et al. (2021) and Khushalani and Ozcan (2017), according to whom it is possi-
ble to improve simultaneously the efﬁciency, quality, and access, denying the idea that there
is a trade-off between them. On the other hand, another group of authors, including Gok
and Sezen (2013), Gorgemans et al. (2018), and Varabyova et al. (2017), showed less conﬁ-
dence in the results claiming that in some situations, the trade-off might exist. According to
Mitropoulos (2021), that trade-off is clear, and thus improving efﬁciency should result in a
downgrade of quality.
The fact that the literature is unclear regarding this topic, reinforces the need to extend
the investigation suggested by this paper. Having a clear notion of the way that quality and
access inﬂuence the efﬁciency of healthcare facilities is fundamental to ensure that operations
are running optimally, favouring both users and managers. To do so, we considered several
variables to evaluate quality and access, and to determine and quantify their impact on the
hospital efﬁciency. Network Data Envelopment Analysis (NDEA) was the method selected
to perform the analysis due to its ability to consider the internal structure and connections of
complex systems, such as hospitals.
DEA, and other DEA augmented methods, are the most widely used non-parametric
modelstoassesstheefﬁciencyofasystem(Blatniketal.,2017;DeNicolaetal.,2014;Gautam
et al., 2013). In fact, according to Mitropoulos et al. (2013b), “DEA is more appropriate for the
analysis of public sector activities.” Moreover, Gok and Sezen (2013) and Kao et al. (2021)
support that DEA is the most used non-parametric method when estimating efﬁciency in
healthcare services and systems worldwide. Agreeing with the idea of Pai et al. (2019), who
stated that DEA is a valuable tool to support management evaluations, the model can suitably
evaluate the policies’ impact or detect inefﬁciencies across all economic ﬁelds.
NDEA presents several advantages as a more recent extension of the classical DEA. Fol-
lowing Kawaguchi et al. (2014) and Khushalani and Ozcan (2017), one of the most critical
features of NDEA (compared to other DEA-based approaches) is its ability to consider the
internal structure of the system. This makes it impossible for a Decision Making Unit (DMU)
to be considered efﬁcient if any subdivisions are not (Tone & Tsutsui, 2009). Moreover, a hos-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2171
pital is a complex system whose reality is not easily translated into a mathematical model due
to the existence of products between its subdivisions. As stated by Kujawska (2018), NDEA
allows taking internal links into consideration, which is fundamental to achieve stronger
results.
According to Ferreira et al. (2020), researchers that seek to ﬁnd the link between efﬁciency
and quality/access in hospital care tend to resort to two main approaches: (1) to consider social
dimensions as separated from the production process of outputs using inputs, i.e., efﬁciency;
and (2) to consider that those dimensions should ﬁgure out alongside the outputs as the result
of inputs utilisation, i.e., as extra outputs. The ﬁrst alternative does not seem to be appropriate
because it assumes that inputs only contribute to produce some outputs (e.g., patients seen
in hospital), regardless of the result (e.g., patients live or die within the hospital). In other
words, quality and access act as external or non-discretionary dimensions, only explaining
the levels of (in)efﬁciency. Because of that, authors usually use techniques like multiple
linear regression analysis, with or without bootstrapping, or even more complex solutions
(order-m and order-α). The second alternative looks more adequate if and only if one is fully
aware of the type of impact (positive or negative) that each social dimension might have
on performance. However, typically one does not know it. The problem exacerbates when
authors use volume-based variables alongside ratios or, even worse, ordinal data (as for
the case of patient satisfaction). Considering the drawbacks mentioned above, the proposed
NDEA model surpasses those issues and thus can be seen as a third alternative to help the
debate regarding the relationship between efﬁciency and social dimensions.
This paper is structured as follows. Section2 introduces the state of the art research
regarding the type of analysis and methods used by other authors to accomplish the same
or similar objectives. Section3 describes the adopted methodology. Section4 introduces the
case study itself, the proprieties of the Portuguese NHS, the variables used, the models
proposed, the data collection and treatment. Section5 presents the results obtained for all the
analyses performed in this paper, followed by their brief description. Finally, Sect. 6 reﬂects
on the results, comparing them with the relevant literature and withdrawing the relevant
implications. Also, the limitations and future work are mentioned.
2 Literature review
The discussion around the trade-off between efﬁciency and quality is not a novelty in the
healthcare ﬁeld. Over the last few years, several authors have relied on diverse methods to
evaluate whether this link exists.
Benchmarking methods can be either parametric or non-parametric. The parametric
approach relies on Stochastic Frontier Analysis (SFA) to calculate hospital efﬁciency. SFA
is an econometric technique that bases the efﬁciency values on the regression of a stochastic
frontier function, bearing in mind the relation between the inputs and outputs of the model.
As suggested by Blatnik et al. (2017) and Gautam et al. (2013), this technique presents
its advantages, namely the ability to detect the weight of white noise (data errors) on the
estimation of efﬁciency and, consequently, distinguish the noise from hospital inefﬁciency.
However, some drawbacks have also been brought up in the healthcare ﬁeld when using
SFA. Firstly, according to De Nicola et al. (2014), this method requires that the stochastic
function is deﬁned a priori, which could highly affect the efﬁciency estimation and therefore
introduce changes in the ranking of hospitals. Secondly, following Gautam et al. (2013), this
technique cannot deal with multiple input–output systems, like hospitals, which deviate the
123

2172
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
models from the reality in which each hospital acts like a single system. These drawbacks and
others lead the majority of authors, such as Mitropoulos et al. (2013b), Blatnik et al. (2017),
De Nicola et al. (2014) and Kao et al. (2021), to choose a non-parametric approach, mostly
DEA, when measuring the efﬁciency of hospitals and other healthcare facilities. DEA and
other related models have the advantage of being data-driven, so the frontier is constructed
without major assumptions (e.g., deﬁning a priori a stochastic function). Additionally, they
can easily account for multiple inputs and outputs. More recently, the NDEA can also con-
sider the intricate relationships between different stages within the same system, as with
hospitals. A complete comparison between the SFA and DEA, pointing out the advantages
and disadvantages in each case, has been done by Jacobs et al. (2006) and Coelli et al. (2005).
A summary of the relevant literature review is presented in Table 7. The inputs, outputs, and
other variables selected, as well as the conclusions reached by the authors, differ signiﬁcantly,
creating controversial results regarding the inﬂuence that quality and access have on overall
efﬁciency. While some studies, such as the work of Campanella et al. (2017), Chatﬁeld
(2014) and van Ineveld et al. (2016), support that efﬁciency and quality go hand in hand,
whichentailsthatifefﬁciencyisimproved,qualitywouldimproveaswell.Otherauthors,such
as Mitropoulos (2021), point out the opposite direction, suggesting that a better efﬁciency
is obtained by decreasing quality. However, the majority of authors did not obtain results
clear enough to draw solid conclusions regarding the trade-off. For example, Gok and Sezen
(2013) report that in smaller hospitals, there might exist a trade-off between efﬁciency and
the social dimensions; on the other hand, regarding larger hospitals, this trade-off might
be questionable. Gorgemans et al. (2018) state that efﬁciency might evolve in the same
way that quality, supporting the nonexistence of the trade-off, however emphasising that
this could not be valid for all cases. Kittelsen et al. (2015) defend that there is no clear
trade-off. Also, Varabyova et al. (2017) afﬁrm that the existence of trade-offs depends on
how quality is incorporated in the models, which could result in a trade-off according with
some approaches. On top of that, the majority of the studies in the ﬁeld are not focused on
establishing a relationship between efﬁciency, quality and access but rather on evaluating the
efﬁciency that healthcare systems operate on. Nevertheless, these studies also rely on several
variables to evaluate the hospitals’ efﬁciency.
The variables chosen to evaluate efﬁciency are in line with the ones also mentioned in
Table 7. As selected by Yang and Zeng (2014) and Almeida et al. (2015), the number of beds,
doctors, and nurses remain the most frequent ones, followed by operation costs adopted by Pai
et al. (2019) and Mitropoulos et al. (2013b). Regarding the system’s outputs, as appointed by
Kao et al. (2021) and Gok and Sezen (2013), the number of inpatients discharges, outpatient
visits and surgeries are the most common in the literature.
Regarding the variables used to include quality and access, the most common are the
ones related to mortality, readmissions and time spent in the inpatient service, as selected by
Chang et al. (2011) and Khushalani and Ozcan (2017). Nevertheless, other authors, such as
Gorgemans et al. (2018), also choose the number of infections and procedure complications.
Although still present in the literature, a less frequent choice, is the use of the number of hip-
fractures surgeries in less than 48h and the number of outpatient surgeries when it is possible
to avoid inpatient admission. It is vital to acknowledge that only countries that follow a
Beveridge health model, such as Portugal since 1979, tend to offer to their population a public
NHS, and for that reason are interested in guaranteeing equal access to all the population in
need. Because these countries are somewhat scarce, the variables used do not evaluate the
access dimension in most cases. Indeed, Ferreira and Marques (2019) already commented
that there were just a few studies dealing with the link or possible trade-off between efﬁciency
and access in healthcare.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2173
Additionally, Mitropoulos et al. (2013a) refer to the importance of considering the waiting
times and the appropriateness of procedures when evaluating healthcare facilities.
All the studies referred to above resorted to a simple DEA model, a two or more stages
model or an adjustment technique to incorporate quality indicators in their models. Some also
rely on further regression analysis to take into consideration the quality of care. Although
these methodologies allow for quantifying the impact of quality on efﬁciency, they all present
some limitations, as referred to in Sect.1.
The use of NDEA to study this topic is extremely scarce in the literature. Consequently, its
application to healthcare could help the discussion around the impact of quality and access
on efﬁciency. Kawaguchi et al. (2014) were the ﬁrst to apply a Dynamic NDEA in healthcare.
However, they only studied the efﬁciency of Japanese hospitals considering that all quality
and access parameters were equal between hospitals. Since that claim might not be valid, the
authors recognise the importance of including variables that evaluate quality and access in
this type of assessment. The same rationale was applied by Pereira et al. (2021), who relied
on NDEA to evaluate the efﬁciency of Portuguese hospitals, and with that, identify the ones
operating on their optimal scale and the ones which do not. However, that evaluation was
made disregarding the quality and access dimensions, which could lead to hospitals being
classiﬁed as efﬁcient while providing low-quality services. Additionally, Kujawska (2018)
and Ozcan and Khushalani (2017) also used NDEA and Dynamic NDEA, respectively, in
healthcare, but to study the impact of public health on the hospital efﬁciency. Although the
focus of the work is not entirely the same, the variables chosen to evaluate the efﬁciency of
hospitals were in line with the ones reported by other authors, including the number of beds
and clinical personnel.
Also, Khushalani and Ozcan (2017) and Mitropoulos (2021) rely on a Dynamic NDEA
and a two-stage NDEA model, respectively, to evaluate the relationship between efﬁciency,
quality, and access. The former concludes that there is no trade-off between efﬁciency and
quality, while the latter supports the opposite. Although both authors used a network model,
the variables selected in both cases to incorporate quality were based on forms completed by
the healthcare services users. This raises a problem since this type of data is highly subjective,
as it is based on subjective assessments rather than objective indicators. The inclusion of such
data in mathematical models have been strongly criticised by some authors; see Ferreira et
al. (2021) for a survey.
3 Methodology
The approach presented in this paper follows the network slack-based model proposed by
Tone and Tsutsui (2009), modiﬁed with the Kuosmanen (2005)’s suggestion to deal with
undesirable outputs. This choice was made to tackle two limitations of previous studies.
First, NDEA can be presented in various manners. On the one hand, there can be radial
models, and on the other, non-radial models. The radial models assume that the same con-
traction applied for one input/output/link is applied to the rest due to one ﬁxed variable
for all inputs/outputs/links. Contrarily, non-radial models relax this constraint transforming
the inequations in equations by adding slacks and eliminating the ﬁxed variable, allowing
the inputs/outputs/links to contract independently. In healthcare, there is no guarantee that
inputs, outputs, or links change proportionally within them. If that would occur, for example,
an increase in beds would mean a proportional increase in doctors. Since it is not necessary
to happen, a non-radial model was considered here. According to Tone and Tsutsui (2009),
123

2174
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
if that proportionally is not guaranteed, only the non-radial approach will provide reliable
results. Other authors have used this methodology, including Cheng and Gao (2015) and Kao
(2009). However, it is essential to mention that most DEA and NDEA-based studies tend to
disregard this issue, thus relying on radial models.
Second, in healthcare, exclusively producing desirable outputs, which aim to be max-
imised, is not, unfortunately, always possible. Along with the process of treating patients,
undesirable outputs should likely appear. These unwanted outcomes should be minimised or
even erased from the production process. Due to that, this type of output cannot be treated
as desirable ones. It is vital to take into consideration that when using DEA [including the
approach presented by Tone and Tsutsui (2009)], the method will try to minimise inputs and
maximise outputs. That is why an alteration has been made to the original methodology,
which minimises the group of undesirable outputs.
Undesirable outputs in DEA have been dealt with in several different ways that guarantee
that the model will minimise these. According to Kuosmanen (2005), among others, the most
used methods are to consider them as an input or apply the same mathematical approach as
for the inputs to each given set of outputs individually.
Both solutions referred to above present inconsistencies regarding the axioms of produc-
tion theory, some physical laws, and mathematical ﬂaws, as stated by Färe and Grosskopf
(2003) and Kuosmanen (2005). Consequently, to avoid the stated problems, the undesirable
output weak disposability suggestion of Kuosmanen (2005), also used in other contexts, was
combined with the work of Tone and Tsutsui (2009) and originated the approach used in this
paper.
To take into consideration the output weak disposability theory, an abatement factor,
θ k, was added to the model’s original constraints, deﬁned by Tone and Tsutsui (2009). Let
a DMU o be composed of K subunits, each one with a performance score, ρk
o; thus, the
overall performance score is the average of the K subunits; see Eq. (1). As reinforced by
Tone and Tsutsui (2009), these efﬁciencies are unit-invariant, which means that they are
independent of the units used to measure the variables in each subunit (inputs, outputs, and
links).
ρ∗
o =
K
k=1 ρk
o
K
, k = 1, . . . , K.
(1)
Meanwhile, the performance of each subunit of DMU o depends on the mk received
external inputs, xk
o, the rk produced outputs going outside of the system, yk
o, and the
links, z(k,h)
o
. The latter are nothing but the outputs produced in the subunit k and ﬂow
to the subunit h, acting as some of its inputs. Equations (2) and (3) present the origi-
nal linear programming-based NDEA model proposed by Tone and Tsutsui (2009). The
sk−and sk+ represent, respectively, the input and output slack vectors for the subunit
k.
ρk
o =
min
λk,sk−
1 −
1
mk
mk
i=1
sk−
i
xio
, if k = 1,
ρk
o = max
λk,sk+
1
1 +
1
rk
rk
r=1
sk+
r
ykro
, if k > 1,
(2)
s.t.
xk
o = Xkλk + sk−, k = 1, . . . , K,
yk
o = Ykλk −sk+ k = 1, . . . , K,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2175
Z(k,h)λh = Z(k,h)λk, ∀k, h = 1, . . . , K, k ̸= h,

λk = 1, k = 1, . . . , K,
λk ≥0, sk−≥0, sk+ ≥0, k = 1, . . . , K.
(3)
On top of that, the outputs of the system were also separated into two different vectors, one
representing the desirable outputs, v, and another the undesirable outputs, u, which resulted
in Eq. (4) and (5), after applying the transformation of Kuosmanen (2005) and Kuosmanen
and Podinovski (2009).
ρk
o =
min
λk,sk−
1 −
1
mk
mk
i=1
sk−
i
xio
, if k = 1,
ρk
o = max
λk,sk+
1
1 +
1
rk
rk
r=1
sk+
r
vkro
, if k > 1,
(4)
s.t.
xk
o = Xkλk + sk−, k = 1, . . . , K,
vk
o = Vkλkθ k −sk+, k = 1, . . . , K,
uk
o = Ukλkθ k, k = 1, . . . , K,
Z(k,h)λh = Z(k,h)λk, ∀k, h = 1, . . . , K, k ̸= h,

λk = 1, k = 1, . . . , K,
λk ≥0, 0 ≤θ k ≤1, sk−≥0, sk+ ≥0, k = 1, . . . , K.
(5)
However, the problem became non-linear due to the multiplication between the intensity
λ and the abatement θ vectors, which made it impossible to solve using linear programming.
The linearisation proposed by Kuosmanen (2005) was adopted to overcome that issue, which
decomposes the intensity vector into two and redeﬁnes the abatement factor as shown by Eq.
(6) and (7).
λk = μk + ϕk
(6)
θ k =
ϕk
ϕk + μk
(7)
Therefore, it is possible to linearise and solve the model in (5). In this case, the objective
function in Eq. (4) does not change. However, the constraints are as follows:
xk
o = Xk(μk + ϕk) + sk−, k = 1, . . . , K,
vk
o = Vkϕk −sk+, k = 1, . . . , K,
uk
o = Ukϕk, k = 1, . . . , K,
Z(k,h)(μh + ϕh) = Z(k,h)(μk + ϕk), ∀k, h = 1, . . . , K, k ̸= h,

(μk + ϕk) = 1, k = 1, . . . , K,
μk ≥0, ϕk ≥0, sk−≥0, sk+ ≥0, k = 1, . . . , K,
(8)
where
Xk = (xk
1, . . . , xk
n) ∈Rn×mk
Vk = (vk
1, . . . , vk
n) ∈Rn×rk
123

2176
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
Uk = (uk
1, . . . , uk
n) ∈Rn×wk
Z(k,h) = (z(k,h)
1
, . . . , z(k,h)
n
) ∈Rn×t(k,h)
μk = (μk
1, . . . , μk
n) ∈Rn
+
ϕk = (ϕk
1, . . . , ϕk
n) ∈Rn
+
(9)
Bear in mind that the problem is presented under Variable Return to Scale (VRS) but
could easily be converted into a Constant Return to Scale (CRS) problem by removing the
last constrain from Eq. (8).
4 Case study: the Portuguese NHS
The proposed methodology was applied to the Portuguese public hospitals belonging to the
NHS.Nineefﬁciency,sevenquality,andthreeaccess-relatedvariableswerechosentoperform
the analysis, using four original models and yearly data retrieved from 2016 to 2019. More
recent data was disregarded because of the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, which forced
the adoption of unusual practices in hospitals worldwide. Further research in this topic is
necessary, though.
4.1 An overview
Healthcare in Portugal includes several types of providers, being the Portuguese NHS the
largest one. Nevertheless, a smaller percentage of the population relies on private providers,
often associated with private voluntary insurance schemes or other subsystems speciﬁc to
certain professions (Ferreira et al., 2013, 2018).
The Portuguese NHS was founded in 1979 (Law number 56/79, 15th September) follow-
ing a Beveridge model. To avoid an abusive use of the system and contribute to its funding,
a co-payment is required in some services for some patients according to their social and
ﬁnancial situation. Since most funds come from the Central Government (after taxation),
the Portuguese NHS, which includes all public primary and secondary healthcare entities, is
characterised as a not-for-proﬁt system, universal, general, and equitable for all Portuguese
citizens regardless of their capability to pay for the treatments (Ferreira et al., 2013; Ferreira
& Marques, 2019). Therefore, although these public services should have been mostly con-
cerned with the social dimensions of care, the truth is that ﬁnancial sustainability (efﬁciency)
should also be considered a serious concern by healthcare providers.
The creation of the NHS followed the end of the dictatorship regime that prevailed in
Portugal until 1974 with the goal of transferring to the government the duty of providing,
ﬁnancing, managing, and regulating healthcare services. After its creation, several modiﬁ-
cations have been introduced to satisfy the patient expectations and keep up with the fast
development of medicine over the last years. Besides, the expenditure on healthcare started
to rise around the end of the last century threatening the NHS sustainability and its capability
to continue providing equitable access.
Nowadays, in Portugal mainland there are 22 hospital centres (groups of secondary care
hospitals horizontally integrated), and eight local health units (vertical aggregations between
primary care facilities and secondary care hospitals), while 13 hospitals remain single entities.
All of these are public hospitals. There is currently (February 2022) one hospital providing
services to the NHS throughout a public-private partnership. Due to their autonomy, the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2177
archipelagos of Azores and Madeira have different healthcare services that do not follow
completely the guidelines of the Ministry of Health and were consequently excluded from this
study. Local health units and specialised hospitals (oncology centres) were also disregarded
from the analysis because of their unique production process, turning them incomparable to
the others.
As the expenditure with healthcare in Portugal continues to raise, the importance of keep-
ing the system as efﬁcient as possible also raises. Portugal is one of the countries that spends
more of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per year with healthcare, roughly 10% of the
national GDP. This signiﬁcant percentage of public money increases the pressure on the gov-
ernment to keep the costs as low as possible without jeopardising the quality and availability
of care provided. To contain the rise observed over the last years, the government should
ﬁnd new ways to improve efﬁciency and achieve better outcomes with the same or fewer
resources (Pereira et al., 2020).
4.2 Efficiency
The most frequent inputs used in DEA to evaluate efﬁciency are related to capital invest-
ment, labour, and expenditures (Kao et al., 2021; van Ineveld et al., 2016; Yaya et al., 2020).
Particularly, the use of the number of beds is widely chosen to evaluate capital investment
(Chang et al., 2011; Gao & Wang, 2020; Gok & Sezen, 2013), the number of doctors and
nurses (or their ﬁnancial impact) to evaluate labour (De Nicola et al., 2014; Gorgemans et
al., 2018; Varabyova et al., 2017), and the operating costs to account for expenses (Chatﬁeld,
2014; Ferreira et al., 2020; Khushalani & Ozcan, 2017). Regarding the outputs, as seen in
Sect.2, the number of patients treated (inpatient and outpatients) is the most used measure
of production (Gao & Wang, 2020; Gorgemans et al., 2018; van Ineveld et al., 2016). Nev-
ertheless, others have frequently been used, such as the number of surgeries (Chang et al.,
2011; Gok & Sezen, 2013; Ferreira et al., 2020), when the analysis considers these services.
To ensure a more detailed set of results, the efﬁciency variables were separated into two
groups.Thedifferencesarethesubstitutionofthenumberofdoctorsandnursesbyitsﬁnancial
impact, the personnel costs, and the addition of the outsourcing costs in some models. Note
that only one group was considered at each time. For example, when the model considers the
number of doctors and the number of nurses, the costs with personnel were not applied.
The selected variables to consider efﬁciency measures in the models are presented in
Table 1, along with their description.
4.3 Quality
Toevaluatequalityinhealthcare,boththesafetydimensionandtheappropriatenessofthecare
provided are fundamental (Gorgemans et al., 2018; Ferreira & Marques, 2019; Mitropoulos,
2021). Consequently, the variables found in the literature related to the appropriateness of the
care (Q1–Q3) (Ferreira & Marques, 2019; Khushalani & Ozcan, 2017; Onder et al., 2021)
and procedures safety (Q4–Q7) (Ferreira et al., 2018; Gorgemans et al., 2018; van Ineveld
et al., 2016) were added to the analysis. The quality variables presented in Table 2 aggregate
both the desirable (Q1–Q3) and the undesirable ones (Q4–Q7).
123

2178
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
Table 1 Selected variables to take into consideration the efﬁciency of healthcare and their description
Variable
Description
Number of beds (E1)
Number of beds available in the inpatient services
(wards) of each hospital, excluding nursery, individual
rooms, continuous care, palliative care and psychiatry
beds
Number of doctors (E2)
The number of regular yearly hours of full-time
equivalent doctors working in each hospital (including
overtime)
Number of nurses (E3)
The number of regular yearly hours of full-time
equivalent nurses working in each hospital (including
overtime)
Operational costs (E4)
The yearly non-capital expenses (excluding costs with
staff) reported by each hospital to keep the production
line working, in this case, to keep treating patients
Costs with personnel (E5)
The yearly expenses with hospital staff salaries
(including subsidies)
Costs with outsourcing (E6)
The part of each hospital yearly expenses that concerns
the cost of outsourcing services, such as utilities,
security, representation expenses and additional
seasonal staff wages
Inpatients treated (E7)
The number of inpatients discharged from the hospital,
excluding service transfers within the same hospital,
nursery, individual rooms, continuous care, palliative
care, and psychiatry discharges
Outpatients treated (E8)
The number of outpatients appointments realised,
including emergency appointments
Number of surgeries (E9)
The total of non-urgent major (requiring overnight) and
nonurgent ambulatory (not requiring overnight)
surgeries
4.4 Access
Table 3 presents the list of the selected variables to evaluate the access to healthcare as well
as their description. This selection, which simultaneously shows the desirable variable (A1)
and the undesirable ones (A2 and A3), results from the fusion of the variables found in the
literature used to evaluate the availability of the services, an essential dimension of the care
provided according to Mitropoulos et al. (2013a).
4.5 Models
The variables referred to above were used to create four NDEA models (A, B, C, and D), as
shown in Fig.1. The models suggested have a different structure, and the variables considered
in each also change.
In the models presented, each rectangle represents a subunit, and the group of all subunits
represents a hospital. The arrows pointing from outside to a subunit represent an input vari-
able, the arrows between subunits a link, and the arrows pointing out from a subunit an output.
The outputs can be desirable, represented by the solid lines, or undesirable, represented by
the dashed lines.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2179
Table 2 Selected variables to take into consideration the quality of care and their description
Variable
Description
Patients not readmitted within 30 days after dis-
charge (Q1)
The number of inpatients discharged that do not return
to the hospital for an unexpected readmission within
30 days after leaving
Inpatient time under 30 days (Q2)
The number of inpatients that do not stay in the
inpatient’s service more than 30 days between the
check-in and discharge
Outpatient surgeries on potential outpatient pro-
cedures (Q3)
When a surgery is classiﬁed as minor (ambulatory), it
can be done in the outpatient service or in the
operating theatre. The latter case may raise the risk of
nosocomial infections, thus the former is always
preferable
Number of decubitus/pressure ulcers (Q4)
The number of decubitus ulcers occurrences in the
inpatient service
Number of bloodstream infections related to cen-
tral venous catheter (CVC) (Q5)
The number of bloodstream infections associated with
an infection resulting from the existence of a CVC
Postoperative sepsis/septicaemia cases (Q6)
The number of occurrences of sepsis after major or
minor surgery
Postoperative PE or DVT cases (Q7)
The number of occurrences of a Pulmonary Embolism
(PE) of Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) after major or
minor surgery
Table 3 Selected variables to take into consideration the access to healthcare and their description
Variable
Description
Hip fracture surgery in less than 48h (A1)
The number of patients older than 65 diagnosed with a
hip fracture and forwarded to surgery in less than 48h
First appointment not in legal expected time (A2)
The number of outpatients visits that occurs after the
expected time for the ﬁrst appointment. In the
Portuguese NHS, each group of diagnosis have a
maximum legal time of response for a ﬁrst
appointment in hospitals. This variable accounts for
the number of patients who did not have their
appointment within the legal time period, and so,
represents the number of patients who have seen their
access to care delayed or postponed
Surgery waiting time (A3)
The number of days before major surgery in each
hospital
Model A divides each DMU into four subunits, one representing the efﬁciency of the
hospital (the administrative part of operations, k = 1) and the others representing different
services provided by that hospital (k = 2, 3, 4). On the other hand, model B divides each
DMU into three subunits, each one representing the dimensions that this study intends to
evaluate, efﬁciency (k = 1), quality (k = 2) and access (k = 3).
To incorporate the ﬁnancial variables selected, Costs with Personnel (E5) and Costs with
Outsourcing (E6), another two models were also evaluated. Model C, which is the same as
model A but with variable E5 instead of E2 and E3, and the addition of E6 to the efﬁciency
subunit; and model D that results from of the same alterations to model B.
123

2180
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
Fig. 1 Models representation. Each rectangle represents a subunit and each arrow an input (pointing to a
subunit), output (pointing out from a subunit) or link (between subunits). The outputs can be desirable,
represented by the solid lines, or undesirable, represented by the dashed lines
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2181
4.6 Data
The data used to calculate the overall efﬁciency score and the divisional scores of each DMU
was collected from the Ministry of Health of the Government of the Portuguese Republic. In
particular, from the benchmarking database of the ACSS—Administração Central do Sistema
de Saúde, IP1 and the database Transparência — Sistema Nacional de Saúde.2 The data
collected concerns the period between 2016–2019 (4 years).
The Administração Central do Sistema de Saúde provides the data organised by groups, B
toF,accordingtothecharacteristicsandsimilaritiesbetweenthehealthcareentities(hospitals,
hospital centres and local health units). Furthermore, hospitals that belong to the same group
are expected to receive the same complexity of patient cases and perform the same level of
treatments, consequently, a rigorous analysis implies that comparisons should only be done
within the same group.
From the 45 healthcare entities that made up the (mainland) Portuguese NHS, ﬁve were
eliminated due to its particularities regarding the healthcare provided (three oncology centres
and two psychiatric hospitals); eight local health units, since they include primary care facil-
ities, were also not considered; two hospitals operating under a public-private partnership, as
well as, other two that followed the same management method in the time period considered,
were also discarded and so was another hospital, due to incomplete data sets. Brief statistic
information regarding the data used is presented as attachment.
When performing DEA calculations, the relation between the number of variables and
the number of DMUs could impact the results, particularly the number of DMUs that are
considered efﬁcient. To obtain a more detailed set of results (fewer DMUs with a score of
1), the number of DMUs should be as signiﬁcant as possible, and the number of variables
reduced.
Furthermore, variables that present a signiﬁcant correlation between them should not
be applied simultaneously in the same model, in order to improve the results. A Pearson’s
Correlation test was performed to evaluate the possible correlation between variables.
The test analyses and quantiﬁes the level of correlation between two variables. If a pair
of variables present a correlation of over 95%, then their impact in the model is very similar,
and due to that, one of them can be removed without jeopardising the results. It is important
to acknowledge that only pairs of variables with the same classiﬁcation (input, output or link)
within the model can be reduced to one.
5 Results
The results were obtained using the MATLAB® computing platform (version 2018b) with
the addition of the Optimisation Toolbox. The models suggested were implemented into the
platform and applied to the selected data. The relevant results are presented in the sections
below, as well as a sensitivity analysis.
5.1 Pearson’s correlation test
The Pearson’s correlation test results were computed by pairing all the variables used in each
model and by calculating the Pearson’s correlation score.
1 https://benchmarking-acss.min-saude.pt/.
2 https://www.sns.gov.pt/transparencia/.
123

2182
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
As mentioned previously, only pairs of variables that inﬂuence the same subunit and have
the same classiﬁcation (input, output or link) within that model present a signiﬁcant result.
This test identiﬁed three clusters of variables that have a correlation score higher than
95%. The ﬁrst one aggregates the variables Patients not Readmitted within 30 days (Q1) and
Inpatient Time under 30 days (Q2); the second groups the Operational Costs (E4) with Costs
with Personnel (E5) and Costs with Outsourcing (E6); and the third clusters the Number of
Doctors (E2), Number of Nurses (E3) and Operational Costs (E4). Regarding the last set
of variables, to avoid loss of information while evaluating the models, an approach used
by Ozcan and Khushalani (2017) and Yaya et al. (2020) was adopted. This consisted of
combining the Number of Doctors (E2) and the Number of Nurses (E3) into one single
variable, the Clinical Staff. Although the work of doctors and nurses are not comparable,
both variables measure the number of hours spent by part of the workforce in a healthcare
facility. As stated by Kujawska (2018), Ozcan and Khushalani (2017) and van Ineveld et al.
(2016), labour is essential to be accounted for when estimating a hospital efﬁciency; however,
that measure does not need to be divided into working classes to produce reliable results.
5.2 Real data results
The hospitals’ efﬁciencies were calculated using the four different models proposed and the
data retrieved from the four years being analysed. Since several variables were classiﬁed as
highly correlated, various estimations were performed for each model, one for each different
possible combination of variables.
On top of the VRS efﬁciency, also the CRS and scale efﬁciency were calculated for all
DMUs. The complete set of results can be found in Appendix 1. Nevertheless, the aim of
this study is to evaluate whether there is or not an impact caused by the quality and access
variables on the hospital’s efﬁciency. For that, external inﬂuences on the hospital’s operation
should be reduced to guarantee that each DMU’s efﬁciency is calculated assuming that
the hospital operates on its optimal scale. Since the Portuguese hospitals operate under a
centralised budget constraint, according to Mitropoulos et al. (2013b), considering the CRS
efﬁciency might induce in error. Furthermore, Alonso et al. (2015) also state that since the
market competition between hospitals is imperfect in an NHS, and the regulatory measures
signiﬁcant, VRS should be the efﬁciency score considered to ensure a more accurate analysis.
Accordingly, the VRS efﬁciency score average for the period 2016–2019 for each model
and DMU is presented in Fig.2. The model’s variation examined in this set of results consid-
ered the variable Patients not Readmitted within 30 days (Q1) and for models A and C also
the Clinical Staff and Costs with Personnel (E5), respectively.
Fig. 2 VRS efﬁciency score average for each DMU between 2016 and 2019
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2183
Models A and C report a high similarity between the results, both with two DMUs on the
frontier and another three in close proximity to it. The same relationship is veriﬁed for models
B and D, although the similarity between the efﬁciency scores is not as pronounced as for
models A and C. Nevertheless, both present seven DMUs on the frontier, with another one
close to it. The higher number of efﬁcient DMUs for models B and D was already expected
due to the number of subunits in each model (four for models A and C, three for models B
and D).
Observing the results from a broader perspective, reveals their similarity between the four
models, excluding some DMUs such as Hospital Distrital de Santarém, EPE (HDS), Centro
Hospitalar Tondela-Viseu, EPE (CHTV) and Hospital da Senhora da Oliveira, Guimarães,
EPE (HSOG). This ﬁnding might imply that estimating the hospitals’ efﬁciency score with
any of the models proposed would lead to equivalent conclusions regarding the impact that
each variable related to quality and access provoke in overall efﬁciency.
5.3 Sensitivity analysis
In addition to the relatedness of the results observed between models, also within the same
model, the results obtained for each variation report high similarity rates, in some cases of
nearly 100%.
To perform this sensitivity analysis, the VRS efﬁciencies were calculated several times for
the same model, substituting one element of each correlation cluster and therefore creating
several combinations between them. This originated four variations of models A and C and
two variations of models B and D. The difference in number of variations is a consequence
of each variable’s role within the models (input, output or link) since only variables inside
the same category can be changed.
For the vast majority of the DMUs, the results obtained3 with any variations of model A
do not differ signiﬁcantly. Only two out of 27 DMUs, Hospital Distrital da Figueira da Foz,
EPE (HDFF) and Hospital da Senhora da Oliveira, Guimarães, EPE (HSOG) were detected
to present a signiﬁcant alteration in the efﬁciency, around 8% and 12%, respectively. Model
C also produced a similar sensitivity analysis report, identifying the majority of the DMUs
as inducing insigniﬁcant changes in the efﬁciency scores (all below 5%), with the exception
of Hospital Distrital da Figueira da Foz, EPE (HDFF), which still presents a signiﬁcant
difference, around 10%, in the results. However, in model C, the ﬁrst two variations present
a worse result when compared with the others, which is the opposite case of model A, where
the ﬁrst two variations present a better result. Regarding models B and D, their sensitivity
analysis was close to perfection, with both models only reporting differences below 1% for
ﬁve DMUs, and no difference for the remaining.
5.4 Hypothetical scenarios
To study the impact that each quality and access variable provoke in the overall hospital
efﬁciency, two scenarios were built.
The ﬁrst one assumes that every variable is in its best situation, and the second in its
worst. The creation of these scenarios involved the alteration of the data used to calculate the
efﬁciency scores of each variable individually, both for its best and worst case. For example,
3 Result charts can be found at: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ZTPpJjmw5_iFOvsjMPeUimwOFaT
jAHZj?usp=sharing.
123

2184
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
when evaluating the impact of the Number of Decubitus Ulcers (Q4), in the ﬁrst scenario, all
the data (regarding this variable) were transformed into 0’s (close to 0, due to the instability
that 0’s can provoke in DEA), since the best scenario regarding decubitus ulcers happens
when none of the inpatients has one. The same rationale applies to the worst scenario, which
uses the total number of inpatients since it is the maximum number of decubitus ulcers that
could happen in each hospital.
This process was repeated for each of the ten variables related to quality and access, using
the VRS efﬁciency calculated with model A. The results originate new efﬁciency scores for
each hospital, which, when compared to the real ones (presented in Sect. 5.2), allows to
evaluate the impact that an alteration in these variables would have in the overall efﬁciency.
To quantify that impact, the ratio between the hypothetical data and the actual data was
calculated. The results are shown in Fig.3.
Note that if the ratio is equal to one, the change in the variable’s data does not impact
hospital efﬁciency. If the ratio is greater than one, then the new efﬁciency score is higher
than the baseline (actual data), which means that the change of variable results in a better
efﬁciency. On the other hand, if the ratio is smaller than one, then the baseline efﬁciency is
higher than the one calculated with the changed data, so that speciﬁc alteration in the variable
decreases the overall efﬁciency.
The information presented in Fig.3 is the impact that each variable causes. In other words,
the excess over one or the deﬁcit to one. This means that the variables with positive results
have seen their efﬁciency increase with the hypothetical data, and those with negative results
have seen their efﬁciency decrease.
For each variable, the graphic shows the maximum and average (for all DMUs) impact that
each scenario causes on the hospital’s overall efﬁciency. Only variable A3 shows a negative
result for both scenarios, which means that this variable might already be at its optimal
level; however, it impacts the overall efﬁciency since the average impact (around 4%) is still
signiﬁcant in both scenarios.
On the contrary, variables Q1 and Q2 present a non-signiﬁcant impact, almost null in
the best scenario (2% maximum, 0.1% average), on overall efﬁciency. Nevertheless, both
variables still present a maximum impact of 20% in the worst scenario, which is due to an
isolated impact that these variables have in speciﬁc DMUs.
Variable Q3 follows the same behaviour for the best scenario, presenting a non-signiﬁcant
average impact of 0.5% and a maximum of 4%. However, this variable in the worst scenario
originates an average impact of almost 7%, which is signiﬁcant, and might imply that the
Fig. 3 Maximum and average ratio between the hypothetical data and the real data for the period 2016–2019.
Results obtained from model A
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2185
actual data is closer to the best scenario, not producing differences but distanced from the
worst scenario.
Regarding the variables, Number of Decubitus Ulcers (Q4) and Number of Bloodstream
Infections related to CVC (Q5) both present a negative impact in the best scenario, which
means that the hospital’s efﬁciency is reduced in this case; and a positive result in the worst
scenario, which is the consequence of the increase in the hospital’s efﬁciency. Moreover, the
impact is more noteworthy in the worst case (average around 2.5%) than in the best scenario
(average around −1.5%).
Opposing variables Q6, Q7 and A2, also present a negative impact for the best scenario
and a positive one for the worst. However, in this case, the impact is more signiﬁcant in
the ﬁrst scenario, presenting an average of almost −3% in the best scenario and an average
below 1% in the worst.
Finally, variable A1 is the only one that shows a positive and signiﬁcant change in the
efﬁciency for both scenarios. Although this change is more remarkable for the worst scenario
(average of 6%), it is still relevant in the best scenario (average of 3%).
The results presented in Fig.3 do not take into consideration that in Portugal, hospitals
are divided into ﬁve groups according to their operation plan, size and type of patient treated.
This division allows studying the impact that quality and access have in each group. The
results of this analysis are presented in Fig.4.
Figure 4 shows the absolute average impact, of both scenarios, that each variable provokes
in each group. For half of the sample, group E, which represents the biggest and most
developed hospitals, shows the most signiﬁcant impact. Following the same behaviour, group
B, which represents the smallest and less developed hospitals, shows the least impact for half
of the sample.
Nevertheless, the results are not signiﬁcantly conclusive, not allowing to establish any
connection between the size and type of hospital with the impact that quality and access have
on their efﬁciency. As observed, the results are considerably scattered across all variables
and groups.
6 Discussion and conclusions
The aim of this paper was to evaluate the impact that quality and access have on hospital
performance. To achieve it, nine variables related to efﬁciency, seven related to quality and
three related to access were selected to calculate and observe the variation in the efﬁciency
scores of each hospital using a modiﬁed NDEA methodology. The data used are quantita-
tive and longitudinal, collected for each year individually, and applied to the same sample
Fig. 4 Average absolute variation of efﬁciency score for each variable and hospital group
123

2186
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
of hospitals. All the values retrieved from the database are positive, no missing data was
detected, and the values were not standardised. Therefore, the magnitude of the variables
differs signiﬁcantly according to their context.
Nevertheless, the variation of values across the interval considered was reduced, with most
variables presenting a change under 10%, except for those related to the inpatient service
quality and surgery departments.
It is essential to highlight that all variables used correspond to absolute values to ensure
the desired behaviour of the NDEA algorithm. The percentages and ratios retrieved from
the database were previously transformed to ensure that no mathematical constraint could
impact the results.
Detailed yearly statistic analysis for each variable used can be found in Appendix 1
Take into consideration that the conclusions reached were obtained using data from the
Portuguese NHS. As explained before, these conclusions might not be valid for other NHSs,
especially those that do not follow the same model as the Portuguese one. Healthcare ser-
vices based on the Bismack model differ signiﬁcantly from the Portuguese, which follows
a Beveridge model. Therefore, caution is recommended when extrapolating the conclusions
to other case studies.
Firstly, a correlation analysis was performed between all the variables to detect possible
interactions, which were used to improve the quality of the results. Some of those connections
were expected, such as the relationship between the number of doctors, nurses and operational
expenses. In general, hospitals hire doctors and nurses proportionally since both vary with
the number of beds available in each facility. Moreover, wages are one of the most relevant
expensesthatallcompaniesmustassume,sotheimpactthatthenumberofpersonnelproduced
in the operational costs was not unforeseen.
The analysis identiﬁed other two clusters, one that relates the different types of costs,
which are associated a priori since all relate to ﬁnancial data regarding each hospital, and
another that assembles the quality variables concerning the inpatient service. This last cluster
which relates readmissions with time spent in the inpatient service might suggest that the
same patients that are admitted unexpectedly more than once in less than 30 days are the ones
that stay more extended periods hospitalised, which could correspond to the more complex
cases, requiring in general more medical assistance.
To be able to compare the impact of an alteration in a speciﬁc variable to efﬁciency scores,
a common baseline of comparison must be deﬁned. Data from the Portuguese NHS between
2016 and 2019 was used to calculate these baseline efﬁciency scores, employing the four
suggested models. The baseline scores correspond to the direct application of the models
with the data retrieved from the case study without performing any change.
The baseline efﬁciency scores obtained regarding the VRS analysis are in line with pre-
vious works, such as the ﬁndings of Pereira et al. (2021), who evaluated the efﬁciency of the
Portuguese NHS hospitals and detected that out of the 27 DMUs considered, nine were on
the frontier. Although the authors obtained a more substantial number of efﬁcient DMUs, the
ones that this study considers on the frontier are also on that list. Moreover, the results showed
in Sect. 5.2 also support the apparent conclusion regarding the location of these DMUs as
suggested by the authors, who mentioned that the majority of efﬁcient DMUs are located
near the coastline, especially close to the north and centre urban centres.
Respecting the group division that the hospitals are subjected to by the stakeholders, the
results show that smaller hospitals, the ones in group B, and the largest and more advanced
ones, group E, are the ones which present more DMUs on the frontier and better scores on
the overall efﬁciency analysis. Nevertheless, all groups have at least one DMU considered
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2187
efﬁcient, although group D not having any DMU simultaneously considered efﬁcient by the
four models.
Apart from the VRS efﬁciency score, also the scale efﬁciency score was calculated for
each hospital. Instead of considering a hospital as an isolated environment, this measure also
considers the impact that the surroundings and characteristics of each hospital have on the
efﬁciency. When comparing the VRS and scale scores, the most relevant difference concerns
the scores of group E, which decreased signiﬁcantly when scale efﬁciency was calculated.
Group E are the hospitals considered the top in healthcare treatment in Portugal since
it is where the most complex and advanced treatments are delivered. Consequently, all the
patients with complex cases are diverted from their original hospitals to one of these. As a
result, the scale efﬁciency shows better results for group B, where only simpler procedures
are performed and penalise the other hospitals due to the type of care that these facilities
provide.
Adding to the comparison with the results of Pereira et al. (2021), the sensitivity analysis
performed within each model also reinforces the proposed models’ validity, and the method-
ology suggested. The analysis was performed to evaluate whether a change in the variables
selected, which would affect the observations used in the DEA, would signiﬁcantly impact
the results obtained. Therefore, the same model was used with different combinations of
variables, particularly in the efﬁciency subdivision. The results of the various variations of
each model were almost equal, which supports the idea that if other variables were chosen
to perform this evaluation, the ﬁnal conclusions would be similar. Note that even present-
ing more differences, the comparison of results between different models does not produce
contradictory conclusions.
Resorting to the same models, methodology and baseline data, two scenarios were built
to evaluate if there is or not an impact of quality and access variables on the hospitals’
overall efﬁciency. The ﬁrst scenario assumed that the quality and access variables were
in their best performance, while the second assumed their worst situation. This evaluation
was performed variable by variable, scenario by scenario to be able to draw conclusions
individually regarding each variable.
Only two variables out of the ten considered show a reduced impact on the overall efﬁ-
ciency in both scenarios. The remaining showed, at least in one scenario, a signiﬁcant change
in the efﬁciency scores, with half of the sample showing a deterioration in efﬁciency in the
best case scenario and an improvement in efﬁciency in the worst case. In other words, almost
the majority of variables suggest that when quality and access are at their best levels, efﬁ-
ciency will be penalised; and when those variables are in their worst situation, efﬁciency will
be improved.
This apparent trade-off between efﬁciency, quality and access contradicts several other
studies, such as the ﬁndings of Cheng and Gao (2015) and Khushalani and Ozcan (2017)
supporting that this trade-off is nonexistent. In fact, both authors defend that improving
quality will directly improve efﬁciency and that a hospital could strive for a better quality
service without jeopardising its efﬁciency. Also, Campanella et al. (2017) concluded that
hospitals could be more efﬁcient without affecting the quality of care already delivered. In
Portugal, Ferreira et al. (2020) also agree that there is no trade-off between efﬁciency and
the social variables (quality and access).
Contrastingly, other authors seem to support the results obtained, supporting the idea of a
trade-off. Yang and Zeng (2014) are clear when stating that to achieve better quality, a hospital
will need to increase its expenses and consequently decrease its efﬁciency. The ﬁndings of
Gok and Sezen (2013) are not so clear, supporting that for some hospitals, depending on their
size, this trade-off might exist, while for the remaining, it is nonexistent. This uncertainty
123

2188
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
regarding the existence of a trade-off is also supported by Almeida et al. (2015), who using
data from the Portuguese NHS concluded that their ﬁndings were insufﬁcient to establish
a clear relationship between efﬁciency and quality. This is owed to part of their results
seeming to support it, while another seeming to contradict it. However, also in Portugal,
Ferreira and Marques (2019) support the trade-off defending that improving efﬁciency may
result in a decrease in the quality of care, mainly regarding the safety dimension inherent to
it. Nevertheless, concerning access to the healthcare system, the authors sustain that there is
no trade-off with efﬁciency.
Regarding the evaluation made, considering the ﬁve groups in which the Portuguese
hospitals are divided, the results do not show any signiﬁcant correlation. Contrasting with
Gok and Sezen (2013) and Yang and Zeng (2014), who conclude that the trade-off is present
in the smallest hospitals but not in the largest ones, the results presented in Fig.4 seem to point
in the opposite direction. Even though the results are not conclusive, they seem to support
that the impact on the performance is more pronounced in larger hospitals than in smaller.
Considering all the ﬁndings, the results obtained might suggest that quality and access
inﬂuence the hospital’s efﬁciency, more speciﬁcally in a negative way, implying that there
might be a trade-off between them. Nevertheless, the results are not constant across all the
variables, which might imply that some quality and access dimensions do not affect the
efﬁciency.
On top of that, this study evaluated each variable individually, which means that only
data regarding each variable being study at the given time was changed. In reality, all the
variables considered are interconnected, so if one is affected, others will be affected as well.
Consequently, to study the real impact that a variable provokes in the overall performance,
the alterations introduced with the two hypothetical scenarios should be more robust to closer
mimic the reality. With that limitation being highlighted, the apparent relationship that was
established between efﬁciency, quality and access, might not be translated to reality as clearly
as the mathematical ﬁndings suggest.
Nevertheless, that limitation does not overthrow the possibility of the existence of the
trade-off. Thereby, the government should take this into consideration when planning and
creating policies that directly impact the national NHS, fomenting measures that guarantee
that the quality and access desirable levels are achieved by all the hospitals, even if their
efﬁciency is penalised.
In the future, other methodologies should be used to try to clarify this topic, which is far
from being well deﬁned. Moreover, a new approach might be suggested to create scenarios
closer to reality and consequently produce more authentic results.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the project ‘hSNS: Portuguese public hospital performance
assessment using a multi-criteria decision analysis framework’ (PTDC/EGE-OGE/30,546/2017), funded by
the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT, from the Portuguese abbreviation of Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia). G.P. Afonso recognises the support from FCT through his PhD scholarship
(2022.10765.BD). José Rui Figueira also acknowledges the support by Portuguese national funds through the
FCT - Foundation for Science and Technology, I.P., under the project UIDB/00,097/2020. D.C. Ferreira is
grateful for the Foundation for Science and Technology’s support through funding UIDB/04,625/2020 from
the research unit CERIS. The contents of the paper are our own responsibility. The usual disclaimer applies.
Funding Open access funding provided by FCT|FCCN (b-on).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2189
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix A
See Tables 4, 5, 6, 7.
Table 4 List of the considered hospitals (DMUs) and their abbreviation used in the results presentation
#
Group
DMU
Abreviation
1
Group B
Centro Hospitalar do Médio Ave, EPE
CHMA
2
Group B
Centro Hospitalar Póvoa de Varzim/Vila do Conde, EPE
CHPVVC
3
Group B
Hospital Distrital da Figueira da Foz, EPE
HDFF
4
Group B
Hospital Santa Maria Maior, EPE
HSMM
5
Group C
Centro Hospitalar Barreiro/Montijo, EPE
CHBM
6
Group C
Centro Hospitalar de Leiria, EPE
CHL
7
Group C
Centro Hospitalar de Setúbal, EPE
CHS
8
Group C
Centro Hospitalar do Baixo Vouga, EPE
CHBV
9
Group C
Centro Hospitalar Entre Douro e Vouga, EPE
CHEDV
10
Group C
Centro Hospitalar Médio Tejo, EPE
CHMT
11
Group C
Centro Hospitalar Tˆamega e Sousa, EPE
CHTS
12
Group C
Centro Hospitalar Universitário Cova da Beira, EPE
CHUCB
13
Group C
Hospital da Senhora da Oliveira, Guimarães, EPE
HSOG
14
Group C
Hospital Distrital de Santarém, EPE
HDS
15
Group D
Centro Hospitalar Tondela-Viseu, EPE
CHTV
16
Group D
Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, EPE
CHTMAD
17
Group D
Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Algarve, EPE
CHUA
18
Group D
Centro Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, EPE
CHVNGE
19
Group D
Hospital Espírito Santo de Évora, EPE
HESE
20
Group D
Hospital Fernando Fonseca, EPE
HFF
21
Group D
Hospital Garcia de Orta, EPE
HGO
22
Group E
Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Ocidental, EPE
CHLO
23
Group E
Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, EPE
CHUC
24
Group E
Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Lisboa Central, EPE
CHULC
25
Group E
Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, EPE
CHUSJ
26
Group E
Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, EPE
CHUP
27
Group E
Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, EPE
CHULN
123

2190
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
Table 5 Variables statistics
Variable
Year
Mean
SD
CV (%)
Min
Max
Median
E1
2016
584.6
386.9
66.2
117
1809
445
2017
591.0
385.7
65.3
117
1807
459
2018
588.6
377.1
64.1
117
1762
500
2019
580.3
360.6
62.1
117
1711
503
E2
2016
250,132.1
201,985.6
80.8
31,957
716,248
164,493
2017
258,294.8
203,489.4
78.8
32,327
721,963
164,343
2018
269,054.2
208,914.3
77.6
34,009
728,806
177,963
2019
272,894.3
208,256.5
76.3
41,119
727,317
190,886
E3
2016
426,606.0
301,578.7
70.7
82,153
1,220,376
322,356
2017
429,526.9
301,262.2
70.1
79,565
1,189,334
328,507
2018
425,388.2
299,867.3
70.5
78,978
1,201,073
322,968
2019
425,106.4
300,613.2
70.7
79,682
1,200,446
321,480
E4
2016
155,165,335.7
123,785,037.0
79.8
23,820,404
452,018,313
96,882,770
2017
162,016,835.5
128,896,298.0
79.6
23,884,991
467,724,538
99,851,907
2018
174,054,077.8
138,089,107.1
79.3
25,730,553
500,978,922
110,649,358
2019
185,888,554.0
144,660,138.4
77.8
28,560,022
522,912,625
124,991,054
E5
2016
78,525,848.6
57,745,775.6
73.5
13,291,520
224,613,038
53,463,904
2017
82,749,683.9
60,115,746.6
72.6
13,705,107
236,698,480
56,623,000
2018
87,919,787.5
63,718,700.2
72.5
14,968,308
249,881,517
59,410,572
2019
96,355,372.1
68,133,292.6
70.7
16,923,922
266,927,122
67,818,630
E6
2016
22,371,598.9
14,732,646.4
65.9
3,903,000
61,091,612
17,713,714
2017
23,121,423.0
15,156,148.6
65.6
4,198,201
63,842,699
17,923,352
2018
25,169,611.9
16,653,460.1
66.2
4,300,879
70,629,430
20,890,397
2019
26,970,613.3
17,378,244.2
64.4
4,679,207
67,752,715
23,090,992
E7
2016
22,505.1
12,951.7
57.5
5178
60,205
21,409
2017
22,018.3
12,712.2
57.7
4923
58,814
20,718
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2191
Table 5 continued
Variable
Year
Mean
SD
CV (%)
Min
Max
Median
2018
21,588.7
12,332.9
57.1
5285
58,126
20,674
2019
21,644.4
12,342.1
57.0
5561
56,514
20,591
E8
2016
330,307.0
228,974.1
69.3
67,880
906,054
260,439
2017
331,510.1
226,503.2
68.3
71,656
892,586
260,345
2018
334,179.5
227,407.8
68.0
78,932
892,734
267,101
2019
340,929.3
229,488.8
67.3
80,813
891,836
277,963
E9
2016
15,423.5
10,022.6
65.0
4444
38,239
12,321
2017
15,739.9
9956.0
63.3
4802
38,702
12,722
2018
15,600.3
92,80.5
59.5
5563
36,884
12,325
2019
16,585.5
10,124.9
61.0
5380
43,563
12,894
Q1
2016
21,275.5
11,844.6
55.7
4520
56,344
21,438
2017
21,312.2
12,139.1
57.0
4378
55,738
20,605
2018
20,799.6
11,781.6
56.6
4664
54,882
20,406
2019
20,875.5
11,736.3
56.2
4899
53,637
20,511
Q2
2016
22,331.9
12,352.5
55.3
4838
59,648
22,287
2017
22,336.7
12,704.7
56.9
4671
58,994
21,496
2018
21,764.6
12,351.3
56.7
4998
58,321
21,186
2019
21,751.6
12,196.0
56.1
5237
56,232
21,318
Q3
2016
3915.3
2054.6
52.5
1044
8839
3756
2017
3953.1
2041.5
51.6
1150
8712
3417
2018
3934.6
1769.5
45.0
1167
7760
3813
2019
4232.0
1930.8
45.6
1293
8506
3994
Q4
2016
11.0
9.7
88.6
0
35
9
2017
4.1
4.7
112.6
0
17
2
2018
4.3
3.8
88.2
0
12
3
123

2192
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
Table 5 continued
Variable
Year
Mean
SD
CV (%)
Min
Max
Median
2019
4.3
4.6
106.9
0
17
2
Q5
2016
1.7
2.6
146.5
0
10
1
2017
2.0
2.6
131.6
0
9
1
2018
1.9
2.7
142.5
0
10
1
2019
2.6
3.8
146.8
0
14
1
Q6
2016
18.9
20.0
106.1
0
80
13
2017
15.7
16.2
103.0
0
53
10
2018
18.3
18.2
99.6
0
72
12
2019
15.9
15.2
95.6
0
60
10
Q7
2016
8.4
10.1
120.9
0
40
5
2017
13.1
16.3
124.1
0
70
5
2018
13.4
15.6
116.3
0
59
7
2019
13.7
15.8
115.7
0
55
9
A1
2016
126.4
59.7
47.2
29
301
117
2017
128.0
68.3
53.4
26
336
111
2018
124.5
75.5
60.6
25
326
103
2019
127.2
81.3
63.9
39
302
103
A2
2016
9114.0
5780.4
63.4
450
19,285
9051
2017
9857.6
6243.5
63.3
484
24,897
9375
2018
10,185.3
7344.9
72.1
590
32,875
9338
2019
11,153.3
7928.8
71.1
1251
34,787
9455
A3
2016
4246.5
3328.9
78.4
493
12,027
3043
2017
4276.3
4097.4
95.8
511
16,520
2773
2018
4026.3
3841.6
95.4
533
14,859
2403
2019
4104.3
3984.8
97.1
593
14,650
2486
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2193
Table 6 Results obtained for model A
Group
DMU
2016
2017
2018
2019
VRS
CRS
Scale
VRS
CRS
Scale
VRS
CRS
Scale
VRS
CRS
Scale
Group B
CHMA
0.727
0.680
0.936
0.810
0.784
0.967
0.779
0.698
0.896
0.922
0.774
0.839
Group B
CHPVVC
0.925
0.917
0.991
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.987
0.987
1.000
Group B
HDFF
1.000
0.950
0.950
1.000
0.972
0.972
0.906
0.839
0.926
0.972
0.880
0.905
Group B
HSMM
1.000
0.873
0.873
1.000
0.924
0.924
1.000
0.964
0.964
1.000
0.946
0.946
Group C
CHBM
0.656
0.606
0.923
0.625
0.594
0.951
0.769
0.592
0.770
0.891
0.669
0.750
Group C
CHL
0.995
0.871
0.876
0.961
0.774
0.805
0.942
0.704
0.748
0.973
0.788
0.810
Group C
CHS
0.810
0.741
0.915
0.757
0.674
0.890
0.833
0.696
0.836
0.805
0.664
0.825
Group C
CHBV
0.894
0.808
0.904
0.904
0.803
0.887
0.939
0.800
0.852
0.882
0.772
0.875
Group C
CHEDV
0.986
0.848
0.860
0.840
0.792
0.943
1.000
0.986
0.986
0.785
0.688
0.875
Group C
CHMT
0.820
0.762
0.929
0.713
0.643
0.902
0.887
0.755
0.852
0.733
0.624
0.851
Group C
CHTS
1.000
0.881
0.881
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.980
0.874
0.891
1.000
0.894
0.894
Group C
CHUCB
0.744
0.707
0.949
0.802
0.742
0.925
0.787
0.728
0.924
0.662
0.644
0.972
Group C
HSOG
0.891
0.734
0.824
0.785
0.740
0.942
0.742
0.620
0.836
1.000
0.695
0.695
Group C
HDS
0.705
0.684
0.971
0.711
0.654
0.919
0.868
0.708
0.816
0.981
0.705
0.719
Group D
CHTV
0.759
0.581
0.766
0.673
0.526
0.782
0.786
0.541
0.689
0.887
0.568
0.641
Group D
CHTMAD
0.883
0.775
0.878
0.963
0.788
0.819
0.877
0.699
0.796
0.946
0.691
0.731
Group D
CHUA
0.597
0.450
0.754
0.642
0.464
0.723
0.619
0.462
0.746
0.719
0.482
0.670
123

2194
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
Table 6 continued
Group
DMU
2016
2017
2018
2019
VRS
CRS
Scale
VRS
CRS
Scale
VRS
CRS
Scale
VRS
CRS
Scale
Group D
CHVNGE
0.946
0.726
0.768
0.916
0.684
0.746
0.916
0.634
0.693
0.912
0.674
0.739
Group D
HESE
0.777
0.761
0.979
0.756
0.718
0.950
0.638
0.597
0.936
0.898
0.787
0.877
Group D
HFF
0.874
0.660
0.755
0.864
0.726
0.840
0.960
0.745
0.776
0.995
0.818
0.823
Group D
HGO
0.821
0.686
0.836
0.748
0.566
0.756
0.796
0.598
0.752
0.702
0.514
0.732
Group E
CHLO
0.813
0.461
0.567
0.538
0.416
0.773
0.683
0.445
0.651
0.516
0.402
0.779
Group E
CHUC
1.000
0.480
0.480
1.000
0.475
0.475
1.000
0.463
0.463
1.000
0.468
0.468
Group E
CHULC
0.983
0.533
0.542
0.974
0.490
0.503
0.943
0.422
0.447
0.717
0.444
0.620
Group E
CHUSJ
0.913
0.753
0.825
1.000
0.772
0.772
1.000
0.773
0.773
1.000
0.731
0.731
Group E
CHUP
0.848
0.542
0.640
0.917
0.511
0.557
1.000
0.663
0.663
0.936
0.726
0.775
Group E
CHULN
0.867
0.687
0.793
0.865
0.489
0.565
0.873
0.478
0.548
0.863
0.505
0.585
Values for VRS. CRS and Scale Efﬁciency for each year considered
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2195
Table 7 Relevant literature summary
Authors
Variables
Conclusions
Inputs
Outputs
Other
Campanella et al. (2017)
Number of Beds;Number of
Doctors;Number of Nurses(per
patient)
30-day risk-adjusted
mortality
Contextual factorsa such as
location,demographic
information and economic
situation
A better efﬁciency could be
achieved without penalise
quality
Chang et al. (2011)
Number of Beds; Number of
Doctors; Number of Nurses;
Number of supporting
personnel
Outpatients Treated; Number
of Surgeries; Number of
patient days; Number of net
inpatient mortality
-
Is possible for hospitals to
improve their operating
efﬁciency without
sacriﬁcing quality
Chatﬁeld (2014)
Number of Beds; Operation
Costs without depreciation and
labour expenses; Total
employees; Service mix
Inpatients Treated;
Outpatients Treated;
Quality (composite measure
calculated using 20 quality
variables)
-
Quality outcomes are not
penalised by a higher
efﬁciency. A trade-off
between efﬁciency and
quality was not observed
De Nicola et al. (2014)
Number of Beds; Number of
Doctors; Number of Nurses
Number of total patients;
Case mix
Environmental variablesb
such as organisational
models reimbursement
systems location, year and
population
Healthcare efﬁciency
increases if a quality
service is provided
Ferreira et al. (2020)
Staff costs; Operation Costs;
Costs of goods sold and
consumed; Costs with
outsourcing; Hospital days
Inpatients Treated;
Emergency cases; First
medical appointments;
Follow-up scheduled
medical appointments;
Outpatient surgeries;
Conventional surgeries;
Urgent surgeries; Births;
Hospital days
Environmental variablesc
such as mortality rate,
population demographics,
birth rate and illiteracy rate
There is no trade-off between
efﬁciency, quality and
access. Efﬁciency can be
improved without
decreasing quality and
access
Gao and Wang (2020)
Number of Beds; Number of
Doctors; Number of Nurses;
Number of supporting staff
Outpatients Treated;
Inpatients Treated
Environmental variablesb
such as population average
age, location and hospital
classiﬁcation
Higher efﬁciency scores
imply a better equity
regarding access
123

2196
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
Table 7 continued
Authors
Variables
Conclusions
Inputs
Outputs
Other
Gok and Sezen (2013)
Number of Beds; Number of
specialist physicians; Number
of non-specialist physicians
Bed utilisation rate; Bed
turnover rate; Number of
Surgeries; Number of
births; Outpatients Treated;
Average facility inpatient
days; Inpatients Treated
Hospital sizeb; Average
length of stayb; Structural
qualityb
The relationship between
quality and efﬁciency is
dependent on the hospital
size. In small and medium
hospitals there is a trade-off
between the two, which
does not happen in larger
hospitals
Gorgemans et al. (2018)
Number of Beds; Number of
Doctors; Number of Nurses
Inpatients Treated;
Outpatients Treated
Mortality rated; CVC
Bloodstream Infectionsb;
Postoperative PEe or DVTf
and sepsis
Improvements in efﬁciency
could produce
improvements in quality,
although the relation is not
valid for all cases
Khushalani and Ozcan (2017)
Number of Beds; Non-physician
FTEg; Operation Costs;
Resident Nurses to Total
Nursing FTE ratio; Hi-tech
service mix
Outpatients Treated; % of
patients who would
deﬁnitely recommend the
hospital; % of patients who
gave the hospital a high
rating
Net patient revenue per bedh;
Mortalityh; Readmission
ratesh; Case-mix adjusted
dischargesi; Number of
Surgeriesi; Emergency
Visitsi
There is no trade-off between
efﬁciency and quality
Kittelsen et al. (2015)
Hospital Costs
Medical inpatients; Surgical
inpatients; Outpatients
Treated
Readmissionb; Mortalityb;
Patient Satisfactionb
A clear trade-off between
costs and quality was not
detected, although a
signiﬁcant trade-off
between productivity and
readmissions rates was
observed
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2197
Table 7 continued
Authors
Variables
Conclusions
Inputs
Outputs
Other
Mitropoulos (2021)
Number of Beds; Number of
Doctors; Expenditure
Quality of care; Patient safety
Inpatients Treatedi;
Outpatients Treatedi;
Unmet Demandi
A trade-off between
production and service
quality was detected,
suggesting that improving
efﬁciency might worsen
quality
Onder et al. (2021)
Number of Beds; Number of
Employees; Inpatients Treated
Readmission Rate; Operation
Costs
Environmental variablesj
such as wages index,
location and teaching status
Improvements in quality
results in a better efﬁciency
van Ineveld et al. (2016)
FTE employed by the hospital
(except physicians); Number of
Doctors; Operation Costs
Inpatients Treated;
Outpatients Treated;
Number of day care
treatments
Number of Decubitus Ulcersc
Quality and economic
improvements evolve in the
same way
Varabyova et al. (2017)
Number of Doctors; Number of
Nurses
Inpatients Treated
Patient satisfactionk mortality
rate and radiation exposure
There is no clear trade-off
between efﬁciency and
quality. The impact of
quality in efﬁciency
depends on the measure
used
a Used in a Tobit regression model
b Used in a regression model
c Used as external non-discretionary variables
d Used in a logistic regression
e Pulmonary Embolism
f Deep Vein Thrombosis
g Full Time Equivalent
h Used as a carry over
i Used as a link
j Used in a truncated regression
k Used in a non-parametric regression
123

2198
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
References
Almeida, A., Frias, R., & Pedro Fique, J. (2015). Evaluating hospital efﬁciency adjusting for quality indicators:
An application to Portuguese NHS hospitals. Health Economics & Outcome Research: Open Access,
01(01), 1–5.
Alonso, J. M., Clifton, J., & Díaz-Fuentes, D. (2015). The impact of New Public Management on efﬁciency:
An analysis of Madrid’s hospitals. Health Policy, 119(3), 333–340.
Blatnik, P., Bojnec, Š, & Tušak, M. (2017). Measuring efﬁciency of secondary healthcare providers in Slovenia.
Open Medicine (Poland), 12(1), 214–225.
Campanella, P., Azzolini, E., Izzi, A., Pelone, F., De Meo, C., La Milia, D., Specchia, M. L., & Ricciardi,
W. (2017). Hospital efﬁciency: How to spend less maintaining quality? Annali dell’Istituto Superiore di
Sanita, 53(1), 46–53.
Chang, S. J., Hsiao, H. C., Huang, L. H., H. (2011). Taiwan quality indicator project and hospital productivity
growth. Omega, 39(1), 14–22.
Chatﬁeld, J. S. (2014). Data envelopment analysis comparison of hospital efﬁciency, quality and control.
International Journal of Management Accounting Research, 4(1), 93–109.
Cheng, Y., & Gao, H. L. (2015). Matrix-type network DEA model with its application based on input–output
tables. Mathematical Problems in Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/505941
Coelli, T. J., Prasada Rao, D. S., O’Donnell, C. J., & Battese, G. E. (2005). An introduction to efﬁciency and
productivity analysis. New York: Springer.
De Nicola, A., Gitto, S., Mancuso, P., & Valdmanis, V. (2014). Healthcare reform in Italy: An analysis of
efﬁciency based on nonparametric methods. International Journal of Health Planning and Management,
29(1), 48–63.
Färe, R., & Grosskopf, S. (2003). Nonparametric productivity analysis with undesirable outputs: Comment.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 85(4), 1070–1074.
Ferreira, C., Marques, R. C., & Nicola, P. (2013). On evaluating health centers groups in Lisbon and Tagus
Valley: Efﬁciency, equity and quality. BMC Health Services Research, 13(1), 529. https://doi.org/10.
1186/1472-6963-13-529
Ferreira, D. C., & Marques, R. C. (2019). Do quality and access to hospital services impact on their technical
efﬁciency? Omega (United Kingdom), 86, 218–236.
Ferreira, D. C., Marques, R. C., Nunes, A. M., & Figueira, J. R. (2021). Customers satisfaction in pedi-
atric inpatient services: A multiple criteria satisfaction analysis. Socio-economic Planning Sciences, 78,
101036.
Ferreira, D. C., Nunes, A. M., & Marques, R. C. (2018). Doctors, nurses, and the optimal scale size in the
Portuguese public hospitals. Health Policy, 122(10), 1093–1100.
Ferreira, D. C., Nunes, A. M., & Marques, R. C. (2020). Operational efﬁciency vs clinical safety, care appro-
priateness, timeliness, and access to health care: The case of Portuguese public hospitals. Journal of
Productivity Analysis, 53(3), 355–375.
Gao, Q., & Wang, D. (2020). Hospital efﬁciency and equity in health care delivery: A study based in China.
Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 76, 100964.
Gautam, S., Hicks, L., Johnson, T., & Mishra, B. (2013). Measuring the performance of critical access hospitals
in Missouri using data envelopment analysis. Journal of Rural Health, 29(2), 150–158.
Gok, M. S., & Sezen, B. (2013). Analyzing the ambiguous relationship between efﬁciency, quality and patient
satisfaction in healthcare services: The case of public hospitals in Turkey. Health Policy, 111(3), 290–300.
Gorgemans, S., Comendeiro-Maaløe, M., Ridao-López, M., & Bernal-Delgado, E. (2018). Quality and tech-
nical efﬁciency do not evolve hand in hand in Spanish hospitals: Observational study with administrative
data. PLoS ONE, 13(8), 1–12.
Jacobs, R., Smith, P. C., & Street, A. (2006). Measuring efﬁciency in health care: Analytic techniques and
health policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kao, C. (2009). Efﬁciency decomposition in network data envelopment analysis: A relational model. European
Journal of Operational Research, 192(3), 949–962.
Kao, C., Pang, R. Z., Liu, S. T., & Bai, X. J. (2021). Most productive types of hospitals: An empirical analysis.
Omega (United Kingdom), 99, 102310.
Kawaguchi, H., Tone, K., & Tsutsui, M. (2014). Estimation of the efﬁciency of Japanese hospitals using
a dynamic and network data envelopment analysis model. Health Care Management Science, 17(2),
101–112.
Khushalani, J., & Ozcan, Y. A. (2017). Are hospitals producing quality care efﬁciently? An analysis using
Dynamic Network Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). Socio-economic Planning Sciences, 60, 15–23.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 342:2169–2199
2199
Kittelsen, S. A. C., Anthun, K. S., Goude, F., Huitfeldt, I. M. S., Häkkinen, U., Kruse, M., Medin, E., Rehnberg,
C., & Rättö, H. (2015). Costs and quality at the hospital level in the Nordic countries. Health Economics,
24(2007), 140–163.
Kujawska, J. (2018). Efﬁciency of Healthcare Systems in European countries—The Dea network approach.
Metody Ilo´sciowe w Badaniach Ekonomicznych, 19(1), 60–70.
Kuosmanen, T. (2005). Weak disposability in nonparametric production analysis with undesirable outputs.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 87(4), 1077–1082.
Kuosmanen, T., & Podinovski, V. (2009). Weak disposability in nonparametric production analysis: Reply to
Färe and Grosskopf. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 91(2), 539–545.
Mitropoulos, P. (2021). Production and quality performance of healthcare services in EU countries during the
economic crisis. Operational Research, 21(2), 857–873.
Mitropoulos, P., Mitropoulos, I., & Giannikos, I. (2013). Combining DEA with location analysis for the
effective consolidation of services in the health sector. Computers and Operations Research, 40(9),
2241–2250.
Mitropoulos, P., Mitropoulos, I., & Sissouras, A. (2013). Managing for efﬁciency in health care: The case of
Greek public hospitals. European Journal of Health Economics, 14(6), 929–938.
Onder, O., Cook, W., & Kristal, M. (2021). Does quality help the ﬁnancial viability of hospitals? A data
envelopment analysis approach. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 79, 101105.
Ozcan, Y. A., & Khushalani, J. (2017). Assessing efﬁciency of public health and medical care provision in
OECD countries after a decade of reform. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 25(2),
325–343.
Pai, D. R., Hosseini, H., & Brown, R. S. (2019). Does efﬁciency and quality of care affect hospital closures?
Health Systems, 8(1), 17–30.
Pereira, M. A., Ferreira, D. C., Figueira, J. R., & Marques, R. C. (2021). Measuring the efﬁciency of the
Portuguese public hospitals: A value modelled network data envelopment analysis with simulation.
Expert Systems with Applications, 181(May), 115169.
Pereira, M. A., Figueira, J. R., & Marques, R. C. (2020). Using a Choquet integral-based approach for incorpo-
rating decision-maker’s preference judgments in a Data Envelopment Analysis model. European Journal
of Operational Research, 284(3), 1016–1030.
Tone, K., & Tsutsui, M. (2009). Network DEA: A slacks-based measure approach. European Journal of
Operational Research, 197(1), 243–252.
van Ineveld, M., van Oostrum, J., Vermeulen, R., Steenhoek, A., & van de Klundert, J. (2016). Productivity
and quality of Dutch hospitals during system reform. Health Care Management Science, 19(3), 279–290.
Varabyova, Y., Blankart, C. R., & Schreyögg, J. (2017). Using nonparametric conditional approach to inte-
grate quality into efﬁciency analysis: Empirical evidence from cardiology departments. Health Care
Management Science, 20(4), 565–576.
Yang, J., & Zeng, W. (2014). The trade-offs between efﬁciency and quality in the hospital production: Some
evidence from Shenzhen, China. China Economic Review, 31, 166–184.
Yaya, S., Xi, C., Xiaoyang, Z., & Meixia, Z. (2020). Evaluating the efﬁciency of China’s healthcare service: A
weighted DEA-game theory in a competitive environment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 270, 122431.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123