TITLE: Disrupting disruptions: enhancing supply chain resilience—lessons from the US Air Force
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06527-6
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06527-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Disrupting disruptions: enhancing supply chain
resilience—lessons from the US Air Force
Ron Berger1
· Ralf Wagner2 · Paul M. Dion3 · Olga Matthias4
Received: 29 March 2024 / Accepted: 5 February 2025 / Published online: 19 February 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Black swan events have highlighted the importance of supply chain resilience and hence
drawn increased attention from academia. Using military supply chains as our research set-
ting, we illustrate how supply chain resilience can be implemented in civilian networks and
incorporate agility and ﬂexibility into a responsive system-to-system model. We use a sim-
ulation model based on the Cassandra application to further develop supply chain network
resilience theory. Our model provides updated situational awareness to decision makers and
allows managers to identify direct and indirect threats to supply chains, allowing adaptation
to unforeseen situations. We developed a dynamic, whole-system network model to provide
timely, accurate, updateable and scalable information to planners and decision-makers at all
levels in-order to reduce risk and increase resilience.
Keywords Supply chain resilience · Complex adaptive systems · Casandra · Modeling ·
Disruption
1 Introduction
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a
pandemic. Pandemics are deﬁned as the occurrence of an infectious disease over an extensive
area, crossing international borders, and affecting a great number of individuals (Kelly, 2011).
B Ron Berger
ron.berger@biu.ac.il
Ralf Wagner
wagner@wirtschaft.uni-kassel.de
Paul M. Dion
pdion3@unl.edu
Olga Matthias
olga.matthias@capabilitygap.com
1
Graduate School of Business Administration, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel
2
School of Economics and Management, University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany
3
College of Business, University of Nebraska Lincoln, Lincoln, USA
4
Business School, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland
123

1164
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Pandemics are characterized by a reduced ability to predict the future and a perceived loss
of control. They represent situations where responses to the emergency generate additional
unforeseen (and usually negative) outcomes (Gebhardt et al., 2022). A pandemic-induced
crisis is a heterogeneous phenomenon, varying in breadth (what is affected), depth (intensity
of its impact), and temporality (duration). The present global economic crisis strongly linked
totheCOVID-19pandemicissubstantiallydifferentfromthelastﬁnancialcrisis(2007–2008)
since it does not have a ﬁnancial origin (bubble–burst cycle). It can be viewed as a black swan
event—a totally unexpected event that takes the world economy by surprise (Belghitar et al.,
2022). Black swan events occur with low probability but have high impact and are perceived
by critical stakeholders to threaten the viability of the economy (Puthusserry et al., 2022).
In the COVID-19 black swan event, this unforeseen development meant a simultaneous
supply and demand shock that was difﬁcult to overcome (Amankwah-Amoah et al., 2021).
For instance, on the supply side, employees were unable to go to work, production was
severely disrupted and supply channels were blocked; on the demand side, the shock was
manifested by households and businesses being unable to buy basic goods and services as a
result of lockdowns and supply chain disruptions (Sarkar & Clegg, 2021). The COVID-19
crisis was characterized by complexity and uncertainty, inﬂuencing (and being inﬂuenced by)
government policies, health systems, ﬁrm behavior, and individual behaviors (Mena et al.,
2022).
These black swan events energized the present research into supply chain resilience, the
ability to respond to and recover from unexpected supply chain disruptions (Brandon-Jones
et al., 2014; Hohenstein et al., 2015). This paper focuses on supply chain resilience mod-
eling and not environmental trigger events. According to Tukamuhabwa et al. (2015) and
DuHadway et al. (2017), supply chain resilience can be deconstructed into phases encompass-
ing anticipation, resistance, and recovery. Academic research focused on developing strong
resilience strategies for better coping with disruptions (Gebhardt et al., 2022; Kamalahmadi
et al., 2022; Verma & Gustafsson, 2020). The operational and economic global disruptions
seen during the COVID-19 period of 2020–2023 amply demonstrate the vulnerability of
supply chains to idiosyncrasies of demand and supply shocks. Researchers note that lack of
supply chain resilience was a primary reason for poor supply chain performance during this
period (Qader et al., 2022). The impact caused by the COVID-19 pandemic on global trade
is without precedent, precluding the application of traditional theories of risk and resilience
(Mena et al., 2022).
It does not, however, take a black swan event to underscore the vulnerability of supply
chain to disruptions. These are unavoidable in today’s economic environments and varied in
cause and effect (DuHadway et al., 2019; Gebhardt et al., 2022). Over the last few decades,
corporations have set up global supply chains by expanding offshoring and outsourcing
activities (Gebhardt et al., 2022). Globalization has led to supply chains becoming longer
and more complex, thereby increasing their vulnerability to shocks (Mena et al., 2022). Risk,
in this context, relates to events that can cause widespread and sustained shortage of a product
or service with no alternatives or substitutes available. International supply chains continue to
expand in line with increasing levels of globalization, leading to higher interconnectedness
and interdependence among ﬁrms. While the interdependence has enhanced supply chain
efﬁciency with practices of lean manufacturing, concurrent engineering, and “just-in-time”
deliveries, it has also increased supply chain vulnerabilities (World Economic Forum, 2019).
The economic and social connections that engendered globalization have also reinforced
interdependencies and hence the need for improved resilience.
Complex adaptive systems were initially applied to researching living systems (Surana
et al., 2005). These systems are deﬁned as a kind of structure that gradually emerges as a
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1165
coherent form through the properties of adaptation and self-organization (Choi et al., 2001).
It focuses on the emergence of order in dynamic and non-linear systems (Kauffman, 1995).
Resilience is one major inherent feature of complex adaptive systems (Fangxu et al., 2024).
To function as a complex adaptive system, one connects with others in the system and
make decisions based on imperfect information (Day, 2014). Co-evolution may instigate
a change from equilibrium to disequilibrium between a system and its environment. As
organizations adapt to complex environments with multiple relationships and interactions,
more and more scholars and practitioners suggest that it is a natural step to investigate
operations and management issues within the complex adaptive systems paradigm (Pathak
et al., 2007). By utilizing complex adaptive systems theory, we are able to develop a detailed
analysis of the key tenets of complexity from which we provide theoretical and practical
insights.
Supply chains are human constructs with functional goals that include delivering speciﬁc
products and services to customers with set cost minimizing or proﬁt-maximizing objec-
tives (Novak et al., 2021). Supply chains have been conceptualized as complex adaptive
systems that operate as networks (Choi et al., 2001; Pathak et al., 2007) or as complex socio-
ecological systems that are cross-linked to other social-ecological systems that can shape
what is considered normal and desirable (Yaroson et al., 2021). From a complex adaptive
system perspective, the supply chain continuously adapts, self-organizes, and transforms into
new conﬁgurations that allow it to maintain its functionality (Hearnshaw & Wilson, 2013;
Mason & Leek, 2008; Novak et al., 2021). Accordingly, supply resilience and risk manage-
ment’s joint aim is to abate the inﬂuence of sudden disruptions and return to operational
normality in a timely and cost-effective manner (Christopher & Holweg, 2017). As such, we
must understand the sources of such disruptions.
Supply chain disruptions have many causes, which we classify into ﬁve main groups. The
ﬁrst cause is the demand and supply shocks that occur when there are unexpected increases in
demand or supply shortages. These temporal mismatches occur when resources are consumed
at rates that cannot be sustained or even at a normal rate when there is not enough supply in
sight. For example, harvesting lumber or ﬁsh more rapidly than a forest or ﬁsh populations
can naturally regenerate or when the COVID-19 epidemic drove up lumber prices when
producers completely misgauged the number of homeowners doing renovations during the
pandemic (NBC News, 2021). Another example is the US military now facing ammunition
shortages because of a demand surge caused by the Ukraine invasion (WSJ, 2022). In the US,
vehicle sales collapsed during COVID-19 and then rebounded but chipmakers had meanwhile
switched to supplying consumer electronics makers, causing shortages and delays. The switch
was a conscious decision by chipmakers responding to the market that resulted in automakers
not being able to meet market demand (Feltmate, 2021).
The second source of disruptions is natural disasters that can wreak havoc on supply chain
systems. For instance, in 2022 Hurricane Ian left Florida with shortages ranging from bottled
water to ﬂashlights (Tampa Bay Times, 2022). Following the Tohoku earthquake in Japan in
2011, Toyota’s supply chains were severely disrupted and, as a result, the company put in
place-improved coordination mechanisms to restore supply chain resilience (Matsuo, 2015).
The third source of disruptions is deliberate political and military conﬂicts, potent sources
of supply chain disruption (Blessley & Mudambi, 2022). For instance, Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine in February 2022 set off a domino effect of supply chain disruptions too numerous to
catalog, shaking the core of global business. It is claimed that the Kremlin set out deliberately
to cause economic disruption among NATO supporters of Ukraine (Rannane et al., 2022).
123

1166
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
The fourth source of disruptions is unintentional accidents (Roh et al., 2021). For instance,
the Ever Given, which ran aground in the Suez Canal, left more than 100 ships stranded at
each end of the canal for weeks, leading to global delays and supply disruptions.
The ﬁfth source of disruptions is interactions between causes one through four
(Gunasekaran et al., 2015; Hearnshaw & Wilson, 2013). For instance, high fuel prices in
Florida caused by the Russian invasion of Ukraine (February 2022) were exacerbated by
the natural disaster in Florida (September 2022), which made the resupply of gas stations
difﬁcult. Both supply and demand chain vulnerabilities fed one another leading to acute
shortages. In another example, COVID-19 caused a shortage of microchips because workers
could not get to the fabrication plants or were too sick to come to work, which situation was
worsened by the Ukraine war, which increased demand for chips as components in weapons.
The risk of supply chain disruption can be further intensiﬁed by managerial factors
when two industrial practices—lean manufacturing and just-in-time production—are fol-
lowed (Yaroson et al., 2021). These approaches aim to eradicate possible waste and advance
the ﬂow within the supply chain and suppliers’ responsiveness to customers. Nonetheless,
corporations could become more susceptible to supply chain disturbances when adopting
these strategies. To successfully follow them, corporations must depend on actors outside
of their control (Craighead et al., 2020), which paradoxically weakens their supply chain
resiliency. To reduce such dependency, redundancies may be necessary. These may sacriﬁce
the efﬁciency goals of individual ﬁrms in the short term, but promote supply chain resilience
over the long term. Nandi et al. (2020) claim that effectively managing supply chain resilience
is more signiﬁcant than honing internal competences. This issue has yet to be fully explored.
Supplychainsrequiremanagerialstrategicinterventionstosurvivedisruptions.Thiscanbe
done, in part, by modeling possible solutions to potential problems (i.e., a type of risk analysis
and management). Here we ask and model how resilience can be enhanced by reducing
asset speciﬁcity. Much of the contemporary supply chain management literature researches
resilience from the perspective of a ﬁrm or a speciﬁc industry (Novak et al., 2021). In our
view there is a need to improve the understanding of the linkages between resilience and the
multiscaledynamicsthatexplainhowsupplychainsevolveovertimeinlightofenvironmental
changes, as discussed in the previous paragraphs about trigger events (Gebhardt et al., 2022;
van Hoek, 2020; Verma & Gustafsson, 2020). We seek to create a holistic simulation model
that would help managers in creating a complex adaptive system that is better able to cope
with disruptions to the supply chain in advance or in real time. It would provide alternatives
that facilitate speedy decisions about optimum choices for continuous information and supply
ﬂows. It will further help to maximize supply chain management robustness. We contribute to
existing research models on supply chain management by identifying the factors that enhance
supply chain resilience in environments that are prone to disruption.
We evaluate key factors that can inﬂuence both the robustness and responsiveness of the
supply chain network using experiences from the US Air Force. Our paper offers an empirical
study of a dynamic system designed with a complex adaptive system network applied to a
perennial military problem as well as proof of its efﬁcacy. Such military ﬁndings were found
to be applicable in civilian supply chains seeking enhanced supply chain resilience (Kakhki
et al., 2022). The paper describes a project conducted with the United States Air force in
which supply network resilience modeling was applied to its supply chain. The United States
Air Force sought solutions to problems caused by insufﬁcient management of supply chains,
which in turn led to ﬂawed decision-making, based on partial information, continuing poor
tracking and a defective data cycle. This research is the ﬁrst exploration, to the best of our
knowledge, of a complete supply chain model as a series of interdependent networks. This
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1167
study addresses proactive designs of supply chains including the factors that could impinge
on supply chain performance and resilience.
Military forces have increasingly been deployed in humanitarian assistance and disaster
relief. This pulls on the military’s strength of ‘readiness’ to help peacekeeping and disaster
relief activities. On the other hand, it is hampered by the different working styles, roles
and guiding principles the military and humanitarian organizations have (Heaslip & Barber,
2016). The large number of agents involved in the network further increases complexity.
These speciﬁc performance challenges make military supply chains particularly suitable
for whole-chain analysis using a networked approach to coordination and decision-making.
Yoho et al. (2013) posit that defense and business supply chains have become similar because
supply chain turbulence has generally increased, as has the imperative to have an efﬁcient
and effective ﬂow of goods, services and information.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, we examine previous research
on supply chain resilience in light of black swan events. Secondly, we explain the research
methodology implemented. Thirdly, we present our model and results, and discuss their
implications in a non-military context. Lastly, we derive conclusions and implications for
theory and practice, note limitations, and propose future research directions.
2 Literature review
Resilience is reﬂected in the ability to prepare for and recover from low probability but rec-
ognized disruptive events and achieve some post-disruption operational equilibrium (Dolgui
et al., 2018). Resilience focuses on maintaining system functionality as opposed to main-
taining functional efﬁciency (Slack et al., 2009). Being resilient, the system is stable, near
equilibrium or steady state, and able to return to that state following shocks, with more
resilient systems bouncing back more quickly than less resilient systems.
The resource-based view (Brandon-Jones et al., 2014), dynamic capability theory (Chowd-
hury & Quaddus, 2017a, 2017b; Iftikhar et al., 2021), resource dependency theory (Gebhard
et al., 2022), social exchange theory (Shin & Park, 2021), and system theory (Kim et al., 2015)
have been widely used as theoretical bases for supply chain resilience research but all have
been found to possess signiﬁcant shortcomings (Tukamuhabwa et al., 2015). These theories
focus on the internal workings of supply chain resilience, without taking supplier systems and
co-evolution into account. Where these papers do acknowledge a systemic aspect, it tends to
be static in nature. For instance, resource based view is ﬁrm biased and ignores component
synergies (Gebhard et al., 2022). It assumes predictable environments where the future value
of resources is determinable. Dynamic capability models based on inter-ﬁrm components
(Wang & Ahmed, 2007) fail to address supply chain resilience as a whole ecosystem. Sys-
tems theory does recognize the systemic structure of supply chains but in focusing on ﬂows,
ﬂow units and their sources, omits temporal changes, which reduces supply chain resilience
accuracy and ability to forecast complex adaptive system future events (Choi et al., 2001;
Kim et al., 2015). Furthermore, the bulk of research on supply chain resilience was found
to be conceptual in nature (Wieland et al., 2016; Christopher & Holweg, 2017; DuHadway
et al., 2017). Teece et al. (1997) extend the resource based theory and believed that ﬁrms
need to constantly integrate and reconstruct their resources and capabilities, as they have to
cope with changes in the external market environment and avoid losing their competitive
advantage due to these changes. The theory is suitable for clarifying how a ﬁrm improves its
operational performance by manipulating the right resources. Some research has been done
123

1168
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
on modeling of supply chain resilience (Erol et al., 2010), complex adaptive system studies
(Brandon-Jones et al., 2014; Purvis et al., 2016) and survey-based work (Wieland & Wallen-
burg, 2013). It seems to us that such examinations fall short of addressing network issues,
which align with biological ecosystem analogies. Accordingly, new model conceptions are
needed.
Industrial ecologists look to biological ecosystems as analogies or metaphors in the study
of supply chains (Côté, 1999). Some ecologists argue that it is the diverse nature of an
ecosystem, which is central to its sustainability. This diversity enables some redundancy in
function, which, in turn, supports the stability and resilience of the system. Scholars have
used biological ecosystems as an analogy to explore inter-organizational relationships and
supply chains, yet the prevalence and increasing importance of business ecosystems across
industries has sparked a burgeoning research focus in this area. Allenby and Cooper (1994)
pointed out that supply chains share many of the properties of biological systems. Their
conclusion was that a supply chain resembles a biological community.
Despite resource-based view’s deﬁciencies, in our view, it is the best starting point to
apply to our model as it is based on the idea that companies depend on their environments
to acquire scarce resources under favorable conditions to ensure their survival (Nandi et al.,
2020). Moreover, given that resilience research is mostly based on resource-based view,
it would seem a suitable framework for studying supply chain interdependencies (Spieske
et al., 2022) with biological ecosystem analogies to offset the above-mentioned theories’
weaknesses. Resource-based view deals with conditions where supply chains depend on
an uncertain environment to acquire resources essential for their operations. Using resource-
based view, prior literature has shown that ﬁrms’ internal resources, such as physical facilities,
ﬁnancial assets, human resources, and technological development as well as their external
resources such as supply connectivity, are critical for supply chain resilience (Gebhardt
et al., 2022). Resource-based view states that a ﬁrm’s competitive edge is inﬂuenced by the
strategic resources or capabilities it possesses (Barney, 1991). The basic premise behind this
view is that resources are heterogeneously and spread across ﬁrms. If they are valuable, rare,
not perfectly imitable and non-substitutable, they are able to sustain the ﬁrm’s competitive
advantage (Iftikharet al., 2021).
Resilience from a resource based view perspective is an outcome of the organizational
capabilities employed to minimize the unfavorable impact of disturbances (Nandi et al.,
2020). Resilience is considered a multifaceted concept that addresses how an organization
and its members react to uncertainty (Blessley & Mudambi, 2022). These are all-inclusive
capabilities, which are utilized to obtain resources, and reorganize, integrate, and priori-
tize their allocation in a complex business environment. This implies that a resilient supply
chain possesses large buffering capacity, and an even more resilient supply chain is one
that can withstand relatively large shocks while retaining its current structures and processes
(Kamalahmadi et al., 2022). Resilience-building strategies allow the supply chain to maintain
functionality by adapting and transforming in response to black swan events. For example,
if a set of suppliers is no longer available due to an embargo or a natural disaster, a bridg-
ing strategy, which only resilient supply chain management would have, might involve the
improvisation of actively managing customer expectations, using new suppliers, or ﬁnding
substitute inputs.
To use resource-based view and limit the impact of its shortcomings, we view the supply
chain as one intertwined unit and not as individual ﬁrms. By integrating and exploiting
resources across autonomous ﬁrms, new exclusive competences are formed and resilience
increased (Lu et al., 2010). In other words, learning from past research on resource-based
view’s ﬂaws, we expand its theoretical scope to focus on the supply chain, not on a speciﬁc
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1169
ﬁrm, and introduce unpredictable environments into our model, which is able to adapt to
disruptions. Supply chain integration is realized in the resilience literature as a strategic
resource that can be utilized in alleviating supply chain disruptions and enhancing resilience
(Wu et al., 2010). It is claimed that a resilient supply chain is a network that can retain existing
structures and functions should it undergo some type of shock (Novak et al., 2021).
The resource dependency theory, furthering the resource based view, introduced by Pfeffer
and Salancik (1978) is an organizational theory that focuses on how organizations rely on
others and manage their relationships to survive by reducing environmental uncertainty. This
theory is the main motivator in creating a value chain network (Barringer & Harrison, 2000).
The theory can enlighten the antecedent of inter-organizational collaboration and the reason
for joint actions. It views organizations as the stakeholders, which have dynamic interests
and can be used to examine and interpret their behavior in collaborating with others for
achieving their goals. Within this theory, organizations are aware that dependence forms
trust and tolerance of others, which becomes the basis of a relationship.
However, both the resource based theory and the resource dependency theory focus on
resource potential rather than systemic interactions, which limits its explanatory power
regarding the relationship between visibility and business performance (Wong & Karia,
2010). In the ﬁeld of supply chain research, the resource-based view focuses on the internal
resources of ﬁrms and does not go beyond the level of ﬁrms (Kraaijenbrink et al., 2010). In
addition, the resource-based view assumes that the future value of resources is determined in
a predictable environment, but supply chain resilience is precisely nonlinear, dynamic, and
unpredictable.
To overcome the shortcomings of the resource based theory and the resource dependency
theory, Wang et al., (2016) introduce the dynamic capability theory, as an extension to the
resource based theory. It better explains the inﬂuence of big data capability. Many studies have
explored supply chain resilience and its formation mechanism based on dynamic capability
theory, and many researchers regard supply chain resilience itself as a dynamic capability
(Chowdhury & Quaddus, 2017a, 2017b; Kraaijenbrink et al., 2010). As such, the dynamic
capability theory provides a theoretical basis for related research on supply chain resilience
and the logical framework of this paper. Common to these studies is that dynamic capabilities
are distinct from ordinary routines or organizational competences, and even dynamic capa-
bilities are hierarchically ordered in ways that the higher-order capabilities contribute the
most to adaptation after radical changes (Winter, 2003). By considering dynamic capabilities
as best practices, these authors render the concept of dynamic capabilities more practical and
generalizable (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000).
As systems provides an essential, actionable framework from a managerial perspective, we
utilize in parallel to the dynamic capability theory, systems theory. The reason for selecting
this systems-level approach is that it provides an appropriate theoretical view for generat-
ing and guiding informative decision insights to supply chain actors in risky environments,
ultimately enhancing the overall network resilience (Govindan & Al-Ansari, 2019). Spiegler
et al. (2012), among others, have studied the dynamics of supply chain systems and assessed
alternative inventory and ordering control policies against resilience, having a view on a
speciﬁc process, thus providing a demonstration of the usefulness of system thinking as a
way to link resilience and supply chain operations.
Social exchange theory was also used in supply chain research. It focuses on relationships
that inherently involve an exchange between providers and consumers (Berger et al., 2014).
Borrowing its roots from social psychology and behavioral economic paradigm, the premise
of this theory asserts that, when an actor is being presented with choices, they will undergo
subjective cost–beneﬁt analysis and weight available alternatives before making the ﬁnal
123

1170
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
decision. Cropanzano et al., (2017) concluded that this theory is about individuals as part of a
community and how they make rational decisions to maximize positive experiences through
social interactions. Social exchange theory posits that reinforcement mechanisms underpin
social relations, arguing that people engage in social exchanges where mutual beneﬁts form
the basis for maintaining these relationships. A basic assumption is that the exchange parties
do not seek a one-off transactional relationship but a continuous social relationship. As this
theory is more on a personal level and not on the supply chain technical level, we found that
this theory does not ﬁt the focus of our research.
Prior research on supply chain resilience seldom considered it in terms of interdependent
networks or whole system solutions (Hearnshaw & Wilson, 2013). This linearity precludes
supply chain resilience from handling the vagaries of disruption in today’s dynamic supply
chain – so essential when a black swan event occurs (Olivares-Aguila & Vital-Soto, 2021).
Supply chain models are often found to be unrealistically oversimpliﬁed and linear (Hearn-
shaw & Wilson, 2013; Kamalahmadi et al., 2022; López & Ishizaka, 2019), which inhibits
efforts to boost supply chain resilience. Many researchers have come to the conclusion that
supply chain resilience analysis based on simplistic linear scrutiny is ineffective and lead to
supply chain resilience failures (Li & Zobel, 2020; Olivares-Aguila & Vital-Soto, 2021).
Researchers have begun re-conceptualizing supply chains as dynamically evolving struc-
tures with diverse connections and multiple constituent entities. This new view requires
new models and theories to depict the complex and adaptive phenomena that may affect
resilience (Hearnshaw & Wilson, 2013; Tukamuhabwa et al., 2015). The focus has moved to
consolidating results from linear quantitative network modeling and optimization (Ribeiro
& Barbosa-Povoa, 2018; Scholten et al., 2019) and concepts describing human behavior
(Oshio et al., 2018) and management techniques (Linnenluecke et al., 2015). Tukamuhabwa
et al. (2015) offered one of the ﬁrst research efforts on supply chain resilience by taking a
nonlinear complex adaptive system approach (Holland, 1992). Their research highlighted a
number of gaps in the existing approaches to making supply chains consistently resilient.
For instance, they pointed out that interdependencies between global supply chains alongside
their individual sources need to be considered and, in addition to strategies to increase supply
chain resilience; the implementation of these strategies needs to be addressed.
Recently, Mena et al. (2022) classiﬁed supply chain resilience according to adaption
capabilities ranging from individuals and single supply chain systems up to economies and
societies on a national level. Complementing this research, Gebhard et al. (2022) introduced a
distinction between studies considering response measures and recovery measures to a supply
chain disruption post hoc. Parker and Ameen (2018) proposed a resilient adaptive system
design that, on the one hand, is robust to disruptions without accelerating buffering and, on
the other hand, prevents stock-keeping costs from rising. More and more, supply chains are
being viewed as having the complexity of nonlinear biological systems (Shin & Park, 2021).
Like biological systems, supply chains rely on relationships, reciprocity, and coordinative
capacity and function best as a mutually beneﬁcial shared enterprise (Dooley et al., 2013; Qian
et al., 2021; Tangpong et al., 2014). Hence, a supply chain resilience model must account for
the necessity of a post-disruption channel function (possibly at a diminished level) in acute
situations such as military or disaster relief applications (Kamalahmadi et al., 2022). The
issue, however, of continued operation at a diminished but still viable functioning level when
a distribution actor is lost is not well researched (Gebhardt et al., 2022). Complex adaptive
systems theory, proposed by Holland (1992), builds on general systems theory (Holweg &
Pil, 2008). It is concerned with the total performance of a system rather than its separate
parts, even when a change in only one or a few of its parts is contemplated (Ackoff, 1971). It
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1171
is applied in many disciplines, including evolutionary biology, sociology and management
systems (Choi et al., 2001; Holweg & Pil, 2008).
System properties develop from the associations between the system parts, how they
interact, and how they ﬁt together. Complex adaptive system theory allows the study of
the behavior and response of systems that dynamically change and learn from experience.
Complex adaptive systems form an interconnected network of entities, which over time,
coalesce into a coherent system because of their ability to adapt and self-organize. This
implies ﬂexibility, responsiveness, and a learning capability, partly due to the fact that the
entities that constitute the complex adaptive systems are guided by order-generating rules,
calledschemas(Choietal.,2001;Pathaketal.,2007).Inthecontextofsupplychainresilience,
ﬂexibility is deﬁned as the aptitude to quickly adapt and react to disruptions instead of trying
to withstand the disturbance (Dolguietal.,2018). Ithas been asserted thata supply chain looks
like a complex adaptive system (Choi et al., 2001; Hearnshaw & Wilson, 2013; Day, 2012),
since it mirrors the main features of a complex adaptive system, particularly in the context of
supply chain resilience. Table 1 has been adapted in-order to illustrate how Tukamuhabwa
et al. (2015) captured these features.
Supply chain network resilience theory, which emerged from complex adaptive system
theory, is posited to explain supply chain resilience. Whilst not all supply chains are complex
(for instance, quarrying stone), by thinking of those that are (such as military or humanitarian
missions) as a complex adaptive system, managers and researchers can understand these sup-
ply networks more completely and develop interventions that are more likely to be effective
(Choi et al., 2001; Holweg & Pil, 2008; Li et al., 2010). Tukamuhabwa et al. (2015) stated that
the features of a supply chain network resilience make resilience inherent within the network,
since it is a system designed to adapt to environmental threats without violating its integrity
as a functioning system. Adaptation, however, can only occur within the limits of the net-
work’s capabilities. If no adaptation is possible, it could result in a system’s loss of integrity,
malfunction or total destruction of the network’s ability to function (Holland, 1992). This is
a common characteristic of any system faced with a problem outside of its design speciﬁca-
tions. The supply chain network resilience approach is a potential resolution, not a failsafe
one, which Tukamuhabwa et al. (2015) failed to note. The schemas presented in our model
determine the supply chain network resilience’s responses and subsequent changes during
the adaptation process; thus, adaptation and change occur through continuing co-evolution.
This, in turn, increases the supply chain’s ruggedness. Flexibility, i.e., adaptation, is key to
achieving resilience, as it enables ﬁrms to respond to market dynamism and manage risks
by reconﬁguring their resources (Slack et al., 2009). Flexibility-oriented ﬁrms are more able
to sense disruptions early, enabling themselves to react rapidly. They design their course of
action quickly and reconﬁgure their properties in response to the recognized threats to gain
competitive advantage. Flexibility is thus perceived as a proactive attribute of resilience.
For supply chain network resilience theory to be of use in the real world, the network
model’s properties must mirror real-world supply chains (Hearnshaw & Wilson, 2013).
Military supply chains provide an excellent scenario for a real-world exploration of sup-
ply chain resilience improvement. These supply chains require agility and ﬂexibility and a
responsive system-to-system model that can enhance the robustness of an entire supply chain
network with end-user considerations for decision-making both strategically and tactically.
The data available about the Unites Staes Air Force’s vision, tracking, and options supply
chain problems, as reﬂected in information sources related to the Joint Expeditionary Force
Experiment, a dataset established in 1999 by the United Sates Air Force (Cokus et al., 2000)
and expanded every year until closed in 2013, were ideally suited for applying a supply
chain network resilience approach. In real life, military supply chains/networks cannot rely
123

1172
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Table 1 Comparison of complex adaptive system, SC and Supply chain resilience features (synthesized from
Tukamuhabwa et al., 2015)
Complex adaptive system
features
Description
Relevance to supply
chain
Relevance to supply
chain resilience
Adaptation and coevolution
Complex adaptive
system agents change
so as to cope with
changes in other
agents and its
environment through
self-organization.
Complex adaptive
system can also
inﬂuence changes in
other agents as well
as in its environment
Due to environmental
dynamism, the
supply chain
changes in order to
adapt. Activities of
individual ﬁrms
may also inﬂuence
the supply chain
environment
Supply chain
resilience is an
adaptive
phenomenon. Firms
adapt to supply chain
threats, but this may
cause more changes
in the environment
Multiscale/heterogeneous
agents
Agents refer to entities
that form a complex
adaptive system.
They operate at
different levels in the
system. Agents may
be individuals, teams,
divisions, or the
entire organization.
They are
heterogeneous, given
that they follow
different schemas but
aim to enhance their
ﬁtness within the
entire system
Agents in a supply
chain may be the
individual ﬁrms.
These operate at
different levels with
different rules,
functions and
objectives, e.g.,
supplier,
manufacturer,
distributor, retailer
and customer
The resilience of a
supply chain is a
collective outcome
from the interactions
of different ﬁrms
along the supply
chain as they apply
schemas (strategies
and rules) to increase
ﬁtness/ survival
Schema
Schema refers to the
norms, values, beliefs
and assumptions
shared by a group of
individuals. It is a set
of goal-led rules
guiding the decisions
and operations of
individual complex
adaptive system
agents
Organizations within
the supply chain
have rules, visions,
objectives, goals
and strategies that
guide their decisions
and operations
Schemas include
strategies and plans
such as ﬁrms’
Supply chain
resilience strategies,
which enable ﬁrms
to modify their
operations and adapt
to their supply chain
threats
on ‘steady-state’ conditions and are challenged by chaotic external pressures and turbulent
change in vulnerable areas where there are high levels of operational risk (Pettit et al., 2013).
Additionally, in common with all other supply chain research, creating dynamic capabilities
that promote ﬂexibility and the achievement of resilience at the lowest possible economic
cost are of utmost importance in both the military and business environments alike (Davids
et al., 2013; Fiksel et al., 2015).
Yoho et al. (2013) posited that defense and business supply chains have become similar
because supply chain turbulence has generally increased, as has the imperative to have an
efﬁcient and effective ﬂow of goods, services and information. Whilst the trade-off between
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1173
Table 1 (continued)
Complex adaptive system
features
Description
Relevance to supply
chain
Relevance to supply
chain resilience
Environment, dynamism
and rugged landscape
The environment in
which the complex
adaptive system
operates consists of
other complex
adaptive systems and
is more complex than
the complex adaptive
system itself. It is
rugged and dynamic,
causing changes that
the complex adaptive
system agents must
adapt to in order to
achieve ﬁtness. This
adaptation may also
cause changes in the
World Health
Organizational
system as well as in
the environment
In a supply chain
environment,
changes exist, e.g.,
in the supply base,
statutory
regulations, etc
Environmental
dynamism creates
threats. Supply chain
resilience involves
adaptation to both
internal and external
threats
Ability to learn
Agents in a complex
adaptive system learn
by obtaining
information from
their relationships
within the system
and the surrounding
environment. It is
through their
dynamic learning
that they are able to
make decisions on
modifying their
capabilities and
changing their
schema in order to
improve their ﬁtness
and performance
Organizational
learning exists
among ﬁrms/agents
in the supply chain
Organizational
learning enhances
Supply chain
resilience. Learning
helps in adaptation
by facilitating the
modiﬁcation of
resilience strategies
Nonlinearity
There is a nonlinear
relationship between
the cause and effect
of complex adaptive
system events – a
seemingly small
event may cause
large effects in the
system (either
positive or negative).
Similarly, severe
events may yield very
trivial effects and, at
times, no effect at all
A small change in the
downstream part of
the supply chain can
cause ampliﬁed and
oscillating
changes
in the supply chain
upstream, e.g., the
Bullwhip effect
Due to nonlinearity
coupled with
interdependence,
seemingly small
disturbances can
result in massive
supply chain threats.
Survival depends on
embracing Supply
chain resilience
strategies, such as
increasing visibility
and ﬂexibility
through
multiple-sourcing
123

1174
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Table 1 (continued)
Complex adaptive system
features
Description
Relevance to supply
chain
Relevance to supply
chain resilience
Network
connectivity/interaction
Complex adaptive
system is composed
of agents and their
connections. The
connectivity of these
agents determines the
complexity and the
dimensionality of the
complex adaptive
system
Agents in a supply
network have a
physical connection
that facilitates the
ﬂow of information,
resources and
materials. Such
connections include
telephone lines and
the internet
Supply network
connectivity and
clustering facilitated
by information ﬂows
facilitate
collaboration, reduce
opportunistic
behavior, and
enhance resilience
Dimensionality
Dimensionality refers
to the degree of
freedom an
individual agent
possesses in order to
act somewhat
autonomously
Supply chain entities
have different
objectives and
constraints. They
operate
autonomously
although their
connectivity with
other supply chain
members causes
some
interdependence
Individual ﬁrms have
partial freedom to
make decisions. This
contributes to
self-organization,
emergence and
adaptation – crucial
for Supply chain
resilience
Self-organization and
emergence
Decisions made by
individual agents
cause new structures,
patterns, and
properties to emerge
at the system level
without being
externally controlled
or imposed by any
single agent. Some
agents may have
greater inﬂuence on
the system than
others, but they
cannot control it
entirely
No single ﬁrm
deliberately controls
or organizes the
entire supply chain.
The control or
organization simply
emerges in part
because a ﬁrm
cannot manage the
entire extended
supply chain. Each
ﬁrm tries to achieve
its goals but this in
turn contributes to
the collective
behavior of the
entire network
Resilience is an
emergent feature of
a supply chain. It is a
result of
self-organized
processes that
enhance adaptation.
No single ﬁrm
controls the
resilience of the
entire supply chain
efﬁciency and effectiveness is a concern, it is readiness that is the core operational requirement
of military systems (Wilhite et al., 2014). Readiness incorporates responsiveness, ﬂexibility
and agility—fundamental to supply chain resilience and to supply chain network resilience
(Day, 2014; Ponomarov & Holcomb, 2009). Absence of readiness results in failure, where
proﬁt, in the military context, is usually counted in terms of loss of life, not reduced prof-
itability or disgruntled shareholders (Kovács & Tatham, 2009; Wilhite et al., 2014). An added
complexity for military supply chains is that they frequently operate, especially in relation to
the “last mile [re]supply”, in damaged or poorly-developed infrastructure areas, with over-
strained local authorities, widespread threats ranging from theft to attack, as well as harsh
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1175
Table 1 (continued)
Complex adaptive system
features
Description
Relevance to supply
chain
Relevance to supply
chain resilience
Scalability
The same causal
dynamics in a
complex adaptive
system may apply
across all of its levels
Agents/ﬁrms at
different tiers in the
supply chain may
have similar
concerns, e.g.,
improving quality,
delivery speed and
reducing cost
Inter-relatedness
within a supply
chain and the
presence of common
schemas shared by
ﬁrms are vital for the
adaptation and
survival (resilience)
of the entire supply
chain
conditions – sand, salt, cold, heat and combat (Tatham et al., 2017; Wilhite et al., 2014). Mil-
itary forces have increasingly been deployed for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief
(Bealt et al., 2016; Heaslip & Barber, 2014, 2016; Lis, 2016). This leverages the military’s
‘readiness’ strength (serving as peacekeepers and offering disaster relief) but is hampered
by the different working styles, roles and guiding principles the military and humanitarian
organizations have (Heaslip, 2012; Heaslip & Barber, 2016). The great number of players
involved in the network further increases complexity. These speciﬁc performance challenges
make military supply chains particularly suitable for whole-chain analysis using a networked
approach to coordination and decision-making.
Several studies have developed models to address supply chain resilience and to create
varying robust supply chain network resilience. For instance, Sebbah et al. (2013) developed
a mathematical optimization algorithm to improve efﬁciency and scalability with regard to
the distribution of heterogeneous commodities to forward operating bases in a theatre of
operations. Ghanmi (2011) created a discrete facility location model, using mixed integer
nonlinear programming, to determine optimal hub locations for the Canadian Armed Forces,
supplemented with an aircraft routing model for the movement of cargo between the hubs.
Skipper et al. (2016) proposed the use of a multiple objective linear programming model,
again for the optimization of hub locations. Whilst it can help determine trade-offs between
key network entities, its linearity precludes it from handling the vagaries of disruptions in
the supply chain. Tsadikovich et al. (2016) incorporated an intermediary controlling module
when developing an integrated demand-responsive scheduling system within a military sup-
ply chain consisting of transportation and maintenance operations. Glas et al. (2013) carried
out a conceptual study using illustrative complex adaptive system studies. Adopting the con-
tingency approach, they sought to provide a decision-support tool for defense contracting.
They called this the performance-based logistics portfolio. As with the mathematical models,
this tool provides limited applicability, as well as being empirically unproven.
The above literature review highlights a number of gaps in current approaches to mak-
ing supply chains consistently resilient. None of the models cited present a whole-system
solution. Each corresponds to a speciﬁc aspect of a supply chain. We seek to ﬁll in this
lacuna and build a more robust and ﬂexible model that advances modeling research on sup-
ply chain network resilience by embedding in resource-based theory and system theory. This
approach enables the incorporation of time, information, systems, heterogeneity, relation-
ships, change, adaptation and co-evolution into a whole-system network model. Moreover,
it can serve both military and commercial supply chain resilience needs. In a succession of
123

1176
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
post-operational mission reviews, the Unites States Air Force consistently identiﬁed the man-
agement of vision, tracking, and options as core barriers to supply chain network resilience
(Lis, 2016; Tsadikovich et al., 2016). Our proposal is a response to the call for solutions to
the United States Air Force supply chain problem.
3 Methodology
With probability reasoning it was envisaged that our proposed model could replicate eco-
logical biological systems and provide the ability to survive, adapt and grow in the face
of turbulent environmental change. The approach develops a road map of people, process
and technology requirements to support the military logistics process. More importantly, the
model shifts easily into non-military contexts and can also offer civilian decision-makers the
widest possible range of options available to maintain and adapt a cohesive supply chain. The
probability reasoning method and other reasoning methods are main techniques employed
in intelligent systems for processing uncertain and vague information (Guo et al., 2003).
Probability reasoning provides the logic for inductive reasoning (North, 2010). The concep-
tual foundation is to view the assessment of probabilities as a process of going from our
information to numbers that characterize uncertainty based on that information. This process
depends on logical reasoning and must be consistent as the complexity of the judgments
involved makes it impossible to build up probability assessments from information item
by item. Therefore, if we are going to reason consistently about uncertain events using a
numerical measure (as opposed, e.g., to qualitative descriptors). As a result, we implement
the probability reasoning theory, as speciﬁed in its modern form by the Kolmogorov axioms
(Wu et al., 2002). Our model is intended to: (1) Support decision-making and responsiveness
to ensure the entire supply chain remains operational throughout the mission; (2) Permit
propagation of decisions up and down the supply chain, rather than just in one direction; and
(3) Generate a continuous ﬂow of both supplies and information.
The vulnerability of supply chains, envisioned above as networks, can be conceived as the
chances of one or more of its nodes (an actor/s in the supply chain) being rendered incapable
of fulﬁlling its function in the supply chain due to forces acting directly on the node. For
example, a supply truck might be vulnerable to destruction by enemy ﬁre. Nodes rely on other
nodes to carry out their tasks. Thus, a node can be incapacitated because it requires input from
another node that is not functioning. In symbiotic relationships, reliance originates when one
organization’s output is the input for another supply chain member (Ivanov, 2020). A supply
truck would have a dependency on its source of fuel, as it cannot transport supplies without
fuel. Our model scores nodes based on the cumulative transitive dependency that other nodes
have on it and identiﬁes where they occur. The scores reﬂect how seriously the network would
be affected by the respective node’s incapacitation, including downstream effects. Our model
thus identiﬁes dependencies that are not obvious. For example, if the military operation is in
a cold climate region, the supply truck and many other vehicles require antifreeze, making a
reliable supply of antifreeze much more important than it appears at ﬁrst glance. Having the
model take this into consideration enables managers to anticipate supply chain problems and
proactively deal with them before they occur rather than just reacting to failures. Managers
can distinguish between nodes that may both have similar scores but differ in that some of
them are more readily replaced.
The model is generalizable to any supply chain because all supply chain components
can be treated as nodes in both military and commercial applications. The model can be
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1177
Fig. 1 Basic node model of supply chain dependency ﬂows
interpreted easily using a graphical interface because node dependencies are shown as dotted
lines where the thickness of the line indicates the strength of the dependency (see Fig. 1).
To address the basic requirement of identifying node dependencies, the ﬁrst step was to
provide visibility across the entire network. A simple, intuitive node-based representation
of the supply chain network captures all its aspects, from strategic to operational levels. A
straightforward example of this node-based representation is depicted in Fig. 1.
Nodes are described in terms of the type of resource they represent and the kinds of
interactions they can have with other nodes of various types. There are three types of nodes:
actor, physical or concept. Actor nodes are people, groups, or organizations (actors in a supply
chain network resilience). Physical nodes are resources, objects or locations (environments
in a supply chain network resilience). Concept nodes are ideas, goals, principles, policies,
methodsoforganization,oroperatingprocedures(whichinﬂuence‘adaptation’and‘learning’
(dimensionality in supply chain network resilience) (as noted in Table 1). Additionally, nodes
can be described in terms of the interdependencies—for example, an actor could “defend”
another actor node or “damage” a physical node. A list of potential dependency relationships
between node types can be found in Table 2.
Algorithms developed by Dijkstra (1959) and Floyd (1962) were then applied to these
networks of nodes and their relationships. This allows our model to capture the nonlinearity
and network connectivity/interaction suggested by supply chain network resilience theory,
and adding the vision, tracking, and options capabilities required by the United Sates Air
force, as laid out in the Joint Expeditionary Force Experiment information sources. These
algorithms look at the complete conﬁguration and assign a dependency score to each node.
They locate points of high dependency and evaluate their impact across the supply chain in
the event of a disruption. This allows the classiﬁcation of nodes in terms of capability, depen-
dency, and vulnerability. Capability is the output of a node and can be either quantitative
(fuel, transportation) or qualitative (supervision, subject knowledge). Its production is based
on the provision of an output from one or more nodes, deﬁning one or more dependencies,
which it needs to realize its capabilities. Vulnerability is the direct susceptibility of a node
to a phenomenon generated by an action or event. In the supply truck example described
123

1178
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Table 2 Node and dependency relationships
Actor
Physical
Concept
Actor
Actor supports Actor
Actor defends Actor
Actor directs actor
Actor supervises actor
Actor opposes actor
Actor motivates actor
Actor moves actor
Actor operates physical
Actor maintains physical
Actor repairs physical
Actor constructs physical
Actor damages physical
Actor destroys physical
Actor moves physical
Actor accesses physical
Actor formulates concept
Actor advocates concept
Actor opposes concept
Actor accepts concept
Actor rejects concept
Actor adopts concept
Actor votes concept
Actor implements concept
Physical
Physical protects actor
Physical supports actor
Physical motivates actor
Physical damages actor
Physical destroys actor
Physical moves actor
Physical supplies physical
Physical supports physical
Physical constructs physical
Physical destroys physical
Physical damages physical
Physical directs physical
Physical supports concept
Physical motivates concept
Physical instantiates concept
Concept
Concept motivates actor
Concept directs actor
Concept supports actor
Concept supports physical
Concept motivates physical
Concept instantiates physical
Concept motivates concept
Concept rebuts concept
Concept contradicts concept
Concept supports concept
Concept subsumes concept
at the beginning of this section, the truck might represent a node capable of providing the
transportation capability. It is vulnerable to damage or being destroyed by hostile actors and
is dependent on its fuel depot’s refueling capability. The fuel depot node too will have depen-
dencies of its own. Accordingly, the truck node could be disabled by damage or disruption
to itself, the fuel depot, or any of the nodes on which the depot depends.
Complex adaptive system theory speciﬁes nonlinearity and network connectivity / inter-
action (Yarosen et al., 2021). To ensure these components exist in our model, the algorithms
used in it were designed to exploit the nodes’ ability to meet the primary capability, depen-
dency, and vulnerability requirements. The node attributes and the possible node dependency
permutations in Table 2 were integrated into the basic ﬂow of the algorithms.
3.1 Data collection and model development
Joint Expeditionary Force Experiment is a large-scale Air Force experiment designed to
assist the U.S. Air Force in preparing for the challenges of the 21st Century Expeditionary
Air and Space Force operations. The Joint expeditionary force experiment link provides a
virtual workspace to share information across its participants. Web tools were added to help
manage operating and assessment tasks and to encourage collaboration, that we had access to.
Observations were collected via a web-based tool during each experiment on ways to improve
the design, planning, execution, and assessment of the Joint Expeditionary Force experiment.
The Joint Expeditionary Force experiment link web portal was essential to access, share, and
manage information across the experiment enterprise efﬁciently.
The United States Air Force’s consistent identiﬁcation of vision, tracking, and options
logistics problems prompted the outlined approach and adoption of complex adaptive sys-
tem theory, as detailed above. The combined attributes highlighted in Table 2 provided the
rationale for the model. The model was designed to implement all the complex adaptive
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1179
system features (Table 1) to existing data sources so that vision, tracking, and options was
possible (Fig. 2). In addition to the capability, dependency, and vulnerability attributes, the
node model contains additional information necessary to correctly model aspects of node
behavior. Figure 2 shows the complete node model with the additional information incorpo-
rating temporal and other metadata. The United States Air Force’s consistent identiﬁcation of
vision, tracking, and options logistics problems prompted the outlined approach and adoption
of complex adaptive system theory, as detailed above. The combined attributes highlighted
in Fig. 1, and Table 2 provided the rationale for the model. The model was designed to
implement all the complex adaptive system features (Table 1) to existing data sources so
that vision, tracking, and options was possible (Fig. 2). In addition to the vision, tracking,
and options attributes, the node model contains additional information necessary to correctly
model aspects of node behavior. Figure 2 shows the complete node model with the additional
information incorporating temporal and other metadata.
The model was designed to implement the features of a complex adaptive system (Table 1)
using data taken from the Joint Expeditionary Force experiment information sources. In addi-
tion to the capability, dependency, and vulnerability attributes, our model contains additional
information necessary to correctly model aspects of node behavior. Figure 1 shows the com-
plete node model for an example node with additional information regarding temporal and
other metadata (a data set that describes and gives information about other data). Once tested
and validated, the model was applied to live operational systems based on the Joint Expe-
ditionary Force experiment data base. The architectural overview (Fig. 3) shows how the
existing legacy systems were mined for data. This became a continuous process, permitting
real-time updating and decision-making once ﬁeld operations were live.
In this way, future models can be developed for economic, infrastructure, social, and
information networks. These models will differ in terms of the number and nature of their
Fig. 2 Outline of the node model
123

1180
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Fig. 3 Information access architecture overview
nodes, the description of the actors and how they interact (e.g., support, defends, directs,
and/or supervises) with other actors, the structure of communications networks, the physi-
cal equipment involved and the speciﬁc action options available to actors. Nevertheless, the
model presented here is applicable to all the supply chain categories identiﬁed above. Each
model identiﬁes the interdependencies between nodes within the same network. More impor-
tantly, they allow for the speciﬁcation of the interdependencies that occur between different
networks. The resultant network model comprises multiple networks including producers,
inter- and intra-theatre air and sealift capabilities, ground movement and last mile deliveries.
Last mile resupply in a military context is the ability of a supply chain to provide logistics
support to combat forces that are within 300 m–30 km of a point of engagement with enemy
forces. The model provides updated situational awareness regarding each supply chain on a
near real-time basis.
3.2 Data analysis
The algorithms can be applied in six distinct ways to the populated node model. These are
captured in Table 3, which describes each application, the purpose it serves and the sort of
information the analysis provides.
Considering networks and their differing dependencies in terms of their links allows the
viewer to grasp the strength of the dependency (ranging from minor to critical), its nature
(“supplies”, “operates”, “supervises”) and consequence vis-à-vis the output of the dependent
node (and nodes that depend directly or indirectly on the dependent node) if it disappears.
These dependencies create a cumulative dependency score for every node in the network. It
enables all nodes to be ranked by how much disruption to the rest of the network their loss
would cause. For instance, the chain of dependent nodes from depot 1 to forward operating
base 1 (Fig. 4) contains one or more common route segments (roads, junctions, bridges) with
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1181
Table 3 Reasoning capability categories
Algorithm
Purpose
Output
Dependency-two options
Dependee
Identify how easily a node is impacted by
changes to the capabilities of the
node(s) upon which it is dependent
Nodes scored and ranked based on the
cumulative dependency a node has on
others (the need of a depot for fuel,
electrical power, people, etc.)
Dependent
Identify the importance of a node to the
overall functioning of the network
Nodes scored and ranked based on the
cumulative transitive dependency that
other nodes have on it (several supply
depots all dependent on the same
bridge)
Consequence
Identify the immediate consequence of a
change in a node’s capability and
propagate this to all transitively
dependent nodes
Identiﬁcation and ranking of all
impacted nodes in terms of the
percentage change to the dependent
capability
Probability
Identify and rank potential weaknesses in
a selected transitive dependency chain
Calculation of a maximum probability
that a dependency exists between a
pair of nodes based on the combined
probability of the correct identiﬁcation
of the nodes and links in the chain
Cluster
Discover self-contained sub-networks
within the overall model that contain
nodes World Health Organizationse
transitive dependencies are above a
user-provided threshold
Identiﬁcation and ranking of (by number
of nodes) sub-networks that contain
nodes from multiple disparate
networks
Completeness
Identify missing capability, dependency,
and vulnerability attributes and, where
possible, identify potential values and
mappings
Identiﬁcation and ranking of nodes
based on combining their dependency
score and the number of missing
capability, dependency, and
vulnerability
Instantiation
Identify the speciﬁc values for a node
from a potential set of candidates
Identiﬁcation and ranking of based on
the number of other value
instantiations that are either reduced or
forced to have a speciﬁc value
the chain from depot 1 to forward operating base 2. This would result in higher dependency
scores for the common nodes than ones that are not common. Each forward operating base
is dependent upon its own network of trucks, helicopters and fuel and maintenance facilities.
Each node dependency (Fig. 4) is shown as a dotted line and the thickness of the line
indicates the strength of the dependency. For example, P2 has a far higher dependency on
forward operating base 2 for its logistics than it has on forward operating base 1 as shown by
the thicker broken line. The strength of a dependency is rated from 1 to 10 and the relationship
is identiﬁed based on the pair of nodes involved (as noted in Table 2). A value between 1 and
100 reﬂects the percentage change in the node’s capacity if the dependency is not addressed
(as seen in Fig. 4). For example, a truck could be equally dependent on a driver and fuel,
giving them both a 5.0 dependency value. The lack of either a driver or fuel, however, means
that the truck is non-operational (i.e., lacks the transport capability) regardless of how well
the other dependency is met. In this complex adaptive system, using logic gate principles, the
resulting value on each link would be 100, reﬂecting a 100% loss of the transport capability
123

1182
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Fig. 4 Network supply chain dependency model
if either dependency is not met. The value of a dependency that is helpful but not strictly
necessary would be less than 100, reﬂecting that even without this input, the node could still
operate at a reduced capacity.
The results of dependency and associated consequence analyses identify vulnerable points
in the network that need to be resolved. Complex adaptive systems through the Casandra
application was used to provide suggestions how the lack of resilience could be mitigated
(Drabble & Schattenberg, 2016). For example, air assets are not directly dependent on the
road network, but still may be indirectly and adversely affected by disruptions to it. Air assets
are dependent on fuel supplies, which are dependent on the road network for transport to
the forward operating base. By iteratively reconﬁguring asset use, complex adaptive systems
through the Cassandra application presents decision-makers with a ranked list of ways in
which they could use the assets available to them to meet as many dependencies as pos-
sible, thereby increasing supply chain resilience by providing decision-makers with action
options. This approach can be used to suggest modiﬁcations to the structure and capability
of the supply chain nodes to increase their resilience, thus manifesting self-organization and
emergent behavior (as itemized in Table 1). Figure 5 illustrates the situation where there is an
alternative ground route from depot 1 to forward operating base 2 but at present, this cannot
be used because enemy actions have damaged a road junction and a bridge along the route.
If these nodes could be repaired to restore their capability, then the existing but non-usable
supply route would be reopened and the resilience of the supply chains between the depot
and the forward operating bases improved. The network would allow forward operating base
1 to forward operating base 2 movement with additional movements to forward operating
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1183
Fig. 5 Modiﬁed dependency model with suggested modiﬁcations
base 2 via the reopened route. Moreover, because the reopened route do not have any road
segments in common with the current routes, this reduces the dependency on these transport
infrastructure nodes signiﬁcantly. This approach produces outcomes adapted to the prevailing
environment, increasing resilience, ﬂexibility, and thereby ﬁtness. It does not require generic
solutions to be developed in advance to deal with the range of possible changes in the supply
network. It enables planners to examine the speciﬁcs of a situation and make the changes that
would most effectively increase resilience. In other words, the optimal supply chain network
resilience model will evolve organically as environmental changes evolve.
4 Findings
Ten different supply chain and logistics models were created. Five 8000–10,000 node models
describing the delivery of a range of logistics from producers in the US, by inter-theatre
airlift to Afghanistan via Germany and to the requesting forces via intra-theatre air and
ground aspects were created. Five small scale 1200–1550 node models were also generated
to capture intra-theatre and last mile resupply aspects of military supply chains. An example
of a small-scale model (Fig. 6) demonstrates the occurrences and relationships between
physical or concept nodes and their corresponding capability, dependency, and vulnerability
values.
The dependency network is a complex adaptive system with the additional capability to
alter the behavior of the network as potential issues are identiﬁed (Fig. 6). This capability is
based on complex adaptive systems, planning and learning techniques, adopted from previous
military applications. The dependency network can propagate changes easily from the tactical
level to the strategic level within the same model, allowing planners to anticipate the full
impact of these changes. Dependency analysis alerts planners to cumulative dependency
increases of which they are usually unaware, especially in the complex adaptive system
when other planners and systems are involved in decision-making with respect to the supply
123

1184
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Fig. 6 Inter-theatre airlift dependency model
chain. This allows them to proactively make the kind of changes depicted in Fig. 5, controlling
dependency and eliminating sources of failure.
Potential changes to ranking occur all along the supply chain—from the manufacturers
of the materials who may be a continent away and have raw material issues, to the planes
moving the logistics to the supply depot, or the trucks moving to the forward operating base
1—forward operating base 2 or forward operating base 1 or 2—depot 1, as depicted in Fig. 4.
The values associated with dependency links, as determined by the model, can be used to
assess the direct effects of an action or event on a node’s vulnerability. Additionally, the model
enables identiﬁcation of the indirect, cumulative and complex adaptive system effects on the
capabilities and dependencies of dependent nodes. It may be the complex adaptive system
that in the network, a node, is highly depended upon but its loss can easily be compensated
for by using other nodes with similar capabilities. The ability to distinguish between these
types of nodes and the more important ones—both depended on strongly and having high
consequence values (identifying a lack of resilience in the network)—allows decision-makers
to focus on the most pressing resilience issues in the network.
5 Conclusions
The simulation model built with its easy to understand graphical user interface through the
Cassandra application can help military commanders and civilian supply chain managers to
ensure the maximum number of successfuloutcomes while minimizing attrition and collateral
damage / loss. In this way, readiness is maintained because assets remain coordinated and
executable at all times, adjusting for losses due to damage or re-tasking to higher-priority
events.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1185
As discussed, modern supply chains, epitomized by military supply chains in this instance,
are highly complex, and out of necessity of highly choreographed network systems. Our
dependency model allows decision-makers to immediately identify the direct and indirect
effects of changes to the supply chain, whether planned by the decision-maker or caused by
external events and actions. Through the complex adaptive systems and Cassandra applica-
tion,theintegratedplanningandanalysiscapabilityofourmodelcanprovidedecision-makers
with situational awareness and visibility, enabling them to adapt and keep the supply chain
operational throughout a mission. The ability to model networks from different levels of
the supply chain (strategic, tactical and operational) within the same representation ensures
that the effects of actions and events are propagated quickly across the supply chain and the
command-and-control chain, supporting efﬁcient tracking and option generation. These two
combined capabilities may enable decision-makers to ensure a continuous ﬂow of supplies to
front line units. It further allows quick responses to mission changes and an increased tempo
of operations. We believe that the ability to mine information from multiple data sources and
fuse them into a cohesive model more easily provides a level of situational awareness not pre-
viously available in other models. While the analysis capability adds value, when asked, it is
the ability to view the complete supply chain with all its direct and indirect dependencies that
the decision-makers may ﬁnd the most useful. Frequently, indirect dependencies are hidden
that lead to a lack of resilience in the supply chain that thwarts even experienced planners.
The approach we offer gives decision-makers a way to make these hidden dependencies more
explicit.
In our view, the model will be able to reduce the generation times for usable supply chain
models from days to hours. Nonetheless, it is the ability to reduce the projected manpower
needed to maintain and update the supply chain model that may provide the greatest beneﬁts to
supply chain planners. For example, the logistics J4 planning cell for an air operations center
usually has a staff of ﬁve personnel. The use of the data mining architecture may result in a
reduction of the number of staff required for data management. This signiﬁcantly increases
the number of staff focusing on the actual function of the logistics cell. Thus, problems
can be identiﬁed sooner, and more options developed and analyzed. Using this type of and
analyzing a whole-system network supply chain, mission plans will have a greater probability
of executing successfully, thus ensuring the continuous delivery of logistics materials.
Firms participate directly or indirectly in global supply chains and are embedded in the
broader international trade system. They must abide by international trade rules and use the
existing infrastructure. As a result, every practitioner, whether in the private or public sector,
should be interested in the factors underpinning the resilience of the international supply
chain system. Supply chain disruptions are becoming more frequent (Lopez and Ishizaka,
2019) and tend to lead to an excessive rise in costs, stock-out, delays, and inability to serve
client demand, in addition to the ﬁrm’s loss of market position. Under the Schumpeterian
viewpoint (Vanpoucke et al., 2014), preserving competitive advantage through supply chain
resilience in a shifting, unpredictable environment is challenging and requires supply chains
to continuously reconﬁgure resources to ﬁt ﬂuctuating situations.
Modern supply chains, especially military supply chains, are highly complex, strongly
choreographed network systems and their resilience must match their strength if they are to
survive and thrive. Resilience requires two things—understanding what the problem is/could
be and then being able to solve it or plan for it. It is argued that a resilient ﬁrm improves its
competitive position and the responsive capability of its supply chain (Lopez and Ishizaka,
2019
). The aim of the model outlined in this paper was to develop a dynamic, whole-system
network model that uses the complex adaptive system Cassandra application to provide
123

1186
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
timely, accurate, updatable and scalable information to military and civilian planners and
decision-makers at all supply chain levels. Our model underscores the prevailing assumption
that supply chain resilience will undergo important modiﬁcations following the COVID-19
pandemic (Blessley & Mudambi, 2022; Mena et al., 2022). Practitioners must recognize
the developing trends to implement measures to stay competitive in future supply chain
disruption scenarios. The required outcome in any supply chain disruption scenario—in tur-
bulent, volatile and harsh conditions, whether because of conﬂict, peacekeeping or disaster
relief—is maintaining a continuous supply. Our system, developed using supply chain net-
work resilience principles, fulﬁlls the requirement for continuous supply by providing vision,
tracking, and options for decision-making, facilitating both understanding of the problem and
timely, appropriate resolution.
Our model is a generic one and can easily be adapted to any situation in which there are
interdependent networks across which the direct and indirect effects of actions and events
need to be analyzed. Our model takes into account the complex adaptive system in supply
chains where there are different networks of producers, transportation and storage groups,
and consumers who need the materials to support their mission objectives and tasks. While
the military context of these supply chains means they operate in a critical and volatile
environment, all supply chains, even civilian ones, could proﬁt from the capitalization of
successful outcomes while curtailing marginal loss and secondary damage. A dependency
network methodology aids in preserving competences in adverse environments of whatever
sort by keeping resources synchronized and executable at all times and ﬁne-tuning for losses
or re-tasking for higher-priority events.
Evaluating networks in terms of their consequence value allows us to better understand
their vulnerabilities. In addition to examining nodes in terms of how many other nodes depend
on them directly or indirectly, this model also allows planners to examine how difﬁcult it
would be to route around a node if it was incapacitated and focus their efforts on nodes who’s
responsibilities cannot be assumed by other nodes in an emergency. Once implemented, the
immediate beneﬁt is a graphical user interface front-end, allowing the visualization of the
tens of thousands of nodes and the thousands of relationships. Whilst here analysis was
the primary goal, the graphical presentation provided by the modeling enables all decision-
makers, irrespective of role or location, to have access to and see the same information.
Visualizing an important node and its place in a given context alongside its dependencies
and linkages with other nodes presents a useful holistic image of the bigger picture. A purely
mathematical model with equations, tables and so on does not enable people to visualize
the system as a functioning coherent network. Representing this information with icons is
a more intuitive way of providing information. Because of the explicit links with the data-
mining architecture, which is feeding the data directly into the model, the need for manual
updating is eliminated. As such, the model provides the core features of supply chain network
resilience and supply chain resiliency (adaptation, coevolution, learning, and emergence), all
inﬂuenced by the landscape, its ruggedness and dimensionality (Table 1).
Learning from high impact disruptions must take into account contextual factors, as
responses to new high impact disruptions may require a more creative and restructured
approach (Sirmon et al., 2007). For low impact disruptions, major reconﬁguration may not
be necessary, but high impact disruptions require signiﬁcant reconﬁguration. For supply
chains to become both resilient and innovative, their capacity to manage resources effec-
tively and deal with risk is key. Our model enables decision-makers to affect nodes in a
supply chain network in real time directly by dealing with their vulnerabilities and indirectly
by circumventing their dependencies. This incorporation of dependency metadata about the
strength and nature of connections differentiates our model from other approaches that only
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1187
consider indicators such as the number of outputs or inputs associated with a node or inter-
connected sub-graphs (spanning node) when identifying the level of a node’s dependency.
Direct measures of connectivity such as these that fail to identify the highly dependent nodes
importance is due to other nodes depending on the capabilities they deliver, not their location
in the network, is crucial.
The COVID-19 crisis and a general rise in the severity and frequency of black swan events
in recent decades have triggered calls for more substantial policy interventions to create the
proper regulatory environment for increasing supply chain resilience. Our research and model
can help policy makers in drafting better risk management decisions that reduce risk. At a
strategic level, economic resilience policy will shape different industrial ecosystems to rebal-
ance international supply chain networks, striving for superior supply chain resilience and
enhanced economic and social resilience. The strategy can be achieved by better understand-
ing of the interconnectedness of the supply chain network and by fostering and facilitating
investment in the industry needed to promote resilience strength.
6 Limitations and future research
Our model was developed using a combination of techniques and approaches, based on
complex adaptive systems with the Cassandra application, blending supply chain resilience,
complex adaptive system and mathematics. Resource based view theory acknowledges that
there are likely contingencies in the business environment that may affect the usefulness of
different resources and capabilities for enhancing resilience (Iftikharet al., 2021). Our model
efﬁciently calculates and depicts the quantitative aspects. A main limitation at present is
its ability to handle quantitative information only. For instance, it can provide options for
how much travel to a given destination can be done with 10,000 L of fuel divided among
10 planes or 20 planes, and how those journeys differ. When it comes to handling non-
quantiﬁable capabilities, such as supervision, knowledge or learning, the model in its current
format falls short. To support qualitative as well as quantitative decision-making, further
development is required.
A further limitation is that having been developed, and further enhanced, in combat situ-
ations, it has yet to be applied outside of the military environment. In view of the breadth of
military involvement highlighted in our literature review, however, generalizability appears
highly feasible, given the generic nature of the algorithms and the associated model. Kovács
and Tatham (2009) showed that failure in any part of the military supply network is counted in
terms of loss of life, not proﬁts. This also applies to other sectors, e.g., humanitarian and dis-
aster relief as noted in the literature review as well as to the domains of emergency services,
healthcare and water, for instance. Further empirical work on post-conﬂict, multi-agency
joint work would be useful to test the extent of the model’s intuitiveness, its shared visual
language and its ability to update itself continuously. The application of the model to multiple
scenarios in a variety of sectors to continue testing its applicability and the level of resilience
it provides should be encouraged. In our view, the study’s limitations offer opportunities for
future research.
Funding Open access funding provided by Bar-Ilan University.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest None.
123

1188
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Ethical approval None (theoretical paper).
Informed consent None.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ackoff, R. L. (1971). Towards a system of systems concepts. Management Science, 17(11), 661–671.
Allenby, B. R., & Cooper, W. (1994). Understanding industrial ecology from a biological systems perspective.
Total Quality Environmental Management, 3, 343–354.
Amankwah-Amoah, J., Khan, Z., & Wood, G. (2021). COVID-19 and business failures: The paradoxes of
experience, scale, and scope for theory and practice. European Management Journal, 39(2), 179–184.
Barney, J. B. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 17(1),
99–120.
Barringer, B. R., & Harrison, J. S. (2000). Walking a tightrope: Creating value through interorganizational
relationships. Journal of Management, 26, 367–403.
Bealt, J., Barrera, J. C. F., & Mansouri, S. A. (2016). Collaborative relationships between logistics service
providers and humanitarian organizations during disaster relief operations. Journal of Humanitarian
Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 6(2), 118–144.
Belghitar, Y., Moro, A., & Radi´c, N. (2022). When the rainy day is the worst hurricane ever: The effects of
governmental policies on SMEs during COVID-19. Small Business Economics, 8(2), 943–961.
Berger, R., Silbiger, A., Herstein, R., & Barnes, B. R. (2014). Analyzing business to business relationships in
an Arab context. Journal of World Business, 50(3), 454–464.
Blessley, M., & Mudambi, S. M. (2022). A trade way and a pandemic: Disruption and resilience in the food
bank supply chain. Industrial Marketing Management, 102, 58–73.
Brandon-Jones, E., Squire, B., Autry, C. W., & Petersen, K. J. (2014). A contingent resource-based perspective
of supply chain resilience and robustness. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 50(3), 55–73.
Choi, T. Y., Dooley, K. J., & Rungtusanatham, M. (2001). Supply networks and complex adaptive systems:
Control versus emergence. Journal of Operations Management, 19, 351–366.
Chowdhury, M. M. H., & Quaddus, M. (2017a). Supply chain resilience: Conceptualization and scale devel-
opment using dynamic capability theory. International Journal of Production Economics, 188, 185–204.
Chowdhury, M. H., & Quaddus, M. (2017b). Supply chain resilience: Conceptualization and scale development
using dynamic capability theory. International Journal of Production Economics, 188(2), 185–204.
Christopher, M., & Holweg, M. (2017). Supply chain 2.0 revisited: A framework for managing volatility-
induced risk in the supply chain. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management,
47(1), 2–17.
Cokus, S., Matsumoto, M., Nishimura, T., and Eddelbuettel, D. (2000). RANDMT: Octave function to produce
random numbers via Mersenne twister. Octave codes.
Côté, P. R. (1999). Exploring the analogy further. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 3(2/3), 11–12.
Craighead, C. W., Ketchen, D. J., & Darby, J. L. (2020). Pandemics and supply chain management research:
Toward a theoretical toolbox. Decision Sciences, 51(4), 838–866.
Cropanzano, R., Anthony, E., Daniels, S., & Hall, A. (2017). Social exchange theory: A critical review with
theoretical remedies. Academy of Management Annals, 11(1), 1–38.
Davids, K., Araújo, D., Correia, V., & Vilar, L. (2013). How small-sided and conditioned games enhance acqui-
sition of movement and decision-making skills. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, 41(3), 154–161.
Day, J. M. (2014). Fostering emergent resilience: The complex adaptive supply network of disaster relief.
International Journal of Production Research, 52(7), 1970–1988.
Day, J. M., Melnyk, S. A., Larson, P. D., Davis, E. W., & Whybark, D. C. (2012). Humanitarian and disaster
relief supply chains: A matter of life and death. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 48(2), 21–36.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1189
Dijkstra, E.W. (1959). Communication with an automatic computer, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Ams-
terdam.
Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2018). Ripple effect in the supply chain: An analysis and recent
literature. International Journal of Production Research, 56(1–2), 414–430.
Dooley, L., Kirk, D., & Philpott, K. (2013). Nurturing life-science knowledge discovery: Managing multi-
organisation networks. Production Planning & Control, 24, 195–207.
Drabble, B. and Schattenberg, S. (2016). Transforming complex business challenges into opportunities for
innovative change – An application for planning and scheduling technology. In 30thworkshop, Plan-
nen/Scheuling und Konﬁgurieren/Entwefen (PUK). Austria: Klagenfurt.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Papadopoulos, T., Blome, C., & Luo, Z. (2019). Antecedents of
resilient supply chains: An empirical study. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 66(1),
8–19.
DuHadway, S., & Dreyfus, D. (2017). A simulation for managing complexity in sales and operations planning
decisions. Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Education, 15(4), 330–348.
DuHadway, S., Carnovale, S., & Hazen, B. (2019). Understanding risk management for intentional supply
chain disruptions: Risk detection, risk mitigation, and risk recovery. Annals of Operations Research,
283(1), 179–198.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Martin, J. A. (2000). Dynamic capabilities: What are they? Strategic Management
Journal, 21(10–11), 1105–1121.
Erol, O., Sauser, B. J., & Mansouri, M. (2010). A framework for investigation into extended enterprise
resilience. Enterprise Information Systems, 4(2), 111–136.
Fangxu, Y., Shiyuan, Y., Lujie, C., & Fu, J. (2024). Complexity in a platform-based servitization: A complex
adaptability theory perspective. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 27(7),
1092–1111.
Feltmate, T. TD Newsletter. (2021). https://economics.td.com/us-automotive_supply_chain.
Fiksel, J. (2015). From risk to resilience. In Resilient by design (pp. 19–34). Washington, DC: Island Press.
Floyd, J., Campbell, D. C., Jr., & Dominy, D. E. (1962). Agenesis of the trachea. American Review of Respi-
ratory Disease, 86(4), 557–560.
Gebhardt, M., Spieske, A., Kopyto, M., & Birkel, H. (2022). Increasing global supply chains’ resilience after
the COVID-19 pandemic: Empirical results from a Delphi study. Journal of Business Research, 150,
59–72.
Ghanmi, A. (2011). Optimal RSOM-hub locations for Canadian Forces Northern operations. International
Conference on Logistics (pp. 329–334). IEEE.
Glas, A., Hofmann, E., & Ebig, M. (2013). Performance-based logistics: A portfolio for contracting military
supply. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 43(2), 97–115.
Govindan, R., & Al-Ansari, T. (2019). Computational decision framework for enhancing resilience of the
energy, water and food nexus in risky environments. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 112,
653–668.
Gunasekaran, A., Subramanian, N., & Rahman, S. (2015). Supply chain resilience: Role of complexities and
strategies. International Journal of Production Research, 53(22), 6809–6819.
Guo, F., Qiu, H. Z. L., Li, D. X., & Wen, X. Z. (2003). Acknowledge processing method for intelligent systems
based on inclusion degree. Expert Systems, 20(4), 187–195.
Hearnshaw, E. J. S., & Wilson, M. M. J. (2013). A complex network approach to supply chain network theory.
International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 33, 442–469.
Heaslip, G. (2012). Challenges of civil military cooperation/coordination in humanitarian relief. In Relief
supply chain management for disasters: Humanitarian, aid and emergency logistics, (pp. 147–172). IGI
Global.
Heaslip, G. E., & Barber, E. (2016). Improving civil–military coordination in humanitarian logistics: The
challenge. The Irish Journal of Management, 35(2), 143–158.
Heaslip, G. E., & Barber, E. (2014). Using the military in disaster relief: Systemizing challenges and oppor-
tunities. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 4(1), 60–81.
Hohenstein, N. O., Feisel, E., Hartmann, E., & Giunipero, L. (2015). Research on the phenomenon of supply
chain resilience: A systematic review and paths for further investigation. International Journal of Physical
Distribution & Logistics Management, 45(1/2), 90–117.
Holland, J. H. (1992). Complex adaptive systems. Daedalus, 121(1), 17–30.
Holweg, M., & Pil, F. K. (2008). Theoretical perspectives on the coordination of supply chains. Journal of
Operations Management, 26(3), 389–406.
Iftikhar, A., Purvis, L., & Giannoccaro, I. (2021). A meta-analytical review of antecedents and outcomes of
ﬁrm resilience. Journal of Business Research, 135, 408–425.
123

1190
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Ivanov, D. (2020). Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on global supply chains: A simulation-based
analysis on the coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2) complex adaptive systeme. Transporta-
tion Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 136, 1–14.
Kakhki, M.D., Rea, A., and Deiranlou, M. (2022). Data analytics dynamic capabilities for Triple-A supply
chains. In Industrial Management & Data Systems, in print.
Kamalahmadi, M., Shekarian, M., & Mellat, P. M. (2022). The impact of ﬂexibility and redundancy on
improving supply chain resilience to disruptions. International Journal of Production Research, 60(6),
1992–2020.
Katsaliaki, K., Galetsi, P., & Kumar, S. (2022). Supply chain disruptions and resilience: A major review and
future research agenda. Annals of Operation Research, 319(1), 965–1002.
Kauffman, S. A. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for laws of self-organization and complexity.
Oxford University Press.
Kelly, H. (2011). The classical deﬁnition of a pandemic is not elusive. Bulletin of the World Health Organiza-
tion, 89, 540–541.
Kim, Y., Chen, Y.-S., & Linderman, K. (2015). Supply network disruption and resilience: A network structural
perspective. Journal of Operations Management, 33–34, 43–59.
Kovács, G., & Tatham, P. (2009). Responding to disruptions in the supply network-from dormant to action.
Journal of Business Logistics, 30(2), 215–229.
Kraaijenbrink, J., Spender, J.-C., & Groen, J. A. (2010). The resource-based view: A review and assessment
of its critiques. Journal of Management, 36(1), 349–372.
Li, G., Yang, H., Sun, L., Ji, P., & Feng, L. (2010). The evolutionary complexity of complex adaptive sup-
ply networks: A simulation and complex adaptive system study. International Journal of Production
Economics, 124(2), 310–330.
Li, Y., & Zobel, C. W. (2020). Exploring supply chain network resilience in the presence of the ripple effect.
International Journal of Production Economics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2020.107693
Linnenluecke, M. K. (2015). Resilience in business and management research: A review of inﬂuential publi-
cations and a research agenda. International Journal of Management Reviews, 19(1), 4–30.
Lis, A. (2016). Logistic aspects of the NATO comprehensive approach to the conduct of operations: Orches-
trating the engagement of military logistics resources and capabilities in stability and humanitarian
operations. Journal of Positive Management, 7(2), 15–26.
López, C., & Ishizaka, A. (2019). A hybrid FCM-AHP approach to predict impacts of offshore outsourcing
location decisions on supply chain resilience. Journal of Business Research, 103, 495–507.
Mason, K., & Leek, S. (2008). Learning to build a supply network: An exploration of dynamic business models.
Journal of Management Studies, 45(4), 774–799.
Matsuo, H. (2015). Implications of the Tohoku earthquake for Toyota’s coordination mechanism: Supply
chain disruption of automotive semiconductors. International Journal of Production Economics, 161,
217–227.
Mena, C., Karatzas, A., & Hansen, C. (2022). International trade resilience and the Covid-19 pandemic.
Journal of Business Research, 138, 77–91.
Nandi, S., Sarkis, J., Hervani, A., & Helms, M. (2020). Do blockchain and circular economy practices improve
post COVID-19 supply chains? A resource-based and resource dependence perspective. Industrial Man-
agement & Data Systems, 121(2), 333–363.
NBC
News.
(2021).
https://www.nbcnews.com/business/economy/how-lumber-industry-misread-covid-
ended-global-shortage-sky-high-n1272542 NBC News.
North, W. D. (2010). Probability theory and consistent reasoning. Risk Analysis, 30(3), 1–5.
Novak, D. C., Wu, Z., & Dooley, K. J. (2021). World Health Organizations resilience matters? Addressing
issues of scale in supply chain resilience. Journal of Business Logistics, 42(3), 323–335.
Olivares-Aguila, J., & Vital-Soto, A. (2021). Supply chain resilience roadmaps for major disruptions. Logistics,
5(4), 78–96.
Oshio, A., Taku, K., Hirano, M., & Saeed, G. (2018). Resilience and Big Five personality traits: A meta-
analysis. Personality and Individual Differences, 127, 54–60.
Parker, H., & Ameen, K. (2018). The role of resilience capabilities in shaping how ﬁrms respond to disruptions.
Journal of Business Research, 88, 535–541.
Pathak, S. D., Day, J. M., Nair, A., Sawaya, W. J., & Kristal, M. M. (2007). Complexity and adaptivity in
supply networks: Building supply network theory using a complex adaptive systems perspective. Decision
Sciences, 38, 547–580.
Pereira, C. R., Christopher, M., & Da Silva, A. L. (2014). Achieving supply chain resilience: The role of
procurement. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 19(5/6), 626–642.
Pettit, T. J., Croxton, K. L., & Fiksel, J. (2013). Ensuring supply chain resilience: Development and imple-
mentation of an assessment tool. Journal of Business Logistics, 34(1), 46–76.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
1191
Pfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. (1978). The External Control of Organizations: A Resource Dependence Perspective.
Harper and Row.
Ponomarov, S. Y., & Holcomb, M. C. (2009). Understanding the concept of supply chain resilience. Interna-
tional Journal of Logistics Management, 20(1), 124–143.
Purvis, L., Spall, S., Naim, M., & Spiegler, V. (2016). Developing a resilient supply chain strategy during
‘boom’ and ‘bust.’ Production Planning & Control, 27(7–8), 579–590.
Puthusserry, P., King, T., Miller, K., & Khan, Z. (2022). A typology of emerging market SMEs’ COVID-19
response strategies: The role of TMTs and organizational design. British Journal of Management, 33(2),
603–633.
Qader, G., Junaid, M., Abbas, Q., & Mubarik, S. M. (2022). Industry 4.0 enables supply chain resilience and
supply chain performance. Technological Forecomplex Adaptive Systemting & Social Change. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.122026
Qian, C., Seuring, S., & Wagner, R. (2021). Reviewing interﬁrm relationship quality from a supply chain
management perspective. Management Review Quarterly, 71(3), 625–650.
Rannane, Y., Mharzi, H., and El Oualidi, M.A. (2022). A systematic review of the supply chain resilience
measurement literature. In2022 14th international colloquium of logistics and supply chain management
(LOGISTIQUA), (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
Ribeiro, J. P., & Barbosa-Povoa, A. (2018). Supply chain resilience: Deﬁnitions and quantitative modelling
approaches—A literature review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 115, 109–122.
Roh, J., Tokar, T., Swink, M., & Williams, B. (2021). Supply chain resilience to low-/high-impact disruptions:
The inﬂuence of absorptive capacity. International Journal of Logistics Management, 33(1), 214–238.
Sarkar, S., & Clegg, S. R. (2021). Resilience in a time of contagion: Lessons from small businesses during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Change Management, 21(2), 242–267.
Scholten, K., Sharkey, S. P., & Fynes, B. (2019). Building routines for non-routine events: SC resilience
learning mechanisms and their antecedents. Supply Chain Management, 24(3), 430–442.
Sebbah, S., Boukhtouta, A., Berger, J., & Ghanmi, A. (2013). Military logistics planning in humanitarian relief
operations. Humanitarian and relief logistics (pp. 77–110). New York, NY: Springer.
Shin, N., & Park, S. (2021). Supply chain leadership driven strategic resilience capabilities management: A
leader-member exchange perspective. Journal of Business Research, 122, 1–13.
Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. A., & Ireland, R. D. (2007). Managing ﬁrm resources in dynamic environments to
create value: Looking inside the black box. Academy of Management Review, 32(1), 273–292.
Skipper, J. B., Cunningham, W. A., Boone, C. A., & Hill, R. R. (2016). Managing hub and spoke networks:
Military complex adaptive system comparing time and cost. Journal of Global Business & Technology,
12(1), 33–47.
Slack, N. C., Johnston, S., & Betts, A. (2009). Operations and process management: Principles and practices
for strategic impact. London: Pearson Education.
Spiegler, V. L. M., Naim, M. M., & Wikner, J. (2012). A control engineering approach to the assessment of
supply chain resilience. International Journal of Production Research, 50(21), 6162–6187.
Spieske, A., Gebhardt, M., Kopyto, M., & Birkel, H. (2022). Improving resilience of the healthcare supply
chain in a pandemic: Evidence from Europe during the COVID-19 crisis. Journal of Purchasing & Supply
Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pursup.2022.100748
Surana, A., Kumara, S., Greaves, M., & Raghavan, U. (2005). Supply-chain networks: A complex adaptive
systems perspective. International Journal of Production Research, 43(20), 4235–4265.
Tampa Bay Times. (2022). https://www.tampabay.com/hurricane/2022/09/27/tampa-bay-preps-shortages-
ahead-hurricane-ian/.
Tangpong, C., Hung, K.-T., & Li, J. (2014). Agent-system co-development in supply chain research: Propo-
sitions and demonstrative ﬁndings. Journal of Operations Management, 32, 154–174.
Tatham, P., Stadler, F., Murray, A., & Shaban, R. Z. (2017). Flying maggots: A smart logistic solution to an
enduring medical challenge. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 7(2),
177–193.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic
Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533.
Tsadikovich, D., Levner, E., Tell, H., & Werner, F. (2016). Integrated demand-responsive scheduling of main-
tenance and transportation operations in military supply chains. International Journal of Production
Research, 54(19), 5798–5810.
Tukamuhabwa, B. R., Stevenson, M., Busby, J., & Zorzini, M. (2015). Supply chain resilience: Deﬁnition,
review and theoretical foundations for further study. International Journal of Production Research,
53(18), 5592–5623.
123

1192
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:1163–1192
Van Hoek, R. (2020). Research opportunities for a more resilient post-COVID-19 supply chain—Closing the
gap between research ﬁndings and industry practice. International Journal of Operations and Production
Management, 40(4), 341–355.
Vanpoucke,E.,Vereecke,A.,&Wetzels,M.(2014).Developingsupplierintegrationcapabilitiesforsustainable
competitive advantage: A dynamic capabilities approach. Journal of Operations Management, 32(7–8),
446–461.
Verma, S., & Gustafsson, A. (2020). Investigating the emerging COVID-19 research trends in the ﬁeld of busi-
ness and management: A bibliometric analysis approach. Journal of Business Research, 118, 253–261.
Wang, C. L., & Ahmed, P. K. (2007). Dynamic capabilities: A review and research agenda. International
Journal of Management Reviews, 9(1), 31–51.
Wang, G., Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E. W., & Papadopoulos, T. (2016). Big data analytics in logistics and
supply chain management: Certain investigations for research and applications. International Journal of
Production Economics, 176(2), 98–110.
Wieland, A., & Wallenburg, C. M. (2013). The inﬂuence of relational competencies on supply chain resilience:
A relational view. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 43(4),
300–320.
Wieland, A., Handﬁeld, R. B., & Durach, C. F. (2016). Mapping the landscape of future research themes in
supply chain management. Journal of Business Logistics, 37(3), 205–212.
Wikipedia - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JOINT_EXPEDITIONARY_FORCE_EXPERIEMENT#JOINT%
20EXPEDITIONARY%20FORCE%20EXPERIEMENT_99.
Wilhite, D. A., Sivakumar, M. V., & Pulwarty, R. (2014). Managing drought risk in a changing climate: The
role of national drought policy. Weather and Climate Extremes, 3, 34–13.
Winter, S. G. (2003). Understanding dynamic capabilities. Strategic Management Journal, 24(10), 991–995.
WSJ.
(2022).
https://www.wsj.com/articles/ukraine-war-depleting-u-s-ammunition-stockpiles-sparking-
pentagon-concern-11661792188.
Wong, C. Y., & Karia, N. (2010). Explaining the competitive advantage of logistics service providers: A
resource-based view approach. International Journal of Production Economics, 128(1), 51–67.
World Economic Forum. (2019). Outbreak readiness and business impact protecting lives and livelihoods
across the global economy, (pp. 1–22). https://www.weforum.org/whitepapers/outbreak-readiness-and-
business-impact-protecting-lives-and-ivelihoods-across-the-global-economy. Accessed: 25 Aug 2022.
Wu, S. J., Melnyk, S. A., & Flynn, B. B. (2010). Operational capabilities: The secret ingredient. Decision
Sciences, 41(4), 721–754.
Wu, W., Leung, Y., & Zhang, W. (2002). Connections between rough and Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence.
International Journal of General Systems, 31(4), 405–430.
Yaroson, E. V., Breen, L., Hou, J., & Sowter, J. (2021). Advancing the understanding of pharmaceutical
supply chain resilience using complex adaptive system (CAS) theory. Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, 26(3), 323–340.
Yoho, D. K., Rietjens, S. S., & Tutham, P. (2013). Defense logistics: An important research ﬁeld in need of
research. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 43(2), 80–96.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123