TITLE: Mathematical political districting taking care of minority groups
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04227-5
---

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04227-5
ORIGINAL - OR MODELING/CASE STUDY
Mathematical political districting taking care of minority
groups
Verónica Arredondo1
· Miguel Martínez-Panero2
· Teresa Peña2
·
Federica Ricca3
Accepted: 12 July 2021 / Published online: 17 August 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Political districting (PD) is a wide studied topic in the literature since the 60s. It typically
requires a multi-criteria approach, and mathematical programs are frequently suggested to
model the many aspects of this difﬁcult problem. This implies that exact models cannot be
solved to optimality when the size of the territory is too large. In spite of this, an exact formu-
lation can also be exploited in a heuristic framework to ﬁnd at least a sub-optimal solution for
large size problem instances. We study the design of electoral districts in Mexico, where the
population is characterized by the presence of minority groups (“indigenous community”)
who have a special right to be represented in the Parliament. For this, the Mexican electoral
law prescribes that a ﬁxed number of districts must be designed to support the representation
of the indigenous community. We formulate mixed integer linear programs (MILP) following
these two principles, but also including the basic PD criteria of contiguity and population
balance. The district map is obtained in two stages: ﬁrst we produce the ﬁxed number of
indigenous districts established by the Law; then we complete the district map by form-
ing the non-indigenous districts. This two-phase approach has two advantages: a dedicated
objective function can be formulated in Phase 1 to form indigenous districts at best; in the
second phase the instance size is reduced (both in the number of territorial units and in the
number of districts) so that the computational effort to solve the problem is reduced as well.
We test our procedure on the territory of Chiapas in Mexico and on some ﬁctitious problem
instances in which the territory is represented by a grid graph. We also compare our district
map with the Institutional one currently adopted in Chiapas.
B Federica Ricca
federica.ricca@uniroma1.it
Verónica Arredondo
varredondo@uaz.edu.mx
Miguel Martínez-Panero
panero@eco.uva.es
Teresa Peña
maitepe@eco.uva.es
1
Universidad Autónoma de Zacatecas, Zacatecas, Mexico
2
Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain
3
Università di Roma, La Sapienza, Rome, Italy
123

376
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
Keywords Political districting · Minorities’ representation · Respect of administrative
boundaries · Graph partitioning · Mixed integer linear programming
1 Introduction
Designing electoral districts has been a wide studied subject of research in the literature
of the last 60years. Since the ﬁrst Multi-Kernel Growth procedure introduced by Vickrey
(1961), and the location-allocation model provided by Hess et al. (1965), the challenging
task of obtaining a fair division of the territory, with respect to speciﬁc electoral criteria,
has motivated the production of a variety of Political Districting (PD) models and methods
which follow different, exact and heuristic, optimization approaches. A general picture of
the state-of-the-art on this subject is provided in Ricca et al. (2013, 2017) and Ricca and
Scozzari (2020) were the main models and criteria for PD are surveyed and discussed. Other
interesting survey papers on the topic are those by Duque et al. (2007) and Kalcsics et al.
(2005) and the very recent volume edited by Rios-Mercado (2020). All provide surveys of
methods and models for the general Territory Design problem which includes PD.
Typically PD models are integer or mixed integer mathematical programs. Differences
among models depend on which objective function is minimized (or maximized) and on the
number and type of restrictions imposed in each formulation. They follow from the particular
features deemed relevant in each speciﬁc model, according to the principles established in the
electoral law of each country. The complexity of the solution process also derives from such
elements, according to which of them are considered in the PD problem and how they are
actually formulated in the corresponding mathematical model. The classical PD criteria are
population equality (or balance), contiguity, compactness, and conformity to administrative
boundaries, see Grilli di Cortona et al. (1999). All these criteria pursue desirable properties
of the districts, but it is generally impossible to include all of them in an algebraic model,
since, due to the binary nature of the decision variables, this may lead to PD models which
cannot be solved in reasonable computational time.
Other criteria have been suggested in the literature on PD, referring to particular aspects
which may be considered valid only in very special cases. In this view, George et al. (1997)
propose conformity to the natural conﬁguration of the territory, that is, a criterion which
requires to avoid that electoral districts’ boundaries cross rivers, high mountains, and all
such natural barriers of the territory which may prevent reachability between two sites located
inside the same district. This criterion is generally well-accepted, but frequently it is discarded
in order to avoid that the model complexity increases too much.
A different issue is related to the idea of trying to avoid the split of communities of common
interests (also referred to as respect of minority groups, or communities representation).
This last criterion is widely discussed in the literature and, although there are authors that
strongly criticize its inclusion in a PD model, others support it. Morril (1987) mentions the
importance of considering respect of minority groups in PD and Williams (1995) discusses
some examples where the lack of communities’ representation produces an unfair solution.
Even more, the “Erice Decalogue” (unanimously signed in 2005 by relevant researchers in
this area) explicitly established in its eighth point that: “A system using electoral districts
should respect existing communities of interest”, see Simeone and Pukelsheim (2006). In
this sense, in Cameron et al. (1996), the authors suggest non linear estimation techniques and
simulate districting strategies trying to solve the under-representation of minority interests
in the political process. On the other side, using surveys that sampled minorities in the U.S.
and New Zealand, both these countries modiﬁed their electoral systems, so that the minority
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
377
groups will have sufﬁcient power to elect their representatives. In Banducci et al. (2004)
it is showed that giving this option to minorities in U.S. these groups also improves their
knowledge about representation and the contact with their representatives; in the case of New
Zealand this also increases the electoral participation.
In our opinion, the representation of minority groups must be included in the PD model
only when the electoral law of a country explicitly prescribes this kind of requirement, and
given that the communities under consideration are well deﬁned and can be easily located
over the territory. This is in fact a way to pursue a better representation of the minorities
in the Parliament, with positive implications on public policies concerning socio-economic
problems. This is the case of our application to Mexico, where the resident population is
characterized by the presence of community of indigenous people having very well deﬁned
cultural and social characteristics which allow to identify with a high level of precision the
community to represent.
According to the Mexican law, seven criteria must be considered in the political dis-
tricting process. They are: 1. balancing districts’ populations, 2. guaranteeing a preﬁxed
number of indigenous districts in which the indigenous population is at least 40% of the total
(respect of the indigenous minorities), 3. guaranteeing integrity of municipalities (respect of
administrative boundaries), 4. optimize compactness, 5. minimizing traversing time from one
municipality to another within the same district, 6. contiguity, 7. respecting socio-economic
factors and geographic features. To be more precise, the ﬁrst two criteria have a priority
over the others, since they are acknowledged by the Constitution.1. Population balance is
established in Articles 53 and 116, paragraph II of the Constitution, while the respect of
indigenous minorities is established in Article 2. Differently, the other ﬁve criteria are stated
in the Mexican Electoral Law.2 For the two main principles stated above some precise rules
are given: for population balance the requirement is that each district has a population which
does not differ more than the 15% from the average one; for respect of indigenous minori-
ties, a preﬁxed number of districts must be formed by collecting together the indigenous
municipalities.
In the paper we propose an automatic procedure which solves the PD problem in two
successive stages, both adopting integer mathematical models, which can be equivalently
formulated as Mixed Integer Linear Programs (MILP), and by applying ordinary optimization
techniques. We consider the classical, PD criteria, such as population balance and districts’
contiguity. To follow the principles stated in the Mexican law, we also include respect of
minority groups, but, to give it a major importance, we model it as an objective, with the aim
of collecting together as many indigenous municipalities as possible in the established-by-
the-law indigenous districts. Besides this, also respect of municipal boundaries is considered,
which, together with the speciﬁc purpose for which it is conceived, is also useful to avoid
the splitting of indigenous municipalities. This was possible in our model since respect
of municipal boundaries was considered as a hard constraint. We point out that this is an
innovative aspect for PD in Mexico, since even if this criterion is clearly stated by the law, it
seems to be ignored in the institutional district map.
The methodology proposed in this paper is motivated by the idea that optimization pro-
cedures can be a valid decision support for lawmakers in the delicate process of designing
1 The
Constitución
Política
de
México,
available
in
Spanish
at
http://www.ordenjuridico.gob.
mx/Documentos/Federal/wo14166.doc
and
in
English
https://www2.juridicas.unam.mx/constitucion-
reordenada-consolidada/en/vigente.
2 Article 214, paragraph 1 of the Ley General de Instituciones y Procedimientos Electorales, Acuerdo
INE/CG59/2017, available in Spanish at https://repositoriodocumental.ine.mx/xmlui/handle/123456789/
92303.
123

378
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
electoral districts. The automatic nature of the method is also a guarantee of “fairness”, pro-
vided that decision makers agree on formulating the PD problem by a mathematical model.
Electoral districts satisfying many desirable criteria simultaneously can be obtained efﬁ-
ciently by a super-partes automated tool, which can be easily implemented in the computers
of an electoral ofﬁce. If, on the one hand, the solution procedures (which, in any case, are a
matter of the optimization solver) are not within everyone’s reach, on the other hand, MILP
models can be easily understood by everyone, also with the possibility of evaluating the
output solution and, possibly, modifying it, if this is deemed necessary. In this view, basic
principles of electoral problems, like simplicity, transparency, and impartiality, can be pur-
sued while providing useful tools to solve efﬁciently problems which are technically difﬁcult.
Since considering too many criteria in a MILP leads to the impossibility of solving it in rea-
sonable times, not all PD criteria can be included in the model, and, in our approach, we
chose to give a secondary role to compactness. There are different reasons supporting this
choice which we illustrate in what follows. The ﬁrst one is that unlikely a country imposes
compactness explicitly in the electoral law. As in Mexico, it is generally recommended that
electoral districts have a “round” shape, but it is well-known that translating this into a formal
constraint is difﬁcult and it is generally impossible to model the many facets of compactness,
see Horn et al. (1993) or Grilli di Cortona et al. (1999) and the references therein. A second
problem is related to the fact that it is generally not correct to judge the compactness of the
districts looking directly at their geographical shape on the map, since the actual compactness
also depends on the distribution of the population over the territory. Also the geographical
orientation of the state may affect the compactness level which can be actually reached in
a district map. Therefore, even if compactness is a deterrent for gerrymandering, when an
automatic procedure is adopted, fair district maps can be obtained also without imposing
compactness, provided that the procedure is not biased a priori.
Finally, in the particular case of our PD problem in Mexico, a priority is respecting
municipal boundaries, that is, municipalities must not be divided into more than one district.
Since the Mexican municipalities have highly non regular geographical shapes, it is very hard
to ﬁnd districts with regular shapes without dividing them in smaller parts. This means that
geographical compactness and respect of municipal boundaries are conﬂicting criteria and,
between the two, we gave priority to the second. This choice also depends on an additional
consideration, which is very important when coping with the delicate criterion of respect
of minorities. Following the principle that indigenous representation must be guaranteed
in the Parliament, the idea of this criterion is that indigenous must be collected in the same
districts to gain representation power. Depending on where the indigenous are actually located
in the country’s territory, this task may become really hard. Imposing compactness in this
framework may produce conﬂicts in the model tasks, and this may prevent the formation of
suitable indigenous districts. For this reason we do not consider compactness when designing
the indigenous districts in Phase 1 of our procedure.
In our second phase the situation is completely different, since we have just to produce
non-indigenous districts, and we do not care any more about the criterion related to the
minorities. Therefore, in this case, compactness could be considered, even if, together with
population balance and contiguity, this results in a very hard model. To manage this aspect,
in our second phase we include compactness and try to solve the model. As we will see, the
model becomes impossible to solve to optimality in short times. For this reason we resorted
to a successive divisions approach by applying the districting model with compactness and
dividing the territory into two parts in successive steps. This is a classical approach in territory
design and in PD literature, see, for example, Forrest (1964).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
379
In the paper we test our procedure on Chiapas and on some additional artiﬁcial data sets
with size ranging from 100 to 200 territorial units (municipalities). For Chiapas and the other
territories of similar size (120 units) we manage to solve the problem by applying our MILP
models, while for the cases with 210 units the computational time for solution becomes too
long and an heuristic procedure is required.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the main characteristics of the
classical PD problem and the traditional PD criteria. Section 3 introduces the notation and
illustrates the mathematical programs used in our procedure to solve the problem exactly. On
the other hand, Sect. 4 illustrates an alternative heuristic approach which can be used when
the exact solution becomes a hard task. Section 5 reports on the results of the application to
the Mexican state of Chiapas and to a set of ﬁctitious territories with size similar to Chiapas
or larger. Finally, Sect. 6 draws some conclusions and ﬁnal thoughts, as well as possible
extensions of our approach.
2 Criteria
Classical criteria in political districting are population equality (or balance), conformity to
administrative boundaries, contiguity and compactness. In our model we also include the
respect of minority groups. We brieﬂy recall each of them in what follows.
Population equality Under the assumption that the electoral system is a plurality one, all
districts should have the same proportion of representation (according to the “one person,
one vote” principle); in particular, in case of single member districts, they should have nearly
the same population. This criterion could be implemented as a constraint in the model, by
ﬁxing a maximum tolerance on the deviation of the population of each district from the
average district population, and imposing each district population to be within the tolerance
thresholds. The ideal situation would be having exactly the same population in each district,
but this is obviously impossible to get, and typically the maximum absolute deviation is ﬁxed
as a percentage of the average district population. In this way, the model rigidly bounds the
districts’ populations from above and below.
As for any other criteria, in a mathematical program, population balance can be pursued
also by means of the objective function. In this case, a measure of the total deviation of
population over all districts must be established (for example one can compute the L1-norm
or L2-norm of the districts’ populations), and the model tries to minimize it. This leads to
different mathematical models according to the algebraic form of the objective function.
Conformity to administrative boundaries According to this criterion, one should avoid as
much as possible that already existing administrative or normative zones (such as counties or
municipalities) are split among two or more electoral districts. Actually, splitting a munic-
ipality into two or more parts does not affect conformity to its administrative boundaries if
each of these parts corresponds to a single district. In fact, even if in this case the integrity
of the municipality is broken, its separated parts are not included in a district together with
portions of other municipalities. This last situation must be avoided instead. On the other
hand, if integrity of municipalities is imposed, the districts automatically satisfy conformity
to municipal boundaries, too. This is in fact the way in which we pursued this criterion at
best in our model.
CompactnessCompactnessisaveryintuitiveconcept,but,unfortunately,arigorousdeﬁnition
of this notion does not exist. A district may be considered compact if it spans a round region,
123

380
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
without straggling or rambling. Deviation from compactness has been classiﬁed by Taylor
(1973) according to the shape of the district in the following four categories: elongation,
indentation, separation, and puncturedness. Notice that Taylor’s deﬁnition of compactness
is very strong, since it implies both contiguity (non-separation) and absence of holes (non-
puncturedness). Caution should be taken when dealing with this criterion because every
attempt to deﬁne a correct measure of compactness turns out to be strongly related to only
one of the above categories, and each indicator is able to detect only some types of non-
compactness. An idea could be to consider more than one compactness measure at the same
time. This implies a careful measurement of compactness at the expense of a very complicated
mathematical model which could become unmanageable if there are also other criteria. This
is why, in the end, the most practical thing to do is to measure compactness, as every other
criterion, with a single index. This is the typical approach in the literature on PD where
compactness is frequently measured as the total inertia of the district map, see Grilli di
Cortona et al. (1999).
Contiguity A district is contiguous if it is possible to reach any place in the district from
any other one in the same district without leaving it. In any territorial districting problem,
contiguity is a crucial aspect, since it provides a structural feature aimed at guaranteeing
well deﬁned responsibility areas (whichever the activity related to the district: political vote,
commercial activities, the distribution of a service). The difﬁculty with this criterion is that
it is hard to be implemented in an algebraic model. For these reasons, the PD problem
is frequently modeled via the use of a connected graph, called contiguity graph, which
represents the territory, see Ricca et al. (2008) and Ricca and Simeone (2008), among others.
After a discretization of the territory into a ﬁxed number of elementary territorial units, in the
contiguity graph, nodes correspond to territorial units and an edge between node i and node
j exists if i and j are neighbors. In this context, contiguity can be guaranteed by searching for
a partition of the graph into connected components. An organized presentation of the main
issues related to contiguity in territorial districting can be found in Duque et al. (2007) and
in Ricca and Scozzari (2020).
In this paper we consider population balance, conformity to administrative boundaries,
contiguity and respect of the Mexican indigenous community.
We basically control population balance by imposing lower and upper thresholds for the
district populations.
Conformity to municipal boundaries is considered as a hard condition, and, in principle,
our aim is to maintain integral the territory of all municipalities. Unfortunately, as we will
see in the application to Chiapas reported in Sect. 5, this is not always possible, since some
municipalities with population much larger than the average district population may exist.
This evidently prevents perfectrespectof municipalboundaries, but, in any case, our approach
aims at avoiding as much as possible the division of a municipality into many pieces assigned
to different districts.
Districts’ contiguity is a main issue in the methodology proposed in this paper. We apply
the approach provided by Shirabe (2009) who introduces a set of ﬂow constraints able to
enforcethecontiguityofthedistricts.Evenifthisrequiresapolynomialnumberofconstraints,
the mathematical models for PD have binary variables, so that the solving the problem to
optimalityiscomputationallyhardandonlyproblemsofsmallsizecanbesolvedinreasonable
time.
We point out that there is a variety of approaches for managing contiguity when a graph
representation of the territory is adopted. There are three typical approaches based on the
following three ideas, see Duque et al. (2007) and Miyazawa et al. (2021): (1) imposing order
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
381
constraints on the assigning variables related to nodes lying on speciﬁc paths; (2) exploiting
tree structures to guarantee the contiguity of each district; (3) using networks ﬂow formu-
lations. Among these methods, ﬂow constraints have the best performance since they are
able to solve problems with up to 100 nodes. However, this is generally possible only for the
basic problem of partitioning a graph into connected components (without other constraints).
When, on the contrary, some additional constraints are included in the model even small prob-
lems become difﬁcult to solve to optimality. Attempts to overcome this problem are present
in the current literature on the subject, and some interesting results are provided for exam-
ple in Validi et al. (2020), Rios-Mercado and Lopez-Perez (2013) and Oehlein and Haunert
(2017). Unfortunately, efﬁciency in the design of contiguous district maps can be obtained
at the price of using high sophisticated technical tools, such as cutting planes strategies,
or adding extra constraints to formulate separation problems. On the contrary, a districting
method has to be as simple as possible in order to be understood and used by politicians,
legislators, public administrators, etc. This is a long-standing question in the mathematics of
electoral systems, which always leads to the evaluation of the compromise between efﬁciency
and user-friendlyness of the proposed procedures. In our approach we model contiguity as
a hard constraint since we believe that it is a fundamental aspect of the problem, not easily
manageable by non technicians. Including it in the model guarantees that lawmakers have
a procedure which produces a balanced and contiguous district map, without any need of
additional intervention for ﬁxing possible non-contiguity.
Respect of minority groups Given a speciﬁc and recognizable type of community, which
can be reasonably considered a minority w.r.t. the rest of the population of a country, when
designing the electoral districts, one should collect as much as possible people from the
minority group in the same districts. In other words, electoral districts’ populations should
be as much homogeneous as possible w.r.t. the group identity.
As already discussed, in the Mexican case, maintaining the identity and the representation
power of the indigenous community is a main issue. This is the reason why, in our approach,
we focus our attention on this aspect and try to design a model approach aimed at guaranteeing
respect of communities.
Finally, as we will see in Sect. 3, we consider the compactness criterion in our second
phase model by modeling it in the objective function.
3 A two-phase districting procedure for political districting with
minority groups
The methodology proposed in this paper is tailored for PD in Mexico, but can be applied in
general when the population of a given country is characterized by the presence of a well
deﬁned minority group and the law supports the representation of such minority. The method
is based on Mathematical Programming, and works in two successive stages: in the ﬁrst one,
districts including the minority groups are designed; then the district map is completed in the
second stage with the formation of non-indigenous districts. The method is tested on real-life
data referring to the territory of Chiapas and on some ﬁctitious territories represented by grid
graphs with size similar to Chiapas or larger. A successive divisions approach is applied when
the MILP cannot be solved to optimality. In these cases, even if the solutions of the models are
not exact, we manage to obtain a good solution w.r.t. to all the PD criteria considered in the
model. This provides a practical solution tool for political districting able to give automated
123

382
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
decision support to lawmakers and to electoral ofﬁces. A heuristic variant of the method is
also developed to solve problem instances of larger size.
The PD problem is the following one. A division of the territory into municipalities is
given. Each municipality represents an elementary territorial unit and is characterized by its
resident population. Municipalities are classiﬁed into two types according to how large is
the number of residents belonging to the minority. A threshold τ (ﬁxed in advance by the
Government) is used to obtain this classiﬁcation. A municipality is classiﬁed as a minority
municipality if at least τ% of its population belongs to the minority. We also consider a graph
representation of the territory which is useful for visualizing the results on a map and helpful
to formulate and understand the contiguity constraints, which in our model are implemented
by means of network ﬂow constraints, see Ahuja et al. (1993).
The connection structure of the graph is also exploited in the heuristic procedure that
follows a constructive strategy of the districts and works by adding municipalities one at a
time.
In the contiguity graph G, nodes represent municipalities and there exists an edge between
nodes i and j if the corresponding municipalities share a common boundary (different from
a single point). As we will see, in order to implement the ﬂow constraints in the model, we
have also to consider the network G which can be obtained from G in the ordinary way, i.e.,
by maintaining the set of nodes and replacing each edge < i, j > of G by a pair of (directed)
arcs (i, j) and (j, i).
The PD problem is formulated as partitioning the set of the municipalities (nodes of the
graph G) into a preﬁxed number k of contiguous districts (connected components of G),
taking into account the basic PD criteria. Aggregating nodes of G, the municipal boundaries
are automatically respected by the fact that a municipality (node of G) is never split among
more than one district. No other administrative boundaries are considered.
The special situation given by the existence of the indigenous minority also requires that
only a part of the k districts contains the minority group population, so that a number kI is
given as an input parameter providing the number of minority districts to design.
3.1 Basic notation and parameters’definitions
We introduce here all the notation necessary to formulate the mathematical programming
models presented in the next sections. Considering the Mexican case, we have indigenous
and non-indigenous population.
Sets
M
Municipalities
MI
Indigenous municipalities
MN I
Non-indigenous municipalities
K
Districts
KI
Indigenous districts
KN I
Non-indigenous districts
Parameters
pi
Population of municipality i
m
Number of municipalities
mI
Number of indigenous municipalities
mN I
Number of non-indigenous municipalities
k
Number of districts
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
383
kI
Number of indigenous districts
kN I
Number of non-indigenous districts;
¯P =

i∈M
pi/k
Average district population (target population)
Ph
Population of district h
α
Maximum absolute deviation for each district population to ¯P(%)
di j
Distance between municipality i and municipality j (in km)
Decision variables
xih
: Equals 1 if municipality i is assigned to district h, 0 otherwise
wih
: Equals 1 if municipality i is chosen as the center of district h, 0 otherwise
yi jh
: Amount of ﬂow from municipality i to municipality j for district h
3.2 Mathematical programming models
In this section we introduce the mathematical programming models which we apply to build
a PD map taking into account minority groups in Mexico. We propose Integer Programming
formulations with non linear objective functions which are then linearized to obtain the
corresponding Mixed Integer Linear Programs.
Our approach applies in two successive phases. The ﬁrst one is dedicated to the design
of the kI indigenous districts, which should include all the indigenous municipalities. In the
second phase, the remaining municipalities are considered to form the rest of the districts
(kN I ). Note that in the ﬁrst phase all municipalities are considered, but the model does not
force those in MN I to be assigned to some districts. This is motivated by the idea of giving
ﬂexibility to the model in the ﬁrst phase, when population from the minority group must be
collected together as much as possible, but provided that all PD constraints are satisﬁed.
min
x
⎛
⎝max
h∈KI

i∈MN I
xih
⎞
⎠
s.t.

h∈KI
xih = 1
∀i ∈MI
(1)

h∈KI
xih ≤1
∀i ∈MN I
(2)

i∈M
wih = 1
∀h ∈KI
(3)
wih ≤xih
∀i ∈M, ∀h ∈KI
(4)

j|(i, j)∈A
yi jh −

j|( j,i)∈A
y jih ≥xih −[ |M| −|KI | + 1] wih
∀h ∈KI , ∀i ∈M
(5)

j|( j,i)∈A
y jih ≤[ |M| −|KI | ]xih
∀h ∈KI , ∀i ∈M
(6)
(1 −α) ¯P ≤

i∈M
pi xih ≤(1 + α) ¯P
∀h ∈KI
(7)
yi jh ≥0 ∀h ∈KI ,
∀(i, j) ∈A
xih, wih ∈{0, 1},
∀h ∈KI ,
∀i ∈M
123

384
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
The formation of the kI districts of the ﬁrst phase is performed via restrictions (1) and (2)
in the model, according to which a municipality i ∈MI should be assigned to some districts
in KI (the constraint is an equality), and a municipality i ∈MN I could be assigned to one
of them (the constraint is an inequality). Constraints (3) state that each district in KI should
have exactly one center, while constraints (4) model the dependency between variables xih
and wih. Restrictions (5) and (6) are the ﬂow constraints proposed by Shirabe (2009) for
districts’ contiguity and involve variables yi jh representing the ﬂow from municipality i
to municipality j related to contiguity for the hth district. Note that the use of these ﬂow
constraints requires the model to identify one center per district. The role of such centers is
merely technical and in our application it has no speciﬁc political, territorial, or demographic
meaning. Constraints (7) limit the population of the districts between two bounds whose level
can be modulated by changing the percentage α that establishes the maximum and minimum
absolute population deviations from the average district population ¯P. The respect of minority
groups is considered in the objective function which tries to minimize the maximum number
of non-indigenous municipalities belonging to the districts in KI . This objective function
can be linearized using some well-known techniques in order to obtain an equivalent MILP.
A new variable λ ≥0 is introduced representing the maximum number of non-indigenous
municipalities in an indigenous district. Therefore, the objective of the model is to minimize λ
under the following set of constraints which guarantees that λ is the above deﬁned maximum:
λ ≥

i∈MN I
xih
∀h ∈KI
Once the indigenous districts have been formed, a second mathematical model is applied
to complete the district map. At this stage only non-indigenous municipalities are involved
and, in particular, only those which were not assigned to any district in the ﬁrst phase. Even
if they actually are a subset of MN I , for the sake of simplicity, in the following we refer to
this subset (of only non-indigenous municipalities) still as MN I .
max
⎛
⎝min
h∈KN I

i∈MN I
pi xih
⎞
⎠
s.t.

h∈KN I
xih = 1 ∀i ∈MN I
(1)

i∈MN I
wih = 1 ∀h ∈KN I
(2)
wih ≤xih
∀i ∈MN I , ∀h ∈KN I
(3)

j|(i, j)∈A
yi jh −

j|( j,i)∈A
y jih ≥xih −[ |MN I | −|KN I | + 1] wih
∀h ∈KN I , ∀i ∈MN I
(4)

j|( j,i)∈A
y jih ≤[ |MN I | −|KN I | ]xih
∀h ∈KN I , ∀i ∈MN I
(5)

i∈MN I
pi xih ≤(1 + α) ¯P
∀h ∈KN I
(6)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
385
yi jh ≥0 ∀h ∈KN I ,
∀(i, j) ∈A
xih, wih ∈{0, 1} ∀h ∈KN I ,
∀i ∈MN I
This second model has a structure similar to the previous one, but now the territorial units
are all of the same type (all non-indigenous), so that the objective function can be exploited
in order to reduce the number of constraints in the model. Therefore, now we bound districts’
populations only by above, and we control them by below with a max–min objective that
can be linearized as before, by introducing a new variable μ ≥0 representing the minimum
district population, as well as the related set of constraints:
μ ≤

i∈MN I
pi xih
∀h ∈KN I
In order to take into account also compactness, an alternative model was considered in which
both lower and upper bounds on population are included in the set of constraints, while total
inertia is minimized as objective function. This leads to a Phase II model which analogous to
the one by Hess et al. (1965), but including also the contiguity constraints. Using our model
variables the inertia objective is formulated as a quadratic function:

h∈KN I

i∈MN I

j∈MN I
pid2
i j xihw jh
and the Phase II model becomes a Quadratic Program. It is worth noting that, even if the
objective function is quadratic, the constraints remain linear, and the model can be solved with
the standard optimization solver for this type of programs, by applying a successive division
approach, we were able to solve this quadratic program at each stage for the territories of
smallest size.
To conclude this section, we point out that, after Phase I, some non-indigenous munici-
palities which were not assigned to a district may form enclaves, i.e., they can be isolated
from the rest of non-indigenous municipalities which will be processed altogether in Phase
II. This is a physiological consequence of the two-phase procedure which sometimes may
arise. As we will see in Sect. 5, if this happens, only few territorial units remain isolated.
4 Heuristics for the two-phase PD approach
In the application of our exact procedure to Chiapas we encountered some problems of
different nature. On the one hand, we detected some irregularities in the structure of the
territory which prevented the possibility of exploiting the contiguity graph in the best way.
On the other hand, some difﬁculties arose in the solution of some MILP due to the excessive
computational effort required by the procedure, especially when solving Phase II.
The ﬁrst problem is due to the preexisting territory subdivision into municipalities, which
in our model correspond to the elementary territorial units (nodes of the contiguity graph).
As already discussed, the model input should be given by elementary units having more or
less similar populations. The huge population of Tuxtla in Chiapas shows that this condition
is not satisﬁed in our real case. Since Tuxtla population is not enough to form two districts,
we were forced to operate some manual preprocessing on this municipality. This kind of
123

386
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
situations does not generally arise if the given administrative division of the territory into
municipalities is population balanced. This was one of the reasons why, we decided to extend
our experimental analysis and test our procedure also on ﬁctitious territories with balanced
municipalities’ populations.
A second problem was detected during the solution of our programs, especially in Phase
II, when considering the large-size problems for which the exact approach required too
much computational time. This was probably due to the presence of connectivity constrains
combined with those on population bounds. To overcome these problems efﬁciently we
developed a heuristic procedure in which we tried to maintain the same two-phase approach
as the exact one. It is a constructive procedure which aggregates municipalities one at a time
to form the non-indigenous districts. The basic principles of the two-phase approach are still
satisﬁed, but the heuristic procedure allows to solve the second phase faster than before.
As we will see in the section dedicated to the experiments, there is also an additional
problem that may require a particular computational effort. It is related to the spatial distribu-
tion of the indigenous population on the territory. In fact, even if in most cases the minority
groups are all located in a speciﬁc well deﬁned part of the state, it may also happen that
different communities are found far from each other. In our experiments on ﬁctitious data
we generated different conﬁgurations in which indigenous municipalities are concentrated,
or they spread all over the territory. It is natural to expect that, when the communities are
sparse, the districting problem becomes harder, but we will see that some difﬁculties arise
also when they are concentrated in the same zone, but geographically located in the center
of the territory.
In all cases in which the computational effort to solve the problem optimally becomes too
heavy, we resort to the heuristic method. The empirical study of these cases permitted us to
better understand the PD problem with minorities, and also to provide a reference scheme
about which cases, for size and territory conﬁguration, can be solved optimally and which
necessarily require a heuristic approach.
4.1 The heuristic procedure
Theprocedureworksonthecontiguitygraphbyformingonedistrictatatime.Foreachdistrict
a heavy node (in terms of population) is selected and the algorithm follows a sequential kernel-
growth strategy. In order to avoid premature arrests and to satisfy district population bounds,
a parameter Plow is introduced to control the amount of population of the districts under
construction. The idea is to obtain ﬁrst the kernels of the districts with a population which
is smaller than the imposed lower bound. Next, in the growth step, these partial districts are
completed by adding the unassigned municipalities to the districts with smallest population
and taking into account contiguity.
At the end, all the municipalities are assigned to some districts. Thanks to the use of
parameter Plow, which must be carefully calibrated, in our experiments we are able to obtain
districts whose population is either in the range of the bounds imposed at the beginning (15%),
or it is not too far from such bounds. Therefore, if some districts exceed the maximum possible
population, the municipality in the district with the smallest population is removed and it is
assigned to an adjacent district with the smallest population. Similarly, a district h may have
a population size smaller than the minimum allowed, so that the district adjacent to h with
the largest population is selected and, among its municipality adjacent to h, the one with
the smallest population is removed from it and assigned to h. In our experiments this kind
of situations arises, but, in all cases, they are solved by performing just few of these steps.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
387
This is due to the fact that districts with population outside the imposed bounds are, in fact,
not too far from such limits, and also thanks to the fact that elementary territorial units are
population balanced.
The heuristic algorithm was implemented by using the software Mathematica.3 We brieﬂy
illustrate the main steps of the procedure.
——————————————————————————————————
Algorithm: HEURISTIC PD
——————————————————————————————————
Set Plow equal to a percentage of ¯P and Ndistr equal to the number of districts
to form
repeat:
(CONSTRUCTION OF DISTRICT h)
Ph := 0
select the non assigned municipality with the largest population, say pi
set Ph := Ph + pi
while Ph < Plow do:
among all the municipalities adjacent to those already included in district h
select the one with the largest population, say j, and add it to district h
update Ph := Ph + p j
end while
Ndistr = Ndistr −1
until Ndistr = 0
for each non assigned municipality i
assign i to the the district with the smallest population among those adjacent to i
end for
—
—————————————————————————————————
The above heuristics is mainly thought for solving the second phase problem, since this
is typically the computationally hardest. However, in the larger data sets we encountered
computational problems also in solving the MILP model of Phase I, so that the heuristic
approach was exploited also in this phase for the hardest problems.
In particular, we resorted to the heuristics for solving the PD problem on ﬁctitious territo-
ries when indigenous municipalities have the conﬁguration of being spread over the territory.
In this case, the task of collecting all indigenous municipalities in the indigenous districts
becomes, in fact, too challenging, and imposing this as a hard constraint may lead to an unfea-
sible model. This problem arises for all data sets when indigenous are spread-located and, in
order to ﬁnd the indigenous districts, in our Phase I model we have to relax into inequalities
the assignment constraints for indigenous municipalities (which before were formulated as
equalities) as follows:

h∈KI
xih ≤1 ∀i ∈MI
(1)
The MILP is then solved with these relaxed constraints and lowering the average district
population to a value equal to Plow < ¯P. This implies that in Phase I only partial districts
are produced, for which the population is maintained smaller than the ﬁnal district popula-
tion (typically, it is under the lower bound imposed in the model). The partial districts are
then completed heuristically by adding adjacent municipalities in order to bring districts’
populations within the preﬁxed bounds.
3 https://www.wolfram.com/mathematica/.
123

388
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
A natural consequence of this procedure is that not necessarily all indigenous municipal-
ities are assigned to some indigenous districts in Phase I. With indigenous population spread
over the territory this is unavoidable, but thanks to the objective function of our Phase I MILP,
we are still able to assign as many indigenous municipalities as possible in such districts.
The above illustrated strategies showed to be effective, since for all our grids we were
able to obtain a ﬁnal contiguous district map with all district populations within the imposed
bounds. For spread indigenous conﬁgurations, it happened that a single indigenous munici-
pality (or just few) is assigned to a non-indigenous district.
5 Application and experiments
The Mexican Chamber of Deputies is elected by a mixed electoral system. The Chamber
of Deputies, is composed by 500 representatives: 300 are elected by a ﬁrst-past-the-post
method in single-member districts; the other 200 are elected through a proportional method
in ﬁve electoral constituencies with 40 representatives each. The Mexican Electoral Institute
recognizes the peculiarity of the Mexican population to have indigenous communities and
a municipality is considered indigenous if at least 40% of its population is indigenous,
according to INEGI (National Institute of Statistics and Geography, Mexico). We applied
our model to design single-member districts in real territory of the municipality of Chiapas,
but also to solve the same PD problem on a set of ﬁctitious territories. It is worth mentioning
that in the Mexican mixed electoral system the allocation of proportional seats depends on
the results of the election by the plurality system. In fact, the votes obtained by a party in
a single member district are also used to get seats in the electoral constituencies where the
proportional method is applied.
We solved our models by using the AMPL modeling language4 and the available solver
CPLEX12.6.1.0.Allourrunscouldbesolvedwithin15minonaprocessorIntel(R)Core(TM)
i7-4810MQ CPU @ 2.80GHZ.
5.1 Application to the State of Chiapas
The state of Chiapas has a total population of 4.8 million people, and a considerable part
of it is indigenous. The number of municipalities in Chiapas is 118 and the percentage of
indigenous municipalities is 39.8 (47 municipalities).
The number of districts in Chiapas is 13, 5 of which should be indigenous according to
the INE/CG59/2017 (total population data and indigenous population per municipality was
taken from INEGI’s website5). In order to visualize the solutions on the map, we used the
open-source software R.
In order to implement our model on these real data, it is necessary to perform a preprocess-
ing on those municipalities which show some structural features that do not ﬁt our modeling
framework. In Chiapas we detected three situations which need in fact a speciﬁc treatment.
We illustrate them in the following special cases.
Tuxtla municipality
This municipality is the capital of the state of Chiapas with a population size equal to 555,374.
The average district population in Chiapas is ¯P = 368, 969. Hence, depending on the value
ﬁxed for the parameter α, this municipality alone may exceed the upper limit imposed on
4 https://ampl.com/.
5 www.INEGI.GOB.MX.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
389
Fig. 1 Chiapas municipalities not ﬁtting basic data requirements for the application of our models
the district population. Unfortunately, this already happens when considering a maximum
percentage of deviation about 15%, but it still happens if it is increased up to 30%.
San Cristobal de las Casas municipality
This municipality is geographically divided into two separated parts. Therefore, it is struc-
turally non contiguous by itself.
Tapachula municipality
Tapachula has a population of 320, 450 inhabitants. Therefore, it alone could form a district
respecting the population bounds of a maximum deviation of 15% from the target ¯P =
368, 969. In spite of this, municipality of Tapachula is geographically located in a position
that isolates a group of six municipalities (Suchiate, Frontera de Hidalgo, Metapa, Tuxtla
Chico, Cacahuatán and Unión Juárez). These municipalities can be connected among them,
but obtaining a total population about 148, 391 which alone is not enough to produce a
district. Alternatively, they can be connected to the rest of the Chiapas municipalities, but
only through Tapachula. In fact, for this set of municipalities Tapachula represents a barrier
of connection with the rest of the territory. Therefore, when it is left alone, it provides a
feasible district, but this prevents the formation of other contiguous districts satisfying the
population bounds.
The particular features of each of the three cases listed above (shown in Fig. 1) do not allow
to satisfy the modeling prerequisites to apply our methodology. Therefore each situation must
be treated in some way before the application of the models.
Sincerespectofmunicipalboundariesisahardconstraintinthismodels,itisnotpossibleto
split a municipality (elementary unit) among two or more electoral districts. If a municipality
alone exceeds the upper bound on the district population, it could be divided in more than
one part, provided that the exceeding population is sufﬁcient to form another district (i.e.,
123

390
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
it reaches at least the lower bound). Since this is not possible for Tuxtla, perfect respect
of municipal boundaries is not possible for Chiapas. To cope with this problem, without
dividing Tuxtla into too many pieces, we split it a priori into two parts. One has population
equal to the upper bound over the district population and forms a district completely included
in Tuxtla; the other covers the rest of the population of this municipality and is assigned to
another district. Given the structure of this big municipality, which in any case requires
to split Tuxtla, this is a simple way to optimize respect of municipal boundaries since the
municipality is divided only in two pieces rather than in many.
For San Cristobal de las Casas, which is an indigenous municipality, we have a strange
situation in which the territory of the municipality covers two separated portions of land.
These are in fact two elementary territorial units in our data set (obtained from the INEGI data
base), labeled by number 78 and 120, respectively. In order to avoid unexpected and undesired
districts conﬁgurations, in our data we maintained the two separated territorial units, but we
included in the model an additional constraint which forces these two municipalities to be
always in the same district. Therefore, given that x78k and x120k are the assignment variables
for district k and municipality 78 and 120 respectively, the restrictions to impose are the
following:
x78k = x120k ∀k ∈KI
(2)
Only districts in KI are involved in this set of constraints, since the two units belong to
an indigenous municipality. Combined with contiguity, these additional constraints act to
guarantee that in any output district map the two units are always included in the same
(connected) district.
Finally, for Tapachula municipality we have another technical problem, since this munici-
pality geographically conﬁgures as a physical barrier between a set of municipalities and the
rest of the territory. The set, which we denote by S, includes six municipalities, i.e., Suchiate,
Frontera de Hidalgo, Metapa, Tuxtla Chico, Cacahuatán and Unión Juárez, which in total
do not reach the minimum district population when the threshold of 15% is adopted. On the
other hand, by adding also Tapachula the district population upper limit is exceeded. It is
then impossible to form a set of contiguous districts, all within the 15% population limit,
without dividing Tapachula. Hence, we separated a priori a piece of territory from Tapachula
to get one district formed by this part and the 6 municipalities. After this, the rest of the
territory of Tapachula forms a new territorial unit to be included in some other districts. By
this preprocessing of Tuxla and Tapachula, even if perfect respect of municipal boundaries
cannot be reached in Chiapas, we manage to optimize it since only two municipalities are
split, and in only two parts. Operating in this way produces two advantages: (1) the structural
problems of Chiapas municipalities is overcome; (2) two districts are formed a priori and the
number of districts to be formed by the MILP is reduced by 2.
Figure 2 shows the results obtained in the ﬁrst phase of the proposed model. In this
ﬁrst phase all the 47 indigenous municipalities in Chiapas were assigned to some indigenous
districts.Aftertheapplicationoftheﬁrstphase,threenon-indigenousmunicipalitiesremained
non assigned. Since they formed enclaves enclosed in one of the indigenous districts, they
were added a posteriori to that district.
Figure 3 shows the non-indigenous districts formed after Phase II is completed. First of
all, one can visualize the two districts formed a priori. For Tapachula, one part is included in
District 13, together with Suchiate, Frontera de Hidalgo, Metapa, Tuxtla Chico, Cacahuatán
and Unión Juárez, while the rest formed a territorial unit which was then included in District
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
391
Fig. 2 Map of the indigenous districts in Chiapas formed after Phase I
6. On the other hand, one can easily visualize that District 12 is cut from the municipality of
Tuxtla, the rest of which is included in District 11.
In this phase 6 districts were actually formed out of the total 8 non-indigenous districts,
since, as already discussed, a part Tuxtla forms one district on its own, while another is given
by a part of Tapachula and the 6 municipalities of the set S.
These 6 districts are the output of our successive division approach. We ﬁrst divided the
territory into 2 districts, and, successively, we further divided each of the two parts into 3
districts. Therefore we got in total 6 districts in which one can appreciate also the effect of
considering compactness. In fact, 4 out of 6 districts have a quite compact shape, while the
other two, namely district 7 and 10, have an elongated shape. We point out here that also the
institutional districts map shown in Fig. 5 has elongated districts, although with a different
shape. In Chiapas this is an unavoidable output for some districts, since some municipalities
in the western part of the country have small population density, and elongation derives from
the effort of collecting together a sufﬁcient amount of residents to get a district. We point out
in any case that, what is guaranteed by our approach is that mathematical programs do not
pursue gerrymandering on their own, so that lack of shape compactness cannot be attributed
to lack of fairness in the division process.
The ﬁnal 13 districts obtained for Chiapas with our procedure are presented in Fig. 4. The
population of all the districts satisﬁes the imposed bounds which, according to a maximum
15% absolute deviation from ¯P, correspond to Pmin = 313, 624 and Pmax = 424, 314.
Figure 5 shows the institutional districts currently adopted in Chiapas.
123

392
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
Fig. 3 Map of the non-indigenous districts in Chiapas formed after Phase II
Comparing the two maps, we see that both are contiguous and with balanced districts’
populations. On the contrary, we guarantee that municipal boundaries are respected by the
districts in Fig. 4, while this is not true for those showed in Fig. 5. Finally, the main criterion
related to respect of minority groups is fully satisﬁed by districts in Fig. 4, since here indige-
nous municipalities are all collected inside the preﬁxed 5 indigenous districts. Differently, in
the institutional map in Fig. 5 they spread outside such districts (see also Figs. 6 and 7).
In fact, as expected, the main difference between the two solutions appears in the for-
mation of indigenous districts. Both maps satisfy the requirement that at least 40% of the
population of these districts is indigenous, but in our map this aspect is optimized since it
concentrates in these districts as many indigenous municipalities as possible. Figure 6 for our
map and Fig. 7 for the institutional one illustrate the composition of the districts w.r.t. which
municipalities they include, showing a clear distinction in our solution between indigenous
and non-indigenous districts: indigenous municipalities are all collected inside the preﬁxed
5 indigenous districts and are well separated from the non-indigenous ones. On the con-
trary, in the institutional solution they spread outside such districts and district 11, which is
non-indigenous, includes many indigenous municipalities.
The characteristics of the indigenous districts in the two maps can be further illustrated
by computing the actual percentage of indigenous inhabitants in each of the ﬁve districts
for both layouts, which, however may be a bit misleading. In fact, on the one hand, we see
that the percentages of indigenous people in indigenous districts are high in both cases, and
for both maps there is a district with a clearly lower percentage: District 1 in our solution
(65.6%), and District 4 in the institutional one (58.8%). On the other hand, one can realize
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
393
Fig. 4 Complete district map for Chiapas provided by our method
that this is due to some indigenous municipalities (those labeled as 7, 38, 64, 78, 94 appear in
both low percentage indigenous districts) which themselves have probably a low percentage
of indigenous. In the end, the result is that the conﬁguration in Fig. 6 has indigenous districts
with more homogeneous percentages of indigenous residents, and no indigenous people in
the non-indigenous districts. On the contrary in Fig. 7 we see a big difference between the
lowest (58.8%) and the highest (87.5%) percentage, and, most all, we have a number of
indigenous included in a non-indigenous district (21.8% in District 6).
Basing on optimization, we can maximize the concentration of indigenous into their
districts, without leaving any indigenous municipalities outside them. This is very important
in view of the representation power which the law wants to guarantee to the indigenous
population. Actually, the fact that indigenous population is concentrated in the same districts
is meaningful, not only at the moment of the expression of the vote, but also under a territorial
administrative viewpoint, when the representatives elected by the indigenous community
become operational in the practical implementation of public policies.
5.2 Application to fictitious data
We test our exact and heuristic procedures also on ﬁctitious territories. We choose territories
with a very regular structure for which the corresponding contiguity graph is a rectangular
grid. As known, and frequently exploited in the applications, see Ricca et al. (2008) and
Miyazawa et al. (2021), grids resemble real territories, since they are planar graphs with
123

394
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
Fig. 5 Institutional district map for Chiapas
Fig. 6 Indigenous and non-indigenous Chiapas municipalities distribution in the districts provided by our
method
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
395
Fig. 7 Indigenous and non-indigenous Chiapas municipalities distribution in the institutional districts
Table 1 Fictitious problem size
m
mI
mN I
k
kI
kN I
120
46
74
13
5
8
210
86
124
25
10
15
node degree between 2 and 4. In the pictures shown in the rest of the paper, the elementary
units of the grids are represented as adjacent cells.
In our experimental plan we consider rectangular grids of different size m (number of
nodes/municipalities), and the corresponding subdivision into a number (mI ) of indigenous
municipalities and the rest (mN I ) of non-indigenous ones. We also consider different values
for the number of districts (k, kI , kN I ). Table 1 shows the numerical characteristics of our
test problems. It can be seen that we test ﬁrst ﬁctitious territories of size similar to that of
Chiapas, then we try to solve the problem on larger size data sets. Results on even larger
graphs are not reported since, already with 210 nodes we had some difﬁculties which forced
us to switch from the exact procedure to the (partially) heuristic one. We generate randomly
the population of the municipalities of the test problems by choosing populations with size
ranging between 100 and 350.
To take into account the existence of indigenous and non-indigenous municipalities, we
consider three different conﬁgurations for the indigenous distribution over the territory. Thus,
in each grid graph, for the location of the mI nodes corresponding to the indigenous munici-
palities we have three situations: (1) all indigenous nodes are inside a smaller subgrid located
in the center of the original grid; (2) all are in a smaller subgrid located at a corner of the
original grid; (3) all indigenous nodes randomly spread all over the original grid.
123

396
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
Fig. 8 Case 1: M = 120, indigenous located in a corner
In the pictures showing our ﬁctitious territories the subgrids where indigenous are located
are visualized within a rectangle (in bold), and the indigenous municipalities are labeled by
white numbers (on the contrary, the black numbers refer to non-indigenous). In each ﬁgure
we also report a table showing the populations of indigenous and non-indigenous districts.
First we illustrate the results obtained on the ﬁrst three grids with M = 120 municipalities,
among which MN I = 46 are indigenous. In this data sets we have 13 districts, 5 indigenous
and 8 non-indigenous. With respect to population, we have ¯P = 1532 and, considering a
value α = 0.15, Pmin = 1302 and Pmax = 1762. Computational times required for the
solution of the optimization models of Phase I for the grid with 120 nodes and the indigenous
communities located in a corner were similar to those for Chiapas. As for Chiapas, we were
also able to consider compactness in Phase II and to obtain a good map in reasonable times
by applying a successive division approach (see Fig. 8).
Figures 8, 9 and 10 show the results on grids with 120 nodes. One can verify that the bounds
on the district population are fully satisﬁed in all cases. With respect to the distribution of the
indigenous municipalities in the territory, with the ﬁrst two conﬁgurations the procedure was
able collect all of them within the indigenous districts. On the contrary, when the indigenous
municipalities are spread, as expected, in the ﬁnal solution some indigenous municipalities
belongtonon-indigenousdistricts(seeFig.10).Whenindigenousaresparseovertheterritory,
in Phase I we are forced to relax the assignment constraint for indigenous and to use the
MILP model only to ﬁnd partial districts which are then completed heuristically. The spread
conﬁguration produces some additional difﬁculties also for solving Phase II, since, after the
formation of indigenous districts, in this case the remaining municipalities to be still assigned
are sparse as well. In our experiments, this implied that only the heuristic procedure could
be applied to complete the district map.
A similar problem was encountered with the conﬁguration in which the indigenous munic-
ipalities are located in the center. In this case, for the 120 node grid we were able to apply the
exact approach in Phase I, and assign all indigenous municipalities to indigenous districts,
but, after this, the remaining non-indigenous municipalities had a ring conﬁguration, and this
again made hard the task of solving the MILP model of Phase II.
Forthegridwith210nodeswehave ¯P = 1876,and,usingα = 0.15,wehave Pmin = 1594
and Pmax = 2157. The results for this case are shown in Figs. 11, 12, and 13. It can be seen
that, when indigenous population is spread, relaxing the assignment constraints in the model
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
397
Fig. 9 Case 2: M = 120, indigenous located in the center
Fig. 10 Case 3: M = 120, indigenous spread
of Phase I unavoidably implies that some indigenous municipalities are assigned to a non-
indigenous district (Fig. 13).
For all cases with 210 nodes we had computational problems in solving the MILP models
exactly. Therefore, it was necessary to exploit the heuristic procedure to get solutions in
reasonable times by constructing partial (kernel) districts in Phase I and then using the
heuristic to complete them, and then also to produce the non-indigenous ones. In any case,
for all grids we were able to obtain a contiguous district map with all district populations
within the imposed bounds. In addition, thanks to the integral nature of the municipalities,
represented as nodes of the graph, perfect conformity is always guaranteed.
The increasing difﬁculties found in the solution of PD on territories when the number of
units becomes large suggests that it is not possible to apply our MILP models further. Our
experiments made us understand up to which size our MILP models can be exploited at best.
We also tried to solve the PD problem on territories with 500 municipalities, but, as expected,
in these cases only a heuristic approach can be applied.
123

398
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
Fig. 11 Case 4: M = 210, indigenous located in the corner
Fig. 12 Case 5: M = 210, indigenous located in a center
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
399
Fig. 13 Case 6: M = 210, indigenous spread
The results in this section provide district maps which satisfy population equality, conti-
guity, and guarantee perfect conformity to municipal boundaries. In addition, they optimize
the criterion of respecting minority groups. This goal is fully reached for the small-size ter-
ritories, for which all indigenous municipalities are assigned to indigenous districts, while it
is optimized in the larger data sets, or when indigenous are spread, by collecting as much as
possible indigenous in their districts.
6 Conclusions
In this paper we propose an optimization approach for Political Districting in Mexico. The
aim is to obtain a procedure for designing electoral districts taking into account that in this
country there exist minority groups which, according to the law, have a special right to
be represented in the Parliament. The approach is tailored for the Mexican case, but it is
applicable to any PD problem in which respect of minority groups is a main issue. It was
motivated by the observation that in Mexico the law considers the existence of the minority
groups and prescribes explicitly that a ﬁxed number of districts should be designed with
the precise aim of supporting their representation. For this reason, we focus our attention
on minorities and suggest a procedure which collects together in the prescribed number
of indigenous districts as many indigenous municipalities as possible. We also consider the
basic PD criteria of contiguity, which is treated as a strict constraint, together with population
equality and conformity to municipal boundaries, which are satisﬁed at best. In particular,
population equality is satisﬁed according to the bounds on district populations imposed by
the law, while, by considering municipalities as elementary (indivisible) territorial units,
conformity to municipal boundaries is automatically satisﬁed by the districts. This is one
123

400
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
aspect of the more general conformity to administrative boundaries criterion which, in our
opinion, is fundamental in any territorial zoning problem with an institutional role.
The solution procedure is performed in two stages: the ﬁrst one is devoted to the design
of indigenous districts, the second is aimed at completing the map with the construction of
the non-indigenous districts. Our experimental experience showed the pros and cons of the
procedure, but the general performance is good, especially for the results w.r.t. respect of
indigenous minorities and conformity to municipal boundaries.
In particular, for the solution of the speciﬁc Mexican PD problem, we have the following
results:
The application of our method to Chiapas produces a district map which matches the
law requirements of balancing population and having a ﬁxed number of indigenous districts;
under this point of view, our solutions outperforms the institutional district map, since in
such map indigenous municipalities are not concentrated only in the indigenous districts, but
they spread also in some non-indigenous ones. In our solution they are all collected in the
KI indigenous districts, providing a map in which the separation between the two types of
districts is clear.
The districts map provided by our procedure outperforms the institutional one also w.r.t.
conformity to municipal boundaries, which is one of the most important criteria according
to the Mexican law. Actually, in the institutional district map, several municipalities are split
between more than one district, and this is an evident consequence of pursuing population
balance without caring of municipalities’ borders. This splitting does not appear in our map,
except for only two cases in which the territory of a municipality is divided between only
two districts. This is, in fact, unavoidable for Chiapas, due to some structural problems in
the already existing administrative division of its territory into municipalities. If population
equality must be satisﬁed within the bounds imposed by the law on district populations, at
least two splits must be performed.
The good performance of the exact two-phase districting procedure is conﬁrmed when
applied to our artiﬁcial data sets, but only if the size of the problem is within a maximum
which corresponds more or less to the size of Chiapas. For these problems, as for Chiapas,
we also managed to take into account the compactness criterion when designing the non-
indigenous districts, without loosing anything in conformity to municipalities boundaries. On
the contrary, we discarded compactness in the formation of the indigenous districts, basically
because it is conﬂicting with respect of minority groups. These results suggest that the method
can be successfully used for practical application of PD problems.
On territories of larger size good district maps can be still obtained in reasonable times by
resorting to the heuristic procedure. The two-phase approach shows some difﬁculties when
the distribution of the indigenous population over the territory has a very particular (non-
concentrated) conﬁguration. Unfortunately, in PD with minority groups, if this is the case, the
problem becomes harder for any procedure, and typically this requires ad hoc intervention
and additional computational effort. In our approach, we were able to cope with this by
applying our kernel-growth procedure.
We ﬁnally point out that our procedure is conceptually simple and easy to apply (of course,
with suitable computer aid) by the electoral ofﬁces who have to implement the operations
prescribed by the law. We think that this is an important aspect when mathematical models
and methods are applied in the social science context and, in our opinion, this should be
promoted also in view of the principles of transparency and simplicity which are at the basis
of the electoral law in any country.
We conclude the paper by meditating on our heuristics which is clearly very simple and
straightforward, but this was mainly due to the fact that it was developed when experiments
123

Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
401
demonstrated the impossibility of applying our MILP for large size problems. We think that
our future work may be headed towards developing a most sophisticated heuristic procedure
which is still able to exploit the two-phase approach proposed in this work.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza within the CRUI-
CARE Agreement.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ahuja, R. K., Magnanti, T. L., & Orlin, J. B. (1993). Network ﬂows. Hoboken: Prentice Hall.
Banducci, S. A., Donovan, T., & Karp, J. A. (2004). Minority representation, empowerment, and participation.
The Journal of Politics, 66(2), 534–556.
Cameron, C., Epstain, D., & O’Halloran, S. (1996). Do majority–minority districts maximize substantive black
representation congress? American Political Science Review, 90(4), 794–812.
Duque, J. C., Ramos, R., & Suriñach, J. (2007). Supervised regionalization methods: A survey. International
Regional Science Review, 30(3), 195–220.
Forrest, L. (1964). Apportionment by computer. American Behavioral Science, 8(4), 23.
George, J. A., Lamar, B. W., & Wallace, C. A. (1997). Political district determination using large-scale network
optimization. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 31(1), 11–28.
Grilli di Cortona, P., Manzi, C., Pennisi, A., Ricca F.& Simeone B. (1999). Optimization models for electoral
districting. In Evaluation and optimization of electoral systems (pp. 165–190). Philadelphia PA: Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Hess, S. W., Weaver, J. B., Siegfelatt, H. J., Whelan, J. N., & Zitlau, P. A. (1965). Nonpartisan political
redistricting by computer. Operations Research, 13(6), 998–1006.
Horn, D. L., Hampton, C. R., & Vandenberg, A. J. (1993). Practical application of district compactness.
Political Geography, 12(2), 103–120.
Kalcsics, J., Nickel, S., & Schroeder, M. (2005). Towards a uniﬁed territorial design approach—Applications,
algorithms and GIS integration. TOP, 13(1), 1–56.
Miyazawa, F. K., Moura, P. F. S., Ota, M. J., & Wakabayashi, Y. (2021). Partitioning a graph into balanced con-
nected classes: Formulations, separation and experiments. European Journal of Operational Research,
263(3), 826–836.
Morril, R. L. (1987). Redistricting, region and representation. Political Geography Quaterly, 6(3), 241–260.
Oehlein, J., & Haunert, J.-H. (2017). A cutting-plane method for contiguity-constrained spatial aggregation.
Journal of Spatial Information Science, 15, 89–120.
Ricca, F., & Scozzari, A. (2020). Mathematical programming formulations for practical political districting.
In Optimal Districting and Territory Design (pp. 105–128). Cham: Springer.
Ricca F., Scozzari A. & Seraﬁni P. (2017). A Guided tour of the mathematics of seat allocation and political
districting. In U. Endriss (Ed.), Trends in computational social choice (pp. 49–68). AI Access.
Ricca, F., Scozzari, A., & Simeone, B. (2008). Weighted Voronoi region algorithms for political districting.
Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 48(9–10), 1468–1477.
Ricca, F., Scozzari, A., & Simeone, B. (2013). Political districting: From classical models to recent approaches.
Annals of Operations Research, 204(1), 271–299.
Ricca, F., & Simeone, B. (2008). Local search algorithms for political districting. European Journal of Oper-
ational Research, 189(3), 1409–1426.
Rios-Mercado, R. Z. (Ed.). (2020). Optimal districting and territory design. Berlin: Springer.
Rios-Mercado, R. Z., & Lopez-Perez, J. F. (2013). Commercial territory design planning with realignment
and disjoint assignment requirements. Omega, 41, 525–535.
123

402
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:375–402
Shirabe, T. (2009). Districting modeling with exact contiguity constrains. Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design, 36(6), 1053–1066.
Simeone, B., & Pukelsheim, F. (Eds.). (2006). Mathematics and democracy. Heidelberg: Springer.
Taylor, P. G. (1973). A new shape measure for evaluating electoral district patterns. American Political Science
Review, 67(3), 947–950.
Validi, H., Buchanan, A., & Lykhovyd, E. (2020). Imposing contiguity constraints in political districting
models. Operations Research. Preprint, http://www.optimization-online.org/B_HTML/2020/01/7582.
html.
Vickrey, W. (1961). On the prevention of gerrymandering. Political Science Quaterly, 76(1), 105–110.
Williams, J. C, Jr. (1995). Political redistricting: A review. Papers in Regional Sciences, 74(1), 13–40.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123