TITLE: Towards robust interpretable surrogates for optimization
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07101-4
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07101-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Towards robust interpretable surrogates for optimization
Marc Goerigk1 · Michael Hartisch1 · Sebastian Merten1
Received: 2 December 2024 / Accepted: 4 February 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
An important factor in the practical implementation of optimization models is the accep-
tance by the intended users. This is inﬂuenced among other factors by the interpretability
of the solution process. Decision rules that meet this requirement can be generated using
the framework for inherently interpretable optimization models. In practice, there is often
uncertainty about the parameters of an optimization problem. An established way to deal
with this challenge is the concept of robust optimization.
The goal of our work is to combine both concepts: to create decision trees as surrogates for the
optimization process that are more robust to perturbations and still inherently interpretable.
For this purpose we present suitable models based on different variants to model uncertainty,
and solution methods. Furthermore, the applicability of heuristic methods to perform this
task is evaluated. Both approaches are compared with the existing framework for inherently
interpretable optimization models.
Keywords Data-driven optimization · Interpretability and explainability in optimization ·
Robust optimization · Decision trees
1 Introduction
1.1 Motivation
Most optimization models and solution techniques are designed for practical application.
Similarly, machine learning approaches aim for real-world use, with increasing emphasis on
enhancing user acceptance and comprehension. While explainability in artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) has become a major research focus, the development of approaches that prioritize user
acceptance and comprehensibility in the realm of optimization remains relatively niche. This
is somewhat surprising, because much like in AI, solutions to optimization problems are typ-
ically generated by solvers and algorithms that are not easily understood by all stakeholders.
However, having insights into how and why speciﬁc solutions are chosen can signiﬁcantly
enhance the acceptance of those solutions. Conversely, a lack of transparency in the decision-
making process can undermine trust and cause discontent, resulting in poor adoption of
optimized decisions and ultimately rendering the optimization process ineffective.
B Sebastian Merten
sebastian.merten@uni-passau.de
1
Business Decisions and Data Science, University of Passau, Dr.-Hans-Kapﬁnger-Str. 30, 94032 Passau,
Germany
123

Annals of Operations Research
To increase the comprehensibility of machine learning models, much focus has been put
on their explainability and interpretability. Interpretability, unlike explainability, requires
that the entire process—from instance to solution—is inherently comprehensible, rather than
merely offering post-hoc justiﬁcations on why a speciﬁc solution was (not) chosen. As the
interpretability of a method implies its explainability, interpretability is what we should strive
for (Rudin, 2019).
In optimization, several efforts have been made to enhance the explainability of solutions
only recently. However, much less attention has been given to developing interpretable, and
henceeasilycomprehensible,surrogatesfortheoptimizationprocess.Interpretablesurrogates
must not only be easily comprehensible, but also attain high quality solutions, which calls
for a trade-off between these two conﬂicting goals. The proposed methods for surrogates of
optimization problems base their process of attaining the surrogate on historical samples or
observations. The common question in machine learning is, to what extend the found model
(in our case the surrogate)—that performs well on historical observations—performs well on
new data that has not been part of the training data. We go a step further and ask the question
to what extend the surrogate performs well if disturbed data is used in the surrogate, while
the obtained solution is evaluated on the true, undisturbed data. Such situations arise when
the decision maker cannot access the true parameters of the environment and instead relies
on data that might be distorted by noise, subject to estimation errors, or simply outdated:
e.g., when selecting a path to get from A to B, one is able to access estimates of the travel
time, which can be based on outdated data (a no-longer existing trafﬁc jam) or incomplete
information (e.g., an accident just happened but is not yet reported). Hence, while the true
parameters are ﬁxed in the underlying system, the decision maker can only base her decisions
on observed and potentially perturbed data.
In this work, we aim at identifying high-quality, interpretable surrogates that are robust
to perturbations in the observation of instance parameters. We focus on decision trees as
surrogates, which query instance parameters in their splits and provide solutions to the opti-
mization problem at their leaves. The main idea is that the instance parameters guiding the
path through the decision tree may not have been correctly observed. As a result, the traversal
could lead to an undesirable leaf, and a solution might be implemented that is not suited to
the actual parameters at hand.
1.2 Motivating example
In the following, we want to motivate our research question with an example. For a given
optimization problem, we want to make use of the framework of Goerigk and Hartisch (2023)
to ﬁnd an interpretable surrogate in form of a decision tree for the optimization process.
We want to evaluate the performance of this decision tree in the presence of disturbances
and compare it to an alternative surrogate model. This alternative decision tree remains
interpretable, but is constructed with robustness as a priority.
Let us consider the graph given in Fig. 1. The goal is to ﬁnd the shortest path from node
s to node t. There are only two feasible solutions, the path containing the edges e1 and e2,
and the path containing the edges e3 and e4. We will refer to them as path A (s-1-t) and path
B (s-2-t), respectively. We assume that the costs to traverse edges in this graph can vary.
Table 1 contains ﬁve historical samples for the edge costs, which we will use as training data.
First, we want to ﬁnd a decision tree that maps cost observations to solutions of this
shortest path problem, and that is optimal with respect to the average costs across the ﬁve
observations. We refer to this measure as the nominal costs. Note that in this case using
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Example graph.
Table 1 Historical observations.
e1
e2
e3
e4
c1
0
1
7
9
c2
1
5
3
10
c3
9
4
4
9
c4
9
10
5
7
c5
10
8
2
2
Fig. 2 Decision tree optimal for the nominal case.
the sum of costs is equivalent to using the average cost criterion, which is why we present
only the sums for comparison later on. To ensure interpretability, we limit ourselves to only
consider univariate decision trees with a maximum depth of two. For the sake of simplicity,
we further restrict ourselves to the use of branching thresholds on the midpoints between two
observed values for the same edge, e.g., we only consider the thresholds 0.5, 5, and 9.5 for
edge e1.
Figure 2 illustrates the structure of an optimal decision tree for the nominal setting and
its implied split in a two-dimensional projection of the feature space. For a given cost vector
ˆc ∈R4, we have to verify whether the costs of edge e1 are less or equal to ﬁve. If this is the
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Decision tree optimal for the robust case.
case, we will choose path A, and choose path B otherwise. It can be seen that each historical
observation is assigned its optimal solution, i.e., scenarios 1 and 2 are assigned to path A,
while scenarios 3, 4, and 5 are assigned to path B, with cumulated cost of 36 for this nominal
problem.
Now, consider that we might not be able to observe the cost parameters correctly. These
perturbations will inﬂuence the way we use the decision tree to assign solutions. Note that
in our setting, this interference affects the user’s observation, but does not affect the actual
costs of paths. In a robust decision tree, we want to take the worst-case disturbance of the
observations into account. For this example, imagine an adversary with a budget of ﬁve,
which can be distributed over all historical observations to perturb an observation (ˆcj) of the
actual costs cj. In case of the nominal tree, a worst-case perturbation occurs in cost vector
c5, where the observed cost of edge e1 may become 5 and hence a user would falsely select
solution A, see Fig. 2. This results in a much worse objective value of 18 in this scenario,
compared to only 4 in the nominal case, yielding overall costs of 50.
In Fig. 3, another decision tree and its implied splits are represented. By applying it to our
given historical observations, we also achieve a nominal objective value of 36. However, this
tree hedges against the adversarial attack which was observed in the ﬁrst setting. Hence, it is
not possible to perturb the observed costs of edge e1 in cost vector c5 given the budget in a way
which results in an assignment of c5 to path A. A perturbation with the worst implications—
increasing the observed cost of edge e2 in observation c2—results in an objective value of
only 41 using this tree.
This example highlights that the performance of decision trees in an environment with
uncertainparameterscansigniﬁcantlyvaryfromitsassumedqualitywhentrainedwithrespect
to nominal data. It can be seen that it is possible to shrink this variance by considering the
uncertainty during constructing the trees. We furthermore have seen that hedging against
perturbation not necessarily comes with the price of a genuinely worse performance in the
nominal setting. To ﬁnd a robust decision tree, we need to take both the structure of the tree
into account, and which solutions we assign to the leaves.
123

Annals of Operations Research
1.3 Related Work
As explainability and interpretability in optimization is still an emerging research ﬁeld, the
body of existing work is relatively small. Research on explainability started out with domain-
speciﬁcapproaches( ˇCyrasetal.,2019)andrecentlyhasseenasurgeofmoregeneralmethods,
e.g. for multi-stage stochastic optimization (Tierney et al., 2022), linear optimization (Kurtz
et al., 2025) and multi-objective optimization (Corrente et al., 2024). Explanations for math-
ematical optimization are often data-driven (Aigner et al., 2024; Forel et al., 2023) or use a
counterfactual approach (Kurtz et al., 2025; Korikov and Beck, 2023). Most of the existing
work on interpretable approaches is problem-speciﬁc, for example considering the stop-
ping problem (Ciocan and Miši´c, 2022), COVID-19 testing (Bastani et al., 2022), clustering
(Bertsimas et al., 2021; Carrizosa et al., 2023) and project scheduling (Portoleau et al., 2024).
Optimal policy trees (Amram et al., 2022) and optimal prescriptive trees (Bertsimas et al.,
2019) have been proposed to obtain interpretable prescription policies, mapping instances
to a predeﬁned set of so-called treatment options. Furthermore, the framework presented in
Goerigk and Hartisch (2023) is suitable to describe the problem of ﬁnding inherently inter-
pretable surrogates for a broad class of optimization problems. In that framework, and also in
the work presented in this paper, the parameters used as input for the surrogate are limited to
cost parameters and the surrogate’s output is a speciﬁc solutions to the optimization problem.
In Goerigk et al. (2024), this restriction was lifted, enabling a feature-based description of
both the instance and the solution, which then serve as the input and output of the surrogate,
respectively.
In this work, we focus on using decision trees as surrogates for the optimization process,
as several studies suggest that trees are particularly understandable (Baehrens et al., 2010;
Huysmans et al., 2011; Miller, 2019), with sparsity being a signiﬁcant factor contributing
to their comprehensibility (Gleicher, 2016). Our approach is data-driven, requiring a set of
sample data points to evaluate the performance of the derived tree. Speciﬁcally, the surrogate
model should perform well on average for these samples, even under worst-case perturba-
tions of their observed parameters. This worst-case perspective is the core idea of robust
optimization, which does not require known probabilities and is frequently used in theory
and practice (Goerigk and Hartisch, 2024; Gorissen et al., 2015). One of the key challenges
when applying robust optimization is the selection of a suitable uncertainty set (Bertsimas et
al., 2018; Chassein et al., 2019). In this work, we assume the perturbations on the parameter
observations to be restricted by variants of budgeted uncertainty (Bertsimas and Sim, 2003;
Bertsimas and Sim, 2004).
In the context of decision trees, robustness has been used for several types of classiﬁcation
problems in machine learning, e.g., to make them more robust against adversarial examples
(Chen et al., 2019; Vos and Verwer, 2021, 2022) and perturbations of the data (Justin et al.,
2022). Other approaches aimed at improving the stability of decision trees (Bertsimas and
Digalakis, 2023). Furthermore, in Portoleau et al. (2024) the authors aim at ﬁnding robust
decision trees for project scheduling which hedge against uncertain activity duration. In our
work, we focus on mathematical programming formulations of decision trees (Aghaei et al.,
2024; Justin et al., 2022), which require only minor adaptations for our setting. It is worth
noting that alternative approaches for constructing decision trees exist, particularly dynamic
programming methods (Nijssen and Fromont, 2007; van der Linden et al., 2023), but adapting
them from the standard classiﬁcation to our optimization setting is out of the scope of this
paper. For the interested reader, we also refer to recent surveys on decision trees (Blockeel
et al., 2023; Costa and Pedreira, 2023).
123

Annals of Operations Research
The main difference of the aforementioned works to our approach is that our surrogates
do not output predeﬁned classiﬁcation labels, but solutions to optimization problems. In
particular, there is an exponential number of potential outputs in our case, in contrast to a
discrete, predeﬁned set of labels. Another difference is that in case of classiﬁcation, an error
on the training set is minimized (e.g. minimize the number of misclassiﬁcations), while we,
on the other hand, are dealing with cost deviations for non-optimal assigned solutions that
depend on the true cost scenario as well as the provided solution. Hence, there is a connection
to the predict-then-optimize framework (Elmachtoub and Grigas, 2022), where the criterion
for the prediction process is not the accuracy of the prediction itself, but its effect on the
subsequent (optimization) process that uses the prediction. In this realm, advances have been
made to improve comprehensibility (Blanquero et al., 2023). While there are similarities in
the evaluation function, it is important to note that we do not predict parameters; instead, we
map parameters directly to solutions.
1.4 Contribution and structure of the paper
Contribution of this paper.
Our work builds upon the framework presented in Goerigk
and Hartisch (2023), which introduced interpretable surrogates for optimization. Their key
idea is to generate surrogates to replace the black-box optimization process, and we focus on
univariate decision trees as such surrogates. The original framework allows for the implemen-
tation of various optimization criteria that can be deployed when searching for a surrogate.
In particular, it allows for the worst-case criterion, which seeks a surrogate that performs best
in the worst-case cost scenario. In contrast, this current work focuses on a different notion
of robustness: We aim to construct a decision tree such that, even when the observation of
the true underlying cost scenario is perturbed in the worst-case manner, the surrogate still
achieves strong average performance. We consider two types of budgeted uncertainty sets and
develop exact and heuristic solution approaches. Furthermore, we analyze the complexity of
our setting and note special cases that become easier to solve. In computational experiments,
we consider the impact of the choice of uncertainty set as well as the size of the uncertainty,
and compare to the previous, nominal approach. We ﬁnd that at a small cost in terms of
nominal performance, our robust models can achieve considerably better performance on
disturbed observations, and even on new observations that are taken out-of-sample.
Course of the work.
In Section 2 we introduce the problem formulation, including the con-
sidered types of uncertainty, and present an iterative solution method for generating optimal
robust surrogates in form of a decision tree. Since this method is computationally expensive,
several heuristics are presented in Section 3. In Section 4 we elaborate on the interconnection
of the presented heuristics and the underlying problem, as well as on computational com-
plexity results. We present computational experiments in Section 5 and conclude the paper
in Section 6.
2 Robust interpretable surrogates
2.1 Problem formulation and uncertainty sets
Consider a minimization problem with a set of feasible solutions X ⊆Rn, a linear objective
function, and N ∈N historical samples c1, . . . , cN ∈Rn of realizations of the objective func-
123

Annals of Operations Research
tion vector. Throughout the paper, we use the notation [N] = {1, . . . , N} to denote index sets
and for simplicity of presentation, assume that the problem minx∈X c⊤x can be represented
as a mixed-integer linear program (MIP). The framework presented in Goerigk and Hartisch
(2023) aims at ﬁnding a surrogate for the optimization process that maps realizations of the
objective function vector to solutions. We investigate the case that the observed objective
function values are perturbed, affecting the mapping and potentially resulting in solutions
that perform poorly under the true costs. Hence, we assume that the cost parameters of a
given instance are ﬁxed, but the observed values can be perturbed, meaning they may deviate
from the true underlying values, which do not change. With this perspective, the goal is to
ﬁnd a robust surrogate for the optimization process in which a decision tree maps (disturbed)
cost scenario observations to corresponding solutions. Here, robustness implies achieving
the best average performance over all samples, even under the worst-case realization of their
observed values within the chosen uncertainty set.
Let T ⊆{T : Rn →X} denote the set of decision trees that map cost vectors to solutions.
Note that for the sake of obtaining easily comprehensible surrogates, we restrict T to contain
only univariate trees and limit the tree’s depth to a speciﬁed maximum. In particular, every
split of the tree queries the cost of a single item. Furthermore, we demand that splits are
based on the historical samples, i.e., we assume that a split on item i ∈[n] uses a threshold
from the interval [min j∈[N] c j,i, max j∈[N] c j,i].
Foradisturbedobservation ˆc ∈Rn correspondingtosample c,let T(ˆc) ∈X bethesolution
this observation is mapped to when using decision tree T ∈T . Note that the resulting cost
is then given by c⊤T (ˆc), as only the observation and not the cost vector itself is disturbed.
Hence, the problem of ﬁnding an optimal robust decision tree can be stated as
min
T ∈T
max
(ξ1,ξ N )∈U

j∈[N]
c⊤
j T (cj + ξ j),
(RIT)
where ξ j ∈RN speciﬁes the perturbation applied to the observations of sample j ∈[N],
and U is the set of possible perturbations, which we call the uncertainty set. The abbreviation
RIT stands for the “robust interpretable tree” problem.
In this paper, we consider a variant of so-called budgeted uncertainty (Bertsimas and
Sim, 2004), where the deviation from the nominal costs cannot exceed a given budget. We
consider two types of budgeted uncertainty which differ in their way of allowing the budget to
be spent. The set Uglob represents the uncertainty set for a given global budget. The adversary
can perturb the observations by in total glob ∈R. This setting allows large perturbations of
one single observation, whilst other observations remain equal to the nominal ones. Formally,
this global budgeted uncertainty set is deﬁned as
Uglob(glob) = {(ξ1, . . . , ξ N)⊤∈RN×n :

j∈[N]

i∈[n]
|ξ j,i| ≤glob}.
In addition to this concept of a global budget, we explore an uncertainty set Uloc that imposes
a budget on the perturbation for each individual observation, which we call a local budget.
This local budgeted uncertainty set is deﬁned as
Uloc(loc) = {(ξ1, . . . , ξ N)⊤∈RN×n :

i∈[n]
|ξ j,i| ≤loc ∀j ∈[N]}.
Observe that Uglob() ⊆Uloc() for any value of , which means that the global budgeted
uncertainty set is more restrictive than the local one, if we use the same budget. However, we
123

Annals of Operations Research
obtain Uloc() ⊆Uglob(N ·), i.e., the global set becomes more powerful for an appropriate
scaling of the budget.
2.2 Iterative solution approach
We tackle Problem (RIT) via an iterative approach, using the well-known method of scenario
generation, see e.g. Aissi et al. (2009); Zeng and Zhao (2013) and Goerigk and Hartisch
(2024), Chapter 5.1. During the ﬁrst step, a decision tree is generated by solving an MIP,
referred to as the master problem. The model considers only a subset of perturbation scenarios
from the uncertainty set. Note that ﬁnding an optimal binary decision tree is already NP-hard
(Hyaﬁl and Rivest, 1976).
In the second step, we solve the adversarial problem. An instance of this problem takes in a
decision tree (as output from the master problem) and checks the average cost resulting from
a worst-case perturbation of cost observations under the considered uncertainty set. The goal
is to ﬁnd a perturbation that maximizes the total cost across all samples, where the solutions
are determined by traversing the decision tree using the perturbed observations. In case the
found objective value differs from the objective value of the master problem, the worst-case
perturbation is added to the subset of perturbation scenarios and the process is repeated. The
method terminates as soon as the objective value of master and adversary problem is equal.
Let us now take a closer look at the master problem. Note that the description of the
master problem is independent of the considered uncertainty set. Let U′ be a ﬁnite subset
of the uncertainty set. To simplify the explanation, we can assume that U′ = {(0, . . . , 0)} at
the start of the algorithm, meaning that only the scenario that does not perturb the historical
samples is considered, which is a valid subset for both of the considered uncertainty sets. For
easier notation, let S = |U′| be the current number of scenarios considered. In contrast to the
model presented in Goerigk and Hartisch (2023), we use the stronger ﬂow-based formulation
to model the decision tree (Aghaei et al., 2024; Justin et al., 2022). To this end, we need to
introduce some notation. Let D ∈N be the ﬁxed depth of the binary tree. Since the depth and
width of the tree is determined in advance, only the parameters for the branching nodes and
the solutions in the leaves have to be determined as part of the optimization problem. The
2D+1 −1 many nodes are split up into the set of inner nodes Q, where instance parameters
are queried to perform the splits, and the set of leaves K that hold solutions to the underlying
optimization problem. Let Q−⊂Q be the set of inner nodes without the root node of the
tree, labeled with 0. Let l,r : Q →Q ∪K be the functions mapping every inner node to its
left and right child, respectively. Furthermore, p : Q−∪K →Q maps every node (except
of the root node 0) to its predecessor in the tree. We use the vector xk ∈Rn to represent the
solution proposed at leaf k ∈K. The binary variables z j,s
q,c indicate for inner node q ∈Q and
its child c ∈{l(q),r(q)}, whether for sample point j ∈[N] the decision path traverses node
q towards c in perturbation scenario s ∈[S].
We precompute splits that are worth considering. For every i ∈[n], let (i) be a set of
possible split points in dimension i. Within this paper, we use the midpoints between the
sorted entries, i.e., let ¯c1,i ≤¯c2,i ≤. . . ≤¯cN,i be the sorted entries in dimension i ∈[n],
and we use (i) = { 1
2(¯c j,i + ¯c j+1,i) | j ∈[N −1]}. We can then use binary variables
bq,i,θ to indicate whether the cost of item i ∈[n] is queried via ci ≤θ for θ ∈(i) at inner
node q ∈Q. Furthermore, the continuous variables ¯z j,s contain the objective value resulting
from following the decision path for sample j ∈[N] in scenario s ∈[S] when using the
123

Annals of Operations Research
decision at the respective leaf. Finally, the epigraph variable u holds the worst-case overall
cost resulting from using the found tree. Problem (1) shows the full master problem.
min u
(1a)
s.t.
xk ∈X
∀k ∈K
(1b)

i∈[n]

θ∈(i)
bq,i,θ = 1
∀q ∈Q
(1c)
z j,s
0,l(0) + z j,s
0,r(0) = 1
∀j ∈[N], s ∈[S]
(1d)
z j,s
p(q),q = z j,s
q,l(q) + z j,s
q,r(q)
∀j ∈[N], s ∈[S], q ∈Q−
(1e)
z j,s
q,l(q) ≤

i∈[n]

θ∈(i):
c j,i +ξs
j,i ≤θ
bq,i,θ
∀j ∈[N], s ∈[S], q ∈Q
(1f)
z j,s
q,r(q) ≤

i∈[n]

θ∈(i):
c j,i +ξs
j,i >θ
bq,i,θ
∀j ∈[N], s ∈[S], q ∈Q
(1g)
¯z j,s + M j(1 −z j,s
p(k),k) ≥c⊤
j xk
∀j ∈[N], s ∈[S], k ∈K
(1h)
u ≥

j∈[N]
¯z j,s
∀s ∈[S]
(1i)
bq,i,θ ∈{0, 1}
∀q ∈Q, i ∈[n], θ ∈(i)
(1j)
z j,s
q,c ∈{0, 1}
∀j ∈[N], s ∈[S], q ∈Q, c ∈{l(q),r(q)}
(1k)
¯z j,s ∈R
∀j ∈[N], s ∈[S]
(1l)
u ∈R
(1m)
Constraint (1b) guarantees that each of the K leaves contains a feasible solution to the
underlying optimization problem. For every inner node, Constraint (1c) ensures that exactly
one attribute is selected for the split, along with a corresponding threshold value. For each
sample point in every scenario, one unit of ﬂow is introduced at the root of the decision tree
and is directed towards one of its successor nodes via Constraint (1d) and ﬂow conservation
at the remaining inner nodes is enforced via Constraint (1e). Constraints (1f) and (1g) ensure
that for each perturbed observation of a data point, the ﬂow adheres to the decision tree’s
structurebasedontheselectedbranchingdecisions.Hence,theﬂowindicateswhichperturbed
observation is assigned to which solution. Based on this, the resulting objective for every
disturbed observation is calculated via Constraint (1h). Finally, Constraint (1i) completes the
epigraph formulation of the objective function by taking into account the worst-case sum of
costs. Sufﬁciently large values for the big M parameters in Constraint (1h) can be computed
by setting M j = maxx∈X c⊤
j x for all j ∈[N] or any other upper bound for the objective
value of the solution for an observation j ∈[N].
When implementing the master problem, it is possible to reduce both the number of
constraints and variables. Instead of creating N · S copies of each variable to represent ﬂow
through the tree, we can aggregate identical disturbed observations of a sample point into a
single variable, avoiding S copies for every sample point even when identical disturbances
occur in the uncertainty set. Thus, for each sample point j ∈[N], we only need as many
copies of the ﬂow variables as there are distinct perturbations ξs
j for s ∈[S]. This approach
requires maintaining a data structure to track which disturbed observations correspond to
each scenario s ∈[S].
123

Annals of Operations Research
After constructing the decision tree deﬁned by the split queries, represented by variables
bq,i,θ, and the solutions at the leaves xk, the adversarial problem is invoked to determine the
disturbance in the observed attributes that leads to the worst-case overall costs when applying
the optimization surrogate to the sample points. To formulate the adversary problem, we can
exploit the fact that we can precompute the efforts the adversary has to undertake to disturb
observations of sample point j ∈[N] such that the surrogate assigns it to the solution
provided in leaf k ∈K. In particular, let ρ j
k represent the minimum sum of the absolute
changes in the observed attributes cj that are required to yield the perturbed observation ˆcj,
which would be mapped to leaf k in the decision tree derived from the master problem. In
particular, assume item i ∈[n] is queried at node q ∈Q along the path to node k with
threshold θ ∈(i). If l(q) leads to leaf k then the cost of max{0, c j
i −θ} is added to ρ j
k . If
r(q) leads to leaf k then max{0, θ −c j
i +ϵ} is added, for some small ϵ > 0. If the same feature
is queried multiple times along a path, the associated costs are consolidated, so that only the
minimal adjustment needed to satisfy all queries is counted. By deﬁnition, we have ρk
j = 0
for the leaf k that is reached in observation j by the decision tree without disturbance. Note
that these perturbation costs are the same for both types of uncertainty sets. In order to ﬁnd
the worst-case perturbation, we can formulate the adversary problem as a multiple choice
knapsack problem (Sinha and Zoltners, 1979), which is known to be NP-hard (Kellerer et al.,
2004). In case of the global budgeted uncertainty set, Model (2) can be used, where variable
y j
k indicates whether the observation of sample point j ∈[N] is disturbed in such a way that
it is mapped to leaf k ∈K.
max

j∈[N]

k∈K
(c⊤
j xk)y j
k
(2a)
s.t.

j∈[N]

k∈K
ρ j
k y j
k ≤glob
(2b)

k∈K
y j
k = 1
∀j ∈[N]
(2c)
y j
k ∈{0, 1}
∀j ∈[N], k ∈K
(2d)
For the case of the local budgeted uncertainty, the adversary problem is obtained by exchang-
ing Constraint (2b) with the constraint

k∈K
ρ j
k y j
k ≤loc
∀j ∈[N].
(3)
In this case, the problem can be decomposed so that for each j ∈[N], we solve
max

k∈K
(c⊤
j xk)y j
k
s.t.

k∈K
ρ j
k y j
k ≤loc

k∈K
y j
k = 1
y j
k ∈{0, 1}
∀k ∈K.
Each subproblem can be solved to optimality in polynomial time by simply selecting k ∈
arg maxk∈K {c⊤
j xk : ρ j
k ≤loc}.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Further note that for both types of uncertainty sets, a worst-case assignment of samples to
leaves—given by variables y j
k —can be transformed into a corresponding perturbation ξ j of
the observation of sample j ∈[N], by backtracking the path from k to the root and setting
ξ j,i according to the cost that are incurred in ρ j
k for this sample. If the optimal objective value
of the adversary problem is equal to the objective value of the master problem, the process
terminates, as no scenario exists that can increase the worst-case cost. If, on the other hand,
the objective value of the adversary problem exceeds the cost of the master problem, the
newly found scenario is added to U′ and we return to solve the upgraded master problem.
2.3 Post-processing
Our proposed method aims to construct a complete binary tree of predeﬁned depth D.
However, the resulting tree may not always utilize all K = 2D leaves. In such cases, a
post-processing step is applied to simplify the ﬁnal surrogate and eliminate redundancies,
thereby reducing its complexity. For example, if all leaves in a subtree correspond to the same
solution, the subtree can be pruned and replaced by a single inner leaf, eliminating the need
for further queries. Furthermore, it might happen that a tree is produced where certain leaves
are not attained by any of the observations, even in the worst-case perturbation. Then, we
propose removing these leaves along with their preceding query, retaining only the solution
of the corresponding sister leaf.
Furthermore, some post-processing can be applied to reﬁne the query thresholds: The
model only considers midpoints between consecutive data values as candidate thresholds.
This restriction may overlook trees with more nuanced splits. To address this, once the tree
structure is ﬁxed, we revisit the chosen thresholds to explore potential improvements within
their respective intervals. Speciﬁcally, for an interval [¯c j,i, ¯c j+1,i] with the current threshold
1
2 ¯c j,i + 1
2 ¯c j+1,i, we instead allow thresholds of the form
π ¯c j,i + (1 −π)¯c j+1,i,
π ∈{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9}.
For each such choice across all query thresholds Q, we reconstruct the corresponding tree,
evaluate it by solving Problem (2), and select the tree that achieves the minimal objective
value.
3 Heuristics
We present one baseline heuristic as well as three more sophisticated heuristics for generating
robust decision trees. All heuristics share the idea of dividing the problem of ﬁnding a tree
into two (interdependent) parts: ﬁnding a good tree structure (i.e. branching attributes and
corresponding thresholds) and determining the solutions associated with its leaves. We are
trying to reduce the computation times by treating the variables of one of these as parameters
and only optimizing the other subproblem.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.1 Baseline heuristic H1: single solution
One obvious way of simplifying Problem (RIT) is to restrict the allowed structure of the
decision tree even further than necessary for comprehensibility. In our baseline approach—
referred to as H1—we restrict ourselves to only considering trees with a depth of zero. In
particular, we do not need to ﬁnd any splits as the allowed trees only consist of a single (leaf)
node, i.e., every data point is mapped to the same solution x. Furthermore, no uncertainty has
to be taken into account (as there are no splits). The resulting problem of ﬁnding the optimal
solution can be formulated as
min
x∈X

j∈[N]
c⊤
j x.
3.2 Heuristic Htree: fix tree, optimize solutions
The approach of this heuristic is to repeatedly generate a random decision tree and then assign
the best possible solutions to the leaves. After the time limit is reached, the best combination
of tree structure and solutions is returned. Depending on the type of budget to be considered,
the procedures for determining the solutions differ. We refer to this heuristic as Hglob
tree and
Hloc
tree for the global and local uncertainty set, respectively.
Consider a given tree structure. In case of a global budget, an iterative approach is needed
to ﬁnd the best solutions xk for leaves k ∈K. We start out with a subset of perturbations,
which again can be assumed to be U′ = {(0, . . . , 0)}. Let [S] be the enumeration of this set and
let s ∈[S] refer to one speciﬁc perturbation. As the tree structure is ﬁxed, for every sample
j ∈[N], we can precompute the leaf it is mapped to. Hence, the binary parameters y j,s
k
indicate whether sample j ∈[N] is mapped to leaf k ∈[K] given perturbation s ∈[S]. By
solvingthereducedMasterProblem (4)weobtainoptimalsolutionsforthegivencombination
of tree structure and perturbations.
min u
(4a)
s.t. u ≥

j∈[N]

k∈K
(c⊤
j xk)y j,s
k
∀s ∈[S]
(4b)
xk ∈X
∀k ∈K
(4c)
u ∈R
(4d)
In the ﬁrst iteration, the solutions are optimized on the nominal setting and the resulting
decision is not necessarily well-protected against perturbed observations. As in Section 2
we now need to detect the most harmful perturbation of the observations by solving the
Adversary Problem (2). The found perturbation is added to U′, increasing S by one, and
Problem (4) is solved again. By using this iterative procedure until the objective function
values are identical, we can ﬁnd solutions that are optimal for the ﬁxed tree structure.
When dealing with a local budget, there is no need for an iterative approach, as the
worst-case perturbation of every sample point can be considered independently. In particular,
for every sample j ∈[N] we can again calculate the adversary cost ρ j
k of perturbing the
observations in such a way that it ends up in leaf k (see Section 2.2). Then, we can extract
¯K( j) = {k ∈K : ρ j
k ≤loc}, which is the set of leaves the adversary can send sample j to.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Then, Problem (5) ﬁnds the optimal solutions to be assigned to the leaves of the ﬁxed tree.
min

j∈[N]
u j
(5a)
s.t. u j ≥c⊤
j xk
∀j ∈[N], k ∈¯K( j)
(5b)
xk ∈X
∀k ∈K
(5c)
u j ∈R
∀j ∈[N]
(5d)
The entire procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1, differentiating between the local and the
global budgeted uncertainty set with T ⋆being the current incumbent best surrogate.
Algorithm 1 Htree heuristic
1: T ∗←None, obj(T ∗) ←∞
2: while time limit is not reached do
3:
for all q ∈Q do
▷Sample tree structure
4:
bq,i,θ ←0 ∀i ∈[n] ∀θ ∈(i)
5:
i′ ←sample uniformly from [n]
6:
θ′ ←sample uniformly from (i′)
7:
bq,i′,θ′ ←1
8:
for all j ∈[N], k ∈K: compute ρ j
k
9:
if Uloc then
▷Determine solutions xk
10:
for all j ∈[N]: compute ¯K( j)
11:
solve Problem (5); extract surrogate T and objective value objmas
12:
else if Uglob then
13:
U′ ←{(0, . . . , 0)}; S ←1
14:
converged ←False
15:
while not converged do
16:
for all k ∈K, j ∈[N], s ∈S: compute y j,s
k
17:
solve Master Problem (4); extract surrogate T and objective value objmas
18:
solve Adversary Problem (2); extract perturbation ξ and objective objadv
19:
if objadv = objmas then
20:
converged ←True
21:
else
22:
U′ ←U′ ∪{ξ}; S ←S + 1
23:
if objmas < obj(T ∗) then
24:
obj(T ∗) ←objmas
25:
T ∗←T
26: return T ∗
Within the outer loop that runs until a time limit is met, we ﬁrst sample a random tree
structure in Lines 3–8. As part of this process, we sample both an item and a threshold
for each query node of the tree. In our implementation, we restrict this sampling to items
and thresholds that, given the current structure of the tree (i.e., the already ﬁxed queries),
introduce genuinely new cuts. We then determine solutions xk for each leaf k ∈K, using
either Lines 10–11 in case of local budgeted uncertainty, or Lines 13–22 in case of global
budgeted uncertainty, which requires an inner loop. Finally, we keep track of the best solution
found in the algorithm and return this best solution at the end.
This approach requires repeatedly ﬁnding feasible solutions xk ∈X. Since this can be
challenging in itself, a natural variation of this method consists of heuristically computing
a candidate pool for xk. This allows replacing Constraint (4c) respective Constraint (5c) by
restrictions indicating an assignment of solution candidates to leaves using binary variables.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.3 Heuristic Hsol: fix solutions, optimize tree
The second heuristic samples a set of K solutions and randomly assigns each of them to
one of the leaves. The remaining task is to ﬁnd splits of the tree, that perform best if these
solutions are ﬁxed at the leaves. This procedure again is performed repeatedly and after the
time limit is reached, the best combinations and tree structure is returned. To ﬁnd the best
tree for one ﬁxed set of solutions, we reuse the iterative approach presented in Section 2.2,
where we now can ﬁx the values xk, k ∈K, according to the sampled solutions. In this
case, we need to apply the iterative approach both in the cases of global and local budgeted
uncertainty set, obtaining heuristics Hglob
sol and Hloc
sol, respectively.
Algorithm 2 Hsol heuristic.
1: T ∗←None, obj(T ∗) ←∞, Xcand ←∅
2: for all j ∈[N] do
▷Determine solution pool
3:
Xcand ←Xcand ∪{arg minx∈X c⊤
j x}
4: while time limit is not reached do
5:
for all k ∈K do
▷Sample random solutions
6:
xk ←sample uniformly from Xcand
7:
U′ ←{(0, . . . , 0)}; S ←1
8:
converged ←False
▷Determine tree structure
9:
while not converged do
10:
solve Master Problem (1) with xk ﬁxed
11:
extract surrogate T and objective value objmas
12:
solve Adversary Problem (2); extract perturbation ξ and objective objadv
13:
if objadv = objmas then
14:
converged ←True
15:
else
16:
U′ ←U′ ∪{ξ}; S ←S + 1
17:
if objmas < obj(T ∗) then
18:
obj(T ∗) ←objmas
19:
T ∗←T
20: return T ∗
We ﬁrst generate a pool of solution candidates in Lines 2–3. In this case, we simply choose
solutions that optimize with respect to one of the historical cost vectors; in principle, other
methods to generate suitable candidate solutions—especially problem-speciﬁc heuristics—
can be applied here as well. We then repeat the remaining process until the time limit is
reached. We ﬁrst sample a random subset of solutions in Lines 5–6, and then optimize for
the tree structure that takes uncertainty into account using the scenario generation loop in
Lines 7–16. In addition to the convergence criterion, a maximum number of iterations can
be set after which the loop terminates. This allows a potential trade off between the number
of samples investigated and the time used to improve each. The last lines of the algorithm
are used to keep track of the best solution found.
3.4 Heuristic Halt: alternate Htree and Hsol
Our ﬁnal heuristic approach is based on the idea of merging heuristics Htree and Hsol in an
alternating fashion. We ﬁrst call Htree once, i.e. only one iteration of the loop in Line 2 of
Algorithm 1 is performed. This provides us with a random tree structure and the respective
optimized solutions at its leaves.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Scheme of the alternating heuristic for a global budget (Hglob
alt ).
We now take these optimized solutions and use them in Hsol as if they were randomly
sampled. In particular, we ﬁx these solutions and optimize the splits given the ﬁxed solutions,
i.e., we perform a single iteration of the loop starting in Line 4 of Algorithm 2 where we do
not sample random solutions xk, but instead ﬁx them to the solutions found in Htree.
Now, we extract the splits from the newly found surrogate from Hsol and call Htree once
again, where we replace Lines 3–8 of Algorithm 1 such that the splits are set according to
these extracted splits. Again, the obtained solutions that are optimal for this tree are used in
Hsol, and this process is repeated until both methods generate the same objective value.
Similar to the other two heuristics, this is performed several times, until a time limit is
reached, after which the best encountered surrogate is returned. Figure 4 represents the nested
structure of one run of this heuristic, referred to as Hglob
alt
for the case of a global budgeted
uncertainty set. Recall that for the case of a local budgeted uncertainty set, Hloc
alt does not have
to perform an iterative approach in order to conduct the Hloc
tree sub routine.
4 Complexity
In the previous section, we introduced the heuristic H1, which simply maps every cost vector
to the same, single solution. As the next theorem shows, this approach is even optimal if the
uncertainty budget is sufﬁciently large, which means that the adversarial becomes powerful
enough to map any cost vector to any leaf of a decision tree. For a discussion of this effect
for classiﬁcation problems, we refer to Vos and Verwer (2022).
Theorem 4.1 Let T be the set of univariate trees of depth D ∈N as described in Section 2.1.
Let M = maxi∈[n]

max j∈[N] c j,i −min j∈[N] c j,i

. For a global budgeted uncertainty set
with glob > D · N · M and for a local budgeted uncertainty set with loc > D · M, the
solution obtained by H1 is optimal for Problem (RIT).
Proof Foraﬁxedadversarydecisionontheperturbationofobservations,anysamplethatisfed
to the decision tree has to pass D queries. Hence, any adversary decision results in the pertur-
bation of at most D· N observations. Regardless of the threshold for the splits, it never makes
sense to perturb the observations further than the range of the queried item in the data. Conse-
quently, for any split, a deviation of at most M = maxi∈[n]

max j∈[N] c j,i −min j∈[N] c j,i

of the observed value is implemented by the adversary. Let us consider the cases glob >
D · N · M and loc > D · M. In this case, as argued above, the adversary is capable of
123

Annals of Operations Research
perturbing the observations in such a way, that any sample can end up in any of the leaves.
Hence, the selection of splits no longer affects the result; only the solutions chosen at the
leaves matter. Then
min
T ∈T
max
(ξ1,...,ξ N )∈U

j∈[N]
c⊤
j T (cj + ξ j) =
min
x1,...,x|K|∈X

j∈[N]
max
k∈K c⊤
j xk
≥
min
x1,...,x|K|∈X max
k∈K

j∈[N]
c⊤
j xk
= min
x∈X

j∈[N]
c⊤
j x
and therefore, H1, which surely yields a feasible surrogate, is optimal for these cases.
⊓⊔
As a consequence, the complexity of Problem (RIT) becomes the same as minimizing a
linear function over X.
Corollary 4.1 In a situation as outlined in Theorem 4.1, Problem (RIT) has the same com-
plexity as the optimization problem speciﬁed by the underlying domain X.
As a second consequence, any other heuristic that optimizes the solutions of the leaves of
a decision tree, will also be optimal for sufﬁciently large budget.
Corollary 4.2 In a situation as outlined in Theorem 4.1, heuristics Htree and Halt obtain an
optimal solution to Problem (RIT).
We also show that our proposed heuristic of ﬁxing the splits of a decision tree and then
optimizing over the solutions assigned to the leaves needs to solve an NP-hard problem for
both types of uncertainty. To this end, we deﬁne the problem (LSAP) of selecting the best
solutions for a decision tree under uncertainty.
Deﬁnition 4.1 The Leaf Solution Assignment Problem (LSAP)
Given: N historical samples of cost vectors c1, . . . , cN, a set of feasible solutions X ⊆Rn,
a univariate tree of depth D with ﬁxed splits and thresholds and with K = 2D leaves, and
an uncertainty set that perturbs observations of the samples.
Task: ﬁnd a set of solutions associated to each leaf x1, . . . , x|K| that minimizes the average
cost with respect to the worst-case mapping of samples to leaves, resulting from perturbations
of the observations by the adversary.
In contrast to Problem (RIT), the splits of the tree are ﬁxed and only the solutions need to
be selected. This problem deﬁnition covers both the local and global budgeted uncertainty
set.
We show that this problem is NP-hard already for the selection problem, where X = {x ∈
{0, 1}n : 
i∈[n] xi = p} for some given integer p. To that end, we construct a reduction
from the partition problem, which is known to be NP-complete (Garey and Johnson, 1978).
Theorem 4.2 The Problem (LSAP) is NP-hard for the selection problem, even if  = 1.
Proof We start out with the partition problem with n items, n ∈N even, and a positive integer
weight wi associated to every item i ∈[n]. Let W = 
i∈[n] wi ≥2. We need to decide if
there exists a subset P ⊆[n] with p = |P| = n
2, such that 
i∈P wi = W
2 .
The arising instance of (The Leaf Solution Assignment Problem) builds upon the selection
problem with X = {x ∈{0, 1}n+p : 
i∈[n+p] xi = p}. There are N = 3 samples and a
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Samples of the cost
vector.
item
1
· · ·
n
n + 1
n + 2
· · ·
n + p
c1
W −w1
· · ·
W −wn
M
M
· · ·
M
c2
M
· · ·
M
0
0
· · ·
0
c3
2w1
· · ·
2wn
W
0
· · ·
0
decision tree of depth D = 1. The single split in the decision tree queries the cost of item n+1
with threshold W. The historical samples are deﬁned as shown in Table 2, with M ≥3pW
being a sufﬁciently large value.
Both for the global and the local budgeted uncertainty set, we set the budget to 1. Hence,
samples c1 and c2 are not affected by the adversary’s perturbation and always end up in
different leaves, which we name leaf 1 and leaf 2, respectively. The adversary can perturb the
observation of item n + 1 of c3, causing sample 3 to end up in either leaf. Let μ(1) = {1},
μ(2) = {2} and μ(3) = {1, 2} describe these mapping options of the adversary, which are
valid for both types of uncertainty.
Due to the structure of c1, which is assigned to leaf 1 in the decision tree, the solution x1
only selects from the ﬁrst n items. Furthermore, using the same argument, in x2 none of the
ﬁrst n items are selected, but instead all items n + 1,…, n + p are chosen.
Let I ∈[n] be the set of items chosen in solution x1 and let X(I) = 
i∈I wi. The costs
with respect to sample c1 are always pW −X(I), the costs with respect to sample c2 are
always 0, and for sample c3 they depend on the adversary’s decision given by μ(3): If the
ﬁrst leaf is selected by the adversary, x1 is implemented resulting in costs of 2X(I). If the
second leaf is selected the costs are W. Hence,
min
x1,...,x|K|∈X

j∈[N]
max
k∈μ( j) c⊤
j xk = min
I∈[n] max{pW −X(I) + 2X(I), pW −X(I) + W}
= min
I∈[n] pW + max{X(I), W −X(I)} .
By selecting I ∈[n] such that X(I) = W
2 these costs are minimal. In particular, if and only
if there is a solution to the partition instance, the optimal costs of the instance of the (LSAP)
instance are equal to (p + 1
2)W.
⊓⊔
Finally, note that for a budget of zero, regardless of the uncertainty set, the (LSAP)
problem decomposes to K separate nominal problems minx∈X ¯c⊤
k x, where ¯ck is the sum of
all scenarios that are assigned to leaf k by the decision tree. Hence, in this case (LSAP) is in
P, if the underlying optimization problem is in P.
5 Computational experiments
5.1 Setup
In this section, computational experiments testing our approaches are presented. In particular,
we want to answer the three following sets of questions:
1. Is there a correlation between the objective values of a decision tree when evaluated w.r.t.
both uncertainty sets presented in Section 2.1?
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 List of methods evaluated.
Abbreviation
Description
Reference
SG
Scenario generation
Section 2.2
H1
Single solution
Section 3.1
Htree
Fix tree, optimize solutions
Section 3.2
Hsol
Fix solutions, optimize tree
Section 3.3
Halt
Alternate Htree and Hsol
Section 3.4
Tnom
Nominal tree
Goerigk and Hartisch (2023)
2. To which extent do our methods generate more robust decision trees than methods which
only take a nominal training environment into account? What is the beneﬁt of relying on
a (potentially vulnerable) tree structure vs. using only one solution?
3. What is the trade-off between nominal and robust objective value? How well do the trees
generated generalize to new data? How does the instance size inﬂuence the performance
of our methods?
For each experiment, an indicated subset of the methods presented in Sections 2 and 3
will be used. We will benchmark against decision trees which were trained following the
approach from Goerigk and Hartisch (2023) using only nominal observations and therefore
do not consider uncertainty. Instead of using the authors’ MIP formulation, we use Model (1)
considering only the unperturbed observations resulting in optimal decision trees for the
nominal setting. We will refer to this method as the nominal one and use the representative
Tnom in plots and tables. By using the nominal approach and H1 in every experiment as
benchmarks, we cover both extreme cases: not considering uncertainty at all and hedging
in the most conservative way possible (see Theorem 4.1). Besides our heuristics Htree, Hsol,
and Halt, we also test the exact iterative solution approach, which is denoted as SG. In all
experiments, univariate, binary trees with a maximum depth of two are generated. Table 3
provides an overview of the methods evaluated and abbreviations used.
We perform tests on synthetic data for shortest path problems. The artiﬁcial instances
consist of d × d grid graphs, in which all edges are directed from south to north and west to
east, respectively. The objective is to ﬁnd the shortest path from the node in the southwestern
corner to the node in the northeastern corner. The costs of the edges are generated by using
a variation of the procedure of Goerigk and Hartisch (2023). Three basis scenarios were
created, consisting of an individual range of possible cost values for every edge. To generate
one observation, ﬁrst, one of these basis scenarios was selected randomly. Then, for every
edge a value representing its cost was sampled uniformly from the interval corresponding to
this combination of basis scenario and edge.
Further experiments were conducted for scheduling problems of type P||Cmax which are
known to be strongly NP-hard (Garey and Johnson, 1978). The duration times are assumed to
be uncertain. For the generation of the corresponding scenarios we make use of the algorithm
and parameters proposed by Cohen et al. (2023) for small problem instances of so-called
type II. The results of these experiments can be found as part of the appendix.
Wewillrefertothe N samplesastrainingdata,andthe1,000datapointsusedforevaluation
as test data. The quality of solutions evaluated using the former is also referred to as in-
sample performance, using the test data as out-of-sample performance. Furthermore, we will
differentiate between the nominalperformance, where we evaluate using only the unperturbed
observations, and the robust performance where we evaluate using the observations perturbed
123

Annals of Operations Research
in the most harmful way possible w.r.t. to the indicated uncertainty set. Every data point in the
following ﬁgures and tables is based on the averaged results of 20 instances. All 20 instances
are different, but the same 20 instances were used for each data point.
For our experimental tests, both uncertainty sets that we introduced were considered.
Instead of stating the absolute values of loc and glob, we will report the parameter λ ∈[0, 1]
which is used to compute both. For a given instance, loc can be computed by using
loc = λD max
i∈[n]

max
j∈[N] c j,i −min
j∈[N] c j,i

,
i.e., λ > 1 implies that for a given tree with a depth of at most D, every data point in our
training data can be perturbed such that it could end up in every leaf (see Theorem 4.1). In
contrast, λ = 0 allows for no perturbation at all and is therefore equal to a setting with no
uncertainty. The speciﬁc value used for glob will we be written in dependency of loc.
The numerical experiments were set up using Python 3.12.3 graphs were constructed and
managed by using the networkx library (Hagberg et al., 2008). Furthermore, we used Gurobi
(Gurobi, 2024) version 12.0.3 and its Python interface to solve the MIP formulations. For
each combination of instance and method described in Sections 5.2.2 and 5.2.3, a time limit
of one hour was set. For the experiments presented in Appendix A Gurobi’s internal time limit
was set to 30 minutes whilst still maintaining an overall time limit of one hour per method.
Additionaly for method Hsol we make use of an internal iteration limit of 50 as proposed
in Section 3.3. All experiments were conducted on a machine with 96 cores running on 3.6
GHz and 256 GB memory. Gurobi’s core usage was limited to one and up to 80 instances
were solved in parallel. For ϵ, which was used during the pre- and post-processing of the
adversary problem, a value of 0.001 was chosen to avoid numerical issues. The code and the
generated data are available on GitHub1.
5.2 Results
5.2.1 First experiment – correlation
Two types of uncertainty sets are introduced in Section 2.1. We want to examine if the
performance of a decision tree in both settings is correlated. A strong correlation could imply
that it is only necessary to protect against one of these uncertainty sets to perform well in
both environments.
To this end, we sample random decision trees and evaluate their robustness using both
uncertainty sets. The possible outcomes for both uncertainty sets depend on the given budget.
However, this has a different meaning in the two sets, which makes a meaningful compar-
ison difﬁcult. We therefore use two different settings throughout this experiment. First, we
investigate the case where we set glob = Nloc which implies Uloc ⊆Uglob. Those results
are illustrated in Fig. 5a-d. Second, we examine the setting where glob = loc and hence
Uglob ⊆Uloc, shown in Fig. 5e-h.
For every plot we used 20 cost matrices, but the same 20 for every plot, each consisting of
N = 5 observations on a 4 × 4 grid graph and sampled 200 surrogates. Each plot therefore
contains 4,000 data points. The robust in-sample performance was determined for each sur-
rogate by solving Problem (2) with respect to the given tree structure and both uncertainty
sets. Each surrogate is represented by one point, where the horizontal coordinate indicates its
1 https://github.com/sbstnmrtn/robust_interpretable_surrogates
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Correlation between the performance of sampled surrogates evaluated under Uglob and Uloc.
performance w.r.t. Uglob, and its vertical coordinate indicates its performance on Uloc. The
Pearson correlation coefﬁcients are presented as r in the captions.
It can be seen that there is a strong (linear) correlation for all tested settings. For the case
where glob = Nloc an increase in correlation for increasing values of λ can be determined.
An explanation for this is that for a growing portion of the trees, an increase in λ does not
lead to an increase in objective value w.r.t. to Uglob. As stated in Theorem 4.1, setting λ to
a value greater that one for glob = Nloc allows the adversary to perturb the dataset such
that every observation can end up in every leaf given any tree as described in Section 2.1. For
one speciﬁc decision tree, eventually a value of λ of less than one can be sufﬁcient to already
allow to perturb the dataset in such a way. Since Uloc(loc) ⊆Uglob(Nloc), the values of λ
where this effect can be seen w.r.t. Uglob(Nloc) are therefore smaller or equal than those for
Uloc(loc). Thus, the increasing correlation can be explained by the effect that an increase in
λ raises the objective value using Uloc and therefore brings it closer to its upper limit given
by objective using Uglob.
In contrast, in the setting where glob = loc the correlation decreases with rising λ. Here
the increase in λ allows for disproportionately worse perturbations for Uglob than for Uloc.
This effect will invert after a speciﬁc value of λ, analogously to the case described before.
5.2.2 Second experiment – robust in-sample performance
In this experiment, the methods presented in Sections 2 and 3 are compared with respect to
their robust in-sample performance using both uncertainty sets. Furthermore, the inﬂuence of
different values of λ is investigated. For all results discussed in the context of this experiment,
instances with d = 4 and N = 5 were used. We have set glob = Nloc. Similar experiments
on scheduling instances are presented of Appendix A.
Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the robust in-sample objective value of the best surrogate which
could be found within the time limit using each method evaluated on the global and local
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Comparison of solution methods evaluated using robust objective values in-sample with Uglob.
Fig. 7 Comparison of solution methods evaluated using robust objective values in-sample with Uloc.
budgeted uncertainty set, respectively. On the horizontal axis the value of λ which was used
for training as well the evaluation is indicated. Solid lines are utilized to indicate methods
which were trained with respect to the uncertainty set used for evaluation. Dotted lines specify
methods optimized for the respective other uncertainty set. An increment of 0.01 was selected
for the interval λ ∈[0, 0.1]. For λ ∈[0.1, 0.2] an increment of 0.02 was chosen.
It can be seen that when using the global budgeted uncertainty set for evaluation, it
is beneﬁcial to use either Hglob
tree or Hglob
alt
for generating robust decision trees when λ ∈
[0.01, 0.1], while Hglob
sol
also performs well for λ ∈[0.01, 0.09]. For λ = 0, i.e. a setting
without uncertainty, it is advantageous to use the nominal approach for constructing a tree. In
the heuristics case it is due to the fact that they are not guaranteed to ﬁnd an optimal solution.
Furthermore, we can not beneﬁt from using our scenario generation approach, which would
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Number of instances solved to optimality by SG.
λ
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
≥0.10
Uloc
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
91
Uglob
20
20
20
15
6
1
1
1
0
0
1
terminate after the ﬁrst iteration. For values of λ > 0.1 (i.e. a setting with a high degree of
uncertainty), it is best to use H1, Hglob
alt
or Hglob
tree .
Figure 7 shows that the observations also show rising objective values for an increasing
value of λ in the setting using Uloc. In contrast to the previous results, the increase here is
less strong. This is congruent with the observations in the ﬁrst experiment and our theoretical
considerations in Section 2.1. As shown in Theorem 4.1 at least for a λ value of one, the use
of any of our methods will result in a solution that only is as good as H1 in the best case. In
fact, we would expect for a subset of our instances and some λ < 1 to not be able to ﬁnd
a better solution than H1 (as observed in Fig. 6 using Uglob). For this setting, however, our
experiments did not cover the point at which the usage of H1 would be advantageous.
Despite the strong correlation between the performance of a tree on both uncertainty sets,
it becomes obvious that it is better to hedge against the speciﬁc uncertainty set. Still, in nearly
every case, it is better to have optimized using the respective other uncertainty set compared
to not considering uncertainty at all with Tnom.
In terms of comparison between our methods, Htree unambiguously outperforms all other
methods with respect to both uncertainty sets. It can be observed that the heuristics Halt
and Htree indeed ﬁnd surrogates which are always better or equal to H1 (see Corollary 4.2).
While methods SG and Hsol perform well considering Uloc, they fall short on providing good
solutions for the lager uncertainty set Uglob.
The (potentially optimal) method SG not being able to beat the benchmark approach H1
for larger values of λ can be explained by the fact that in most cases it was not possible to ﬁnd
optimal solutions within the time limit of one hour. Table 4 shows the number of instances in
dependency of λ and the uncertainty set for which solutions with an optimality gap smaller or
equal to 0.001 could be found using this approach. It can be seen that the problems become
harder to solve with an increasing value of λ. Furthermore, problems using Uglob tend to be
signiﬁcantly harder to solve than problems using Uloc for the same λ.
In Figure 8 a more detailed view on the results using Uglob and λ = 0.05 is being presented.
The average robust in-sample objective value is depicted in dependency of the runtime in
seconds. The start of each line represents the point in time at which surrogates were returned
for all of the 20 instances. It can be seen that by using Halt and Htree good solutions can be
found fast, though Halt only barely being able to improve these over time. In contrast, SG and
Hsol both converge slowly but ﬁnally result in low objective values. These results suggest the
use of Htree especially in situations where surrogates of decent quality need to be found fast.
The observed trend of Uglob being more challenging than Uloc is consistent with the results
for scheduling problems presented in Appendix A. Methods Htree and Halt in particular show
good performance for these when exposed to Uloc. In contrast, all methods scale insufﬁciently
for uncertainty set Uglob.
Since Htree was observed to perform best, for further experiments we will focus on this
method in combination with both benchmark approaches.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 Average robust objective value in-sample with Uglob and λ = 0.05 over time.
5.2.3 Third Experiment – Instance Size
The experiments described in this section were conducted varying the number of scenar-
ios (N) used during applying our methods as well as the grid size of the underlying shortest
path instances (d). We consider λ := 0.05, glob := Nloc and make use of only Htree,
H1 and the nominal approach. The absolute budget which was used for the training was also
used for the evaluation on the test data.
The results are presented in Table 5 and 6. All results are scaled to the objective value of
the nominal approach with the respective uncertainty set using the formula
objscaled = obj −objnom
objnom
.
That is, positive scaled values indicate that the nominal solution performs better, while
negative scaled values mean that the comparison method performs better. In Table 5 the scaled
nominal objective is presented. In contrast, Table 6 illustrates the scaled robust objective
value.
In Table 6, we therefore distinguish between Hglob
1
and Hloc
1 , even though the absolute
objective value of the solution of H1 does not depend on the uncertainty set used.
Table 5 shows that the loss of Htree in nominal performance on the training data is generally
small and varies between zero and about two percent. Especially, when trained with respect
to Uloc it reveals only a slightly worse performance in this setting.
The results furthermore suggest that while our methods perform only slightly worse than
Tnom onthetrainingdatainanominalsetting,theytendtooutperform Tnom onunseentestdata,
even in a setting with no uncertainty. This effect occurs in particular if Uloc is considered
during the training, and seems to intensify with increasing instance size. Moreover, Htree
achieves signiﬁcantly better performance than H1 with respect to both measures.
Table 6 displays the robust performance. Here, Htree shows clearly better results than H1
and Tnom. In both cases, the relative difference in performance between Htree and Tnom is
bigger on the training than on the test data. It is striking that Hglob
tree tends to perform better
than Hloc
tree on the training data, but this effect is reversed when the test data is considered.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 5 Relative nominal
objective value (%).
Method
N
d
H1
Hglob
tree
Hloc
tree
Training
3
4
6.7056
0.7601
0.0000
5
4
7.1063
1.3409
0.0019
7
4
8.2096
1.7839
0.0683
10
4
9.0149
1.2810
0.2239
5
3
6.7006
1.1816
0.1231
5
4
7.1063
1.3409
0.0019
5
5
8.4293
0.7675
0.0027
5
6
8.9419
1.0754
0.0000
Test
3
4
1.4574
-3.5196
-2.9219
7
4
7.7731
-0.0254
-1.5873
5
4
4.1758
-1.5949
-2.1542
10
4
7.1866
-0.6344
-2.4047
5
3
5.6114
-0.2643
-0.2719
5
4
4.1758
-1.5949
-2.1542
5
5
5.1061
-1.7015
-2.5616
5
6
4.9936
-1.8398
-2.0780
This can be explained by the use of the same absolute values for glob in the training and
test environment, which reduces its relative impact in the latter case. For Hglob
tree as well as
Hloc
tree the relative robust in-sample objective value with an increasing number of training
scenarios seems to increase. Furthermore, the relative robust out-of-sample objective values
tends to slightly increase with an increasing number of training scenarios used whilst they
slightly decrease with an increased grid size for Hglob
tree . For Hloc
tree no further clear trend can be
identiﬁed.
5.2.4 Illustrative Example
To illustrate the comprehensibility and robustness of the proposed surrogates we present one
of them here. The results shown are based on one of the shortest path instances consisting of
ﬁve observations and a 3 × 3 grid graph. To improve readability, all depicted edge costs and
splitting thresholds were rounded to one decimal place.
The ﬁve observations used as training data are visualized in Fig. 9. The values displayed
alongtheedgesrepresenttheircosts.Eachedgeisalsocolor-codedusingindividualheatmaps,
where green indicates the lowest observed cost and red indicates the highest. As part of our
experiments in Section 5.2.3, the surrogates depicted in Fig. 10 were found. Queries of the
trees are visualized by highlighting the edge which cost are queried, explicitly stating the
numerical value of the threshold as well as representing it by the color of the node. Solutions
in the leaves are given by the sequence of highlighted edges. The nominal surrogate was
found by using method Tnom and was proven to be optimal for the nominal setting. Heuristic
Htree and an uncertainty set Uloc with λ := 0.05 resulting in loc = 2.33 were used to
generate the robust surrogate.
When evaluating the nominal surrogate in a setting without uncertainty an objective value
of 331.54 is realized. The robust surrogate performs slightly worse, achieving an objective
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 6 Relative robust objective
value (%).
Method
N
d
Hglob
1
Hglob
tree
Hloc
1
Hloc
tree
Training
3
4
-11.6931
-16.5768
-6.4579
-12.3362
5
4
-12.1996
-14.7334
-6.4776
-12.6550
7
4
-10.3727
-12.3778
-0.9281
-8.3764
10
4
-10.1519
-11.8721
-0.8404
-8.8017
5
3
-7.1212
-9.5898
-0.6234
-6.7494
5
4
-12.1996
-14.7334
-6.4776
-12.6550
5
5
-9.8890
-13.5613
-4.5905
-12.0053
5
6
-10.2244
-13.5537
-3.6031
-11.4937
Test
3
4
0.8075
-3.9619
-2.9829
-5.3602
5
4
2.8149
-2.6869
-3.4448
-7.4720
7
4
6.4011
-1.0517
1.2833
-5.3891
10
4
5.4065
-2.0250
0.4371
-7.3566
5
3
4.8031
-0.8108
0.7480
-2.6088
5
4
2.8149
-2.6869
-3.4448
-7.4720
5
5
3.7280
-2.7843
-2.6295
-7.0116
5
6
3.6832
-2.8038
-1.5053
-4.9970
Fig. 9 Observations used as training data.
value of 333.35. Whereas, when facing the uncertain environment, the nominal surrogate
performs worse than the robust one with an objective value of 340.39 compared to 333.35.
In particular, no observation can be perturbed in a way that causes the robust surrogate to
deviate from the proposed solutions; even under worst-case perturbations, each observation
is assigned as if the true data were observed. In contrast, when using the nominal surrogate,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 10 Interpretable surrogates for ﬁnding shortest paths.
there is a way to perturb observations two and ﬁve in such a way that they are mapped to
inferior solutions. E.g., in observation 2, if the observed cost of the edge queried in the second
level of the nominal tree is 25.5 instead of the true value 26.5, the assigned solution changes.
Instead of using a solution with total cost of 14.5 + 11.4 + 12.4 + 27.5 = 65.8, a solution
with cost 14.5 + 13.8 + 26.5 + 18.1 = 72.9 is proposed.
6 Conclusion
To ensure that results of mathematical optimization are used in practice by decision makers,
an important requirement is that the solution process needs to be transparent. For this purpose,
we studied the framework for ﬁnding interpretable surrogates as ﬁrst introduced in Goerigk
and Hartisch (2023), which uses a decision tree to map instance data (in this case, cost vectors)
to solutions.
Whilethisimprovesthecomprehensibilityoftheoptimizationprocess,real-worlddecision
making is further complicated by the presence of uncertainty. Indeed, it is rarely the case
that we have completely accurate information available at the point in time when a decision
is taken. For this reason, we propose to extend the scope of interpretable surrogates to also
include a robust optimization aspect, which protects against worst-case perturbations of the
data we observe. We introduced two uncertainty sets for this purpose, which differ regarding
how the size of perturbations on historic observations is bounded. Using an iterative solution
process, it is possible to ﬁnd optimal robust decision trees. We note that ﬁnding a worst-case
perturbation depends on the type of uncertainty set that is applied. However, this approach
is limited to small-scale problems due to its high computational effort. For this reason, we
introduced heuristics which are based on solving only one aspect of the optimization problem,
i.e., we only focus on ﬁnding best solutions in the leaves or on ﬁnding a decision tree for
given leaf solutions. In a theoretical analysis of the problem complexity, we show that the
problem simpliﬁes if the perturbation budget is sufﬁciently large. Furthermore, we show that
the problem of determining best leaf solutions for a given decision tree is already NP-hard.
We conducted several computational experiments to evaluate our approach. We ﬁrst note
that the worst-case objective values stemming from both types of uncertainty sets are cor-
related, which is an indication that easier-to-treat local budgeted uncertainty sets may be a
preferred choice in practice. We then compare the performance of our heuristics and the exact
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 11 Comparison of solution methods for ﬁnding robust surrogates for the scheduling problem P||Cmax
evaluated using robust in-sample objective values with Uglob.
approach with the performance of the nominal solution, that ignores uncertainty. Depend-
ing on the size of the uncertainty, we ﬁnd that robust objective values can be considerably
reduced using our methods. As robust objective values represent only one side of the coin,
we also evaluate the performance of our approach in more detail using in-sample and out-of-
sample objective values using nominal and perturbed scenarios. We ﬁnd that at small costs
with respect to nominal performance, it is possible to improve on all other metrics, and in
particular, obtain solutions that perform better out-of-sample.
Several interesting challenges for further research arise. While our methods perform well,
they do not provide approximation guarantees, and they are slower than the nominal approach.
Finding performance guarantees and further improvements regarding their speed could fur-
ther strengthen this approach. Moreover, our experiments indicate potential for combining
existing problem-speciﬁc heuristics with our methods to improve performance, particularly
when facing underlying NP-hard problems. For simplicity, we introduced one budget loc for
all observations j ∈[N]. A straight-forward extension is to allow different budgets loc
j
for
different observations, as well as upper bounds on perturbations ξ j,i. Indeed, extending the
idea of more ﬂexible uncertainty sets further, an interesting problem is how to design data-
driven uncertainty sets, which can be used to estimate possible perturbations from historical
data.
Appendix A. Experiments using Scheduling Instances
In this section, we expose our methods to the strictly NP-hard (Garey and Johnson, 1978)
scheduling problem P||Cmax. Analogous to the experiments presented in Section 5.2.2,
we evaluate the robust in-sample performance for varying values of λ. In the experiments
presented the duration times of the jobs are considered uncertain. Scenarios were generated
according to the method presented as algorithm for so-called small type II instances in Cohen
et al. (2023). Instances covering ten observations, ﬁve machines and 20 jobs each are used.
We also set glob = Nloc.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 12 Comparison of solution methods for ﬁnding robust surrogates for the scheduling problem P||Cmax
evaluated using robust in-sample objective values with Uloc.
Figures 11 and 12 display the quality of the surrogates found evaluated in a robust envi-
ronment in dependency of the size of the uncertainty set. It can be seen that when evaluated
considering uncertainty set Uloc especially the methods which have been optimized for this
set clearly outperform the nominal approach Tnom. Methods Hloc
tree and Hloc
alt are indeed able to
perform at least as good as the benchmark solution H1. In contrast, in the case of the larger
uncertainty set Uglob decision trees found by our methods lack protection against adversarial
perturbations. In particular, for most instances the surrogates found within the time limit do
not perform better than the benchmark H1. This is especially noteworthy for Hglob
tree and Hglob
alt ,
which are potentially capable of ﬁnding solutions at least as good as H1 (see Corollary 4.2).
Nevertheless, for values of λ ≥0.05, it can be observed that SGglob, Hglob
tree and Hglob
alt
still
provide more robustness than the use of nominal trees.
These results conﬁrm the earlier assumption that optimization with respect to Uglob is sig-
niﬁcantly more computationally expensive than optimization with respect to Uloc. It therefore
seems reasonable to consider developing further—potentially problem-speciﬁc—heuristics
that tackle the problem of optimizing the solutions in the leaves heuristically.
In summary, it can be stated that our methods are suitable to provide robust interpretable
surrogates when facing an uncertainty set of type Uloc, even when the underlying optimization
problem is NP-hard. For an uncertainty set of type Uglob, further methods and heuristic
approaches are necessary in order to efﬁciently obtain high-quality robust surrogates.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Declarations
Conﬂicts of Interest Marc Goerigk declares that he has no conﬂict of interest. Michael Hartisch declares that
he has no conﬂict of interest. Sebastian Merten declares that he has no conﬂict of interest.
Ethical Approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Aghaei, S., Gómez, A., & Vayanos, P. (2024). Strong optimal classiﬁcation trees. Operations Research, 73(4),
2223–2241.
Aigner, K.-M., Goerigk, M., Hartisch, M., Liers, F., & Miehlich, A. (2024). A framework for data-driven
explainability in mathematical optimization. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence,38(19), 20912–20920.
Aissi, H., Bazgan, C., & Vanderpooten, D. (2009). Min-max and min-max regret versions of combinatorial
optimization problems: A survey. European Journal of Operational Research, 197(2), 427–438.
Amram, M., Dunn, J., & Zhuo, Y. D. (2022). Optimal policy trees. Machine Learning, 111(7), 2741–2768.
Baehrens, D., Schroeter, T., Harmeling, S., Kawanabe, M., Hansen, K., & Müller, K.-R. (2010). How to explain
individual classiﬁcation decisions. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11, 1803–1831.
Bastani, H., Drakopoulos, K., Gupta, V., Vlachogiannis, J., Hadjichristodoulou, C., Lagiou, P., Magiorkinis,
G., Paraskevis, D., & Tsiodras, S. (2022). Interpretable operations research for high-stakes decisions:
Designing the Greek COVID-19 testing system. INFORMS Journal on Applied Analytics, 52(5), 398–
411.
Bertsimas, D., & Digalakis, V. (2023). Improving stability in decision tree models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.17299.
Bertsimas, D., Dunn, J., & Mundru, N. (2019). Optimal prescriptive trees. INFORMS Journal on Optimization,
1(2), 164–183.
Bertsimas, D., Gupta, V., & Kallus, N. (2018). Data-driven robust optimization. Mathematical Programming,
167, 235–292.
Bertsimas, D., Orfanoudaki, A., & Wiberg, H. (2021). Interpretable clustering: An optimization approach.
Machine Learning, 110, 89–138.
Bertsimas,D.,&Sim,M.(2003).Robustdiscreteoptimizationandnetworkﬂows.MathematicalProgramming,
98(1), 49–71.
Bertsimas, D., & Sim, M. (2004). The price of robustness. Operations Research, 52(1), 35–53.
Blanquero,R.,Carrizosa,E.,&Gómez-Vargas,N.(2023).Explainablepredict-and-optimize.Preprintavailable
online.
Blockeel, H., Devos, L., Frénay, B., Nanfack, G., & Nijssen, S. (2023). Decision trees: From efﬁcient prediction
to responsible AI. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 6, 1124553.
Carrizosa, E., Kurishchenko, K., Marín, A., & Morales, D. R. (2023). On clustering and interpreting with rules
by means of mathematical optimization. Computers & Operations Research, 154, Article 106180.
Chassein, A., Dokka, T., & Goerigk, M. (2019). Algorithms and uncertainty sets for data-driven robust shortest
path problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 274(2), 671–686.
Chen, H., Zhang, H., Boning, D., & Hsieh, C.-J. (2019). Robust decision trees against adversarial examples.
In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1122–1131. PMLR.
Ciocan, D. F., & Miši´c, V. V. (2022). Interpretable optimal stopping. Management Science, 68(3), 1616–1638.
Cohen, I., Postek, K., & Shtern, S. (2023). An adaptive robust optimization model for parallel machine
scheduling. European Journal of Operational Research, 306(1), 83–104.
Corrente, S., Greco, S., Matarazzo, B., & Słowi´nski, R. (2024). Explainable interactive evolutionary multiob-
jective optimization. Omega, 122, Article 102925.
Costa, V. G., & Pedreira, C. E. (2023). Recent advances in decision trees: An updated survey. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Review, 56(5), 4765–4800.
ˇCyras, K., Letsios, D., Misener, R., & Toni, F. (2019). Argumentation for explainable scheduling. In Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 33, 2752–2759.
Elmachtoub, A. N., & Grigas, P. (2022). Smart “predict, then optimize.” Management Science,68(1), 9–26.
Forel, A., Parmentier, A., & Vidal, T. (2023). Explainable data-driven optimization: from context to decision
and back again. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 10170–10187. PMLR.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Garey, M. R., & Johnson, D. S. (1978). “Strong”np-completeness results: Motivation, examples, and implica-
tions. Journal of the ACM (JACM),25(3), 499–508.
Garey, M. R., & Johnson, D. S. (1979). Computers and intractability, vol. 174. Freeman San Francisco.
Gleicher, M. (2016). A framework for considering comprehensibility in modeling. Big Data, 4(2), 75–88.
Goerigk, M., & Hartisch, M. (2023). A framework for inherently interpretable optimization models. European
Journal of Operational Research, 310(3), 1312–1324.
Goerigk, M., & Hartisch, M. (2024). An Introduction to Robust Combinatorial Optimization. Cham: Springer.
Goerigk, M., Hartisch, M., Merten, S., & Sharma, K. (2024). Feature-based interpretable surrogates for opti-
mization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01869.
Gorissen, B. L., Yanıko˘glu, ˙I, & den Hertog, D. (2015). A practical guide to robust optimization. Omega, 53,
124–137.
Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, (2024).
Hagberg, A. A., Schult, D. A., & Swart, P. J. (2008). Exploring network structure, dynamics, and function
using networkx. In Proceedings of the 7th python in science conference (SciPy2008), pp. 11–15.
Huysmans, J., Dejaeger, K., Mues, C., Vanthienen, J., & Baesens, B. (2011). An empirical evaluation of the
comprehensibility of decision table, tree and rule based predictive models. Decision Support Systems,
51(1), 141–154.
Hyaﬁl, L., & Rivest, R. L. (1976). Constructing optimal binary decision trees is NP-complete. Information
Processing Letters, 5(1), 15–17.
Justin, N., Aghaei, S., Gomez, A., & Vayanos, P. (2022). Optimal robust classiﬁcation trees. In The AAAI-22
workshop on adversarial machine learning and beyond.
Kellerer, H., Pferschy, U., & Pisinger, D. (2004). The multiple-choice knapsack problem. Knapsack problems
(pp. 317–347). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Korikov, A., & Beck, J. C. (2023). Objective-based counterfactual explanations for linear discrete optimiza-
tion. In International conference on integration of constraint programming, artiﬁcial intelligence, and
operations research, pp. 18–34. Springer.
Kurtz, J., Birbil, ¸S. ˙I., & den Hertog, D. (2025). Counterfactual explanations for linear optimization. European
Journal of Operational Research.
Miller, T. (2019). Explanation in artiﬁcial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
267, 1–38.
Nijssen, S., & Fromont, E. (2007). Mining optimal decision trees from itemset lattices. In Proceedings of the
13th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 530–539.
Portoleau,T.,Artigues,C.,&Guillaume,R.(2024).Robustdecisiontreesforthemulti-modeprojectscheduling
problem with a resource investment objective and uncertain activity duration. European Journal of
Operational Research, 312(2), 525–540.
Rudin, C. (2019). Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use
interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(5), 206–215.
Sinha, P., & Zoltners, A. A. (1979). The multiple-choice knapsack problem. Operations Research, 27(3),
503–515.
Tierney, K., Balzereit, K., Bunte, A., & Niehörster, O. (2022). Explaining solutions to multi-stage stochastic
optimization problems to decision makers. In 2022 IEEE 27th international conference on emerging
technologies and factory automation (ETFA), pp. 1–4. IEEE.
van der Linden, J., de Weerdt, M., & Demirovi´c, E. (2023). Necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for optimal
decision trees using dynamic programming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36,
9173–9212.
Vos, D., & Verwer, S. (2021). Efﬁcient training of robust decision trees against adversarial examples. In
International conference on machine learning, pp. 10586–10595. PMLR.
Vos, D., & Verwer, S. (2022). Robust optimal classiﬁcation trees against adversarial examples. Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,36(8), 8520–8528.
Zeng, B., & Zhao, L. (2013). Solving two-stage robust optimization problems using a column-and-constraint
generation method. Operations Research Letters, 41(5), 457–461.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123