TITLE: Sample average approximation for the stochastic resource-constrained project scheduling problem with flexible resource profiles
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07092-2
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07092-2
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Sample average approximation for the stochastic
resource-constrained project scheduling problem with
ﬂexible resource proﬁles
Ann-Kathrin Mendl1
· Julia Rieck1
Received: 14 November 2024 / Accepted: 2 February 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Despite the availability of various decision support tools for project managers, only few
methods explicitly account for uncertainty in activity durations and ﬂexibility in resource allo-
cation. To address this issue, we consider a stochastic resource-constrained project scheduling
problem with ﬂexible resource proﬁles. The problem is formulated as a mixed-integer linear
program with chance-constraints, aiming to minimize the project duration while ensuring
a predeﬁned conﬁdence level. Uncertainty is modeled through workload distributions and
approximated using a sample average approximation based on discrete scenario sets. While
exact solutions can be obtained for small instances with standard solvers, larger instances
require heuristic approaches. For this purpose, we develop a serial schedule generation
scheme to create feasible solutions and apply a scatter search to improve them. Both methods
check the scenarios for feasibility with respect to the conﬁdence level. Once a feasible sched-
ule is identiﬁed, improvements are pursued by rescheduling activities along the critical paths.
The proposed methods are evaluated in a comprehensive performance analysis, focusing on
solution quality, robustness across scenarios, and scalability with respect to instance size and
resource conﬁgurations.
Keywords Stochastic resource-constrained project scheduling · Flexible resource
allocation · Chance-constrained formulation · Sample average approximation · Scatter
search
1 Introduction
In many companies, project work plays a central role, particularly in research and devel-
opment (R&D), IT, and ﬁnance, where structured planning is essential for innovation and
technological advances. As part of project planning, the individual activities of a project are
scheduled over the time axis so that an objective function is optimized. When scheduling
B Ann-Kathrin Mendl
mendl@bwl.uni-hildesheim.de
Julia Rieck
rieck@bwl.uni-hildesheim.de
1
Institute for Business Administration and Information Systems, Operations Research Group,
University of Hildesheim, Universitätsplatz 1, 31141 Hildesheim, Germany
123

Annals of Operations Research
the activities, the available renewable resources (e.g., employees or workers) must be used
efﬁciently. For our purposes, we consider projects represented as activity-on-node networks
N = (V , E). Node set V = {0, . . . , n + 1} consists of real activities i = 1, . . . , n and
two ﬁctitious activities, 0 and n + 1, denoting the unique start and end of the project. The
precedence constraints between two activities i and j ∈V , which indicate that i must be
completed before j can be started, are stored in set E. If the objective is to minimize the
project duration, then it is a so-called deterministic resource-constrained project scheduling
problem (RCPSP). This problem assumes a ﬁxed duration di ≥0 of the activities i ∈V and
a constant resource requirement rik ≥0 of resources k ∈K during the execution of activi-
ties. K deﬁnes the set of all renewable resources and Rk is the available resource capacity of
resource k. In the RCPSP, uncertainties regarding future durations and resource requirements
are therefore ignored. As a consequence, the resulting schedule S (solution of the problem,
i.e., the vector of start times Si of all activities i ∈V ) may be too restrictive and unsuitable
for the underlying practical application (Hartmann and Briskorn, 2010).
One of the most signiﬁcant challenges in project scheduling arises from the difﬁculty of
predicting activity durations. The stochastic RCPSP (SRCPSP), introduced by Möhring et
al. (1984), addresses these uncertainties by modeling activity durations as random variables.
Similar to the RCPSP, the SRCPSP assumes that the resource requirement of each activity
remains constant throughout its duration. In practice, however, this assumption is often not
true. Hence, it is supposed that only the total resource requirement (workload) wik ≥0
of activity i and resource k is known in advance, whereas activity durations and resource
allocations must be determined accordingly (Tritschler et al., 2017). Given that resources can
ﬂexibly be scheduled over time to meet the total resource requirements, rather than being
scheduled constantly, different durations for each activity can result. For instance, with a
workload wik = 3, activity i may last three periods with a constant allocation of one unit, or
only two if two resource units are assigned initially. To reﬂect this purpose, a discretization
of the planning horizon T into individual periods t ∈T is typically carried out. A model that
integrates resource allocation decisions is originally proposed by Kolisch et al. (2003) and
deﬁned as ﬂexible RCPSP (FRCPSP) by Naber and Kolisch (2014).
Using the FRCPSP, the uncertainty of reality can be taken into account by modeling the
workloads as random variables. Since activity durations depend on the resources allocated
over time, stochastic workloads imply stochastic durations. Especially when human resources
are involved, whose deployment is subject to uncertainty, workloads should be considered
stochastic. This is particularly relevant in long-term projects, e.g., in pharmaceutical research,
where the workload required for mixing or testing substances cannot be precisely predicted.
Even in short-term IT projects, estimating the workload for programming functions or testing
components is equally challenging in advance. Although the RCPSP has been extensively
studied, only a limited number of approaches address uncertainties that occur in practical
project settings. To make a signiﬁcant advance here, we would like to address a practice-
relevant problem that incorporates both stochastic activity durations and ﬂexible resource
proﬁles.
In this paper, we focus on generating a proactive baseline schedule that anticipates uncer-
tainty by meeting precedence and resource constraints with high probability. We deliberately
refrain from developing or analyzing reactive scheduling policies that dynamically adjust a
schedule to disruptions during project execution. Instead, we introduce a schedule-based fea-
sibility check that evaluates the robustness of the baseline schedule across multiple workload
scenarios.
Our contribution covers ﬁve aspects: (1) The essential characteristics of the stochas-
tic RCPSP with ﬂexible resource proﬁles (abbreviation: FSRCPSP) are identiﬁed. (2) On
123

Annals of Operations Research
this basis, a mathematical model is formulated using the notation of Pritsker et al. (1969)
and chance-constrained (CC) conditions. These conditions ensure that the precedence and
resource constraints are satisﬁed with regard to a certain conﬁdence level (CL). (3) In order
to solve the chance-constrained FSRCPSP, we use a sample average approximation (SAA)
approach, where the expected project duration is approximated by the average over various
samples. (4) Since the resulting CC-FSRCPSP, as a generalization of the RCPSP, falls into
the category of NP-hard problems (Blazewicz et al., 1983), only small instances can be
solved optimally using a standard solver (e.g., CPLEX). Therefore, an extensive heuristic
solution method based on a serial schedule generation scheme (SGS) and a scatter search is
developed. (5) Computational results show the success of the approaches in order to solve
large and real-world instances.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 distinguishes between
the deterministic RCPSP, the SRCPSP, and the FRCPSP. Additionally, we provide a review
of the relevant research related to these problems. The insights that are gained are used
to contextualize our approach within the existing literature. Section 3 presents our chance-
constrained model that integrates both stochastic and ﬂexible characteristics. In order to
solve instances of the FSRCPSP with 60 or more activities, we present a serial schedule
generation scheme to generate initial solutions. We further improve the initial solutions by
applying a scatter search, which was originally introduced by Glover (1977). Both procedures
are explained in Section 4. In our performance analysis, we solved 4,440 instances which
have been generated based on the PSPLIB library by Kolisch and Sprecher (1997). The
computational results are presented and analyzed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 provides a
summary and an outlook for future studies.
2 Related work
The RCPSP has been studied extensively in both academia and practice, leading to a wide
range of mathematical models and solution methods. Exact methods such as branch-and-
bound (B&B) algorithms are commonly applied for small instances (see, e.g., Brucker et al.,
1999). For large and complex instances, heuristic approaches are typically used; surveys are
provided by, e.g., Kolisch and Padman (2001), Demeulemeester and Herroelen (2002), and
Neumann et al. (2003). In addition, Kolisch and Hartmann (2000, 2006) present metaheuris-
tics and evaluate their effectiveness for the RCPSP.
As explained in Section 1, the deterministic RCPSP assumes ﬁxed activity durations and
constant resource requirements during activity execution. In practice, these parameters are
often uncertain, especially in novel projects with limited prior experience. In order to integrate
these uncertainties into the RCPSP, various variants can be found in the literature. These
include the RCPSP with stochastic aspects and the RCPSP with ﬂexible resource proﬁles,
which are considered in a combined form as FSRCPSP. With the aim of analyzing and solving
the FSRCPSP, Section 2.1 discusses solution methods for the RCPSP with stochastic activity
durations. Then, different methods for addressing the RCPSP with ﬂexible resource proﬁles
are described (see Section 2.2).
2.1 Stochastic project scheduling
In contrast to the deterministic RCPSP, the SRCPSP models activity durations as random
variables and aims to minimize the expected project (Möhring et al., 1984). Igelmund and
123

Annals of Operations Research
Radermacher (1983a,b) as well as Stork (2001) report computational applications and exper-
iments using B&B algorithms to solve the SRCPSP. Tsai and Gemmill (1998) introduce
greedy and local search heuristic methods. Furthermore, Ballestín (2007) discusses when it
is reasonable to consider stochastic activity durations instead of deterministic ones. Ballestín
and Leus (2009) present high-quality solutions for the SRCPSP using a greedy randomized
adaptive search procedure with scenario generation, where descriptive sampling is utilized.
Based on the previous work of Stork (2001), Creemers (2015) proposes an approach that
determines a globally optimal policy. For a detailed overview of existing methods that can
be used to solve the SRCPSP, the literature reviews by Bruni et al. (2015) and Pellerin et al.
(2020) provide further insights.
A solution of the SRCPSP determines the start times of the activities in a stochastic
environment so that the expected project duration is minimized. In practice, however, it may
be beneﬁcial not only to determine a ﬁxed schedule but also to deﬁne rules for reacting to
deviations (Herroelen and Leus, 2004). This has led to a two-stage concept that distinguishes
between proactive and reactive scheduling. A so-called baseline schedule SB is generated
in the ﬁrst stage to provide robustness against uncertainty, while a reactive policy can be
applied in the second stage to adjust the schedule during execution. The generated baseline
schedule performs essential functions such as resource allocation across various activities or
scheduling the activities in coordination with all stakeholders (Lamas and Demeulemeester,
2016). Our approach focuses exclusively on proactive scheduling. While no reactive policy
is implemented, we evaluate SB by checking whether it remains feasible under different
scenario realizations.
Although the concepts of proactive and reactive scheduling are not new, their combined
use to achieve advantages has only been explored in recent years. For example, Artigues et
al. (2013) introduce a robust model that combines the objective of minimizing the makespan
with a robustness criterion. In contrast, Chakrabortty et al. (2017) focus on the RCPSP under
different uncertainty conditions and propose six heuristic methods within a robust optimiza-
tion framework. Bruni et al. (2017) present an adjustable robust optimization model designed
to minimize the worst-case project duration. The authors assume that activity durations are
subject to interval-based uncertainty. Moreover, they develop a Benders decomposition algo-
rithm that solves both a master problem and a subproblem in each iteration. Taking stochastic
activity durations into account, Davari and Demeulemeester (2019a) introduce a proactive
and reactive model for stochastic activity durations and compare four dynamic program-
ming methods in order to estimate the expected cost of the baseline schedule. Extending
this work, Davari and Demeulemeester (2019b) study two types of buffer-based responses
aimed at shortening project duration. For a comprehensive overview of proactive and reactive
scheduling, including solution methods and applications for the RCPSP and its variants, we
refer to the studies of Herroelen and Leus (2005), Brˇci´c et al. (2012), as well as Khoshsirat
and Mousavi (2024).
In order to establish an efﬁcient approach for proactive scheduling, the chance-constrained
approach for the uncertainty has also gained attention. Bruni et al. (2011) present a model
that integrates chance-constrained programming into the SRCPSP. The authors propose a
stochastic dynamic generation scheme in which a subproblem containing joint probabilistic
constraints is solved in each iteration. Later, Lamas and Demeulemeester (2016) develop
a new procedure for generating a proactive baseline schedule that is entirely independent
of the applied reactive policy. The approach uses a branch-and-cut algorithm to efﬁciently
determine a robust baseline schedule using a robustness measure. Furthermore, Davari and
Demeulemeester (2018) present a B&B algorithm capable of solving instances with a sample
average approximation method. A hybrid approach is given by Sallam et al. (2021) in which
123

Annals of Operations Research
the CC-problem is tackled by using two metaheuristic approaches. Depending on the current
position in the search space, the method switches between the discrete cuckoo search and
the multi-operator differential evolution. In order to solve a stochastic project scheduling
problem with hierarchical alternatives, Tao et al. (2018) develop a metaheuristic framework
by combining the discrete artiﬁcial algae algorithm with SAA.
OverallitcanbesaidthattheSRCPSPhasalreadybeenformulatedasachance-constrained
model where the CC-conditions ensure that the probability of satisfying all precedence con-
straints is greater than or equal to a predeﬁned conﬁdence level. Since a numerical solution of
the CC-model is difﬁcult to obtain, approximation methods such as sample average approx-
imation are preferred. In this method, the actual distribution of activity durations is replaced
by an empirical distribution corresponding to a set of random samples.
2.2 Project scheduling with flexible resource profiles
The approaches for the FRCPSP can be categorized according to the types of resources
they address. A mixed-integer programming (MIP) model for a project scheduling problem
that integrates variable resource allocations can be traced back to Kolisch et al. (2003).
The authors introduce an initial approach for the FRCPSP with discrete resources, which is
evaluated in the context of real-world applications in pharmaceutical research projects. They
propose a priority rule-based method using serial or parallel schedule generation schemes
to schedule an activity as early as possible with the maximum feasible amount of resources.
Based on the approach of Kolisch and Meyer (2006), which emerged from the work of
Kolisch et al. (2003), Ranjbar and Kianfar (2010) formulate the RCPSP with ﬂexible work
proﬁles and apply a genetic algorithm (GA) to solve it. Baumann and Trautmann (2013)
also use the FRCPSP model of Kolisch et al. (2003) as a basis and present a MIP model for
the FRCPSP with discrete resources. Motivated by the work on the FRCPSP with discrete
resources, Naber and Kolisch (2014) specify four time-discrete MIP models for the FRCPSP
with continuous resources and introduce three different resource categories. Subsequently,
Tritschler et al. (2014) develop a GA, inspired by the GA of Hartmann (1998), to solve the
FRCPSP. Schramme (2014) studies a GA as well that considers both ﬂexible and constant
resource requirements. Tritschler et al. (2017) integrate the GA from Tritschler et al. (2014)
into a hybrid metaheuristic. The resulting method combines concepts from the parallel SGS,
delayed scheduling, and a non-greedy resource allocation approach based on Fündeling and
Trautmann (2010). In addition to an activity list, the authors use a resource limit list and a start
delay list as input parameters. The GA is initially applied to generate feasible schedules and
a variable neighborhood search, in which resources are transferred between two activities, is
then used to further improve these schedules. This approach determines the activity duration
as a result of the resource allocation. Moreover, Naber (2017) present a FRCPSP in continuous
time and solve it by using a branch-and-cut approach. Besides, a comprehensive overview
of various publications on the FRCPSP is given, categorized by discrete and continuous
resources as well as exact and heuristic solution methods. Based on the multi-mode RCPSP
by Talbot (1982), Kellenbrink and Helber (2015) extend the RCPSP by introducing a general
model-endogenous decision framework for ﬂexible project structures. They present a GA
to tackle the resulting problem of deciding whether or not to implement and schedule a
particular activity.
Due to the wide range of practical applications, the FRCPSP is frequently mentioned in
the literature. The problem is typically viewed as deterministic and evolutionary as well as
population-based algorithms, in particular genetic algorithms, are increasingly used for the
123

Annals of Operations Research
solution. To the best of our knowledge, no approach explicitly combines stochastic activity
durations with ﬂexible resource proﬁles in a single model. This leads to a research gap that is
addressed in this paper. The combined FSRCPSP (cf. Section 3) is formulated as a CC-model,
where the CC-conditions are approximated using SAA (inspired by the SRCPSP literature).
This way, a baseline schedule can be generated for small instances with a standard solver. For
large instances, a scatter search procedure is implemented (cf. Section 4) to obtain feasible
solutions (inspired by the FRCPSP literature, where evolution-based algorithms are utilized).
3 Model formulation and sample average approximation
The problem under consideration is a stochastic RCPSP with ﬂexible resource proﬁles. We
assume that the underlying project consists of n ≥1 real activities and two ﬁctitious activities;
0 and n + 1. The precedence constraints between activities i and j are represented as arcs
⟨i, j⟩∈E in the network N. The objective is to minimize the project duration Sn+1. Each
activity i ∈V is associated with a stochastic workload wik for each resource k ∈K. To
model this stochastic workload, we ﬁrst deﬁne a deterministic workload wd
ik for activity i
and resource k. This represents both the expected workload for each resource and the ratio
between the different resource requirements per activity. Next, a stochastic scaling factor
fi > 0 for activity i is drawn from a predeﬁned probability distribution P. The stochastic
workload wik is then calculated as the product of the deterministic workload wd
ik and the
scaling factor fi, preserving the resource demand ratios across resources. All activities are
assumed to be non-preemptive, meaning each resource k ∈K must be allocated for the entire
duration di of the activity i ∈V and cannot be interrupted.
In order to model the FSRCPSP, we use two groups of binary decision variables. As in
Pritsker et al. (1969), we specify xit ∈{0, 1}, i ∈V , t ∈T , which indicate whether activity
i is started at time t (xit = 1) or not (xit = 0). Furthermore, yit ∈{0, 1}, i ∈V , t ∈T , takes
the value 1 if activity i is not yet completed at time t, and 0 otherwise. Following the FRCPSP
model formulations of Naber and Kolisch (2014) and Tritschler et al. (2017), we assume that
resource quantities are continuously divisible and additive. Accordingly, we deﬁne rikt ≥0,
i ∈V , k ∈K, t ∈T , as real-valued decision variables for the resource requirement of
activity i on resource k at time t, and di ≥0, i ∈V , as real-valued decision variables for the
duration of activity i. The ﬂexible resource allocation must be within the predeﬁned lower
and upper resource limits. For each required resource k of activity i, if wik > 0 holds, the
limits satisfy 0 < rik ≤rik, where rik ≤maxt∈T {Rkt}. For all other resources for which
wik = 0 applies, we set rik = rik = 0. Rkt denotes the resource capacity of resource
k at time t. To incorporate uncertainty into the model, we introduce random variables for
the stochastic workloads and approximate them through a discrete scenario set, where each
scenario corresponds to one speciﬁc realization of the workload distributions. The resulting
stochastic model is then transformed into an equivalent deterministic model, where we use
chance-constraints asinBrunietal.(2011)aswellasLamasandDemeulemeester(2016).The
construction of the chance-constraints depends on the effects that different workloads have
on the decision variables. In our problem, the workloads particular affect the durations di of
activities and the resource requirements rikt. Thus, the conditions for maintaining precedence
constraints and for maintaining resource capacities should be formulated as CC-conditions
(see also, e.g., Sallam et al., 2021).
With our model formulation, we want to determine a proactive, robust baseline schedule
SB with minimum project duration. The baseline schedule SB should be designed to be as
123

Annals of Operations Research
protected as possible against any uncertainties that may arise. If a sufﬁciently robust baseline
schedule is generated, the need for additional reactive measures during project execution
may be reduced. As in Lamas and Demeulemeester (2016), we evaluate the robustness of
the baseline schedule SB by means of a conﬁdence level. The CL measures the probability
that each activity i starts exactly at the same time as in the baseline schedule, i.e., CL =
Pr (SR
i −SB
i = 0, i ∈V ). Here, SR
i denotes the start time of activity i, which results from
the realization of the stochastic workloads. It represents the actual start time that materializes
according to the workload distributions, not a rescheduled or reactive adjustment. Therefore,
ﬂuctuations in the workload data that cannot be controlled may be allowed with acceptable
safety margins. Consequently, the CL remains unaffected by any reactive policy that might
be used during the execution of the project (Lamas and Demeulemeester, 2016).
Let (1−α) denote the conﬁdence level speciﬁed by the project managers. The term Pr(∗)
refers to the underlying probability measure used to evaluate the chance-constraints. The CC
require that the probability of violating precedence or resource constraints does not exceed
the given conﬁdence level (1 −α). By taking a maximum project duration |T | into account,
set W i = {ESi, ESi + 1, . . . , LSi} deﬁnes possible start times of activity i, where ESi is the
earliest and LSi the latest start time of activity i. We compute the earliest and latest start
times using a deterministic longest-path approximation. Speciﬁcally, we assume that each
activity i is executed with its maximum possible workload maxk∈K {wik} and that the upper
resource limit rik is allocated at each time t. The duration is obtained as the ceiling of the ratio
between maxk∈K {wik} and rik, i.e., rounded up to the nearest integer. This yields the shortest
feasible duration under the worst-case assumption and allows us to compute ESi and LSi by
means of a forward and backward pass over the activity-on-node network. Although this is
a conservative approximation, it guarantees that the resulting time window W i includes all
possible start times of i. Then, the CC-FSRCPSP can be formulated as follows:
min.

t∈T
t · xn+1,t
(1)
s.t.

t∈W i
xit = 1
i ∈V
(2)
Pr
⎛
⎝
t∈W j
t · x jt −
t∈W i
t · xit ≥di, ⟨i, j⟩∈E
⎞
⎠
Pr
 
i∈V
rikt ≤Rkt, k ∈K, t ∈T
 
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
≥(1 −α)
(3)

t∈W i
rikt = wik
i ∈V , k ∈K
(4)
yit ≤
|T |−1

τ=t

k∈K
rikτ ≤

k∈K
wik

· yit
i ∈V , t ∈T
(5)

t∈T

yit +
t
τ=0
xiτ −1
 
= di
i ∈V \ {0, n + 1}
(6)
123

Annals of Operations Research
rik

yit +
t
τ=0
xiτ −1
 
≤rikt ≤rik

yit +
t
τ=0
xiτ −1
 
i ∈V , k ∈K, t ∈T
(7)
di,rikt ≥0
i ∈V , k ∈K, t ∈T
(8)
xit, yit ∈{0, 1}
i ∈V , t ∈T
(9)
The objective (1) is to minimize the project duration. Constraints (2) ensure that each
activity i is started exactly once. Conditions (3) are formulated as chance-constraints. They
state that a solution is only feasible if the probability that all precedence constraints and
resource capacities Rkt are met for each resource k at each point in time t is greater than or
equal to the predeﬁned conﬁdence level (1 −α). Equations (4) specify that the total amount
of allocated resources rikt must exactly cover the required workload wik of activity i for
resource k. Taking into account binary decision variables yit ∈{0, 1}, Constraints (5) ensure
that resources can only be allocated to an activity i if it has not yet been completed at time
t. Once the activity is ﬁnished (yit = 0), no further resources can be assigned to it. By
connecting the decision variables xit and yit in Conditions (6), it can be determined whether
an activity i is in progress at time t or not. The number of periods in which resources are
assigned to activity i corresponds to its duration di. Constraints (7) ensure that the allocated
resources rikt are always within the lower rik and upper limits rik of activity i for resource
k. Finally, Conditions (8) and (9) state the domains of the decision variables.
Since the resulting MIP model (1)–(9) for determining a baseline schedule SB cannot
be solved in a direct way, we reformulate the CC-FSRCPSP by using a sample average
approximation approach. In this context, scenarios π ∈S represent distinct realizations of
the scaling factors fi, drawn for each activity i from the predeﬁned probability distribution
P. The scaling factors are applied to the deterministic workloads to compute the stochastic
workloadswπ
ik.Pleasenotethattheearliestandlateststarttimesarenowcomputedbydividing
the maximum workload maxk∈K,π∈S{wπ
ik} over all scenarios π ∈S by the upper resource
limit rik and rounding up the result. This ensures that the corresponding time window W i
remains valid for all scenarios in set S. Moreover, the real-valued decision variables for the
resource requirements and the activity durations also depend on scenario π (i.e., rπ
ikt ≥0
and dπ
i ≥0). In addition, the binary decision variable yit, which indicates whether activity
i has not yet been completed at time t, also becomes scenario-dependent and is denoted as
yπ
it ∈{0, 1}. In contrast, xit remains scenario-independent, as it deﬁnes the common baseline
schedule that must be feasible under all scenarios. In our reformulation, we explicitly have to
distinguish between the conﬁdence level (1 −α) in the CC-FSRCPSP and the sample-based
conﬁdence level (1 −ϵ) using SAA. While (1 −α) refers to the required probability that a
solution is feasible under the stochastic model, (1 −ϵ) deﬁnes the number of scenarios for
which feasibility must be guaranteed. This distinction is essential because the SAA replaces
distributional guarantees by empirical feasibility in the scenario set S. To ensure that the
resulting solution still satisﬁes the original probabilistic constraints with high conﬁdence, it
is common practice to choose ϵ ≤α (Lamas and Demeulemeester, 2016). Accordingly, we
replace Constraints (3) by the following restrictions:

t∈W j
t · x jt −

t∈W i
t · xit ≥dπ
i −

|T | + max
k∈K
wπ
ik
rik
 
· ρπ
⟨i, j⟩∈E, π ∈S (10)
123

Annals of Operations Research

i∈V
rπ
ikt −

i∈V
rik −Rkt

· ρπ ≤Rkt
k ∈K, t ∈T , π ∈S
(11)

π∈S
ρπ ≤⌊|S| · ϵ⌋
(12)
dπ
i ,rπ
ikt ≥0
i∈V , k ∈K, t∈T , π ∈S
(13)
ρπ, xit, yπ
it ∈{0, 1}
i ∈V , t ∈T , π ∈S
(14)
Constraints (10) and (11) check if a solution is feasible under the scenario π ∈S with
regard to the precedence constraints and resource capacities. Please note that the big-M’s
used in these conditions are already suitably small due to the maximum functions. The
binary decision variables ρπ ∈{0, 1} take the value 1 if any violation occurs in scenario
π ∈S, meaning that either the precedence constraints and/or the resource constraints are
not satisﬁed. Inequalities (12) limits the total number of violated scenarios to ⌊|S| · ϵ⌋,
ensuring the predeﬁned conﬁdence level (1 −ϵ). The resulting SAA-FSRCPSP enables the
minimization of the makespan over all scenarios while taking a conﬁdence level into account
and the fulﬁllment of Constraints (2), (4)–(7), and (10)–(14), supplemented with π. Using
the model and a standard solver (e.g., CPLEX), only small instances with a low number of
activities and scenarios can be solved in acceptable time. In order to solve large instances
as well, we have implemented a serial SGS (SSGS) in C++ and integrated it into a scatter
search (see Section 4).
4 Solution methods for the SAA-FSRCPSP
As shown in Section 2, population-based heuristics have been increasingly applied to solve
the FRCPSP. Oliveira et al. (2012) report a similar trend for the classical RCPSP. In addition
to widely used approaches such as tabu search, simulated annealing, and genetic algorithms,
Kolisch and Hartmann (2006) identify scatter search as one of the most promising meta-
heuristics in their comparative study.
Since exact methods are generally limited to small instances with up to 30 activities, they
are of little practical relevance for solving larger problems, as typically encountered in real-
world R&D projects (see, e.g., Demeulemeester and Herroelen, 2002; Pellerin et al., 2020).
To address this issue, we present two heuristic methods tailored to solve instances of the
SAA-FSRCPSP. Section 4.1 introduces the SSGS for ﬁnding initial feasible solutions, while
Section 4.2 presents a scatter search framework for iterative improvement. Both methods
include the necessary steps for generating a proactive, robust baseline schedule SB. For
illustration purposes, corresponding examples are provided in the Appendix.
4.1 Serial schedule generation scheme
To construct an initial solution xinit for the SAA-FSRCPSP, a priority-based scheduling
method, which consists of two key components—a schedule generation scheme and a priority
rule—can be used. The two most commonly referenced scheduling generation schemes in
the literature are the serial SGS and the parallel SGS (PSGS). While the serial SGS builds
a schedule by incrementally increasing the number of activities, the parallel SGS creates a
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Serial schedule generation scheme for solving the SAA-FSRCPSP
non-delayed schedule by incrementing the number of time periods (Kolisch and Hartmann,
2000). Although the PSGS often achieves a better makespan in classical RCPSP settings
(see e.g., Kolisch and Hartmann, 2000), our problem introduces additional complexities that
make the SSGS more appropriate for generating an initial schedule. In particular, the presence
of multiple scenarios π ∈S with workloads wπ
ik, ﬂexible durations, and varying resource
limits requires a careful integration of probabilistic and scenario-speciﬁc information. Once a
feasible schedule has been generated, the PSGS can reﬁne it based on temporal and resource
interactions. For these reasons, we use the SSGS to generate initial solutions and apply the
PSGS in the local improvement phase of the scatter search (cf. Section 4.2). This combination
allows us to leverage the beneﬁts of both approaches in a complementary way. Moreover, the
choice of priority rules also plays a critical role in determining a schedule, especially when
the project duration is considered as a goal (see e.g., Wang et al., 2017; Luo et al., 2022). Our
implementation supports several types of priority rules, including “earliest start time ﬁrst”
(EST), “greatest resource demand ﬁrst” (GRD), and “random selection” (RAND), which can
be ﬂexibly applied within our entire scatter search framework (cf. Figure 2).
According to the model formulation, the aim (1) of the SAA-FSRCPSP is to determine one
schedule that is satisﬁed for all scenarios π ∈S with a probability of (1 −ϵ). As illustrated
in Figure 1, the procedure is divided into two main steps (shown in gray and red), which
are connected by a feasibility check (shown in blue). First, a schedule S is generated, taking
all available scenarios π ∈S into account. The schedule may or may not be feasible over
all scenarios, i.e., with at most ⌊|S| · ϵ⌋violated scenarios allowed (cf. Constraints (12)).
In case of infeasibility, a new schedule S must be created, where the worst-case workloads
wmax
i
of all activities i ∈V are included. Here, wmax
i
corresponds to the workload vector
taken from the scenario in which at least one workload wπ
ik attains the overall maximum
(maxk∈K,π∈S{wπ
ik}). In this way, we compile a ﬁctitious scenario based on the workloads
of all resources. As soon as S is feasible, an attempt is made to ﬁnd a ﬁrst improvement
which involves systematically rescheduling the activities on critical paths. In this way, we
systematically shorten the makespan with regard to the given conﬁdence level and return a
ﬁnal solution xinit at the end.
Let us take a closer look at the individual steps. Starting with activityi = 0, all activities are
scheduled one after the other. In each iteration of the gray part, the set of eligible activities E is
determined on the basis of the given network N = (V , E). Due to a predeﬁned priority rule,
123

Annals of Operations Research
an activity j with the highest priority is selected from E. Then, the start time Sj of activity
j has to be identiﬁed. To do this, we ﬁrst calculate the earliest start time ES j of activity
j by considering its predecessor activities i as follows: ES j = max⟨i, j⟩∈E,π∈S{Si + dπ
i }.
Consequently, all durations dπ
i
of the different scenarios π ∈S are explicitly included.
In order to specify dπ
i , the corresponding workloads wπ
ik are distributed over the time axis
within the limits rik and rik. Once ES j is identiﬁed, the time t∗≥ES j at which a resource-
feasible scheduling of activity j can take place must be determined. To avoid using worst-case
workloads, we select a scenario π′ and the corresponding workloads wπ′
jk for activity j by
means of a roulette-wheel selection. Preliminary studies have shown that it is advantageous
to set the selection probabilities of each scenario proportionally to the aggregated workload
and to modify them using a beta(2,5)-distribution. The resulting workloads wπ′
jk for activity j
are then distributed over the time axis, starting initially with ES j within the limits [rik,rik].
The earliest point in time at which a feasible distribution of wπ′
jk is possible is t∗. Hence, we
set the start time of j to Sj := t∗.
When all activities are scheduled and set C, which contains the activities that have no start
timeyet,isempty,aschedule S iscreated.Thefeasibilityof S mustbecheckedforallscenarios
with regard to the given conﬁdence level (blue part). We introduce the concept of violation
slack ψ, which speciﬁes the difference between the current number of violated scenarios and
the maximum number of allowed violations ⌊|S| · ϵ⌋. Accordingly, ψ indicates how many
additional scenarios that currently satisfy precedence and resource constraints could still
be violated without affecting the feasibility of the entire schedule. If schedule S is feasible
(Case 1) and there is some violation slack ψ > 0 with 
π∈S ρπ + ψ = ⌊|S| · ϵ⌋, we can
potentially reduce the makespan Sn+1 by preponing an activity j that lies on the critical path
CP in network N (red part). Consequently, the scenarios that consider the highest workload
wmax
j
for an activity j ∈CP and thus the largest duration are no longer fulﬁlled. Let dmax
j
denote the duration of j in the scenarios with the highest workload and dmax −1
j
represent
its duration under the scenarios with the second-highest workload. In order to maximize the
reduction of the project duration Sn+1, we calculate the improvement potential  j for each
activity j ∈CP, which lies on the critical path, in the following way:
 j = dmax
j
−dmax −1
j
.
(15)
We denote ξ j by the number of scenarios with the same value wmax
j
for activity j. Then,
we select the activity jprev = arg max j∈CP{ j}, where ξ jprev ≤ψ. The start times of each
successor l of activity j must now be updated to Sl := Sl − j. A new schedule S′ is created
and checked for feasibility. If S′ is feasible (Case 1a), we set S := S′. Subsequently, the
critical path CP is further searched for improvements by further restricting the scenarios that
are fulﬁlled. However, when S′ is infeasible (Case 1b), another activity j′ with  j′ > 0
is selected on the critical path. The start times of the successors l with ⟨j′,l⟩∈E are
updated and the feasibility check is carried out. This procedure is repeated until no further
improvement is possible without violating the conﬁdence level.
If S is infeasible (Case 2), a ﬁctitious scenario with wmax
i
for all i ∈V is generated and
S is created within the SSGS (blue part). In case that S is feasible, the determination of the
critical path CP is carried out (red part). Once there is no more violation slack (cf. Constraints
(12)), the schedule S = xinit is a proactive, robust, and feasible schedule with regard to the
predeﬁned conﬁdence level (1 −ϵ).
In addition to determining feasible initial solutions xinit, the SSGS is also applied to decode
a solution in the scatter search. We use a priority list λ as a solution representation in which
the activities are listed in the sequence in which they are scheduled for resource allocation.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In contrast to Tritschler et al. (2017), the percentage of resource allocation is additionally
integrated into the representation instead of setting a ﬁxed limit for it. Let γ be the respective
list, where for each activity i, the parameter γi indicates the percentage of resource units
k ∈K that should be assigned based on the upper resource limit rik in each time period t.
This means that we can allocate a maximum of up to ⌊rik · γi⌋resource units per period t ∈T
for activity i ∈V . The approach allows us to strategically adjust the resource allocation for
i—either by increasing or decreasing γi—to enable resource reallocation between critical
and non-critical activities within the improvement method of the scatter search. The goal
of reallocation is to consistently prioritize critical activities by assigning them additional
resources in early execution periods, allowing them to be completed earlier and reducing
the project duration Sn+1 (cf. Section 4.2). For a detailed illustrative example of the SSGS
procedure under scenario-based uncertainty, we refer the reader to the Appendix.
4.2 Scatter search
In order to improve a generated initial solution, we use a scatter search method that has been
adjusted to address the particular characteristics of the SAA-FSRCPSP. Originally introduced
by Glover (1977), a scatter search combines existing reference points to generate new candi-
date solutions (Van Peteghem and Vanhoucke, 2011). In contrast to other population-based
metaheuristics (such as genetic algorithms), it relies on principles for structural combination
of reference points or solutions rather than just random crossover operations. This approach,
together with explicit mechanisms for diversiﬁcation and intensiﬁcation, allows the exploita-
tion of problem-speciﬁc features of the solution space (Martí et al., 2006). Building on the
general approach of scatter search, our framework incorporates several adaptations for the
SAA-FSRCPSP. In particular, solutions are represented by a priority list λ and a resource
distribution list γ . We apply a simultaneous neighborhood search over both lists and use a
PSGS combined with stochastic scenario evaluation to assess feasibility with respect to the
given conﬁdence level. To improve clarity, the main steps of our scatter search framework
are summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Procedure of the proposed scatter search
1: Step 1: Create solutions for Pinit until |P| = PSize
2:
Choose a priority rule and use SSGS to generate solution x; add x to P
3:
Improve x by applying a neighborhood operator; decode new solution x′ using PSGS
4:
if x′ is feasible then Add x′ to P
5: Step 2: Build the reference set RefSet = b1 ∪b2
6: while stop criterion is not met do
7:
Step 3: Select different two-element subsets σ from RefSet
8:
for each subset σ do
9:
Step 4: Combine solutions (x1, x2) ∈σ
10:
Apply two-point crossover to lists λ and γ of x1 and x2
11:
Generate new solutions x S and x D
12:
for each x ∈{x S, x D} do
13:
Decode x and improve it
14:
if x is feasible then
15:
Step 5: Update reference set RefSet
16: return best solution in RefSet
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Overview of the proposed scatter search for solving the SAA-FSRCPSP
As shown in Algorithm 1 and illustrated in Figure 2, the proposed framework follows a
ﬁve-step procedure. In particular, these steps are “creation of an initial population” (Step 1),
“building of a reference set RefSet” (Step 2), “selection of subsets from the RefSet” (Step
3), “combination of solutions from the subsets” (Step 4), and “updating the RefSet” (Step
5). In Figure 2, the color “blue” indicates solutions that have already been improved, while
the color “red” marks those that still require further improvement. The scatter search usually
relies on a reference set consisting of b solutions, which are composed of the best solutions
from set b1 and the most diverse solutions from set b2.
Starting from an initial solution xinit, represented by λ and γ , a sufﬁciently diverse initial
population Pinit is constructed (Step 1). To do this, the SSGS (cf. Section 4.1) is applied with
various priority rules, such as EST, GRD, and RAND. In order to enhance both quality and
feasibility, an improvement method is then used to search for a new solution x′ = S′ within
the neighborhood N(x) of the current solution x = S. We employ a speciﬁc swap operator
that swaps two activities in the priority list λ. The swap is considered feasible if it fulﬁlls
all given precedence constraints in set E. The aim of this improvement step is to achieve an
early completion of critical activities and thus shorten the project duration Sn+1. Based on the
approach of Tritschler et al. (2017), we choose an activity pair C = {(i, j)|i /∈CP, j ∈CP}
for swapping, with i representing a non-critical activity and j a critical activity. Since the
priority list λ does not necessarily correspond to the actual sequence of scheduled activities,
it must be ensured that more resources are allocated to activity j than to any non-critical
activity i. Therefore, it is not enough to change the sequence in λ; adjustments to the resource
distribution list γ are also necessary. For this purpose, we ﬁrst identify non-critical activities
i that overlap in time with the critical activity j and share at least one resource k ∈K. A
transfer is only considered if the current allocation satisﬁes rikt > rik and the critical activity
has free capacity on the same resource, i.e., r jkt < r jk. To guarantee that reallocating
resource units from activity i does not delay any of its successor activities l, we deﬁne the
maximum duration dmax
i
= min⟨i,l⟩∈E (Sl −Si) of i, based on the start times Sl in the current
schedule S. This value determines how long activity i may last without violating precedence
123

Annals of Operations Research
constraints. For each shared resource k, we calculate the minimal required allocation φik as
φik =
wmax
ik
dmax
i

,
where wmax
ik
denotes the maximum workload of activity i on resource k across all scenarios
π ∈S. This ensures that, even under the most demanding scenario, the workload of activity
i can be completed within dmax
i
periods, which is deﬁned by the earliest start time of any
successor l of i in the current schedule. We thus obtain the lowest allocation level that can be
applied without delaying any Sl. The corresponding allocation percentage is then updated as
follows:
γ ′
i =
max
k∈K|rik>0
φik
rik
 
.
(16)
A value of γ ′
i < γi conﬁrms that the allocation can be reduced without affecting the feasibility
of the current schedule. If a feasible reduction is found, the released resource units are
transferred to the critical activity j, provided its upper limit is not exceeded. The implemented
strategy allows for targeted resource adjustments to support activities on the critical path and
thereby reduce the overall project duration.
Using schedule S, the new priority list λ′, and the corresponding resource distribution γ ′,
a new schedule S′ can be determined. To this end, we use a PSGS based on the concept of the
ﬂexible resource proﬁle parallel schedule generation scheme from Tritschler et al. (2017).
Similar to the SSGS, activity i = 0 is started and completed immediately at time t = 0.
However, instead of iterating over the set of activities i ∈V , the PSGS proceeds period by
period, i.e., over time periods t ∈T , and schedules activities successively. At each period
t, we begin by checking which activities are already started but not yet completed. Those
that were active in the previous period t −1 and are still ongoing must remain active to
prevent interruptions in execution, which are not allowed. We denote the set of such ongoing
activities as A′. As summarized in the following Algorithm 2, the PSGS is structured into
three cases.
Algorithm 2 Procedure of the proposed parallel schedule generation scheme
1: for each t ∈T do
2:
Identify set of started but not yet completed activities A′
3:
for each i ∈A′ do
▷Case 1
4:
Assign rik ∀k ∈K to activity i
5:
Determine set E containing all eligible activities with ES ≤t
▷Case 2
6:
while E ̸= ∅do
7:
Select j ∈E with highest priority
8:
Draw workload wπ′
j
via roulette-wheel selection
9:
if 
i∈A′ rπ′
ikt + r jk ≤Rkt ∀k ∈K then
▷Case 2a
10:
Assign r jk to activity j, and update sets A′ and E
11:
else
▷Case 2b
12:
Delay start of activity j by at least one time unit
13:
while resources are still available do
▷Case 3
14:
Increase rikt for i ∈A′ according to λ′ and γ ′
i
According to the sequence in λ′, we assign at t the lower limit rik to each activity i ∈A′
(Case 1). This approach aims to increase the number of parallel activities so that activities
123

Annals of Operations Research
from schedule S can start earlier and the overall project duration Sn+1 is reduced. After
allocating resources to all activities i ∈A′ at t, we assess whether further activities can
be scheduled without causing a resource conﬂict (Case 2). We determine which activities
can be started based on the eligible set E and check whether the earliest start time ES of
them is less than or equal to the current t. The activity j ∈E with the highest priority is
selected. Next, a workload wπ′
j is randomly speciﬁed using our roulette-wheel selection. If
no resource conﬂict arises (Case 2a), we assign activity j its respective lower limit r jk,
ensuring 
i∈A′ rπ′
ikt + r jk ≤Rkt for all k at time t and for π′. Subsequently, sets A′ and E
are updated accordingly. Otherwise, we delay the start of activity j by at least one time unit
(Case 2b). This process is repeated until no further activity can be scheduled from E.
If resources k ∈K are still available in period t, we allocate additional resource units to
the activities i ∈A′ that are in progress at t (Case 3). In accordance with the sequence of the
prioritylistλ′,theactivitiesi ∈A′ areselectedoneafteranother.Then,theadditionalresource
units that should be allocated to i are calculated. In each period t, a maximum of

rik · γ ′
i

resource units can be assigned to i. Before assigning the additional resources, it must be
veriﬁed whether (a) sufﬁcient resource units are available and whether (b) these resource
units are still needed elsewhere. In any case, the procedure must ensure that the lower limit
rik for the resource allocation in the next period (t + 1) is also observed; see Constraints (7).
Please note that this approach is only practicable as long as the lower limit rik corresponds
to ⌈0.5 · rik⌉(cf. Section 5.1). If this condition is no longer fulﬁlled, the procedure must be
extended to consider at least two periods in order to ensure rπ′
ikt ∈[rik,rik] at both t and
t +1. This extension allows a forward-looking redistribution of resources between activities,
improving the adaptability of the scheduling procedure. Once all time periods are passed, the
result is a new schedule S′, which is represented by the updated lists λ′ and γ ′. The feasibility
of S′ is then checked for all scenarios π ∈S according to the predeﬁned conﬁdence level
(1 −ϵ). In case S′ is feasible, it will be added to the population Pinit, with Sn+1 being the
corresponding ﬁtness value of the new solution x′; otherwise, it will be excluded.
When the population reaches size PSize, the two sets b1 and b2 can be derived for RefSet
(Step 2). Based on the project duration Sn+1, the best b/2 solutions are assigned to b1. For set
b2, the b/2 most diverse solutions in relation to the solutions in b1 are selected. Please note
that b1 ∩b2 = ∅. To identify the diversity of a candidate solution x′ with respect to the elite
solutions in b1, we use a normalized Hamming distance based on the priority list λ. For each
solution pair x′ and x ∈b1, we determine the proportion of activity positions at which the
two solutions differ. The diversity of x′ is deﬁned as the average of these proportions across
all solutions in b1. This metric is adapted from the diversity measure proposed by Mobini et
al. (2009) and Baradaran et al. (2010). In contrast to their original (absolute) formulation, we
normalize the count to obtain a percentage, enabling consistent comparison over different
problem sizes and populations. Let ϑx,x′,ϱ ∈{0, 1} be an indicator that speciﬁes whether
the activity at position ϱ differs between the two solutions x and x′. The diversity of x′ in
relation to x ∈b1 is calculated as follows:
100
(n + 1) · |b1| ·

x∈b1
n+1

ϱ=0
ϑx,x′,ϱ [%] .
(17)
Whenever at least one new solution is added to the RefSet, subsets of solutions from the
RefSet are selected. Each subset σ is constructed using a subset generation method, ensuring
that σ ̸= σ ′ holds for all created subsets. In our method, the solutions from set b1 are ﬁrst
combined with each other, followed by combinations with the solutions from set b2 to form
two-element subsets (Step 3).
123

Annals of Operations Research
The solutions of the subset are used as input for the solution combination method (Step 4).
A two-point crossover is applied to combine the solutions x1 and x2 from a given subset σ.
The approach proceeds in such a way that two crossover points c1 and c2, c1 ≤c2, are drawn
randomly in λ and γ of one solution. The ﬁrst c1 elements from solution x1 are inserted into
the new solution x S, while the corresponding c1 elements from x2 are copied into the second
new solution x D. To avoid redundancies, the respective elements from x1 are removed from
x2, and vice versa. This ensures that no activities are duplicated in the new solutions. Next,
the c2 −c1 elements representing the activities between x1 and x2 are transferred. Finally, the
remaining (n + 1) −c2 elements, which correspond to activities after the second crossover
point, are added to the new solutions.
Solutions x S and x D are decoded using the SSGS, followed by the improvement method
to ﬁnd a better solution in the neighborhood. Taking into account each new feasible solution,
sets b1 and b2 in reference set RefSet are updated (Step 5). Steps 3 to 5 are repeated until
a predeﬁned stop criterion is met. This is the case when either no further improvement of
the makespan Sn+1 is possible or when the maximum time limit Tmax of 7,200 seconds is
reached. In order to provide a more detailed explanation, an illustrative example is given in
the Appendix.
5 Computational results
In this section, we present a performance analysis to evaluate the heuristic methods that are
introduced in the previous Section 4. These methods solve the SAA-FSRCPSP by ensuring
that the required workload wπ
ik of each activity i ∈V is completely covered in every scenario
π ∈S using ﬂexible resources k ∈K. As long as the number of conﬂicts deﬁned in
Constraints (12) is not exceeded, the result is a proactive, robust, and feasible schedule S.
Beginning with Section 5.1, we ﬁrst outline the process of instance generation, providing
detailed information about the parameters and assumptions used. With the aim of analyzing
the ability of GAMS 39.3 and CPLEX 22.1 to ﬁnd feasible and optimal solutions, we then
assess the impact of increasing the number of resources and the number of scenarios for
instances with up to 30 activities in Section 5.2. Furthermore, the predeﬁned CL (1 −ϵ)
is validated and the order strength (OS) is used to characterize the structural properties
of the instances with respect to their precedence constraints. Moreover, we evaluate the
performance of the heuristic approaches by comparing the results of the scatter search with
optimal solutions for medium-sized instances. For large and practical-relevant instances with
up to 120 activities, we compare the results of the scatter search with the initial solutions
obtained by the SSGS to assess its effectiveness in improving the solution quality.
5.1 Experimental setup
Using the PSPLIB library presented by Kolisch and Sprecher (1997), we ﬁrst generated a
total of 1,000 instances with n = {10, 30, 60, 90, 120} real activities. Since the PSPLIB
benchmark does not provide RCPSP instances with n = 10, we derived them from the
multi-mode RCPSP dataset (j10 ﬁles) by ﬁxing the ﬁrst execution mode for each activity
and discarding all others. This ensures structural consistency with the standard single-mode
RCPSP instances used for the other activity sizes. For each activity count n, the ﬁrst 50
instances were extracted from the benchmark. This procedure guarantees that our instance
set is consistent, reproducible, and free from manual bias. Since the PSPLIB instances always
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Number of optimally
solved instances with n = 10
activities, using |K| = 2
resources, four different sample
sizes, and a conﬁdence level of
1.0
|S|
∅Sn+1
# optimal
∅tcpu
# feasible
# no sol.
10
29.64
50
183.33
0
0
50
31.31
42
2,980.02
0
8
100
33.00
16
6,112.37
0
34
200
–
0
7,432.75
0
50
contain |K| = 4 renewable resources, we had to adjust them in order to also obtain instances
with |K| = {1, 2, 3} resources. For |K| = 1, the deterministic resource requirements of
each activity are summed over all resources (i.e., rik1 = 
k∈K rd
ik). The corresponding
resource capacity Rk1t is computed analogously. For |K| = {2, 3}, the four resources are
partitioned into |K| disjoint subsets. Within each group, resource requirements and capacities
are aggregated. For |K| = 4, no changes to the original instances are necessary. This gives
us 200 instances for each activity count n = {10, 30, 60, 90, 120}.
Based on the deterministic resource requirements in the generated instances, we specify,
as outlined in Section 3, the expected workload E(wik) = 
k∈K rd
ik·dd
i for activity i ∈V and
resource k ∈K. On this basis, the stochastic workload is deﬁned as wπ
ik = fi ·E(wik), where
fi ∼β [0.5, 2.25] follows the beta(2,5)-distribution used by Lamas and Demeulemeester
(2016). To enable ﬂexible resource allocation, we add lower and upper resource limits for
each activity i ∈V and resource k ∈K. We set rik = rd
ik if the condition rd
ik > 0 is
fulﬁlled for the corresponding k ∈K in the PSPLIB instance. Moreover, as stated in Kolisch
et al. (2003), we assume that using only 50% of the available resource is sufﬁcient to avoid
delays in the activity duration; i.e., we set rik = ⌈0.5 · rik⌉. For each instance, we generate a
scenario sample of predeﬁned size. Taking into account the scenarios π ∈S and the resource
limits rik and rik, the earliest and latest start times of all activities can be computed.
Parameters are also required for the solution methods. We set the population size of our
scatter search to PSize = 30. The maximum runtime per approach is limited to Tmax = 7,200
seconds.
5.2 Comparative study
In order to obtain exact solutions for the SAA-FSRCPSP (see Section 3), optimization runs
are carried out for instances with n = {10, 30} activities. Since the number of scenarios
(sample size) directly affects the number of decision variables and constraints, an increase
in sample size is expected to raise both runtime and problem complexity.
To illustrate the computational impact of increasing the number of scenarios, Table 1
provides an overview of the results obtained for the 50 instances with n = 10 activities and
four different sample sizes |S| = {10, 50, 100, 200}, using two resources (|K| = 2). We
set the conﬁdence level to (1 −ϵ) = 1.0 in order to ensure that a feasible solution over all
scenarios is generated. For each conﬁguration, we present the average project duration ∅Sn+1
and the average runtime ∅tcpu [seconds]. Furthermore, we indicate the number of optimally
and feasibly solved instances, as well as the number of instances for which no solution could
be achieved within Tmax. Please note that the labels “# feasible” and “# no sol.” refer to
the solver status reported by CPLEX: “# feasible” counts instances for which a feasible but
no proven optimal solution was found, whereas “# no sol.” refers to instances in which no
solution was returned before the time limit expired.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The results in Table 1 reveal a clear trend. As the number of scenarios increases, the
computational effort and the runtimes rise substantially. While all 50 instances are solved
optimally for |S| = 10, the optimal solution rate drops to 84% for |S| = 50 and to 32%
for |S| = 100. For |S| = 200, none of the instances can be solved within the time limit of
Tmax = 7,200 seconds. It is noteworthy that, in this setting, all feasible solutions identiﬁed
by CPLEX were also proven optimal, indicating that whenever a feasible solution was found
within the time limit, the solver reached optimality. Furthermore, the results show that for
larger sample sizes, the SAA-FSRCPSP cannot be solved by CPLEX within Tmax due to the
increasing computational complexity. When looking at the average values of the objective
functions, it is apparent that the values increase with the number of scenarios. This may be
because the number of optimal solutions decrease or because more scenarios mean that the
proactive, robust solutions receive a higher objective function value. There are parameters that
werekeptconstantinTable1,suchasthenumberofresourcesandthechosenconﬁdencelevel.
To systematically capture this dependency and compare settings across multiple parameter
combinations, we deﬁne the feasibility rate FR(1−ϵ)
n,|K|,|S|. This metric quantiﬁes the probability
of solving an instance, optimally or feasibly, within 7,200 seconds for a speciﬁc combination
of n activities, |K| resources, |S| scenarios, and the conﬁdence level (1 −ϵ). The following
Figure 3 illustrates how the feasibility rate is affected by the different parameters.
Figures 3a to 3f visualize the feasibility rates FR(1−ϵ)
10,|K|,|S| for different values of the
conﬁdence level (1 −ϵ). The number of resources |K| = {1, 2, 3, 4} is shown on the x-axis,
while the number of scenarios |S| = {10, 50, 100, 200} appears on the y-axis. Each cell
displays the observed share of instances for which CPLEX computed a feasible or optimal
solution within the time limit. Darker shading indicates higher feasibility, whereas lighter
shades signal lower success rates.
Across all analyzed conﬁdence levels, the feasibility rate generally declines with an
increasing number of scenarios |S|, reﬂecting the computational complexity introduced by
larger sample sizes. In contrast, the inﬂuence of the resources availabilities |K| is more
nuanced. A slightly higher resource availability generally increases the feasibility rate by
reducing competition and increasing scheduling ﬂexibility. At |S| = 50, e.g., the highest
feasibility is not achieved with one or four resources, but rather with two or three. A simi-
lar effect can be observed at |S| = 100 for the lower conﬁdence levels 0.7 and 0.8. These
results suggest that moderately constrained instances are structurally easier to solve than
those that are either too restrictive or too ﬂexible. Tight resource limits increase the proba-
bility of infeasibility, while very generous resource availability may expand the search space
and complicate the solution process.
As expected, the conﬁdence level has a strong inﬂuence. With lower ϵ-values, the chance-
constraints become more restrictive, requiring a larger number of scenarios to be satisﬁed.
For example, with |K| = 4 resources and |S| = 100 scenarios, the feasibility rate drops
from FR = 0.36 at a CL of (1 −ϵ) = 0.7 to FR = 0.02 at a CL of (1 −ϵ) = 1.0. This
behavior results directly from the SAA-FSRCPSP model. For any given combination of n,
|K|, |S|, and (1 −ϵ), Constraints (12) restrict the feasible number of violated scenarios to
⌊|S| · ϵ⌋. Therefore, a higher conﬁdence level, e.g., (1 −ϵ) = 0.9, allows fewer violations
and deﬁnes a feasible region that is contained within that of a lower conﬁdence level (e.g.,
(1 −ϵ) = 0.7). As a result, the search space becomes smaller and the problem becomes
increasingly difﬁcult to solve as the conﬁdence level increases. Taken together, the results
in Figures 3a–3f reveal a clear trade-off between robustness and computational tractability.
Higher conﬁdence levels enhance theoretical protection against uncertainty but reduce the
probability of ﬁnding a solution within the time limit.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Comparison of different CPLEX feasibility proﬁles depending on the predeﬁned conﬁdence levels as
well as various numbers of resources |K| and scenarios |S|
In Section 3, it was explained that a distinction must be made between the conﬁdence
level (1 −α) in the CC-FSRCPSP and the sample-based conﬁdence level (1 −ϵ) used in
the SAA. The scaling of both levels must be well aligned. To achieve this, we compute the
estimated conﬁdence level (1 −ˆα), following the validation procedure proposed by Lamas
and Demeulemeester (2016). Each optimal schedule obtained by solving the SAA-FSRCPSP
model with n = 10 activities, a speciﬁc CL (1 −ϵ), and scenario set S is re-evaluated on a
much larger and independent scenario set S2, using the feasibility check of the SSGS (see
Section 4.1). Please note that for the values given in Table 1, e.g., with n = 10, |K| = 2,
CL = 1.0, and |S| = {10, 50, 100, 200}, we have the following numbers of optimal solutions
{50, 42, 16, 0}. For each scenario π ∈S2, we verify whether the project duration Sπ
n+1
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Estimated conﬁdence levels (1−ˆα) for all optimally solved instances with n = 10 activities, varying
the number of resources |K| and scenarios |S| (italic values: conﬁgurations from Table 1)
|K|
|S|
(1 −
ˆα)-results
for
opt.
SAA-
FSRCPSP solutions with diff. (1 −ϵ)
(1 −ϵ)
1.0
0.99
0.95
0.9
0.8
0.7
1
10
0.843
0.843
0.843
0.884
0.867
0.843
50
0.884
0.884
0.935
0.899
0.883
0.884
100
0.984
0.975
0.941
0.938
0.883
0.883
200
0.992
0.993
0.949
0.975
0.886
0.873
2
10
0.777
0.777
0.777
0.741
0.809
0.777
50
0.858
0.858
0.918
0.909
0.870
0.841
100
0.983
0.978
0.964
0.960
0.899
0.877
200
–
0.966
0.967
0.981
0.924
0.921
3
10
0.768
0.768
0.768
0.827
0.807
0.768
50
0.952
0.952
0.923
0.963
0.838
0.815
100
0.981
0.974
0.948
0.951
0.900
0.877
200
–
0.993
0.960
0.941
0.909
0.915
4
10
0.605
0.605
0.605
0.656
0.601
0.601
50
0.911
0.911
0.896
0.763
0.827
0.804
100
0.988
0.922
0.924
0.920
0.893
0.877
200
–
–
–
0.977
0.977
0.968
avg(1 −ˆα)
0.887
0.893
0.888
0.893
0.861
0.845
matches the value SCPLEX
n+1
obtained in the original solution. The estimated conﬁdence level
is then speciﬁed using the following Equation (18):
(1 −ˆα) = |Smatch|
|S2|
with Smatch =

π ∈S2
 Sπ
n+1 = SCPLEX
n+1

.
(18)
The respective validation scenario set S2 is chosen to be 16 times larger than the cor-
responding sample size S, resulting in |S2| = {160, 800, 1600, 3200}. The results are
summarized in Table 2. Each value indicates the average estimated conﬁdence level (1 −ˆα)
across all optimally solved instances of the given conﬁguration. The (1 −ˆα)-values shown
in italics correspond to the conﬁgurations reported in Table 1. The last line of Table 2, aggre-
gates the estimated values of (1−ˆα) across all resource and scenario conﬁgurations for each
conﬁdence level (1 −ϵ), allowing us to assess how well each of them is met on average.
Overall, the results show that considering a larger number of scenarios when using the
solver to ﬁnd an optimal solution leads to a more robust schedule, i.e., the (1 −ˆα)-values
for |S| = {100, 200} are always larger than for |S| = {10, 50}. However, since the number
of optimally solved instances is small for high scenario numbers, the results are based on a
signiﬁcantlyreduceddataset,whichisproblematicforageneralstatement.Forconﬁgurations
where no optimal solutions were obtained, no estimated conﬁdence level (1 −ˆα) could be
computed. This is indicated by “–” in Table 2. Therefore, comparisons across scenario sizes
are limited to conﬁgurations with valid optimal solutions, and the results for large |S| should
be interpreted with caution.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The average values of (1 −ˆα), i.e. avg(1 −ˆα), provide information about how well
the conﬁdence levels (1 −ϵ) are met across all conﬁgurations. For smaller (1 −ϵ)-values,
e.g., 0.7–0.9, the conﬁdence levels (1−ϵ) largely correspond to avg(1−ˆα) in the respective
columns (highlighted in bold). Larger conﬁdence levels are less consistent with the estimated
results. This discrepancy is likely caused by the fact that the solver provides suboptimal
solutions that formally fulﬁll the random conditions but offer less empirical protection. For
the further performance study, we choose a conﬁdence level of (1 −α) = 0.9 to ensure
that the probability of meeting time and/or resource constraints is 90%. In accordance with
this speciﬁcation, we also select the sample-based CL to be (1 −ϵ) = 0.9. This is possible
according to the analysis and the avg(1 −
0.9)-value of 0.893.
Although the previous analysis of instances with n = 10 activities provided valuable
information about the trade-off between robustness and computational effort, it offers only
limited potential for studying structural effects. All instances considered have the same num-
ber of activities and the same number of precedence constraints. As a consequence, the
resulting variation in the underlying network structure is marginal, which limits the scope
for studying how the network structure affects the solution processes. To address this issue,
we extend the analysis of exact and heuristic approaches to instances with n = 30 activities,
which are characterized by more structural diversity. We evaluate all 480 PSPLIB instances
with n = 30 activities using a sample size of |S| = 10 and four resource conﬁgurations
(|K| = {1, 2, 3, 4}), resulting in 1,720 additional instances (i.e., (480 −50) instances · 4
resources). This comprehensive setup enables an in-depth analysis of how structural prop-
erties such as network density and resource availability affect the solution behavior. For
|S| = 50, we did not evaluate all 480 PSPLIB instances but selected 50 representative
instances starting from numbers 1, 160, and 320. This selection enables us to examine how
increasing the number of scenarios affects the computational effort and the relative perfor-
mance of CPLEX and the scatter search across different conﬁgurations.
A common metric to quantify the structural complexity of project networks is the order
strength, which is deﬁned as the ratio of the number of precedence constraints (including
transitive ones, but excluding the two ﬁctitious activities 0 and n + 1) to the maximum
possible number of edges n(n−1)/2 (Demeulemeester et al., 2003). Based on this deﬁnition,
we compute the OS-values for all PSPLIB instances with n = 30 activities. The instances
are partitioned into three equally sized groups of 160 instances each. The corresponding OS-
values induce three distinct intervals, which are used to characterize the structural complexity
of the instances. Speciﬁcally, the groups cover the OS-ranges G1 = [0.25, 0.49], G2 =
[0.37, 0.55], and G3 = [0.51, 0.64], respectively. While the groups are deﬁned by their
index ranges, these intervals highlight systematic differences in the restrictiveness of the
underlying precedence structures.
To ensure a fair comparison between CPLEX and scatter search, we restrict the analysis
to those instances for which CPLEX was able to ﬁnd an optimal solution. The respective
percentage of optimally solved instances is given by the rate FRopt, classiﬁed according to
OS-group and the number of resources |K|. Each instance is solved using the sample sizes
|S| = {10, 50}. Larger sample sizes (e.g., |S| = {100, 200}) are excluded from the analysis,
as CPLEX was not able to solve a sufﬁcient number of instances to optimality within Tmax.
Table 3 provides a detailed comparison of the solution results from CPLEX and the scatter
search. For each conﬁguration, we present the average project duration ∅Sn+1 and the average
runtime ∅tcpu [seconds]. In order to evaluate the quality of the solutions, we calculate the
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Comparison of CPLEX and scatter search on optimally solved instances with n = 30 activities and
CL = 0.9, grouped by OS, |K|, and sample sizes |S| = {10, 50}
OS
|K|
FRopt
CPLEX
Scatter Search
∅GAP
∅Sn+1
∅tcpu
∅Sn+1
∅tcpu
(a) Comparative results of CPLEX and scatter search for |S| = 10 scenarios
[0.25, 0.49]
1
1.00
87.83
199.72
92.60
133.31
0.06
2
1.00
87.92
384.38
93.35
152.38
0.07
3
1.00
88.60
728.72
95.57
173.54
0.08
4
1.00
88.51
1175.33
95.13
206.07
0.08
[0.37, 0.55]
1
1.00
92.61
143.58
97.62
143.66
0.06
2
1.00
93.57
253.91
98.00
185.89
0.05
3
1.00
93.62
444.39
98.14
217.66
0.05
4
1.00
93.75
706.21
99.12
193.53
0.06
[0.51, 0.64]
1
1.00
101.52
188.40
104.49
154.08
0.03
2
1.00
101.63
217.44
106.00
180.08
0.05
3
1.00
101.56
408.02
105.35
202.68
0.04
4
1.00
102.44
656.84
107.43
215.00
0.05
(b) Comparative results of CPLEX and scatter search for |S| = 50 scenarios
[0.25, 0.49]
1
0.52
88.04
3581.00
93.42
481.50
0.07
2
0.38
87.47
4154.89
93.16
567.94
0.08
3
0.24
90.08
4807.26
93.58
535.28
0.04
4
0.06
91.00
5062.28
93.67
486.86
0.03
[0.37, 0.55]
1
0.48
93.42
4187.72
98.38
492.74
0.06
2
0.36
92.56
3850.66
98.28
628.84
0.07
3
0.32
93.50
4475.06
97.38
601.13
0.04
4
0.10
83.80
4319.09
91.00
618.92
0.09
[0.51, 0.64]
1
0.70
101.71
3296.23
103.86
562.94
0.02
2
0.52
104.85
3418.41
107.88
534.25
0.03
3
0.48
104.08
3957.63
105.54
518.41
0.01
4
0.28
108.21
4031.97
110.43
602.38
0.02
GAP for each instance using the following equation:
GAP = SScatter
n+1
−SCPLEX
n+1
SCPLEX
n+1
[%].
(19)
The GAP-values are determined per instance, and the arithmetic mean over all instances
∅GAP is included in Table 3. Please note that Table 3a contains average results for 1,920
instances and Table 3b for 600 instances.
In general, the results show that the scatter search delivers good results with consistently
low GAP-values across all tested conﬁgurations. Nevertheless, a distinction should be made
between the two sample sizes |S| = 10 and |S| = 50, as they differ in terms of difﬁculty,
scope, and analytical purpose. In line with expectations, larger scenario sets result in substan-
tially higher computational effort and longer project durations (similar effects were already
123

Annals of Operations Research
observed in Table 1). For |S| = 10, all conﬁgurations were solved optimally by CPLEX
(FRopt = 1.00). The average GAP-values obtained by the scatter search remain consistently
low across all settings, reaching a maximum of 0.08 in OS-range G1 with [0.25, 0.49] for
|K| = {3, 4}. Moreover, larger OS-values tend to yield slightly smaller average GAPs, e.g.,
between 0.03 and 0.05 in OS-range G3 with [0.51, 0.64]. While the average CPLEX runtimes
increase strongly with the number of resources, rising from about 140 to 1,200 seconds, the
scatter search remains in a much narrower range of roughly 130 to 220 seconds, indicating
a stable computational performance even for more complex conﬁgurations. In the case of
|S| = 50, the number of optimally solved instances decreases as expected with growing
resource numbers. The highest feasibility rates occur for structurally denser instances in
OS-range G3 = [0.51, 0.64], where FRopt = 0.70 for |K| = 1. In contrast, instances with
fewer precedence relations are generally more difﬁcult to solve, leading to lower feasibility
rates down to 0.06 in OS-range G1 = [0.25, 0.49] for |K| = 4. Although less constrained
networks would generally be expected to be easier to solve, the increased scheduling freedom
enlarges the solution space and thus the combinatorial complexity, making these instances
more challenging for exact methods. Furthermore, it can be observed that the average GAP
remains consistently small across all conﬁgurations, ranging between 0.01 and 0.09, with the
lowest values found in OS-range G3 = [0.51, 0.64]. These results demonstrate that the scat-
ter search handles larger scenario sets reliably and continues to deliver high-quality solutions
even under increased problem complexity. In both scenario settings, no systematic effect of
the number of resources on the solution quality can be identiﬁed. Consequently, the scatter
search performs robustly across a wide range of instance structures. A comparison of the
runtimes further highlights the efﬁciency advantage of the heuristic, as CPLEX frequently
exceeds 3,000 seconds and reaches up to 5,000 seconds for larger resource conﬁgurations,
while the scatter search consistently remains below 650 seconds. This underlines the scatter
search’s suitability for larger sample sizes and conﬁrms its practical efﬁciency.
Building on the previous results, we now extend the analysis to larger instances to assess
how effectively the scatter search improves upon the initial solutions generated by the SSGS.
Since CPLEX is not able to provide feasible solutions within two hours for instances with
more than 30 activities, we evaluate the performance based on the relative improvement of the
makespan achieved by the scatter search. In order to ensure comparability, all instances with
n = {60, 90, 120} activities are solved with a sample size of |S| = 10 and |K| = {1, 2, 3, 4}
renewable resources. For instances with n = 60 activities, we extend the evaluation to
the entire PSPLIB set and consider all 480 instances. As in the previous experiments with
n = 30 activities, each instance with n = 60 is solved under all four resource conﬁgurations,
resulting in a total of 1,920 instances. Based on their OS-values, the instances are grouped
into three equally sized subsets. The corresponding OS-ranges are G′
1 = [0.20, 0.36], G′
2 =
[0.31, 0.43], and G′
3 = [0.40, 0.55], reﬂecting increasing levels of structural restrictiveness
of the underlying precedence networks. For instances with n = {90, 120} activities, we
retain the setup from the initial experiments and solve the ﬁrst 50 instances each. This design
keeps the analysis computationally tractable while isolating the effects of problem size and
resource availability on the improvement delivered by the scatter search. We calculate the
average improvement of the makespan ∅Impr. [%], using the makespan of the SSGS as the
reference. Please note that a positive value indicates how much the scatter search improves
the project duration compared to the initial solution. Accordingly, ∅Impr. is calculated as
follows:
∅Impr. = SSSGS
n+1 −SScatter
n+1
SSSGS
n+1
[%].
(20)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 4 Comparison of SSGS and scatter search for instances with n = {60, 90, 120} activities, setting CL =
0.9 and sample size |S| = 10
OS
|K|
SSGS
Scatter Search
∅Impr.
∅Sn+1
∅tcpu
∅Sn+1
∅tcpu
(a) Improvement of the project duration achieved by scatter search compared to SSGS for
instances with n = 60 activities, grouped by OS and number of resources |K|
[0.20, 0.36]
1
168.36
22.14
127.97
1077.78
0.23
2
171.60
22.05
133.20
1114.87
0.22
3
179.66
22.25
138.90
1147.68
0.22
4
181.48
22.73
136.21
1264.92
0.24
[0.31, 0.43]
1
172.86
22.71
137.16
692.07
0.20
2
175.20
23.24
140.93
714.60
0.19
3
182.79
23.70
147.92
832.88
0.18
4
178.53
24.14
144.07
905.27
0.18
[0.40, 0.55]
1
178.92
22.62
142.43
680.89
0.20
2
181.34
23.12
143.97
710.38
0.19
3
187.50
23.77
147.81
830.41
0.20
4
183.91
24.11
147.05
882.11
0.19
n
|K|
SSGS
Scatter Search
∅Impr.
∅Sn+1
∅tcpu
∅Sn+1
∅tcpu
(b) Improvement of the project duration achieved by scatter search compared to SSGS for
instances with n = {90, 120} activities, grouped by number of activities n and resources |K|
90
1
203.94
71.05
151.70
3202.41
0.26
2
217.60
71.16
155.50
3262.20
0.29
3
218.40
74.62
156.72
3663.12
0.29
4
217.74
58.68
155.24
3070.21
0.29
120
1
231.12
119.15
169.20
7050.20
0.25
2
235.52
125.71
174.54
7122.97
0.26
3
235.28
137.51
175.16
7137.82
0.25
4
234.92
161.37
174.08
7165.75
0.26
For each method, we specify the average project duration ∅Sn+1 and the average runtime
∅tcpu [seconds]. The following Table 4 provides a detailed overview of the results, listing the
average performance measures for all tested conﬁgurations. This allows us to examine how
the solution quality of the scatter search evolves with increasing instance size and number of
resources |K|, while keeping the sample size |S| ﬁxed.
The results in Table 4 conﬁrm that the scatter search consistently improves the initial
solutions (i.e., the initial project durations) generated by the SSGS. For instances with n = 60
activities (cf. Table 4a), the average improvement ∅Impr. ranges between 18% and 24%. The
largest improvements are observed for instances belonging to OS-range G′
1 = [0.20, 0.36],
indicating that the heuristic particularly beneﬁts from the increased scheduling ﬂexibility in
less restrictive precedence networks. Regarding computational effort, the average runtimes
∅tcpu for instances in G′
1 = [0.20, 0.36] range between approximately 1,000 and 1,300
seconds. In contrast, instances assigned to the medium and higher OS-ranges [0.31, 0.43]
123

Annals of Operations Research
and [0.40, 0.55] exhibit considerably lower and more uniform runtimes, typically between
600 and 900 seconds. This behavior differs from the results reported in Table 3, where the
average runtimes were largely independent of the underlying OS-ranges. For larger instances
with n = {90, 120} activities (cf. Table 4b), the average improvement increases slightly
to values between 25% and 29%, demonstrating the quality of the method with respect to
both number of activities n and resources |K|. The improvements remain nearly constant
across all resource conﬁgurations, highlighting the scalability of the approach for even larger
problems. Runtimes increase from approximately 3,000 seconds for n = 90 to approximately
7,200 seconds for n = 120. In summary, the scatter search performs robustly with respect to
both network structure and resource availability. It consistently yields strong improvements
over the SSGS baseline while demonstrating predictable growth in computational effort. To
ensure applicability to even larger problems or more extensive scenario sets, future work
should aim to improve the algorithm’s efﬁciency by evaluating alternative neighborhood
operators, reﬁning diversiﬁcation mechanisms, or implementing adaptive termination rules.
6 Conclusions
Assuming that all necessary information is known, the deterministic RCPSP is based on
ﬁxed activity durations and constant resource requirements. In practice, however, projects
are often subject to considerable uncertainty, especially during early planning phases when
estimating activity durations is particularly challenging. This problem arises notably in ﬁelds
such as R&D, IT, or ﬁnance, where typically only the total workload is known in advance
and may vary substantially. When human resources are involved, ﬂexible allocation strate-
gies are often more effective than constant assignments to cover these workloads. To address
this, we identiﬁed the key characteristics of a stochastic RCPSP with ﬂexible resource pro-
ﬁles and formulated a mathematical model that builds upon the SRCPSP by Möhring et al.
(1984) and the FRCPSP by Kolisch et al. (2003). The model integrates chance-constraints for
both precedence constraints and resource capacities. Following the approach of Lamas and
Demeulemeester (2016), we use a conﬁdence level as a robustness measure to evaluate how
well the proactive baseline schedule is protected against uncertainty. This measure captures
the probability that all activities start at their baseline times across multiple scenarios, with-
out requiring an explicit reactive scheduling policy. The resulting stochastic optimization
problem is approximated by using sample average approximation.
In order to solve larger instances of the SAA-FSRCPSP, we developed a serial schedule
generation scheme that checks each scenario individually to ensure feasibility. Once a feasible
schedule is identiﬁed, we systematically search for improvements by rescheduling activities
on the critical path. By including a priority list λ and a resource distribution list γ in our
solution representation, we enhanced ﬂexibility in managing multiple scenarios. In order to
obtain a new solution in the scatter search, solutions of the reference set are combined by
using a two-point crossover. We extended the PSPLIB instances of Kolisch and Sprecher
(1997) with ﬂexible and stochastic elements, including upper and lower resource limits.
We conducted a structured performance analysis on 4,440 instances to evaluate the model
and solution methods across multiple conﬁgurations of the different parameters. For small
instances with n = 10 activities, we examined the impact of sample size, number of resources,
and conﬁdence levels on the feasibility of ﬁnding exact solutions with CPLEX. The results
show that the solver reliably handles instances with |S| = 10, but its performance deteriorates
rapidlyforlargerscenarionumbers.Inparticular,nosolutionscouldbeobtainedfor|S| = 200
123

Annals of Operations Research
within the time limit. Furthermore, our validation of the estimated conﬁdence level (1 −ˆα)
using an extended scenario set S2 with up to 3,200 scenarios has shown that some of the
optimal solver solutions do not meet the conﬁdence level (1−ϵ), especially when the (1−ϵ)-
value is high and the sample size is small. For our chosen conﬁdence level (1 −ϵ) = 0.9,
the estimated conﬁdence level (1 −ˆα) was also 0.9 and therefore very appropriate.
For instances with n = 30 activities and different network structures, we evaluated the
quality and runtime of the scatter search. The results show that the scatter search consistently
produces near-optimal schedules with low average GAP-values, even as structural complex-
ity increases. In particular, the method performs reliably across all instances, including those
belonging to the highest order-strength range G3. Compared to CPLEX, the scatter search
requires signiﬁcantly less runtime and handles larger sample sizes more efﬁciently. To further
evaluate the scatter search’s performance on larger instances, we extended the analysis to
instances with up to 120 activities. Thereby, we compared the scatter search with the initial
solutions obtained by the SSGS. For medium-sized instances (n = 60), average improve-
ments range between 18% and 24%, and for large instances (n = {90, 120}), between 25%
and 29%. These results underline the robustness and effectiveness of the scatter search for
varying numbers of activities n and resources |K|.
Overall, our study demonstrates that combining stochastic activity durations with ﬂexi-
ble resource proﬁles can improve the robustness of the schedule under uncertainty. Future
research could focus on extending the model to support more general temporal constraints or
to allow preemption of activities. From an algorithmic perspective, adaptive neighborhood
operators and reﬁned recombination strategies may improve scalability for larger scenario
sets such as |S| = 400 and |S| = 800. Given the long runtimes observed for large instances,
improving the algorithm’s efﬁciency remains an important objective to ensure applicabil-
ity to more complex problems. In addition, alternative metaheuristic frameworks should be
examined to identify complementary search strategies and evaluate their performance in com-
parison to scatter search. Incorporating alternative objective functions may further enhance
the practical relevance of the model. Applying the methods to real-world project data could
help to validate their robustness and uncover additional modeling requirements. Finally, inte-
grating simple reactive policies may offer further insights into the trade-off between baseline
robustness and rescheduling effort during project execution.
Appendix
To complement the explanations given in Section 4, this appendix provides a step by step
example of the SSGS which is used to construct the initial solution. Building on this, the prin-
ciples of the scatter search algorithm are illustrated by showing how solutions are generated,
combined, and improved throughout the search process.
Example 1: Serial schedule generation scheme
With the following example (see Figure 4), we want to understand the SSGS in detail. The
given problem consists of 10 real activities, a set of 10 scenarios, and one renewable resource k
(i.e., index k can be eliminated). For each activity i ∈V , an upper and a lower resource limit,
along with an expected workload value, denoted as E(wi) is given. The resource capacity is
Rt = 10 at each point in time t.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Sample instance of the SAA-FSRCPSP
Fig. 5 Resource proﬁle of schedule S after the ﬁrst step of the SSGS
Starting with activity 0, all activities are scheduled sequentially. In the ﬁrst iteration, the
eligible set E = {1, 2, 3} is identiﬁed. Following the priority rule GRD, which selects the
activity with the greatest expected resource demand E(wi), activity 1 is selected. Since its
only predecessor is the activity i = 0, the earliest start time for j = 1 is t = 0. The scenario
π′ = 10 is randomly chosen using a roulette-wheel selection. The corresponding workload
w10
1
= 58 is distributed over the time axis, starting from ES j = 0 within the limits [3, 5].
It is important to note that the resource allocation follows a greedy strategy; i.e., in each
iteration, we allocate as much as possible. Then, E = {2, 3, 6} holds and activity 3 is the
next to be scheduled. We determine S3 = 0 and select π′ = 9 with a workload of w9
3 = 30.
Subsequently, activity 6 must be included in the schedule, and for this purpose, the start
time of 6 has to be identiﬁed. To do this, we calculate ES6 = max⟨i,6⟩∈E,π∈S{Si + dπ
i } =
maxπ∈S{S1 + dπ
1 } = 0 + ⌈70/5⌉= 14. Since t = 14 is a feasible start for j = 6 according to
all scenarios π ∈S, we schedule activity 6 at S6 = t∗= 14. These steps are repeated until
all activities are scheduled.
The resulting resource proﬁle, including the respective time buffers (red rectangles), which
are necessary for calculating the time-feasible earliest start time of the corresponding suc-
cessor activities, is shown in Figure 5. The workloads of the activities used in the planning
are marked in bold in the table in Figure 4.
Once set C is empty, we have to examine the feasibility of the resulting schedule
S = (0, 0, 17, 0, 21, 25, 4, 41, 21, 48, 32, 53) over all scenarios with regard to the predeﬁned
conﬁdence level (1 −ϵ) = 0.9. This involves checking each scenario π ∈S independently.
If the precedence and/or resource constraints are violated for a scenario π, we increase ρπ to
1. In our example, however, ρπ remains 0 for all scenarios. This suggests that we can poten-
tially reduce the objective function by preponing an activity that lies on the critical path. To
123

Annals of Operations Research
determine the critical path, we start from the last critical activity j = n + 1 and identify
the previous critical activity jprev = arg max⟨i, j⟩∈E(CTi), where i are the predecessors of j
and CTi are the corresponding latest completion times over all scenarios π ∈S. Thus, we
analyze all predecessors of activity 11 (project end), i.e., i ∈{8, 9, 10}, and check which
activity has the highest CT -value. Since max{26, 53, 43} = 53, we set j = jprev = 9. Then,
we check all predecessors of j = 9 (i.e., i ∈{3, 7}) and determine activity 7 as the next
critical one. This process is continued until the project start (i = 0) is obtained. With this
method, we receive CP = {0, 2, 5, 7, 9, 11}.
According to Equation (15), for each real critical activity j ∈{2, 5, 7, 9}, we compute
the difference between the durations in the scenario with the highest workload (dmax
j
) and
the second-highest workload (dmax −1
j
). The respective calculations are as follows: 2 =
dmax
2
−dmax −1
2
= ⌈11/3⌉−⌈7/3⌉= 4 −3 = 1, 5 = ⌈7/5⌉−⌈6/5⌉= 2 −2 = 0,
7 = ⌈46/7⌉−⌈43/7⌉= 7 −7 = 0, and 9 = ⌈24/5⌉−⌈21/5⌉= 5 −5 = 0. In order
to maximize the improvement, we select activity 2 with the highest . Since ξ2 = 1 and
ξ2 ≤ψ = 1 hold, we set jmax = 2. As a result, the start times of each successor l are reduced
by one time unit. In this way, a new schedule S′ = (0, 0, 17, 0, 20, 24, 14, 40, 20, 47, 31, 52)
is generated that is subsequently checked for feasibility over all scenarios π ∈S. Since S′
cannot be improved any further, the algorithm terminates. As the initial solution xinit was
generated using a greedy approach, all activities can be allocated up to 100% of the upper
limit rik (i.e., γi = 1, i ∈V ). Therefore, xinit is the schedule S = S′, which is represented
by λ = (0, 1, 3, 6, 2, 4, 10, 8, 5, 7, 9, 11) and γ = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1).
Example 2: Scatter search
We consider the schedule S = (0, 0, 17, 0, 20, 24, 14, 40, 20, 47, 31, 52), obtained via the
SSGS, as the initial solution xinit for the instance shown in Figure 4. This solution is repre-
sented by the priority list λ = (0, 1, 3, 6, 2, 4, 10, 8, 5, 7, 9, 11) and the resource allocation
percentage γ = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1). Based on xinit, we search for a better solu-
tion within the neighborhood N(xinit) in order to reduce the project duration Sn+1 = 52. In
accordance with the precedence constraints in E and the critical path CP = {0, 2, 5, 7, 9, 11},
we want to select an activity pair C = (i, j) to prioritize activity j ∈CP by adjusting the
resource allocation in a way that shortens the makespan. Since activity 2 lies on the criti-
cal path, increasing its resource allocation can reduce its duration and thereby shorten the
overall project duration. Consequently, we identify any non-critical activities overlapping
with j = 2 in time periods where 2 is active. In our case, activity 6 overlaps with activity 2
during time period t = 17 (see Figure 5). Now, we perform a swap of activities 2 and 6 and
check for feasibility. To increase the resource allocation of activity 2, we assess the assigned
resources for activity 6. Since the resource allocation for activity 6 exceeds its lower limit
r6 = 5 in periods t = {14, 15, 16} and the allocation for activity 2 remains below its upper
limit r2 = 3 in periods t = {18, 19}, a feasible resource transfer is possible. Thus, we reduce
the resource allocation γ6 for activity 6, ensuring that this adjustment does not delay the
overall project duration Sn+1. The available resources are then reassigned to activity 2, until
either its allocation rπ
ikt reaches the upper limit rik or no further resources can be transferred
without violating the given constraints of the model. With γ ′
6 = 0.9, the start times of all
successor activities can be ensured without causing any delays.
Based on the resulting schedule S = (0, 0, 17, 0, 20, 24, 14, 40, 20, 47, 31, 52), along
with the updated solution representation λ′ = (0, 1, 3, 2, 6, 4, 10, 8, 5, 7, 9, 11) as well as
γ ′ = (1, 1, 1, 1, 0.9, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1), we create a new schedule S′ by applying the PSGS.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Resource proﬁle of schedule S′ after applying the PSGS
Starting with period t = 0, activity i = 0 is carried out. Since no other activities have been
started yet, the set A′ is empty at t = 0. Therefore, we have to determine the eligible set
E; in our case it holds that E = {1, 2, 3}. With the earliest start times of all activities j ∈E
being less than or equal to t = 0, activity j = 1 is selected according to the priority rule
GRD and the workload w3
1 = 41 is randomly chosen. Subsequently, the lower resource limit
r1 = 3 is allocated and the set A′ = A′ ∪{1} is updated. Now, we have to check if further
activities j ∈E can be started without causing a resource conﬂict at time t = 0. Since there
are still 7 resource units available up to capacity Rt = 10, activities 3 and 2 can also be
started by assigning their lower resource limits r3 = 3 and r2 = 2. The sets A′ = {1, 2, 3}
and E = ∅are updated accordingly. There are still two resource units available before the
capacity limit is reached, which can be ﬁlled with units from activities i ∈A′. According to
the sequence of λ′, we consider activity 1 as the ﬁrst activity to receive additional resources.
We check the upper resource limit, which is speciﬁed by r1 ·γ1 = 5, ·1 = 5, and allocate two
additional resource units to activity 1. In period t = 1, we assign the lower resource limit
rik to each activity i ∈A′, following the sequence of λ′. Since E = ∅, no further activities
are scheduled; A′ remains. After that, resource units are still allocated up to the capacity
R1 = 10. As in t = 0, activity 2 receives two more resource units. At t = 2, activities 1, 3,
and 2 are scheduled again. However, since the assignment of r2 = 2 resource units means
that only one resource unit (lower than r2 = 2) is available from activity 2 in the next period
t = 3, activity 2 must be given an additional resource unit to ensure the feasibility of the
solution. After that, only one resource unit remains up to capacity 10 and activity 1 receives
it.
The process is repeated in the following periods until all activities have been scheduled,
resulting in a new resource proﬁle, as shown in Figure 6. Please note that the allocated
resources as a result of Case 3 are highlighted in the resource proﬁle with blue rectangles.
Furthermore, the maximum resource limit of activity 6 has to be considered with r6 = 10 ·
0.9 = 9. At the end, we achieve the schedule S′ = (0, 0, 0, 0, 22, 22, 14, 30, 22, 44, 33, 49)
with Sn+1 = 49 (ﬁtness value).
Assume an initial population Pinit of 30 solutions is generated using three priority rules:
EST, GRD, and RAND. For each rule, we ﬁrst generate an initial solution using SSGS
and then apply an improvement step using PSGS to obtain a second solution. This results
in four solutions from the deterministic rules EST and GRD. The remaining 26 solutions
are generated in 13 additional iterations using RAND, where each iteration again cre-
ates one solution via SSGS and one improved neighbor via PSGS, yielding the complete
population of 30 solutions. We set b = 10 and choose the best ﬁve solutions. For the
remaining solutions, we calculate their diversity according to Equation (17) in relation to
the solutions in b1 = {x2, x4, x6, x8, x10} and select the ﬁve most diverse to create the set
b2 = {x1, x5, x7, x9, x13}. Then, the subsets are generated by combining the elements of
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Performing a two-point crossover based on subset σ = (x2, x8)
b1 with each other and with the solutions from b2. This results in 35 different two-element
subsets σ, which are selected one after the other. For each subset, a two-point crossover is
used to generate new solutions. Let σ = (x2, x8) be the given subset and c1 = 3 and c2 = 8
the two crossover points, then two new solutions x S and x D are obtained. Both solutions are
represented by their respective λ and γ (see Figure 7).
In order to ﬁnd possible improvements, an improvement method or a local search
method is performed for each solution x S and x D. Thereby, the neighbor solution x D′
λ
=
(0, 1, 3, 2, 5, 6, 4, 7, 10, 8, 9, 11) can be determined by swapping the activities 4 and 6. In
this context, we also change the resource allocation by setting γ3 = 0.83 and redistribute the
resources from the non-critical activity i = 3 to the critical activity j = 1. This adjustment
leads to the optimal schedule S = (0, 0, 1, 0, 17, 12, 14, 24, 30, 32, 27, 39) with Sn+1 = 39.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the German Research Foundation for the ﬁnancial
support of our current research.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Declarations
Conﬂict of Interests This study was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG), project no.
520722132. Apart from that, the authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content
of this article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Artigues, C., Leus, R., & Talla Nobibon, F. (2013). Robust optimization for resource-constrained project
scheduling with uncertain activity durations. Annals of Operations Research, 25(1), 175–205. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10696-012-9147-2
Ballestín, F. (2007). When it is worthwhile to work with the stochastic RCPSP? Journal of Scheduling, 10(3),
153–166. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10951-007-0012-1
Ballestín, F., & Leus, R. (2009). Resource-constrained project scheduling for timely project completion with
stochastic activity durations. Production and Operations Management, 18(4), 459–474. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1937-5956.2009.01023.x
123

Annals of Operations Research
Baradaran, S., Fatemi Ghomi, S., Mobini, M., & Hashemin, S. (2010). A hybrid scatter search approach
for resource-constrained project scheduling problem in pert-type networks. Advances in Engineering
Software, 41(7), 966–975. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advengsoft.2010.05.010
Baumann, P., & Trautmann, N. (2013). Optimal scheduling of work-content constrained projects. Proceedings
oftheIEEEInternationalConferenceonIndustrialEngineeringandEngineeringManagement,395–399,.
https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEM.2013.6962441
Blazewicz, J., Lenstra, J., & Kan, A. (1983). Scheduling subject to resource constraints: Classiﬁcation and
complexity. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 5(1), 11–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-218X(83)90012-
4
Brucker, P., Drexl, A., Möhring, R., Neumann, K., & Pesch, E. (1999). Resource-constrained project schedul-
ing: Notation, classiﬁcation, models, and methods. European Journal of Operational Research, 112(1),
3–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(98)00204-5
Bruni, M. E., Beraldi, P., & Guerriero, F. (2015). The stochastic resource-constrained project scheduling
problem. Handbook on Project Management and Scheduling Vol. 2 (pp. 811–835). Cham: Springer.
Bruni, M. E., Beraldi, P., Guerriero, F., & Pinto, E. (2011). A heuristic approach for resource constrained
project scheduling with uncertain activity durations. Computers & Operations Research, 38(9), 1305–
1318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2010.12.004
Bruni, M. E., Pugliese, L. D., Beraldi, P., & Guerriero, F. (2017). An adjustable robust optimization model for
the resource-constrained project scheduling with uncertain activity durations. Omega, 71, 66–84. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2016.09.009
Brˇci´c, M., Kalpiˇc, D., & Fertalj, K. (2012). Resource constrained project scheduling under uncertainty: A
survey. 401–409.
Chakrabortty, R. K., Sarker, R. A., & Essam, D. L. (2017). Resource constrained project scheduling with
uncertain activity durations. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 112, 537–550. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cie.2016.12.040
Creemers, S. (2015). Minimizing the expected makespan of a project with stochastic activity durations under
resource constraints. Journal of Scheduling, 18(3), 263–273. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10951-015-0421-
5
Davari, M., & Demeulemeester, E. (2018). A novel branch-and-bound algorithm for the chance-constrained
resource-constrained project scheduling problem. International Journal of Production Research, 57(4),
1265–1282. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1504245
Davari,M.,&Demeulemeester,E.(2019a).Theproactiveandreactiveresource-constrainedprojectscheduling
problem. Journal of Scheduling, 22(2), 211–237. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10951-017-0553-x
Davari, M., & Demeulemeester, E. (2019b). Important classes of reactions for the proactive and reactive
resource-constrained project scheduling problem. Annals of Operations Research,274(1), 187–210.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-018-2899-7
Demeulemeester, E., & Herroelen, W. (2002). Project scheduling (1st ed.). New York: Springer.
Demeulemeester, E., Vanhoucke, M., & Herroelen, W. (2003). RanGen: A random network generator
for activity-on-the-node networks. Journal of Scheduling, 6(1), 17–38. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:
1022283403119
Fündeling, C.-U., & Trautmann, N. (2010). A priority-rule method for project scheduling with work-content
constraints. European Journal of Operational Research, 203(3), 568–574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2009.09.019
Glover, F. (1977). Heuristics for integer programming using surrogate constraints. Decision Sciences, 8(1),
156–166. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5915.1977.tb01074.x
Hartmann, S. (1998). A competitive genetic algorithm for resource-constrained project scheduling. Naval
Research Logistics, 45(7), 733–750. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1520-6750(199810)45:7<733::AID-
NAV5>3.0.CO;2-C
Hartmann, S., & Briskorn, D. (2010). A survey of variants and extensions of the resource-constrained project
scheduling problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 207(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ejor.2009.11.005
Herroelen, W., & Leus, R. (2004). Robust and reactive project scheduling: A review and classiﬁcation of
procedures. International Journal of Production Research, 42(8), 1599–1620. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207540310001638055
Herroelen, W., & Leus, R. (2005). Project scheduling under uncertainty: Survey and research potentials.
European Journal of Operational Research, 165(2), 289–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2004.04.
002
Igelmund, G., & Radermacher, F. J. (1983a). Algorithmic approaches to preselective strategies for stochastic
scheduling problems. Networks,13(1), 29–48. https://doi.org/10.1002/net.3230130103
123

Annals of Operations Research
Igelmund, G., & Radermacher, F. J. (1983b). Preselective strategies for the optimization of stochastic project
networks under resource constraints. Networks,13(1), 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1002/net.3230130102
Kellenbrink, C., & Helber, S. (2015). Scheduling resource-constrained projects with a ﬂexible project structure.
European Journal of Operational Research, 246(2), 379–391. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.05.003
Khoshsirat, M., & Mousavi, S. M. (2024). A new proactive and reactive approach for resource-constrained
project scheduling problem under activity and resource disruption: A scenario-based robust optimization
approach. Annals of Operations Research, 338(1), 597–643. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05895-
9
Kolisch, R., & Hartmann, S. (2000). Experimental evaluation of state-of-the-art heuristics for the resource-
constrained project scheduling problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 127(2), 394–407.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(99)00485-3
Kolisch, R., & Hartmann, S. (2006). Experimental investigation of heuristics for resource-constrained project
scheduling: An update. European Journal of Operational Research, 174(1), 23–37. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ejor.2005.01.065
Kolisch, R., & Meyer, K. (2006). Selection and scheduling of pharmaceutical research projects. In Perspectives
in Modern Project Scheduling. International Series in Operations Research & Management Science Vol.
92, 321–344. Springer, Boston.
Kolisch, R., Meyer, K., Mohr, R., Schwindt, C., & Urmann, M. (2003). Ablaufplanung für die Leitstruktur-
optimierung in der Pharmaforschung. Journal of Business Economics, 78, 825–848.
Kolisch, R., & Padman, R. (2001). An integrated survey of deterministic project scheduling. Omega, 29(3),
249–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-0483(00)00046-3
Kolisch, R., & Sprecher, A. (1997). PSPLIB–A project scheduling problem library: OR software–ORSEP
operations research software–exchange program. European Journal of Operational Research, 96(1),
205–216. https://doi.org/0.1016/S0377-2217(96)00170-1
Lamas, P., & Demeulemeester, E. (2016). A purely proactive scheduling procedure for the resource-constrained
project scheduling problem with stochastic activity durations. Journal of Scheduling, 19(4), 409–428.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10951-015-0423-3
Luo, J., Vanhoucke, M., Coelho, J., & Guo, W. (2022). An efﬁcient genetic programming approach to design
priority rules for resource-constrained project scheduling problem. Expert Systems with Applications,198,
Article 116753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.116753
Martí, R., Laguna, M., & Glover, F. (2006). Principles of scatter search. European Journal of Operational
Research, 169(2), 359–372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2004.08.004
Mobini, M., Rabbani, M., Amalnick, M., Razmi, J., & Rahimi Vahed, A. (2009). Using an enhanced scatter
search algorithm for a resource-constrained project scheduling problem. Soft Computing, 13(6), 597–610.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-008-0337-5
Möhring, R., Radermacher, F., & Weiss, G. (1984). Stochastic scheduling problems I: General strategies.
Mathematical Methods of Operations Research, 28(7), 193–260. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01919323
Naber, A. (2017). Resource-constrained project scheduling with ﬂexible resource proﬁles in continuous time.
Computers & Operations Research, 84, 33–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2017.02.018
Naber, A., & Kolisch, R. (2014). MIP models for resource-constrained project scheduling with ﬂexible resource
proﬁles. European Journal of Operational Research, 239(2), 335–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2014.05.036
Neumann, K., Schwindt, C., & Zimmermann, J. (2003). Project scheduling with time windows and scarce
resources (2nd ed.). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Oliveira, J., Dias, L., & Pereira, G. (2012). Solving the RCPSP with an evolutionary algorithm based on instance
information. Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Operations Research and Enterprise
Systems (ICORES), 157–164
Pellerin, R., Perrier, N., & Berthaut, F. (2020). A survey of hybrid metaheuristics for the resource-constrained
project scheduling problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 280(2), 395–416. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejor.2019.01.063
Pritsker, A., Waiters, L. J., & Wolfe, P. M. (1969). Multiproject scheduling with limited resources: A zero-one
programming approach. Management Science, 16(1), 93–108. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.16.1.93
Ranjbar, M., & Kianfar, F. (2010). Resource-constrained project scheduling problem with ﬂexible work pro-
ﬁles: A genetic algorithm approach. Transaction E: Industrial Engineering, 17(1), 25–35.
Sallam, K. M., Chakrabortty, R. K., & Ryan, M. J. (2021). A reinforcement learning based multi-method
approach for stochastic resource constrained project scheduling problems. Expert Systems with Applica-
tions, 169 Article 114479. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.114479
Schramme, T. (2014). Modelle und Methoden zur Lösung des ressourcenbeschränkten Projektablaufpla-
nungsproblems unter Berücksichtigung praxisrelevanter Aspekte PhD Thesis. University of Paderborn.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Stork, F. (2001). Stochastic resource-constrained project scheduling PhD Thesis. Technical University of
Berlin.
Talbot, F. B. (1982). Resource-constrained project scheduling with time-resource tradeoffs: The nonpreemptive
case. Management Science, 28(10), 1197–1210. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.28.10.1197
Tao, S., Wu, C., Sheng, Z., & Wang, X. (2018). Stochastic project scheduling with hierarchical alternatives.
Applied Mathematical Modelling, 58, 181–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2017.09.015
Tritschler, M., Naber, A., & Kolisch, R. (2014). A genetic algorithm for the resource-constrained project
scheduling problem with ﬂexible resource proﬁles. Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Project Management and Scheduling 230–233.
Tritschler, M., Naber, A., & Kolisch, R. (2017). A hybrid metaheuristic for resource-constrained project
scheduling with ﬂexible resource proﬁles. European Journal of Operational Research, 262(1), 262–273.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.03.006
Tsai, Y.-W., & Gemmill, D. (1998). Using tabu search to schedule activities of stochastic resource-constrained
projects. European Journal of Operational Research, 111(1), 129–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-
2217(97)00311-1
Van Peteghem, V., & Vanhoucke, M. (2011). Using resource scarceness characteristics to solve the multi-mode
resource-constrained project scheduling problem. Journal of Heuristics, 17(6), 705–728. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10732-010-9152-0
Wang, Y., He, Z., Kerkhove, L.-P., & Vanhoucke, M. (2017). On the performance of priority rules for the
stochastic resource constrained multi-project scheduling problem. Computers & Industrial Engineering,
114, 223–234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2017.10.021
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123