TITLE: Theory, computation, and practice of multiobjective optimisation
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05051-1
---

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1477–1478
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05051-1
PREFACE
Theory, computation, and practice of multiobjective
optimisation
Matthias Ehrgott1 · Alexander Engau2 · Margaret M. Wiecek3
Accepted: 26 October 2022 / Published online: 17 November 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Following the 25th International Conference on Multiple Criteria Decision Making (MCDM
2019) in Istanbul, Turkey, June 16–21, 2019, and the Dagstuhl Seminar on Scalability in
Multiobjective Optimization in Dagstuhl, Germany, January 12–17, 2020, we decided to
organise a special issue on theory, computation, and practice of multiobjective optimisation.
Since at the two conferences many presentations addressed a variety of different multiob-
jective optimisation problems, we decided to focus this special issue distinctively on recent
developments in multiobjective optimisation falling within the a posteriori paradigm of mul-
tiple criteria decision making (MCDM). Motivated by the prevalence of presentations on this
topic, our goal was to give the international community an opportunity to publish papers
proposing models, methods, and algorithms for multiobjective optimisation and their sup-
porting mathematical theory. In addition, to make the future volume appealing to scientists,
engineers, and practitioners, the ﬁnal call for papers also asked for manuscripts describing
important applications of multiobjective optimisation in practice.
In total, we received 38 submissions for this issue. Of these submissions, 15 papers were
out of scope by addressing other topics in the MCDM area; 9 papers were rejected following
reviews; 1 paper was withdrawn by the authors during the review process; and 13 papers
were accepted. These 13 papers constitute this special issue.
The topics addressed in these papers follow the recent trends observed in the optimisa-
tion area in general. The type of optimisation problems addressed ranges from scheduling
problems with two objectives to mixed integer linear optimisation problems and nonlinear
optimization problems, both with only continuous and with continuous as well as binary
variables. Some multiobjective models are speciﬁcally bi- or tri-objective while the methods
include exact, heuristic, or hybrid algorithms to compute or approximate the Pareto set of
these problems. Exact methods are typically used for small-size problems while heuristic
or hybrid algorithms are designed for large-scale instances for which they prove to be com-
petitive. The presented applications reﬂect the type of decision-making situations that are
important but challenging and therefore of interest to researchers.
B Matthias Ehrgott
m.ehrgott@lancaster.ac.uk
1
Department of Management Science, Lancaster University Management School, Lancaster, UK
2
Rowe School of Business, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada
3
School of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, USA
123

1478
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1477–1478
We observe that multiobjective optimisation under uncertainty and multiobjective optimi-
sation in practical applications are the dominating research themes throughout this volume
because a majority of studies address either one or both of them simultaneously. Multiob-
jective optimisation models carrying uncertainty are considered from a theoretical as well
as an applied perspective. For the former, you will ﬁnd a paper developing robust optimality
conditions for quadratic problems under data uncertainty, another one presenting optimality
conditions for robust multiobjective optimisation problems, and still another one proposing
robustness measures for integer linear problems under decision uncertainty. In an applied
context, bi-objective facility location in the presence of data uncertainty and a robust opti-
misation approach to a closed loop supply-chain model are presented in two other papers.
To demonstrate a new methodology, many of the papers also cover an application prob-
lem either directly or as a case study. In particular, these case studies include 3D printing;
load balancing in aeronautical telecommunication networks; a location-allocation problem
for unmanned aircraft systems; and several problems arising in logistics and supply chain
modelling (disassembly line balancing, supplier selection, and facility location). Other appli-
cations relate to education (efﬁciency and fairness in assigning students to projects) and
medicine (radiotherapy treatment planning).
In summary, we believe that the 13 papers in this special issue, cover a wide range of
optimisation models, solution methods and applications, and provide evidence that the area
of multiobjective optimisation is continuously developing. We are conﬁdent that readers will
ﬁnd some contributions of interest to them and will appreciate the evolution of multiobjective
optimisation that for us, the co-editors of this volume, has been a source of professional energy
and fulﬁlment.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123