TITLE: A survey on approximability of traveling salesman problems using the TSP-T3CO definition scheme
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06641-5
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06641-5
ORIGINAL - SURVEY OR EXPOSITION
A survey on approximability of traveling salesman problems
using the TSP-T3CO deﬁnition scheme
Sophia Saller1
· Jana Koehler2
· Andreas Karrenbauer3
Received: 26 May 2024 / Accepted: 28 April 2025 / Published online: 1 July 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
The traveling salesman (or salesperson) problem, short TSP, is of strong interest to many
researchers from mathematics, economics, and computer science. Manifold TSP variants
occur in nearly every scientiﬁc ﬁeld and application domain: e.g., engineering, physics, biol-
ogy, life sciences, and manufacturing. Several thousand papers are published every year. This
paper provides the ﬁrst systematic survey on the best currently known approximability and
inapproximability results for well-known TSP variants such as the “standard”, Path, Bottle-
neck, Maximum Scatter, Generalized, Clustered, Quota, Prize-Collecting, Time-dependent
TSP, Traveling Purchaser Problem, Proﬁtable Tour Problem, Orienteering Problem, TSP with
Time Windows, and Orienteering Problem with Time Windows. The foundation of our survey
is the deﬁnition scheme TSP-T3CO , which we propose as a uniform, easy-to-use and exten-
sible means for the formal and precise deﬁnition of TSP variants. Applying TSP-T3CO to
deﬁne a TSP variant reveals subtle differences within the same named variant and also brings
out the differences between variants more clearly. We achieve the ﬁrst comprehensive, con-
cise, and compact representation of approximability results by using TSP-T3CO deﬁnitions.
This makes it easier to understand the approximability landscape and the assumptions under
which certain results hold. Open gaps become more evident and results can be compared
more easily.
Keywords Traveling Salesperson · Traveling Salesman · Deﬁnition scheme ·
Polynomial-time approximation algorithms
B Andreas Karrenbauer
andreas.karrenbauer@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Sophia Saller
ssaller@xpect.ai
Jana Koehler
jana.koehler@hslu.ch
1
Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Künstliche Intelligenz, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Lucerne, Switzerland
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
123

2130
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
1 Introduction
The traveling salesman problem, the gender-neutral name being the traveling salesperson
problem, short TSP, is a problem of strong interest to many researchers and practitioners in
the ﬁelds of mathematics, economics, computer science, and engineering. In practice, a huge
variety of variants of the TSP occurs in almost every scientiﬁc ﬁeld or application domain:
engineering, physics, biology, life sciences, and manufacturing, just to name a few.
Although the “general” TSP is NP-hard, constraints on the tour or the targeted cities
can lead to problem variants for which polynomial-time exact solution or approximation
algorithms exist. The existence of lower and upper approximation bounds helps to further
classify problem variants. Lower and upper bounds characterize the difﬁculty of a variant and
indicate how well a variant can be solved with an efﬁcient, i.e., polynomial-time, algorithm. In
particular, most upper-bound results, which we review in this paper, devise such an algorithm
thatguaranteesacertainsolutionquality.Itisofhighrelevancetoresearchersandpractitioners
alike to easily determine whether a particular result applies to a variant under study.
The amount of papers published about the TSP is impressive. Searching for “traveling
salesman” (with quotes) on Google Scholar returned about 235,000 publications in total.1
19,200 of these have been published since 2020. Searching for “traveling salesperson” (with
quotes) returns 3,220 publications published since 2020. These publications reveal the almost
endless number of variants being studied. It is not only the sheer number of publications, but
in particular the many variants in which the TSP is studied that complicates further progress
in research and the transfer of theoretical results into practice.
When taking a closer look at some publications, one realizes that is often difﬁcult to
precisely identify the variant that it is studied due to the non-uniform terminology that is
used when describing a variant. As a consequence, it is hard to ﬁnd related work because
the same problem variant may be named differently, or different problem variants may be
named similarly or even identically. The non-uniform representation of variants makes it
challenging to understand whether a theoretical or empirical result applies to the variant under
consideration as details of the problem deﬁnition often remain unclear or have to be identiﬁed
by carefully reading formal proofs where additional assumptions are described. The current
“muddle” of variant deﬁnitions also hinders the communication between interested parties
and the transfer of theoretical results into practice. Notably, practitioners ﬁnd it impossible or
far too time-consuming to position their problem w.r.t. a known problem variant and to beneﬁt
from existing research results. It is too cumbersome to judge whether an approximation result
is applicable to a speciﬁc problem variant and whether or not an algorithm can be reused if
a review of the proof behind the result is required.
In this paper, we review approximability results for TSP variants and propose a uniform,
systematic and extensible deﬁnition scheme named TSP-T3CO (pronounced ti: PEs pi: ti:ko)
that we believe is equally well-suited to satisfy the needs of researchers from computer
science, economics, and mathematics as well as practitioners. TSP-T3CO represents the
ﬁve parameters, which we use to characterize TSP: the Traveler, the Targets, the Tour, the
Costs, and the Objectives. The deﬁnition scheme takes inspiration from similar scheme(s)
from the domain of scheduling problems (Conway et al., 1967; Graham et al., 1979; Pinedo,
2012), which use a tuple of parameters for the characterization of a scheduling variant,
where each parameter is characterized by one or several attribute-value ﬁelds. Existing work
on scheduling classiﬁcation schemes also shows that slightly different classiﬁcation schemes
have emerged from the early work introduced in Graham et al. (1979) and that it is not always
1 Accessed on March 31, 2025.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2131
fully clear which scheme is adopted in a scientiﬁc publication as the schemes do not have a
clearly recognizable name and the deﬁnition of attributes and values may slightly differ. The
lack of a name also makes it impossible to directly search for publications using a speciﬁc
scheme. Therefore, we decided to name the proposed deﬁnition scheme for TSP variants TSP-
T3CO . We also opted for strict mathematical rigor when deﬁning the tuple of parameters
and their associated attributes and values. We also added the year to the TSP-T3CO name
and speak of “TSP-T3CO 2025” to support the versioning of the deﬁnition scheme and to
facilitate a concise reference in publications as the set of attributes and values used to specify
a parameter may change over time.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the TSP and gives basic deﬁni-
tions as well as an example to illustrate the deﬁnitions. Section 3 discusses earlier reviews of
approximability results and reviews related work on the deﬁnition and taxonomic classiﬁca-
tion of problem variants for scheduling, traveling salesperson, and vehicle routing problems
as well as selected subﬁelds of artiﬁcial intelligence research. Section 4 formally intro-
duces the deﬁnition scheme TSP-T3CO using an EBNF grammar. We distinguish a longhand
and a shorthand notation for the deﬁnition scheme, the former supporting a detailed, well-
structured, and easily readable variant deﬁnition and the latter allowing for a very compact
precise deﬁnition of TSP variants. In Section 5, attributes and values for the ﬁelds of the
TSP-T3CO 2025 deﬁnition scheme are formally deﬁned. These attributes and values are
used to characterize TSP variants in our review of approximability results. In Section 6, we
present our review of approximability and inapproximability results for TSP variants. We
use TSP-T3CO 2025 to deﬁne commonly known variants of the TSP that are widely studied,
which include the “standard” TSP, Path TSP, Bottleneck TSP, Maximum Scatter TSP, Gen-
eralized TSP, Clustered TSP, Traveling Purchaser Problem, Proﬁtable Tour Problem, Quota
TSP, Prize-Collecting TSP, Orienteering Problem, Time-dependent TSP, TSP with Time Win-
dows, and the Orienteering Problem with Time Windows. We contacted the authors of the
referenced publications as far as possible and asked them to review the TSP-T3CO deﬁnition
of their respective variant. Many of them got in touch with us, which allows us to present over
60 conﬁrmed deﬁnitions that are marked with ✓. In Section 7, we brieﬂy discuss how TSP-
T3CO 2025 can be extended to deﬁne vehicle routing problem variants involving more than
one traveler. Finally, in Section 8, we summarize the contributions of this paper. Appendix 9
provides a cheat sheet for TSP-T3CO 2025. In Appendix 10, we propose deﬁnitions for the
TSP variants surveyed in Section 6.
2 The traveling salesman problem
TSP is one of the best-known combinatorial optimization problems. Given a list of cities
and distances between them, a traveling salesperson needs to ﬁnd a shortest possible route
to visit the cities. There are many variants of this problem, which makes it hard to formally
deﬁne a generic version. However, many variants of TSP (if not all) can be formulated over
a graph. Let G = (V , E) be a graph with n nodes in V representing the cities and m edges
in E representing connections between cities. The edges can either be directed or undirected
where the latter implies that the direction of travel does not matter, and the former allows us
to model one-way roads and asymmetries, e.g., between uphill and downhill travel times. An
undirected edge e is an unordered two-element subset of the node set, i.e., e = {v, w} ⊆V .
If it is directed, it is an ordered pair of nodes, i.e., e = (v, w), which means that the edge is
123

2132
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
directed from v to w. Generally speaking, TSP are concerned with walks in the given graph,
which can formally be deﬁned as follows, see Schrijver (2003).
Deﬁnition 1 (Walk) A walk in a graph G = (V , E) is a sequence
S = (v0, e1, v1, . . . , ek, vk) ,
where ei = {vi−1, vi} or ei = (vi−1, vi) for all i ∈[k] := {1, . . . , k} in an undirected or
directed graph, respectively. A walk is called closed if vk = v0. A walk is called simple if
no nodes appear more than once in the sequence except for potentially v0 = vk. A simple
closed walk is called circuit. A simple walk that is not a circuit is called path.
A walk in an undirected graph implicitly deﬁnes a direction for the edges on the walk. A
circuit containing all nodes of the graph is usually referred to as a Hamiltonian Circuit
and a path containing all nodes is accordingly called Hamiltonian Path.
There are variants of TSP that distinguish between visiting and traversing a node,
e.g., depending on whether a traveler stops in a city or just passes through. To this end,
we allow to drop nodes from a walk, i.e., more than one edge may appear in the sequence
between two nodes provided that consistency2 is maintained. In this light, v ∈S refers
to a node that is visited by S, i.e., explicitly appears in S. We call a walk proper if it is
an alternating sequence of nodes and edges. If a walk S is not proper, then we call the
inclusion-wise maximal walk with the same set of edges the originating proper walk of S.
Let (v1, . . . , vk) be the sequence of visited nodes of some walk. Accordingly, we deﬁne
visitsS(v) := |{i : vi = v}| as the multiplicities in S for all v ∈V . If the walk is clear from
the context, we may omit the subscript S. Moreover, we deﬁne the sequence of traversed
nodes of S as the sequence of visited nodes of the originating proper walk W. Accordingly, we
have traversalsS(v) := visitsW(v). If no distinction is made between visited and traversed
nodes, then, as the default, the node is traversed.
In what follows, we sometimes refer to parts of a walk. For convenience, we deﬁne the
following notation.
Deﬁnition 2 (Parts of a Walk) Let S := (v0, e1, . . . , vk) be a walk. We use the notation
• SV for the sequence of visited nodes of a walk,
• VS := {v ∈V : v ∈S} for the set of visited nodes of a walk,
• SE for the sequence of edges of a walk,
• ES := {e ∈E : e ∈S} for the set of traversed edges of a walk,
• S≤i := (v0, e1, . . . , vi) for the preﬁx of a walk ending at its i-th visited node where
i ≤k,
• S<i := S≤i −vi where the last node is removed from the sequence,
• Si := S≤i −S<i, which is the i-th visited node of the sequence,
• start(S) is the ﬁrst traversed node of S, i.e., start(S) = WV (0) where W is the origi-
nating proper walk of S,
• end(S) is the last traversed node of S, i.e., end(S) = WV (k) where W is the originating
proper walk of S and k = |WV | −1.
The difference between SV and VS is that the former is a sequence with potentially
multiple occurrences of some nodes, while the latter is a set of nodes without multiplicities.
This distinction is necessary to model the objective for some TSP variants.
2 Should a walk consist solely of undirected edges between the same two nodes, dropping both nodes may
lead to an ambiguity about the direction. In this case, we assume that the originating proper walk can be
restored from the context.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2133
Fig. 1 Example of an undirected graph with its edge and node costs
A cost function c can be any map from the set of walks to the reals. However, it is most
common to consider separable functions that are sums over costs of visited nodes and edges
of the walk where occurrences are counted with multiplicities, i.e.,
c(S) =

e∈SE
c1(e)



=:c2(SE)
+

v∈SV
c2(v)



=:c1(SV )
,
where c1 : E →R and c2 : V →R. Moreover, there are variants that do not require to visit
all nodes, but penalties p occur for nodes that are not visited. For convenience, we use the
notation
p(SV ) :=

v∈V \VS
p(v).
For a directed edge (u, v) ∈E, we will use the notation c(u, v) to refer to its cost instead
of c((u, v)). Similarly, we write c(u, v) for an undirected edge {u, v} instead of c({u, v}),
where it is implicitly assumed that c(u, v) = c(v, u). Moreover, c(S) always refers to the
total costs even if the domain of c is not the set of walks, i.e., we consider a suitable lifting
of c. For some TSP variants, it is necessary to consider parallel edges between the same pair
of nodes, e.g., when their costs are time-dependent or multiple cost functions are involved
where no edge dominates the other in all aspects.
Figure 1 shows an example graph of a TSP with V
= {v1, v2, v3, v4} and E =
{e1, e2, e3, e4, e5} as well as associated edge and node costs. Let us consider the following
three walks in the graph from Figure 1: S1 = (v1, e1, v2, e2, v3, e2, e3, v4, e4), in which node
v2 is visited before node v3, the walk S2 = (v1, e1, v2, e2, v3, e2, v2, e3, v4, e4), in which
node v2 is visited twice, and the walk S3 = (v1, e1, v2, e2, v3, e2, e3, v4, e5), which uses
an alternative edge e5 to close the circuit. The sequence SE = (e1, e2, e2, e3, e4) describes
the edges of the ﬁrst two walks. In this sequence, visited vertices remain implicit and the
sequence leaves open whether the traveler visits node v2 before or after node v3 or even
twice. The costs of these walks in our example are c(SE) = 8, c(S1) = 12, c(S2) = 13, and
c(S3) = 13. In a TSP variant where we do not care about node costs and only consider the
length of the tour, SE is sufﬁcient as a representation of a solution.
3 Related work
Until today, there is no comprehensive review of polynomial-time approximability and inap-
proximality results available. Papers that publish new theoretical results usually limit their
related work section to earlier work with results for the TSP variant studied in the paper
123

2134
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
or on publications of algorithmic techniques that are used or improved to achieve a new
result. Excellent examples are Vygen (2012), which focuses on the asymmetric, symmetric,
and graphic variants of the “standard” TSP, and Traub (2020), which focuses on asymmetric
and symmetric variants of the “standard” TSP and the path TSP. A recent and comprehen-
sive survey on the Generalized TSP was published in Pop et al. (2023), which provides an
overview on exact and approximate algorithms, transformation methods, and heuristic and
metaheuristic algorithms. A survey on heuristic approximations was published in Kongkaew
and Pichitlamken (2014). Older surveys are Burkard et al. (1998), which resents an overview
of polyniomal-time solvable TSP variants known until 1998, and Laporte (1992); Bern and
Eppstein (1996), which review selected exact and approximate algorithms for the “standard”
TSP. A very good overview on the TSP and a bibliography of historic TSP publications is
provided by William Cook.3
With the growing number of publications on the TSP in the 1990s, an increasing desire
to classify problem variants and to clarify the relationships between published results can
be observed. A paper published by Langevin et al. (1990) reviews and compares different
formulations of the TSP with the goal of establishing correspondences between the different
published results. Another analysis and review of publications on time-dependent TSP vari-
ants was published by Gouveia and Voß (1995). A bibliography of 500 publications on TSP,
vehicle routing, chinese postman, and rural postman problems was published by Laporte and
Osman (1995), which was motivated by “the abundant and somewhat disorganized litera-
ture” on these problems. This paper used a “simple and relatively broad classiﬁcation scheme”
specifying the properties of the graph, the objective, and a set of constraints. However, none
of the attributes or their values were formally deﬁned because the focus of this classiﬁcation
scheme was more on providing a taxonomy to organize and structure the comprehensive list
of references collected in the paper.
A successful attempt to classify TSP variants was published by Reinelt with the Traveling
Salesperson Problems Library TSPLIB (Reinelt, 1991). TSPLIB had the goal of providing
the community with challenge problems and solutions. It was, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst
attempt that introduced speciﬁc attribute/value pairs to deﬁne TSP variants. For example, the
keyword TYPE with possible values such as TSP, ATSP, or CVRP identiﬁes symmetric TSP,
asymmetric TSP, or vehicle routing problems. The attribute CAPACITY is used to denote the
capacity of vehicles in a vehicle routing problem, GRAPH_TYPE speciﬁes whether the graph
is complete or sparse, and EDGE_TYPE speciﬁes whether edges are directed or undirected.
Costs are deﬁned in the EDGE_WEIGHT_TYPE attribute and can comprise different distance
metrics such as euclidean, Manhattan, or geographical distances. Some of Reinelt’s keywords
and values also occur in our deﬁnition scheme.
In the decades following the work on TSPLIB, many new TSP variants were studied;
however, less interest can be observed in the community to adopt a uniform scheme for
deﬁning these variants. The book by Applegate et al. (2011) touches upon “the many ﬂavors
of the TSP” in its introductory chapter but only consider the “standard” TSP that is equivalent
to computing a Hamiltonian circuit. In Deineko et al. (2014), a complete classiﬁcation for
restricted polynomially-time solvable variants of the TSP with so-called four-point conditions
is presented to establish a precise border between polynomially-time solvable and NP-hard
variants of this restricted problem.
For the TSP with several travelers, also known as the multiple TSP or MTSP, and com-
monly denoted as the vehicle routing problem (VRP), several proposals for a classiﬁcation
scheme or taxonomy have been made over the last decades. They are motivated by the high
3 https://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/index.html
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2135
practical relevance of the problem and the huge number of variants in which a VRP can
occur in practice. Interestingly, work on systematizing VRP variants is more focused on
deﬁning taxonomies rather than on formally deﬁning the properties that characterize a vari-
ant. Researchers implicitly seem to take it for granted that there is a uniform and precise
understanding of a problem variant and, therefore, naming the problem variant is sufﬁcient
for its precise identiﬁcation.
The ﬁrst VRP taxonomy dates back to Bodin (1975), who observed that “this problem
has a reasonably natural taxonomic structure” and that “many vehicle routing and scheduling
problems can be classiﬁed by their underlying properties”. Bodin introduced three charac-
teristics of a VRP: First, the network classiﬁcation that speciﬁes whether it is a node routing,
branch routing, or general routing problem. Second, the number of vehicles, and third, the
type of the algorithm or solution method, which is used to solve a problem, e.g., exact or
heuristic methods. In Bodin and Golden (1981), the attributes to characterize a VRP vari-
ant were reﬁned into 13 different categories and 7 different types of solution methods were
distinguished. All later proposals for the classiﬁcation of VRPs are variations of this early
work.
In 1990, Desrochers et al. (1990) introduced a TSP classiﬁcation scheme with four ﬁelds:
addresses, vehicles, problem characteristics, and objectives. A wide variety of attributes and
possible values is introduced for each ﬁeld, but the paper does not provide a formal deﬁni-
tion for the attributes. To specify the scheme, a context-free grammar was used and several
examples of well-known VRP and TSP were classiﬁed. For example, the TSP with time
windows is denoted by 1, tw j | 1 |  | T . The proposal nevertheless was not successful,
perhaps due to the lack of formal deﬁnitions for the attributes and values. Several different
taxonomies were published over time, many of them with the goal of systematically review-
ing the abundant literature on TSP/VRP variants; for example, comprehensive reviews on
transportation network design and routing problems can be found in Current and Min (1986);
Current and Marsh (1993). Dynamic VRP variants where “part of the input required to solve
it (that is, which nodes actually request service) is revealed to the dispatcher concurrently
with the determination of the route” are reviewed in Psaraftis (1995). Variants of the location-
routing problem LRP that combines tour planning and facility location planning within the
same problem are reviewed in Min et al. (1998). An overview on variants of the dynamic
resource transformation problem can be found in Powell et al. (2001). A critical review
of these classiﬁcation proposals was published in Eksioglu et al. (2009), which proposes
yet another taxonomy to classify so-called generalized routing problems. This taxonomy is
meant to be extensible and provides the following 7 classes: (1) shortest path problem, (2)
Chinese postman problem, (3) rural postman problem, (4) dial-a-ride service route problem,
(5) arc routing problem, (6) TSP, and (7) VRP. None of these problem classes is formally
and precisely deﬁned.
The literature survey in Pillac et al. (2013) reviews VRP application areas and algo-
rithm types based on the taxonomy from Psaraftis (1995) and simpliﬁes it into a
4-quadrants model using information quality (stochastic/deterministic) and information evo-
lution (static/dynamic) as its two axes. A literature review of green vehicle routing problems
can be found in Lin et al. (2014), which introduces a large set of names for various problem
variants, but again without providing precise formal deﬁnitions. Further taxonomic varia-
tions are introduced in these VRP surveys (Montoya-Torres et al., 2015; Lahyani et al., 2015;
Psaraftis et al., 2016; Braekers et al., 2016; Cheikhrouhou & Khouﬁ, 2021) published between
2015 and 2021. A more formally deﬁned classiﬁcation scheme of VRPs can be found in Irnich
et al. (2014). Formal deﬁnitions for various VRP variants are given and problems are clas-
siﬁed based on the (road) network structure, the type of transportation requests, constraints
123

2136
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
that affect each route individually, the ﬂeet composition and location, inter-route constraints,
and optimization objectives. Formal deﬁnitions of attributes and values to characterize the
problems along these properties are not given. Instead, the paper informally reviews possible
deﬁnitions from related work.
The literature offers all these proposals, none of which seem to have convinced researchers
and practitioners. As evidence, take for example the fact that none of the available proposals
is uniformly adopted by all papers within the research paper collections published between
2008 and 2020 (Golden et al., 2008; Toth & Vigo, 2014; Derbel et al., 2020). We see several
reasons for this ongoing quest for an easy-to-use and extensible approach to precisely char-
acterize TSP/VRPs: First, a taxonomy introduces a predeﬁned hierarchical structure to align
or separate problem classes, which is too rigid to cover the manifold variants under study.
Secondly, most of the proposals introduce problem attributes without providing precise math-
ematical deﬁnitions of these attributes and their possible values. This has the consequence that
the classiﬁcation of a problem instance often depends on the informal problem description
of a problem class, which might give room for interpretation. Thirdly, most VRP taxonomies
serve as a basis to organize a survey of the scientiﬁc literature and are less aimed at providing
a formalism that would support researchers and practitioners in the precise deﬁnition of their
problem variant. Last but not least, we believe that the deﬁnition of the problem and possible
solution methods/algorithms should be clearly separated. However, as most VRP taxonomies
are used to review the scientiﬁc literature, it is not surprising that adopted solution methods
are an essential part of most taxonomies.
The work on TSP-T3CO is inspired by classiﬁcation schemes used to characterize schedul-
ing problems. A ﬁrst such scheme was introduced by Conway, Maxwell, and Miller in their
seminal book (Conway et al., 1967). It uses four information categories to describe a schedul-
ing problem, where each category introduces different attributes and possible values and is
denoted with an upper-case letter: A - jobs and operations to be processed, B - number and
types of machines available for processing, C - the variant of the scheduling problem such
as, for example, ﬂow-shop or randomly routed job-shop, D - evaluation criteria (objective)
for the evaluation of a schedule such as, for example, the average or maximum completion
time, ﬂow time, lateness or tardiness. A notation was deﬁned that separates each category by
a slash and lists the attribute values. As examples for this notation, the problem n/2/F/Fmax
asks to minimize the maximum ﬂow-time, which is the time the last job is ﬁnished, for n
jobs in a 2-machine ﬂow shop, whereas the problem n/m/G/Fmax asks to schedule n jobs
in a job shop with m machines using the same objective.
It took some time for this classiﬁcation scheme to gain inﬂuence. A survey paper (Bak-
shi & Arora, 1969) and the textbook by Baker (Baker & Trietsch, 1974) do not make use
of it although both give a comprehensive overview on classes of scheduling problems. The
collection edited by Coffman (1976) also provides a detailed review of the state of the art
in scheduling algorithms in the 1970s but uses its own scheduling model with the elements
resources, task systems, sequencing constraints (focusing on preemption/non-preemption
and task priorities), and performance measures. A task system is speciﬁed by a set of tasks,
precedence constraints, execution times, resource requirements, and weights being inter-
preted as deferral costs. The model is described using a speciﬁc notation and was used by all
contributing authors of this book.
It was not until the paper by Graham et al. (Graham et al., 1979) that a 3-ﬁeld classiﬁcation
scheme α | β | γ was introduced, but it does not explicitly refer to the work by Conway
et al. (1967). In this scheme, α characterizes the machine environment, β speciﬁes the job
characteristics, and γ refers to the objective. Similarly to Conway et al. (1967), a shorthand
notation was introduced that separates ﬁelds by vertical lines and only lists attribute values
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2137
between the lines. In this notation, the example 1 | prec | Lmax speciﬁes the problem to
minimize the maximum lateness of jobs with precedence constraints on a single machine.
We build on the idea of clearly separated ﬁelds denoted by Greek letters and also make use
and extend the idea of the shorthand notation.
Comparing both (Graham et al., 1979) and (Conway et al., 1967), one notices that the
α-ﬁeld combines information from the B- and C-ﬁeld and that the γ -ﬁeld corresponds to
the D-ﬁeld. The β-ﬁeld is a new ﬁeld and is reﬁned further to specify job characteristics
such as preemption or required resources. The data that deﬁnes a speciﬁc problem instance is
separated as so-called “job data” and is not part of the classiﬁcation scheme deﬁned in Graham
et al. (1979), whereas in Conway et al. (1967) it is part of the A-ﬁeld in the classiﬁcation
scheme. The book chapter by Lawler et al. (1993) makes extensive use of the classiﬁcation
scheme by Graham et al. (1979). The textbook by Brucker (1995) uses, reﬁnes, and slightly
modiﬁes this classiﬁcation scheme further. For example, additional attributes are introduced
fortheα-ﬁeldtocharacterizemorecomplexmachineenvironmentsinvolvingmulti-processor
tasks. Both publications (Lawler et al., 1993; Brucker, 1995) also make extensive use of the
shorthand notation introduced in Graham et al. (1979) to specify a wide range of problem
variants and to provide an overview of known complexity-theoretic results and algorithms
for these variants.
Today, the classiﬁcation scheme α | β | γ is widely established to characterize scheduling
problems and is used, for example, in Dawande et al. (2005); Pan and Ruiz (2013); Pfund
et al. (2004); Ruiz and Maroto (2005); Sayadi et al. (2010) to name a few publications with
an overview character. In the inﬂuential textbook by Pinedo (2022), the α-ﬁeld contains a
single entry with one out of 9 possible values to characterize the machine environment. The
β-ﬁeld is more ﬂexibly used to specify processing characteristics and constraints and can
contain several entries that are separated by “,”. Pinedo lists an initial set of 12 possible
entries emphasizing that “any other entry that may appear in the β-ﬁeld is self explanatory”
(Pinedo, 2022, p. 17). The γ -ﬁeld describes the single (and to be minimized) objective. In
the handbook on scheduling by Blazewicz et al. (2019), the α | β | γ classiﬁcation scheme
is used with the α-ﬁeld being reﬁned into two subﬁelds and the γ -ﬁeld being reﬁned into 8
subﬁelds.
Other ﬁelds tackling optimization problems have also developed classiﬁcation schemes:
a taxonomy to classify black-box and simulation-based optimization problems based on
constraint classes is proposed in Le Digabel and Wild (2015), multi-disciplinary design
optimization architectures are surveyed and classiﬁed in Martins and Lambe (2013), and
a classiﬁcation of formulations for the optimization of distributed systems can be found
in Tosserams et al. (2009). A comprehensive overview on graph problems and the P/NP
boundary can be found in (Ridder et al. 2025).
Researchers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence have also developed formally deﬁned deﬁnition
schemes and taxonomies to characterize problem variants. A well-known example is the
work on ontological representations using so-called description logics (also known as con-
cept languages or terminological logics), which are fragments of ﬁrst-order predicate logic.
A large family of language variants is deﬁned with the goal to determine decidable fragments
of ﬁrst-order predicate logic and to study the complexity of reasoning algorithms deciding
for example subsumption in these fragments, see Baader et al. (2007, 2017) for an overview.
The theoretical work on the decidability and complexity of various description-logic vari-
ants has provided the foundation for the semantic web (Berners-Lee et al., 2001) and the
Ontology Web Language OWL (Web Ontology Language, 2012). In AI planning, the Plan-
ning Domain Deﬁnition Language PDDL was introduced in 1998 (McDermott, 2000) and
extended in 2003 (Fox & Long, 2003; McDermott, 2003) to achieve a standardized represen-
123

2138
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Fig. 2 EBNF for the TSP-T3CO longhand notation
tation of planning problems as the foundation to hold a regular competition among different
planning algorithms.4 PDDL fragments of different expressivity were identiﬁed and deﬁned
the tracks within this competition. The deﬁnition of the PDDL language was preceded by
research results on the complexity of planning problems in different planning formalisms,
e.g., Bylander (1991); Bäckström and Nebel (1995). Research results aiming at understand-
ing the border between tractable and intractable (NP-hard) subclasses of problems were
published for temporal reasoning using Allen’s Interval Algebra (Nebel & Bürckert, 1995)
and for spatial reasoning using the Region Connection Calculus (Renz & Nebel, 1999).
4 The TSP Deﬁnition Scheme TSP-T3CO
The TSP deﬁnition scheme TSP-T3CO is deﬁned by the EBNF grammars5 in Figures 2 and 3,
which introduce a longhand and a shorthand notation for the deﬁnition of a TSP variant using
ﬁve different ﬁelds: The α-ﬁeld characterizes the travelers, who are usually salespeople in
TSP, but can also be vehicles, robots, or any other entity that can move and is not stationary.
The β-ﬁeld describes how often (each or a particular) node in the graph needs to be visited
by a traveler. The γ -ﬁeld describes the tours or constraints on possible tours a traveler may
take. The δ-ﬁeld describes the cost functions existing in the problem. Finally, the ϵ-ﬁeld
describes the objective(s) in the form of optimization criteria or bounds on the costs. As
already mentioned, these ﬁve ﬁelds give the name to the deﬁnition scheme TSP-T3CO : the
Traveler, the Targets, the Tour, the Costs, and the Objectives.
In the TSP-T3CO longhand notation, a pair of angle brackets encloses the ﬁve ﬁelds.
The description of each ﬁeld begins with either a Greek letter or a keyword denoting the
ﬁeld’s name followed by a colon. In the α, β, and γ ﬁeld, a sequence of attribute-value
pairs separated by semicolons follows. An attribute is described by a name, a relation, and a
4 See https://www.icaps-conference.org/competitions/
5 Following the EBNF style introduced in Pattis (1994), we use ( | ) to list choices and {} to denote repetitions
of 0 or more occurrences. Non-terminal symbols are written in italics and terminal symbols are written within
“”. Strings in normal font such as ‘mathematical expression’, ‘string’, or ‘set’ have the standard meaning from
computer science.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2139
Fig. 3 EBNF for the TSP-T3CO shorthand notation. Rules for non-terminal symbols not deﬁned here can be
found in Figure 2
value. Names can be arbitrary strings, and values can be arbitrary mathematical expressions,
as TSP-T3CO is intended to be extensible and thus does not impose a speciﬁc notation for
attribute-value pairs. Accordingly, also the list of relations to be used between names and
values shown in Figure 2 is not meant to be ﬁnal. Attribute-value pairs should be meaningful
mathematical expressions; for example, the ∈-relation should only be used with a set as a
possible value.
In the δ-ﬁeld, the colon is followed by one or more deﬁnitions of cost functions. A cost
function is deﬁned by a name, followed by a colon after which the domain and range of the
cost function are deﬁned. An optional sequence of attribute deﬁnitions may follow, which
is separated by a comma from the deﬁnition of the cost function(s). Domain and range
speciﬁcations can be arbitrary sets and no speciﬁc notation is imposed except the →arrow
between them.
In the ϵ-ﬁeld, the colon is followed by a sequence of objective functions separated by
semicolons. An objective function can be any mathematically meaningful combination of
cost functions from the δ-ﬁeld and, hence, is only deﬁned as an arbitrary string by the EBNF.
Usually, the objective may be either to minimize, maximize or bound (above or below) the
objective function(s) or any combination thereof.
The example below illustrates the longhand notation by deﬁning a variant of the “standard”
TSP.6 In this “standard” TSP variant, a single traveler (count = 1) visits each of the n nodes of
the graph exactly once (visits = 1). The traveler may start at any node (start = False) and has
to return to the starting node at the end of the tour (circuit = True, end = False). An undirected
edge (undirected = True) exists between any two nodes (complete = True). A cost function
c is deﬁned with the set of edges E as its domain and the range being in the non-negative
rational numbers. The objective is to minimize the tour costs min c(S).
⟨α : count = 1;
β : traversals = 1;
γ : start = False;
end = False;
circuit = True;
graphtype = complete;
edgetype = undirected;
δ : c: E →R≥0;
ϵ : min c(S); ⟩
6 See Section 6.1 for a more detailed discussion of the “standard” TSP. Attributes and values will be formally
deﬁned in Section 5. We give here a brief informal explanation of each attribute as the example is intended to
illustrate the EBNF notation.
123

2140
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
The EBNF for the shorthand notation of TSP-T3CO in Figure 3 introduces a very compact
notation that omits the names of ﬁelds and that separates ﬁelds by vertical lines. For this
purpose, the EBNF in Figure 3 redeﬁnes attribute deﬁnitions, making the name, relation, and
value optional. The intended usage is as follows: As long as attribute values are uniquely
deﬁned across all attributes and the same value is not used by different attributes, only
the value is listed in a ﬁeld. If the value is non-unique or there is more than one attribute
deﬁned for a ﬁeld sharing the same range of values, the attribute-value pair must be listed
completely to achieve a precise deﬁnition. For Boolean attributes with values True and False,
the attribute name is listed if the attribute has value True. The absence of a Boolean attribute
name indicates that the attribute has value False. The deﬁnition of the δ and ϵ ﬁelds remains
unchanged except that the name of the ﬁelds are omitted. In this shorthand notation, there is
no last semicolon to end each ﬁeld as vertical lines serve as separators between ﬁelds.
The TSP variant, which we deﬁned above in the longhand notation, now simply reads
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected | c : E →R≥0 | min c(S) ⟩
in the TSP-T3CO shorthand notation. Only listing the relation and numeric value = 1 without
the attribute name in the α and β-ﬁeld yields a unique deﬁnition of this TSP variant based on
the initial list of attributes that we propose for these ﬁelds in Section 5. All attributes in the
γ -ﬁeld are Boolean attributes and therefore only the names of these attributes that all have
the value True are listed.
In Section 6, manifold examples of the shorthand notation will be shown. Some of these
examples impose additional constraints on a problem variant that are for example exploited
in the formal proof of an approximability result. These constraints are often speciﬁc to a
certain theoretical result. In this case, the TSP-T3CO shorthand notation ends with ⟩⊕and the
constraints are stated separately as text or formal deﬁnitions. If several TSP-T3CO deﬁnitions
in a publication require extensions, a running number such as ⊕1 can be added. In Section 7,
we discuss how TSP-T3CO can be extended to deal with MTSP and VRPs by introducing
additionalattributesfortheα-ﬁeld.AnextensionofTSP-T3COmayinvalidatetheuniqueness
of earlier attribute deﬁnitions. For example, it seems natural for a VRP to describe the number
and capacities of moving vehicles in the α-ﬁeld, which would make a deﬁnition of just = 1 in
this ﬁeld non-unique. We therefore use versioning and explicitly state the year of publication
of a speciﬁc TSP-T3CO version.
5 Formal Deﬁnition of Attribute-Value Pairs
In this section, we proceed with the formal deﬁnition of an initial set of attributes and values
for the α, β, γ , and δ-ﬁeld that we propose to start with in TSP-T3CO 2025. As the deﬁnition
scheme is extensible, we understand these deﬁnitions as an initial core set that can be easily
extended by researchers, with new values or attributes as needed. We also develop the notation
for the ϵ-ﬁeld further.
5.1 The Travelers Field ˛
The α-ﬁeld describes the number of salespeople traveling simultaneously, or equivalently the
number of visiting sequences that are to be found. In the case of multiple salespeople, it may
also describe their characteristics, such as capacities. For the “standard” TSP, there is just a
single salesperson who has to visit given cities. The case of several salespeople leads to the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2141
vehicle routing problem, for which we brieﬂy discuss possible extensions of the α-ﬁeld in
Section 7.
count: int | expression
The count attribute describes the number of salespeople considered in the problem; for
example, the count entry of the “standard” TSP is = 1 as exactly one salesperson exists in
the problem (Dantzig et al., 1954). The classical VEHICLE routing problem (Bellmore &
Hong, 1974; Rao, 1980), on the other hand, has count = k for some constant k.
= 1
A solution consists of a single ﬁnite sequence.
= (1) A solution consists of k ﬁnite sequences, where k = (1) is a ﬁxed parameter that
is not part of the input.
= k
A solution consists of k ﬁnite sequences, where k ≥2 is part of the input.
≥1
A solution consists of at least one ﬁnite sequence.
5.2 The Targets Field ˇ-Field
The β-ﬁeld describes which cities and how often each city has to be visited and describes
the targets of the tour. In the “standard” TSP, each city has to be visited exactly once or at
least once, but other variants exist, which allow for certain cities not to be visited or ask for
some cities to be visited multiple times. A solution of a TSP is a walk (see Section 2) and
the β-ﬁeld describes properties a solution must satisfy.
traversals: int | expression
The traversals attribute describes how often each city is to be traversed in a solution sequence.
In the “standard” TSP (Miller et al., 1960), in which each city must be traversed exactly once,
the attribute takes value = 1. If cities may be traversed multiple times, but must be traversed
at least once, the value of the traversals attribute is ≥1, which is the case for example in the
TSP with multiple visits (TMSP) (Gutin & Punnen, 2006). Furthermore, if each city should
be traversed at most once and is allowed to not be traversed at all, the traversals attribute
takes value ≤1, cf. Feillet et al. (2005).
= 1
For any solution S and all v ∈V , it must hold that traversalsS(v) = 1.
= d
For any solution S and all v ∈V it must hold that traversalsS(v) = d, where
d ≥2.
= d(v) For any solution S and all v ∈V , it must hold that traversalsS(v) = d(v).
≥1
For any solution S and all v ∈V , it must hold that traversalsS(v) ≥1.
≥0
For any solution S and all v ∈V , it must hold that traversalsS(v) ≥0.
≥d(v)
For any solution S and all v ∈V , it must hold that traversalsS(v) ≥d(v).
≤1
For any solution S and all v ∈V , it must hold that traversalsS(v) ≤1.
If one wants to further specify the value of an attribute, it is possible to extend the string value.
As an example, suppose one wishes to express that for a given subset D of V any solution S
must traverse each node in D at least once with no restrictions on the number of traversals
of other nodes. To express this, the value ≥d(v) may be extended to ≥d(v) ∈{0, 1}.
visits: string
The visits attribute describes how often each node is to be visited, i.e., how often each node
occurs in a solution. Recall from Section 2 that a node may be traversed without being visited.
If every node is visited on each traversal, it takes value always. If each traversed node is only
visited once, the attribute takes value once. If the traveler receives a bonus for each visit
123

2142
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
of a node, but also consumes time when visiting a node, the visits attribute may have value
≥once to say each node must be visited at least once, but may also be visited multiple times,
or it may have value ≤once to say that some nodes must not be visited.
= always
For any solution S and all v
∈
V , it must hold that visitsS(v)
=
traversalsS(v).
= once
For any solution S and all v ∈V such that traversalsS(v) > 0, it must
hold that visitsS(v) = 1.
≥once
For any solution S and all v ∈V such that traversalsS(v) > 0, it must
hold that visitsS(v) ≥1.
≤once
For any solution S and some v ∈V such that traversalsS(v) > 0, it can
hold that visitsS(v) ≤1.
If no distinction is made between visited and traversed nodes, then the visits attribute does
not appear in the TSP-T3CO variant deﬁnition. In the short-hand notation, we can leave out
the = sign if there is no ambiguity, i.e., we write always instead of =always.
group: string
The nodes in the graph can be grouped into sets {P1, . . . , Pk}. The group attribute describes
the properties of these groups/sets and how many nodes in each group must be visited. Groups
can be disjoint or overlapping and exactly one or at least one node from each group must
be visited, which is described by the parameter = once or ≥once in parentheses behind the
property value.
= partition (once)
For all v ∈V , there exists a unique i ∈{1, . . . , k} such that v ∈Pi,
and for any solution S and all j ∈{1, . . . , k}, there exists a unique u ∈VS such that
u ∈Pj.
= partition (≥once)
For all v ∈V , there exists a unique i ∈{1, . . . , k} such that v ∈Pi,
and for any solution S and for all j ∈{1, . . . , k}, there exists at least one u ∈VS such
that u ∈Pj.
= cover (once)
For all v ∈V , there exists at least one i ∈{1, . . . , k} such that v ∈Pi, and
for any solution S and all j ∈{1, . . . , k}, there exists a unique u ∈VS such that u ∈Pj.
= cover (≥once)
For all v ∈V , there exists at least one i ∈{1, . . . , k} such that v ∈Pi,
and for any solution S and all j ∈{1, . . . , k}, there exists at least one u ∈VS such that
u ∈Pj.
The set of parameters may also be extended to include further information, for example
specify the number of nodes that should be traversed in each cluster or how many clusters
exist in the problem. Further, the number of clusters may also be described by replacing the
partition value by bipartition (if there are exactly two clusters) or k-partition (if there are
exactly k clusters). Examples of such value speciﬁcations can be found in Section 6.5.
covering: string
The covering attribute describes the subset of nodes that is to be covered by a solution walk,
where a node v is covered by a solution S if it is either on the tour, i.e., v ∈VS, or within a
predetermined cost bound to an arbitrary node on the tour. The values include two parameters.
The ﬁrst parameter c is the cost function used to measure the shortest-path distance from a
node to the solution walk, where c must be a cost function or expression over cost functions
deﬁned in the δ-ﬁeld. The second parameter gives the bound b on how far nodes are allowed
to be from the solution walk.
= all (c, ≤b)
For any solution S and for all v ∈V there exists u ∈VS such that, u = v
or distc(u, v) ≤b.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2143
= subset (c, ≤b)
For any solution S and for all v ∈D ⊂V there exists u ∈VS such that,
u = v or distc(u, v) ≤b.
5.3 The Tours Field 
The γ -ﬁeld characterizes the graph of the problem and deﬁnes possible constraints on the
tour such as a ﬁxed start or end node or precedence constraints. In many variants of the TSP,
the underlying graph is complete, i.e., every node can be reached from every other node, the
salesperson needs to return to its origin node at the end and neither start nor end node are
ﬁxed.
start: bool
The start attribute deﬁnes whether the starting node of the tour is ﬁxed as for example in An
et al. (2015) or not.
= True
Given start node s, every solution S must satisfy start(S) = s.
= False For any solution S, start(S) can be any node in V .
end: bool
The end attribute deﬁnes whether the end node of the tour is ﬁxed, as, for example, in An et
al. (2015), or not.
= True
Given end node t, every solution S must satisfy end(S) = t.
= False For any solution S, end(S) can be any node in V .
circuit: bool
The circuit attribute describes whether solutions are closed walks and the traveler returns to
its start node at the end of the walk or not.
= True
Every solution S satisﬁes start(S) = end(S).
= False There may exist a solution S such that start(S) ̸= end(S).
graphtype: string
The graphtype attribute deﬁnes characteristics of the underlying graph. For example, a com-
plete graph is considered in Dantzig et al. (1954).
= complete
For all u, v ∈V : {u, v} ∈E if G is undirected, or (u, v) ∈E and (v, u) ∈E
if G is directed.
= strongly connected
For all u, v ∈V , there exists a directed walk (u, e1, ..., ek, v) where
ei ∈E for all i ∈{1, ..., k}.
= planar
The graph is planar, i.e., it can be embedded in the Euclidean plane without edge
crossings, equivalently, it neither contains a K5-minor nor a K3,3-minor.
= tree(b)
The graph is a tree with b leaves. Without the parameter b, the number of leaves
is arbitrary.
= path
The graph is a path, i.e., a tree with only 2 leaves, so is equivalent to tree(2).
= cycle
The graph is a circular graph, i.e., consists of a simple cycle.
= binary tree
The graph is a binary tree.
If none of the above attribute values are speciﬁed, the graph can be arbitrary.
edgetype: string
The edgetype attribute deﬁnes properties of edges present in the graph. Commonly occurring
values are undirected, directed, or bidirected. In a bidirected graph as, for example, considered
123

2144
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
in Papadimitriou and Vempala (2006), edges are directed, but whenever an edge from some
node u to some node v exists, the return edge from v to u must also exist. This enables the
deﬁnition of problems where it is always guaranteed that if one can travel directly between
two nodes, one can travel in both directions, but the edge costs depend on the traversal
direction, such as for example when cycling up or down a hill.
= undirected
Each edge {u, v} is an unordered two-element subset of V .
= directed
Each edge (u, v) is an ordered pair in V × V .
= bidirected
Each edge (u, v) is an ordered pair in V × V and (v, u) ∈E.
precedences: string
The precedences attribute describes whether precedence constraints exist between nodes in
the graph, which specify whether certain cities have to be visited before others, see, for
example, Balas et al. (1995); Koehler et al. (2021).
= atomic
There exists a set of atomic precedence constraints A ⊂V × V . Any solution
S must satisfy that for all (u, v) ∈A, if there exists j such that SV ( j) = v, then there
must exist i such that i < j and SV (i) = u.
= arbitrary
There exist constraints deﬁned in some constraint language that are speciﬁed
outside the deﬁnition scheme. These constraints should be described in the ⊕extension
of the TSP-T3CO deﬁnition.
The values are currently stated for visited nodes rather than traversed nodes in a solution.
However, they can be extended to traversed nodes.
cluster: string
The cluster attribute restricts the visiting order of nodes in the graph. Nodes are grouped
into clusters {P1, . . . , Pk} and all nodes within each cluster must be visited consecutively in
a solution sequence. The cluster can be partitions, where each node is in exactly one cluster
(Laporte et al., 1997), or covers (Hansknecht et al., 2021), where nodes may be in more than
one cluster. Two optional parameters in parentheses can follow the attribute value to deﬁne
further restrictions on the order in which the nodes are to be visited. The ﬁrst parameter
order restricts a possible visiting order between the clusters and the second parameter
sequence restricts the visiting sequence within a cluster, often specifying entry and exit
nodes in a cluster.
= partition(order, sequence)
For all v ∈V , there exists a unique a ∈{1, . . . , k} such
that v ∈Pa and any solution S must satisfy that if i < j < l and SV (i) ∈Pa and
SV (l) ∈Pa then SV ( j) ∈Pa.
= cover(order, sequence)
For all v ∈V , there exists at least one a ∈{1, . . . , k} such
that v ∈Pa and any solution S must satisfy that if i < j < l and SV (i) ∈Pa and
SV (l) ∈Pa then SV ( j) ∈Pa.
For the optional order parameter, the value ordered is deﬁned:7
ordered For any solution S and for all i < j with SV (i) ∈Pa and SV ( j) ∈Pb, it must hold
that a ≤b.
For the optional sequence parameter, the following values are deﬁned:
start
Given start nodes {s1, . . . , sk} ⊂V , any solution S must satisfy that s j = SV (min{i :
SV (i) ∈Pj}) for all j ∈{1, . . . , k}.
7 The value unordered is the default value and the parameter can be omitted in this case.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2145
startend
Given start nodes {s1, . . . , sk} ⊂V and end nodes {t1, . . . , tk} ⊂V , any solution
S must satisfy that s j = SV (min{i : SV (i) ∈Pj}) and t j = SV (max{i : SV (i) ∈Pj})
for all j ∈{1, . . . , k}.
terminals
Given a set of potential start and end nodes Tj ⊆Pj for each j ∈{1, . . . , k}, any
solution S must satisfy that {SV (min{i : SV (i) ∈Pj}), SV (max{i : SV (i) ∈Pj})} ⊆Tj.
As before, the values can be extended to traversed nodes.
5.4 The Costs Field ı
Several cost functions can be deﬁned for a problem in the δ-ﬁeld. They are identiﬁed by a
unique name and speciﬁed by domain and range. The syntax is uniformly deﬁned for the
longhand and the shorthand notation, recall Figures 2 and 3:
cost function ⇐name “ : ” domain
“ →” range {“, ” attribute}
The domain of the cost function is usually taken from the set of edges E (edge costs) or nodes
V (node costs) in the graph. An example of using node costs can be found in Laporte and
Martello (1990). The quadratic TSP as described in Fischer and Helmberg (2013) uses the
pair of edges E × E. The range of the cost function can be any subset of the real numbers
R. The subsequent attributes are used to further characterize a cost function in the δ-ﬁeld.
property: string
The property attribute is deﬁned for cost functions with domain E. For example, edge costs
may satisfy the triangle inequality (Ding et al., 2007), be determined by a pseudometric
(Glebov, 2017), a metric (Karlin et al., 2021), a graphic metric (Mömke & Svensson, 2011),
a planar metric (Klein, 2005), an induced metric subspace of a planar metric (Klein, 2006),
or a euclidean metric (Arora, 1996). Due to the non-uniform deﬁnitions of pseudometric and
quasimetric that we observed in the literature, we introduce parameters to further characterize
cost functions. Any premetric properties are explicitly listed in “()”. If multiple properties
apply, the most speciﬁc one should be listed. For example, euclid is more speciﬁc than metric,
planar is more speciﬁc than graphic, and graphic implies triangle.
= (params)
The edge cost function satisﬁes some attributes of a metric that are speciﬁed
by parameters in “()”.8
= metric
The edge cost function satisﬁes the parameters symmetry, identity, and triangle.
= graphic
The edge cost function corresponds to the number of edges of the shortest path
between two nodes in an unweighted graph. Consequently, it is a metric.
= planar
The edge cost function corresponds to the cost of the shortest path between two
nodes in a planar graph with non-negative weights. Consequently, it is a metric.
= subset planar
The edge cost function is a metric. The points of this metric correspond to
a subset of the nodes of a planar graph. The distances between the points are the costs of
the shortest paths using all nodes and edges, which must have non-negative lengths, in
the entire planar graph.
= euclidean
The edge cost function is determined by a euclidean metric.
=euclideanﬁxeddim
Theedgecostfunctionisdeterminedbyaﬁxed-dimensionaleuclidean
metric.
= euclidean plane
The edge cost function is determined by a euclidean metric in the plane.
8 In particular, self loops have costs 0, i.e., if (u, u) ∈E then c(u, u) = 0 for all u ∈V , and edge costs are
non-negative. TSP with self loops with costs strictly larger than 0 or TSP with negative edge costs, do not
deﬁne a premetric.
123

2146
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
= grid(m,n)
The edge cost function is determined by a euclidean metric induced by m × n
grid points of an equidistant two-dimensional array.
As possible parameters params, a subset of the following can occur in “()”:
identity
For all (u, v) ∈E, it holds that c(u, v) > 0 if and only if u ̸= v.
triangle
For all u, v, w ∈V , it holds that c(u, v) ≤c(u, w) + c(w, v).
α-triangle For all u, v, w ∈V , it holds that c(u, v) ≤α · (c(u, w) + c(w, v)).
symmetric For all (u, v) ∈E, it holds that (v, u) ∈E and c(u, v) = c(v, u).9
For cost functions with domain E or domain V or a combinations of both, we deﬁne the
following two attributes:
partial: bool
The partial attribute describes whether only some of the edge or node cost are incurred on
a tour. For example, if the cost corresponds to the availability of a product in certain cities,
then the traveler may only buy some of the available product, see for example (Manerba et
al., 2017; Bontoux & Feillet, 2008).
= True
A tour only incurs partial edge or node costs.
= False
A tour always incurs the full cost values.
temporal: string
The temporal attribute describes whether the cost function has a temporal dependency and
may thus change over time. Typical examples are cost functions that depend on the cost of
nodes or edges (Hansknecht et al., 2021; Malandraki & Dial, 1996) or on the number of edges
(Gouveia & Voß, 1995; Picard & Queyranne, 1978) of the preﬁx of the walk at the current
node. Such cost functions may also only change a ﬁxed number of times, e.g., Brodén et al.
(2004). In the Kinetic-based TSP or Moving-target TSP, e.g., Helvig et al. (1998), nodes move
with constant speed in a ﬁxed direction and edge costs between nodes change continuously.
= time
For all u, v ∈V , c(u, v) or c(u) is a function of the arrival time of the preﬁx
of the walk at node u.
= position
For all u, v ∈V , c(u, v) or c(u) depends on the number of edges and/or
nodes of the preﬁx of the walk at node u.
= costzone(k) The cost function satisﬁes the conditions of value time and changes at most
k −1 times.
= poszone(k) The cost function satisﬁes the conditions of value position and changes at
most k −1 times.
= waiting
When travelers arrive at a node u, they may wait before they visit the node
u.
= kinetic
Each node moves with constant speed in a ﬁxed direction and edge costs
between nodes change continuously.
5.5 The Objectives Field 
The objectives ﬁeld deﬁnes the objective(s) in the problem, i.e., which costs are to be bounded,
maximized or minimized and be written as an arbitrary string. Suppose c is a cost function
speciﬁed in the δ-ﬁeld, then c(S) denotes the sum of costs of the walk S and c(S) denotes
the complement of these costs.
9 Note that the value undirected of the attribute edgetype implies the parameter symmetric of the cost function.
If symmetry is not required, then asymmetric costs are permitted.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2147
We will use simple arithmetic expressions in these strings, which are mostly self-
explanatory. For example, if two cost models c1 and c2 were deﬁned in the δ-ﬁeld and the
objective is to minimize their sum, we write min c1(S)+c2(S) in the ϵ-ﬁeld. If the objective
is to maximize their sum, we write max c1(S) + c2(S) in the ϵ-ﬁeld. If there is a constraint
on the maximum value of the function over cost models, i.e., an upper bound b, we write
c1(S) + c2(S) ≤b. In case of a lower bound b, we write for example c1(S) + c2(S) ≥b.
6 Review of Approximability Results
In this section, we review results for TSP variants known as the the “standard” TSP, Path
TSP, Bottleneck TSP, Maximum Scatter TSP, Generalized TSP, Clustered TSP, Traveling
Purchaser Problem, Proﬁtable Tour Problem, Quota TSP, Prize-Collecting TSP, Orienteering
Problem, Time-dependent TSP, TSP with Time Windows, and the Orienteering Problem
with Time Windows. After a brief informal description of the problem variant, we present
an overview of approximability and inapproximability results where we limit ourselves to
only peer reviewed results and focus on the best currently known bounds. We selected a
paper for inclusion in the review if the paper either uses the name of the problem variant
or provides a deﬁnition that is very close to other publications using the name. For hybrid
TSP variants, we only included the Orienteering Problem with Time Windows due to the
extensive body of results. Further approximability results exist for other hybrid variants. For
each reference from the literature, we provide a TSP-T3CO deﬁnition using the shorthand
notation. The deﬁnition makes it possible to very compactly and clearly summarize the results
in table form and it clariﬁes the restrictions under which a result holds. Note that we do not
review algorithms running only in quasi-polynomial time, but only polynomial time results.
However, occasionally in the text, we point to further results outside the scope of this paper.
In the presentation of the approximability results, we use an asymptotic notation for upper
and lower bounds. This typically includes big-O and little-o for upper bounds, whereas big- 
and little-ω is used in lower bounds. Informally speaking, the difference between big-O and
little-o is similar to the difference between ≤and <, whereas the difference between big- 
and little-ω is similar to the difference between ≥and >.
More formally, for a function f : Z≥0 →R we deﬁne:
• O( f (n)) := {g : Z≥0 →R : ∃c, n0 > 0, ∀n ≥n0 : |g(n)| ≤c · | f (n)|}
is the set of functions that grow at most as fast as f .
• ( f (n)) := {g : Z≥0 →R : ∃c, n0 > 0, ∀n ≥n0 : | f (n)| ≤c · |g(n)|}
is the set of functions that grow at least as fast as f .
• o( f (n)) := {g : Z≥0 →R : ∀c > 0, ∃n0 > 0, ∀n ≥n0 : |g(n)| ≤c · | f (n)|}
is the set of functions that grow strictly slower than f .
• ω( f (n)) := {g : Z≥0 →R : ∀c > 0, ∃n0 > 0, ∀n ≥n0 : | f (n)| ≤c · |g(n)|}
is the set of functions that grow strictly faster than f .
In general, we use ϵ to denote any arbitrarily small positive real number. Though the asymp-
totic notation deﬁnes sets, we also use it in mathematical expressions and equations. The
former case describes a transformed set by means of composition, whereas a statement is
considered true if it holds for at least one function in the corresponding set. Furthermore,
when a result holds for non-negative edge costs, it can be generalized to also include nega-
tive edge costs unless there is a directed cycle with negative cost. This is due to Johnson’s
123

2148
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
trick (Johnson, 1977): In the absence of negative directed cycles, there exist node poten-
tials p : V →R such that, for each edge e = (v, w) with cost c(e), the reduced cost
cp(e) := c(e) + p(v) −p(w) is non-negative. When we add the reduced costs along a
directed cycle, the node potentials cancel out, so that the cost of any cycle is the same as its
reduced cost. Such node potentials can be found in polynomial time using the Bellman-Ford
algorithm.
From a complexity point of view, the encoding of the numbers in the input matters.
However, reals can be approximated by rationals to any desired degree of accuracy such that
the inﬂuence on approximation factors becomes insigniﬁcant. We therefore use R for the
domain of cost functions unless further restrictions apply.
6.1 The“standard” TSP
We consider the “standard” TSP to be the problem of ﬁnding a shortest walk through a graph
traversing all cities and returning to the origin city at the end. The edge costs may be assumed
to be asymmetric (Sysło, 1980) or some restrictions may be placed on the edge costs, for
example that they are euclidean (Arora, 1996). Additionally, the underlying graph may be
considered to be complete (Sysło, 1980) or incomplete (Bellmore & Hong, 1974).
It is a well-known fact that no polynomial time ρ-approximation algorithm exists for the
“standard” TSP in which each city is to be traversed exactly once, where ρ is any polynomial
time computable function, unless P=NP. We indicate this with ∞as lower bound (see the
ﬁrst row of Table 1). As most extensions of the TSP can be reduced to a “standard” TSP,
this inapproximability result generalizes to most of the extensions presented in this section.
Furthermore, this result means that approximability results can only exist for variants of
the “standard” TSP, which simplify the problem by applying further restrictions on the cost
function, or by relaxing restrictions on the tour.
An overview of approximability and inapproximability results is given in Table 1.
Most importantly, the “standard” TSP with metric edge costs and on a complete graph can
at best be approximated with a ratio of 123/122 (Karpinski et al., 2015). The ﬁrst algorithm
giving an upper bound better than 3/2 for the same variant was presented (Karlin et al., 2021),
which is considered a major breakthrough. If more restrictions are imposed on the values of
the edge costs, so required to be euclidean or given by a graphic metric of a planar graph,
then the “standard” TSP can be approximated arbitrarily closely i.e., with a ratio of 1 + ϵ in
polynomial time. Finally, note that the following holds:
Fact 1 The following two TSP-T3CO variant deﬁnitions are equivalent:
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected | c : E →R≥0, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
(1)
⟨= 1 | ≥1 | circuit; undirected | c : E →R≥0 | min c(S)⟩
(2)
Thus, any results that apply to one, also transfer to the other.
However, there is a subtle difference between planar and subset planar metric spaces
in the last two entries of Table 1. The ﬁrst of the two is equivalent to ⟨= 1 |
≥
1 | circuit; planar; undirected | c : E →R≥0 | min c(S)⟩, whereas the latter is equivalent
to ⟨= 1 | ≥d(v) ∈{0, 1} | circuit; planar; undirected | c : E →R≥0 | min c(S)⟩for some
characteristic function d indicating some subset S of the nodes. The latter problem is also
called planar Subset TSP or planar Steiner TSP. Note that the graph induced by S generally
does not yield the same shortest path distances and it might not be possible to generate the
metric by a planar graph on S.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2149
Table 1 Approximability and inapproximability results for the “standard” TSP. Note that = 1 in the β ﬁeld can be replaced by ≥1 in all variants with a cost function satisfying
the triangle inequality, see Fact 1
Variant
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; undirected |
∞
Karp (1972)
c : E →R | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥1 | circuit; strongly connected; directed |
75
74
Karpinski et al. (2015) ✓
22 + ε
Traub and Vygen (2020) ✓
c : E →R≥0 | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
123
122
Karpinski et al. (2015) ✓
3
2 −10−36
Karlin et al. (2021)
c : E →R≥0, metric | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
7
5
Seb˝o and Vygen (2014) ✓
c : E →R≥0, graphic | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
1 + ε
Arora (1996); Mitchell (1999)
c : E →R≥0, euclid | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
1 + ε
Klein (2005) ✓
c : E →R≥0, planar | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
1 + ε
Klein (2006) ✓
c : E →R≥0, subset planar | min c(S)⟩
123

2150
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 2 Variants of the Path TSP
Variant
Reference
⟨= 1 | = 1 | start; end; complete; undirected | c :
E →R≥0, metric | min c(S)⟩
An et al. (2015) ✓Traub et
al. (2020) ✓Seb˝o (2013) ✓
Seb˝o and Van Zuylen
(2016) ✓Zenklusen (2019)
⟨= 1 | = 1 | start; end; complete; directed | c :
E →R≥0, triangle | min c(S)⟩
Köhne et al. (2020)✓Feige
and Singh (2007); Svensson
et al. (2020)
⟨= 1 | ≥1 | start; end; undirected | c : E →
{1} | min c(S)⟩
Seb˝o and Vygen (2014) ✓
Traub and Vygen (2020)✓
Traub et al. (2020)✓Mucha
(2014); An et al. (2015);
Mömke and Svensson
(2016)
6.2 Path TSP
In the Path TSP, also denoted as the s −t Path TSP, the goal is to ﬁnd the shortest Hamiltonian
path between two nodes s and t in the graph rather than a cycle traversing all nodes. For a long
time, there was a gap between the best known approximation bounds for the circuit version
of the TSP compared to the path version of the TSP, see Table 2 for three variants of the Path
TSP that have been studied. However, in 2020, it was shown Traub et al. (2020) that any
α-approximation for a standard TSP can be used to obtain an (α + ϵ)-approximation for the
corresponding path variant. To this end, the α-approximation is called on instances deﬁned
on subgraphs from the instance for Path TSP. Hence, for any standard TSP with non-negative
symmetric edge costs having some some property p that is preserved under taking subgraphs
⟨= 1 | ≥1 | circuit; complete; undirected | c : E →R≥0, p | min c(S)⟩
that admits an α-approximation, we have an (α + ϵ)-approximation for the Path TSP where
the non-negative symmetric edge costs also have property p
⟨= 1 | ≥1 | start; end; complete; undirected | c : E →R≥0, p | min c(S)⟩
for any arbitrarily small constant ε > 0. The currently best known upper approximation
bounds for the Path TSP can thus be obtained from the upper approximation bounds for the
standard TSP by setting the circuit attribute to False, the start and end attributes to True and
by adding +ϵ to the approximation bound.
Various hybrid variants of the Path TSP are also studied in the literature. An example is
the Metric Many-visit Path TSP (Rothkopf, 1966), in which each city needs to be traversed
a pre-speciﬁed number of times. It can be deﬁned in TSP-T3CO as
⟨= 1 | dv | start; end; complete; undirected | c : E →R≥0, metric | min c(S)⟩
A polynomial time approximation algorithm with an approximation ratio of 1.5 for this
problem was devised in Bérczi et al. (2022).
The Path TSP is also denoted in the literature as the Messenger Problem (Gutin & Punnen,
2006; Menger, 1932), the Wandering Salesman Problem (Djang, 1993; Papadimitriou &
Vazirani, 1984), or the Minimum Hamiltonian Path problem (MHP) (Hammar & Nilsson,
2002).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2151
6.3 Bottleneck TSP
The Bottleneck TSP differs from the “standard” TSP only in the objective function (Garﬁnkel
& Gilbert, 1978). Unlike in the “standard” TSP, where the objective is to minimize the sum
of edge costs along the solution path, the objective of the bottleneck TSP is to minimize the
maximum edge cost along the path. Furthermore, the tour has to traverse all nodes, but is
not required to be a circuit. An overview of approximability and inapproximability results is
given in Table 3. The Bottleneck TSP is sometimes also called the MinMax TSP (Kozma &
Mömke, 2015). A closely related variant is the Maximum Scatter TSP, where the objective
is to maximize the minimum cost of an edge on the tour, see Section 6.4.
6.4 Maximum Scatter TSP
The Maximum Scatter TSP (Arkin et al., 1999), similarly to the previously discussed Bot-
tleneck TSP, differs from the “standard” TSP in the objective function. The objective here is
to maximize the minimum edge cost along the path. Furthermore, the tour has to traverse all
nodes, but is not required to be a circuit. An overview of approximability and inapproxima-
bility results is given in Table 4.
The Maximum Scatter TSP is, in general, NP-hard and no constant-factor approximation
algorithm for it exists, unless P=NP. Due to the restrictions on the cost functions, the approx-
imability results for the Bottleneck TSP can not directly be translated to approximability
results for the Maximum Scatter TSP. As for the Bottleneck TSP, a best-possible polynomial
time approximation algorithm exists for the Maximum Scatter TSP achieving an approxima-
bility ratio of 2. When the nodes lie on a line or a circle in the euclidean plane, and the cost
function is given by the euclidean distance between the nodes, an exact linear time algorithm
exists (Arkin et al., 1999). For the extension of the Maximum Scatter TSP from direct neigh-
bors to m-neighbors, further approximability results exist (Arkin et al., 1999; Chiang, 2005).
The Maximum Scatter TSP is sometimes also called the MaxMin TSP (Kozma & Mömke,
2015).
6.5 Generalized TSP
In the Generalized TSP, the nodes of G are grouped into subsets and either exactly one of the
nodes or at least one node from each subset has to be traversed. The subsets of nodes may be
disjoint and form a partition of V , see e.g., Snyder and Daskin (2006), or they may overlap
and form a cover of V , see e.g., Noon and Bean (1993); Noon (1988). In the variants studied
in Fischetti et al. (1997); Noon and Bean (1993); Noon (1988); Snyder and Daskin (2006);
Cosma et al. (2024), the shortest circuit must be found that traverses each subset once. In
Laporte and Palekar (2002), each subset must be traversed exactly once, whereas in Noon
and Bean (1993); Noon (1988), each subset must be traversed at least once. Some variants
of the Generalized TSP are given in Table 5.
In Tsiligirides (1984), the following problem is also referred to as the Generalized TSP,
however, it would usually be classiﬁed as an Orienteering Problem, cf. Section 6.11.
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; end; complete; undirected |
c : E →R, (triangle); q : V →R≥0 | c ≤b; max q(S)⟩
When no assumptions are made about the compositions of the subsets, no algorithm giving
a constant factor approximation in polynomial time is known. Table 6 gives an overview
123

2152
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 3 Approximability and inapproximability results for the Bottleneck TSP. The constant τ satisﬁes τ > 1, the constant λ satisﬁes λ < 1, and γ is a measure of the asymmetry
of the problem, see ⊕1 for details
Variant
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
ω(1)
Parker and Rardin (1984)
c : E →R | min max{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
2
Parker and Rardin (1984)
2
Parker and Rardin (1984)
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) |
min max{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; directed |
⌈n/2⌉
LaRusic and Punnen (2014)
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) |
min max{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; bidirected |
τ
τ−1 (2τ⌈n/2⌉−1 −τ⌈n/2⌉−2 −1)
LaRusic and Punnen (2014)
c : E →R≥0, (τ-triangle) |
min max{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; bidirected |
λ
λ−1(λ⌈n/2⌉−1 + λ −2)
LaRusic and Punnen (2014)
c : E →R≥0, (λ-triangle) |
min max{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; directed |
2
An et al. (2021)
O(log n/ log log n)
An et al. (2021)
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) |
min max{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | complete; bidirected |
2 + γ
Kao and Sanghi (2009)
c : E →R≥0 |
min max{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩⊕1
⊕1:
−Each node ni is speciﬁed by a pair of numbers (αi, βi).
−The cost function is then given by c(ni, n j) = d(αi, β j) with d(a, b) =
 b
a f (x)dx if b ≥a and d(a, b) =
 αi
β j g(x)dx if b < a, where the functions f (x) and g(x)
are integrable and satisfy f (x), g(x) ≥0 for all x.
−The constant γ satisﬁes γ ≥f (x)
g(x) ≥1
γ for all x
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2153
Table 4 Approximability and inapproximability results for the Maximum Scatter TSP. When m = n or m = 2, the upper bound in Hoffmann et al. (2017) is 1
Variant
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
ω(1)
Arkin et al. (1999) ✓
c : E →R>0 | max min{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
2
Arkin et al. (1999) ✓
2
Arkin et al. (1999) ✓
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) | max min{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | complete; undirected |
2
Arkin et al. (1999)✓
2
Arkin et al. (1999) ✓
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) | max min{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected; |
1 + o(1)
Hoffmann et al. (2017) ✓
c : E →R≥0, grid(m,n) | max min{c(e) : e ∈ES}⟩
123

2154
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 5 Variants of the Generalized TSP
Variant
Reference
⟨= 1 | ≤1; partition(≥once) | circuit; complete; undirected | c : E →R | min c(S)⟩
Fischetti et al. (1997) ✓
⟨= 1 | ≤1, cover(≥once) | circuit; complete; directed | c : E →R, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
Lien et al. (1993) ✓
⟨= 1 | ≤1; partition(once) | circuit; complete; undirected | c : E →R | min c(S)⟩
Fischetti et al. (1997) ✓Laporte and Palekar (2002)
⟨= 1 | ≤1; partition(once) | circuit; complete; directed | c : E →R | min c(S)⟩
Laporte and Palekar (2002)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2155
of the polynomial time approximation bounds currently known. Some further polynomial
time constant factor approximation results for neighborhoods with speciﬁc properties can
be found in Dumitrescu and Mitchell (2003) where the subsets correspond to nodes within
neighborhoods in the plane and are either connected regions of the same or similar diameter
or are disjoint unit disks in the plane. Due to their speciﬁcity, we have not included these in
the overview here.
Generalized TSP is also referred to as Set TSP or One-of-a-Set TSP, or Group TSP in the
literature, cf. Noon and Bean (1993); Fischetti et al. (1997); Guha and Khuller (1998).
6.6 Clustered TSP
In the Clustered TSP, the nodes of G are grouped into subsets. All nodes in G must be
traversed such that all nodes of one subset are traversed before the nodes in another subset.
Usually, the subsets P1, . . . , Pm form a partition of the set of nodes N (Laporte & Palekar,
2002; Ding et al., 2007). Infrequently, this restriction is not made (Guttmann-Beck et al.,
2018). Sometimes, further restrictions on the subsets are made such as ﬁxing a start and end
node (Laporte et al., 1997).
Most polynomial time approximability results for the Clustered TSP focus on the case
when the clusters are disjoint. When there is additionally an order given in which the clusters
should be traversed, a 5/3 approximation is possible in polynomial time, whether the solution
is to be a path or cycle or the start and end nodes are given or not. When the order of the
clusters is not given, only less good approximation ratios are currently known. Several cases
are covered in the literature depending on whether start and end nodes in each cluster are
given or not. An overview of the polynomial time constant factor approximation results can
be found in Table 7.
Hybrid variants of the generalized and the clustered TSP are studied as well, e.g., Cosma
et al. (2023); Baniasadi et al. (2020).
6.7 Traveling Purchaser Problem
In the Traveling Purchaser Problem (TPP), a set of m products is to be purchased at some
nodes, which usually represent cities. Cities may offer the products at different prices and
only a limited number of products may be available at each city. For each product, a demand
di is speciﬁed. For each city, the product availability speciﬁes how many units of this product
are available and the price for a unit of this product in this city is given. The aim is for
the traveler to visit a subset of the cities and purchase at least the required demand of each
product while minimizing the sum of purchasing and traveling costs. At each visited node v, a
certain amount sharei(v) of the available product is purchased. The sum of all sharei(v) along
the solution walk is then denoted sharei(Sv). A good overview on the Traveling Purchaser
Problem and its variants can be found in Manerba et al. (2017), from which we formalized
the basic deﬁnition of the problem using TSP-T3CO in Table 8. The same deﬁnition of the
problem is for example discussed in Bontoux and Feillet (2008) and Laporte et al. (2003).
Other variants use a modiﬁed range for the cost functions of demand and availability, e.g.,
in Burstall (1966), the availability is either 0 or ∞. Alternatively as in Batista-Galván et al.
(2013), the demand is either 0 or 1, i.e., the demand is not further speciﬁed.
The Traveling Purchaser Problem is polynomial-time solvable when the number of prod-
ucts k is O(log n), where n denotes the number of cities, or when the number of cities n is
O(log k) (Xiao et al., 2020). Due to the hardness of the general problem (Manerba et al.,
123

2156
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 6 Approximability results for the Generalized TSP. Note that the bound given in Garg et al. (2000) was originally determined with O(log2 n log log n log k). With the result
from Fakcharoenphol et al. (2003), it improves to O(log k log2 n) as shown in the ﬁrst entry in this table
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≥0; k −partition (≥once) |circuit; undirected |
O(log k log2 n)
Garg et al. (2000) ✓Fakcharoenphol et al. (2003)
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; k −partition (once, k = O(log n)) |
1 + ϵ
Khachay and Neznakhina (2020) ✓
circuit; complete; undirected | c : E →R>0, euclidean | min c(S)⟩⊕1
⟨= 1 | ≤1; k −partition (once, k = n −O(log n)) |
1 + ϵ
Khachay and Neznakhina (2020) ✓
circuit; complete; undirected | c : E →R>0, euclidean | min c(S)⟩⊕1
⟨= 1 | ≤1; k −partition (once) |
1.5 + 8
√
2 + ϵ
Bhattacharya et al. (2015)
circuit; complete; undirected | c : E →R>0, euclidean | min c(S)⟩⊕1
⟨= 1 | ≥0; k −partition(≥once, k ≥n −O(log n)) |
22 + ϵ
Khachay et al. (2022)
circuit; strongly connected; directed | c : E →R≥0 | min c(S)⟩
⊕1:
The nodes in the problem correspond to a set of points in the euclidean plane and every non-empty cell of the integer grid forms a cluster Pi
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2157
Table 7 Approximability results for the Clustered TSP
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | = 1 | start; end; circuit; complete; undirected; partition(ordered) |
5
3
Anily et al. (1999)
c : E →R>0, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | start; end; complete; undirected; partition(ordered) |
5
3
Anily et al. (1999)
c : E →R>0, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected; partition(ordered) |
5
3
Anily et al. (1999)
c : E →R>0, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected; partition(startend) |
1.875
Kawasaki and Takazawa (2020)
c : E →R≥0, (symmetric, triangle) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected; partition(start) |
5
2
Bao et al. (2017) ✓
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected; partition(terminals) |
1.714
Kawasaki and Takazawa (2020)
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected; partition |
1.9
Bao et al. (2017) ✓
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | complete; undirected; cover |
4
Guttmann-Beck et al. (2018) ✓
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) | min c(S)⟩
123

2158
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 8 Variants of the Traveling Purchaser Problem. The cost function c denotes the edge costs, the cost function availi gives the availability of product i at each node, and the
cost function pricei gives the cost of product i at each node
Variant
Reference
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | complete; directed |
Burstall (1966)
c : E →R>0; {availi}m
i=1 : V →{0, ∞}, partial; {pricei}m
i=1 : V →R>0 |
∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} sharei(SV ) ≥di; ∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} ∀v ∈V sharei(v) ≤availi(v) ;
min c(S) + m
i=1

v∈SV pricei(v) · sharei(v)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; circuit; complete; directed |
Bontoux and Feillet (2008) ✓
c : E →R>0; {availi}m
i=1 : V →Z≥0, partial; {pricei}m
i=1 : V →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} sharei(SV ) ≥di; ∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} ∀v ∈V sharei(v) ≤availi(v) ;
min c(S) + m
i=1

v∈SV pricei(v) · sharei(v)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; circuit; complete; directed |
Manerba et al. (2017) ✓
c : E →R≥0; {availi}m
i=1 : V →Z>0, partial; {pricei}m
i=1 : V →R>0 |
∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} sharei(SV ) ≥di; ∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} ∀v ∈V sharei(v) ≤availi(v) ;
min c(S) + m
i=1

v∈SV pricei(v) · sharei(v)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; circuit; undirected |
Laporte et al. (2003) ✓
c : E →R≥0; {availi}m
i=1 : V →Z≥0, partial; {pricei}m
i=1 : V →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} sharei(SV ) ≥di; ∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} ∀v ∈V sharei(v) ≤availi(v) ;
min c(S) + m
i=1

v∈SV pricei(v) · sharei(v)⟩
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2159
2017), few algorithms with performance guarantees are known. To our knowledge, there
exists only a single polynomial time approximation algorithm for the Traveling Purchaser
Problem with a performance guarantee, which we present in Table 9. Note that Ravi and
Salman (1999) also presents a bi-criteria approximability result for a special case of TPP in
the context of network design where all nodes in the graph must be added to the tour under
an access cost budget. Fixed-parameter tractable algorithms and complexity results for the
Traveling Purchaser Problem are given in Xiao et al. (2020).
6.8 The Profitable Tour Problem
In the Proﬁtable Tour Problem,10 the traveler receives a penalty when not visiting a city.
The objective is to ﬁnd the cheapest tour, when considering travel costs c and penalties
p.11 An overview of approximability results is given in Table 10. For complete graphs,
the Proﬁtable Tour Problem is at least as hard to approximate as the corresponding plain
TSP variant, e.g., by setting the penalties to twice the maximum edge cost. In the metric
case, i.e., for a given complete undirected graph with non-negative edge costs satisfying
the triangle inequality, Goemans and Williamson (1995) have presented a framework that
yields a 2-approximation. This was later slightly improved to roughly 1.98 by Archer et al.
(2011) and recently even more so as shown in Table 10. The rooted and unrooted versions
of the problem, i.e., whether start is true or false in our notation, are reducible to each other,
while preserving approximation ratios (Archer et al., 2011). This is achieved by calling an
algorithm for the unrooted problem with a sufﬁciently high penalty for the designated root
or repeatedly calling one for the rooted problem with an uncovered node as root until each
node has been covered by a tour. Thus, we specify only one of both versions in Table 10
based on the citation.
6.9 Quota TSP
In the Quota TSP, each node is associated with a proﬁt q. The aim is for the traveler to ﬁnd
a tour which visits each node at most once to collect the corresponding proﬁt so that the
total proﬁt exceeds a given quota b while minimizing the travel cost. Known approximability
results are given in Table 11.
In the literature, the Quota TSP is sometimes also referred to as TSP with Proﬁts. When
the task is to visit at least k cities at minimum travel costs, this problem is also called k-TSP.
However, the usage of names varies across publications. For example in Feillet et al. (2005),
TSP with Proﬁts is used as an umbrella term for the Proﬁtable Tour problem, the Orienteering
problem, and the Prize-Collecting TSP.
6.10 Prize-collecting TSP
The Prize-collecting TSP is a combination of the Proﬁtable Tour Problem (Section 6.8) and
the Quota TSP (Section 6.9). As in the Proﬁtable Tour Problem, the traveler receives a penalty
10 In the recent literature, the Proﬁtable Tour Problem has also been frequently called Prize-Collecting TSP,
which we use for the more general version presented in Sec. 6.10 that furthermore includes a prize for each
visited city and a lower bound on the total prizes that are to be collected.
11 The proﬁtable tour problem considered in Dell’Amico et al. (1995) has as objective to minimize the edge
costs of the tour minus the sum of all proﬁts along the tour.
123

2160
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 9 Approximability result for the Traveling Purchaser Problem
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always; | start; circuit; complete; undirected |
max
 
(1 + ϵ),
c : E →R≥0, metric;
(1 + 1/ϵ) O(log3 n log log n)

Ravi and Salman (1999)
{availi}m
i=1 : V →{0, 1}; {pricei}m
i=1 : V →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} sharei(SV ) ≥1;
∀i ∈{1, . . . , m} ∀v ∈V sharei(v) ≤availi(v) ;
min c(S) + m
i=1

v∈SV pricei(v) · sharei(v)⟩
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2161
Table 10 Approximability results for the Proﬁtable Tour Problem. Note that the original bound obtained in Nguyen and Nguyen (2012) was 1 + ⌈log2(n)⌉. With the O(1)-
approximation for ATSP in Traub and Vygen (2020), it improves to the bound shown in the ﬁrst entry in this table. Note that ≤1, always in the β ﬁeld can be replaced by
≥0, once in all variants with a cost function satisfying the triangle inequality, analogously to Fact 1
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | circuit; complete; directed |
c : E →R, (triangle); p : V →R≥0 | min c(S) + p(S)⟩
O(1)
Nguyen and Nguyen (2012) ✓Traub
and Vygen (2020)
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; circuit; complete; undirected |
1.599
Blauth et al. (2024) ✓
c : E →R≥0, (triangle); p : V →
R≥0 | min c(S) + p(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; complete; undirected |
241
141
Archer et al. (2011)
c : E →R≥0, (triangle); p : V →
R≥0 | min c(S) + p(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | circuit; planar; undirected |
1 + ϵ
Bateni et al. (2011) ✓
c : E →R≥0; p : V →R≥0 | min c(S) + p(S)⟩
123

2162
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 11 Approximability results for the Quota TSP. Note that ≤1, always in the β ﬁeld can be replaced by
≥0, once in all variants with a cost function satisfying the triangle inequality, analogously to Fact 1
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; circuit; complete; undirected |
5
Ausiello et al. (2018) ✓
c : E →R>0, (triangle); q : V →Z≥0 | q(S) ≥
b; min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | circuit; complete; undirected |
c : E →R>0, (triangle) |
2
Garg (2005) ✓
|VS| ≥b; min c(S)⟩
Table 12 Variants of the Prize-Collecting TSP
Variant
Reference
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | circuit; complete; directed |
Marques et al. (2019) ✓
c : E →R; p : V →R≥0 | min c(S) + p(S)⟩
(a)
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | circuit; complete; undirected |
Marques et al. (2019)✓
c : E →R; p : V →R≥0 | min c(S) + p(S)⟩
(b)
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | circuit; complete; undirected |
Bérubé et al. (2009)
c : E →R≥0, (triangle); q : V →R≥0 | q(S) ≥
b ; min c(S) ⟩
(c)
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | circuit; complete; undirected |
Balas (1989)
c : E →R; q : V →R≥0 ; p : V →R≥0 | q(S) ≥
b ; min c(S) + p(S) ⟩
p when not visiting a city. Furthermore, as in the Quota TSP, each node may be associated
with a proﬁt q (Bienstock et al., 1993), which the traveler receives if the node is visited. The
aim of the traveler is to minimize the sum of all edge costs and penalties along the tour, while
collecting a total proﬁt, which is the sum of proﬁts of visited nodes, of at least b - where b
is also called the quota (Ausiello et al., 2018). If b = 0, the Prize-collecting TSP reduces to
the Proﬁtable Tour Problem. If p(v) = 0 for all nodes v, the Prize-collecting TSP reduces
to the Quota TSP. Table 12 shows these variants in entries (a) and (b), resp.
In the case of undirected graphs, the following result holds: Given an α-approximation
for (a) and a β-approximation for (b), we obtain an (α + β)-approximation for variant (c) in
Table 12 by concatenating both solutions, i.e., the traveler ﬁrst visits all cities according to
the tour for the Quota TSP, and before returning to the starting point, the traveler visits all
cities of the Proﬁtable Tour that have not been visited yet (Ausiello et al., 2018). This yields
a constant factor approximation for the Prize-collecting TSP using the known constant factor
approximations from the previous two subsections.
Similarly to the name TSP with proﬁts, the name Prize-collecting TSP is also often used
as an umbrella term to denote all variants of the TSP where the traveler collects some proﬁt
or a prize when visiting a node such as the Quota TSP, the Proﬁtable Tour Problem, and the
Orienteering Problem, see for example (Balas, 1989). Even if all penalties are equal to zero
this name is frequently used.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2163
6.11 Orienteering Problem
In the Orienteering Problem (Golden et al., 1987; Vansteenwegen et al., 2011), the traveler
maximizes the proﬁt q without exceeding a given budget b for the total travel cost. An α-
approximation algorithm for the Orienteering Problem with unit proﬁts, i.e., all node costs
are equal to 1, yields an α ·(1+o(1))-approximation algorithm for the Orienteering Problem
with proﬁts in R≥0 (Korula, 2010, Lemma 2.6). The Orienteering Problem occurs in the
literature in various variants as shown in Table 13.
Approximability results for the Orienteering Problem are shown in Table 14.
There is also a quasi-polynomial time O(log2 k)-approximation for the orienteering prob-
lem (Chekuri & Pal, 2005). Papers introducing the Orienteering Problem frequently remark
that this variant of the TSP is also called the Selective TSP (Kara et al., 2016), and vice
versa (Laporte & Martello, 1990). When taking a closer look at the deﬁnitions, one notices a
subtle difference though. Most papers that use the name Selective TSP, usually assume that
the traveler returns to the starting node, whereas most papers that use the term Orienteering
Problem assume that a ﬁxed start and end node are given, which are distinct from one another.
The Selective TSP is also sometimes denoted as the Maximum Collection Problem, see for
example (Kataoka & Morito, 1988). The literature also mentions Bank Robber Problem as
another name for the Orienteering Problem (Arkin et al., 1998; Awerbuch et al., 1998). His-
torically, the Orienteering Problem was sometimes referred to as the Generalized TSP, see
Golden et al. (1987).
6.12 Time-dependent TSP
In the Time-dependent TSP, the edge costs or node costs change over time. For example in
Gouveia and Voß (1995); Picard and Queyranne (1978); Bigras et al. (2008), the costs of
an edge or node usually depend on its position in the solution sequence. In Hansknecht et
al. (2021), the costs of an edge depend on the actual time at which the edge starts being
traversed. In the moving-target or kinetic variant of the time-dependent TSP, targets move
with a ﬁxed constant speed in a ﬁxed direction (Hammar & Nilsson, 2002; Helvig et al.,
2003). A ﬂexible timing scheme where traveling times depend on the time of the day is
considered in Malandraki and Dial (1996). A good overview over the timing models used in
variants of time-dependent TSP and VRP problems is given in Gendreau et al. (2015).
When all n targets and the traveler move on the same line (restriction to one dimension,
acyclic graph) and traveler and targets move with constant speed, an exact optimal algorithm
of complexity O(n2) exists (Helvig et al., 1998, 2003). The inapproximability result for the
metric Time-dependent TSP (Hansknecht et al., 2021), see last line of Table 15, demonstrates
that approximability results for the metric “standard” TSP do not carry over to the Time-
dependent TSP. Any α-approximation of the asymmetric “standard” TSP yields an (αλ)-
approximation for the Time-dependent TSP when the time-dependent cost functions are of
low variance, i.e., bounded by a product of a static cost underestimator with a constant λ ≥1
(Hansknecht et al., 2021).
The Time-dependent Orienteering Problem requires the traveler to visit a maximum
number of targets within a given deadline. Under the assumption that the ratio between
the maximum and minimum traveling times between any two targets is constant, a
2 + ϵ-approximation algorithm exists (Fomin & Lingas, 2002). The kinetic variant of the
Time-dependent TSP is also denoted as the Moving-Target TSP (Helvig et al., 2003) or the
Kinetic TSP (Hammar & Nilsson, 2002). In the Moving-Target TSP with Resupply variant
123

2164
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 13 Variants of the Orienteering Problem
Variant
Reference
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; end; complete; undirected |
Vansteenwegen et al. (2011) ✓
c : E →R; q : V →R≥0 | c(S) ≤b; max q(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; end; undirected |
Kara et al. (2016)
c : E →R; q : V →R | c(S) ≤b; max q(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | circuit; complete; undirected |
Leifer and Rosenwein (1994)
c : E →R, (triangle); q : V →R>0 | c(S) ≤b; max q(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; once | circuit; undirected |
Kataoka and Morito (1988)
c : E →R≥0; q : V →R≥0 | c(S) ≤b; max q(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | circuit; complete; undirected |
Awerbuch et al. (1998) ✓
c : E →R≥0; q : V →R≥0 | c(S) ≤b; max q(S)⟩
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2165
Table 14 Approximability results for the Orienteering Problem. O PT ≤n is the number of nodes visited by an optimal solution. Note that the original bound obtained in
Nagarajan and Ravi (2011) was O(log2 n/ log log n). With the O(1)-approximation for ATSP in Traub and Vygen (2020), it improves to the bound shown in the third entry in
this table. Note that ≤1, always in the β ﬁeld can be replaced by ≥0, once in the last entry, analogously to Fact 1
Variant
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≥0; once | circuit; undirected |
2
Paul et al. (2017, 2020) ✓
c : E →R≥0 | c(S) ≤b; max |VS|⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; once | start; end; undirected |
2 + ϵ
Chekuri et al. (2012) ✓
c : E →R≥0 | c(S) ≤b; max |VS|⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; once | start; directed; circuit |
min
 
O(log2 O PT ),
Chekuri et al. (2012) ✓
c : E →R≥0, (triangle) | c(S) ≤b; max |VS|⟩
O (log n/ log log n)

Nagarajan and Ravi (2011) Traub and Vygen (2020)
⟨= 1 | ≥0; once; | start; undirected; complete |
1481
1480
Blum et al. (2007)
2 + ϵ
Chekuri et al. (2012) ✓
c : E →{1, 2}, metric | c(S) ≤b; max |VS|⟩
⟨= 1 | ≤1; always | start; undirected; complete |
1 + ε
Chen and Har-Peled (2008)
c : E →R≥0, euclidean ﬁxed dim |
c(S) ≤b; max |VS|⟩
123

2166
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 15 Approximability results for the Time-dependent TSP. Recall that the values poszone(k) and costzone(k) of the attribute temporal are deﬁned in Subsection 5.4
Variant
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
2 (√n)
Hammar and Nilsson (2002) ✓
c : E →R≥0, kinetic | min c(S)⟩⊕1
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
2
Hammar and Nilsson (2002) ✓2 + ϵ
Helvig et al. (1998, 2003) ✓
c : E →R≥0, kinetic | min c(S)⟩⊕2
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
1 + ϵ
Hammar and Nilsson (2002) ✓
c : E →R≥0, kinetic | min c(S)⟩⊕3
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
2 −2
3k
Brodén et al. (2004) ✓
c : E →{1, 2}, poszone(k) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
ω(1)a
Brodén et al. (2004) ✓
c : E →R>0, euclidean, costzone(2) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | circuit; complete; undirected |
5
3
Brodén et al. (2004) ✓
c : E →{1, 2}, costzone(2) | min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1 | start; circuit; complete; bidirected |
∞
Hansknecht et al. (2021) ✓
c : E →R≥0, (triangle), time | min c(S)⟩
a In fact, the same argument as in Brodén et al. (2004) also holds for any polynomial-time computable function, thus, the entry could also be ∞
⊕1: −An instance consists of n moving points in the euclidean plane that are described by their respective starting points at time 0 and their two-dimensional velocity vectors
in polar coordinates.
−The traveler starts at time 0 at the origin of the coordinate system. The speed of the traveler is strictly larger than the speed of any moving target. It is often normalized to 1.
⊕2: −The statements for ⊕1 hold.
−The lower bound for the approximability result holds when there are at least two moving targets or when the speed of each moving target is exactly half of the speed of
the traveler.
−The upper bound for the approximability result holds when there are at most O

log n
log log n

moving targets. The other targets have speed 0 and are stationary.
⊕3: The statements for ⊕1 hold. All n targets move with the same ﬁxed constant speed in a ﬁxed direction.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2167
(Helvig et al., 2003), a single traveler must always return to the origin after visiting each
target.
6.13 TSP with Time Windows
In the TSP with Time Windows, each node v is associated with a time window [r(v), d(v)]
duringwhichthenodemustbevisitedChristoﬁdesetal.(1981);Savelsbergh(1985).Travelers
may arrive at the node v before the release timer(v), in which case they need to wait untilr(v)
and usually incur a wait cost w that extends the traveling time. Only seldomly, the waiting
time is not increasing the costs of a tour, e.g., Ascheuer et al. (2001). In most variants, visiting
the node v after the deadline d(v) would not be considered a valid solution. Moreover, it is
often permitted that some of the nodes may have inﬁnite deadlines. It is commonly assumed
that there is no preemption of a job when a traveler visits a node. This means, if a traveler
visits a node, the job at this node is completed once and for all leading to node costs h(v),
representing the handling time at node v. The expression c(S<i) + w(S≤i) + h(S<i) thus
denotes the arrival time of the traveler at node i including the wait cost at node i. In case, the
wait cost or handling time are 0, the expression reduces accordingly. TSP-T3CO deﬁnitions
for typical variants of the TSP with Time Windows are summarized in Table 16.
Various approximability results exist for the TSP with Time Windows, which are summa-
rized in different ﬁgures based on the structure of the underlying graph. Table 17 summarizes
approximation results for variants where the graph is a straight line, only release times are
considered, and no deadlines are allowed. Table 18 summarizes results for variants over trees
or general graphs. The shoreline metric considered in Psaraftis et al. (1990) is deﬁned as
follows:
Deﬁnition 3 (Shoreline Metric (Psaraftis et al., 1990)) Let 1 ≤vi ≤vk ≤v j ≤n be nodes
in the graph. Let c(vi, v j) denote the costs of the edge from node vi to node v j as deﬁned in
Section 2. The shoreline metric satisﬁes the following conditions:
1. c(vi, vi) = 0
2. c(vi, v j) = c(v j, vi)
3. c(vi, v j) ≥c(vi, vk)
4. c(vi, v j) ≥c(vk, v j)
5. c(vi, v j) ≤c(vi, vk) + c(vk, v j)
The TSP with Time Windows is also denoted as TSP with Time Constraints (Christoﬁdes
et al., 1981; Savelsbergh, 1985), Shore Line Problem (Psaraftis et al., 1990), Traveling
Repairman Problem (Tsitsiklis, 1992; Frederickson & Wittman, 2012), Time-constrained
TSP (Karuno et al., 1997), Time-Window TSP (Gao et al., 2020), or Single VRP with release
and handling times (Karuno et al., 1997). VRP variants with Time Windows occur in many
practical applications, see for example (Solomon, 1987; Desrochers et al., 1988, 1992).
Approximability results for those VRP variants have for example been published in Khachay
and Ogorodnikov (2018); Guo et al. (2022).
6.14 Orienteering Problem with Time Windows
In the Orienteering Problem with Time Windows as many nodes as possible are visited within
their time windows. The deadline d(v) is usually a “soft” deadline where a proﬁt p is collected
if and only if a node is visited before its deadline. Proﬁts usually replace the handling times
123

2168
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 16 Variants of the TSP with Time Windows
Variant
Reference
⟨= 1 | ≥1; once | circuit; undirected | c : E →R≥0; w : E →R≥0, waiting; h : V →R≥0 |
Christoﬁdes et al. (1981) ✓
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) + h(S<i) ≤d(vi) −h(Si); min c(S) + w(S) + h(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1; always | circuit; complete; undirected | c : E →R≥0, (triangle); w : E →R≥0, waiting |
Savelsbergh (1985)
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) ≤d(vi); min c(S) + w(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1; always | start; end; complete; bidirected | c : E →R≥0; w : E →R≥0, waiting |
Gendreau et al. (1998)
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) ≤d(vi); min c(S)⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥1; once | circuit; directed | c : E →R≥0, (triangle); w : E →R≥0, waiting; h : V →R≥0 |
Ascheuer et al. (2001)
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) + h(S<i) ≤d(vi) −h(Si); min c(S) + h(S)⟩
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2169
Table 17 Approximability results for the TSP with Time Windows on lines. The parameters Z and L denote the length of the shoreline where Z = n−1
i=1 c(vi, vi+1) and
L = c(v1, vn) is the distance between node 1 and node n. Hence, the upper bounds from Psaraftis et al. (1990) are in all cases bounded by 2. The result in Karuno et al. (1998,
2002) also holds when the maximum lateness at nodes is minimized
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | = 1; always | circuit; complete; undirected |
2Z/(Z + L)
Psaraftis et al. (1990)
c : E →R≥0, shoreline; w : E →R≥0, waiting |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i); min c(S) + w(S) ⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1; always | start; end; complete; undirected |
min{2(L + Z)/3L,
Psaraftis et al. (1990)
c : E →R≥0, shoreline; w : E →R≥0, waiting |
(4Z −L)/2Z}
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i); min c(S) + w(S) ⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥1; once | circuit; undirected; path |
3
2
Karuno et al. (1998, 2002)
c : E →R≥0); w : E →R≥0, waiting; h : V →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) + h(S<i);
min c(S) + w(S) + h(S) ⟩⊕1
⟨= 1 | ≥1; once | circuit; undirected; path | c : E →R≥0; h : V →R≥0 |
3
2
Karuno et al. (2002)
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : c(S<i) + h(S<i) ≤d(vi) −h(Si);
min maxi max{0, c(S<i) + h(S<i) −d(vi)} ⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥1; once | circuit; undirected; path | c : E →R≥0; |
O(n2)
Chan and Young (1995); Young and Chan (1999)
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r ≤c(S<i) ≤d(vi); min c(S) ⟩
⊕1: The solution is a so-called simple schedule. The traveler moves from the ﬁrst node on the line to the last node and back and only chooses to visit a node and do the job at
this node on the ﬁrst move or on the second
123

2170
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 18 Approximability and inapproximability result for the TSP with Time Windows on trees or general graphs. The value of α is instance-dependent and depends on the
maximum release time rmax, the sum of all traveling times, and the sum of all handling times. It always satisﬁes 0 < α ≤1, i.e., the bound is at most 2. The lower approximation
bound in Bockenhauer et al. (2007) applies even if the number of deadlines is at most 2. Furthermore, it was shown that there is no ﬁxed parameter-tractable approximation
algorithm for this problem variant with approximation ratio 2 −ϵ for any ϵ > 0 unless P = NP. According to the authors of Augustine and Seiden (2004), their result also applies
to other tour variants where either start and end nodes are deﬁned or the traveler travels a circuit
Variant
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≥1; once | circuit; bidirected; tree |
1 + α
Karuno et al. (1997)
c : E →R≥0; w : E →R≥0, waiting;
h : V →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) + h(S<i);
min c(S) + w(S) + h(S) ⟩⊕2
⟨= 1 | ≥1; once | start; undirected; tree(b) |
1 + ϵ
Augustine and Seiden (2004)
c : E →R≥0, metric; w : E →R≥0, waiting;
h : V →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) + h(S<i);
min c(S) + w(S) + h(S) ⟩⊕3
⟨= 1 | = 1; always | circuit; complete; undirected; |
5
2
Nagamochi et al. (1997)
c : E →R≥0(triangle); w : E →R≥0, waiting;
h : V →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) + h(S<i);
min c(S) + w(S) + h(S) ⟩
⟨= 1 | = 1; always | circuit; complete; undirected |
2 −ϵ
Bockenhauer et al. (2007) ✓
5
2
Bockenhauer et al. (2007) ✓
c : E →R≥0, metric |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , n} : c(S<i) ≤d(vi); min c(S) ⟩⊕4
⊕2: The traveler starts at the root of the tree.
⊕3: There is a constant number of leaves b in the tree.
⊕4: The number of nodes vi with a ﬁnite deadline d(vi) is bounded by a constant k
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2171
that are considered in the TSP with Time Windows. In some variants, deadlines can also be
exceeded by a constant factor, see for example (Bansal et al., 2004; Farbstein & Levin, 2019).
Tables 19, 20 and 21 summarize approximability results for the Orienteering Problem
with Time Windows split into Table 19 for general proﬁts, Table 20 for only release times or
only deadlines, and Table 21 for release times and deadlines under unit proﬁts.
Further approximability results have also been obtained for the Orienteering Problem
with Time Windows under a variable speed of the traveler, for example, Frederickson and
Wittman (2012); Gao et al. (2020). Variable costs changing at most k −1 times considering
k time zones are studied in Brodén et al. (2004). Quasi-polynomial time approximations
have been published in Friggstad and Swamy (2017, 2021); Chekuri and Pal (2005). The
Orienteering Problem with Time Windows (Bansal et al., 2004; Chekuri & Kumar, 2004) is
also known as the Repairman Problem, (Speeding) Delivery Man Problem (Frederickson &
Wittman, 2012), TSP with Deadlines (Bockenhauer et al., 2007; Böckenhauer et al., 2009),
Time Window Prize Collecting Problem (Gao et al., 2020), Prize-Collecting TSP with Time
Windows (Bar-Yehuda et al., 2005), or Deadline TSP (Tsitsiklis, 1992; Augustine & Seiden,
2004; Bansal et al., 2004; Bar-Yehuda et al., 2005; Chekuri et al., 2012; Frederickson &
Wittman, 2012; Friggstad & Swamy, 2021).
7 Extension of TSP-T3CO to Variants of the Vehicle Routing Problem
The TSP-T3CO deﬁnition scheme can easily be extended to accommodate several travel-
ers such that variants of the vehicle routing problem VRP can be deﬁned. 12 In particular,
attributes and values from the classiﬁcation schemes proposed in Bodin and Golden (1981);
Desrochers et al. (1990) could be added to the respective TSP-T3CO ﬁelds. For example,
the attributes vehicle scheduling and route duration originally belong to the vehicles-ﬁeld
in Desrochers et al. (1990), but would be added to the γ -ﬁeld in TSP-T3CO , because they
characterize the tour of a vehicle. In order to illustrate a possible extension of TSP-T3CO to
VRP, we deﬁne a variant of the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem CVRP as described in
the ﬁrst publication introducing the CVRP (Dantzig & Ramser, 1959) in Figure 4.
When deﬁning problem variants with several travelers, one usually needs to refer to
properties or costs relating to a single traveler rather than the entire collection of travelers.
We denote the set of travelers by T and if an attribute refers to a speciﬁc traveler rather than
the set of travelers, we indicate this by adding an index t to an attribute or cost function. In
Dantzig and Ramser (1959), the CVRP variant is deﬁned over a complete graph with non-
negative edge costs and each node is associated with a non-negative demand d. Edge costs
are symmetric. Travelers (vehicles) deliver items from a depot to the customers. Each vehicle
must start at the depot, perform a circuit to visit each customer exactly once, and return to the
depot. The paper ﬁrst discusses a variant where all vehicles have the same capacity cap, but
then also considers an extension to vehicles of different capacities capt. The sum of demands
along each vehicle’s circuit must not exceed the vehicle’s capacity.
A recent overview of approximability results for variants of the CVRP is available on
arxiv.org (Chen, 2023). Results were e.g., obtained for the CRVP problem in the euclidean
plane (Haimovich & Rinnooy Kan, 1985), for a variant with unit demand, equal capacity of
all vehicles and a ﬁxed, but arbitrary number of depots under an edge cost function, which is
determined by a ﬁxed-dimensional euclidean metric (Khachay & Dubinin, 2016), and for a
variant with a linearly ordered set of time windows and equal capacity of all vehicles in the
12 See Toth and Vigo (2002) for an introduction and overview of the VRP.
123

2172
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 19 Approximability results for the Orienteering Problem with Time Windows with release times and deadlines under general proﬁts. Note that the result in Bar-Yehuda et
al. (2005) also includes handling times. L is the ratio in length between the largest and the smallest time window L = Lmax/Lmin. The density parameter σ of an instance is
deﬁned as σ = maxu,v
|Lu|
c(u,v)+c(v,u)+h(u)+h(v) where Lu is the length of the time interval of node u and c(i, j) is the distance from node i to node j. O PT ≤n is the number
of nodes visited by an optimal solution
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected |
3 log2
2 n
Bansal et al. (2004)
c : E →Z≥0; p : V →Z≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) ≤d(vi); max p(S) ⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once; | start; directed |
(1 + ϵ)(⌊σ⌋+ 1)
Bar-Yehuda et al. (2005) ✓
c : E →R≥0; h : V →R≥0; p : V →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + h(S<i) ≤d(vi) −h(vi); max p(S)⟩
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2173
Table 20 Approximability results for the Orienteering Problem with Time Windows and either release times or deadlines only. The constant β is the approximation ratio for the
Orienteering Problem with time windows with a single deadline where the start and end of the tour are deﬁned (Bansal et al., 2004). The constant α is the approximation ratio for
the prize-collecting TSP with time windows with at most k deadlines (Chekuri & Kumar, 2004) with α = 3 in Farbstein and Levin (2019). The constant Dmax = maxv∈V d(v)
is the maximum deadline in the graph. O PT ≤n is the number of nodes visited by an optimal solution. Note that the bound in the last entry follows from Chekuri et al. (2012),
the result in Nagarajan and Ravi (2011), and the O(1)-approximation for ATSP in Traub and Vygen (2020)
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected |
3 log2 n
Bansal et al. (2004)
c : E →Z≥0; p : V →Z>0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : c(S<i) ≤d(vi); max p(S) ⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected |
O(log Dmax)
Bansal et al. (2004)
c : E →Z≥0; p : V →Z>0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : c(S<i) ≤d(vi); max p(S) ⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected |
3 log2 n
Bansal et al. (2004)
c : E →Z≥0; p : V →Z>0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i); max p(S) ⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected |
O(log 1
ϵ )
Bansal et al. (2004)
c : E →Z≥0; p : V →Z>0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : c(S<i) ≤(1 + ϵ)d(vi); max p(S) ⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected |
β + 1
Chekuri and Kumar (2004) ✓
c : E →R≥0, metric |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : c(S<i) ≤d(vi); max |VS|⟩⊕2
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected; complete |
(1 + ϵ)α
Farbstein and Levin (2019)
c : E →Z≥0, metric; p : V →Z>0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : c(S<i) ≤(1 + 2ϵ)d(vi); max p(S) ⟩⊕1
123

2174
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 20 continued
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected; tree |
1 + ϵ
Farbstein and Levin (2019)
c : E →Z≥0, metric; p : V →Z>0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : c(S<i) ≤(1 + ϵ)d(vi); max p(S) ⟩⊕1
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected; tree |
1
Farbstein and Levin (2019)
c : E →Z≥0, metric; p : V →Z>0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : c(S<i) ≤(1 + ϵ)d(vi); max p(S) ⟩⊕2
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once; | start; end; directed |
min
 
O(log3 O PT ),
Chekuri et al. (2012) ✓
c : E →Z≥0 |
O(log2 n/ log log n)

Nagarajan and Ravi (2011) Traub and Vygen (2020)
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : c(S<i) ≤d(vi); max |VS|⟩
⊕1: The number of distinct deadlines is a ﬁxed constant independent of the input.
⊕2: The number of nodes with ﬁnite deadlines is a constant
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2175
Table 21 Approximability results for the Orienteering Problem with time windows considering release times and deadlines under unit proﬁts. Note that one result in Bar-Yehuda
et al. (2005) also includes handling times. The constant β is the approximation ratio for the Orienteering Problem with time windows with a single deadline where the start and
end of the tour are deﬁned Bansal et al. (2004). L is the ratio in length between the largest and the smallest time window L = Lmax/Lmin. The density parameter of an instance
is deﬁned as σ = maxu,v
|Lu|
c(u,v)+c(v,u)+h(u)+h(v) where Lu is the length of the time interval of node u and c(i, j) is the distance from node i to node j. O PT ≤n is the number
of nodes visited by an optimal solution
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected |
β + 1
Chekuri and Kumar (2004) ✓
c : E →R≥0, metric |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) ≤d; max |VS|⟩⊕3
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; undirected |
β + 2
Chekuri and Kumar (2004) ✓
c : E →R>0, metric |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) ≤d(vi); max |VS|⟩⊕4
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once; | start; undirected; path |
4 + ϵ
Bar-Yehuda et al. (2005) ✓
c : E →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) ≤r(vi) + 1; max |VS|⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once; | start; undirected; path |
(4 + ϵ) log2 L
Bar-Yehuda et al. (2005) ✓
c : E →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) ≤d(vi); max |VS|⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once; | start; directed |
⌊σ⌋+ 1
Bar-Yehuda et al. (2005) ✓
c : E →R≥0; h : V →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + h(S<i) ≤d(vi) −h(vi); max |VS|⟩
123

2176
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Table 21 continued
Variant
Upper Bound
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once; | start; end; undirected |
O(max{log O PT , log L})
Chekuri et al. (2012) ✓
c : E →Z≥0; w : E →Z≥0, waiting |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) ≤d(vi); max |VS|⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once; | start; end; bidirected |
O(log2 O PT ·
Chekuri et al. (2012) ✓
c : E →Z≥0; w : E →Z≥0, waiting |
max{log O PT , log L})
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) + w(S≤i) ≤d(vi); max |VS|⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once| start; end; undirected; tree |
3
Frederickson and Wittman (2012)
c : E →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) ≤r(vi) + 1; max |VS| ⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once| start; end; undirected |
6 + ϵ
Frederickson and Wittman (2012)
c : E →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) ≤r(vi) + 1; max |VS| ⟩
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once| start; end; undirected |
O(log L)
Frederickson and Wittman (2012)
c : E →R≥0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) ≤d(vi); max |VS| ⟩⊕5
⟨= 1 | ≥0; ≤once | start; end; undirected |
10
Frederickson and Wittman (2012)
c : E →R>0 |
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤c(S<i) ≤d(vi); max |VS|⟩⊕6
⊕3: There is a single deadline.
⊕4: The number of distinct time windows is a ﬁxed constant independent of the input.
⊕5: All start end and end times are integers.
⊕6: All time windows have length in [1, 2]
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2177
Fig. 4 TSP-T3CO deﬁnition of the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem CVRP described in Dantzig and
Ramser (1959)
euclidean plane (Khachay & Ogorodnikov, 2019). It is easy to see that TSP-T3CO would
facilitate the precise and compact deﬁnition of these variants using existing attributes and
values and requiring only minimal extensions.
8 Conclusion
Thispaperprovidestheﬁrstsystematicsurveyonthebestcurrentlyknown(in)approximability
results for well-known TSP variants such as the “standard” TSP, Path TSP, Bottleneck TSP,
Maximum Scatter TSP, Generalized TSP, Clustered TSP, Traveling Purchaser Problem,
Proﬁtable Tour Problem, Quota TSP, Prize-Collecting TSP, Orienteering Problem, Time-
dependent TSP, TSP with Time Windows, and the Orienteering Problem with Time Windows.
The foundation of this survey is the TSP-T3CO deﬁnition scheme, which takes inspiration
from a similar and successfully used deﬁnition scheme from the domain of scheduling prob-
lems. We propose TSP-T3CO as a uniform, easy-to-use and extensible means for the formal
and precise deﬁnition of TSP variants by introducing ﬁve ﬁelds: the α-, β-, and γ -ﬁelds,
which characterize the number of travelers, the targeted cities, and the tour, and the δ- and
ϵ-ﬁelds, which deﬁne costs and possible objectives. For each ﬁeld, a set of distinguished
attributes and values is deﬁned for the TSP-T3CO 2025 version used in the survey.
Applying TSP-T3CO to formally deﬁne the variant studied by a paper reveals subtle
differences within the same named variant and also brings out the differences between the
variants more clearly. This makes it easier to understand the approximability landscape and
the assumptions under which certain results hold. Open gaps become more evident and results
can be compared more easily. In summarizing the insights from our survey, we propose a
TSP-T3CO deﬁnition for each TSP variant. A brief discussion of how TSP-T3CO can be
used to deﬁne vehicle routing problems by adding new attributes and values to the deﬁnition
scheme concludes the paper.
123

2178
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Appendix A TSP-T3CO 2025 at a Glance: EBNF and Set of Attributes and
Values
Fig. 5 Recap of Figure 2: EBNF for TSP-T3CO longhand notation
Fig. 6 Recap of Figure 3: EBNF for TSP-T3CO shorthand notation
Appendix B Proposals for TSP Variant Deﬁnitions in TSP-T3CO 2025
Longhand Notation
We propose a TSP-T3CO longhand deﬁnition for each of the TSP variants that we discussed
in Section 6. The longhand deﬁnition subsumes the shorthand TSP-T3CO deﬁnitions of the
various variations. We use the TSP-T3CO longhand notation with the following conventions:
• All ﬁelds that must be deﬁned for the problem variant are listed, for ﬁelds, which are
absent, no values must be deﬁned. These ﬁelds are greyed out.
• If a ﬁeld can take on any of the possible values deﬁned in Section 5, we use “∗”.
• If a ﬁeld can take on several, but not all possible values, these values are separated by
“or”.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2179
Field
Attribute
Type(s)
Values
Comments
α
count
int — expression
= 1 | = Θ(1) | = k | ≥1
k = Θ(1) is a ﬁxed parameter
traveler
that is not part of the input
traversals
int | expression |
= 1 | = d | = d(v) |
d - number of traversals
≥1 | ≥1 | ≥0 | ≥d(v) | ≤1
d(v) - traversals depending on nodes
β
visits
string
= always| = once | ≥once | ≤once
target
group
string
partition(once) |cover(once) |
partition(≥once) | cover(≥once)
covering
string
all(c, ≤b) | subset (c, ≤b)
c - cost function, B - cost bound
start
bool
True | False
end
bool
True | False
circuit
bool
True | False
graphtype
string
complete | strongly connected | planar |
γ
path | cycle | binary tree |
tour
tree(b)
edgetype
string
undirected | directed | bidirected
precedences
string
atomic | arbitrary
cluster
string
partition(order, sequence) |
order=ordered
cover(order, sequence)
sequence = start | startend | terminals
domain
string
E | V
range
string
any subset of R>0
δ
property
string
(params) |
params = identity |triangle| α-triangle
cost
metric | graphic | planar | subset planar | euclidean |
symmetric
function
euclidean ﬁxed dim | euclidean plane | grid(m,n)
partial
bool
True |False
temporal
string
waiting | costzone(k) | poszone(k) |
k - zones change at most k-1 times
time | position | kinetic
ϵ
string
free syntax
example: c1(S) + c21(S) ≤b, min c1(S)
objective
123

2180
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
• For the range of cost functions, the most general value is given, which is often R.
Field
Attribute
”standard”
Path
Bottleneck
Maximum Scatter
TSP
TSP
TSP
TSP
α
count
= 1
= 1
= 1
= 1
β
traversals
= 1 or ≥1
= 1 or ≥1
= 1 or ≥1
= 1 or ≥1
visits
group
covering
γ
start
false
∗
∗
∗
end
false
∗
∗
∗
circuit
true
false
∗
∗
graphtype
∗
∗
∗
∗
edgetype
∗
∗
∗
∗
precedences
cluster
δ
domain/range
c : E →R
c : E →R
c : E →R
c: E →R
property
∗
∗
∗
∗
partial
temporal
ϵ
objective
min c(S)
min c(S)
min max{c(e) : e ∈ES}
max min{c(e) : e ∈ES}
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2181
Field
Attribute
Generalized
Clustered
Traveling Purchaser
Time-Dependent
TSP with
TSP
TSP
Problem
TSP
Time Windows
α
count
= 1
= 1
= 1
= 1
= 1
β
traversals
≤1
= 1
≤1
= 1
= 1 or ≥1
visits
always
once
group
∗
covering
γ
start
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
end
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
circuit
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
graphtype
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
edgetype
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
precedences
cluster
∗
δ
domain/range
c : E →R
c : E →R
c : E →R
c : E →R
c : E →R≥0
{availi}m
i=1 : V →R>0
w : E →R≥0
{pricei}m
i=1 : V →R>0
h : V →R≥0
property
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
partial
∗
temporal
time, position
w : waiting
costzone(k), poszone(k)
kinetic
ϵ
objective
min c(S)
min c(S)
min c(S)
min c(S)
min ∗;
+ m
i=1

v∈SV pricei(v) · sharei(v)
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤
c(S<i) + w(S≤i) + h(S<i) ≤
d(vi) −h(Si)
123

2182
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Field
Attribute
Prize-collecting
Quota
Proﬁtable Tour
Orienteering
Orienteering Problem
TSP
TSP
Problem
Problem
with Time Windows
α
count
= 1
= 1
= 1
= 1
= 1
β
traversals
≥0
≥0
≥0
≥0
≥0
visits
≤once
≤once
≤once
≤once
≤once
group
covering
γ
start
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
end
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
circuit
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
graphtype
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
edgetype
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
precedences
cluster
δ
domain/range
c : E →R
c : E →R
c : E →R
c : E →R
c : E →R
p : V →R≥0
p : V →R≥0
w : E →R≥0
q : V →R≥0
q : V →R≥0
q : V →R≥0
q : V →R≥0
h : V →R≥0
property
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
partial
temporal
w : waiting
ϵ
objective
q(S) ≥b; min c(S) + p(S)
q(S) ≥b; min c(S)
min c(S) + p(S)
max q(S)
max q(S) ;
∀i ∈{0, . . . , k} : r(vi) ≤
c(S<i) + w(S≤i) + h(S<i) ≤
d(vi) −h(vi)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2183
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and the editor for their valuable feed-
back. We would like to thank the following authors for providing feedback on an earlier version of this paper:
Xiaoguang Bao, Nili Beck, Hans-Joachim Böckenbauer, Vincenzo Bonifaci, Chandra Chekuri, Dominique
Feillet, Daniel Freund, Naveen Garg, Elizabeth Goldbarg, Imke Joormann, Michael Khachay, Philip Klein,
Robert Kleinberg, Sascha Kurz, Michail Lampis, Daniele Manerba, Martin Nägele, Hung Nguyen, Bengt J.
Nilsson, Harilaos N. Psaraftis, Jörg Rambau, András Seb˝o, Shimon Shahar, Steven Skiena, Paolo Thoth, Vera
Traub, Pieter Vansteenwegen, Santhosh S. Vempala, Jens Vygen, Benjamin Wah, Alex Zelikowsky.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Declarations
Conﬂicts of Interest Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
An, H.-C., Kleinberg, R., & Shmoys, D. B. (2015). Improving Christoﬁdes’ algorithm for the s-t Path TSP.
Journal of the ACM, 62(5), 1–28.
An, H.-C., Kleinberg, R., & Shmoys, D. B. (2021). Approximation algorithms for the bottleneck asymmetric
traveling salesman problem. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 17(4), 1–12.
Anily, S., Bramel, J., & Hertz, A. (1999). A 5/3-approximation algorithm for the clustered traveling salesman
tour and path problems. Operations Research Letters, 24(1–2), 29–35.
Applegate, D. L., Bixby, R. E., Chvátal, V., & Cook, W. J. (2011). The Traveling Salesman Problem. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Archer, A., Bateni, M., Hajiaghayi, M., & Karloff, H. (2011). Improved approximation algorithms for prize-
collecting Steiner tree and TSP. SIAM Journal on Computing, 40(2), 309–332.
Arkin, E.M., Mitchell, J.S., & Narasimhan, G. (1998). Resource-constrained geometric network optimization.
In: Proc. 14th Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, pp. 307–316. ACM, New York.
Arkin, E. M., Chiang, Y.-J., Mitchell, J. S. B., Skiena, S. S., & Yang, T.-C. (1999). On the maximum scatter
traveling salesperson problem. SIAM Journal of Computing, 29(2), 515–544.
Arora, S. (1996). Polynomial time approximation schemes for Euclidean TSP and other geometric problems.
In: Proc. 37th Conference on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 2–11. IEEE
Ascheuer, N., Fischetti, M., & Grötschel, M. (2001). Solving the asymmetric travelling salesman problem
with time windows by branch-and-cut. Mathematical Programming, 90(3), 475–506.
Augustine, J. E., & Seiden, S. (2004). Linear time approximation schemes for vehicle scheduling problems.
Theoretical Computer Science, 324(2–3), 147–160.
Ausiello, G., Bonifaci, V., Leonardi, S., & Marchetti-Spaccamela, A. (2018). Prize collecting traveling
salesman and related problems. In T. F. Gonzalez (Ed.), Handbook of Approximation Algorithms and
Metaheuristics, Volume 1: Methologies and Traditional Applications (pp. 611–628). Boca Raton: Chap-
man and Hall/CRC.
Awerbuch, B., Azar, Y., Blum, A., & Vempala, S. (1998). New approximation guarantees for minimum-weight
k-trees and prize-collecting salesmen. SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(1), 254–262.
Baader, F., McGuinness, D. L., Nardi, D., & Patel-Schneider, P. F. (2007). The Description Logic Handbook:
Theory, Implementation, and Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baader, F., Horrocks, I., Lutz, C., & Sattler, U. (2017). An Introduction to Description Logic. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bäckström, C., & Nebel, B. (1995). Complexity results for SAS+ planning. Computational Intelligence, 11(4),
625–655.
123

2184
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Baker, K. R., & Trietsch, D. (1974). Principes of Sequencing and Scheduling. Hoboken: Wiley.
Bakshi, M. S., & Arora, S. R. (1969). The sequencing problem. Management Science, 16(4), 247–263.
Balas, E. (1989). The prize collecting traveling salesman problem. Networks, 19(6), 621–636.
Balas, E., Fischetti, M., & Pulleyblank, W. R. (1995). The precedence-constrained asymmetric traveling
salesman polytope. Mathematical Programming, 68(1), 241–265.
Baniasadi, P., Foumani, M., Smith-Miles, K., & Ejov, V. (2020). A transformation technique for the clustered
generalized traveling salesman problem with applications to logistics. European Journal of Operational
Research, 285(2), 444–457.
Bansal, N., Blum, A., Chawla, S., & Meyerson, A. (2004). Approximation algorithms for deadline-TSP and
vehicle routing with time-windows. In: Proc. 36th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
pp. 166–174. ACM, New York.
Bao, X., Liu, Z., Yu, W., & Li, G. (2017). A note on approximation algorithms of the clustered traveling
salesman problem. Information Processing Letters, 127, 54–57.
Bar-Yehuda, R., Even, G., & Shahar, S. M. (2005). On approximating a geometric prize-collecting traveling
salesman problem with time windows. Journal of Algorithms, 55(1), 76–92.
Bateni, M.H., Chekuri, C., Ene, A., Hajiaghayi, M.T., Korula, N., & Marx, D. (2011). Prize-collecting Steiner
Problems on Planar Graphs, pp. 1028–1049. ACM, New York.
Batista-Galván, M., Riera-Ledesma, J., & Salazar-González, J. J. (2013). The traveling purchaser problem,
with multiple stacks and deliveries: A branch-and-cut approach. Computers & operations research, 40(8),
2103–2115.
Bellmore, M., & Hong, S. (1974). Transformation of multisalesman problem to the standard traveling salesman
problem. Journal of the ACM, 21(3), 500–504.
Bérczi, K., Mnich, M., & Vincze, R. (2022). A 3/2-approximation for the Metric Many-Visits Path TSP. SIAM
Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 36(4), 2995–3030.
Bern, M., & Eppstein, D. (1996). Approximation algorithms for geometric problems. In D. S. Hochbaum
(Ed.), Approximation Algorithms for NP-hard Problems (pp. 296–345). Worcester: PWS Publishing Co.
Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J. A., & Lassila, O. (2001). The Semantic Web. Scientiﬁc American, 284(5), 34–43.
Bérubé, J.-F., Gendreau, M., & Potvin, J.-Y. (2009). A branch-and-cut algorithm for the undirected prize
collecting traveling salesman problem. Networks: An Int. Journal, 54(1), 56–67.
Bhattacharya, B., ´Custi´c, A., Raﬁey, A., Raﬁey, A., & Sokol, V. (2015). Approximation algorithms for gen-
eralized MST and TSP in grid clusters. In: Proc. 9th Int. Conf. on Combinatorial Optimization and
Applications, pp. 110–125. Springer
Bienstock, D., Goemans, M. X., Simchi-Levi, D., & Williamson, D. (1993). A note on the prize collecting
traveling salesman problem. Mathematical programming, 59(1), 413–420.
Bigras, L.-P., Gamache, M., & Savard, G. (2008). The time-dependent traveling salesman problem and single
machine scheduling problems with sequence dependent setup times. Discrete Optimization, 5(4), 685–
699.
Blauth, J., Klein, N., & Nägele, M. (2024). A better-than-1.6-approximation for Prize-Collecting TSP. In:
Vygen, J., Byrka, J. (eds.) Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization, pp. 28–42. Springer,
Cham.
Blazewicz, J., Ecker, K. H., Pesch, E., Schmidt, G., Sterna, M., & Weglarz, J. (2019). Handbook on Scheduling:
From Theory to Practice. Cham: Springer.
Blum, A., Chawla, S., Karger, D. R., Lane, T., Meyerson, A., & Minkoff, M. (2007). Approximation algorithms
for orienteering and discounted-reward TSP. SIAM Journal on Computing, 37(2), 653–670.
Bockenhauer, H.-J., Hromkovic, J., Kneis, J., & Kupke, J. (2007). The parameterized approximability of TSP
with deadlines. Theory of Computing Systems, 41(3), 431–444.
Böckenhauer, H.-J., Kneis, J., & Kupke, J. (2009). Approximation hardness of deadline-tsp reoptimization.
Theoretical Computer Science, 410(21–23), 2241–2249.
Bodin, L. D. (1975). A taxonomic structure for vehicle routing and scheduling problems. Computers and
Urban Society, 1, 11–29.
Bodin, L. D., & Golden, B. (1981). Classiﬁcation in vehicle routing and scheduling. Networks, 11, 97–108.
Bontoux, B., & Feillet, D. (2008). Ant colony optimization for the traveling purchaser problem. Computers &
Operations Research, 35(2), 628–637.
Braekers, K., Ramaekers, K., & Van Nieuwenhuyse, I. (2016). The vehicle routing problem: State of the art
classiﬁcation and review. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 99, 300–313.
Brodén, B., Hammar, M., & Nilsson, B. J. (2004). Online and ofﬂine algorithms for the time-dependent TSP
with time zones. Algorithmica, 39(4), 299–319.
Brucker, P. (1995). Scheduling Algorithms. Heidelberg: Springer.
Burkard, R. E., Deineko, V. G., Dal, R., Veen, J. A. A., & Woeginger, G. J. (1998). Well-solvable special cases
of the traveling salesman problem: A survey. SIAM Review, 40(3), 496–546.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2185
Burstall, R. M. (1966). A heuristic method for a job-scheduling problem. Journal of the Operational Research
Society, 17, 291–304.
Bylander, T. (1991). Complexity results for planning. In: Proc. 12th Int. Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence, 10, 274–279.
Chan, C.-l., & Young, G.H. (1995). Single-vehicle scheduling problem on a straight line with time window
constraints. In: Proc. 1st Int. Computing and Combinatorics Conference, pp. 617–626. Springer.
Cheikhrouhou, O., & Khouﬁ, I. (2021). A comprehensive survey on the multiple traveling salesman problem:
Applications, approaches and taxonomy. Computer Science Review, 40, Article 100369.
Chekuri, C., & Kumar, A. (2004). Maximum coverage problem with group budget constraints and applications.
Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization - Algorithms and TechniquesApproximation (pp. 72–
83). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Chekuri, C., & Pal, M. (2005). A recursive greedy algorithm for walks in directed graphs. In: 46th Annual
IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 245–253. IEEE
Chekuri, C., Korula, N., & Pál, M. (2012). Improved algorithms for orienteering and related problems. ACM
Transactions on Algorithms, 8(3), 1–27.
Chen, Y. (2023). Approximation schemes for capacity vehicle routing problems: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.01826.
Chen, K., & Har-Peled, S. (2008). The Euclidean orienteering problem revisited. SIAM Journal on Computing,
38(1), 385–397.
Chiang, Y.-J. (2005). New approximation results for the maximum scatter TSP. Algorithmica, 41(4), 309–341.
Christoﬁdes, N., Mingozzi, A., & Toth, P. (1981). State-space relaxation procedures for the computation of
bounds to routing problems. Networks, 11(2), 145–164.
Coffman, E. G. (1976). Computer and Job-Shop Scheduling Theory. Hoboken: Wiley.
Conway, R. W., Maxwell, W. L., & Miller, L. W. (1967). Theory of Scheduling. Boston, MA: Addison Wesley.
Cosma, O., Pop, P.C., & Cosma, L. (2023). A hybrid based genetic algorithm for solving the clustered general-
ized traveling salesman problem. In: International Conference on Hybrid Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems,
pp. 352–362. Springer.
Cosma, O., Pop, P. C., & Cosma, L. (2024). A novel memetic algorithm for solving the generalized traveling
salesman problem. Logic Journal of the IGPL, 32(4), 576–588.
Current, J., & Marsh, M. (1993). Multiobjective transportation network design and routing problems: Taxon-
omy and annotation. European Journal of Operational Research, 65(1), 4–19.
Current, J., & Min, H. (1986). Multiobjective design of transportation networks: Taxonomy and annotation.
European Journal of Operational Research, 26(2), 187–201.
Dantzig, G. B., & Ramser, J. H. (1959). The truck dispatching problem. Management Science, 6(1), 80–91.
Dantzig, G., Fulkerson, R., & Johnson, S. (1954). Solution of a large-scale traveling-salesman problem. Journal
of the Operations Research Society of America, 2(4), 393–410.
Dawande, M., Geismar, H. N., Sethi, S. P., & Sriskandarajah, C. (2005). Sequencing and scheduling in robotic
cells: Recent developments. Journal of Scheduling, 8(5), 387–426.
Deineko, V. G., Klinz, B., Tiskin, A., & Woeginger, G. J. (2014). Four-point conditions for the TSP: The
complete complexity classiﬁcation. Discrete optimization, 14, 147–159.
Dell’Amico, M., Mafﬁoli, F., & Värbrand, P. (1995). On prize-collecting tours and the asymmetric travelling
salesman problem. Int. Transactions in Operational Research, 2(3), 297–308.
Derbel, H., Jarboui, B., & Siarry, P. (2020). Modeling and Optimization in Green Logistics. Cham: Springer.
Desrochers, M., Lenstra, J. K., Savelsbergh, M. W., & Soumis, F. (1988). Vehicle routing with time windows:
optimization and approximation. In B. L. Golden & A. A. Assad (Eds.), Vehicle Routing: Methods and
Studies. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Desrochers, M., Lenstra, J. K., & Savelsbergh, M. W. P. (1990). A classiﬁcation scheme for vehicle routing
and scheduling problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 46(3), 322–332.
Desrochers, M., Desrosiers, J., & Solomon, M. M. (1992). A new optimization algorithm for the vehicle
routing problem with time windows. Operations Research, 40(2), 342–354.
Ding, C., Cheng, Y., & He, M. (2007). Two-level genetic algorithm for clustered traveling salesman problem
with application in large-scale TSPs. Tsinghua Science & Technology, 12(4), 459–465.
Djang, L.P. (1993). The wandering salesman problem. PhD thesis, The University of Texas at Arlington.
Dumitrescu, A., & Mitchell, J. S. (2003). Approximation algorithms for TSP with neighborhoods in the plane.
Journal of Algorithms, 48(1), 135–159.
Eksioglu, B., Vural, A., & Reisman, A. (2009). The vehicle routing problem: A taxonomic review. Computers
and Industrial Engineering, 57, 1472–1483.
Fakcharoenphol, J., Rao, S., & Talwar, K. (2003). A tight bound on approximating arbitrary metrics by tree
metrics. In: Proc. 35th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 448–455.
Farbstein, B., & Levin, A. (2019). Deadline TSP. Theoretical Computer Science, 771, 83–92.
123

2186
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Feige, U., & Singh, M. (2007). Improved approximation ratios for traveling salesperson tours and paths in
directed graphs. In: Int. Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization, pp.
104–118. Springer
Feillet, D., Dejax, P., & Gendreau, M. (2005). Traveling salesman problems with proﬁts. Transportation
Science, 39(2), 188–205.
Fischer, A., & Helmberg, C. (2013). The symmetric quadratic traveling salesman problem. Mathematical
Programming, 142(1), 205–254.
Fischetti, M., Salazar González, J. J., & Toth, P. (1997). A branch-and-cut algorithm for the symmetric
generalized traveling salesman problem. Operations Research, 45(3), 378–394.
Fomin, F. V., & Lingas, A. (2002). Approximation algorithms for time-dependent orienteering. Information
Processing Letters, 83(2), 57–62.
Fox, M., & Long, D. (2003). PDDL2. 1-An extension to PDDL for expressing temporal planning domains.
Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 20, 61–124.
Frederickson,G.N.,&Wittman,B.(2012).Approximationalgorithmsforthetravelingrepairmanandspeeding
deliveryman problems. Algorithmica, 62(3), 1198–1221.
Friggstad, Z., & Swamy, C. (2017). Compact, provably-good LPs for orienteering and regret-bounded vehicle
routing. In: Proc. 19th Int. Conference on Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization, pp.
199–211. Springer
Friggstad, Z., & Swamy, C. (2021). Constant-factor approximation to deadline TSP and related problems in
(almost) quasi-polytime. In: 48th Int. Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming. Schloss
Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik
Gao, J., Jia, S., Mitchell, J.S., & Zhao, L. (2020). Approximation algorithms for time-window TSP and prize
collecting TSP problems. In: Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics XII, pp. 560–575. Springer, Cham.
Garﬁnkel, R. S., & Gilbert, K. C. (1978). The bottleneck traveling salesman problem: Algorithms and proba-
bilistic analysis. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 25(3), 435–448.
Garg, N. (2005). Saving an epsilon: a 2-approximation for the k-MST problem in graphs. In: Proc. of the 37th
Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 396–402.
Garg, N., Konjevod, G., & Ravi, R. (2000). A polylogarithmic approximation algorithm for the group Steiner
tree problem. Journal of Algorithms, 37(1), 66–84.
Gendreau, M., Hertz, A., Laporte, G., & Stan, M. (1998). A generalized insertion heuristic for the traveling
salesman problem with time windows. Operations Research, 46(3), 330–335.
Gendreau, M., Ghiani, G., & Guerriero, E. (2015). Time-dependent routing problems: A review. Computers
& operations research, 64, 189–197.
Glebov, A.N. (2017). A 5/6-approximation algorithm for the pseudo-metric TSP-max in an incomplete graph.
In: Proc. 17th Int. Baikal Seminar on Optimization Methods and Applications.
Goemans, M. X., & Williamson, D. P. (1995). A general approximation technique for constrained forest
problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 24(2), 296–317.
Golden, B. L., Levy, L., & Vohra, R. (1987). The orienteering problem. Naval Research Logistics, 34(3),
307–318.
Golden, B. L., Raghavan, S., & Wasil, E. A. (2008). The Vehicle Routing Problem: Latest Advances and New
Challenges (Vol. 43). New York: Springer.
Gouveia, L., & Voß, S. (1995). A classiﬁcation of formulations for the (time-dependent) traveling salesman
problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 83(1), 69–82.
Graham, R.L., Lawler, E.L., Lenstra, J.K., & Kan, A.R. (1979). Optimization and approximation in deter-
ministic sequencing and scheduling: a survey. In: Annals of Discrete Mathematics vol. 5, pp. 287–326.
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Guha, S., & Khuller, S. (1998). Approximation algorithms for connected dominating sets. Algorithmica, 20(4),
374–387.
Guo, X., Luo, K., Tang, Z. G., & Zhang, Y. (2022). The online food delivery problem on stars. Theoretical
Computer Science, 928, 13–26.
Gutin, G., & Punnen, A. P. (2006). The Traveling Salesman Problem and Its Variations (Vol. 12). New York:
Springer.
Guttmann-Beck, N., Knaan, E., & Stern, M. (2018). Approximation algorithms for not necessarily disjoint
clustered TSP. Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications, 22(4), 555–575.
Haimovich, M., & Rinnooy Kan, A. H. (1985). Bounds and heuristics for capacitated routing problems.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 10(4), 527–542.
Hammar, M., & Nilsson, B. J. (2002). Approximation results for kinetic variants of TSP. Discrete & Compu-
tational Geometry, 27, 635–651.
Hansknecht, C., Joormann, I., & Stiller, S. (2021). Dynamic shortest paths methods for the time-dependent
TSP. Algorithms, 14(1), 21–44.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2187
Helvig, C.S., Robins, G., & Zelikovsky, A. (1998). Moving-target TSP and related problems. In: European
Symposium on Algorithms, pp. 453–464. Springer
Helvig, C. S., Robins, G., & Zelikovsky, A. (2003). The moving-target traveling salesman problem. Journal
of Algorithms, 49(1), 153–174.
Hoffmann, I., Kurz, S., & Rambau, J. (2017). The maximum scatter TSP on a regular grid. In: Selected Papers
of the Int. Conference of the German, Austrian and Swiss Operations Research Societies, pp. 63–70.
Springer
Irnich, S., Toth, P., & Vigo, D. (2014). Chapter 1: The family of vehicle routing problems. Methods, and
ApplicationsVehicle Routing: Problems (pp. 1–33). Philadelphia: SIAM.
Johnson, D. B. (1977). Efﬁcient algorithms for shortest paths in sparse networks. J. ACM, 24(1), 1–13.
Kao, M.-Y., & Sanghi, M. (2009). An approximation algorithm for a bottleneck traveling salesman problem.
Journal of Discrete Algorithms, 7(3), 315–326.
Kara,I.,Bicakci,P.S.,&Derya,T.(2016).Newformulationsfortheorienteeringproblem.ProcediaEconomics
and Finance, 39, 849–854.
Karlin, A.R., Klein, N., & Gharan, S.O. (2021). A (slightly) improved approximation algorithm for metric
TSP. In: Proc. 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 32–45.
Karp, R.M. (1972). Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In: Miller, R.E., Thatcher, J.W., Bohlinger,
J.D. (eds.) Proc. Symposium on the Complexity of Computer Computations, pp. 85–103. Springer,
Boston.
Karpinski, M., Lampis, M., & Schmied, R. (2015). New inapproximability bounds for TSP. Journal of Com-
puter and System Sciences, 81(8), 1665–1677.
Karuno, Y., Nagamochi, H., & Ibaraki, T. (1998). A 1.5-approximation for single-vehicle scheduling problem
on a line with release and handling times. In: Japan-USA Symposium on Flexible Automation, pp.
1363–1366. ISCIE/ASME, New York.
Karuno, Y., Nagamochi, H., & Ibaraki, T. (1997). Vehicle scheduling on a tree with release and handling times.
Annals of Operations Research, 69, 193–207.
Karuno, Y., Nagamochi, H., & Ibaraki, T. (2002). Better approximation ratios for the single-vehicle scheduling
problems on line-shaped networks. Networks, 39(4), 203–209.
Kataoka, S., & Morito, S. (1988). An algorithm for single constraint maximum collection problem. Journal
of the Operations Research Society of Japan, 31(4), 515–531.
Kawasaki, M., & Takazawa, K. (2020). Improving approximation rations for the clustered traveling salesman
problem. Journal of the Operations Research Society of Japan, 63(2), 60–70.
Khachay, M., & Dubinin, R. (2016). PTAS for the euclidean capacitated vehicle routing problem. In: Proc.
9th Int. Conference on Discrete Optimization and Operations Research, pp. 193–205. Springer.
Khachay, M., & Ogorodnikov, Y. (2018). Improved polynomial time approximation scheme for capacitated
vehicle routing problem with time windows. In: Proc. 4th Int. Conference on Optimization and Applica-
tions, pp. 155–169. Springer
Khachay, M., & Ogorodnikov, Y. (2019). Approximation scheme for the capacitated vehicle routing problem
with time windows and non-uniform demand. In: Proc. 18th Int. Conference on Mathematical Optimiza-
tion Theory and Operations Research, pp. 309–327. Springer.
Khachay, M., Neznakhina, E.D., & Ryzhenko, K.V. (2022). Constant-factor approximation algorithms for a
series of combinatorial routing problems based on the reduction to the asymmetric traveling salesman
problem. Proc. of the Steklov Institute of Mathematics 319(Suppl 1), 140–155
Khachay, M., & Neznakhina, K. (2020). Complexity and approximability of the euclidean generalized traveling
salesman problem in grid clusters. Annals of Mathematics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 88(1), 53–69.
Klein, P.N. (2005). A linear-time approximation scheme for planar weighted TSP. In: 46th Annual IEEE
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’05), pp. 647–656.
Klein, P.N. (2006). A subset spanner for planar graphs, with application to subset tsp. In: Proceedings of the
Thirty-Eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. STOC ’06, pp. 749–756. Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
Koehler, J., Bürgler, J., Fontana, U., Fux, E., Herzog, F., Pouly, M., Saller, S., Salyaeva, A., Scheiblechner, P.,
& Waelti, K. (2021). Cable tree wiring-benchmarking solvers on a real-world scheduling problem with
a variety of precedence constraints. Constraints, 1–51
Köhne, A., Traub, V., & Vygen, J. (2020). The asymmetric traveling salesman path LP has constant integrality
ratio. Mathematical Programming, 183(1–2), 379–395.
Kongkaew, W., & Pichitlamken, J. (2014). A survey of approximate methods for the traveling salesman
problem. Kasetsart Engineering Journal, 27(89), 79–87.
Korula, N. J. (2010). Approximation Algorithms for Network Design and Orienteering. Urbana-Champaign:
University of Illinois.
123

2188
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Kozma, L., & Mömke, T. (2015). A PTAS for euclidean maximum scatter TSP. In: Proc. 32nd European
Workshop on Computational Geometry, pp. 1512–02963. CoRR, Lugano.
Lahyani, R., Khemakhem, M., & Semet, F. (2015). Rich vehicle routing problems: From a taxonomy to a
deﬁnition. European Journal of Operational Research, 241(1), 1–14.
Langevin, A., Soumis, F., & Desrosiers, J. (1990). Classiﬁcation of travelling salesman problem formulations.
Operations Research Letters, 9(2), 127–132.
Laporte, G. (1992). The traveling salesman problem: An overview of exact and approximate algorithms.
European Journal of Operational Research, 59(2), 231–247.
Laporte, G., & Martello, S. (1990). The selective travelling salesman problem. Discrete Applied Mathematics,
26(2–3), 193–207.
Laporte, G., & Osman, I. H. (1995). Routing problems: A bibliography. Annals of operations research, 61(1),
227–262.
Laporte, G., & Palekar, U. (2002). Some applications of the clustered travelling salesman problem. Journal of
the Operational Research Society, 53(9), 972–976.
Laporte, G., Potvin, J.-Y., & Quilleret, F. (1997). A tabu search heuristic using genetic diversiﬁcation for the
clustered traveling salesman problem. Journal of Heuristics, 2(3), 187–200.
Laporte, G., Riera-Ledesma, J., & Salazar-González, J.-J. (2003). A branch-and-cut algorithm for the undi-
rected traveling purchaser problem. Operations Research, 51(6), 940–951.
LaRusic, J., & Punnen, A. P. (2014). The asymmetric bottleneck traveling salesman problem: algorithms,
complexity and empirical analysis. Computers & Operations Research, 43, 20–35.
Lawler, E. L., Lenstra, J. K., Kan, A. H. R., & Shmoys, D. B. (1993). Sequencing and scheduling: Algorithms
and complexity. Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science, 4, 445–522.
Le Digabel, S., & Wild, S.M. (2015). A taxonomy of constraints in simulation-based optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1505.07881
Leifer, A. C., & Rosenwein, M. B. (1994). Strong linear programming relaxations for the orienteering problem.
European Journal of Operational Research, 73(3), 517–523.
Lien, Y.-N., Ma, E., & Wah, B. W. S. (1993). Transformation of the generalized traveling-salesman problem
into the standard traveling-salesman problem. Information Sciences, 74(1–2), 177–189.
Lin, C., Choy, K. L., Ho, G. T., Chung, S. H., & Lam, H. (2014). Survey of green vehicle routing problem:
past and future trends. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(4), 1118–1138.
Malandraki, C., & Dial, R. B. (1996). A restricted dynamic programming heuristic algorithm for the time
dependent traveling salesman problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 90(1), 45–55.
Manerba, D., Mansini, R., & Riera-Ledesma, J. (2017). The traveling purchaser problem and its variants.
European Journal of Operational Research, 259(1), 1–18.
Marques, T.S., Cezario, S.F., Goldbarg, E.F., Goldbarg, M.C., & Maia, S.M. (2019). Quota traveling salesman
with passengers and collection time. In: 28th Brazilian Conference on Intelligent Systems, pp. 299–304.
IEEE
Martins, J. R., & Lambe, A. B. (2013). Multidisciplinary design optimization: a survey of architectures. AIAA
journal, 51(9), 2049–2075.
McDermott, D. M. (2000). The 1998 ai planning systems competition. AI Magazine, 21(2), 35–55.
McDermott, D. M. (2003). PDDL2. 1-The art of the possible? Commentary on Fox and Long. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 20, 145–148.
Menger, K. (1932). Das Botenproblem. Ergebnisse eines mathematischen Kolloquiums, 2(4), 11–12.
Miller, C. E., Tucker, A. W., & Zemlin, R. A. (1960). Integer programming formulation of traveling salesman
problems. Journal of the ACM, 7(4), 326–329.
Min, H., Jayaraman, V., & Srivastava, R. (1998). Combined location-routing problems: A synthesis and future
research directions. European Journal of Operational Research, 108(1), 1–15.
Mitchell, J. S. B. (1999). Guillotine subdivisions approximate polygonal subdivisions: A simple polynomial-
time approximation scheme for geometric TSP, k-MST, and related problems. SIAM Journal on
Computing, 28(4), 1298–1309.
Mömke, T., & Svensson, O. (2011). Approximating graphic TSP by matchings. In: 52nd Annual IEEE Sym-
posium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 560–569. IEEE
Mömke, T., & Svensson, O. (2016). Removing and adding edges for the traveling salesman problem. Journal
of the ACM, 63(1), 1–28.
Montoya-Torres, J. R., Franco, J. L., Isaza, S. N., Jiménez, H. F., & Herazo-Padilla, N. (2015). A literature
review on the vehicle routing problem with multiple depots. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 79,
115–129.
Mucha, M. (2014). approximation for graphic TSP. Theory of Computing Systems, 55(4), 640–657.
Nagamochi, H., Mochizuki, K., & Ibaraki, T. (1997). Complexity of the single vehicle scheduling problem on
graphs. Information Systems and Operational Research, 35(4), 256–276.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
2189
Nagarajan, V., & Ravi, R. (2011). The directed orienteering problem. Algorithmica, 60(4), 1017–1030.
Nebel, B., & Bürckert, H.-J. (1995). Reasoning about temporal relations: A maximal tractable subclass of
Allen’s interval algebra. Journal of the ACM, 42(1), 43–66.
Nguyen, V. H., & Nguyen, T. T. (2012). Approximating the asymmetric proﬁtable tour. Int. Journal of Math-
ematics in Operational Research, 4(3), 294–301.
Noon, C.E. (1988). The generalized traveling salesman problem. PhD thesis, University of Michigan
Noon, C. E., & Bean, J. C. (1993). An efﬁcient transformation of the generalized traveling salesman problem.
Information Systems and Operational Research, 31(1), 39–44.
Pan, Q.-K., & Ruiz, R. (2013). A comprehensive review and evaluation of permutation ﬂowshop heuristics to
minimize ﬂowtime. Computers & Operations Research, 40(1), 117–128.
Papadimitriou, C. H., & Vazirani, U. V. (1984). On two geometric problems related to the travelling salesman
problem. Journal of Algorithms, 5(2), 231–246.
Papadimitriou, C. H., & Vempala, S. (2006). On the approximability of the traveling salesman problem.
Combinatorica, 26(1), 101–120.
Parker, R. G., & Rardin, R. L. (1984). Guaranteed performance heuristics for the bottleneck travelling salesman
problem. Operations Research Letters, 2(6), 269–272.
Pattis, R. E. (1994). Teaching EBNF ﬁrst in CS 1. ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, 26(1), 300–303.
Paul, A., Freund, D., Ferber, A., Shmoys, D.B., & Williamson, D..P. (2017). Prize-collecting TSP with a budget
constraint. In: 25th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms. Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum
fuer Informatik
Paul, A., Freund, D., Ferber, A., Shmoys, D. B., & Williamson, D. P. (2020). Budgeted prize-collecting
traveling salesman and minimum spanning tree problems. Mathematics of Operations Research, 45(2),
576–590.
Pfund, M., Fowler, J. W., & Gupta, J. N. D. (2004). A survey of algorithms for single and multi-objective unre-
lated parallel-machine deterministic scheduling problems. Journal of the Chinese Institute of Industrial
Engineers, 21(3), 230–241.
Picard, J.-C., & Queyranne, M. (1978). The time-dependent traveling salesman problem and its application to
the tardiness problem in one-machine scheduling. Operations research, 26(1), 86–110.
Pillac, V., Gendreau, M., Guéret, C., & Medaglia, A. L. (2013). A review of dynamic vehicle routing problems.
European Journal of Operational Research, 225(1), 1–11.
Pinedo, M. (2012). Scheduling: Theory, Algorithms, and Systems (4th ed.). Cham: Springer.
Pinedo, M. (2022). Scheduling: Theory, Algorithms, and Systems (6th ed.). Cham: Springer.
Pop, P.C., Cosma, O., Sabo, C., & Sitar, C.P. (2023). A comprehensive survey on the generalized traveling
salesman problem. European Journal of Operational Research.
Powell, W. B., Shapiro, J. A., & Simao, H. P. (2001). A representational paradigm for dynamic resource
transformation problems. Annals of Operations Research, 104(1–4), 231–279.
Psaraftis, H. N. (1995). Dynamic vehicle routing: Status and prospects. Annals of Operations Research, 61(1),
143–164.
Psaraftis, H. N., Solomon, M. M., Magnanti, T. L., & Kim, T.-U. (1990). Routing and scheduling on a shoreline
with release times. Management Science, 36(2), 212–223.
Psaraftis, H. N., Wen, M., & Kontovas, C. A. (2016). Dynamic vehicle routing problems: Three decades and
counting. Networks, 67(1), 3–31.
Rao, M. R. (1980). A note on the multiple traveling salesmen problem. Operations Research, 28(3), 628–632.
Ravi, R., & Salman, F.S. (1999). Approximation algorithms for the traveling purchaser problem and its variants
in network design. In: European Symposium on Algorithms, pp. 29–40. Springer.
Reinelt, G. (1991). TSPLIB - A traveling salesman problem library. ORSA Journal on Computing, 3(4),
376–384.
Renz, J., & Nebel, B. (1999). On the complexity of qualitative spatial reasoning: A maximal tractable fragment
of the region connection calculus. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 108(1–2), 69–123.
Ridder, H. N., et al. (2025). Information System on Graph Classes and their Inclusions (ISGCI). https://www.
graphclasses.org
Rothkopf, M. (1966). The traveling salesman problem: On the reduction of certain large problems to smaller
ones. Operations Research, 14(3), 532–533.
Ruiz, R., & Maroto, C. (2005). A comprehensive review and evaluation of permutation ﬂowshop heuristics.
European Journal of Operational Research, 165(2), 479–494.
Savelsbergh, M. W. (1985). Local search in routing problems with time windows. Annals of Operations
Research, 4(1), 285–305.
Sayadi, M., Ramezanian, R., & Ghaffari-Nasab, N. (2010). A discrete ﬁreﬂy meta-heuristic with local search
for makespan minimization in permutation ﬂow shop scheduling problems. Int. Journal of Industrial
Engineering Computations, 1(1), 1–10.
123

2190
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:2129–2190
Schrijver, A. (2003). Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efﬁciency. Heidelberg: Springer.
Seb˝o, A. (2013). Eight-ﬁfth approximation for the path TSP. In: Proc. 16th Int. Conference on Integer Pro-
gramming and Combinatorial Optimization, pp. 362–374. Springer.
Seb˝o, A., & Van Zuylen, A. (2016). The salesman’s improved paths: A 3/2+ 1/34 approximation. In: 57th
Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 118–127. IEEE
Seb˝o, A., & Vygen, J. (2014). Shorter tours by nicer ears: 7/5-approximation for the graph-TSP, 3/2 for the
path version, and 4/3 for two-edge-connected subgraphs. Combinatorica, 1–34.
Snyder, L. V., & Daskin, M. S. (2006). A random-key genetic algorithm for the generalized traveling salesman
problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 174(1), 38–53.
Solomon, M. M. (1987). Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems with time window
constraints. Operations Research, 35(2), 254–265.
Svensson, O., Tarnawski, J., & Végh, L. A. (2020). A constant-factor approximation algorithm for the asym-
metric traveling salesman problem. Journal of the ACM, 67(6), 1–53.
Sysło, M. M. (1980). Generalizations of the standard travelling salesman problem. Applicationes Mathemati-
cae, 4(16), 621–629.
Tosserams, S., Etman, L. F. P., & Rooda, J. E. (2009). A classiﬁcation of methods for distributed system
optimization based on formulation structure. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 39(5), 503–
517.
Toth, P., & Vigo, D. (2002). The Vehicle Routing Problem. Philadelphia: SIAM.
Toth, P., & Vigo, D. (2014). Vehicle Routing: Problems, Methods, and Applications (2nd ed.). Philadelphia:
SIAM.
Traub, V. (2020). Approximation algorithms for traveling salesman problems. PhD thesis, Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn.
Traub, V., & Vygen, J. (2020). An improved approximation algorithm for ATSP. In: Proc. 52nd Annual ACM
SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 1–13. ACM, New York.
Traub, V., & Vygen, J. (2020). Beating the integrality ratio for s-t-tours in graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing.
Special Section FOCS 2018
Traub, V., Vygen, J., & Zenklusen, R. (2020). Reducing Path TSP to TSP. In: Proc. 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT
Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 14–27. ACM, New York.
Tsiligirides, T. (1984). Heuristic methods applied to orienteering. Journal of the Operational Research Society,
35(9), 797–809.
Tsitsiklis, J. N. (1992). Special cases of traveling salesman and repairman problems with time windows.
Networks, 22(3), 263–282.
Vansteenwegen,P.,Souffriau,W.,&VanOudheusden,D.(2011).Theorienteeringproblem:asurvey.European
Journal of Operational Research, 209(1), 1–10.
Vygen, J. (2012). New approximation algorithms for the TSP. Uni Bonn: Forschungsinst. für Diskrete Math-
ematik.
Web Ontology Language (OWL). (2012). https://www.w3.org/OWL/.
Xiao, M., Zhang, J., & Lin, W. (2020). Parameterized algorithms and complexity for the traveling purchaser
problem and its variants. Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 1–17.
Young, G. H., & Chan, C.-L. (1999). Single-vehicle scheduling with time window constraints. Journal of
Scheduling, 2(4), 175–187.
Zenklusen, R. (2019). A 1.5-approximation for path TSP. In: Proc. 13th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms, pp. 1539–1549. SIAM.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123