TITLE: The future of data-driven relationship innovation in the microfinance industry
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04943-6
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04943-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The future of data-driven relationship innovation
in the microﬁnance industry
Umme Hani1
· Ananda Wickramasinghe1 · Uraiporn Kattiyapornpong1 ·
Shahriar Sajib2
Accepted: 25 August 2022 / Published online: 20 September 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Data-driven innovation (DDI) initiatives by microﬁnance institutes have transformed the
global poverty alleviation landscape. Despite the fact that relationship building is one of the
primary goals of DDI initiatives in microﬁnance operations, there has been little research on
the dimensions of relationship quality. This study examines how DDI initiatives recognize and
incorporate relational dimensions in their service offerings to alleviate poverty. Drawing on a
systematic literature review, thematic analysis and interviews with 20 microﬁnance managers,
this research explores the relationship quality parameters that need to be leveraged. Grounded
in the resource-based theory, the ﬁndings of this study conﬁrm trust and commitment as
two key relationship capabilities. The ﬁndings contribute to a better understanding of how
microﬁnance institutes can use DDI to achieve sustainable competitive advantage.
Keywords Relationship innovation · Big data analytics · Data-driven innovation · Trust ·
Commitment · Sustained competitive advantage
1 Introduction
“Big data can be a powerful tool to help combat poverty. While data helps understand the
needs of the poor and design solutions, the technology makes it possible to reach the poor
B Umme Hani
uh821@uowmail.edu.au
Ananda Wickramasinghe
ananda@uow.edu.au
Uraiporn Kattiyapornpong
pingk@uow.edu.au
Shahriar Sajib
Shahriar.Sajib@uts.edu.au
1
School of Business, Faculty of Business and Law, University of Wollongong, Wollongong,
NSW 2522, Australia
2
UTS Business School, University of Technology, 15 Broadway, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia
123

972
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
rapidly”, as stated by Grameen Foundation CEO Steve Hollingworth (Wharton, 2019). Finan-
cial institutions have had limited success in meeting the requirements of economically active
low-income households and micro-enterprises in emerging nations (Fang & Zhang, 2016).
The microﬁnance sector has obtained a license as a formal ﬁnancial institution that pro-
vides credit to low-income borrowers. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
report, two hundred million people were not eligible for formal credit before microﬁnance
began (Wharton, 2019). Despite the enormous contribution of microﬁnance in alleviating
poverty and ﬁnancial inclusion, it constantly faces challenges in maintaining a long-term
relationship with its customers (Hani et al., 2021a, 2021b). Microﬁnance relies on a contin-
uing relationship with its customers for monitoring and collecting repayment (Hani et al.,
2021a, 2021b). Relationship innovation can play a crucial role in mitigating this relationship
problem, embedding trust, commitment, value, and satisfaction in their offerings (El-Kassar
& Singh, 2019; Sänger et al., 2014). We deﬁne relationship innovation as a new relationship
offering using big data related to microﬁnance activities (Akhtar et al., 2019).
Big data transforms the global innovation landscape by introducing unique services or
processes (Davenport & Kudyba, 2016). Obtaining enormous volumes of client data has
grown more accessible, allowing ﬁnancial services to innovate and differentiate themselves
from the competition. Financial services that move from traditional customer analytics to big
data analytics integrate a wide range of relationship-oriented data that will beneﬁt from this
expansion (Kitchens et al., 2018). Utilizing relationship-oriented big data and analytics to
understand the customer better can create more sustainable relationships (Palmatier & Mar-
tin, 2019) and result in immediate beneﬁts such as reducing operational costs and risk (Huber
& Funaro, 2018). The integration and utilization of such a wealth of relationship-oriented
big data have enormous potential for innovation (Kitchens et al., 2018). Data-driven relation-
ship innovation occurs when a service leverages cutting-edge technologies such as artiﬁcial
intelligence, blockchain, and cloud computing to create innovative relationship offerings
through collecting and mining relationship-oriented data, its integration and processing, and
analysis and modeling (Akter et al., 2020). Relationship innovation is signiﬁcant for a sus-
tainable competitive advantage for competing in the current environment and foreseeable
future (Kitchens et al., 2018). A relationship-based sustainable competitive advantage is
built on the solid foundation of commitment, trust, and reciprocal bonds, which is difﬁcult
to copy (Palmatier & Steinhoff, 2019). The transformative applications of big-data analytics
leverage those capabilities to innovate relationship-building offerings to build sustainable
competitive advantage on their current operations and innovative products, procedures, and
business models (Ransbotham & Kiron, 2017).
Big Data is uniquely positioned to minimize the relationship issues inherent in microﬁ-
nance. It aids in meeting the ever-changing needs and expectations of microﬁnance customers
(Mahajan, 2019). Due to the fact that microﬁnance is not a new idea, banks already have data
to proﬁle and generate archetypes of previously served borrowers (Choo, 2016). This data set
contains a wealth of demographic information, such as age, gender, occupation, estimated
income, repayment patterns, and meeting center attendance (Nambiar, 2019). Predictive ana-
lyticscanbeanexampleofbigdatawhichcanhelpresolverelationalchallengesbyidentifying
behavioral trends and patterns. It allows them to proﬁle and generate archetypes of previous
borrowers. In addition to anticipating client requirements, these models enable banks to tailor
loan programs to speciﬁc demographic groups or even individual borrowers(Choo, 2016).
Also, several studies, such as Brown et al. (2011), argue that digital platforms provide the
most compelling opportunities to connect with customer relationship development and create
sustained value. Nambiar (2019) suggests that big data can play an innovative role in reduc-
ing operational costs and building relationships while meeting customers’ growing needs
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
973
and expectations in microﬁnance. In a similar spirit, Bull (2020) states that microﬁnance will
lag further behind more agile competitors the longer it takes to develop these capabilities.
Although DDI leveraging relationship quality parameters gains attention to build a sustain-
able competitive advantage (Akhtar et al., 2019; Neutzling et al., 2018), virtually no research
aims to ﬁll this research gap. Thus, this research addresses the following research question:
How does big data analytics create relationship innovations and sustain competitive
advantages in the context of the microﬁnance industry?
The current study investigates the links between relationship innovation and big data analytics
in the context of microﬁnance. Drawing on a systematic literature review, thematic analysis,
the resource-based theory and interviews with 20 microﬁnance managers in Bangladesh,
this research aims to explore the relationship quality parameters that need to be embedded
in service offerings. This research extends resource-based theory by introducing trust and
commitment in designing new data-driven services for customers.
2 Literature review
2.1 Big data and analytics
Big data is characterized as a voluminous, complex, and diversiﬁed data set that traditional
information processing software cannot process (Akter & Wamba, 2016). Additionally, big
data is characterized by 5Vs: volume, velocity, variety, veracity, and value (Dijck, 2012;
Schroeck et al., 2012; White, 2012). The volume refers to the massive amount of data acquired
from a variety of data points, the variety refers to the structured and unstructured nature of
the data being collected and processed, and the velocity refers to the rate at which the data is
collected and managed and analyzed (Dijcks, 2012; Schroeck et al., 2012). Veracity refers
to the reliability and integrity of the data sources and the data that has been gathered (White,
2012); lastly, the value implies the informational, strategic, and transactional beneﬁt that
can be harnessed through big data (Wamba et al., 2015). In the present digital economy, big
data can be a critical resource to achieve a competitive advantage. Therefore, an increasing
number of businesses are investing in big data infrastructure in order to identify and capitalize
on new business prospects facilitated by data analytics (Schroeck et al., 2012).
Big data analytics (BDA) refers to the advanced analytic tools and methods that can be
applied to the diverse and extensive data set to unravel underlying associations, trends, and
valuable insights for the business organization. It reduces cost, increases revenue, identiﬁes
new opportunities, and offers a superior experience to customers (Davenport, 2014). BDA
can be considered as a population of tools that can extract, interpret information and predict
decision outcomes (Bose, 2009). Furthermore, analytics deployment may reveal meaningful
patterns that can address critical business problems (Demirkan & Spohrer, 2015). Large
corporations are adopting "advanced analytics" or "discovery analytics," utilizing a torrent
of data for improved marketing perception and planning (Akter & Wamba, 2016; Russom,
2011). Recently, the deployment of AI-enabled analytics has allowed ﬁrms to precisely
forecast customers’ purchase patterns, predict credit fraud, and target individual customers
in real-time for marketing purposes (Davenport, 2014). To gain competitive advantages,
managers can leverage big data to facilitate their decision regarding the development of new
products or services, and the utilization of big data can generate a competitive advantage
in the present competitive landscape (Kamioka & Tapanainen, 2014). Therefore, combining
123

974
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
big data with analytics tools to result in successful innovation and competitive advantage is
a crucial business priority in the current business environment.
2.2 Data-driven innovation
Big data coupled with analytics has paved the way to advance data-driven innovation. Daven-
port and Kudyba (2016) deﬁne DDI as a systematic approach to capturing and creating value
through processing the data accessible to the organization. Davenport and Kudyba (2016)
articulate DDI as the process of untangling the potential value of data fostering further inno-
vation accompanying the business model, operational, functional, and strategic aspects of
an organization. Stone and Wang (2014) suggest that data utilization to facilitate the inno-
vation process to create value is considered DDI. It delivers innovative applications that
carry strategic advantages generated from data analytics to enable speciﬁc decision-making
processes and organizational performance (Akter et al., 2020).Global tech giants have been
taking advantage of DDI due to the rapid development in information and communication
technologies. They are increasing investment in initiatives driven by big data and AI, robust
analytics capabilities, data governance, and building a data culture aligned with organiza-
tional capabilities.
Leading technological companies have leveraged data to build a competitive advantage by
differentiating their service offering to offer customers a superior experience. For example,
Google’s target advertising (Hienz, 2014) and LinkedIn’s service, such as ‘people you may
know,’ can be an example of DDI (Davenport & Kudyba, 2016). Scholars in the ﬁeld of data-
driven innovation have informed in the dominant area such as supply chain management
(Sanders 2014), e-commerce (Akter & Wamba, 2016), business intelligence (Chen et al.,
2012), and other essential ﬁelds. Early research on DDI primarily paid attention to building
traditional information products (Browning et al., 2002; Kim et al., 2006; Littler et al.,
1995; Meyer & Zack, 1996; Moenaert & Souder, 1990; Nambisan, 2003; Von Hippel, 1998)
that did not capture the scope of big data analytics in the DDI processes. In recent times
data-driven innovations have effectively been adopted in business activities such as data-
intensive product development (Zhan et al., 2019), R&D (Kayyali et al., 2013), and data-
driven processes and marketing (Erevelles et al., 2016). The scholarly ﬁeld of DDI is in
an early phase requiring more theoretical and empirical research on data-driven initiatives
(Davenport, 2014; Ghasemaghaei & Calic, 2019). Relationship innovation is also a relatively
new ﬁeld of study; therefore, how data-driven innovation can facilitate relationship innovation
and create competitive advantage within a microﬁnance service environment in a developing
country context will reveal valuable insights. Table 1 shows the research on data-driven
service innovation and the research gaps.
2.3 Data-driven relationship
The data-driven relationship has emerged as an essential research domain for managing
customer relationships in the current business environment. Customers’ information from
interactions during the service delivery, information regarding the nature of the usage of the
service by the customers, or valuable demographic and contextual information on customers’
can be leveraged to enhance the relationship quality with the customer (Brown et al., 2011;
Gilmore, 2020). In the age of the rapidly changing technological landscape, large organiza-
tions have adopted data-driven technologies within their customer relationship management
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
975
Table 1 Important studies on data-driven service innovation
Study focus
Study
Is there any study on relationship innovation in
microﬁnance?
Key ﬁndings on data-driven innovation
The potential scope of data analytics in
developing data products
Davenport and Kudyba
(2016)
No
By combining data analytic capability and
increasing valuable data assets, companies
can offer value-added information as
differentiated products or service offering
to generate a higher level of revenue by
reaching a more signiﬁcant customer
segment
Personalized recommendation system for an
online learning platform
Xiao et al. (2018)
No
Authors suggest that through association
rules, collaborative ﬁltering and content
ﬁltering, personalized recommendation
systems effectively provide the learners
with customized assistance to address their
individual preferences in an online
learning platform
Scope of customer-generated data in digital
marketing and service innovation
Balayan and Tomin
(2020)
No
The article highlights the current dominant
digital marketing practices adopted by
platform-based service providers to
continuously collect data from users’
interactions for monetizing purposes
123

976
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
Table 1 (continued)
Study focus
Study
Is there any study on relationship innovation in
microﬁnance?
Key ﬁndings on data-driven innovation
Application of BDAC on the online streaming
platform
Gilmore (2020)
No
The author analyses the underlying
mechanism that online-based platforms
utilize data produced by the customers’
interactions, such as clicks, with a platform
such as Netﬂix to generate customized
experiences and leverage the data to reﬁne
further and improve algorithms used for
the recommendation system
An empirical study on the impact of BDAC on
BMI
Ciampi et al. (2021)
No
Big Data Analytics Capabilities (BDAC)
offer essential tools and technologies to
achieve competitiveness in a highly
dynamic marketplace. This study ﬁnds a
positive impact of BDAC on Business
Model Innovation (BMI). It suggests that
BDAC has signiﬁcant potential for
creating value for the companies and their
stakeholders
Role of BDA in e-commerce
Alrumiah and Hadwan
(2020)
No
The authors suggest that electronic vendors
utilize Big Data Analytics (BDA) to
achieve a competitive advantage and
increase revenue outcomes. Further, the
study conﬁrms that e-commerce
companies aim to understand customers’
behavior to improve customer loyalty
through processing and analyzing big data
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
977
Table 1 (continued)
Study focus
Study
Is there any study on relationship innovation in
microﬁnance?
Key ﬁndings on data-driven innovation
A quantitative study on big data analytic
capability on service innovation
Xiao et al. (2018)
No
The authors ﬁnd a positive impact of Big
Data Analytics Capabilities, namely big
data analytics personnel capabilities
(BDAP) and big data analytics technical
capabilities (BDAT), on service innovation
mediated by dynamic capabilities. Further,
the study highlights the signiﬁcance of
digital platform capabilities in performing
service innovation
Consumer trust-building of e-retailers
Chen and Dibb (2010)
No
The authors examined online retailers and
found that trust is important in developing
favorable behavioral attitudes in customers
and intentions towards the e-retailer’s
website. The study further reveals
user-friendliness of the interface, security,
assurance of privacy, and superior product
information quality as quality features that
affect consumers’ trust
123

978
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
practices to effectively tailor their service according to the customers’ requirements (Dav-
enport & Kudyba, 2016). The plethora of customer information has enabled companies to
successfully deliver personalized services (Balayan & Tomin, 2020; Xiao et al., 2018). In
addition, the emergence of big data analytics to extract actionable insights from big data
has enabled present business organizations to perform service innovation more effectively
than before (Akter et al., 2020; Zhan et al., 2019). For operational service innovation, by
utilizing data generated at various touchpoints during customer interactions, it is essential
to adopt an effective digital strategy to deliver customized assistance by recommending a
system to enhance the relationship with the customer (Gilmore, 2020; Xiao et al., 2018).
A customer-oriented perspective supported by data-driven practices allows ﬁnancial service
providers to identify potential strategies for building a special relationship with the customers
to retain them over the long term (Garepasha et al., 2020). Therefore, fostering data-driven
relationship innovation will be vital to service organizations’ long-term success.
2.4 Data-driven relationship innovation
Innovation focusing on the factors associated with superior customer relationships within
present digital communication channels and social media is critical (Garepasha et al., 2020).
By leveraging insights from customer data, service companies can gain a higher degree
of loyalty, commitment, and trust, resulting in superior ﬁrm performance and competitive
advantage (Kitchens et al., 2018; Palmatier & Martin, 2019). Akhtar et al. (2019) deﬁne rela-
tionship innovation as more relevant to the former transformation because it spans numerous
aspects (e.g., satisfaction, trust, data, information, and analytics) and enables collaborating
partners to develop innovative relationships. The customer relationship of the modern-day
relies heavily on big data analytics to gain visibility into their operations and monitor market
trends (Hazen et al., 2014). McAfee and Brynjolfsson (2012) noted that data-driven decision-
making signiﬁcantly enhances relationship innovation. It is also worth noting that the power
of big analytics can considerably impact the management of several operational activities
(Akhtar et al., 2019). For instance, ﬁnancial institutions can analyze customer requirements,
behavior, and sales patterns to aid in precise forecasting and inventory management, sup-
porting innovative relationship development (Akhtar et al., 2019). To appropriately identify
the customers’ requirements considering the unique contextual factors, it is important to
pay serious attention to different relationship quality parameters with the customers through
leveraging data-driven tools and technologies.
2.5 Data-driven relationship in financial services
Big data are transforming ﬁnancial services across the globe. Data analytics and computa-
tional power advancements enable businesses to utilize data more efﬁciently, quickly, reliably,
andonabiggerscale(Abrahametal.,2019).Topresent,researchintheﬁnancialsectorreveals
that customer relationship is one of the critical sectors for innovation using big data (Arthur
& Owen, 2019; Coumaros et al., 2014; Kitchens et al., 2018; Palmatier & Steinhoff, 2019).
Data analytics is being utilized to enhance the client experience facilitated by customized
product and service offers. This data analytics includes proﬁling and segmenting customers,
trend analysis, and predictive modeling (Arthur & Owen, 2019; Berry & Linoff, 2004). These
initiatives also include identifying potential customers and analyzing marketing campaign
success or failure (Rygielski et al., 2002). In the context of B2C relationship quality in online
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
979
banking services, the authors ﬁnd that satisfaction, commitment and trust are three dimen-
sions of online relationship quality between consumers and banks (Brun et al., 2014). These
dimensions of relationship quality will assist ﬁnancial institutions in fostering long-term
relationships through determining the relational positioning to improve targeted marketing
strategies and activities. Within the context of ﬁnancial services, through investigating the
B2C relationship quality of the Islamic banking industry in Malaysia, Haron et al. (2020)
ﬁnd empirical evidence of the partial mediation role of trust between customer satisfaction
and loyalty. Further, Amin (2016) investigates online banking services and ﬁnds a signiﬁcant
relationship between customer satisfaction, loyalty, and service quality based on an empirical
study on online banking customers in a developing country. In a similar notion, Garepasha
et al. (2020) investigated B2C relationship quality in online banking services in Iran and
found that the customer relationship lifecycle affects customer loyalty on customer relation-
ship quality in online banking services. The study ﬁnds that relationship quality becomes a
less effective predictor of customer loyalty over time and advises managers to explore alter-
native marketing actions to retain customers in the long term. Finally, based on an empirical
study on trust-building strategies by ﬁnancial companies, Yousafzai et al. (2005) recommend
that situational normality mechanisms and structural assurance impact customers’ trustwor-
thiness perceptions that ﬁnancial institutions can use to develop a portfolio of strategies to
build trust with customers. Therefore, adopting a practical digital approach is critical for
ﬁnancial institutions to build superior customer relationships (Sia et al., 2016). Although
the above studies have demonstrated the importance of relationship dimensions in online
banking using big data, they fail to investigate these relational dimensions through the lens
of the microﬁnance context, which is widely ignored and neglected.
2.6 Data-driven relationship in microfinance
The formation of direct and mutually beneﬁcial relationships has been cited as the essential
innovation in microﬁnance (Baledh & Peña, 2016). The relationship dimension trust has been
identiﬁed as one of the relationship innovations that aided in reducing information asymme-
tries and the establishment of compatible incentives, enabling MFls to succeed in providing
ﬁnancial services, particularly lending, to low-income segments of the population (Baledh
& Peña, 2016). Brown et al. (2011) suggest that trust and relationships play a vital role in
accessing capital for entrepreneurs within complex relationship dynamics of actors in the
ﬁnancial capital industry. Aggarwal (2015) investigates the factors that inﬂuence customer
trustworthiness in the microﬁnance industry in developing countries and discovers that lend-
ing institutions use borrower demographic information, such as gender, to assess repayment
reliability in societies where behavior trust formation processes are prevalent. For example,
within the context of social banking, the loan receiver may experience an unexpected circum-
stance that may affect their capacity to repay the premium (Aggarwal, 2015). Mehta et al.
(2011) investigate the signiﬁcance of big data in increasing commitment and trust among
women entrepreneurs in microﬁnance. The study describes how microﬁnance institutions
create psychological commitment to achieve social and economic objectives through regular
communication with the use of cell phones.
The research also ﬁnds trust and commitment as two dimensions of microﬁnance rela-
tionships (Cornée & Szafarz, 2014). These dimensions of relationship quality will assist
microﬁnance in mitigating informational opacity and the risk of credit default. However,
regular communication with microﬁnance customer who mostly lives in remote village is
123

980
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
often challenging (Choo, 2016). Big data enables microﬁnance to access customer infor-
mation, credit score, transaction pattern, and customer behavior pattern (Choo, 2016) and
assists in developing trust and commitment building strategies to mitigate credit default risk
(Mehta et al., 2011). The empirical investigation by Hani et al., (2021a, 2021b) describes
the importance of relationship quality dimensions in recovering the quality of life of the
poor customer of microﬁnance using different platforms such as mobile and face-to-face
platforms (Hani et al., 2021a, 2021b). Big data analytics can process such data from various
platforms by harvesting information to build relationship innovation (Akhtar et al., 2019),
which can help microﬁnance achieve better visibility, veracity, versatility, and velocity. In
addition, microﬁnance institutions can effectively control risk by tailoring their services to the
needs of potential clients (Choo, 2016). Besides, big data can create value for microﬁnance
customers by building trust and loyalty in their relationships (Finnegan, 2014). Despite the
prevalence of references to big data in microﬁnance and relationships, there is a dearth of
microﬁnance-speciﬁc research on relationship innovations based on big data.Table 2 shows
a literature review of studies highlighting the importance of big data and relationship quality
in ﬁnancial and microﬁnance services.
3 Theoretical underpinnings
The resource-based view (RBV) of the ﬁrm emphasizes the possession and utilization of
valuable, rare, inimitable, and novel resources for building sustainable competitive advan-
tage (Penrose, 1959; Barney, 1991). In the rapidly changing business environment, it is
challenging for companies to sustain a competitive advantage. As a result, it has become
critical to focus on intangible assets such as relationships with consumers built on goodwill,
trust, dedication, and loyalty (Brown et al., 2011; Hollebeek, 2019). The RBV advocates
a foreseeable linkage between resource and organizational value creation leading to supe-
rior performance outcomes. Furthermore, a superior relationship with the customers can be
leveraged to create value to achieve a competitive advantage that highlights the importance
of adopting the RBV for studying relationship innovation within microﬁnance services.
Relationship with customers is a valuable organizational resource that can potentially
contribute to superior organizational performance in various ways. The superior relation-
ship fostered by positive emotions by the front-line employees during interactions with the
customers signiﬁcantly increases customers’ trust, loyalty, and excellent organizational per-
formance. Based on empirical investigation on B2C relationship quality, Hollebeek (2019)
suggests that engagement between business and customers is a critical factor in fostering
co-creation and productive relationships through examining the social media adoption and
engagement by business enterprises. The author ﬁnds the importance of RBV in studying
customer engagement through conceptualizing business-to-customer relationships as a criti-
cal resource for enhancing performance. On the other hand, employees’ skills and capacity to
harness and nurture superior customer relationships through fostering customer engagement
are precious in the current business environment (Ranjan et al., 2020).
At present, digital economy data is considered one of the most valuable strategic assets
(Morabito, 2015). Balayan and Tomin (2020) highlight the dominant digital marketing prac-
tices adopted by platform-based service providers to collect data from users’ interactions for
monetizing purposes continuously. Further, the rich insights obtained through customer data
analysis are critical resources for superior operational and strategic performance outcomes,
therefore considered valuable resources by scholars (Alrumiah & Hadwan, 2021). Thus, DDI
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
981
Table 2 A literature review on big data and relationship quality in ﬁnancial and microﬁnance services
Study focus
Study
Context
Key ﬁndings and research
gaps
Relationship quality
dynamics in social
banking
Hani et al., (2021a,
2021b)
Social banking
The study identiﬁes
respect, reciprocity, and
trust as critical
relationship quality
dimensions. In addition,
it discusses how
different channels (such
as mobile and
face-to-face) can be
used to continue a
long-term relationship.
However, it did not
discuss relationship
innovation using big
data
Relationship quality of
online banking customers
in Spain and Mexico
Olavarría-Jaraba et al.
(2018)
Online banking
Considering the context
of online channels
within an empirical
context of the Spanish
and Mexican banking
industry, the authors
ﬁnd that market
orientation, knowledge
management, and
customer perception
about investment in
customer relationships
positively affect
relationship quality.
Therefore the ﬁndings
are essential for
long-term relationship
management with the
customers
Opportunities, dangers, and
challenges of using
digital technologies and
big data in the MFI
Baledh and Peña (2016)
Microﬁnance
The study discusses the
potential to increase
efﬁciency, productivity,
and customer service by
offering affordable,
convenient, and secure
MFI services using the
widespread use of ICT,
such as mobile phones
and tablets. However, it
does not discuss the
innovation of
relationships using such
technologies
123

982
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
Table 2 (continued)
Study focus
Study
Context
Key ﬁndings and research
gaps
The digital strategy of large
ﬁnancial institution
Sia et al. (2016)
Financial service
Highlighting the
customers’ increasing
demand for digital
products by explicating
the case of a large Asian
bank DBS, the authors
articulate the critical
capabilities needed to
pursue an effective
business strategy for the
digital technological
landscape
Factors of customer
trustworthiness within the
Microﬁnance industry
Aggarwal (2015)
Microﬁnance
Although the authors
conﬁrm the utilization
of demographic
information of
borrowers to determine
the trustworthiness of
repayment of
microcredit loans, the
study is not focused on
relationship innovation
using big data
B2C relationship quality in
online banking services
Brun et al. (2014)
Online banking
Based on an investigation
of online banking
services, the authors
ﬁnd that trust,
satisfaction, and
commitment are three
dimensions of online
relationship quality
between consumers and
banks. These
dimensions of
relationship quality will
assist ﬁnancial
institutions in fostering
long-term relationships
through determining the
relational positioning to
improve targeted
marketing strategies
and activities
Importance of cell phones
and relationships for
agricultural
entrepreneurship in East
Africa
Mehta et al. (2011)
Microﬁnance
Although the study
highlights trust as an
important dimension of
relationship quality and
the importance of
digital technologies for
entrepreneurs in a
developing country did
not focus on
relationship innovation
using big data
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
983
Table 2 (continued)
Study focus
Study
Context
Key ﬁndings and research
gaps
Relationship marketing
within online banking
service
Lang and Colgate (2003)
Online banking
The authors highlight the
importance of
relationship marketing
in the ﬁnancial service
industry. The study
ﬁnds evidence of
information technology
and information
technology channels in
fostering solid
relationships with
customers
focusing on relationship innovation will enable organizational members to create valuable
intangible resources that can effectively leverage to gain superior ﬁnancial performance.
This study aims at integrating the RBV with the present data-driven relationship innovation
research stream to allow superior theoretical underpinning. Shahbaz et al. (2020) empha-
size considering BDA as an organizational resource that develops dynamic organizational
capabilities such as customer relationship management (CRM). The study reveals that BDA
plays a signiﬁcant mediating function between CRM and a company’s sales performance.
Finally, following the RBV, Shibin et al. (2020) say that a company’s ability to manage its
marketing information system positively affects its competitive performance. This effect is
partly mediated by marketing analytics and service innovation in a data-rich environment.
4 Research approach
Although big data analytics gains momentum in customer relationship literature, it often fails
in real-life situations to capture the complexity of an individual’s actual behavior (Akter et al.,
2020). This investigation adopted a systematic review of the literature with triangulation and
thematic investigation of 20 in-depth interviews to produce the dimensions of relationship
innovation in microﬁnance (Akter et al., 2019). The study synthesizes qualitative interviews
of practitioners and managers to extract their perspectives on relationship innovation, context,
settings, and meanings (Skinner et al., 2000). Thus, in-depth interviews helped triangulate
the ﬁndings of the systematic literture review (Carter et al., 2014). Furthermore, adopting a
scientiﬁc approach has offered transparency of the protocol to explicate the scope, criteria,
and methodology at every stage of the literature review to ensure accuracy and objectivity
(Hossain et al., 2019).
4.1 Literature review strategies
The review procedure begins with the research inquiry: How does big data create relation-
ship innovations in microﬁnance? This research inquiry facilitated the review procedures to
identify the study domain accurately, sources of information, relevant scholarly works, and
123

984
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
the criteria determining the omission and addition for the evaluation. The review depicted
the insightful and meaningful aspects supported by scientiﬁc evidence to offer a practical
answer to the research inquiry. This research deﬁned a list of requirements for including
relevant articles. Firstly, the time period was 2001 to 2021; hence the search includes pub-
lications from 2001 in order to achieve rigor in the big data and microﬁnance literature.
Secondly, the study considers all scholarly articles related to customer relationship quality
in ﬁnancial services as there has been little investigation in this particular empirical domain.
Lastly, because the research’s objective is to explore relationship innovation in microﬁ-
nance through big data, all scholarly articles on big data in microﬁnance, data-driven service
innovation, and customer relationship quality in microﬁnance were reviewed. A database
including the keywords used for searching was: ‘big data’, ‘relationship innovation’ with the
words ‘microﬁnance’, ‘ﬁnancial service’, ‘banking’, ‘online banking’. Searching for ‘cus-
tomer relationship in microﬁnance’ and ‘big data in microﬁnance relationship’ generated
other scholarly articles.
This research began in March 2019 and concluded in November 2021. The electronic
databases were exhaustively searched for peer-reviewed academic journal articles and high-
quality online content and publications or journals related to microﬁnance/ ﬁnancial service
relationships from the year 2001 to 2021: ScienceDirect, Business Source Complete, EBSCO
Open Access Journals, and ABI/INFORM Complete are highly reputed, widely used and top-
ranked journals in social science and business disciplines. Also, other important sources such
as; the Web of Science, Scopus, and Google Scholar have also been regarded as the primary
source of search. There were 239 peer-reviewed scholarly papers found in the initial search
using the keyword, title, and abstract. Only 23 articles were chosen for in-depth examination
after cutting down from the original list of 47 articles. The researchers were able to envision
a variety of frameworks that pull big data relationship innovation in microﬁnance as a result
of their examination of these studies. The theme analysis section of the literature review is
useful for detecting recurring or recurrent connotations of themes across a data set associated
with the investigated phenomenon, empirical contexts, or issues.
4.2 Thematic analysis of literature review and in-depth interviews
In accordance with Braun and Clarke (2006), we conducted a thematic analysis of our data.
The extensive review of 23 papers yielded a total of two distinct themes. Krippendorff’s alpha
(or, Kalpha) was estimated in this study to verify the validity of the analysis as a reliable
predictor of events. It takes three judges to assess two themes (trust and commitment) and
ﬁve sub-themes (credibility, customization, caring, affective commitment, and continuance
commitment). An inter-rater reliability analysis was conducted using IBM SPSS 26. (Hayes
& Krippendorff, 2007). The results report a Kalpha value of 0.82, which is greater than the
0.80 cut-offs, conﬁrming inter-rater reliability (De Swert, 2012).
A qualitative study in the form of in-depth interviews (n = 20) was conducted with
microﬁnance managers to validate the ﬁndings of the thematic analysis further. The sample’s
demographics were diverse in terms of gender, age, education, and profession. The age
range of the participants is between 18 and 64 years old, 65% are male, and interviews were
conducted via telephone with a duration of approximately 60 min. The sampling was designed
following a convenient sampling method, and all the participants were willing to volunteer to
participate in this study. We adopted a nonprobability sampling method as it produces rich,
insightful, and detailed data to explicate the complexity of the phenomenon and its diversity
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
985
Fig. 1 Proposed relationship innovation model using big data analytics
(Sim et al., 2018). Based on the purposive sampling selection criteria, convenience sampling
is critical to the study goal (Sim et al., 2018).
NVivo content analysis software was used in conjunction with manual analysis to capture,
transcribe, evaluate and assess the discussions and conversations conducted during the project
(Hossain et al., 2019). During the qualitative study, numerous considerations were taken into
account. Initially, passages from the early interviews were highlighted. Then, the fundamental
aspects of relationship innovation in microﬁnance, such as trust and commitment, were
conﬁrmed. Finally, two independent academic judges reviewed the interview excerpts and
uncovered the reoccurring themes within the key dimensions. The ﬁndings conﬁrmed the sub-
dimensions of trust (i.e., credibility, customization, caring) and commitment (i.e., affective
commitment and continuance commitment). NVivo and Microsoft Excel were used again at
this stage of the study to estimate inter-rater reliability, which was found to be 0.84, exceeding
the 0.80 requirements (Straub et al., 2004). Figure 1 depicts the last two propositions or
themes derived from qualitative interviews: trust and commitment, which are congruent with
the literature research results. Next, we discuss the proposed relationship innovation model
that resulted from the ﬁndings of the comprehensive literature review and in-depth interviews.
5 Proposed model
We propose a relationship innovation model with two dimensions and ﬁve subdimensions
based on the results of the previous section. "Trust" is the ﬁrst dimension, which is sub-
divided into three subdimensions: credibility, customization, and caring. "Commitment" is
the second dimension, which is subdivided into two subdimensions: affective and continu-
ous commitment. The model also proposes that the inﬂuence of relationship innovation on
microﬁnance can contribute to sustained competitive advantage (see Figure 1).
123

986
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
5.1 Trust
Trust is one of those resources for an organization that is inimitable, rare, valuable, and
non-substitutable (Barney, 1991). Nevertheless, businesses maintain superior performances
by utilizing this resource to develop competitive advantages (Srivastava et al., 2001). Specif-
ically, microﬁnance requires trust to maintain an ongoing relationship where uncertainty or
risk is inherent and informational opacity is typical (Hani et al., 2021a, 2021b). Big data
can mitigate this informational opacity and uncertainty by providing trustworthy offerings
to microﬁnance customers. We deﬁne trustworthy offerings as big data that captures data
for delivering credible, customized, and caring offerings for microﬁnance customers. Our
ﬁndings align with Hani et al., (2021a, 2021b)’s earlier research. According to the system-
atic literature review and interviews from the microﬁnance managers, the study ﬁnds that
trustworthy offerings consist of credibility, caring and customization.
5.1.1 Credibility
Credibility in trust plays a crucial role in extenuating informational opacity and uncertainty
associated with microﬁnance. We deﬁne credibility as promises and information provided
by microﬁnance perceived as accurate and can perform the job accurately and effectively
(Hani et al., 2021a, 2021b). Customers seek credibility when information or promises become
pertinent for actions or decisions yet unknown from personal experience(Wanner & Janiesch,
2019). In microﬁnance, the bank’s credibility is indicated by the fact that it is expected not
to make any false claim or charge higher interest to their vulnerable customers (Hani et al.,
2021a, 2021b, p. 300). For example, big data analytics can provide up-to-date and real-time
data using the bulk amount of text, data, and analysis of customers’ responses from online
and ofﬂine feedback or opinions (Wanner & Janiesch, 2019). Thus, big data can offer various
prospects for credible service offerings for microﬁnance customers, considering these data
to mitigate uncertainty and informational opacity among customers. The following quote
signiﬁes how big data assists in delivering a credible service offering for social banking
customers:
Data can assist us in predicting the number of installments of each customer and
correctly analyze credit losses or defaults. Thus, we can effortlessly identify our current
and past transactions with our customers, which can help us uphold our integrity among
customers and deliver our services efﬁciently and effectively. (Interviewee # 11).
5.1.2 Customization
Customization is the cornerstone of relationship innovation in which a ﬁrm offers tailored ser-
vices or products to meet the expected needs of heterogeneous customers(Coelho & Henseler,
2012).
Customization in service contributes to trust-building, especially the availability of big
data provides organizations new opportunities to customize products or services to ever-
demanding customers. Big data enhances an organization’s ability to maintain customer
relationships by obtaining and analyzing consumer information, permitting more effective ﬁr-
m–customerinteractions,andexpeditingproductandservicecustomization(Garrido-Moreno
etal.,2014).CRM’sdata-miningcapabilitiesletbusinessesbetterunderstandtheircustomers’
behavior and customize their products and services accordingly (Krasnikov et al., 2009). For
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
987
example, with the help of big data, ‘BRAC’s microﬁnance introduced the ‘Client Interac-
tion Point (CIP)’ for readymade garments (RMG) workers in Bangladesh. BRAC realized
that although RMG workers are an integral part of the Bangladeshi RMG industry, they are
mostly unbanked. They cannot manage time to open a bank account during the working day
or compromise a pay cut. Understanding the importance and urgency of this need, BRAC
introduced a customized product, “CIP,” a digital ﬁnancial service (DFS) guaranteeing an
end-to-end digital operation process in which customers can directly receive the loan, pay
installments and save money through bKsah or cash (BRAC, 2021). In microﬁnance, we
deﬁne customization as the bank’s ability to tailor products and services to meet the speciﬁc
demands of each customer (Hani et al., 2021a, 2021b). The importance of big-data analytics
in customized service offerings is reﬂected in the following quote:
Data allow us to identify trends and patterns concerning current loan information and
future loan offerings. In this context, we can use structured and unstructured data in
the form of transaction, demographic, psychographic, and socio-economic variables to
develop personalized offerings. Managers can use this information to better understand
customers’ ﬁnancial circumstances and take necessary actions.(Interviewee #17).
5.1.3 Caring
Caring for microﬁnance customers is critical because they are vulnerable and encounter
various challenging environments (Hani et al., 2021a, 2021b). Customer’s trust in microﬁ-
nance is embedded in the caring attitude that prioritizes the customers’ well-being over the
organization’s interests (Ganesan, 1994). It is the degree of willingness to do good for the
customers without any proﬁt motive (Mayer et al., 1995). The importance of big data in
microﬁnance for providing caring offerings to vulnerable customers has recently appeared in
the current pandemic lockdown in Bangladesh. For example, BRAC microﬁnance used big
data to identify the clients who required emergency money and returned savings during the
rapid countrywide lockdown (Gateway, 2020). In the microﬁnance context, caring is help-
ing the customers in any new circumstances that were not promised before, and there is no
intention to make proﬁts.The following quote also apprehends the importance of big data in
microﬁnance for caring offerings:
We are serving the most disadvantaged populations of society. Unfortunately, natural,
political, and environmental instability is often pervasive. Data can allow us to identify
the most needed customer and assists us in offering the services to help those customers
( Interviewee # 5)
The qualitative research studies showed that credibility, caring, and customization can be used
to predict different types of trust among microﬁnance customers using big data analytics.
Also, the previous qualitative study exhibited that microﬁnance customers mentioned the
importance of customization, caring, and credibility when describing trust (Hani et al., 2021a,
2021b). The notion of trust has been postulated as being the basis of quality interpersonal
interactions and a source of competitive advantage for businesses (Tan & Lim, 2009). Trust,
after all, gives value to customers and determines their loyalty to a business. Many ﬁrms view
this client value as critical when looking for innovative strategies to achieve and sustain a
competitive edge(Ismail et al., 2017). Thus, the study put forward the following proposition:
123

988
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
Proposition 1 Big data-driven relationship innovation creates trust-building offerings.
5.2 Commitment
One of the most important constructs in relationship innovation is commitment (Akhtar
et al., 2019). Commitment, in particular, drives a consumer to loyalty in the service industry.
It is characterized as a valuable relationship structure that fosters collaboration (Christine
Moorman et al., 1992; Morgan & Hunt, 1994). Porter et al., (1974,p.604) stated, Organiza-
tional commitment is deﬁned in the present context in terms of the strength of an individual’s
identiﬁcation with and involvement in a particular organization. Such commitment can gen-
erally be characterized by at least three factors: (a) a strong belief in and acceptance of
the organization’s goals and values; (b) a willingness to exert considerable effort on behalf
of the organization; (c) a deﬁnite desire to maintain organizational membership. In line
with the deﬁnition provided by Porter et al. (1974) and Reichers (1985), we deﬁne commit-
ment as the dimension of big data relationship innovation in which microﬁnance provides
commitment building offerings to its customers for establishing organizational value and
goals, motivating in accomplishing goals and creating a desire to maintain the relation-
ship. Most successful microﬁnance operations are primarily attributable to their innovative
relationship approach and commitment-building strategy among customers, such as partici-
patory management style, close supervision of the members, and rigorous counseling (Wahid,
1994, p. 36). The effective use of big data analytics promotes customers’ commitment to the
organization (Garrido-Moreno et al., 2014). It also offers innumerable advantages to the orga-
nization by providing ready information about the customer’s view at every point of contact
(Doherty et al., 2012). Therefore, an organization can identify the crucial commitment-
building strategy for microﬁnance customers. Several studies have considered commitment
as a unidimensional construct (MacKenzie et al., 1998; Morgan & Hunt, 1994). Others have
captured the multidimensionality of the commitment construct, such as; normative, affective,
and continuance commitments (Brown et al., 1995; Gruen et al., 2000; Kumar et al., 1995).
Considering our exploratory research and the empirical and theoretical work of Gruen et al.
(2000) in relationship marketing, this study proposes a two-component conceptualization of
commitment in microﬁnance relationship innovation—affective commitment and continu-
ance commitment. This study describes commitment as a multidimensional concept where
each dimension (affective and continuance) offers various approaches to maintaining a com-
mitted relationship (Arcand et al., 2017).
5.2.1 Affective commitment
Many studies emphasize affective commitment for a successful long-term engagement with
clients (Arcand et al., 2017; Cater & Zabkar, 2009). Affective commitment refers to the pos-
itive psychological or emotional bond (Allen & Meyer, 1990; Arcand et al., 2017). It delves
into why customers remain in a relationship with the organization. A higher level of partic-
ipation within the organization offers a higher affective commitment (Gruen et al., 2000).
Studies identiﬁed that committed customers tend to endorse the organization’s well-being
by giving something of themselves(Mowday et al., 1982). Thus, we deﬁne affective commit-
ment as the degree of the psychological bond of microﬁnance customers’ positive feelings
and emotional attachment (Allen & Meyer, 1990; Gruen et al., 2000). Big data can enable
microﬁnance managers to harness unprecedented amounts of customer data and develop
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
989
knowledge in building such commitment (Garrido-Moreno et al., 2014). The relevance of
big data in developing affective commitment and its contribution to business operations is
apparent in the following quote:
Customers’ commitment is crucial for the success of microﬁnance that eradicates
poverty. To develop commitment among customers, we allow direct customer par-
ticipation in our operation process; for example, customers need to form a group of
ﬁve self-selected members to get a loan. Each group chooses a leader and meeting site,
and the necessary installation is collected and shared. This kind of involvement fosters
a sense of loyalty and commitment to the group. It makes them feel like a part of it.
The stored structured and unstructured data of the customers ( such as the percent-
age of customer participation, attendance in the weekly meeting, customer problems,
and complaints) enables us to identify our committed customers better and reduce
operations expenses. (Interviewee # 8).
5.2.2 Continuance commitment
Continuance commitment studies the economic and rational calculation of the losses incurred
and beneﬁts sacriﬁced because of the termination of the relationship (Allen & Meyer, 1990).
We deﬁne continuance commitment as a relationship innovation in microﬁnance based on
the customer’s self-interest and the degree of the psychological bond associated with the
cost (social, economic, and status-related) (Gruen et al., 2000) of leaving the institution. The
microﬁnance customers made an initial ﬁnancial and psychological investment by losing
wages, time, transportation, and probable hostility from the community and family (Menon,
2007). It inﬂuences the customers to recover their investment (Ferguson & Brown, 1991). In
addition, the organization directly controls some beneﬁts and advantages that a customer no
longer receives after the termination of the relationship, such as; business-related information,
contacts with professionals, recognition for contribution, and professional identiﬁcations
(Ashforth & Mael, 1989). Big data enables ﬁrms to acquire customer behavior and activity
knowledge to identify committed customers and develop distinguished operational strategies
based on the available knowledge (Garrido-Moreno et al., 2014). The signiﬁcance of big data
in microﬁnance for building continuance commitment among customers is apparent in the
following quote:
Basedontheavailabledataandcustomerinformation,wecanofferservicesorproducts
to continue with us. For example, our recorded data tell us which customer diligently
paid their installments for the last ﬁve years. As a recognition, we offer special loans
to our committed customers such as educational loans to the kids, business loans for
the partners, and home improvement loans…. (Interviewee # 5).
The qualitative ﬁndings indicated that using big data analytics, affective and continu-
ance commitment can predict various types of commitment among microﬁnance consumers.
Commitment motivates consumers to be loyal. It is a beneﬁcial relationship structure that
promotes collaboration (Christine et al., 1992; Morgan & Hunt, 1994). Committed customers
are willing to invest in maintaining and developing close relationships (Ismail et al., 2017).
Such investment and collaboration may increase efﬁciency, reduce operational costs, improve
ﬁnancial output, and increase microﬁnance’s competitiveness. Accordingly, the following
hypothesis is proposed in this study:
123

990
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
Proposition 2 Big data-driven relationship innovation creates commitment-building offer-
ings. Impact of relationship innovation on microﬁnance’s sustained competitive advantages.
This article argues that the inﬂuence of relationship innovation on microﬁnance can con-
tribute to long-term competitiveness. Innovation such as relationship innovation enables
microﬁnance to identify and develop valuable new offerings such as trust and commitment
building offerings that help microﬁnance establish and maintain a sustainable competitive
advantage. It also can direct to new, customized solutions that distinguish microﬁnance
from its competitors. Both theory and practice strongly reﬂect the underlying innovation
process using relationship offerings as a sustainable competitive advantage (Palmatier &
Steinhoff, 2019). The resource-based view (RBV) is a theoretical paradigm for investigating
how microﬁnance generates strategic resources using big data that beneﬁt customers (Nyaga
& Whipple, 2011). According to the RBV, microﬁnance can gain a competitive edge when
it builds relationships that are distinct from its competitors and difﬁcult to imitate (Barney,
1986). Relationship innovation using big data can be a source of successful competitive
advantage if that relationship offering is valuable, rare, and imperfectly imitable. Microﬁ-
nance can be more competitive in the long run if it makes meaningful, unique, or hard-to-copy
relationship offerings like trust and committed service. The qualitative ﬁndings of this study
have signiﬁcant implications for current arguments about the ability to create relationships to
improve operational and marketing effectiveness in turn (Smircich, 1983; Tichy, 1983). This
logic implies that if microﬁnance can provide such relations to its customers that others can
not easily imitate or modify, such relationship offerings can generate sustained competitive
advantage. Thus we posit that:
Proposition 3 Big data-driven relationship innovation inﬂuences overall sustained competi-
tive advantage.
6 Discussion
6.1 Theoretical contribution
Several theoretical contributions are made in this paper. In developing the theoretical model,
this research considers the resource-based view (RBV) (Barney, 1991; Wernerfelt, 1984) to
explain the relationship between institutional data and sustained competitive advantage. This
study demonstrates that organizations can harness performance by deﬁning the underlying
potential of data obtained through customer interactions and leveraging that data to innovate
appropriate relationships with customers within a micro-credit context. Therefore, following
the RBV theory, the relational capital of social business, speciﬁcally microcredit institutions,
utilizes valuable, rare, inimitable, and novel resources for building sustainable competitive
advantage (Barney, 1991; Hollebeek, 2019).
RBV is a theoretical framework to identify the critical organizational resources of concern
that can be important for the company’s strategic beneﬁt. Within the empirical context, the
big data generated through transactional and relational engagement with the customers are
proved to be of serious value to delivering service innovation leading to superior customer
experience, customer retention, and enhanced relationship quality. Considering the context of
the microﬁnance industry during the Covid-19 pandemic, a ﬁnancial service provider needs
to engage with the customers to anticipate diverse potential causes of ﬁnancial hardship.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
991
Different hardship situations may necessitate recognizing speciﬁc emotional and psycholog-
ical needs fulﬁlled by positive emotions and skills of front-line employees, such as empathy,
compassion, and assurance, to offer assistance during a crisis (Ranjan et al., 2020). Appro-
priate recognition of these emotional aspects of customer requirements through analyzing
available data will play a positive role in retaining customers with a higher degree of trust,
commitment, or loyalty; these ﬁndings align with the previous empirical studies (Brown
et al., 2011; Hollebeek, 2019).
This study demonstrates how managers may effectively deliver service innovation or a
superior relational experience to customers through meticulous data analysis, resulting in
long-term improved performance outcomes within the context of data-driven relationship
innovation. As a result, this study’s ﬁndings emphasize the need to develop quality relation-
ships for effective customer interaction, consistent with past academic recommendations.
(Ranjan et al. 2020). The ﬁndings of this study contribute to the growing scholarly domain of
big data analytics by demonstrating the linkage between big data analytics and sustainable
competitive advantage. Furthermore, this study contributes to the empirical ﬁndings that big
data is a strategic asset (Morabito, 2015; Alrumiah & Hadwan, 2021; Balayan & Tomin,
2020; Shahbaz et al., 2020). Following the viewpoint of a data-rich environment, this study
validates the value of big data in delivering sustainable competitive advantage within a novel
empirical context of microcredit ﬁnancial institutions. The ﬁndings of this study have made
essential contributions in the scholarly ﬁeld such as Data-Driven Innovation, Data-Driven
Relationship innovation (Akter et al., 2020; Davenport & Kudyba, 2016) through applying
a resource-based view in these crucial ﬁelds of studies.
6.2 Managerial implications
This study recommends several managerial implications of relationship innovation using big
data in microﬁnance. First, managers in microﬁnance can beneﬁt from data-driven relation-
ship innovation by assessing the psychometric evaluations of relationship quality. Data-driven
relationship offerings can evaluate the applicant’s responses, allowing information to be cap-
tured that might assist in predicting loan repayment behavior, such as the applicant’s views,
commitment, and trust. Second, relationship innovation can aid managers in identifying cus-
tomer behavior patterns. The integration of customer behavior patterns and crucial business
data can be helpful for managers in the creation of application scorecards that can be used
for bias-free customer selection. Managers can make credit decisions in a minute to evaluate
this customer behavior pattern and reduce the overall operational cost. Third, client hetero-
geneity is the biggest challenge in microﬁnance. Relationship innovation in big data can
play an innovative role in microﬁnance institutions by fulﬁlling diverse customer expecta-
tions and demands. The microﬁnance industry will be able to deliver services tailored to its
customers’ needs based on consumer demands revealed through analytics such as customer
segmentation, price modeling, and data modeling. Fourth, relationship innovation using big
data can estimate portfolio behavior across many geographies, allowing them to analyze
defaults and credit losses more precisely. As a result, microﬁnance institutions can select the
portfolio that best suits their ﬁnancial offerings and gain sustained competitive advantages.
Finally, managers can evaluate relationships to determine their future beneﬁts by assessing
relationship quality. Data analytics exhibits the relationship quality by identifying the rela-
tional dimensions of commitment and trust of a customer. Microﬁnance should consider that
relationship innovation can demonstrate relationship quality and deliver advantages while
also recognizing that relationships that fail to create relationship quality will not produce the
123

992
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
desired results. Relationship quality can positively impact operational and strategic success,
regardless of the type of relationship.
7 Conclusion
Microﬁnance appears to be trapped in a bygone era of service delivery, where little seems
to have changed even though technology has fundamentally altered retail ﬁnancial services.
Microﬁnance needs to embrace big data to sustain itself in the competitive age. To gain a
sustained competitive advantage, it must adopt big data analytics to compete in this immense
competitive era, from innovative product design to customer relationship management, oper-
ational efﬁciency, and portfolio growth (Bull, 2020; Nambiar, 2019). Technology should
not replace relationships but rather facilitate the development of the authentic and profound
relationship between the MFI and its clients as it expands its operations. Especially relation-
ship innovation using big data can provide sustained competitive advantages by identifying
various relational dimensions. Rather than considering a replacement for face-to-face rela-
tionships, big data analytics should be viewed as additional advantage microﬁnance may use
to build a strong relationship with its customers.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abraham, F., Schmukler, S. L., & Tessada, J. (2019). Using Big Data to Expand FinancialServices:Beneﬁts
and Risks. World Bank Group Retrieved from https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/
10986/32655/Using-Big-Data-to-Expand-Financial-Services-Beneﬁts-and-Risks.pdf?sequence=1&
isAllowed=y.
Aggarwal, R., Goodell, J. W., & Selleck, L. J. (2015). Lending to women in microﬁnance: Role of social trust.
International Business Review, 24(1), 55–65.
Akhtar, P., Khan, Z., Rao-Nicholson, R., & Zhang, M. (2019). Building relationship innovation in global
collaborative partnerships: Big data analytics and traditional organizational powers. R&D Management,
49(1), 7–20.
Akter, S., & Wamba, S. F. (2016). Big data analytics in E-commerce: A systematic review and agenda for
future research. Electronic Markets. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-016-0219-0
Akter, S., Bandara, R., Hani, U., Fosso Wamba, S., Foropon, C., & Papadopoulos, T. (2019). Analytics-based
decision-making for service systems: A qualitative study and agenda for future research. International
Journal of Information Management, 48, 85–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.01.020
Akter, S., Motamarri, S., Hani, U., Shams, R., Fernando, M., Babu, M. M., & Shen, K. N. (2020). Building
dynamic service analytics capabilities for the digital marketplace. Journal of Business Research, 118,
177–188.
Allen, N. J., & Meyer, J. P. (1990). The measurement and antecedents of affective, continuance and normative
commitment to the organization. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 63(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.2044-8325.1990.tb00506.x
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
993
Alrumiah, S. S., & Hadwan, M. (2021). Implementing big data analytics in e-commerce: Vendor and customer
view. IEEE Access, 9, 37281–37286.
Amin, M., 2016. Internet banking service quality and its implication on e-customer satisfaction and e-customer
loyalty. International Journal of Bank Marketing.
Arcand, M., PromTep, S., Brun, I., & Rajaobelina, L. (2017). Mobile banking service quality and customer rela-
tionships. International Journal of Bank Marketing, 35(7), 1066–1087. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJBM-
10-2015-0150
Arthur, K. N. A., & Owen, R. (2019). A micro-ethnographic study of big data-based innovation in the ﬁnan-
cial services sector: Governance, ethics and organisational practices. Journal of Business Ethics, 160,
363–375. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-019-04203-x
Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organization. Academy of Management
Review, 14(1), 20–39.
Balayan, A. A., & Tomin, L. V. (2020). The Transformation of the Advertising Industry in the Age of “Platform
Capitalism”. Paper presented at the 2020 IEEE Communication Strategies in Digital Society Seminar
(ComSDS).
Baldeh, A. and de la Peña, B.T. (2016). Research paper international master in microﬁnance for entrepreneur-
ship (IMME).
Barney,J.(1991).Firmresourcesandsustainedcompetitiveadvantage.JournalofManagement,17(1),99–120.
Barney, J. B. (1986). Organizational culture: Can it be a source of sustained competitive advantage? Academy
of Management Review, 11(3), 656–665.
Berry, M. J., & Linoff, G. S. (2004). Data mining techniques: for marketing, sales, and customer relationship
management. John Wiley and Sons.
Bose, R., 2009. Advanced analytics: opportunities and challenges. Industrial Management and Data Systems.
BRAC.(2021).ClientInteractionPoints:HowBRACisfacilitatingRMGworkerstoaccessﬁnancialservicesin
Bangladesh. Retrieved from http://blog.brac.net/client-interaction-points-how-brac-is-facilitating-rmg-
workers-to-access-ﬁnancial-services-in-bangladesh/.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology,
3(2), 77–101.
Brown, A., Garguilo, S., & Mehta, K. (2011). The relentless pursuit of ﬁnancial capital for micro-enterprises:
Importance of trust and social capital. International Journal for Service Learning in Engineering, Human-
itarian Engineering and Social Entrepreneurship, 6(2), 78–97.
Brown, J. R., Lusch, R. F., & Nicholson, C. Y. (1995). Power and relationship commitment: Their impact on
marketing channel member performance. Journal of Retailing, 71(4), 363–392.
Browning, T. R., Deyst, J. J., Eppinger, S. D., & Whitney, D. E. (2002). Adding value in product development by
creating information and reducing risk. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 49(4), 443–458.
Brun, I., Durif, F. and Ricard, L., 2014. E-relationship marketing: a cognitive mapping introspection in the
banking sector. European Journal of Marketing.
Bull, G. (2020). After the Storm: How Microﬁnance Can Adapt and Thrive. Retrieved from https://www.cgap.
org/blog/after-storm-how-microﬁnance-can-adapt-and-thrive.
Carter, N., Bryant-Lukosius, D., DiCenso, A., Blythe, J., & Neville, A. J. (2014). The Use of Triangulation in
Qualitative Research. Paper presented at the Oncology Nursing Forum.
Cater, B., & Zabkar, V. (2009). Antecedents and consequences of commitment in marketing research services:
The client’s perspective. Industrial Marketing Management, 38(7), 785–797. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indmarman.2007.10.004
Chen, H., Chiang, R., & Storey, V. (2012). Business Intelligence and Analytics: From Big Data to Big Impact.
MIS Quarterly, 36(4), 1165–1188.
Chen, J., & Dibb, S. (2010). Consumer trust in the online retail context: Exploring the antecedents and
consequences. Psychology and Marketing, 27(4), 323–346.
Choo, M. (2016). Big Data Analytics in Microﬁnance https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/big-data-analytics-
microﬁnance-micky-choo/.
Christine Moorman, A., Gerald Zaltman, A., & Rohit Deshpande, A. (1992). Relationships between providers
and users of market research: the dynamics of trust within and between organizations. Journal of Mar-
keting Research. https://doi.org/10.2307/3172742
Ciampi, F., Demi, S., Magrini, A., Marzi, G., & Papa, A. (2021). Exploring the impact of big data analytics
capabilities on business model innovation: The mediating role of entrepreneurial orientation. Journal of
Business Research, 123, 1–13.
Coelho, P. S., & Henseler, J. (2012). Creating customer loyalty through service customization. European
Journal of Marketing.
Cornée, S., & Szafarz, A. (2014). Vive la Différence: Social Banks and Reciprocity in the Credit Market.
Journal of Business Ethics, 125(3), 361–380. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-013-1922-9
123

994
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
Coumaros, J., Roys, S., Chretien, L., Buvat, J., Kvj, S., Clerk, V., & Auliard, O. (2014). Big data alchemy:
How can banks maximize the value of their customer data? Capgemini Consulting.
Davenport, T. H. (2014). Big data at work: Dispelling the myths, uncovering the opportunities: Harvard
Business Review Press.
Davenport, T. H., & Kudyba, S. (2016). Designing and developing analytics-based data products. MIT Sloan
Management Review, 58(1), 83.
Demirkan, H., & Spohrer, J. (2015). T-shaped innovators: Identifying the right talent to support service inno-
vation. Research-Technology Management, 58(5), 12–15.
De Swert, K. (2012). Calculating inter-coder reliability in media content analysis using Krippendorff’s
Alpha. Center for Politics and Communication, 15.
Doherty, N. F., Ashurst, C., & Peppard, J. (2012). Factors affecting the successful realisation of beneﬁts from
systems development projects: Findings from three case studies. Journal of Information Technology,
27(1), 1–16.
El-Kassar,A.-N.,&Singh,S.K.(2019).Greeninnovationandorganizationalperformance:Theinﬂuenceofbig
data and the moderating role of management commitment and HR practices. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 144, 483–498.
Erevelles, S., Fukawa, N., & Swayne, L. (2016). Big Data consumer analytics and the transformation of
marketing. Journal of Business Research, 69(2), 897–904.
Fang, B., & Zhang, P. (2016). Big data in ﬁnance. Big data concepts, theories, and applications (pp. 391–412).
Berlin: Springer.
Ferguson, J. M., & Brown, S. W. (1991). Relationship marketing and association management. Journal of
Professional Services Marketing, 7(2), 137–147.
Finnegan, M. (2014). Finance sector must use big data to ’regain customer trust’.
Ganesan, S. (1994). Determinants of long-term orientation in buyer-seller relationships. Journal of Marketing,
58(2), 1–19.
Garepasha, A., Aali, S., Zendeh, A. B., & Iranzadeh, S. (2020). Dynamics of online relationship marketing:
Relationship quality and customer loyalty in Iranian banks. Revista Brasileira De Gestão De Negócios,
22, 140–162.
Garrido-Moreno, A., Lockett, N., & García-Morales, V. (2014). Paving the way for CRM success: The medi-
ating role of knowledge management and organizational commitment. Information and Management,
51(8), 1031–1042.
Gateway, F. D. (2020). Can Cash Transfers to Digital Wallets Be a Lifeline During the Pan-
demic? Retrieved from https://www.ﬁndevgateway.org/blog/2020/10/can-cash-transfers-digital-wallets-
be-lifeline-during-pandemic.
Ghasemaghaei, M., & Calic, G. (2019). Does big data enhance ﬁrm innovation competency? The mediating
role of data-driven insights. Journal of Business Research, 104, 69–84.
Gilmore, J. N. (2020). To Afﬁnity and Beyond: Clicking as Communicative Gesture on the Experimentation
Platform. Communication, Culture and Critique.
Gruen, T. W., Summers, J. O., & Acito, F. (2000). Relationship marketing activities, commitment, and mem-
bership behaviors in professional associations. Journal of Marketing, 64(3), 34–49.
Hani, U., Akter, S., Wickramasinghe, A., & Kattiyapornpong, U. (2021a). How does relationship quality
sustain the rich world’s poorest businesses? Journal of Business Research, 133, 297–308.
Hani, U., Wickramasinghe, A., & Kattiyapornpong, U. (2021b). Reviving social banking using relationship
quality dynamics in a developing country. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 29(7), 574–597.
Haron, R., Subar, N.A. and Ibrahim, K., 2020. Service quality of Islamic banks: satisfaction, loyalty and the
mediating role of trust. Islamic Economic Studies.
Hayes, A. F., & Krippendorff, K. (2007). Answering the call for a standard reliability measure for coding data.
Communication Methods and Measures, 1(1), 77–89.
Hazen, B. T., Boone, C. A., Ezell, J. D., & Jones-Farmer, L. A. (2014). Data quality for data science, predictive
analytics, and big data in supply chain management: An introduction to the problem and suggestions for
research and applications. International Journal of Production Economics, 154, 72–80.
Hienz, J. (2014). The future of data-driven innovation. US Chamber of Commerce Foundation.
Hollebeek, L. D., & Macky, K. (2019). Digital content marketing’s role in fostering consumer engagement,
trust, and value: Framework, fundamental propositions, and implications. Journal of Interactive Market-
ing, 45, 27–41.
Hossain, T. M. T., Akter, S., Kattiyapornpong, U., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2019). Multichannel integration quality:
A systematic review and agenda for future research. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 49,
154–163.
Huber, J.-A., & Funaro, D. (2018). How banks can manage operational risk. Retrieved from https://www.bain.
com/insights/how-banks-can-manage-operational-risk/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
995
Ismail, D., Alam, S. S., Hamid, R., & b. A. (2017). Trust, commitment, and competitive advantage in export
performance of SMEs. Gadjah Mada International Journal of Business, 19(1), 1–18.
Kamioka, T., & Tapanainen, T. (2014). Organizational use of big data and competitive advantage-exploration
of antecedents. PACIS(18th).
Kayyali, B., Knott, D., & Van Kuiken, S. (2013). The big-data revolution in US health care: Accelerating value
and innovation. Mc Kinsey & Company, 2(8), 1–13.
Kim, K.-Y., Manley, D. G., & Yang, H. (2006). Ontology-based assembly design and information sharing for
collaborative product development. Computer-Aided Design, 38(12), 1233–1250.
Kitchens, B., Dobolyi, D., Li, J., & Abbasi, A. (2018). Advanced customer analytics: Strategic value
through integration of relationship-oriented big data. Journal of Management Information Systems, 35(2),
540–574.
Krasnikov, A., Jayachandran, S., & Kumar, V. (2009). The impact of customer relationship management
implementation on cost and proﬁt efﬁciencies: Evidence from the us commercial banking industry.
Journal of Marketing, 73(6), 61–76. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.73.6.61
Kumar, N., Scheer, L. K., & Steenkamp, J.-B.E. (1995). The effects of supplier fairness on vulnerable resellers.
Journal of Marketing Research, 32(1), 54–65.
Lang,B.andColgate,M.,2003.Relationshipquality,onlinebankingandtheinformationtechnologygap.Inter-
national Journal of Bank Marketing.
Littler, D., Leverick, F., & Bruce, M. (1995). Factors affecting the process of collaborative product develop-
ment: A study of UK manufacturers of information and communications technology products. Journal of
Product Innovation Management: An International Publication of the Product Development and Man-
agement Association, 12(1), 16–32.
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Ahearne, M. (1998). Some possible antecedents and consequences of
in-role and extra-role salesperson performance. Journal of Marketing, 62(3), 87–98.
Mahajan, S. (2019). How Microﬁnance sector can leverage Big Data analytics for ﬁnancial inclusion. Business
Today, In.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of organizational trust. Academy
of Management Review, 20(3), 709–734.
McAfee, A., Brynjolfsson, E., Davenport, T. H., Patil, D. J., & Barton, D. (2012). Big data: The management
revolution. Harvard Business Review, 90(10), 60–68.
Mehta, K., Maretzki, A., & Semali, L. (2011). Trust, cell phones, social networks and agricultural entrepreneur-
ship in East Africa: A dynamic interdependence. African Journal of Food, Agriculture, Nutrition and
Development, 11(6), 5373–5388.
Menon, S. (2007). Micro-ﬁnance and women empowerment: A critical evaluation. ICFAI Journal of Public
Administration, 3(4), 49.
Meyer, M., & Zack, M. H. (1996). Te design and development of information products. Sloan Management
Review, 37(3), 43–59.
Moenaert, R. K., & Souder, W. E. (1990). An information transfer model for integrating marketing and
R&D personnel in new product development projects. Journal of Product Innovation Management: An
International Publication of the Product Development and Management Association, 7(2), 91–107.
Morabito, V. (2015). Big data and analytics. Strategic and organisational impacts.
Morgan, R. M., & Hunt, S. D. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of relationship marketing. Journal of
Marketing, 58(3), 20.
Mowday, R. T., Porter, L. W., & Steers, R. (1982). Organizational linkages: The psychology of commitment,
absenteeism, and turnover. Academic Press.
Nambiar, M. (2019). How big data can optimise the microﬁnance sector. Retrieved from https://www.
forbesindia.com/blog/ﬁnance/how-big-data-can-optimise-the-microﬁnance-sector/.
Nambisan, S. (2003). Information systems as a reference discipline for new product development. MIS Quar-
terly, pp. 1–18.
Neutzling, D. M., Land, A., Seuring, S., & do Nascimento, L. F. M. (2018). Linking sustainability-oriented
innovation to supply chain relationship integration. Journal of Cleaner Production, 172, 3448–3458.
Nyaga, G. N., & Whipple, J. M. (2011). Relationship quality and performance outcomes: Achieving a sus-
tainable competitive advantage. Journal of Business Logistics, 32(4), 345–360.
Olavarría-Jaraba, A., Cambra-Fierro, J. J., Centeno, E., & Vázquez-Carrasco, R. (2018). Relationship quality
as an antecedent of customer relationship proneness: A cross-cultural study between Spain and Mexico.
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 42, 78–87.
Palmatier, R. W., & Martin, K. D. (2019). The intelligent marketer’s guide to data privacy: The impact of big
data on customer trust. Springer.
Palmatier, R. W., & Steinhoff, L. (2019). Relationship marketing in the digital age. Routledge.
123

996
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
Porter, L. W., Steers, R. M., Mowday, R. T., & Boulian, P. V. (1974). Organizational commitment, job satis-
faction, and turnover among psychiatric technicians. Journal of Applied Psychology, 59(5), 603.
Ranjan, K. R., & Friend, S. B. (2020). An integrative framework of sales ecosystem well-being. Journal of
Personal Selling & Sales Management, 40(4), 234–250.
Ranjan, P. and Nayak, J.K., 2022. Examining the antecedents and consequences of pricing capability: Evidence
from SMEs. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing.
Ransbotham, S., & Kiron, D. (2017). Analytics as a source of business innovation. MIT Sloan Management
Review, 58(3).
Reichers, A. E. (1985). A review and reconceptualization of organizational commitment. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 10(3), 465–476.
Russom, P. (2011). Big data analytics. TDWI Best Practices Report, Fourth Quarter, 19(4), 1–34.
Rygielski, C., Wang, J. C., & Yen, D. C. (2002). Data mining techniques for customer relationship management.
Technology in Society, 24(4), 483–502.
Sanders, N. R. (2014). Big data driven supply chain management:A framework for implementing analytics
and turning information into intelligence. Pearson Education, New Jersey.
Sänger, J., Richthammer, C., Hassan, S., & Pernul, G. (2014). Trust and big data: a roadmap for research.
Paper presented at the 2014 25th international workshop on database and expert systems applications.
Schroeck, M., Shockley, R., Smart, J., Romero-Morales, D., & Tufano, P. (2012). Analytics: The real-world
use of big data. IBM Global Business Services, 12(2012), 1–20.
Shahbaz, M., Gao, C., Zhai, L., Shahzad, F., Abbas, A. & Zahid, R., (2020). Investigating the impact of big
data analytics on perceived sales performance: the mediating role of customer relationship management
capabilities. Complexity, 2020.
Shibin,K.T.,Dubey,R.,Gunasekaran,A.,Hazen,B.,Roubaud,D.,Gupta,S.,&Foropon,C.(2020).Examining
sustainable supply chain management of SMEs using resource based view and institutional theory. Annals
of Operations Research, 290(1), 301–326.
Sia, S.K., Soh, C. & Weill, P., (2016). How DBS Bank Pursued a Digital Business Strategy. MIS Quarterly
Executive, 15(2).
Sim, J., Saunders, B., Waterﬁeld, J., & Kingstone, T. (2018). Can sample size in qualitative research be
determined a priori? International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 21(5), 619–634.
Skinner, D., Tagg, C., & Holloway, J. (2000). Managers and research: The pros and cons of qualitative
approaches. Management Learning, 31(2), 163–179.
Smircich, L. (1983). Organizations as shared meanings. Organizational Symbolism, 55, 65.
Srivastava, R. K., Fahey, L., & Christensen, H. K. (2001). The resource-based view and marketing: The role
of market-based assets in gaining competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 27(6), 777–802.
Stone, D., & Wang, R. (2014). Deciding with data–How data-driven innovation is fuelling Australia’s economic
growth. Pricewaterhouse Coopers , Melbourne.
Straub, D., Boudreau, M. C., & Gefen, D. (2004). Validation guidelines for IS positivist research. Communi-
cations of the Association for Information Systems, 13(1), 24.
Tan, H. H., & Lim, A. K. (2009). trust in coworkers and trust in organizations. The Journal of Psychology,
143(1), 45–66.
Tichy, N. (1983). The essentials of strategic change management. Journal of Business Strategy, 3(4), 55–67.
Van Dijck, J. (2012). Facebook as a tool for producing sociality and connectivity. Television & New Media,
13(2), 160–176.
Von Hippel, E. (1998). Economics of product development by users: The impact of “sticky” local information.
Management Science, 44(5), 629–644.
Wahid, A. N. (1994). The Grameen Bank and Poverty alleviation in Bangladesh: Theory, Evidence and
Limitations Theory, Evidence and Limitations. American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 53(1),
1–15.
Wanner, J., & Janiesch, C. (2019). Big data analytics in sustainability reports: An analysis based on the
perceived credibility of corporate published information. Business Research, 12(1), 143–173.
Wernerfelt, B. (1984). A resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 5(2), 171–180.
Wharton. (2019). Grameen Foundation: Using Data as a Lever to Combat Poverty. Retrieved from https://
knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/grameen-foundation-using-data-lever-combat-poverty/.
White, H. C. (2012). Identity and control. Princeton University Press.
Wamba, S. F., Akter, S., Edwards, A., Chopin, G., & Gnanzou, D. (2015). How ‘big data’can make big impact:
Findings from a systematic review and a longitudinal case study. International Journal of Production
Economics, 165, 234–246.
Xiao, J., Wang, M., Jiang, B., & Li, J. (2018). A personalized recommendation system with combinational
algorithm for online learning. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 9(3), 667–677.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:971–997
997
Yousafzai, S. Y., Pallister, J. G., & Foxall, G. R. (2005). Strategies for building and communicating trust in
electronic banking: A ﬁeld experiment. Psychology and Marketing, 22(2), 181–201.
Zhan, Y., Tan, K. H., & Huo, B. (2019). Bridging customer knowledge to innovative product development: A
data mining approach. International Journal of Production Research, 57(20), 6335–6350.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123