TITLE: The great crypto crash in September 2018: why did the cryptocurrency market collapse?
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05575-0
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05575-0
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The great crypto crash in September 2018: why did
the cryptocurrency market collapse?
Viktor Manahov1
Received: 22 February 2022 / Accepted: 16 August 2023 / Published online: 12 September 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
The cryptocurrency crash on the 5th of September, 2018, resulted in price decreases in 95
of the 100 leading digital currencies. We obtained millisecond data of some of the more
prominent cryptocurrencies–bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin cash and eos–and some of the
smaller cryptocurrencies–neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk–that were most affected in the crash
and investigated what caused the digital market to collapse. We ﬁnd that the behaviour of the
more prominent cryptocurrencies and bitcoin, in particular, was the dominant factor behind
the crash. We also ﬁnd that smaller cryptocurrencies followed the behaviour of the larger ones
in the crash. Furthermore, our empirical ﬁndings show that the trading behaviour of cryptocur-
rency traders (CTs) did not trigger the digital market crash. We propose the introduction of
a single-cryptocurrency circuit breaker most prominent largest cryptocurrency–bitcoin–that
will halt trading during market disruptions.
Keywords Cryptocurrency · Herding behaviour · Market efﬁciency
1 Introduction
Cryptocurrencies have often been compared to the biggest ‘bubbles’ in history, such as
the Dutch Tulip mania of the seventeenth century, the Mississippi bubble of the eighteenth
century, the UK Canal and Railway mania of the nineteenth century, and the more recent
Dot-com bubble in 2000. The ﬁrst crash of the biggest cryptocurrency, bitcoin, occurred in
June 2011, when $8.75 million in bitcoin was stolen from the Mt. Gox
1 exchange through an
online attack using stolen passwords; this resulted in the bitcoin price crashing from $17.51
to $0.01 on the exchange. The second bitcoin crash was triggered by an incident in which
trading at Mt. Gox was suspended between the 11th of April 2013 and the 12th of April
1 Mt. Gox was a bitcoin exchange based in Japan. The trading venue was launched in July 2010; by 2013 and
into 2014 it was handling over 70% of all bitcoin transactions worldwide, as the largest bitcoin intermediary
and the world’s leading bitcoin exchange. In February 2014, Mt. Gox suspended trading, closed its website
and exchange service, and ﬁled for bankruptcy protection from creditors. A year later, the company began
liquidation proceedings. Mt. Gox announced that approximately 850,000 bitcoins belonging to customers and
the company were missing and likely stolen, an amount valued at more than $450 million at the time.
B Viktor Manahov
viktor.manahov@york.ac.uk
1
School for Business and Society, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK
123

580
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
2013 for a ‘market cool-down’, facilitating a sharp sell-off. As a result, the value of a single
bitcoin fell to a low of $55.59 after the resumption of trading. Mt. Gox’s decision to suspend
all bitcoin withdrawals on the 7th of February 2014 and to shut down its trading activities on
the 25th of February 2014 led to the third crash (Cheung, Roca and Su, 2015). The next bitcoin
bubble occurred between December 2017 and December 2018, when the price of the largest
cryptocurrency decreased by more than 83%, following a massive increase in value-from
$1,000 at the beginning of 2017 to $20,000 in December of the same year. The price of the
second-largest cryptocurrency by market capitalisation, ethereum, decreased signiﬁcantly,
registering a monthly loss of 56% in August 2015 and 45% in September 2015, following the
launch of the cryptocurrency live release, ethereum frontier, in late July 2015 (DiGeorgia,
2018).
On the 5th of September 2018, the value of 95 of the top 100 cryptocurrencies decreased
over 24 h, creating a massive sell-off period known as the Great Crypto Crash. During
this cryptocurrency meltdown, the value of bitcoin fell by more than 12% to approximately
$6,450. Ethereum experienced an even more signiﬁcant decrease of 19%, while ripple was
downmorethan12%andbitcoincash,eos,neo,andomgdecreasedbymorethan20%(Meyer,
2018). At the same time, the MVIS CryptoCompare Digital Assets 10 Index experienced a
decrease of 80% from January 2018 to September 2018. This crash surpassed even Nasdaq
Composite Index decline of 78% after the dot-com bubble in 2000.
There are several likely reasons behind the Great Crypto Crash. First, Goldman Sachs
abandoned its plans to launch a dedicated cryptocurrency trading desk. The investment bank
has been a signiﬁcant institution related to cryptocurrency trading, having ﬁnanced the ‘bit-
coin start-up circle’ in 2015 and has expressed interest in launching a crypto trading desk
(Meyer, 2018). Second, on the day of the crash, a ‘whale’2 with no previously recorded
transactions transferred more than 22,100 bitcoins out of the wallet, leading the market to
collapse in price because the support was insufﬁcient to handle this move (CoinSwitch, 2018a,
2018b, 2018c, 2018d, 2018e, 2018f). Third, more than 111,000 bitcoins (worth more than
$700 million) were transferred to the wallets of different trading venues to sell them on the
black-market platform Silk Road (Schroeder, 2018).
Therefore, the cryptocurrency market participants would ask the central question: What
caused the crash? Also, an important question concerns how cryptocurrency traders (CTs)
behave during signiﬁcant and temporary selling pressure in digital markets. Finance theory
suggests that a period of substantial and temporary selling pressure can generate a market
collapse even when a fundamental shock is not present (Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun,
2017).
To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the ﬁrst investigation of the crash. We
obtained millisecond data of the ﬁve largest and ﬁve smaller most affected cryptocurrencies
in the crash. We investigate what caused these cryptocurrencies to decline during a single
2 Whales represent people or a group of people working together to hold a large fraction of any particular
cryptocurrency; such people can use this to their advantage to manipulate the price of that coin. Whales often
deploy a strategy known as ‘rinse and repeat’, which is very proﬁtable to a whale if executed at the right
time. The whale usually begins selling lower than the market rate, which in turn causes cryptocurrency market
participants to start selling off their digital money in panic. Then, the whale will re-purchase when the price
of the coin reaches a new low level. This process is repeated to accumulate more wealth, more coins, and
more control over that particular coin. Another strategy that whales use to manipulate cryptocurrency prices
is by deploying buy and sell walls. If the cryptocurrency price decreases, investors will usually purchase at a
lower price and sell when it reaches a higher price. A whale can impose either buy or sell walls and closely
monitor the price when it hits exactly the anticipated price. Subsequently, the wall vanishes because a whale
has cancelled their large buy or sell order.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
581
trading day. More speciﬁcally, we examine the implications of bitcoin activities on the rest
of the market to shed light on what triggered the cryptocurrency crash.
Our contributions are threefold. First, we observe that the entire cryptocurrency market
experienced herding behaviour when prices of the larger cryptocurrencies decreased on the
5th of September 2018.
We also observe that bitcoin could facilitate the herding phenomenon on its own, and the
other cryptocurrencies followed the behaviour of bitcoin. Moreover, we ﬁnd that the more
prominent cryptocurrencies–such as bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin cash, and eos–drove
the remainder of the market during the crash. Therefore, we conclude that the behaviour of
the more signiﬁcant digital currencies-and bitcoin in particular-was the driving factor behind
the collapse of digital markets.
Second, we deploy several state-space models to investigate whether the activity of cryp-
tocurrency traders (CTs) caused the crash. Our empirical ﬁndings show that the trading
behaviour of CTs did not trigger the cryptocurrency crash. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that sig-
niﬁcantly more information is incorporated into the bid prices of the ten cryptocurrencies
under investigation. An examination of the risk-bearing ability of intermediaries during the
market collapse reveals that changes in inventories of CTs are statistically signiﬁcantly
related to contemporaneous and lagged changes in cryptocurrency prices. The regression
results indicate that this relationship did not change when cryptocurrency prices signif-
icantly decreased during the crash. We also examine market quality before, during, and
after the crash, including bid-ask spreads and quote depth measures. We ﬁnd that bid-ask
spreads increased, whereas quote depth decreased after the crash. Overall, the deteriora-
tion in market quality can be linked directly to the crash, as it could have had the potential
to negatively affect investor conﬁdence, cryptocurrency market participation, and liquid-
ity.
Third, we propose the introduction of single-currency circuit breakers or limit up-limit
down trading halts (price limit rule). A single-cryptocurrency circuit breaker for the most
major currency–bitcoin–will halt trading during market disruptions like the cryptocurrency
crash. Similar to equity markets, we suggest that a trading halt can be triggered after a change
of 5% on either side of the average reference price is estimated using the average price over
the previous ﬁve minutes of trading. Therefore, trading can be halted for ﬁve minutes when
a bitcoin price decline of more than 5% below the average price of the cryptocurrency over
the immediately preceding ﬁve-minute trading interval occurs.3 This should also be the case
for a corresponding price increase.
MacDonnell (2014) was among the ﬁrst to investigate the 2013 bitcoin price crash. This
study uses weekly data covering the period from July 2010 until August 2013 and employs
Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA) methodologies and the Log Periodic Power Law
(LPPL) models to predict crashes. It can be noted that the LPPL model successfully predicted
the crash that took place in December 2013. Similarly, Cheah and Fry (2015) obtained daily
closing prices for the Bitcoin Coindesk Index from July 2010 to July 2014 to detect the
existence of bubbles. The empirical results reveal that a bubble exists in the bitcoin market
and therefore rejects the concept of cryptocurrency market efﬁciency. Like Cheah and Fry
(2015), Donier and Bouchaud’s (2015) study reveals that when the bitcoin price is clearly
out of bounds-as it was in the pre-April 2013 period-the market is undoubtedly in a bubble
state. The authors also show that the three liquidity measures under examination are highly
correlated and do indeed predict the amplitude of a cryptocurrency market crash triggered by
3 Gronwald (2019) used bitcoin daily data from Mt.Gox and Bitstamp and deployed a number of linear
and nonlinear GARCH models to observe that bitcoin price dynamics are strongly inﬂuenced by extreme
price.movements.
123

582
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
a signiﬁcant sell order imbalance.4 Bouri, Jalkh, Mornár, and Roubaud (2017) obtained daily
bitcoin and commodity indices data from July 2010 to December 2015, and they demonstrate
that bitcoin hedge and safe-haven properties against commodities and energy commodities
are only present in the pre-crash period, while the corresponding post-crash period acts as a
diversiﬁer.
Several studies have investigated the bitcoin price crash of 2017. Yaya, Ogbonna, and
Olubusoye (2019) collected daily data on thirteen cryptocurrencies between August 2015
and November 2018. Their work observed higher persistence of price shocks after the crash,
which speculative actions can explain among cryptocurrency traders. The authors also wit-
ness the interdependence of bitcoin on other cryptocurrencies and evidence of non-mean
reversions, suggesting the existence of chances of further price decreases in cryptocurren-
cies. Fruehwirt, Hochﬁlzer, Weydemann, and Roberts (2020) collected data from January
2017 to April 2018 from the Bittrex exchange to conclude that the events in 2017 resulted
in a fundamental change, leading to the instability of the cryptocurrency system. Similar
to Yaya, Ogbonna, and Olubusoye (2019), this study also reports increased interdependen-
cies of cryptocurrency time series. Eom (2020) added a Korean bitcoin dataset to the most
extensively used US data between January 2015 and September 2018 to show that funda-
mental uncertainty generates more dispersion in heterogeneous beliefs among investors and
leads to speculative bubbles. Using a somewhat different data collection technique, Corbet,
Lucey, and Yarovaya (2018) sourced data from documented APIs (application program-
ming interfaces) for the period between the 9th of January 2009 and the 9th of November
2017 (3227 data observations in total) to conclude that there are periods of apparent bub-
ble behaviour, with bitcoin almost certainly in a bubble phase at the time of writing their
paper. Bianchetti, Ricci, and Scaringi (2018) employ daily data of bitcoin and ethereum cov-
ering the period from December 2016 until January 2018 to detect bubbles in their prices.
Different estimations reveal that a bitcoin bubble occurs in mid-December 2017 and the ﬁrst
half of January 2018. In terms of ethereum, bubble behaviour appeared mid-June 2017 and
a weaker bubble sign was detected around January 12, 2018. Cretarola and Figà-Talamanca
(2020) employ a continuous time stochastic model for bitcoin dynamics. They provide evi-
dence that bubbles in digital instruments are connected with the correlation between the
market attention factor on bitcoin and bitcoin returns being above a non-negative threshold.
Hence, market exuberance is the driving force behind bitcoin bubbles. Wheatley, Sornette,
Huber, Reppen, and Gantner (2018) implement a generalised Metcalfe’s law in combina-
tion with the Log Periodic Power Law Singularity (LPPLS) model to forecast bubbles and
crashes in bitcoin markets. This study documents that four bubbles appeared in the bit-
coin market, varying heights and lengths. These bubbles took place on the following dates:
28th of August 2012, 10th of April 2013, 5th of December 2013 and 28th of December
2017. Shu and Zhu (2020) support the study of Wheatley, Sornette, Huber, Reppen, and
Gantner (2018) by presenting evidence that an adaptive multilevel time series detection
methodology based on the LPPLS model and high-frequency data can effectively detect and
forecast bubbles. In another vein, Xiong, Liu, and Zhao (2019) justify that bubble estimation
based on the production cost by applying the LPPL model shows good forecasting abilities.
They predict that the next large bitcoin bubble is expected to occur in the second half of
2020.
Using higher data frequency, Kalyvas, Papakyriakou, Sakkas, and Urquhart (2020) employ
tick-level data of bitcoin from September 2011 to December 2018 to examine the drivers
4 While Donier and Bouchaud (2015) examine the ‘order −book liquidity’, the ‘impact liquidity’ and the
‘theoretical liquidity’, Brauneis, Mestel, Riordan and Theissen (2021) demonstrate that low frequency liquidity
measures are relatively good estimates of actual liquidity in cryptocurrency markets.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
583
behind bitcoin price crash risks after taking into account two distinct elements–economic
uncertainty and behavioural factors. The authors report that economic uncertainty shows a
negative and signiﬁcant association with bitcoin price risk, implying that the crash risk of
bitcoin is low when economic uncertainty is high.
Shu and Zhu (2020) implement an adaptive multilevel time series detection methodol-
ogy and two levels of bitcoin price data–hourly and half-hourly–to examine the existence
of bubbles and monitor the development of the bubbles in the bitcoin price sequence
between October 2017 and June 2018. Their analysis shows that the adaptive multilevel
time series detection methodology has an outstanding performance in bubble detection and
crash forecast, even if the bubble exists in a short period of time. Chaim and Laurini (2019)
analyse high-frequency ﬁve-minute bitcoin data from January 2013 to September 2018 and
conﬁrm the existence of a bubble in bitcoin prices between early 2013 and the middle of
2014, but, interestingly, not in late 2017. Geuder, Kinateder report a similar ﬁnding, and
Wagner (2019), observes that bubble behaviour is a common and reoccurring characteristic
of bitcoin prices in daily data from March 2016 to September 2018. However, a critical time
point is identiﬁed as the 6th of December 2017, after which neither testing model provides
evidence of ongoing bubble behaviour.
Some other studies have contributed to the topic by examining broader datasets that include
different cryptocurrencies. Bouri et al. (2019) used daily data of bitcoin, ripple, ethereum,
litecoin,nem,dash,andstellarfromAugust2015untilDecember2017tostudyco-explosivity
in their markets. On the one hand, bitcoin’s explosivity is found to lower ripple’s explosivity.
On the other hand, ethereum’s explosivity is reinforced by bitcoin, ripple, nem, and dash,
while it receives a negative impact from stellar. In terms of litecoin, there is evidence that
bitcoin, ripple, nem, dash, and stellar facilitate its bubbling. It can be noted that contrary to
our empirical ﬁndings, lower capitalisation currencies prove to be inﬂuential towards larger
ones. In a similar study, Cagli (2019) examines explosive behaviour in the market values of
bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, litecoin, stellar, nem, dash, and monero by collecting daily data
for the period between September 2015 and January 2018. Empirical evidence suggests
that all cryptocurrencies except for nem present explosive behaviour and exhibit signiﬁcant
pairwise comovement linkages. Chen and Hafner (2019) are the ﬁrst to examine bubble
behaviour in the CRIX index by observing locally volatile price dynamics comparable to
speculative bubbles. More recently, Enoksen et al. (2020) detected multiple bubble periods
(particularly in 2017 and early 2018) in eight different cryptocurrencies. The authors also
ﬁnd that higher volatility, trading volume and transactions positively relate to bubbles across
cryptocurrencies.
Based on much academic research, Kyriazis, Papadamou, and Corbet (2020) survey the
academicliteratureconcerningtheformationofpricingbubblesinthecryptocurrencymarkets
and suggest that bitcoin appears to have been in a bubble phase since June 2015, while
ethereum, nem, stellar, ripple, litecoin, and dash have possessed bubble-related characteristics
since September 2015.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Sect. 2 comprises the cryptocurrency
data description and data management; Sect. 3 represents the empirical ﬁndings; Sect. 4
shows the robustness checks; and Sect. 5 concludes the paper.
123

584
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
2 Cryptocurrency data description and data management
2.1 Cryptocurrency data description
We obtained millisecond data for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin cash, eos, neo, nem, omg,
tezos and lisk (described in Appendix B) between the 26th of August and 15th of September,
2018 from Kaiko5 (Kaiko.com). Kaiko also provides data for approximately 5,000 crypto-
to-crypto and crypto-to-ﬁat currency pairs traded on 28 different exchanges: Btcbox, BTCC,
Bittrex, Bitstamp, BTCe, Bitﬁnex, Bithumb, Bit-Z, bitFlyer, BTC38, BitMEX, Binance,
Coinbase, CEX.io, Gatecoin, Gemini, Ethﬁnex, HitBTC, Huobi, Itbit, Kraken, MtGox,
OKEx, OkCoin, Poloniex, Quoine, Yobit and Zaif. Kaiko receives the data by querying
Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) provided by the above trading venues. The data
is stamped at the millisecond timeframe (reported in Universal Coordinated Time) and pre-
sented in the form of a different series of comma-separated ﬁles, with each row recording
the trade and user ID, transaction type (buy or sell), cryptocurrency volume, transaction fees
and a time stamp. In addition, the dataset speciﬁes whether trading orders are initiated by the
buyer or the seller and, more speciﬁcally, if they are aggressive bids or asks. This particular
information is essential for our empirical analysis.
We perform a data-cleaning procedure by aggregating trades following their trade IDs.
We remove transactions where bid or ask orders are missing, those that are duplicated and
those that have the same identiﬁer for buy and sell orders. Also, we only consider US dollar-
denominated trades.
2.2 Cryptocurrency data management
We follow Meade (2002) to model the statistical properties of our millisecond dataset by
implementingthefollowinglinearARMA-GARCHmodel(1−φ1B−...−φp B p)(xt −θ0) 

1 −θ1B... −θq Bq
∈t, where V (∈t |t−1)  σ 2
t ; σ 2
t  a0 + a1 ∈2
t−1 +bσ 2
t−1, t denotes
theavailableinformationattimeperiodt,whiletheStudent’stv randomvariableisrepresented
by (∈t /σt). We use the GARCH aspect of the above model to detect the time-varying
variance.
The very high presence of no price changes is one of the statistical properties of the
millisecond cryptocurrency data. We implemented Meade’s (2002) empirical procedure to
account for this cryptocurrency market inactivity. We modiﬁed the Student’s t distribution6
for the standardised residuals and made their density conditional on market activity:
f
 εt
σt
|δt


⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
p0 gv

εt
σt

1 −p0
i f δt1
i f δt0
⎫
⎪⎬
⎪⎭
(1)
5 We use proper traded prices to execute the topics under our investigation. Alexander and Dakos (2019)
suggest that it is very important to use traded data from crypto trading venues rather than data from coin −
ranking sites when examining market efﬁciency, hedging and portfolio optimisation and trading in cryptocur-
rency markets.
6 The Student’s t distribution represent one–parameter family of curves. The Student’s t distribution is usually
used in hypothesis examination with respect to the population mean in cases when the population standard
deviation is unknown.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
585
where gv(·) represents the Student’s t density function7; (εt/σt) is the Student’s tv random
variable; p0 denotes the population proportion and δt measures market inactivity as follows:
δt 

1
i f |xt| + |xt−1|  0
0
otherwise

(2)
If δt  1, the forecast ˆxt+i|t  0 for i  1, 2, ...
The above procedure aims to determine periods of market inactivity and detect the kurtosis
and heteroskedasticity when the cryptocurrency market is active.
Considering the large dataset size, another critical statistical issue is Lindley’s (1957)
paradox. This paradox could lead to the overstatement of statistical signiﬁcance and a ten-
dency to reject the null hypothesis, even when the posterior odds favour the null. Connolly
(1989) addressed Lindley’s paradox by developing a procedure for estimating the critical val-
ues for t-statistics and F-statistics as a function of the sample size and degrees of freedom.
Consequently, the estimated critical values provide a crucial point for when posterior odds
favour the alternative hypothesis over the null.
However, in a later study, Szakmary and Keifer (2004) pointed out that the critical t-values
equation in the study of Connolly (1989) ‘contains an obvious typo and should read’:
t∗

(T −k)

T 1/T −1
0.5
(3)
where T represents the sample size and k measures the number of estimated parameters.8
We conduct large-sample adjustments to the critical t-values to eliminate the statistical sig-
niﬁcance overstatement. When the absolute value of a regression t-statistic is greater than
the t* value of Eq. 3, its absolute value is reduced by the adjustment t*. The null hypothesis
is rejected when the estimated standard statistic exceeds the critical value of t*.
3 Empirical ﬁndings
3.1 Cryptocurrencies’behaviour during the crash.
Figure 1 shows the decline in the price of bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin cash, eos, neo,
nem, omg, tezos and lisk on the 5th of September, 2018, and Table 1 represents the descriptive
statistics of returns for the ten cryptocurrencies under investigation.
Table 1 shows that the distribution of returns for the ten cryptocurrencies is negatively
skewed, indicating that signiﬁcant negative price changes are more likely than large positive
price changes on the 5th of September, 2018. The kurtosis is signiﬁcantly higher than three
for all cryptocurrencies, implying a fat-tailed distribution of returns.
The Jarque-Bera statistics suggest that the null hypothesis of normally distributed returns
is rejected for all ﬁnancial instruments.
7 Density function represents a statistical articulation illustrating the likelihood of a series of outcomes for a
discrete variable, such as a digital currency.
8 Therefore, we have taken Szakmary and Keifer’s (2004) argument into account and presented Eq. 3 as
suggested in their study. The T values for the ten cryptocurrencies are as follows: 17,258 observations for
bitcoin; 12,366 for ethereum; 9,812 for ripple; 8,799 for bitcoin cash; 6,073 for eos; 2,277 for neo; 2,315 for
nem; 2,005 for omg; 1,974 for tezos and 1,244 for lisk. K represents the number of parameters to be estimated,
allocated 0 and 1 for the alternative and null hypotheses.
123

586
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
We construct an equally-weighted market portfolio to examine the behaviour of cryp-
tocurrencies in comparison to the market consensus:
C M Rm,t 
N
i1 ri,t
N
(4)
where N measures the number of cryptocurrencies;C M Rm,t represents the cryptocurrency
market return; and ri,t measures each cryptocurrency’s daily return. We estimate each cryp-
tocurrency’s daily return as:
ri,t  (Pt −Pt−1)
Pt−1
(5)
where Pt denotes the cryptocurrency price at time t.
Since the main reasons for the cryptocurrency crash are mostly related to bitcoin, we
ﬁrst examine the effect of the more prominent cryptocurrencies on the rest of the market.
Similar to Chiang and Zheng (2010), we divide cryptocurrency market returns to differentiate
asymmetric herding behaviour in cases when the entire market, including bitcoin, is up or
down:
CSADm,t  α + β1(1 −D)rm,t + β2Drm,t + β3(1 −D)r2
m,t + β4Dr2
m,t + ut
(6)
where CSADm,t measures the cross-sectional absolute deviation of returns; (1 −D) and D
are dummy variables equal to 1 when rm,t ≥0 and rm,t < 0, respectively; rm,t represents the
cross-sectional average of the N returns at t; and r2
m,t is the cross-sectional average market
returns squared term.9
The regression results of CSADm,t on market returns are reported in Table 2 (Panel B) and
suggest that the entire cryptocurrency market experiences herding behaviour when prices are
decreasing–the coefﬁcient (D)r2
m,t is negative and signiﬁcant.
We also observe a signiﬁcant negative value when examining the generalised form
r2
m,t(Table 2, Panel A). This ﬁnding is consistent with several other studies. Leclair (2018)
uses ﬁve-minute data on the 12 most popular cryptocurrencies and presents signiﬁcant evi-
dence of increasing herding behaviour in the cryptocurrency markets. Bouri et al. (2019)
perform a rolling-window analysis with the daily closing prices of 14 leading cryptocurren-
cies from 2013 to 2018 and observe signiﬁcant time-varying herding behaviour, mostly driven
by the uncertainty of economic policy. Vidal-Tomás, Ibánes and Farinós (2018) obtained daily
data from 65 digital currencies from January, 2015 to December, 2017 and cross-sectional
standard deviation of returns as a measure of herding dispersion to analyse the existence of
herding behaviour in cryptocurrency markets. This study shows that the most minor cryp-
tocurrencies are herding with the largest ones, and speculators are making decisions based on
the performance of the leading digital currencies. Poyser (2018) obtained daily closing prices
of the 100 top cryptocurrencies and detected the presence of signiﬁcant herding behaviour.
More recently, Giudici and Polinesi (2021) suggest that bitcoin exchange prices are positively
related and, among them, the largest exchanges, such as Bitstamp, drive the prices. King and
Koutmos (2021) documented that some cryptocurrency markets show evidence of herding
behaviours, while in other markets, the authors show evidence of contrarian-type behaviours.
9 In Appendix C, we explain both the linear and the non −linear relationship between the cross −sectional
absolute deviation of returns (CSAD) and the cryptocurrency market return (CMR). We also provide further
explanations on the relationship between the CMR and rm,t.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
587
To investigate whether the cryptocurrency market is behaving in the same way as bitcoin,
we compute the following regression for a market without bitcoin:
(7)
CSADwb,t  α + β1 (1 −D)rwb,t + β2Drwb,t + β3 (1 −D)r2
wb,t
+ β4Dr2
wb,t + β5 (1 −D)r2
b,t + β6Dr2
b,t + ut
where CSADwb,t measures the cross-sectional absolute deviation of returns without bit-
coin, using the subscript wb; (1 −D)rwb,t, Drwb,t, (1 −D)r2
wb,t, and Dr2
wb,t represent the
variables without bitcoin; and (1 −D)r2
b,t and Dr2
b,t are the variables with bitcoin included
(Vidal-Tomás, Ibánes and Farinós, 2018).
The regression results of CSADwb,t on market returns differentiating between bitcoin and
therestofthecryptocurrencymarket(presentedinTable3)suggestthatothercryptocurrencies
follow the behaviour of bitcoin. This is evident by the signiﬁcant negative coefﬁcients of both
(1 −D)r2
b,t and (D)r2
b,t. Moreover, the cryptocurrency market without bitcoin experiences
herding behaviour when prices of the ﬁnancial instruments under investigation are decreas-
ing–the coefﬁcient (D)r2
wb,t is negative and signiﬁcant. We also observe that the weight of
bitcoin in the equally weighted market portfolio increased from −0.8266 for the entire mar-
ket, (D)r2
m,t in Table 2, Panel B, to −0.5725 for the market without bitcoin, (D)r2
wb,t in
Table 3. This important ﬁnding implies that bitcoin can create the herding phenomenon by
itself and that the other cryptocurrencies, therefore, followed the behaviour of bitcoin on the
5th of September, 2018, to trigger the crash. This ﬁnding is in line with Yaya, Ogbonna and
Olubusoye (2019) and Fruehwirt, Hochﬁlzer, Weydemann and Roberts (2020) who observe
interdependence of bitcoin on other popular cryptocurrencies in the 2107 bitcoin price crash
but opposite to Bouri et al. (2019) who report that lower capitalisation currencies prove to
be inﬂuential towards larger ones.
We next investigate whether the smaller cryptocurrencies affected in the crash behave in
the same way as the larger ones by dividing the dataset into two sub-samples. The ﬁrst sub-
sample includes the more prominent cryptocurrencies, while the second sub-sample consists
of the smaller ones. We compute the following regression:
(8)
CSADs,t  α + β1 (1 −D)rs,t + β2Drs,t + β3 (1 −D)r2
s,t + β4Dr2
s,t
+ β5CSADl,t + β6 (1 −D)r2
l,t + β7Dr2
l,t + ut
where the s subscript in CSADs,t, (1 −D)rs,t, Drs,t, (1 −D)r2
s,t and Dr2
s,t denotes a sub-
market with the smaller cryptocurrencies, while the l denotes a sub-market with the larger
ones. This model enables the examination of the more minor cryptocurrency behaviour to
identify–whether they follow the mean return of their sub-market

rs,t

or the mean return
of the larger ones

rl,t

.
Table 4 shows that the coefﬁcients of (1 −D)r2
l,t and Dr2
l,t are both negative and signif-
icant, indicating that the larger digital currencies are driving the remainder of the market.
In addition, the coefﬁcient of CSADl,t is positive and signiﬁcant, highlighting the dominant
inﬂuence of the larger cryptocurrency return dispersions in the digital market. Hence, the
driving factor behind the crash is the behaviour of the more prominent cryptocurrencies. At
the same time, the mean return of the more minor virtual currencies is related to the dynamics
of the market to a lesser extent. This is conﬁrmed by the insigniﬁcant and positive coefﬁcients
of (1 −D)r2
s,t and (D)r2
s,t.
While Banerjee (1992) and Yao et al. (2014) explain this with the relatively limited infor-
mation available about the smaller stocks in traditional ﬁnancial markets, Nguyen et al.
(2020) suggest that bitcoin and litecoin facilitate tail risk when markets are bullish and
123

588
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
ethereum and ethereum classic are the signiﬁcant drivers of tail risk in bearish markets. More
recently, Zhang et al. (2021) demonstrated a positive cross-sectional relation between down-
side risk and future returns in the cryptocurrency market in both portfolio-level analyses and
cryptocurrency-level cross-sectional regressions. However, another driver of price crashes
could be the impact of operational risk and the related losses, as documented by Giudici and
Bilotta (2004), who demonstrate that Bayesian networks represent a valid model for measur-
ing and managing operational risks. In a related study, Fantazzini et al. (2008) implemented
copula distributions to model high dimensional operational risks more ﬂexibly, including
partial dependence.
Our empirical ﬁndings align with the existing literature on the interconnectedness in
the cryptocurrency markets. Fry and Cheah (2016) examine cryptocurrency market crashes
and demonstrate that in the period of the negative bubble, there is a spillover effect from
ripple to bitcoin. Ji, Bouri, Lau and Roubaud (2019) investigated interconnectedness in six
prominent cryptocurrencies and reported that bitcoin and litecoin are the main drivers of
connected cryptocurrency returns, while Antonakakis et al. (2019) examine the transmission
mechanism in nine major cryptocurrencies and shows that ethereum has recently become the
leading transmitting cryptocurrency. However, bitcoin maintains its inﬂuencing role in the
market.
3.2 The activity of CTs and market quality before, during and after the crash.
To investigate whether the activity of CTs triggers the crash, we examine the trading direction
relative to permanent price changes and transitory pricing errors of a state space model. When
CTs trading is orientated in the opposite direction of the permanent pricing error (negatively
correlated with the permanent pricing error) and oriented in the direction of the transitory
pricing error (positively correlated with the transitory pricing error), we can conclude that
CTs facilitated the crash. In contrast, when CTs trading is orientated in the direction of
the permanent pricing error (positively correlated with the permanent pricing error) and
oriented in the opposite direction to the transitory pricing error (negatively correlated with
the transitory pricing error), we can conclude that CTs did not trigger the crash.
The state space model of the cryptocurrencies can be decomposed into two distinguished
parts–permanent and transitory constituents:
pi,t  mi,t + si,t
(9)
where pi,t represents the (log) mid quote (the average of the bid and ask quote) at a time t
for a ﬁnancial instrument i; mi,t is the permanent component of a martingale type-mi,t 
mi,t−1 + wi,t with an innovative element wi,t included in the permanent price component;
and si,t represents the transitory price component.
We develop two different state space models to examine the implications of CTs activity
on the crash. The ﬁrst model looks all trading activity denoted CT sN ET while the second
model analyses the demand and supply components of CTs denoted as CT s D and CT sS.
We compute the aggregate model as:
wi,t  kall
i

CT s
N ET
i,t
+ μi,t
(10)
where 
CT s
N ET
i,t
is the surprise innovation factor in CT sN ET , which is the residual of an
autoregressive model used to eliminate autocorrelation. We implement the Kalman ﬁlter
where cryptocurrency price changes,CT sN ET ,CT s D and CT sS are non-zero, in order to
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
589
estimate the state space model for each digital currency in a trading day for the entire sample
period. Table 5 shows the empirical results of the CT sN ET related to the permanent price
component of the state space model for each ﬁnancial instrument and the overall space model.
Table 6 represents the empirical ﬁndings related to the transitory price component of the state
space model for each cryptocurrency and the overall space model. We observe that all space
models listed in the last row of Table 5 are positively correlated with the permanent price
component.
We also observe that all state space models in the last row in Table 6 negatively correlated
with the transitory price component. Therefore, CTs trading is orientated in the direction of
the permanent pricing error and the opposite direction of the transitory pricing error. These
important ﬁndings imply that the activity of CTs did not trigger the cryptocurrency crash.
We estimate the values of k and ψ in basis points per $1,000,000 traded. The value of 0.85
for the overall k coefﬁcient in Table 5 indicates that $1,000,000 of positive surprise order
ﬂow (bid minus ask orders) corresponds to a 0.85 basis points increase in the permanent price
component.
The aggregate proportion of permanent price variance

kN ET ∗σ

CT sN ET 2 estimated
at 19.76 basis points is also positively correlated with overall CT sN ET order ﬂow. The
negative values of ψ coefﬁcients in the transitory price component in Table 6 suggest that
CTs trade in the opposite direction of the pricing errors, and therefore the activity of CTs did
not trigger the crash. Furthermore, we employ a disaggregated state space model to examine
the individual implications of bid and ask cryptocurrency trading orders on the crash. Table 7
shows that CTs bid and ask orders are positively correlated (kbid and kask values are positive
in all ten cryptocurrencies) with price changes in the permanent price component of the
state space model. The positive values of kask and kbid coefﬁcients suggest that trading is
conducted in the direction of the permanent pricing errors and therefore did not cause the
crash.
At the same time, we ﬁnd a negative relation between ψbid, ψask and the transitory
price component across all ten cryptocurrencies (Table 8), implying that CTsbid and CTsask
trading orders follow the opposite direction of the transitory component of the state space
model and therefore did not trigger the crash. A direct comparison between CTsbid and
CTsask trading orders reveals more minor pricing errors for the CTsbid orders, suggesting that
signiﬁcantly more information is incorporated into the bid prices of the ten cryptocurrencies.
Omrane, Guesmi, Qianru and Saadi (2021) demonstrate that U.S. macroeconomic news
releases exhibit signiﬁcant inﬂuence on jumps in bitcoin and ethereum. However, some
studies relate crashes to the risk-bearing ability of intermediaries.10 We further examine the
activity of CTs during the cryptocurrency crash by looking at the risk-bearing ability of CTs.
We do that by reviewing the minute-by-minute co-movement between the inventory changes
10 For example, Huang and Wang (2009, 2010) design an equilibrium model in which market crashes endoge-
nously occur when an unexpected excess of sell orders overcome the insufﬁcient risk −bearing ability of
market makers. More recently, Ait−Sahalia and Seglam (2017) relates increases in volatility of prices to tighter
inventory bonds for high −frequency traders, highlighting their ability to accommodate increased volatility
risk. Alomari et al. (2021) investigate the effect of news and social media sentiments on the stock and bond
market volatility and their return dynamic correlation and report that that news sentiments have more pro-
nounced effects on volatility while social media show stronger impacts on the correlation. Ho, Shi and Zhang
(2013) conﬁrm the signiﬁcant impact of ﬁrm −speciﬁc news sentiment on intraday volatility persistence with
ﬁrm −speciﬁc news sentiment responsible for a greater proportion of overall volatility persistence. Cerchiello
and Nicola (2018) implement the Structural Topic Model (STM) to examine the possible evolution of topics
obtained from Reuters and Bloomberg and to investigate a causal effect in the diffusion of the news measured
by the Granger causality test. The authors report that the temporal dynamics and the spatial differentiation
play a role in the news contagion.
123

590
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
of CTs and cryptocurrency prices. Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi and Tuzun (2017) suggest that
intermediaries adjust inventories according to price decreases.
In cases when the risk-bearing ability of intermediaries is overcome, they are somewhat
reluctant to hold more inventory without signiﬁcant price compromise. To investigate the
relationship between inventory changes and changes in cryptocurrency prices on the 5th of
September, 2018, we adopt an empirically similar approach to Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi and
Tuzun (2017):
yt  α + φ × yt−1 + δ × yt−1 +
15

i0

βi × pt−1/0.25

+ εt
(11)
where yt denotes the inventories of CTs; yt measures the inventory changes of CTs for
each minute; p measures price changes between the high-low midpoint of minute t–1 and
the high-low midpoint of minute t to accommodate the bid-ask bounce in prices. Similar to
Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi and Tuzun (2017), we convert cryptocurrency price changes into the
number of ticks by dividing p by 0.25. We estimate the t-statistics using the White (1980)
standard errors. Table 9 shows that the regression coefﬁcient of the lagged inventory level is
negative, reﬂecting the mean-reversion of CTs inventory levels. We observe that changes in
CTs inventories are positively related to lagged and contemporaneous price changes up to ten
lags. CTs inventory changes become negatively associated with cryptocurrency price changes
between the 11th and the 15th lagged price changes. This ﬁnding is in line with Kirilenko,
Kyle, Samadi and Tuzun (2017) but opposite to Hendershott and Seasholes (2007), who
documented an entirely negative relationship between the inventories of market makers and
price changes. We also investigate whether the observed statistical relationship between CTs
inventory changes and cryptocurrency price changes signiﬁcantly changed during the crash
by computing the following regressions:
yt  α + φyt−1 + δyt−1 +
15

i0

βi × pt−i/0.25

+ P D
t

αD + φDyt−1 + δDyt−1 +
15

i0

β D
i × pt−i/0.25

(12)
where P D
t
denotes the price decrease of the ten cryptocurrencies during the crash.
The empirical results of the above regressions presented in Table 10 suggest that all
interaction coefﬁcients for CTs during the crash are statistically insigniﬁcant.
Therefore, the statistical relationship between CTs inventory changes and price changes
of the ten cryptocurrencies did not signiﬁcantly change during the crash.
We also compute the associated F-test and fail to reject the null hypothesis that the
interaction coefﬁcients in Eq. 12 are jointly different from zero, implying that CTs’ trading
behaviour did not change.
Next, we use different market quality measures to examine the level of liquidity in the
days and weeks surrounding the crash. According to Boulton, Braga-Alves, and Kulchania
(2014), the bid-ask spread is the primary measure of transaction costs in the microstructure
literature. Demsetz (1968) argues that the bid-ask spread compensates investors for supplying
liquidity to the market.
We estimate the following three different spread measures:
Absolute spread  CC (a)it−CC (b)it
(13)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
591
where CC (a)it and CC (b)it represents the ask and bid for cryptocurrency i at time t, respec-
tively.
Quoted spread 

CC (a)it−CC (b)it

/C Pitx 100
(14)
where CPit represents the cryptocurrency price i at time t.
We also estimate the effective spread because some transactions often occur at a price
outside the bid and ask quotes (Lee, 1993).
E f f ective spread  2 xSitx (Pit−Mit)/Mitx 100
(15)
where Sit denotes the indicator of trade direction which is set equal to + 1 (−1) for buy
(sell) cryptocurrency trading orders and Mit represents the quote midpoint estimated as the
average of ask and bid cryptocurrency prices.
However, Lee, Mucklow and Ready (1993) argue that market participants who experience
adverse selection can increase spreads and reduce depth, where depth is related to the number
of assets a market participant is willing to trade at the best bid and ask quotes. Therefore, we
incorporate the average quote depth of the best bid and ask prices on 5th of September, 2018
in our robustness checks:
Quote depth  (Depthbid + Depthask)/2
(16)
We report the market quality measures for one day before through one day after the
cryptocurrency crash (4th of September–6th of September 2018) in Table 11.
The presented daily spreads are the mean values of the absolute spread, the quoted spread
and the effective spread in the millisecond dataset. Panels A, B and C of Table 11 show
that the absolute, the quoted, and the effective spreads for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin
cash, eos, neo, nem, omg, tezos, and lisk decreased in the days around the crash. All spread
measures suggest that trading costs are signiﬁcantly higher on the 6th of September, the day
after the cryptocurrency crash, compared to the 4th of September, the day before the crash.
For instance, the average quoted spread of bitcoin is 77% higher on the day after the crash
compared to the day of the crash (0.821% and 0.463%, respectively). We obtain similar
quoted, effective, and absolute spread results for all other cryptocurrencies. At the same
time, we observe that the quote depth for all cryptocurrencies under investigation decreased
between the 4th of September 2018 and the 6th of September 2018. Panels A, B and C of
Table 11 show that quote depth for the ten cryptocurrencies is signiﬁcantly lower the day
after the crash compared to the day before and the day of the actual crash. In addition, the
average turnover, measured as the daily number of crypto assets traded divided by the number
of assets outstanding, increased the day after the crash dramatically.
In Table 12, we present the market quality results over ten days before the crash (from
the 26th of August to the 4th of September 2018) and compare the absolute, the quoted,
and the effective spreads and depth measures to the ten days after the crash (from the 6th
of September to the 15th of September 2018). It is evident from Panels A and B of Table
12 that each of the three spread measures has higher values in the ten days after the crash
compared to the ten-day period that preceded the crash for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin
cash, eos, neo, nem, omg, tezos, and lisk. Furthermore, quote depth decreased signiﬁcantly,
while turnover increased before the cryptocurrency crash.
Overall, we ﬁnd that changes of inventories of CTs reveal a statistically signiﬁcant rela-
tionship with contemporaneous and lagged changes in cryptocurrency prices. We also observe
that this relationship did not change when prices substantially decreased during the crash. Fur-
thermore, our empirical ﬁndings suggest that market quality deteriorated during the crash. In
123

592
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
addition, this deterioration in market quality is evident beyond the 5th of September 2018, as
bid-ask spreads are higher and quote depth is lower in the ten days after the crash compared
to the ten days before the cryptocurrency collapse. Such crashes could negatively impact
cryptocurrency market participants, investor conﬁdence, and liquidity.
4 Robustness checks
To check the robustness of our results, we divide the dataset into bitcoin-related (standalone)
decrease price movements (DPMs) and DPMs that occur simultaneously in several cryp-
tocurrencies (co-DPMs) on the 5th of September, 2018. We deﬁne co-DPMs as those that
occur in at least two digital currencies. For empirical testing, we use the three different spread
measures described in Eqs. (13), (14), (15) and the quote depth in Eq. (16).
Table 13 shows that co-DPMs form 89% of the entire sample (21.6 standalone DPMs and
178.9 co-DPMs). The extremely high DPM occurrence could explain the frequent presence
of co-DPMs during the cryptocurrency crash. Table 13 also shows that the average co-DPM
includes 8.5 cryptocurrencies, suggesting that the digital currencies affected in the crash are
following the behaviour of each other. Trading activity and spread metrics are noticeably
different between the two types, with higher volumes and wider spreads recorded during the
standalone DPMs.
The spread measures suggest that trading costs were higher during the standalone DPMs
due to wider spreads. For example, the average quoted spread is 15% higher for standalone
DPMs than co-DPMs (0.184% and 0.159%, respectively). We ﬁnd similar results for the
absolute and the effective spreads. We also ﬁnd that the quote depth is signiﬁcantly lower for
standalone DPMs than co-DPMs (1719.26 and 1069.14, respectively).
In addition, we use raw data where we did not perform the procedures described in Eqs. 1,
2 and 3 to run another set of robustness checks.11 The raw data results in Table 14 reveal that
co-DPMs form 91% of the entire sample (39.2 standalone DPMs and 424.6 co-DPMs), while
the average co-DPM includes 9.1 cryptocurrencies (compared to 8.5 after we perform data
management process). These results suggest that the cryptocurrencies affected by the crash
are following the behaviour of each other. Similar to Table 13, trading activity and spread
values differ between the two types, with higher volume levels and wider spreads recorded
during the standalone DPMs. Therefore, the spread measures suggest that trading costs were
even higher during the standalone DPMs due to wider spreads when we use raw data. For
instance, the average quoted spread is 0.537% for standalone DPMs compared to 0.429% for
co-DPMs, with similar trends for the absolute and the effective spreads.
We also observe that the quote depth is signiﬁcantly lower at 4622.18 for standalone DPMs
compared to 3752.58 for co-DPMs. All these ﬁndings imply that bitcoin activities dominated
the market in the day of the crash, which conﬁrms our main analysis results.
In another set of robustness checks, we examine the co−explosiveness in cryptocurrency
market. Bouri, Shahzad and Roubaud (2019) suggest that investigating co-explosivity periods
inthecryptocurrencymarkethelpsmakeconclusionsonwhetherthepriceinteractionisstrong
or weak, which may impact diversiﬁcation and trading strategies. We compute the following
logistic regression to examine co-explosivity in the cryptocurrency market:
log

P(Y  1|X)
1 −P(Y  1|X)

 β0 + βi Xi,t + εt
(17)
11 Further robustness checks with raw data where we did not perform the procedures described in Eqs. 1, 2
and 3 are available from the authors upon reasonable request.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
593
where the dependent variable is a dummy variable Y that has a value of 1 if BSADFr2,t ≥
cvαT
r2,t(when there is price explosiveness as evidenced by the increase of the BSADF sequence
above corresponding critical value) and 0 if BSADFr2,t ≤cvαT
r2,t; β0 denotes the constant;
Xi,t is a set of nine dummy variables, where i  1,2…0.9; each dummy variable implies
price explosiveness as shown for the dependent variable, in each of the other remaining
nine cryptocurrencies; εt represents the error term assumed to be distributed as the logistic
distribution.
The backward supremum Augmented Dickey–Fuller (BSADF) test mentioned above is
used to determine the starting and ending points of bubble periods. The BSADF test statistics
are developed by Phillips, Shi and Yu (2015):
BSADFr2(r0)  Supr1∈(0,r2−r0) ADFr2
r1
(18)
where the end of the rolling interval window is set at a fraction r2 and the actual window
size expands from fraction r0 to fraction r2. We deﬁne the explosiveness periods based on
the generalised supremum Augmented Dickey–Fuller (GSADF) test:
⌢r e 
inf
r2∈(r0,1)

r2 : BSADFr2 > cvαT
r2

⌢r f 
inf
r2∈

⌢r e,1


r2 : BSADFr2 > cvαT
r2

(19)
where cvαT
r2 represents the 100(1 −αT )% critical value of the supremum Augmented Dick-
ey–Fuller (SADF) test statistics based on r2 observations, and αT has a permanent value of
5%.
Table 15 results reveal that bitcoin price explosivity is the least dependent on the presence
of explosivity in other cryptocurrencies. In contrast, the ethereum explosivity occurrence
increases with the presence of explosivity in bitcoin, ripple, bitcoin cash and eos. The results
also reveal an important observation that the explosivity in bitcoin increases the probability
of producing explosivity in all other cryptocurrencies under investigation. Moreover, the
explosivity in the more prominent cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin
cash and eos facilitates the occurrence of explosivity in the more minor digital currencies
like neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk. We also observe a decrease in the explosiveness affect
among some small cryptocurrencies. These observations align with our initial ﬁndings that
the more prominent cryptocurrencies−and bitcoin in particular−drove the remainder of the
market during the crash. This is broadly consistent with Bouri, Shahzad and Roubaud (2019)
but opposite the results of Agosto and Cafferata (2020), who observe that bitcoin does not
seem more central than the other cryptocurrencies in the process of bubble burst occurrence.
However, one limitation of our study is that we use linear econometric models. Giudici
and Rafﬁnetti (2021) suggest the increasing data availability and computational power enable
researchers to develop artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) machine learning models that are highly
predictive. The authors developed a novel AI model based on applying the Shapley approach
to Lorenz Zonoid and demonstrate that the model helps access both predictive accuracy
and explainability of the explanatory variables in bitcoin prices. Similarly, Lucarelli and
Borrotti (2019) demonstrate that the Double Deep Q−learning trading system based on
Sharpe ratio reward function represents a proﬁtable approach for trading bitcoin. Hitam and
Ismail (2018) obtained a more extensive dataset consisting of bitcoin, ethereum, litecoin, nem,
ripple and stellar to show that the Support Vector Machines (SVM) model characterise with
higher forecasting accuracy compared to other neural networks and deep learning models.
In a similar study, Silva de Souza, Almudhaf, Henrique, Negredo, Ramos, Sobreiro and
123

594
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Kimura (2019) report that the SVM model can generate conservative bitcoin returns on the
risk−adjusted basis, even after taking into account transaction costs. Hong (2021) proposed
a new Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) AI model for automatic cryptocurrency trading,
while Buyruko˘glu (2021) suggests that the LSTM and the single−based LSTM models can
be employed to obtain reliable analysis results in cryptocurrency trading.
Liashenko, Kravets and Repetskyi (2021) also report that the LSTM model can be used
in efﬁcient bitcoin and ethereum exchange rate modelling. Sun, Zhou and Lin (2019) show
that their strategy which includes some factors from Alpha101 machine learning algorithm is
effective in cryptocurrency trading, while Koker and Koutmos (2020) obtain similar results
with their direct reinforcement (DR) model. In a larger-scale study, Liew, Li, Budavári and
Sharma (2019) apply data from the most signiﬁcant 100 cryptocurrency returns between
2015 and 2018 to AI and machine learning algorithms. The authors observe that less volatile
cryptocurrencies are slightly more predictable than more volatile ones and suggest that cryp-
tocurrency predictability may be signiﬁcantly more complex given a set of machine learning
algorithms. The study concludes that near-term cryptocurrency markets are semi-strong form
efﬁcient, and therefore, day trading cryptocurrencies may be very challenging. Another lim-
itation of our research is the interconnectedness related to the same asset traded on different
cryptocurrency exchanges. Giudici and Pagnottoni (2019) implement an extension of Diebold
and Yilmaz (2012) econometric connectedness measures to examine the return spillovers in
ﬁve different bitcoin exchanges during the 2017 increase in prices and the 2018 decline. The
authors observe that Bitﬁnex and Gemini are driving the return spillover transmission, and
the interconnectedness of returns decreased signiﬁcantly before the hype in bitcoin price. At
the same time, it settled during the down−market period.
For our ﬁnal robustness checks, we implemented the BDS (Brock, Dechert, Sheinkman
andLeBaron,1996)statistictestswherethenullthattheseriesinquestionareindependentand
identically distributed (IID) to investigate whether the linear econometric models described
in Eqs. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 capture all structures within the data and be representative of
the problem space. We believe that this test represents a direct and appropriate examination
of model accuracy given a large number of different regression assumptions in our study. In
support of this statement, Brock, Dechert, Sheinkman and LeBaron (1996) suggest that their
method can be used as a model selection tool and a speciﬁcation test because the ﬁrst−order
asymptotic distribution of the test statistic is independent of estimation error. Moreover, the
authors also suggest that for sample sizes of 500 or more, the test has quite a good size
performance and good power against a range of alternatives.
We ﬁnd this particularly important given our large millisecond dataset. The null hypothesis
of the BDS test is that a time series sample comes from a data-generating process that is IID
while the alternative hypothesis is unspeciﬁed.
The test statistic is based on a measure of spatial correlation in m-dimensional space
deﬁned as ‘correlation integral’ (McMillan, 2003) and can be speciﬁed as per Koˇcenda
(2010):
BDSm,T (d)  T 0.5
Cm,T (d) −C1,T (d)m
/σm,T (d)
(20)
where σ represents the sample standard deviation of the data, and Cm,T (d) denotes the sample
correlation integral given ‘embedding dimension’, m, and distance, d. The BDS statistic is
asymptotically distributed as a standard normal, BDSm,T ∼N(0, 1) when applied to IID
series.
The BDS test p values presented in parentheses in Table 16 reveal that the test statis-
tics are insigniﬁcant for all linear regression models under investigation implying that the
null hypothesis of IID cannot be rejected. This important ﬁnding suggests that our linear
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
595
regression models capture all structures within the data and are representative of the problem
space conﬁrming model accuracy. We can also conclude that the residual errors are normally
distributed with constant (homoscedastic) variance.
5 Conclusion
The value of the leading cryptocurrencies signiﬁcantly decreased on the 5th of September,
2018, creating one of the most prominent digital market crashes. There are three likely reasons
behind the crash. One accepted assumption among investors is that the price crash resulted
from Goldman Sachs abandoning plans to launch a cryptocurrency trading desk. However,
some suggest that this might not reveal the whole story. On the day of the crash a ‘whale’ with
no previously recorded transactions transferred more than 22,100 bitcoins out of the wallet,
leading the market to collapse in price. Also, more than 111,000 bitcoins were transferred to
the wallets of different trading venues to sell them through the black-market platform Silk
Road.
In this study, we investigate what caused the crash using millisecond data of the more
prominent cryptocurrencies affected in the crash–bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin cash and
eos–and the smaller cryptocurrencies–neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk.
We demonstrate that the entire cryptocurrency market experienced herding behaviour
when the prices of the more prominent cryptocurrencies decreased. We observe that bitcoin
could facilitate the herding phenomenon on its own, and the other cryptocurrencies followed
the behaviour of bitcoin on the 5th of September, 2018.
The more prominent cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin cash and
eos drove the remainder of the market during the crash. Therefore, we conclude that the
behaviourofthemoresigniﬁcantdigitalcurrencies,particularlybitcoin,wasthedrivingfactor
behind the collapse of digital markets. We also examine market quality before, during, and
after the crash, including bid−ask spreads and quote depth measures. We ﬁnd that bid−ask
spreads increased, whereas quote depth decreased after the crash. Overall, the deterioration
in market quality can be linked directly to the crash, as it could have had the potential to
negatively affect investor conﬁdence, cryptocurrency market participation, and liquidity. We
also investigate whether the activity of CTs caused the crash by using several state−space
models. Our empirical ﬁndings show that the trading behaviour of CTs did not trigger the
cryptocurrency crash.
Furthermore, we report that signiﬁcantly more information is incorporated into the bid
prices of the ten cryptocurrencies under investigation. An examination of the risk−bearing
ability of intermediaries during the market collapse reveals that changes of inventories of
CTs are statistically signiﬁcantly related to contemporaneous and lagged changes in cryp-
tocurrency prices. The regression results indicate that this relationship did not change when
cryptocurrency prices signiﬁcantly decreased during the crash.
Considering this study takes the view that cryptocurrency crash of the 5th of September,
2018 was not the result of an unusual occurrence of events and the actions of CTs, but rather a
consequence of herding behaviour among cryptocurrencies triggered by events surrounding
bitcoin, we suggest policies to mitigate the negative implication of herding behaviour and
address the underlying causes are needed to avoid future cryptocurrency crashes. Based on our
empirical ﬁndings, we propose the introduction of a single−cryptocurrency circuit breaker
or limit up−limit down trading halt (price limit rule). The signiﬁcant difference between
the two mechanisms is that trading is allowed to continue within the price bands for the
123

596
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
limit up−limit down tool. In contrast, trading stops with the single−cryptocurrency circuit
breaker. For example, a single−cryptocurrency circuit breaker for the largest cryptocurrency
bitcoin will estimate the trading threshold and pause trading during market disruptions like
a cryptocurrency crash. The aim of a bitcoin circuit breaker is to prevent extreme price
movements as it provides a cooling−off period.
The trading threshold of bitcoin should depend on the cryptocurrency reference price,
which can be estimated using the average price over the previous ﬁve minutes of trading.
A trading halt can be triggered after a change of 5% on either side of the average reference
price. Therefore, trading can be halted for ﬁve minutes when a bitcoin price decline of more
than 5% below the average price of the cryptocurrency over the immediately preceding
ﬁve−minute interval occurs. This should also be the case for a corresponding price increase.
Alternatively, the limit up−limit−down mechanism should be able to prevent trade in a
cryptocurrency outside upper and lower bonds. The limit up−limit down tool could avoid
extreme cryptocurrency price changes due to speculation and provide CTs with more time
to obtain and interpret information in a fast−moving digital market. One of the advantages
of the limit up−limit down tool is that it does not pause trading activity when there is no
signiﬁcant change in fundamentals. CTs can continue operating at prices within the speciﬁed
price limit bands even when an extreme price is detected. However, the actual trading process
of the digital instrument can continue within the speciﬁed limits.
Greenwald and Stein (1991) suggest that circuit breakers play a positive role in reducing
transaction risk, which is the risk related to the uncertainty of execution prices. This study
also indicates that a circuit breaker could persuade market participants to submit trading
orders when current prices do not appropriately present market information.
Lauterbach and Ben-Zion (1993) analysed the trading activities of the Tel-Aviv Stock
Exchange during the 1987 market break. They concluded that a trading halt smoothed the
price adjustment process and minimized trading order imbalances. At the same time, Kodres
and O’Brien (1994) documented that price limits encourage risk sharing in ﬁnancial markets
when price shocks occur before market participants can execute their orders. In a somewhat
different study, Anderson and Holt (1997) demonstrate the positive role of a circuit breaker in
mitigating unjustiﬁed price ﬂuctuations, while Anshuman and Subrahmanyam (1999) suggest
that price limits are beneﬁcial in lowering the bid−ask spreads and therefore enhancing
liquidity. Similarly, Westerhoff (2003) provides evidence that price limits can reduce price
deviations from fundamental values when traders cannot chase price trends.
Data availability The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corresponding author
upon request.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no relevant ﬁnancial or non−ﬁnancial interests to disclose. The authors
have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this article. All authors certify
that they have no afﬁliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any ﬁnancial interest or
non−ﬁnancial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. The authors have no
ﬁnancial or proprietary interests in any material discussed in this article.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
597
Fig. 1 Price ﬂuctuations of bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin cash, eos, neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk on the
5th of September, 2018. We use raw millisecond data of the ten cryptocurrencies as supplied by the data
provider to create a more realistic representation of the dramatic decline in cryptocurrency prices on the 5th
of September, 2018. (For a more realistic representation of the event, we use raw millisecond data where we
did not apply the econometric data management procedures described in Eqs. 1, 2 and 3.)
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix A
Appendix B–Cryptocurrency description
This study considers the ﬁve largest−capped cryptocurrencies–bitcoin, ethereum, ripple,
litecoin and dash–and two cryptocurrency indices–Crypto Index (CRIX) and CCI30 Crypto
Currencies Index.
Bitcoin was the ﬁrst cryptocurrency that appeared in 2009, providing a solution to the issue
of double spending12 (Nakamoto, 2008). The network is peer-to-peer, and all transactions
are conducted between users directly; therefore, there are no third-party entities or ﬁnancial
institutions. Bitcoin transactions are validated by network nodes using cryptography (the
SHA −256 algorithm) and are stored in a publicly distributed ledger known as a blockchain.
Bitcoin is separable to around eight decimal places, but this could be increased further if
needed. In economic terms, a single bitcoin can be used at a fractional increment, which can
be as small as 0.0000001 bitcoins per single transaction. This particular fractional increment
is known as Satoshi, named after the developer. As of January, 2018, the current market
capitalisation of bitcoin is $191 billion (Bhosale and Mavale, 2018).
Ethereum was ﬁrst introduced in 2013 by Vitalik Buterin, providing a decentralised plat-
form for smart contracts and distributed applications (DApps) to operate without fraud,
12 In other words, a bitcoin can be sent securely and one should not be able to spend the same bitcoin again
without anyone else being able to facilitate a transaction and without one being able to chargeback the same
bitcoin.
123

598
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Table 1 Descriptive statistics of daily returns for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin cash and eos, neo, nem,
omg, tezos and lisk on the 5th of September, 2018
Cryptocurrency
Mean
Median
Min
Max
SK
SD
K
J-B
Bitcoin
0.91
0.78
−85.55
99.36
−0.94
17.92
13.17
0.00
Ethereum
0.83
0.55
−76.76
90.18
−0.80
16.08
12.04
0.00
Ripple
0.80
0.49
−60.53
82.81
−0.67
16.06
9.99
0.00
Bitcoin Cash
0.74
0.47
−61.86
80.99
−0.72
15.99
11.82
0.00
Eos
0.61
0.31
−47.77
63.19
−0.64
10.43
8.77
0.00
Noe
0.48
0.20
−30.21
42.55
−0.51
7.80
4.51
0.00
Nim
0.36
0.14
−24.97
38.19
−0.33
6.55
4.08
0.00
Omg
0.27
0.09
−14.76
31.07
−0.29
6.21
3.99
0.00
Tezos
0.21
0.05
−12.52
26.66
−0.17
4.77
3.16
0.00
Lisk
0.13
0.02
−10.01
17.99
−0.09
3.18
3.08
0.00
We estimate each cryptocurrency’s daily return as:
ri,t  (Pt −Pt−1)
Pt−1
where Pt denotes the cryptocurrency price at time t.
SK skewness, SD standard deviation, K kurtosis, J-B Jarque-Bera test statistics
Table 2 Regression results of
CSADm,t on market returns for
bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin
cash, eos, neo, nem, omg, tezos
and lisk on the 5th of September,
2018
Panel A
α
0.0673*** (0.0002)
rm,t
0.0997*** (0.0240)
r2m,t
−0.3991*** (0.2570)
Adj R2
0.80
Panel B
α
0.0711*** (0.0003)
(1 −D)rm,t
0.7395*** (0.0274)
(D)rm,t
−0.5336*** (0.0266)
(1 −D)r2m,t
0.8370** (0.8352)
(D)r2m,t
−0.8266*** (0.1904)
Adj R2
0.81
***Indicates signiﬁcance at the 1% level; **indicates signiﬁcance at the
5% level
downtime or intervention from an intermediary. Like bitcoin, this cryptocurrency represents
a public platform with open source, blockchain computing and innovative scripting features.
Ether is the token run on the platform, although the Turing −complete programming lan-
guage can trade, secure and codify ﬁnancial derivatives, insurance contracts and many other
transactions. As of January, 2018, ethereum has a market capitalisation of approximately
$105 billion (Bhosale and Mavale, 2018).
Ripple was introduced in 2012 by Chris Larsen and his company, OpenCoin, to provide
instant and affordable international payments. Opposite to bitcoin, this cryptocurrency pos-
sesses a consensus ledger that does not require mining from other network users, leading
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
599
Table 3 Regression results of
CSADwb,t on market returns
differentiating between the larger
and the smaller cryptocurrencies
on the 5th of September, 2018
Cryptocurrency market on the 5th September, 2018
α
0.8004*** (0.0012)
(1 −D)rwb,t
0.7734*** (0.1020)
(D)rwb,t
−0.6881** (0.7053)
(1 −D)r2
wb,t
0.9906* (0.8571)
(D)r2
wb,t
−0.5725*** (0.0363)
(1 −D)r2
b,t
0.0689*** (0.0035)
(D)r2
b,t
−0.9007*** (0.0268)
Adj R2
0.82
***Indicates signiﬁcance at the 1% level; **indicates signiﬁcance at the
5% level; *indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level
Table 4 Regression results of
CSADs,t on market returns
differentiating between the larger
and the smaller cryptocurrencies
on the 5th of September, 2018
Cryptocurrency market on the 5th September, 2018
α
0.7013*** (0.0010)
(1 −D)rs,t
0.6903** (0.4830)
(D)rs,t
−0.0478*** (0.0369)
(1 −D)r2s,t
2.016 (0.9355)
(D)r2s,t
0.7544 (0.8906)
CSADl,t
0.0882*** (0.0067)
(1 −D)r2
l,t
−0.8803*** (0.0105)
(D)r2
l,t
−0.4991*** (0.0283)
Adj R2
0.82
***Indicates signiﬁcance at the 1% level; **indicates signiﬁcance at the
5% level
to less computing power and lower network latency. The payment mechanism allows pay-
ments to another network user in ﬁve seconds, compared to between one and ten minutes in
mining −based protocols. Therefore, ripple has a much better likelihood of competing with
conventional debit and credit cards point −of −sale transactions.
Moreover, some ﬁnancial institutions have used this particular cryptocurrency as their
main settlement infrastructure technology due to the lack of counterparty credit risk (Phillip,
Chan and Peiris, 2018). As of January, 2018, the market capitalisation of ripple is $48 billion
(Bhosale and Mavale, 2018).
The name Bitcoin Cash was suggested by the mining pool ViaBTC in July, 2017 and
began trading on August, 2017. Bitcoin Cash represents a peer-to-peer online cash system
to send money to any recipient in the world, 24 h a day, all year round. Similar to bitcoin,
bitcoin cash protocol is restricted to 21 million coins. Compared to conventional payment
methods, bitcoin cash provides enhanced anonymity because it is impossible to know who
operates the electronic address. The timestamping mining scheme of bitcoin cash is ‘proof
−of −work’ (PoW) and its hash function is SHA −256 (Coinswitch.co).
123

600
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Table 5 Permanent price component of the Sate Space Model for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bicoin cash, eos,
neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk traded on 5th of September, 2018
Permanent price
parameters
kNET (t −stat)
σ 2


CT s
N ET 

kN ET ∗σ


CT s
N ET 2
(t −
stat)
σ 2
wi,t

Measures
bps/$1,000,000
$1,000,000
bps.22
bps.22
Bitcoin
0.97 (12.34)
48.88
24.91 (16.77)
470.62
Ethereum
0.82 (11.07)
40.74
22.68 (14.14)
431.09
Ripple
0.70 (10.16)
39.03
18.80 (11.67)
398.66
Bitcoin Cash
0.68 (9.99)
30.99
17.90 (9.51)
380.77
Eos
0.42 (7.51)
26.87
13.85 (8.97)
312.54
Neo
0.38 (5.02)
20.21
9.61 (5.02)
256.91
Nem
0.30 (4.82)
17.55
5.99 (4.81)
216.77
Omg
0.25 (3.32)
10.37
3.14 (2.20)
182.36
Tezos
0.14 (0.3.05)
8.40
1.99 (2.01)
134.68
Lisk
0.09 (2.15)
4.16
0.74 (1.65)
112.94
All
0.85 (7.26)
31.60
19.76 (11.48)
368.33
The model is estimated for each cryptocurrency using CTs variables to decompose the observable historical
price pi,t for each cryptocurrency i at time t. into two components: the permanent price component mi,t and
the transitory component si,t: pi,t  mi,t + si,t; mi,t  mi,t−1 + wi,t; wi,t  kN ET 
CT s
N ET
i,t
+ μi,t;
si,t  φsi,t−1 +ψ N ET CT sN ET
i,t
+υi,t.Where CT sN ET
i,t
is the overall net order ﬂow and 
CT s
N ET
i,t
represent
the surprise component of the order ﬂow. We estimate the t −statistics using standard errors double-clustered
on the ten digital instruments and millisecond data
EOS represents a decentralised blockchain technology system that allows businesses to
develop applications like web −based applications free of transaction fees. The initial plat-
form EOSIO was introduced by a private company called Block.one and was launched as an
open −source software product on June 1, 2018. Apart from hosting applications, the other
objectives of eos are to implement smart contracts and avoid the scalability issues experienced
by bitcoin and ethereum. Eos operates ‘proof-of-stake’ (PoS) mining mechanism instead of
PoW, which enables faster transaction and execution times. Eos allows market participants to
participate in blockchain governance and cast votes associated with a fraction of the owner’s
stake. The programming language used to build eos is WebAssembly, which includes C and
C + + (Coinswitch.co).
NEO was introduced as Antshares by Da Hongfei in 2014 and rebranded in 2017. The
main aim of neo is to convert traditional ﬁnancial instruments into decentralised digital ones
by using smart contracts. Unlike the above cryptocurrencies, neo is not minable, and there are
100 million tokens. In contrast to other digital currencies based on PoW protocol, neo uses
Delegated Byzantine Fault Tolerance (dBFT) mechanism, which can process up to 10,000
transactions per second at much lower electricity costs. The other advantage of neo is that
contacts can be written in common programming languages such as Java, Python, C + + , etc.,
making it less vulnerable to hackers and more accessible to general investors (Coinswitch.co).
NEM, short for New Economic Movement relies on its code built from scratch. Nem aim
is to be more technologically advanced blockchain offering easily customizable solutions for
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
601
Table 6 Transitory price component of the Sate Space Model for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bicoin cash, eos, neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk traded on 5th of September, 2018
Transitory price
parameters
φ(t-stat)
ψ N ET (t-stat)
σ 2


CT s
N ET 

ψ N ET ∗σ


CT s
N ET 2
(t-stat)
σ 2
si,t

Measures
bps/$1,000,000
$1,000,000
$1,000,000
bps.22
bps.22
Bitcoin
−0.41 (−0.20)
−0.36 (−7.18)
−1.93
−10.76 (−16.70)
−251.62
Ethereum
−0.37 (−0.15)
−0.33 (−5.21)
−1.87
−9.81 (−12.09)
−248.07
Ripple
−0.28 (−0.12)
−0.25 (−4.44)
−1.70
−9.50 (−10.14)
−221.88
Bitcoin Cash
−0.26 (−0.09)
−0.28 (−5.01)
−1.79
−9.89 (−11.21)
−235.74
Eos
−0.18 (−0.07)
−0.21 (−3.99)
−1.53
−6.72 (−8.17)
−181.50
Neo
−0.13 (−0.08)
−0.15 (−2.27)
−1.42
−5.80 (−7.43)
−160.55
Nem
−0.09 (−0.05)
−0.12 (−2.05)
−1.30
−4.46 (−5.99)
−148.23
Omg
−0.06 (−0.03)
−0.09 (−1.88)
−1.22
−4.05 (−5.77)
−133.80
Tezos
−0.04 (−0.02)
−0.08 (−0.90)
−1.16
−3.29 (−4.88)
−117.66
Lisk
−0.03 (−0.02)
−0.06 (−0.84)
−0.96
−2.17 (−3.06)
−100.54
All
−0.24 (−0.15)
−0.29 (−1.67)
−1.58
−8.83 (−6.91)
−212.83
The model is estimated for each cryptocurrency using CTs variables to decompose the observable historical price pi,t for each cryptocurrency i at time t. into two components: the
permanent price component mi,t and the transitory component si,t: pi,t  mi,t +si,t; mi,t  mi,t−1+wi,t; wi,t  kN ET 
CT s
N ET
i,t
+μi,t; si,t  φsi,t−1+ψ N ET CT sN ET
i,t
+υi,t
Where CT sN ET
i,t
is the overall net order ﬂow and 
CT s
N ET
i,t
represent the surprise component of the order ﬂow. We estimate the t-statistics using standard errors double-clustered
on the ten digital instruments and millisecond data
123

602
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Table 7 Permanent price parameters of the disaggregated Sate Space Model for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bicoin cash, eos, neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk traded on 5th of
September, 2018
Permanent
price
parameters
kbid (t-stat)
kask (t-stat)
σ 2


CT s
bid
σ 2


CT s
ask

kbid ∗σ


CT s
bid2
(t-stat)

kask ∗σ


CT s
ask2
(t-stat)
σ 2
wi,t

Measures
bps/$1,000,000
bps/$1,000,000
$1,000,000
/$1,000,000
bps.22
bps.22
bps.22
Bitcoin
51.83 (19.80)
48.09 (16.45)
2.23
1.12
72.19 (26.51)
58.61 (21.25)
647.53
Ethereum
47.66 (15.16)
43.28 (14.44)
1.98
1.01
70.02 (21.91)
52.01 (19.82)
589.04
Ripple
39.87 (12.26)
37.18 (11.31)
1.83
0.80
60.83 (18.99)
46.87 (17.77)
512.24
Bitcoin
cash
41.55 (13.88)
39.87 (10.11)
1.90
0.87
68.88 (20.18)
50.31 (20.29)
555.93
Eos
30.21 (9.45)
27.73 (8.16)
1.56
0.71
57.51 (18.80)
45.52 (18.83)
406.81
Neo
24.33 (5.02)
21.76 (4.93)
1.44
0.52
42.99 (16.66)
39.99 (14.19)
387.92
Nem
22.99 (4.81)
18.54 (4.11)
1.30
0.40
36.07 (14.42)
28.84 (11.03)
351.08
Omg
17.24 (4.03)
14.90 (3.87)
1.27
0.32
28.88 (12.42)
20.32 (9.76)
283.77
Tezos
13.67 (3.88)
10.42 (3.05)
1.15
0.25
21.77 (10.71)
16.43 (7.70)
266.60
Lisk
10.81 (2.95)
7.62 (2.44)
1.08
0.16
18.52 (9.99)
12.42 (6.53)
194.99
All
32.26 (7.73)
27.41 (6.46)
1.62
0.94
60.81 (19.72)
43.85 (13.66)
470.68
The model is estimated for each cryptocurrency using CTs variables to decompose the observable historical price pi,t for each cryptocurrency i at time t into two components:
the permanent price component mi,t and the transitory component si,t: pi,t  mi,t + si,t; mi,t  mi,t−1 + wi,t;wi,t  kbid
i

CT s
bid
i,t + kask
i

CT s
ask
i,t + μi,t;si,t  φsi,t−1 +
ψbid
i
CT sbid
i,t + ψask
i
CT sask
i,t
+ υi,t.Where CT sbid
i,t
and CT sask
i,t
represent bid and ask order ﬂows; 
CT s
bid
i,t and 
CT s
ask
i,t are the surprise components in those order ﬂows. We
estimate the t-statistics using standard errors double-clustered on the ten digital instruments and millisecond data
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
603
Table 8 Temporary price parameters of the disaggregated Sate Space Model for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bicoin cash, eos, neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk traded on 5th of
September, 2018
Transitory
price
parameters
φ(t-stat)
ψbid(t-stat)
ψask(t-stat)
σ 2

CT s
bid
σ 2

CT s
ask

ψbid ∗σ


CT s
bid2
(t-stat)

ψask ∗σ


CT s
ask2
(t-stat)
σ 2
si,t

Measures
bps/$1,000,000
bps/$1,000,000
bps/$1,000,000
$1,000,000
$1,000,000
bps.22
bps.22
bps.22
Bitcoin
−0.87 (−3.17)
−31.27 (−
8.77)
−19.68 (−5.92)
−1.84
−0.98
−49.90 (−16.81)
−30.10 (−12.33)
−513.88
Ethereum
−0.83 (−2.90)
−28.88 (−
7.99)
−18.69 (−5.03)
−1.77
−0.83
−37.06 (−13.28)
−22.81 (−9.32)
−401.09
Ripple
−0.60 (−1.96)
−22.90 (−
6.61)
−16.52 (−4.84)
−1.52
−0.72
−30.18 (−10.19)
−18.44 (−5.99)
−355.68
Bitcoin
cash
−0.67 (−1.83)
−26.85 (−
5.01)
−17.05 (−4.90)
−1.66
−0.76
−35.81 (−12.27)
−19.03 (−6.05)
−372.34
Eos
−0.42 (−1.25)
−19.80 (−
3.77)
−12.88 (−2.59)
−1.04
−0.55
−23.66 (−8.98)
−15.07 (−4.81)
−299.19
Neo
−0.26 (−0.99)
−16.99 (−
2.89)
−9.61 (−2.03)
−0.86
−0.48
−17.53 (−6.61)
−13.14 (−4.05)
−246.78
Nem
−0.17 (−0.72)
−12.42 (−
2.67)
−6.55 (−1.74)
−0.69
−0.31
−11.82 (−4.19)
−8.19 (−2.90)
−178.05
Omg
−0.12 (−0.66)
−10.19 (−
2.07)
−6.01 (−1.40)
−0.42
−0.25
−7.23 (−2.88)
−5.51 (−2.12)
−144.62
Tezos
−0.09 (−0.25)
−8.72 (−1.93)
−4.18 (−1.21)
−0.27
−0.20
−4.17 (−1.80)
−2.88 (−1.77)
−131.03
123

604
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Table 8 (continued)
Transitory
price
parameters
φ(t-stat)
ψbid(t-stat)
ψask(t-stat)
σ 2

CT s
bid
σ 2

CT s
ask

ψbid ∗σ


CT s
bid2
(t-stat)

ψask ∗σ


CT s
ask2
(t-stat)
σ 2
si,t

Lisk
−0.06 (−0.12)
−5.89 (−1.42)
−2.80 (−0.99)
−0.18
−0.11
−2.04 (−1.27)
−1.52 (−0.93)
−102.35
All
−0.62 (−1.01)
−18.62 (−
3.86)
−14.95 (−4.18)
−1.03
−0.58
−28.83 (−4.19)
−18.71 (−3.79)
−303.67
The model is estimated for each cryptocurrency using CTs variables to decompose the observable historical price pi,t for each cryptocurrency i at time t into two components: the permanent price
component mi,t and the transitory component si,t: pi,t  mi,t + si,t; mi,t  mi,t−1 + wi,t;wi,t  kbid
i

CT s
bid
i,t + kask
i

CT s
ask
i,t + μi,t;si,t  φsi,t−1 + ψbid
i
CT sbid
i,t + ψask
i
CT sask
i,t + υi,t.Where CT sbid
i,t and
CT sask
i,t represent bid and ask order ﬂows; 
CT s
bid
i,t and 
CT s
ask
i,t are the surprise components in those order ﬂows. We estimate the t-statistics using standard errors double-clustered on the ten digital
instruments and millisecond data
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
605
Table 9 Net prices and CTs’
holdings of bitcoin, ethereum,
ripple, bicoin cash, eos, neo, nem,
omg, tezos and lisk traded on 5th
of September, 2018
Variable
NP CTs
Intercept
−3.18 (−6.77)
NP CTst−1
−0.04 (−0.86)
NP CTst−1
−0.03 (−4.25)
Pt
51.97 (21.44)
Pt−1
26.70 (16.83)
Pt−2
22.68 (13.05)
Pt−3
20.99 (12.70)
Pt−4
20.04 (11.82)
Pt−5
18.55 (9.78)
Pt−6
15.32 (8.74)
Pt−7
14.08 (6.27)
Pt−8
10.26 (5.80)
Pt−9
8.68 (5.24)
Pt−10
5.99 (3.63)
Pt−11
−0.18 (−0.25)
Pt−12
−0.87 (−1.26)
Pt−13
−1.36 (−2.80)
Pt−14
−2.09 (−2.93)
Pt−15
−3.41 (−4.02)
Adj. R2
0.73
This table shows the computed coefﬁcients for the regression: yt 
α + φ × yt−1 + δ × yt−1 +15
i0

βi × pt−1/0.25

+ εt. Change in
holdings of CTs represents the dependent variable. Price changes are
presented in ticks. NP denotes net price of the ten digital instruments.
The sampling frequency is at the millisecond timeframe. We estimate the
t-statistics reported in parentheses by using the White (1980) estimator
different purposes. Like noe, nem cannot be mined, substantially reducing the energy and
time required to process a transaction. The processing time of 4,000 transactions per second
makes nem faster than Visa and MasterCard. Nem can be generated through a process known
as ‘harvesting’, and all 9 billion coins are currently in supply. Harvesting represents a process
when a transaction is processed on the platform; the ﬁrst computer to see and verify it will
inform other users, creating a block. Moreover, nem uses a ‘proof-of-importance’ (PoI)
method, which is different than PoW and PoS. PoI method assigns more block rewards to
users who own more tokens and actively participate in the network (Coinswitch.co).
OmiseGo (OMG) is an ethereum based open-source payment platform developed in Thai-
land by Jun Hasegawa in 2013. Omg aims to offer banking and ﬁnancial services worldwide.
These include credit and debit card transactions, currency conversions, remittance services,
etc. All ﬁnancial services are done through the omg currency, which can be converted to ﬁat
money, loyalty points or tokens, depending on the type of transaction. The total omg supply
is 140 million tokens.
Tezos (TEZ) is the ﬁrst self-amending cryptocurrency created by Arthur Breitman after
publishing two white papers in 2014. Tezos represents a secure, innovative contract platform
123

606
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Table 10 The relationship
between CTs inventory changes
and cryptocurrency price changes
for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple,
bicoin cash, eos, neo, nem, omg,
tezos and lisk traded on 5th of
September, 2018
Variable
NP CTs
Variable (cont)
Intercept
−4.80 (−7.42)
InterceptD
NPt−1
−0.013 (−0.61)
N P D
t−1
NPt−1
−0.014 (−0.70)
N P D
t−1
Pt
56.99 (21.16)
P D
t
Pt−1
28.77 (14.05)
P D
t−1
Pt−2
27.94 (12.73)
P D
t−2
Pt−3
23.55 (10.09)
P D
t−3
Pt−4
20.25 (8.66)
P D
t−4
Pt−5
19.57 (7.51)
P D
t−5
Pt−6
17.88 (7.04)
P D
t−6
Pt−7
15.90 (6.25)
P D
t−7
Pt−8
14.87 (6.06)
P D
t−8
Pt−9
9.70 (4.17)
P D
t−9
Pt−10
8.46 (3.43)
P D
t−10
Pt−11
−0.25 (−0.73)
P D
t−11
Pt−12
−0.98 (−1.79)
P D
t−12
Pt−13
−1.83 (−2.80)
P D
t−13
Pt−14
−3.99 (−4.01)
P D
t−14
Pt−15
−5.65 (−4.74)
P D
t−15
Adj. R2
0.74
This
table
shows
the
computed
coefﬁcients
for
the
regres-
sion: yt

α + φyt−1 + δyt−1 +15
i0

βi × pt−i/0.25

+
P D
t

αD + φDyt−1 + δD yt−1 +15
i0

β D
i
× pt−i/0.25

. P D
t
repre-
sents a dummy variable related to price decrease of the ten cryptocurren-
cies on the 5th of September, 2018. Change in holdings of CTs represents
the dependent variable. Price changes are presented in ticks. NP denotes
net price of the ten digital instruments. The sampling frequency is at the
millisecond timeframe. We estimate the t-statistics reported in parenthe-
ses by using the White (1980) estimator
with a built-in consensus mechanism. The protocol of this digital currency can evolve and
integrate new information over time. Tesoz uses PoS system, which does not involve mining
and signiﬁcant amounts of electricity consumption–the primary operational process is called
‘baking’ instead of mining. Bakers in this blockchain system devote deposits and receive
rewards for developing and publishing blocks. An innovative feature of the platform is the
involvement of all stakeholders towards governing Tesoz. Stakeholders can vote on changes
to the main protocol or even the entire voting policy (Tezos.com).
Lisk was developed by Max Kordek and Oliver Beddows and launched in early 2016.
Lisk is a decentralised app system that enables users to design apps in Java, making it much
more accessible to the public. Lisk uses sidechains technology and Sowtware Development
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
607
Table 11 Market quality measures before, during and after the cryptocurrency crash for bitcoin, ethereum,
ripple, bicoin cash, eos, neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk
Panel A-4th
September
Absolute
spread
Quoted
spread
Effective
spread
Quote depth
Turnover
%
Bitcoin
0.196
0.478
0.380
4835.882
3.187
Ethereum
0.164
0.440
0.313
4226.006
2.903
Ripple
0.099
0.391
0.261
2716.993
1.467
Bitcoin cash
0.074
0.255
0.224
1934.264
1.120
Eos
0.061
0.201
0.116
1355.027
1.080
Neo
0.044
0.177
0.074
926.180
0.096
Nem
0.028
0.149
0.055
790.178
0.054
Omg
0.019
0.142
0.029
511.163
0.021
Tezos
0.008
0.121
0.014
217.199
0.014
Lisk
0.006
0.109
0.005
99.103
0.009
Panel B-5th September
Bitcoin
0.182
0.463
0.365
4699.004
3.776
Ethereum
0.151
0.426
0.290
3884.465
3.005
Ripple
0.086
0.382
0.204
2390.774
1.888
Bitcoin cash
0.062
0.237
0.193
1624.193
1.568
Eos
0.042
0.197
0.105
1008.255
1.111
Neo
0.038
0.164
0.051
773.109
0.102
Nem
0.020
0.133
0.028
600.128
0.063
Omg
0.015
0.128
0.015
480.083
0.038
Tezos
0.004
0.105
0.006
156.104
0.028
Lisk
0.001
0.102
0.002
71.190
0.018
Panel C-6th September
Bitcoin
0.662
0.821
0.777
3116.108
4.126
Ethereum
0.630
0.799
0.715
2004.374
3.572
Ripple
0.311
0.711
0.688
1873.006
2.210
Bitcoin cash
0.287
0.664
0.569
1004.526
1.999
Eos
0.216
0.588
0.466
777.172
1.773
Neo
0.188
0.552
0.337
336.124
0.887
Nem
0.173
0.424
0.220
362.199
0.552
Omg
0.126
0.411
0.167
279.073
0.115
Tezos
0.099
0.389
0.121
75.110
0.099
Lisk
0.083
0.366
0.093
32.175
0.064
This table shows the market quality measures for all cryptocurrencies under investigation traded on 4th, 5th
and 6th of September, 2018. We estimate the absolute spread as: Absolute spread  CC (a)it–CC (b)it.
where CC (a)it and CC (b)it represents the ask and bid for cryptocurrency i at time t, respectively. We estimate
the quoted spread as: Quoted spread  (CC (a)it–CC (b)it) / CPit × 100.
where CPit represents the cryptocurrency price i at time t. We also estimate the effective spread as:
Effective spread  2 × Sit x (Pit–Mit) / Mit x 100.
where Sit denotes the indicator of trade direction which is set equal to + 1 (−1) for buy (sell) cryptocurrency
trading orders and Mit represents the quote midpoint estimated as the average of ask and bid cryptocurrency
prices. We calculate the quoted depth as: Quote depth  (Depthbid + Depthask) / 2. We report the turnover
as the daily number of cryptocurrencies traded divided by the number of cryptocurrencies outstanding (in
percentage). The presented daily spreads are the mean values of the absolute spread, the quoted spread and
the effective spread in the millisecond dataset
123

608
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Table 12 Market quality measures ten-days before and ten-days after the cryptocurrency crash for bitcoin,
ethereum, ripple, bicoin cash, eos, neo, nem, omg, tezos and lisk
Panel A:26th
August-4th
September
Absolute spread
Quoted spread
Effective spread
Quote
depth
Turnover
%
Bitcoin
0.215
0.582
0.446
5374.299
6.887
Ethereum
0.189
0.503
0.412
4604.172
5.471
Ripple
0.121
0.412
0.323
3545.006
3.822
Bitcoin cash
0.088
0.290
0.281
2257.016
2.713
Eos
0.073
0.203
0.163
1506.002
2.006
Neo
0.059
0.184
0.104
1003.777
1.850
Nem
0.040
0.173
0.073
886.002
1.477
Omg
0.027
0.152
0.047
636.809
1.102
Tezos
0.016
0.133
0.028
376.929
1.004
Lisk
0.012
0.118
0.014
121.535
0.096
Panel B: 6th September-15th September
Bitcoin
0.286
0.699
0.577
4722.106
4.663
Ethereum
0.207
0.578
0.548
3770.274
3.997
Ripple
0.172
0.498
0.466
2999.728
1.906
Bitcoin cash
0.096
0.313
0.402
1836.152
1.535
Eos
0.085
0.280
0.256
1283.028
1.276
Neo
0.071
0.204
0.249
743.204
1.003
Nem
0.066
0.199
0.184
524.726
0.851
Omg
0.045
0.186
0.126
423.116
0.088
Tezos
0.036
0.167
0.097
226.109
0.046
Lisk
0.024
0.145
0.066
96.277
0.023
This table shows the market quality measures for all cryptocurrencies under investigation traded in two different
periods–between 26th of August and 4th of September, 2018 and between 6th of September 15th of September,
2018. We estimate the absolute spread as: Absolute spread  CC (a)it–CC (b)it.
where CC (a)it and CC (b)it represents the ask and bid for cryptocurrency i at time t, respectively. We estimate
the quoted spread as: Quoted spread  (CC (a)it–CC (b)it) / CPit × 100
where CPit represents the cryptocurrency price i at time t. We also estimate the effective spread as:
Effective spread  2 × Sit x (Pit–Mit) / Mit x 100
where Sit denotes the indicator of trade direction which is set equal to + 1 (−1) for buy (sell) cryptocurrency
trading orders and Mit represents the quote midpoint estimated as the average of ask and bid cryptocurrency
prices. We calculate the quoted depth as: Quote depth  (Depthbid + Depthask) / 2. We report the turnover
as the daily number of cryptocurrencies traded divided by the number of cryptocurrencies outstanding (in
percentage)
Kit (SDK), allowing the users to create DApps and individual blockchains within the central
platform.
Unlike most other cryptocurrencies, Lisk does not represent a digital form of money that
retailers will accept as payment but instead as a currency for users of the platform. Lisk uses
PoS protocol and can be mined, but the mining process differs from bitcoin. In contrast to
bitcoin, there is no cap on the maximum number of lisk coins (Coinswitch.co).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
609
Table 13 Standalone and co-DPMs on the 5th of September, 2018
Bitcoin (standalone)
Co-DPMs
mean
std.dev
mean
std.dev
Number of DPMs
21.6
178.9
Number of cryptocurrencies
8.5
Absolute return %
0.67
0.34
0.51
0.28
Traded volume
179.24
121.26
162.38
103.56
Absolute spread
0.062
0.136
0.051
0.121
Quoted spread
0.184
0.927
0.159
0.783
Effective spread
0.105
0.217
0.094
0.199
Quoted depth
1719.26
11.36
1069.14
8.92
This table divides DPMs into standalone (bitcoin) and co-DPMs, with the latter category detecting DPMs that
occur simultaneously in several cryptocurrencies. We estimate the absolute spread as: Absolute spread  CC
(a)it–CC (b)it
where CC (a)it and CC (b)it represents the ask and bid for cryptocurrency i at time t, respectively. We estimate
the quoted spread as: Quoted spread  (CC (a)it–CC (b)it) / CPit × 100
where CPit represents the cryptocurrency price i at time t. We also estimate the effective spread as:
Effective spread  2 × Sit x (Pit–Mit) / Mit x 100
where Sit denotes the indicator of trade direction which is set equal to + 1 (−1) for buy (sell) cryptocurrency
trading orders and Mit represents the quote midpoint estimated as the average of ask and bid cryptocurrency
prices. We calculate the quoted depth as: Quote depth  (Depthbid + Depthask)/2
Table 14 Standalone and co-DPMs on the 5th of September, 2018 with raw data
Bitcoin (standalone)
Co-DPMs
mean
std.dev
mean
std.dev
Number of DPMs
39.2
424.6
Number of cryptocurrencies
9.1
Absolute return %
0.94
0.66
0.78
0.49
Traded volume
622.18
446.03
403.57
397.15
Absolute spread
0.183
0.316
0.124
0.412
Quoted spread
0.537
1.015
0.429
0.993
Effective spread
0.682
0.446
0.214
0.307
Quoted depth
4622.18
37.72
3752.58
23.16
For robustness checks we use raw data where we did not perform the procedures described in Eqs. 1, 2 and
3. This table divides DPMs into standalone (bitcoin) and co-DPMs, with the latter category detecting DPMs
that occur simultaneously in several cryptocurrencies. We estimate the absolute spread as: Absolute spread 
CC (a)it–CC (b)it
where CC (a)it and CC (b)it represents the ask and bid for cryptocurrency i at time t, respectively. We estimate
the quoted spread as: Quoted spread  (CC (a)it–CC (b)it) / CPit × 100
where CPit represents the cryptocurrency price i at time t. We also estimate the effective spread as:
Effective spread  2 × Sit x (Pit–Mit) / Mit x 100
where Sit denotes the indicator of trade direction which is set equal to + 1 (−1) for buy (sell) cryptocurrency
trading orders and Mit represents the quote midpoint estimated as the average of ask and bid cryptocurrency
prices. We calculate the quoted depth as: Quote depth  (Depthbid + Depthask) / 2
123

610
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Table 15 Logistic regression results using dummies of cryptocurrency explosivity as dependent and independent variables for bitcoin, ethereum, ripple, bitcoin cash, eos, neo,
nem, omg, tezos and lisk on the 5th of September, 2018
Crypto
Bitcoin
Ethereum
Ripple
Bitcoin
Cash
Eos
Noe
Nim
Omg
Tezos
Lisk
Bitcoin
2.693***
4.006***
1.120***
4.157***
5.137***
2.362***
6.003***
3.268***
5.239***
Ethereum
2.183***
2.997***
3.162**
4.266**
2.889***
1.988***
2.616***
4.103***
Ripple
4.888***
5.022**
5.434***
4.809***
4.535**
3.177**
3.816***
5.163**
Bitcoin
Cash
3.709***
1.655**
3.551**
2.160*
3.260***
2.314***
4.225**
5.727***
Eos
6.115**
3.768*
6.077***
1.288**
2.007***
4.261**
6.263***
7.172***
Noe
1.290***
3.288***
2.099***
2.879***
Nim
1.773***
2.259***
3.002**
1.277**
Omg
−2.302**
−1.358***
4.023***
3.363*
Tezos
3.126*
1.816**
−2.114**
4.272***
Lisk
−1.365***
−2.349***
−1.238***
−1.206**
C
−
2.014***
−4.827***
−6.250***
−3.799***
−7.152***
−7.996***
−9.131***
−11.890**
−15.142***
−17.528**
McFadden
R2
0.057***
0.283***
0.516***
0.097***
0.826***
0.885***
0.735***
0.816**
0.924***
0.977**
***indicates signiﬁcance at the 1% level; **indicates signiﬁcance at the 5% level; *indicates signiﬁcance at the 10% level
This table shows the results from the following logistic regression: log

P(Y1|X)
1−P(Y1|X)

 β0 + βi Xi,t + εt where the dependent variable is a dummy variable Y that has a value of 1 if
BSADFr2,t ≥cvαT
r2,t (when there is price explosiveness as evidenced by the increase of the BSADF sequence above corresponding critical value) and 0 if BSADFr2,t ≤cvαT
r2,t; β0
denotes the constant;Xi,t is a set of nine dummy variables, where i  1,2…0.9; each dummy variable implies price explosiveness as shown for the dependent variable, in each of the
other remaining nine cryptocurrencies; εt represents the error term assumed to be distributed as the logistic distribution
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
611
Table 16 BDS residual independence tests for linear regression models described in Eqs. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
CSADm,t (Eq. 6)
CSADwb,t (Eq. 7)
CSADs,t (Eq. 8)
pi,t (Eq. 9)
wi,t (Eq. 10)
Δyt (Eq. 11)
Δyt (Eq. 12)
BDS (2,1)
0.3761 (0.2603)
0.4385 (0.3374)
0.4887 (0.3990)
0.2907 (0.2831)
0.0773 (0.4023)
0.8847 (0.5237)
0.9002 (0.6114)
BDS (3,1)
0.4099 (0.3372)
0.5229 (0.3994)
0.5916 (0.4021)
0.3226 (0.3171)
0.0904 (0.5170)
0.9021 (0.7038)
0.9663 (0.8660)
BDS (4,1)
0.6812 (0.5802)
0.7811 (0.6635)
0.8003 (0.6857)
0.3899 (0.3884)
0.1005 (0.7188)
0.9769 (0.8172)
0.9983 (0.9021)
We specify the test statistic as:
BDSm,T (d)  T 0.5
Cm,T (d) −C1,T (d)m
/σm,T (d)
where σ represents the sample standard deviation of the data, and Cm,T (d) denotes the sample correlation integral given ‘embedding dimension’, m, and distance, d. The BDS
statistic is asymptotically distributed as a standard normal, BDSm,T ∼N(0, 1) when applied to IID series. The BDS p −values are presented in parentheses
123

612
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Appendix C
(a) Relationship between CSAD and CMR
We adopted the empirical procedure of Chang, Chen and Khorana (2000) to explain both
the linear and the non-linear relationship between the cross-sectional absolute deviation of
returns (CSAD) and the cryptocurrency market return (CMR):
Et(Ri)  γ0 + βi Et(C M R −γ0)
(21)
where Et represent the expectation in period t; C M R denote the cryptocurrency market
return; Ri denote the return of each cryptocurrency; γ0 shows the zero-beta portfolio return
while βi represent the time-invariant systematic risk measure of the cryptocurrency, i 
1, ..., N and t  1, ..., T . Given that βm is the systematic risk in the CAPM, we obtain:
βm  1
N
N

i1
βi
(22)
The absolute value of the deviation (AVD) of cryptocurrency’s i expected return in period
t can be presented as:
AV Di,t  |βi −βm|Et(C M R −γ0)
(23)
Therefore, we can compute the expected cross-sectional absolute deviation of cryptocur-
rency returns (ECSAD) in period t in the following way:
ECSADt  1
N
N

i1
AV Di,t  1
N
N

i1
|βi −βm|Et(C M R −γ0)
(24)
Hence, we can estimate the linear relation between dispersion and the time-varying market
expected returns as:
∂ECSADt
∂Et(C M R)  1
N
N

i1
|βi −βm| > 0,
(25)
∂2ECSADt
∂Et(C M R)2  0,
(26)
To represent the non-linear relationship between CSAD and CMR, we use CSADt and
C M R as proxy for the unobservable ECSADt and Et(C M R). There will be a less than
proportional increase in the CSAD estimate when cryptocurrency market participants are
more likely to herd during periods of signiﬁcant price ﬂuctuations. To capture the likelihood of
asymmetric degree of herding behaviour in the up-against-the-down-cryptocurrency market,
we perform the following econometric speciﬁcation:
CSADU P
t
 α + γ U P
1
C M RU P + γ U P
2

C M RU P
+ εt
(27)
CSADDOW N
t
 α + γ DOW N
1
C M RDOW N + γ DOW N
2

C M RDOW N
+ εt
(28)
A non-linear relation between CSAD and CMR would occur when cryptocurrency market
participants experience herding towards indicators such as the average consensus of all market
constituents during intervals of large price ﬂuctuations.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
613
(b) Relationship between CMR and rm,t
Based on Cochrane (2005) we explain the relationship between cryptocurrency market return
(C M R) and the cross-sectional average market return (rm,t) in the following way. While CMR
describes how average returns change over time, rm,t measure how average returns change
across different cryptocurrencies. In simple terms, examining the cross section of cruptocur-
rency returns, researchers want to answer the question why cryptocurrency A generates higher
or lower returns than cryptocurrency B across section of many cryptocurrencies at one point
in time. Cochrane (2005) argues that the CAPM is effectively a model that explains the cross-
section of stock returns with only one factor, the systematic risk of a stock. Considering that
the CAPM is empirically not successful in explaining the stock returns thoroughly, there are
other models, such as the Fama-French 3 factor model.
The existing literature explains the direct relation between market return and cross-
sectional market return, as the former can explain and inﬂuence the latter. For example,
Long, Zaremba, Demir, Szczygielski and Vasenin (2020) deploy cross-sectional regressions
to investigate daily returns on 151 cryptocurrencies between 2016 and 2019 and observe
that average past same-weekday returns positively predict future performance in the cross-
section. Moreover, the authors report that cryptocurrencies with high same-day returns in the
past outperform those with low same-day returns. In terms of the stock market, long-term
past returns (DeBondt & Thaler, 1985) and short-term past returns (Jegadeesh & Titman,
1993) can explain the cross-sectional variation in stock returns.
References
Agosto, A., & Cafferata, A. (2020). Financial bubbles: A study of co−explosivity in the cryptocurrency
market. Risks, 8(2), 1–14.
Ait−Sahalia, Y. and Seglam, M. (2017). High frequency market making: Implications for liquidity. Working
paper. Princeton University.
Alexander, C., & Dakos, M. (2019). A critical investigation of cryptocurrency data and analysis. Quantitative
Finance, 20(2), 173–188.
Alomari, M., & Al Rababa’a, A.R., El−Nader, G., Alkhataybeh, A., Ur Rehman, M. (2021). Examining the
effects of news and media sentiments on volatility and correlation: Evidence from the UK. The Quarterly
Review of Economics and Finance, 82, 280–297.
Anderson, L. R., & Holt, C. (1997). Information cascades in the laboratory. American Economic Review, 87(5),
847–862.
Anshuman, V. R., & Subrahmanyam, A. (1999). Price limits, information acquisition and bid−Ask spreads:
Theory and evidence. Economic Notes, 28(1), 91–118.
Antonakakis, N., Chatziantoniou, I., & Gabauer,. (2019). Cryptocurrency market contagion: Market uncer-
tainty,marketcomplexity,anddynamicportfolios.JournalofInternationalFinancialMarketsInstitutions
and Money, 61, 37–51.
Banerjee, A. V. (1992). A simple model of herd behaviour. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 797–817.
Bhosale, J., & Mavale, S. (2018). Volatility of select crypto-currencies: A comparison of Bitcoin, Ethereum
and Litecoin. Annual Research Journal of SCMS, Pune, 6, 132–141.
Bianchetti, M., Ricci, C. and Scaringi, M. (2018). Are Cryptocurrencies Real Financial Bubbles? Evidence
from Quantitative Analyses. Working paper. Intesa Sanpaolo −Financial and Market Risk Management;
University of Bologna.
Boulton,T.J.,&Braga−Alves,M.V.andKulchania,M.(2014).Theﬂashcrash:Anexaminationofshareholder
wealth and market quality. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 23, 140–156.
Bouri, E., Gupta, R., & Roubaud, D. (2019). Herding behaviour in cryptocurrencies. Finance Research Letters,
29, 216–221.
Brauneis, A., Mestel, R., Riordan, R., & Theissen, E. (2021). How to measure the liquidity of cryptocurrency
markets? Journal of Banking & Finance, 124, 106041.
123

614
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Brock, W., Dechert, W. D., Scheinkman, J., & LeBaron, B. (1996). A test for independence based on the
correlation dimension. Econometric Reviews, 15, 197–235.
Buyruko˘glu,S. (2021). Promising cryptocurrency analysis using deep learning. In: 2021 5th International
Symposium on Multidisciplinary Studies and Innovative Technologies (ISMSIT).
Cagli, E. (2019). Explosive behavior in the prices of bitcoin and altcoins. Finance Research Letters, 29,
398–403.
Cerchiello, P., & Nicola, G. (2018). Assessing news contagion in ﬁnance. Econometrics, 6(1), 1–19.
Chaim, P., & Laurini, M. P. (2019). Is bitcoin a bubble? Physica a: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications,
517, 222–232.
Chang, E. C., Chen, J. W., & Khorama, A. (2000). An examination of herd behavior in equity markets: An
international perspective. Journal of Banking and Finance, 24, 1651–1679.
Cheah, E−T., and Fry, J. (2015). Speculative bubbles in Bitcoin markets? An empirical investigation into the
fundamental value of Bitcoin. Economics Letters, 130, 32–36.
Chen, C. Y., & Hafner, C. M. (2019). Sentiment-induced bubbles in the cryptocurrency market. Journal of
Risk and Financial Management, 12(53), 2–12.
Chiang, T. C., & Zheng, D. (2010). An empirical analysis of herd behavior in global stock markets. Journal
of Banking and Finance, 34(8), 1911–1921.
Cochrane, J. (2005). Asset Pricing (Revised). Princeton University Press.
CoinSwitch. (2018d). What is Lisk (LSK)? Future of LSK Cryptocurrency and know how to buy LSK [online].
Available from https://coinswitch.co/info/lisk/what−is−lisk.
CoinSwitch. (2018e). What is Neo (NEO)? Future of NEO Cryptocurrency and know how to buy NEO [online].
Available from https://coinswitch.co/info/neo/what−i−neo.
CoinSwitch. (2018f). What is Nem (Xem) (XEM)? Future of XEM Cryptocurrency and know how to buy
XEM [online]. Available from https://coinswitch.co/info/nem/what-is−nem.
CoinSwitch. (2018a). Possible reasons for today’s cryptocurrency market crash [online]. Available
from
https://coinswitch.co/news/possible−reasons−or−today−cryptocurrency−market−crash−oc
tober−11−2018a.
CoinSwitch.(2018b). What is Bitcoincash (BCH)? Future of BCH Cryptocurrency and know how to buy BCH
[online]. Available from https://coinswitch.co/info/bitcoin−cash/what−is−bitcoin−cash.
CoinSwitch.(2018c). What is EOS? Future of EOS Cryptocurrency and know how to buy EOS [online].
Available from https://coinswitch.co/info/eos/what−is−eos.
Connolly, R. A. (1989). An examination of the robustness of the weekend effect. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 24, 133–169.
Corber, S., Lucey, B., & Yarovaya, L. (2018). Datestamping the Bitcoin and Ethereum bubbles. Finance
Research Letters, 26, 81–88.
Cretarola, A., & Figà- Talamanca, G. (2020). Bubble regime identiﬁcation in an attention−Based model for
bitcoin and ethereum price dynamics. Economics Letters, 191, 108831.
DeBondt, W., & Thaler, R. (1985). Does the stock market overreact? Journal of Finance, 40, 793–905.
Demsetz, H. (1968). The cost of transacting. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 82(1), 33–53.
Diebold, F., & X., and Yilmaz, K. (2012). Better to give than to receive: Predictive directional measurement
of volatility spillovers. International Journal of Forecasting, 28, 57–66.
DiGeorgia, J. (2018). The 2018 cryptocurrency crash is proving to be catastrophic [online]. https://wallstreet
rebel.com/wsr/cryptocurrency/the_2018_cryptocurrency_crash_is_proving_to_be_catastrophic/2018-
09-13-14-25-32.html. Accessed on 01/09/2020.
Donier, J., & Bouchaud J−P,. (2015). Why Do markets crash? Bitcoin data offers unprecedented insights.
PLoS ONE, 10(10), e0139356. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139356
Enoksen, F. A., Landsnes, C. J., Luˇcivjanská, K., & Molnár, P. (2020). Understanding risk of bubbles in
cryptocurrencies. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 176, 129–144.
Eom, Y. (2020). Kimchi premium and speculative trading in bitcoin. Finance Research Letters. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.frl.2020.101505
Fantazzini, D., Dalla Valle, L., & Giudici, P. (2008). Copulae and operational risks. International Journal of
Risk Assessment and Management, 9(3), 238–257.
Fruehwirt, W., Hochﬁlzer, L., Weydemann, L., & Roberts, S. (2020). Cumulation, crash, coherency: A cryp-
tocurrency bubble wavelet analysis. Finance Research Letters. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2020.101668
Fry, J., & Cheah, E−T. (2016). Negative bubbles and shocks in cryptocurrency markets. International Review
of Financial Analysis, 47, 343–352.
Geuder, J., Kinateder, H., & Wagner, N. F. (2019). Cryptocurrencies as ﬁnancial bubbles: The case of Bitcoin.
Finance Research Letters, 31, 179–184.
Giudici, P., & Bilotta, A. (2004). Modelling operational losses: A bayesian approach. Quality and Reliability
Engineering International, 20, 407–417.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
615
Giudici, P., & Pagnottoni, P. (2019). High frequency price change spillovers in bitcoin markets. Risks, 7(4),
111.
Giudici, P., & Polinesi, G. (2021). Crypto price discovery through correlation networks. Annals of Operations
Research, 299, 443–457.
Giudici, P., & Rafﬁnetti, E. (2021). Shapley-Lorenz eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Expert Systems with
Applications, 167, 114104.
Greenwald, B. C., & Stein, J. C. (1991). Transactional risk, market crashes, and the role of circuit breakers.
Journal of Business, 64(4), 443–462.
Gronwald, M. (2019). Is Bitcoin a commodity? On price jumps, demand shocks, and certainty of supply.
Journal of International Money and Finance, 97, 86–92.
Hendershott, T., & Seasholes, M. (2007). Market maker inventories and stock prices. American Economic
Review, 97, 210–214.
Hitam, N. A., & Ismail, A. R. (2018). Comparative performance of machine learning algorithms for cryp-
tocurrency forecasting. Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 11(3),
1121–1128.
Hong, S. (2021). Cryptocurrency automatic trading research by using Facebook deep learning algorithm.
Journal of Digital Convergence, 19(11), 359–364.
Huang, J., & Wang, J. (2009). Liquidity and market crashes. Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2607–2643.
Huang, J., & Wang, J. (2010). Market liquidity, asset prices, and welfare. Journal of Financial Economics, 95,
107–127.
Jegadeesh, N., & Titman, S. (1993). Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications for stock market
efﬁciency. Journal of Finance, 48, 65–91.
Ji, Q., Bouri, E., Lau, C., & K, M., and Roubaud, D. (2019). Dynamic connectedness and integration in
cryptocurrency markets. International Review of Financial Analysis, 63, 257–272.
Kalyvas, A., Papakyriakou, P., Sakkas, A., & Urquhart, A. (2020). What drives Bitcoin’s price crash risk?
Economics Letters, 191, 108777.
King,T.,&Koutmos,D.(2021).Herdingandfeedbacktradingincryptocurrencymarkets.AnnalsofOperations
Research, 300, 79–96. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479−020−03874−4
Kirilenko, A., Kyle, A., Samadi, M., & Tuzun, T. (2017). The ﬂash crash: High−frequency trading in an
electronic market. Journal of Finance LXXII, 3, 967–998.
Koˇcenda,E. (2010). A Test for Iid Residuals Based on Integrating Over the Correlation Integral. CERGE−EI
Working Paper Series No. 101.
Kodres, L. E., & O’Brien, D. P. (1994). The existence of pareto−Superior price limits. American Economic
Review, 84(4), 919–932.
Koker, T., & E. and Koutmos, D. (2020). Cryptocurrency trading using machine learning. Journal of Risk and
Financial Management, 13(8), 178.
Kyriazis, N., Papadamou, S., & Corbet, S. (2020). A systematic review of the bubble dynamics of cryptocur-
rency prices. Research in International Business and Finance, 54, 101254.
Lauterbach, B., & Ben−Zion U,. (1993). Stock market crashes and the performance of circuit breakers:
Empirical evidence. Journal of Finance, 48(5), 1909–1925.
Leclair, E. M. (2018). Herding in the cryptocurrency market [online]. https://www.researchgate.net/publicat
ion/324833550_Herding_in_the_cryptocurrency_market
Lee, C. (1993). Market integration and price execution for NYSE−listed securities. Journal of Finance, 48(3),
1009–1038.
Liashenko, O., Kravets, T., and Repetskyi, Y. (2021) Neural Networks in Application to Cryptocurrency
Exchange Modeling. IT&I−2020 Information Technology and Interactions.
Liew, J., & K−S., Li, R.Z., Budavári, T., and Sharma, A. (2019). Cryptocurrency Investing Examined. The
Journal of British Blockchain Association, 2(2), 1–12.
Lindley, D. V. (1957). A statistical paradox. Biometrika, 44, 187–192.
Long, H., Zaremba, A., Demir, E., Szczygielski, J. J., & Vasenin, M. (2020). Seasonality in the cross−section
of cryptocurrency returns. Finance Research Letters, 35, 101566.
Lucarelli, G. and Borrotti, M. (2019). A deep reinforcement learning approach for automated cryptocurrency
trading. Artiﬁcial intelligence applications and innovations. In: 15th IFIP WG 12.5 International Con-
ference, AIAI 2019 Hersonissos, Crete, Greece, May 24–26, 2019 Proceedings.
MacDonell, A. (2014). Popping the bitcoin bubble: An application of log−periodic power law modeling to
digital currency. University of Notre Dame. Working Paper.
McMillan, D. G. (2003). Non−linear predictability of UK stock market returns. Oxford Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics, 65(5), 531–680.
Meade, N. (2002). A comparison of the accuracy of short−term foreign exchange forecasting methods. Inter-
national Journal of Forecasting, 18, 67–83.
123

616
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 332:579–616
Meyer, D. (2018). Bitcoin bloodbath: News from Goldman Sachs is behind today’s plunging cryptocurrency
prices [online]. Available from http://fortune.com/2018/09/06/bitcoin−crash−goldman−sachs−crypto
currencies/. Accessed on 10/02/2022.
Nguyen, L. H., Chevapatrakul, T., & Yao, K. (2020). Investigating tail−risk dependence in the cryptocurrency
markets: A LASSO quantile regression approach. Journal of Empirical Finance, 58, 333–355.
Omrane, B. W., Guesmi, K., Qianru, Q., & Saadi, S. (2021). The high−frequency impact of macroeconomic
news on jumps and co−jumps in the cryptocurrency markets. Annals of Operations Research. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10479−021−04353−0
Poyser, O. (2018). Herding behaviour in cryptocurrency markets. USA: Cornell University Library.
SEC. (2001). Report of the advisory committee on market information: A blueprint for responsible change.
Report, USA: Securities and Exchange Commission, Washington, D.C.
Shroeder, S. (2018). Crypto market is crashing hard, here’s why [online]. Available from https://mashable.
com/article/crypto−market−crash−august−2018/?europe=true#vonlMSN07Pq4
Shu, M., & Zhu, W. (2020). Real−time prediction of Bitcoin bubble crashes. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications, 548, 124477.
Sun, J., Zhou, Y., and Lin, J. (2019). Using machine learning for cryptocurrency trading. In: 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Industrial Cyber Physical Systems (ICPS).
Szakmary, A. C., & Keifer, D. B. (2004). The disappearing January/Turn of the year effect: Evidence from
stock index futures and cash markets. The Journal of Futures Markets, 24(8), 755–784.
Vidal Tomás, D., Ibánes, A. M., & Farinós, J. E. (2018). Herding in the cryptocurrency market: CSSD and
CSAD approaches. Finance Research Letters. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2018.09.008
Westerhoff, F. (2003). Speculative markets and the effectiveness of price limits. Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 28(3), 493–508.
Wheatley, S., Sornette, D., Huber, T., Reppen, M., & Gantner, R. N. (2018). Are bitcoin bubbles predictable?
Combining a Generalized Metcalfe’s Law and the LPPLS Model (2018), Swiss Finance Institute Research
Paper (18–22).
White, H. (1980). A heteroscedasticity−consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for het-
eroscedasticity. Econometrica, 48, 817–838.
Xiong, J., Liu, Q., & Zhao, L. (2019). A new method to verify bitcoin bubbles: based on the production cost.
North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 51, 101095.
Yao, J., Ma, C., & He, W. P. (2014). Investor herding behaviour of Chinese stock market. International Review
of Economics and Finance, 29, 12–29.
Yaya, O. S., Ogbonna, A. E., & Olubusoye, O. (2019). How persistent and dynamic inter−dependent are pricing
of Bitcoin to other cryptocurrencies before and after 2017/18 crash? Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
and its Applications, 531, 121732.
Zhang, W., Li, Y., Xiong, X., & Wang, P. (2021). Downside risk and the cross−section of cryptocurrency
returns. Journal of Banking & Finance, 133, 106246.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123