TITLE: Social media and sensemaking patterns in new product development: demystifying the customer sentiment
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03775-6
---

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03775-6
S.I.: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Social media and sensemaking patterns in new product
development: demystifying the customer sentiment
Mihalis Giannakis1 · Rameshwar Dubey2
· Shishi Yan3 · Konstantina Spanaki4 ·
Thanos Papadopoulos5
Published online: 29 August 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Artiﬁcial intelligence by principle is developed to assist but also support decision mak-
ing processes. In our study, we explore how information retrieved from social media can
assist decision-making processes for new product development (NPD). We focus on con-
sumers’ emotions that are expressed through social media and analyse the variations of their
sentiments in all the stages of NPD. We collect data from Twitter that reveal consumers’
appreciation of aspects of the design of a newly launched model of an innovative automotive
company. We adopt the sensemaking approach coupled with the use of fuzzy logic for text
mining. This combinatory methodological approach enables us to retrieve consensus from
the data and to explore the variations of sentiments of the customers about the product and
deﬁne the polarity of these emotions for each of the NPD stages. The analysis identiﬁes
sensemaking patterns in Twitter data and explains the NPD process and the associated steps
where the social interactions from customers can have an iterative role. We conclude the
paper by outlining an agenda for future research in the NPD process and the role of the
customer opinion through sensemaking mechanisms.
Keywords Social media · New product development (NPD) · Artiﬁcial intelligence ·
Sensemaking · Customer sentiment
1 Introduction
The rapid development of Big Data Analytics, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques and their
associated applications have brought tremendous opportunities to enterprises (George et al.
2016; Zhan et al. 2020; Fosso Wamba and Akter 2019; Duan et al. 2019; Dwivedi et al. 2019;
Akter et al. 2019, 2020), but also the need to transform Operations and process management
has evolved at the same time (Matthias et al. 2017; Kache and Seuring 2017; Fosso Wamba
and Queiroz 2020). The New Product Development (NPD) is one of the strategic cores
of enterprise survival and development, and an important focus area in corporate strategy
and decision making processes (McCarthy et al. 2006; Gonzalez-Zapatero et al. 2017; Yan
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
123

146
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
and Wagner 2017). In this ever-changing environment, it is imperative for companies to
developnewproductsmeetingthedemandsofthehighlycomplex,dynamicandunpredictable
business environment (Nambisan 2002; Yan and Azadegan 2017), but also foster innovation
in the process while targeting operational efﬁciency (Lam et al. 2016).
In previous decades, NPD was highly reliant on several stages such as market research,
product idea creation and product design. The decision-making at each stage was deemed
difﬁcult because of the challenges in obtaining information from various involved parties
(McCarthy et al. 2006) and often with a signiﬁcant cost in terms of energy, ﬁnancial resources
and time to make decisions (Ogawa and Piller 2006). In the era of Big Data, Analytical
processes and AI, the traditional decision-making process has not kept up with the times; as
the evolution of technology provides cheaper and faster decision-making solutions as data
are evolving and increasing in volume and formats (Bawack et al. 2019; Feki et al. 2016;
Fosso Wamba et al. 2017; Queiroz and Telles 2018; Fosso Wamba et al. 2020), the NPD
process should also focus on “making sense” of the data available (Lycett 2013; Wei et al.
2014). The sensemaking process of public views for NPD can utilise feedback and comments
from social media and highlight the iterative role of the customer in value co-creation while
exploring the sentiment throughout the whole NPD process (Zhan et al. 2018; Du et al. 2016;
Fuchs and Schreier 2011; Majumdar and Bose 2019).
Social media provide a new communication path between the enterprise and the directly
involved stakeholders in NPD (Chae 2015; Du et al. 2016). Social media, equipped with the
latest AI techniques of text mining, could provide unpreceded decision-making opportunities
(Duan et al. 2019; Dwivedi et al. 2019). Social media sensemaking processes in operations
(Matthias et al. 2017) can reach real-time and common consensus and communication with
consumers, opening up a new path for understanding ever-changing consumer demand and
building good relationships with them (Hoyer et al. 2010). Also, the communication with
customers is deemed as essential (Bahemia et al. 2017), not only for the building external links
with the market but also for the support of internal product development teams. Social media
applications can run through the entire process of product development (Du et al. 2016; See-
To and Ngai 2018), from requirements communication, creative generation, product design,
prototype testing, product release, product promotion and information feedback to product
after-sales service. Consumers can be deeply involved in the NPD cycle (Hoyer et al. 2010),
forming a strong relationship with the corporate products, and ultimately reﬂecting consumer
demand for the newly launched products.
Building on a multidisciplinary, combinatory approach of the theoretical and empirical
foundations borrowed from Operations and Information Management, we ground our study
in the NPD and sensemaking academic ﬁelds for the analysis of social media data. We apply
the sensemaking approach to explore the customer’s perspective and sentiment as they are
expressed through social media throughout the stages of NPD. We collect data through an
API that we developed to elicit information from Twitter for a speciﬁc product from the
automotive industry. Through a sentiment analysis that is grounded on fuzzy theory for
retrieving consensus from the data, we identify the impact of customer involvement (via the
use of social media). This can be reﬂected through a variety of emotions throughout the NPD
process.
Our objective is to contribute to our knowledge on NPD by providing theoretical insights
and empirical ﬁndings for each stage and our aim to provide a research consensus for the
analysis of social media data for NPD processes based on sensemaking patterns (Weick
1995; Weick et al. 2005) of customers’ sentiments. To achieve this, we discuss the NPD
process and the associated steps where the public opinion can improve the process, and we
extend each of these steps by exploring the sensemaking patterns in data retrieved from social
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
147
media. Based on our ﬁndings we develop a research agenda for future research, highlighting
the iterative role of the customer in the NPD process and the use of social media as a
facilitator of these communications. Although previous studies have emphasized the use of
marketing intelligence and consumer preferences for the development of new products, our
study proposes a novel approach through the use of social media to identify latent product
features using a two-level analysis. The proposed sensemaking mechanisms are used through
the combination of sentiment analysis and fuzzy mathematics to provide a lens of analysing
NPD stages and on a broader scope, various operations and supply chain processes.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. First, we explain the emergence of social
media in NPD through an extensive literature review putting social media data strategies
on the core of attention alongside the sensemaking perspectives in operations management
ﬁelds. Building on this, we conceptualise and explore the aspects of the NPD to underpin our
investigation of the customer iterations in the whole process. Next, we develop a sensemaking
approach through the analysis of social media data (collected for an example product from
the automotive industry—10,210 tweets) providing the views of customers on various stages
of NPD.
2 Theoretical foundations
The question motivating our study is: What is the impact of the customer sentiment in the steps
of the Product Development Process? We aim to uncover insights from social media data of
customer views and demystify the sentiment variations during the development process and
the associated value for the overall operations.
Following Weick’s (1995) prescriptions, we adopt a sensemaking-oriented approach to
the analysis of social media data. In particular, we draw on the (commonly) conceptual work
in the NPD literature to develop a framing for the analysis of the NPD process in various
stages. We analyse the sentiment variations of the customer opinion for a case product (from
the automotive industry) for each step of the NPD process, while we explain and discuss the
arisingsensemakingpatternsofcustomerviewsforeachstageofNPDtoimprovetheproducts
and services. Thus, we provide an initial overview of the overarching theoretical concepts
whichmotivatedandsupportedthisstudy,namely:theprocessofNPD,customerparticipation
in the NPD, AI, social media and NPD and ultimately the foundations of sensemaking for
social and public opinion.
2.1 Product design and development: the NPD process
NPD activities constitute a signiﬁcant source of companies’ long-term proﬁts, and sustain-
able competitive advantage (Van Oorschot et al. 2010). NPD includes the identiﬁcation
and deployment of detailed characteristics that result progressively into genuinely new and
improved products (Levitt 1985). The products are comprised of multiple traits and embedded
components, such as quality, cost, technology, packaging and services, and any breakthrough
in one dimension can be regarded as the production of new products (Takeuchi and Nonaka
1986). Seminal research work on NPD focuses on the innovative and strategic potential of
the NPD cycle and the implications for the success or failure of the product launch (Schilling
and Hill 1998; Veryzer 1998) and the key role of Big Data Analytics and AI have to play in
this process (Trabucchi and Buganza 2019).
123

148
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
Speciﬁc NPD details include changes in product structure, technical performance, or
material that are superior to the previous generation, resulting in products more advanced
and closer to consumer demand (Ding and Eliashberg 2003). When deﬁning the functional
requirements of a new product, critical factors need to be considered, such as technological
progress, promoting business growth, increasing proﬁts, increasing customer satisfaction, or
reducing costs (Cooper et al. 2005). The company’s new products can be original products,
existing products with added unique characteristics, or new brands. At the same time, com-
panies need to analyse the characteristics of new products, from different perspectives like
sales, proﬁts, customer groups, competitors and prices to make sure which product functions
should be focused on in order to achieve success in the market.
For Hoyer et al. (2010), the NPD process includes four major stages: ideation, product
development, commercialisation, and post-launch. In this study we focus on the ﬁrst three,
leaving the post-launch phase for further research, as it can be inﬂuenced differently from
after-sales feedback (Ramanathan et al. 2017).
Ideation The idea screening stage is divided into a customer and a vendor source process
(Barczak 1995). The customer-sourced idea screening process is well suited to the needs of
a particular user or market and accounts for a large proportion of NPD (Hoyer et al. 2010).
The manufacturer develops new products according to the original product ideas proposed by
the customers. Product concept development is based on market demand through continuous
communication and feedback information from the market (Barczak et al. 2009) thus an
overall evaluation of the competitiveness and economic viability at each stage.
Product development Product development refers to developers’ or engineers’ research to
design physical products based on product concepts, so that product ideas can be transformed
into useful products (McCarthy et al. 2006). The product development process is transforming
aproductconceptintoanewproductentityandmainlysolvingtheproblemofwhetherproduct
ideas can be transformed into commercially and technically available products (Ferioli et al.
2010; Hoyer et al. 2010). The process is completed through the design, trial production,
testing and certiﬁcation of new products.
Commercialisation If the new product trial sales achieve the expected results, the company
will decide to commercialise the new products (Barczak et al. 2009). At this point, the
company should focus on the following aspects: choose the correct time to market, speciﬁc
target market and right marketing mix strategy. To truly enter the commercial circulation and
complete the ﬁnal commercial realisation, the product also needs to go through a complete
commercial packaging process to form a commodity. This usually includes activities such
as customer delivery content, product sales policies, product sales brochures, product sales
quotes, product sales agreements, and product after-sales services (Durmu¸soˇglu and Barczak
2011).
2.2 Customer participation in NPD
As the customers can have an iterative role in knowledge and opinion calls such as customer
preferences, market demand and popular trends (Chong et al. 2016), customer involvement
is deemed necessary for the NPD process (Lagrosen 2005; Tsinopoulos and Mena 2015).
In order to ensure the smooth progress of the innovation process for the increasing need
for more diversiﬁed and customised products, enterprises gradually realise the importance
of user participation. User engagement can motivate companies to generate new ideas and
encourage companies to invest more resources and capabilities into product innovation and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
149
process improvement (Poetz and Schreier 2012) supporting also customer value co-creation
initiatives (Romero and Molina 2011).
Customer participation involves a relationship of sharing of resources between the cus-
tomer and the enterprise in the process of enterprise NPD, providing valuable knowledge
and information to the process (Chang and Taylor 2015). It has multiple manifestations such
as: jointly developing new products or technologies; paying close attention to user demand
for product performance, preferences on appearance types; implementing user knowledge
management and better service NPD (Lin and Germain 2004). Customer engagement also
could refer to the resources (capabilities, ideas, knowledge, investments) that users provide
in NPD activities (Mikkola and Skjøtt-Larsen 2004).
The above deﬁnitions mainly describe the speciﬁc lines of user participation, deﬁning the
role of the user and the scope of activities involved. The involvement of customers in the
NPD process is vast and could provide a competitive advantage for value co-creation (Hoyer
et al. 2010), a decision-making mechanism (McCarthy et al. 2006) and a source of creativity
(Stevens et al. 2003) for NPD. Combined with the above research, user participation our
study is based on information resource sharing and performance improvement. The company
actively invites users to participate in innovative activities such as product and technology
process development, to achieve the absorption and utilisation of essential resources such as
customer knowledge, information and capabilities.
2.3 AI, social media and NPD
Access to information about customers’ product needs, preferences and needs are often
seen as a foundation of successful innovation in NPD (Poetz and Schreier 2012; Chang and
Taylor 2015; Lam et al. 2016; Hartmann et al. 2016). According to recent surveys, most
enterprises regard social media information as an important source of enterprise’s innovation
(Cui et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2015), which is of considerable signiﬁcance to enterprise product
development. As a result, many researchers have focused on social media, applying social
media data to their business processes, and integrating customers into the company’s NPD
(Du et al. 2016). Users can feedback product requests or ideas on social media platforms,
and these online interactions or online comment exchanges have become the focus of NPD
researchers (Chan et al. 2017; Fuchs and Schreier 2011; Gu and Ye 2014).
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), as a principle, existed for over 6 decades, however, the last
decade the term came back to popularity (Duan et al. 2019). Nowadays, AI is mostly applied
for decision making; where the common role of AI is either to support/assist the human
decision makers, or to replace them (Bawack et al. 2019; Duan et al. 2019; Dwivedi et al.
2019). One of the most popular AI techniques for decision-making is through text mining
techniques, obtaining insight from social media content (Bawack et al. 2019; Fosso Wamba
et al. 2019). As the progress of AI enables stakeholders to obtain knowledge from social
media, new requirements evolve as to demystify the knowledge and make sense of it, and
the major challenge is to undertake more complex tasks that require cognitive capabilities
(Duan et al. 2019).
Many scholars have fully afﬁrmed the critical value of social media for the process trans-
formation but also product development (Aral et al. 2013). Social media can be a powerful
platform for collaboration between companies and customers, where the user-generated con-
tent can provide valuable insights for operational development (Fader and Winer 2012). Piller
and Walcher (2006) propose a social network-based creative contest application that allows
manufacturers to get innovative ideas and solutions from their users. Social media also enable
123

150
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
companies to monitor the list of competitors, track trends in other companies’ news releases,
identify new products, and understand potential customer needs (Fan and Gordon 2014).
The availability and use of social media have opened new ways of value creation and
potential to business and process transformation (Rad et al. 2018), as well as unprecedented
operational opportunities for collaboration (Kane et al. 2014). Moving beyond marketing
value to innovative product development, multiple opportunities arise as social media provide
new methods in marketing, information systems and social sciences research and can also go
towards directions related to operations management, where the opportunities could increase
for innovative processes, products or services (Leonardi 2014; Levina and Arriaga 2014).
Chae (2015) but also Mishra and Singh (2018) emphasize the potential role of social
media for a wide array of supply chain practices (such as professional networks, stakeholder
engagement, demand shaping, new product/service development and supply chain risk man-
agement). Singh et al. (2018) also posit that using text mining methods for social media
analysis could help to improve the management of the supply chain. There is a growing
body of literature that advocates that the analysis of data collected from social media, while
focusing on the main concerns of consumers can provide a series of recommendations for
developing a consumer-centric supply chain (Chae 2015; Lam et al. 2016; See-To and Ngai
2018; Singh et al. 2018).
2.4 Sensemaking and social media
Social media in general, and Twitter feeds in particular, are often used for expression of pub-
lic opinion in the political discussion (Stieglitz and Dang-Xuan 2013), crisis management in
emergencies (Fosso Wamba et al. 2019; Kumar et al. 2020; Singh et al. 2019) and informa-
tion sharing for humanitarian operations (Maresh-Fuehrer and Smith 2016; Panagiotopoulos
et al. 2016). Bruns and Stieglitz (2013) explain that often Twitter can support and inﬂuence
various situations, spanning from isolated crises to cultural interactions, but also reviews
of products and services (Rehman et al. 2016; See-To and Ngai 2018). However, the major
problem identiﬁed in Twitter-based communication as a data collection method is the lack
of standard metrics for comparing communicative patterns across cases (Bruns and Stieglitz
2013). Identifying and making sense of prevailing patterns within the collected data from
social media, while disseminating and sharing information, could be challenging as various
sources should be ﬁltered and integrated for this process (Zeng et al. 2010). An additional
challenge in the use of social media content could be around the different ways this content
could be interpreted, or even misinterpreted (Stieglitz and Dang-Xuan 2013). Therefore, a
rigorous analysis should be followed in order to extract the exact content speciﬁcs, and iden-
tify the various roles of the content generators, as well as their sentiment (Feldman 2013;
Pang and Lee 2009).
Sensemaking is a generic term that refers to the processes of interpretation whereby indi-
viduals and groups interpret and reﬂect on phenomena (Weick et al. 2005). The sensemaking
cycle iterates the social means of people enactment of their experiences and views, through
verbal or written communication and negotiations (Light et al. 1967). In Operations and Sup-
ply Chain Management several best practices have been applied to enhance sensemaking,
such as interaction with both suppliers and customers at trade shows, cross-organisational
or cross-functional teams, or the use of the practice of the guest engineer at suppliers’
sites. These practices facilitate the development of common understanding of critical issues.
Through the development and use of a shared vocabulary, the individual understanding and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
151
Table 1 Research design
Stage
Process and speciﬁcs
Contribution
Research design
a. Data collection
Process methods to collect the
twitter data (API development)
Speciﬁcs of the process deﬁning the
product and the data collection
period
Methodological (deﬁning the data
collection requirements)
b. Initial exploratory phase
Process sentiment analysis of the
collected Twitter data
Speciﬁcs of the process identifying
the polarity and sentiment of the
customers’ views for each of the
NPD phases
Theoretical (enhancing sentiment
analysis background for NPD
process)
Methodological (deﬁning sentiment
analysis requirements)
c. In-depth analysis
Process sensemaking approach
through fuzzy mathematics
Speciﬁcs of the process identifying
patterns in the data for each of the
NPD processes through techniques
of fuzzy mathematics
Theoretical (sensemaking approach
for social media data analysis)
Methodological (deﬁning
requirements for pattern analysis
through fuzzy mathematics)
appreciation is integrated to collective cognitions that shape decision making (Grant 1996;
Revilla and Knoppen 2015).
Sensemaking as a way to deﬁne patterns from social media data can also be conceived as
ethnomethodology to study different ways that people construct a stable social world through
everyday utterances and actions (Garﬁnkel 2016). In our study, we apply an interpretative
scheme and hermeneutics (Myers et al. 2011; Walsham 1995) to social media data, in order
to elicit information and knowledge and identify the sensemaking patterns for the analysis
of customer views. Therefore, the sensemaking approach as it is presented in this study
provides a methodological grounding, where the application of fuzzy mathematics assists in
identifying the patterns/themes in the data which can make sense for each of the NPD stages.
3 Research design
Our study is highly motivated and inﬂuenced by the work of Chan et al. (2016) that extracted
data from Facebook via the NCapture tool. For accurate content analysis, the researchers
selected the NPD-related factors (such as product price, product performance) by high-
frequency word sorting to establish a model for NPD evaluation. Their model logically links
the features that customers care most about with NPD. There are a few studies on NPD
supporting how product performance can determine market strategy, product development
process and product services (Cho and Lee 2013). Our study frames the whole analysis of the
NPD process for the speciﬁc product in four distinct aspects related to the style-appearance,
performance, conﬁguration and service. These four features were identiﬁed as the common
sensemaking patterns (prevailing themes in the data) characterised by the high frequency
within the content of collected tweets (Mirbabaie and Zapatka 2017) and review the qualities
of the product under research.
Our research design draws on three major stages (Table 1), namely:
123

152
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
a. The data collection stage,
b. The initial exploratory phase (sentiment analysis)
c. The in-depth analysis (sensemaking approach through fuzzy mathematics).
The data collection process included the required methods to collect the twitter data, for
a given product in a speciﬁc period. The exploratory phase served the purposes of an initial
exploratory analysis of the collected Twitter data, identifying the polarity and sentiment of
the customers’ views for each of the NPD phases. The ﬁnal stage adapted the principles
of sensemaking in identifying patterns in the data for each of the NPD processes through
techniques of fuzzy mathematics. These stages are explained further in the following sub-
sections.
4 First stage: data collection
The case product As the automotive industry is one of the main research contexts in operations
and supply chain management (e.g., Lin and Zhou 2011; Kim et al. 2011; Prahinski and
Benton 2004; Wagner et al. 2009; Childerhouse et al. 2003), we selected as an exemplary
case a product from the automotive industry as our research context. In recent years, with
the exhaustion of energy and the popularity of new energy vehicles, people are increasingly
aware of the importance of new energy vehicles and are beginning to buy new energy vehicles
or electric vehicles. Tesla, an American electric vehicle and energy company, is the ﬁrst to
be sought. Moreover, Model X is a new model of Tesla and recently has entered the global
market, therefore it could base as an example case the speciﬁcs of this study. Through the
sentiment analysis and the fuzzy theory for text mining of tweets, we explore the variations
of sentiments of the customers about the product. As quantitative methods of text analysis
will also bring basis and support the results of the sentiment analysis, we postulate that we
adopt a holistic perspective about the negative and positive emotions about Tesla’s product
development, or redesign stages.
Twitter data Our study is based on commentary twitter data about Tesla’s Model X char-
acteristics. Comments and responses to a tweet are also crucial as well as the retweeting
behaviour (Bruns and Stieglitz 2013; Stieglitz and Dang-Xuan 2013). The Twitter open plat-
form can easily provide developers with rich applications and complete service platforms
using third-party access (Chae 2015). Developers can access rich interface resources accord-
ing to the application service process, and there are plenty of data interfaces that can be
collected, including tweets, users’ information, content, relationships, and topics (Bruns and
Stieglitz 2013; Mirbabaie and Zapatka 2017). There are two main types of data collection
methods from Twitter: (1) Twitter Open Platform Application Programming Interface (API),
which can conveniently and quickly obtain Tweets in batches and (2) Web crawler tech-
nology that can automatically extract information from web pages. Due to the freedom and
freeness of the Twitter open platform, and for the purposes of this study, we chose to collect
data through Twitter’s free and open-source API, Tweepy, which is based on Python and can
provide a large to a rich pool of data. In “Appendix A” we provide the code for the data
collection and a snapshot of the collected data.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
153
5 Second stage (exploratory phase)
Twitter data and information are mostly in the form of text. Conducting a sentiment analysis
with Tesla Model X’s commentary can provide the means to consider the users’ opinions.
Our proposition is that by following the inclusion of social media in their NPD processes,
Tesla could potentially match the needs of consumers as much as possible, and make rational
decisions based on customer requirements.
The construction of a sentiment dictionary is a fundamental primary stage in the senti-
ment analysis. We used a lexicon-based approach to extract sentiment from the texts. The
extent of which the sentiment dictionary could be comprehensive and accurate is primarily
inﬂuenced by the results of the analysis of the emotional sentiment of the text (Burnap et al.
2015; McKenna et al. 2017). Our approach adopted the following process: We constructed
a domain of emotional resources, developed the evaluation of information quaternions, and
then calculated the emotional polarity of phrases and sentences (Lau et al. 2014).
A speciﬁc domain of sentiment lexicon has been constructed within a particular sentiment
analysis environment. The expanded sentiment dictionary made up for the incompleteness
of the basic sentiment dictionary, the disadvantages of domain emotional words and online
emotional words are not included and improve the accuracy of emotional sentiment analysis.
The construction of the domain sentiment dictionary comprised the selection of emotional
seed words, the extension of the emotional dictionary (the ﬁeld words are added to the
dictionary), and the calculation of the weight of the emotional words.
5.1 Research propositions
Our research propositions were formed around ﬁve thematic clusters, related to product
characteristics as these are introduced by Popescu and Etzioni (Popescu and Etzioni 2007):
Proposition 1 The customer is interested and comments on general characteristics of the
product throughout the new product development lifecycle phases.
Proposition 2 The customer is interested and comments on the product’s components
throughout the new product development lifecycle phases.
Proposition 3 The customer is interested and comments on the appearance-aesthetics
throughout the new product development lifecycle phases.
Proposition 4 The customer is interested and comments on the product’s attributes through-
out the new product development lifecycle phases.
Proposition 5 The customer is interested and comments on product-related concepts
throughout the new product development lifecycle phases.
5.2 Evaluation object and evaluation methods
The ﬁve thematic clusters which formed the propositions of this research were applied as
evaluation objects. The evaluation object of the tweet is the user’s opinion on a speciﬁc aspect
of a certain product. In the commentary information of the tweet, the evaluation object mainly
refers to the product itself, a speciﬁc attribute or characteristic of the product, and the situation
of some things related to the product itself (logistics, customer service, outer packaging). The
123

154
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
ﬁve types of product evaluation objects used for the sentiment analysis could be summarised
as (Popescu and Etzioni 2007): (1) the overall product, (2) the product’s components, (3) the
appearance-aesthetics, (4) the product’s attributes and (5) product-related concepts.
The product evaluation objects (Popescu and Etzioni 2007) are represented in the tweets
in the following exemplary manner.
1. “Tesla is very good” (the overall product) where the evaluation object is “Tesla” itself
2. “The design of the seat is not very suitable for human factors” (the product components)
where the evaluation object is the part of the car “the seat of the car”;
3. “The colour of this car is not good” (the appearance-aesthetics) where the evaluation
object “colour” is related to the appearance of the car;
4. “The engine of Tesla’s engine is not good” (the product’s own attributes) where the
evaluation object “engine” is the performance of the product;
5. “Regular maintenance is not good” (the product-related concepts) where “maintenance”
is relevant to the product-related properties.
The extraction of the evaluation objects is mainly used to obtain the speciﬁc object for
which the expression provides the evaluation information. In the study of the evaluation object
extraction, the evaluation information corpus is pre-processed (discontinuation word process-
ing, the lemmatisation and part-of-speech tagging), nouns or noun phrases are extracted as
candidate evaluation object sets, and then the collection is performed by statistical methods.
Finally, the noun words less than a certain threshold are removed, and the more frequent
nouns or noun phrases are retained as the evaluation object set.
5.3 Extraction of emotional words
Our evaluation method followed a lexicon-based extraction method which is highly supported
by Computational Linguistics research (Qiu et al. 2011; Taboada et al. 2011) in text mining
unsupervised knowledge extraction through AI (Quan and Ren 2014; Rozenfeld and Feldman
2011). Firstly, the evaluation information was pre-processed, and then the processed words
were compared with the pre-built emotional domain sentiment lexicon (adverb dictionary,
negative words dictionary and turning words dictionary). If the word we found was in the
dictionary, we concluded that this is an emotional word, and subsequently obtained the
corresponding word information; if the word was not in the dictionary, then we evaluated
the next words until the end of the whole sentence in the tweet. When emotional words were
found in a sentence, the same method was used to traverse the negative dictionary, the adverb
dictionary, the turning word dictionary. With this process, the corresponding word weight
was obtained accordingly.
Based on the extraction of the evaluation words and the evaluation objects, a phrase-based
quaternary model was then constructed. The evaluation path obtained the relevant elements
of the phrase to facilitate the calculation based on the emotional polarity related rules of the
evaluation information. For an evaluation message of Tesla on Twitter, the user evaluation
information was segmented into phrases, and a four-tuple model of sentiment analysis was
then constructed based on the phrase.
For example: “The engine performance is not good, but the GPS system is very good,
and I like it very much.” The evaluation information was divided into three phrases: “The
engine performance is not good”, “but the GIS system is very good” and “I like it very
much”. The evaluation factors were sequentially extracted for the evaluation phase. For the
subjective evaluation information that did not contain commodity attributes such as “I like
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
155
it very much”, the pronoun “I” was directly removed during pre-processing, and only the
emotional phrase “like very much” was retained.
5.4 Calculation of emotional values
For the sentiment analysis of tweets, the emotional tendencies of the constructed feature quads
were analysed (Ilieva et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019). According to fuzzy statistical analysis,
the common four-tuple of emotional phrases follow the four identiﬁed sets of conditions:
Evaluation Object (O) + Emotional Words (W)
In our analysis, the emotional extremes of the quad phrase were judged by combining the
weight of the evaluation object and the emotional polarity and intensity of the words in the
sentiment dictionary. For example, in the phrase “This car is beautiful”, the commentary
only contains the evaluation object “this car” and the evaluation of the emotional word
“beautiful”. When calculating the emotional polarity of the tweet, it is only necessary to
multiply the weight of the evaluation object and the weight of the emotional word. In the
tweets where the evaluation sentence contained a plurality of evaluation quads, all the quads
were weighted and summed to obtain the emotional polarity of the entire sentence.
Evaluation Object (O) + Negative Words (N) + Emotional Words (W)
However, the emotional polarity of emotional words is not only related to negative words
but also closely related to the number of negative words. When the quaternion performs
the emotional polarity calculation, the weight of the evaluation object, the weight of the
negative word, and the weight of the emotional word were multiplied to obtain the emotional
extreme value of the emotional phrase. In the case where there were several negative words,
the weight of the negative words was multiplied by the corresponding number of times.
When the number of negative words was even, this was consistent with the polarity of the
emotional words; in the case where the number was odd, this was opposite to the polarity of
the emotional words. For example, for the tweets “this car is not beautiful,” and “this car is
not no beautiful”, the number of negative words in these two sentences is different, and the
apparent emotional polarity is inconsistent.
Evaluation Object (O) + Adverb (Ad) + Emotional Words (W)
An additional layer in our analysis included the tweets/sentences in which the appearance of
modiﬁed adverbs could potentially enhance the emotional intensity of emotional words. The
emotional polarity of a phrase changes appropriately with the degree of emotional adverbs
based on emotional words. For example, in the tweet “this car is pretty beautiful”, the inclu-
sion of the degree adverb “pretty”, the apparent emotional word “beautiful” is moderated.
The calculation of the polarity of the emotional words is not a simple weighted summa-
tion, but on the basis of the extreme values of the modiﬁed emotional words, the emotional
intensity is strengthened. The formula we used in our analysis is:
If the emotional word (W) is positive, then
Polarity  (W) + (1 −(W)) ∗(Ad)
If the emotional word (W) is negative, then
Polarity  (W) + (−1 −(W)) ∗(Ad)
123

156
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
Table 2 Examples of calculations of quaternions of emotional values
Type of combination
Formula
Example
Value
S  W
W
This car is beautiful
0.7
S  N + W
N*W
This car is not beautiful
−0.7
S  N1 + N2 + W
N1*N2*W
This car is not no beautiful
0.7
S  Ad + W
Positive: W + (1 −W) *Ad
This car is pretty beautiful
0.91
Negative: W + (−1 −W) *Ad
This car is pretty ugly
−0.91
S  N + Ad + W
Positive: W*N + (1 −W) *Ad
This car is not pretty beautiful
−0.49
Negative: W*N + (−1 −W) *Ad
This car is not pretty ugly
0.49
Taking the previous example into account, if the value of the emotional word “beautiful”
is 0.7, then the emotional phrase “pretty beautiful” is (0.7 + (1 −0.7) * 0.7) is 0.91. Based
on obtaining the weight of the emotional words, the weights of the evaluation objects were
subsequently weighted and summed to obtain the emotional extreme values of the evaluation
phrases.
Evaluation Object (O) + Negative Words (N) + Adverb (Ad) + Emotional Words (W)
In tweets where the negative words and adverbs appeared at the same time, based on the
multiplication of the weights of the sentiment words and the weights of the negative words,
the weights of the evaluation objects were weighted and summed to obtain the emotional
extremes of the evaluation phrases. The formula we used in our analysis is:
If the emotional word (W) is positive, then
Polarity  (W) ∗(N) + (1 −(W)) ∗(Ad)
If the emotional word (W) is negative, then
Polarity  (W) ∗(N) + (−1 −(W)) ∗(Ad)
The above rules cover the emotional expression of most of the commentary phrases.
Our analysis was built on the method proposed by Taboada et al. (2011), as a formula for
calculating the emotional polarity of the quaternary (Table 2).
By using the degree adverbs, negative words, sentiment lexicons, and several statistical
rules introduced above, the emotional polarity and emotional extremes of most evaluation
information quads were calculated. In “Appendix B” we provide the code in python for the
sentiment analysis.
6 Third stage: in-depth analysis (sensemaking patterns based on fuzzy
mathematics)
In the previous section, we discussed in detail the way that the sentiment analysis was
performed on Tesla’s Model X for a single tweet message. For the sentiment analysis of a
single tweet, the method directs to one of the ﬁve categories of the user’s emotional tendency
toward the product {very good, good, average, poor, very poor}. The proposed method can
be convenient for the decision-makers or the company (Tesla) to categorize and understand
the polarity of the information. However, it may take a lot of time to go through the ﬁve
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
157
Table 3 Example of category for evaluating features
First-level indicator
Second-level indicator
Object
B1 style appearance
C1 Colour
Black, white, silver-metallic, sky-blue
C2 Space
Enough, crowded, small
C3 Shape
Flat, double-door
B2 Performance
C4 Speed
Fast, slow-start, acceleration
C5 Engine
Powerful, dynamic
C6 Displacement
Low-emission
B3 Conﬁguration
C7 Sunroof
Airy, ventilate
C8 GPS
Accurate, sensitive
C9 Seat comfort
Comfortable, leathery
B4 Service
C10 Price
Cheap, expensive
C11 Maintenance
Complete, leather-protection
C12 Cleanliness
Clean, dirty
categories to see the attitude of each tweet. For that purpose, the proposed method of a fuzzy
comprehensive evaluation is used for sentiment analysis, to quantify the qualitative emotional
tendency and to calculate the complete emotional value of the commodity through a detailed
evaluation model. This comprehensive value can assist the company (Tesla) to decide, plan
and improve the future steps or processes of NPD.
6.1 Classification of evaluation objects
The following step in our analysis of Twitter feeds was the construction of the evaluation
indicator system of Tesla’s X model. The evaluation indicator system was used to summarise
and reﬂect the users’ appreciation of the product (Zhou et al. 2019). Due to their generality,
the evaluation indicators cannot cover all the evaluation objects. Hence, the evaluation objects
were classiﬁed to obtain the fuzzy evaluation and the index weights by using fuzzy statistics
so as to conduct a comprehensive sentiment analysis on Tesla (Vatrapu et al. 2016; Zhou et al.
2019). In order to obtain the aspects of Tesla’s X model that consumers are interested in, ﬁrst
we conducted a word frequency statistic of all the words that were used in the twitter com-
ments. Our analysis shows that the words “grey”, “small”, “V-shape”, “fast”, “powerful”,
“low-emission”, “big-sunroof”, “accurate”, “comfortable”, “economy”, “good service”
and “clean” are the most frequently used about the X model. Based on these evaluation
objectives, all the evaluation objects were classiﬁed according to the ﬁrst-level indicators
and the second-level indicators determined in the indicator structure model. The speciﬁc
categories are shown in Table 3 below.
6.2 Construction of indicator system
The evaluation indicator system is a core and critical link in the evaluation of Tesla vehicles. In
the indicator system for building a certain product, many scholars have constructed various
reasonable structural models of commodity evaluation indicators, which can bring a lot
of substantial help to the company’s further development. Based on the analysis of many
structural models (e.g. Soukhoroukova et al. 2012; Malviya and Kant 2016; Wu et al. 2015)
123

158
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
Fig. 1 The evaluation indicator
system
A1 Item Evaluation 
Factor
B1 Style / 
Appearance
Colour
Space
Shape
B2 
Performance
Speed
Engine
Displacement
B3 
Configuration
Sunroof
GPS
Seat Comfort
B4 Service
Price
Maintenance
Cleanliness
and combined with the evaluation information of users on Twitter, the indicator structure
model for our study is shown in Fig. 1. For Tesla’s evaluation indicator structure model, the
determination of indicators is a factor that most users are concerned about. However, we
acknowledge that there can be evaluation models that can include more or other indicators.
6.3 Determination of the evaluation indicators
In the process of fuzzy evaluation of products (Malviya and Kant 2016; Wu et al. 2015),
each evaluation indicator has a different inﬂuence on the product, so it is necessary to cal-
culate the weight coefﬁcient of the indicator reasonably. At present, there are two standard
methods for calculating the weights of the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation indicators: sub-
jective and objective weighting methods. The ﬁrst is based on the subjective judgment of
an individual’s comments to determine the index weight. There are some common subjec-
tive weighting methods, such as the Delphi method and the direct judgment method. The
subjective weighting method is convenient and straightforward to use, but it strongly relies
on people’s judgements. The objective weighting method uses statistical methods, and the
weights are determined according to statistical correlations, such as principal component
analysis, entropy method, etc. This method has a more accurate theoretical basis, higher
credibility, and is suitable for a large amount of data, but the calculation is relatively cum-
bersome.
The weight determination method that we used is more in line with objective facts than the
method used by the previous researchers. It can not only use large-scale evaluation informa-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
159
tion, but also make the weight determination more convincing, and can carry out incremental
weight calculation. At the same time, it reduces the tediousness of double counting, saves
time, and maximises the use of tweet information.
Based on the advantages and disadvantages of the above two methods, we propose a more
concise and easier to understand evaluation index weight assignment method.
• First, we count the number of pieces of comment information of the item (n)
• Then, we obtain the evaluation object through the extraction method of the evaluation
object mentioned earlier
• Finally, the frequency of mention of each evaluation object is multiplied by the score of
the previous sentiment analysis.
6.4 Example analysis
Based on the previous steps of the sentiment analysis, the secondary indicator score is equal
to the average of the scores in the tweet containing corresponding objectives. Based on each
secondary indicator, we can calculate a rating for each primary indicator. This is calculated
by dividing the sum of all secondary indicator scores by the number of secondary indicators
(Shown in Table 4).
An indicative example of the sentiment analysis is shown in Table 5. We provide only
one example for illustration purposes, due to the large number of the collected tweets (also
shown in “Appendix C”).
Style/appearance Based on our analysis, the score of the style/appearance indicator is
0.31 (0.78 in colour, 0.02 in size and 0.14 in shape) and the proportion of style/appearance
is 0.28. As can be seen from the data in Table 4, the users are positively disposed toward the
style/appearance of Tesla Model X. Style/appearance’s mention rate is about 28% of the sum
of the four aspects. Based on the data, this part focuses on how to conduct the NPD process
from two aspects, namely idea generation and idea screening.
Performance The score for the performance indicator is −0.04 (−0.36 in terms of speed,
−0.23 in terms of engine, 0.46 in terms of displacement) and the proportion of performance
is 0.33. The performance of the Tesla Model X is the company’s ﬁrst priority. On the one
hand, the performance rate of mention is the highest of the four ﬁrst-level indicators. On
the other hand, according to the user’s tweets, the performance of Model X appears to be at
a medium level. Based on this analysis, we can extrapolate that Tesla’s design department
should pay attention to this aspect of the products’ characteristics.
Conﬁguration The score for the conﬁguration indicator is 0.32 (−0.24 for the sunroof,
0.85 for the GPS and 0.35 in terms of seat comfort). 18% of users’ comments focus on the
product’s conﬁguration and the proportion of the conﬁguration indicator is 0.18. According
to our results, Tesla Model X’s perceived evaluation in terms of conﬁguration is considered
good. The most frequent user tweets referred to the design of the sunroof. Based on our data,
the conﬁguration of the sunroof does not appear to meet consumers’ expectations. Therefore,
in the idea generation or the idea screening processes, the company should pay more attention
to the redesign of the sunroof.
Service:Thescoreoftheserviceindicatoris−0.33(−0.54inprice,−0.11inmaintenance
and −0.34 in cleanliness) and the proportion of service is 0.21. According to our results,
Tesla Model X’s overall service is in a poor state, especially in terms of price. For those users
who tweeted about the product’s service dimensions, price is also the most eminent issue.
So, this part will focus on the price of the Tesla Model X.
123

160
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
Table 4 Primary and secondary indicators score table in Tesla Model X
First-level indicator
Second-level indicator
Frequency
Second-level score
First-level score
First-level proportion
First-level weight
B1 Style/appearance
C1 Colour
1086
0.78
0.31
0.28
0.08
C2 Size
928
0.02
C3 Shape
876
0.14
B2 Performance
C4 Speed
2026
−0.36
−0.04
0.33
−0.01
C5 Engine
563
−0.23
C6 Displacement
731
0.46
B3 Conﬁguration
C7 Sunroof
602
−0.24
0.32
0.18
0.06
C8 Gps
448
0.85
C9 Seat comfort
798
0.35
B4 Service
C10 Price
1356
−0.54
−0.33
0.21
−0.07
C11 Maintenance
374
−0.11
C12 Cleanliness
422
−0.34
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
161
Table 5 Partial tweet analysis results
Tweet
Objective
Second-level indicator
Score
My Tesla model X is only a low-proﬁle version of 70
kWh (the 85-kWh model is equipped with a
higher-powered motor), and the acceleration capability
is already mad, and I always want to test drive the P85D
Acceleration
Speed
−0.8
Tesla Model X’s dynamic performance is amazing
Dynamic
Engine
0.75
Tesla’s model X during driving, my son said the seat
made him very comfortable
Seat
Seat comfort
0.91
rt omicrono tesla prepara un kart elctrico con forma de
model x para adultos
/
/
/
The new slipstream wheels offer a multi-axis design
similar to the previous cyclone, echoing the
streamlined lines of the Tesla Model X, which is great
Streamline
Shape
0.7
7 Discussion
7.1 Implications for research
In this paper, we set off to investigate how information retrieved from social media can
assist decision-making processes and customer co-creation for NPD. Our analysis identiﬁed
sensemaking patterns in Twitter data, thereby explaining the NPD process and the associated
steps where the social interactions from customers can have an iterative role. We contribute
to the literature of NPD using digital innovations (e.g. Akter et al. 2020; Fosso Wamba et al.
2019), as we discuss the importance of digital innovations (supported by technology-Twitter)
in making people’s emotions evident and present, and how people appreciate (or disapprove)
the design of a product. Furthermore, we acknowledge the role of Big Data Analytics and
AI in this process (Trabucchi and Buganza 2019) as we attempt to make sense of the use of
Twitter data during NPD. Hence, we extend current studies (e.g. Kumar et al. 2020) in that we
use this data to make sense of the proposed products during the NPD process, reinvigorating
the role of customers as active participants in the process of co-creation (Irani et al. 2017).
Therefore, we contribute to the research on effective customer involvement to create synergies
and networks that are necessary for the creation of products that satisfy customer needs and
aspirations and the strategic goals of the organisation (Romero and Molina 2011; Niesten
and Stefan 2019).
By analysing Twitter data, we illustrate the usefulness of social media in the co-creation
process as a sense-making device that assists managers and developers to make sense of the
data available (Lycett 2013; Wei et al. 2014) and customer sentiment and decision-making
opportunities (Duan et al. 2019; Dwivedi et al. 2019) throughout the whole NPD process
(Zhan et al. 2018; Du et al. 2016; Fuchs and Schreier 2011; Majumdar and Bose 2019).
Therefore, we argue that the NPD is inseparable from the familiarity with the law of market
operation and the understanding of customer needs. It is necessary to ﬁrst form market data
and information into new product (technology) concepts, and then combine concepts into
research and development projects. Social media is the optimal platform where the company
can conduct data/sentiment collection and analysis which is a fundamental prerequisite for
NPD.
123

162
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
7.2 Implications for practice
This study has signiﬁcant implications for practitioners and managers who are involved in
NPD. It illustrates how companies can harness social media to improve aspects of the design.
For instance, the results of the analysis of the case show that even though customers are
satisﬁed in terms of the style/appearance of the studied product, 28% of the customers are
concerned about the current style/appearance of the product. During the idea generation stage
of product design, the company could consider what aspects of Model X’s performance can
be improved. The sentiment analysis can assist in the design of a brand new sunroof, but also
help the company to improve the existing sunroof. In this way, social media data can help a
company get ideas from consumers, but also to collect feedback related to opinion generation.
For the screening phase, the results suggest that social media can play an important role in the
idea screening stage. Big data analysis based on social media can perform behaviour analysis
on users. In this way, companies can establish evaluation criteria in the idea screening pro-
cess in NPD. Within the product development phase, a company could understand the target
market conditions and deﬁne target consumers at the early stage of the new product market
strategy formulation. Consumers are constantly changing their communication methods and
consumption patterns in the face of different new media and platforms. Social media analytics
provides real-time data to understand consumers’ social media usage habits, social content,
and the motivation behind them. Finally, in terms of commercialization, product managers
(e.g. the product manager of Tesla Model X) need to consider these aspects, price, main-
tenance and cleanliness. On one hand, when faced with the advertising-based commercial
product, the manager can emphasize this part of the repricing, as well as highlight free main-
tenance and cleaning services. On the other hand, product managers can develop value-added
services, such as high-end paid maintenance, which can improve customers’ satisfaction.
Our study calculates a score from the sentiment analysis, which is very useful for product
managers, as it determines the customer satisfaction of aspects of Tesla Model X. The propor-
tional which results from the fuzzy theory is used to determine which aspects of the product
are the main objects mentioned by the user on Twitter. To be important, the weight, the product
between the score and the proportion, determines the priority of each part of Tesla Model X in
terms of existing and limited human resources, ﬁnancial resources, and technical resources.
To sum up, our study highlights that social media can positively contribute to all the stages
of NPD of a company. Social media can play three distinctive roles in a company’s NPD
process. Firstly, social media can help to explore the direction of innovation in new products.
In addition to well-known platforms, many unfamiliar platforms, such as professional forums
or blogs, also provide a wealth of information to help companies’ NPD. Social media can also
change the traditional way of exploring new ideas. NPD is often inﬂuenced by unanticipated
market segments. However, traditional marketing research is difﬁcult to reach these segments.
Relying on social media makes it easy to get relevant information. A company simply needs
to develop processes and systems that enable social media users to participate throughout
the process. In addition, social media can assist in the commercialization of new product
launches. A company can use social networking sites to achieve broad user engagement and
generate innovative and interactive ways to spark customer interest in new products.
8 Conclusion
An important application area of Data Analytics and AI is to mine and analyse a large number
of product reviews on social media. Its primary purpose is to discover underlying patterns
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
163
to assess more accurately certain capabilities and drawbacks of products or services (Chan
et al. 2016; Fader and Winer 2012). The utmost interest of a product review is to support
a company through AI in identifying and obtaining the characteristics or attributes of the
product, know the subjective comments of the user, extract comments and collocations, and
distinguish the user’s tendency (Singh et al. 2017) so that the company can plan and tailor
the production strategy analogously. The extraction of information serves many roles for
NPD, like market research, collections of customer’s requests and the choice of strategy. The
information extracting and sensemaking of product reviews is mostly based on data mining
techniques of AI. However, since the subject of the product review is the name of the product,
the focus of the product review is to extract information around the speciﬁc characteristics
of the product and the corresponding emotional words (Bruns and Stieglitz 2013).
With the popularity of Internet users, social media have become an important part of
people’s daily lives. The sentiment analysis and fuzzy analysis of the evaluation of products
in social media can affect the process of NPD to a certain extent. Based on our study’s
objectives, we carried out an in-depth research and generated insights for the improvement of
the use of social media in the NPD process through a combination of sentiment analysis and
fuzzy mathematics for the identiﬁcation of sensemaking patterns that can assist companies
in several stages of NPD.
The limitations of the study have to do with the limited generalisability because of
the choice of one case in a particular context. However, the aim of the study is not about
statistical generalizability (Guba and Lincoln 1994; Lincoln and Guba 1990); rather, it is
about theory generalization from the case ﬁndings (Yin 2009), where theory is informed
of a phenomenon and results are judged based on the appropriate reasoning used when
discussing the ﬁndings and conclusions.
A potential extension of our study could be to examine other operations decision-making
areas, such as sales forecasting and supply chain risk assessment. It would be interesting also
to focus on various stages of product development such as concept development, business
analysis, and prototyping. The sentiment analysis method that we propose subdivides the
emotional vocabulary to a certain extent and obtains ﬁve evaluation grades, which have
achieved certain effects. However, several limitations allow further reﬁnement of emotion
and the understanding of the emotional semantic level. Exploring new methods of identiﬁ-
cation through AI of the emotional polarity and more dimensions could extend the research
scope of this study for the future. To improve the reliability of fuzzy evaluation analysis,
it is necessary to increase the research on the degree of discrimination of indicators. The
evaluation information sentiment analysis classiﬁcation results have a low recall rate and
an unstable accuracy rate. In the future research, different data are selected for comparative
experiments, and the reasons for the instability of the evaluation results are found, and the
classiﬁcation accuracy and recall rate of each level are further improved.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

164
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
Appendix A: Python codes for collecting twitter data
1 import [weepy
2 i mpo r t jso n
3 
4 consumer key = "89ODEOSHOLz7yMqoYVbc54f8X"
5 
consumer secret = "nR0906C8qcz57YAu8CIG9Yjvj1Si8ge1J6nCWrq3J5zwajGCJT"
6 access token = "1017871918995787781-gMfna2Obw3bMXyfiQ6COvvNnJYpdOz"
7 access_token_secret = "vivzEpAfesIy5tp0vW8A37402zHWvpusS7Q0kmsE6TEgu"
8 
9 auth = tweepy.0AuthHandler(consumer_key, consumer secret)
10 auth.set_access_token(access_token, access_token_secret)
11 api = tweepy.API(auth)
12 output_file=open('data/Tw.txts,'a',encodingwutf-8')
1 3
14 search_results = api.search(qwtesla model z'ecount=20000)
15
i(q = key words ,count = the amount of data)
1 6
1 7
18 *Iterative operation
19 for tweet in search_results:
20
if 'text' in tweet. json:
21
print('Tweet:'+tweet.text,filesoutput_file)
22
'Converting to a string and save it to a file
2 3 ou tpu t_ fi l e. clo se()
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
165
Appendix B: Python codes for sentiment analysis
123

166
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
167
123

168
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
169
Appendix C: Partial raw data from 2000 tweets
123

170
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
References
Akter, S., Bandara, R., Hani, U., Wamba, S. F., Foropon, C., & Papadopoulos, T. (2019). Analytics-based
decision-making for service systems: A qualitative study and agenda for future research. International
Journal of Information Management, 48, 85–95.
Akter, S., Michael, K., Uddin, M. R., McCarthy, G., & Rahman, M. (2020). Transforming business using
digital innovations: The application of AI, blockchain, cloud and data analytics. Annals of Operations
Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03620-w.
Aral, S., Dellarocas, C., & Godes, D. (2013). Introduction to the special Issue—Social media and business
transformation. Information Systems Research. https://doi.org/10.3233/IES-140532.
Bahemia, H., Squire, B., & Cousins, P. (2017). A multi-dimensional approach for managing open innovation in
NPD. International Journal of Operations and Production Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-
07-2015-0415.
Barczak, G. (1995). New product strategy, structure, process, and performance in the telecommunications
industry. Journal of Product Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-5885.1230224.
Barczak, G., Grifﬁn, A., & Kahn, K. B. (2009). Perspective: Trends and drivers of success in NPD practices:
Results of the 2003 PDMA best practices study. Journal of Product Innovation Management. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1540-5885.2009.00331.x.
Bawack, R. E., Wamba, S. F., & Carillo, K. D. A. (2019). Artiﬁcial intelligence in practice: Implications for
information systems research. In 25th Americas conference on information systems, AMCIS 2019.
Bruns, A., & Stieglitz, S. (2013). Towards more systematic Twitter analysis: Metrics for tweeting activities.
International Journal of Social Research Methodology. https://doi.org/10.1080/13645579.2012.756095.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
171
Burnap, P., Rana, O. F., Avis, N., Williams, M., Housley, W., Edwards, A., et al. (2015). Detecting tension in
online communities with computational Twitter analysis. Technological Forecasting and Social Change.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.04.013.
Chae, B. (2015). Insights from hashtag #supplychain and Twitter analytics: Considering Twitter and Twit-
ter data for supply chain practice and research. International Journal of Production Economics, 165,
247–259.
Chan, H. K., Lacka, E., Yee, R. W. Y., & Lim, M. K. (2017). The role of social media data in operations and
production management. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/002075
43.2015.1053998.
Chan, H. K., Wang, X., Lacka, E., & Zhang, M. (2016). A mixed-method approach to extracting the value of
social media data. Production and Operations Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12390.
Chang, W., & Taylor, S. A. (2015). The effectiveness of customer participation in new product development:
A meta-analysis. Journal of Marketing. https://doi.org/10.1509/jm.14.0057.
Chen, C., Zhang, J., Xie, Y., Xiang, Y., Zhou, W., Hassan, M. M., et al. (2015). A performance evaluation of
machine learning-based streaming spam tweets detection. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social
Systems, 2(3), 65–76.
Childerhouse, P., Hermiz, R., Mason-Jones, R., Popp, A., & Towill, D. R. (2003). Information ﬂow in auto-
motive supply chains—Present industrial practice. Industrial Management and Data Systems, 103(3–4),
137–149.
Cho, J., & Lee, J. (2013). Development of a new technology product evaluation model for assessing com-
mercialization opportunities using Delphi method and fuzzy AHP approach. Expert Systems with
Applications. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.03.038.
Chong, A. Y. L., Li, B., Ngai, E. W., Ch’ng, E., & Lee, F. (2016). Predicting online product sales via online
reviews, sentiments, and promotion strategies. International Journal of Operations & Production Man-
agement, 36(4), 358–383.
Cooper, R., Jones, C., & Perks, H. (2005). Characterising the role of design in a new product development:
An empirically derived taxonomy. Journal of Product Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.0737-6782.2005.00109.x.
Cui, R., Gallino, S., Moreno, A., & Zhang, D. J. (2018). The operational value of social media information.
Production and Operations Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12707.
Ding, M., & Eliashberg, J. (2003). Structuring the new product development pipeline. Management Science.
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.48.3.343.7727.
Du, S., Yalcinkaya, G., & Bstieler, L. (2016). Sustainability, social media driven open innovation, and new
product development performance*. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 33, 55–71.
Duan, Y., Edwards, J. S., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2019). Artiﬁcial intelligence for decision making in the era of
big data: Evolution, challenges and research agenda. International Journal of Information Management.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.01.021.
Durmu¸soˇglu, S. S., & Barczak, G. (2011). The use of information technology tools in new product development
phases: Analysis of effects on new product innovativeness, quality, and market performance. Industrial
Marketing Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2010.08.009.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Hughes, L., Ismagilova, E., Aarts, G., Coombs, C., Crick, T., et al. (2019). Artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI):Multidisciplinaryperspectivesonemergingchallenges,opportunities,andagendaforresearch,prac-
tice and policy. International Journal of Information Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2
019.08.002.
Fader, P. S., & Winer, R. S. (2012). Introduction to the special issue on the emergence and impact of user-
generated content. Marketing Science. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.1120.0715.
Fan, W., & Gordon, M. D. (2014). The power of social media analytics. Communications of the ACM. https://
doi.org/10.1145/2602574.
Feki, M., Boughzala, I., & Wamba, S. F. (2016). Big data analytics-enabled supply chain transformation: A
literature review. In Proceedings of the 2016 49th Hawaii international conference on system sciences
(HICSS), IEEE Computer Society (pp. 1123–1132).
Feldman, R. (2013). Techniques and applications for sentiment analysis. Communications of the ACM. https://
doi.org/10.1145/2436256.2436274.
Ferioli, M., Dekoninck, E., Culley, S., Roussel, B., & Renaud, J. (2010). Understanding the rapid evaluation
of innovative ideas in the early stages of design. International Journal of Product Development. https://
doi.org/10.1504/ijpd.2010.034313.
Fosso Wamba, S., & Akter, S. (2019). Understanding supply chain analytics capabilities and agility for data rich
environments. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 39, (6/7/8), 887–912.
123

172
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
Fosso Wamba, S., Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., & Akter, S. (2020). The performance effects of big data ana-
lytics and supply chain ambidexterity: The moderating effect of environmental dynamism. International
Journal of Production Economics, 222, 107498.
Fosso Wamba, S., Edwards, A., & Akter, S. (2019). Social media adoption and use for improved emergency
services operations: The case of the NSW SES. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-017-2545-9.
Fosso Wamba, S., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Ren, S. J., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2017). Big data analytics
and ﬁrm performance: Effects of dynamic capabilities. Journal of Business Research, 70, 356–365.
Fosso Wamba, S., & Queiroz, M. M. (2020). Blockchain in the operations and supply chain management:
Beneﬁts,challengesandfutureresearchopportunities.InternationalJournalofInformationManagement,
52, 102064.
Fuchs, C., & Schreier, M. (2011). Customer empowerment in new product development. Journal of Product
Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5885.2010.00778.x.
Garﬁnkel, H. (2016). Studies in ethnomethodology. In Social theory re-wired: New connections to classical
and contemporary perspectives: Second Edition. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315775357.
George, G., Osinga, E. C., Lavie, D., & Scott, B. A. (2016). Big data and data science methods for management
research. Academy of Management Journal, 59(5), 1493–1507.
Grant, R. M. (1996). Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 17(S2),
109–122.
Gu, B., & Ye, Q. (2014). First step in social media: Measuring the inﬂuence of online management responses
on customer satisfaction. Production and Operations Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.1204
3.
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1994). Competing paradigms in qualitative research. Handbook of qualitative
research, 2(163–194), 105. (Edited by: Denzin, N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S), 4th Edition, USA.
Hartmann, P. M., Zaki, M., Feldmann, N., & Neely, A. (2016). Capturing value from big data–a taxonomy of
data-driven business models used by start-up ﬁrms. International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, 36(10), 1382–1406.
Hoyer, W. D., Chandy, R., Dorotic, M., Krafft, M., & Singh, S. S. (2010). Consumer cocreation in new product
development. Journal of Service Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094670510375604.
Ilieva, G., Yankova, T., & Klisarova-Belcheva, S. (2018). Decision analysis with classic and fuzzy EDAS
modiﬁcations. Computational and Applied Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40314-018-0652-0.
Irani, Z., Sharif, A. M., Papadopoulos, T., & Love, P. E. (2017). Social media and Web 2.0 for knowledge
sharing in product design. Production Planning & Control, 28(13), 1047–1065.
Kache, F., & Seuring, S. (2017). Challenges and opportunities of digital information at the intersection of
Big Data Analytics and supply chain management. International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, 37(1), 10–36.
Kane, G., Labianca, G. G., Borgatti, S. P., & Alavi, M. (2014). What’s different about social media networks?
A framework and research agenda. MIS Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004.
Kim, Y., Choi, T. Y., Yan, T., & Dooley, K. (2011). Structural investigation of supply networks: A social
network analysis approach. Journal of Operations Management, 29(3), 194–211.
Kumar, A., Singh, J. P., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Rana, N. P. (2020). A deep multi-modal neural network for
informative Twitter content classiﬁcation during emergencies. Annals of Operations Research. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03514-x.
Lagrosen,S.(2005).Customerinvolvementinnewproductdevelopment:Arelationshipmarketingperspective.
European Journal of Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/14601060510627803.
Lam, H. K. S., Yeung, A. C. L., & Cheng, T. C. E. (2016). The impact of ﬁrms’ social media initiatives on
operational efﬁciency and innovativeness. Journal of Operations Management, 47–48, 28–43.
Lau, R. Y. K., Li, C., & Liao, S. S. Y. (2014). Social analytics: Learning fuzzy product ontologies for aspect-
oriented sentiment analysis. Decision Support Systems. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2014.05.005.
Leonardi, P. M. (2014). Social media, knowledge sharing, and innovation: Toward a theory of communication
visibility. Information Systems Research. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2014.0536.
Levina, N., & Arriaga, M. (2014). Distinction and status production on user-generated content platforms: Using
Bourdieu’s theory of cultural production to understand social dynamics in online ﬁelds. Information
Systems Research. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2014.0535.
Levitt, T. (1985). Exploit the product life cycle. Harvard Business Review. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3832
42.
Light, D. W., Berger, P. L., & Luckmann, T. (1967). The social construction of reality: A treatise in the
sociology of knowledge. Sociological Analysis. https://doi.org/10.2307/3710424.
Lin, X., & Germain, R. (2004). Antecedents to customer involvement in product development: Comparing US
and Chinese ﬁrms. European Management Journal. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emj.2004.01.009.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
173
Lin, Y., & Zhou, L. (2011). The impacts of product design changes on supply chain risk: A case study.
International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 41(2), 162–186.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1990). Judging the quality of case study reports. Internation Journal of
Qualitative Studies in Education, 3(1), 53–59.
Lycett, M. (2013). ‘Dataﬁcation’: Making sense of (big) data in a complex world. European Journal of
Information Systems, 22(4), 381–386.
Majumdar, A., & Bose, I. (2019). Do tweets create value? A multi-period analysis of Twitter use and content
of tweets for manufacturing ﬁrms. International Journal of Production Economics, 216, 1–11.
Malviya, R. K., & Kant, R. (2016). Hybrid decision making approach to predict and measure the success
possibility of green supply chain management implementation. Journal of Cleaner Production, 135,
387–409.
Maresh-Fuehrer, M. M., & Smith, R. (2016). Social media mapping innovations for crisis prevention, response,
and evaluation. Computers in Human Behavior. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.08.041.
Matthias, O., Fouweather, I., Gregory, I., & Vernon, A. (2017). Making sense of big data—Can it transform
operations management? International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 37(1), 37–55.
McCarthy, I. P., Tsinopoulos, C., Allen, P., & Rose-Anderssen, C. (2006). New product development as a
complex adaptive system of decisions. Journal of Product Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1
111/j.1540-5885.2006.00215.x.
McKenna, B., Myers, M. D., & Newman, M. (2017). Social media in qualitative research: Challenges and
recommendations. Information and Organization. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infoandorg.2017.03.001.
Mikkola, J. H., & Skjøtt-Larsen, T. (2004). Supply-chain integration: Implications for mass customization,
modularization and postponement strategies. Production Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/
0953728042000238845.
Mirbabaie, M., and Zapatka, E. (2017). Sensemaking in social media crisis communication: A case study on
the Brussels Bombings in 2016. In Proceedings of the 25th European conference on information systems.
Mishra, N., & Singh, A. (2018). Use of twitter data for waste minimisation in beef supply chain. Annals of
Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2303-4.
Myers, M., Avison, D., & Boland, R. J. (2011). Information system use as a hermeneutic process. Qualitative
Research in Information Systems. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781849209687.n12.
Nambisan, S. (2002). Designing virtual customer environments for new product development: Toward a theory.
Academy of Management Review. https://doi.org/10.5465/AMR.2002.7389914.
Niesten, E., & Stefan, I. (2019). Embracing the paradox of interorganizational value co-creation—Value
capture: A literature review towards paradox resolution. International Journal of Management Reviews,
21(2), 231–255.
Ogawa, S., & Piller, F. T. (2006). Reducing the risks of new product development. MIT Sloan Management
Review, 47(2), 65.
Panagiotopoulos, P., Barnett, J., Bigdeli, A. Z., & Sams, S. (2016). Social media in emergency management:
Twitter as a tool for communicating risks to the public. Technological Forecasting and Social Change.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.06.010.
Pang, B., & Lee, L. (2009). Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Computational Linguistics. https://doi.
org/10.1162/coli.2009.35.2.311.
Piller, F. T., & Walcher, D. (2006). Toolkits for idea competitions: A novel method to integrate users in new
product development. R and D Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9310.2006.00432.x.
Poetz, M. K., & Schreier, M. (2012). The value of crowdsourcing: Can users really compete with professionals
in generating new product ideas? Journal of Product Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1540-5885.2011.00893.x.
Popescu, A. M., & Etzioni, O. (2007). Extracting product features and opinions from reviews. Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Text Mining. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-84628-754-1_2.
Prahinski, C., & Benton, W. C. (2004). Supplier evaluations: Communication strategies to improve supplier
performance. Journal of Operations Management, 22(1), 39–62.
Qiu, G., Liu, B., Bu, J., & Chen, C. (2011). Opinion word expansion and target extraction through double
propagation. Computational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.1162/coli_a_00034.
Quan,C.,&Ren,F.(2014).Unsupervisedproductfeatureextractionforfeature-orientedopiniondetermination.
Information Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2014.02.063.
Queiroz, M. M., & Telles, R. (2018). Big data analytics in supply chain and logistics: An empirical approach.
The International Journal of Logistics Management, 29(2), 767–783.
Rad, A. A., Jalali, M. S., & Rahmandad, H. (2018). How exposure to different opinions impacts the life cycle
of social media. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2554-8.
123

174
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
Ramanathan, U., Subramanian, N., & Parrott, G. (2017). Role of social media in retail network operations
and marketing to enhance customer satisfaction. International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, 37(1), 105–123.
Rehman, M. H. U., Chang, V., Batool, A., Wah, T. Y., ur Rehman, M. H., Chang, V., et al. (2016). Big data
reduction framework for value creation in sustainable enterprises. International Journal of Information
Management, 36(6), 917–928.
Revilla, E., & Knoppen, D. (2015). Building knowledge integration in buyer-supplier relationships. Interna-
tional Journal of Operations & Production Management, 35(10), 1408–1436.
Romero, D., & Molina, A. (2011). Collaborative networked organisations and customer communities: Value
co-creation and co-innovation in the networking era. Production Planning and Control. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09537287.2010.536619.
Rozenfeld, B., & Feldman, R. (2011). Unsupervised lexicon acquisition for HPSG-based relation extraction.
IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. https://doi.org/10.5591/978-1-57735-51
6-8/IJCAI11-316.
Schilling, M. A., & Hill, C. W. L. (1998). Managing the new product development process: Strategic impera-
tives. Academy of Management Executive. https://doi.org/10.5465/ame.1998.1109051.
See-To, E. W., & Ngai, E. W. (2018). Customer reviews for demand distribution and sales nowcasting: A big
data approach. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1–2), 415–431.
Singh, A., Shukla, N., & Mishra, N. (2018). Social media data analytics to improve supply chain management
in food industries. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tre.2017.05.008.
Singh, J. P., Dwivedi, Y. K., Rana, N. P., Kumar, A., & Kapoor, K. K. (2019). Event classiﬁcation and location
prediction from tweets during disasters. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1047
9-017-2522-3.
Singh, J. P., Irani, S., Rana, N. P., Dwivedi, Y. K., Saumya, S., & Roy, P. K. (2017). Predicting the ‘helpfulness’
of online consumer reviews. Journal of Business Research, 70, 346–355.
Soukhoroukova, A., Spann, M., & Skiera, B. (2012). Sourcing, ﬁltering, and evaluating new product ideas: An
empirical exploration of the performance of idea markets. Journal of Product Innovation Management.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5885.2011.00881.x.
Stevens, G., Burley, J., & Divine, R. (2003). Creativity business discipline  higher proﬁts faster from new
product development. Journal of Product Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-5885.
1650455.
Stieglitz, S., & Dang-Xuan, L. (2013). Social media and political communication: A social media analytics
framework. Social Network Analysis and Mining. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13278-012-0079-3.
Taboada, M., Brooke, J., Toﬁloski, M., Voll, K., & Stede, M. (2011). Lexicon-based methods for sentiment
analysis. Computational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10.1162/COLI_a_00049.
Takeuchi, H., & Nonaka, I. (1986). The new product development game. Harvard Business Review, 64(1),
137–146.
Trabucchi, D., & Buganza, T. (2019). Data-driven innovation: Switching the perspective on big data. European
Journal of Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-01-2018-0017.
Tsinopoulos, C., & Mena, C. (2015). Supply chain integration conﬁgurations: Process structure and product
newness. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 35(10), 1437–1459.
Van Oorschot, K., Sengupta, K., Akkermans, H., & Van Wassenhove, L. (2010). Get fat fast: Surviving stage-
gates in NPD. Journal of Product Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5885.2010.0
0754.x.
Vatrapu, R., Mukkamala, R. R., Hussain, A., & Flesch, B. (2016). Social set analysis: A set theoretical approach
to big data analytics. IEEE Access, 4, 2542–2571.
Veryzer, R. W. (1998). Discontinuous innovation and the new product development process. Journal of Product
Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-5885.1540304.
Wagner, S. M., Bode, C., & Koziol, P. (2009). Supplier default dependencies: Empirical evidence from the
automotive industry. European Journal of Operational Research, 199(1), 150–161.
Walsham, G. (1995). The emergence of interpretivism in IS research. Information Systems Research, 6(4),
376–394.
Wei, Z., Yi, Y., & Guo, H. (2014). Organizational learning ambidexterity, strategic ﬂexibility, and new product
development. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31(4), 832–847.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations (Vol. 3). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Weick, K. E., Sutcliffe, K. M., & Obstfeld, D. (2005). Organizing and the process of sensemaking. Organization
Science. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1050.0133.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 308:145–175
175
Wu, K.-J.-J., Liao, C.-J.-J., Tseng, M.-L.-L., Lim, M. K., Hu, J., & Tan, K. (2015). Toward sustainability:
Using big data to explore the decisive attributes of supply chain risks and uncertainties. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 142, 663–676.
Yan, T., & Azadegan, A. (2017). Comparing interorganizational new product development strategies: Buy or
ally; supply-chain or non-supply-chain partners? International Journal of Production Economics, 183,
21–38.
Yan, T., & Wagner, S. M. (2017). Do what and with whom? Value creation and appropriation in inter organi-
zational new product development projects. International Journal of Production Economics, 191, 1–14.
Yin, R. K. (2009). How to do better case studies. In: Bickman, L. & Rog, D.J (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of
applied social research methods, USA.
Zeng, D., Chen, H., Lusch, R., & Li, S. H. (2010). Social media analytics and intelligence. IEEE Intelligent
Systems. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2010.151.
Zhan, Y., Tan, K. H., Li, Y., & Tse, Y. K. (2018). Unlocking the power of big data in new product development.
Annals of Operations Research, 270(1–2), 577–595.
Zhan, Y., Tan, K. H., Chung, L., Chen, L., & Xing, X. (2020). Leveraging social media in new product
development: Organisational learning processes, mechanisms and evidence from China. International
Journal of Operations & Production Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-04-2019-0318.
Zhou, Q., Xu, Z., & Yen, N. Y. (2019). User sentiment analysis based on social network information and its
application in consumer reconstruction intention. Computers in Human Behavior. https://doi.org/10.10
16/j.chb.2018.07.006.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
Aﬃliations
Mihalis Giannakis1 · Rameshwar Dubey2
· Shishi Yan3 · Konstantina Spanaki4 ·
Thanos Papadopoulos5
B Rameshwar Dubey
r.dubey@ljmu.ac.uk
Mihalis Giannakis
mgiannakis@audencia.com
Shishi Yan
S.Yan.1@warwick.ac.uk
Konstantina Spanaki
K.Spanaki@lboro.ac.uk
Thanos Papadopoulos
A.Papadopoulos@kent.ac.uk
1
Audencia Business School, Nantes, France
2
Liverpool Business School, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK
3
University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
4
School of Business and Economics, Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK
5
Kent Business School, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK
123