TITLE: The maximum geometric mean criterion: revisiting the Markowitz–Samuelson debate: survey and analysis
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06250-8
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06250-8
ORIGINAL - SURVEY OR EXPOSITION
The maximum geometric mean criterion: revisiting
the Markowitz–Samuelson debate: survey and analysis
Haim Levy1
Received: 8 April 2024 / Accepted: 26 August 2024 / Published online: 12 September 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
By the Almost First-degree Stochastic Dominance (AFSD) rule, corresponding only to
economically relevant preferences, for an inﬁnite horizon the theoretical claim of both
Markowitz and Samuelson is not intact. However, for the practically more relevant case of
the long but ﬁnite horizon, with stocks-bonds portfolios, Markowitz empirically is right
as we ﬁnd that the MGM portfolio coincides with the optimal myopic portfolio for all risk
aversion parameters α < 1.7. For α ≥1.7 the MGM portfolio dominates by AFSD rule all
optimal myopic portfolios, as long as the investment horizon is 12–15 years or longer.
Keywords Geometric mean · Myopic preference · Almost ﬁrst-degree stochastic
dominance (AFSD) · FSD-violation area
JEL Classiﬁcation G11
1 Introduction
The following citation probably best describes the longstanding disagreement between the
two Noble Prize Laureates (Paul Samuelson and Harry Markowitz) on the role that the MGM
rule plays in the long run, namely on the relevancy of the investment horizon;
"Through the years Paul and I have one ongoing debate on the following topic. If an
investor invests for "the long run" should she or he choose each period, the portfolio
which maximizes the expected logarithm of 1+ return for that period? I say yes; Paul
says no" (see, Markowitz, 2010, p. 417).
We devote this study to this old dispute. We employ an investment rule that appeared decades
after the Markowitz–Samuelson dispute to analyze the optimal investment rule for the very
long run. This investment rule is called Almost First-degree Stochastic Dominance (AFSD),
an investment rule that relates only to all economically relevant utility functions, to distin-
guish from all theoretically legitimate utility functions. To illustrate the distinction between
all theoretical and all economically relevant utility functions, suppose that an investor faces
B Haim Levy
mshlevy@huji.ac.il
1
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
123

264
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
two prospects: prospect G yielding 2% with certainty and prospect F yielding either 1%
or 1000% with an equal probability. We suspect that all investors would choose prospect
F. If this choice is not convincing, please replace the 1000% with 10 10 percent. Yet, by
the expected utility paradigm neither F nor G dominates the other by First-degree Stochas-
tic Dominance (FSD), as there is a theoretically legitimate utility function for which the
expected utility of G is larger than the expected utility of F. In the above example, for all
economically relevant utility f unctions, F is preferred to G. The AFSD rule, discussed
later on in this study, indeed reveals a dominance of F over G. Thus, the AFSD rule distin-
guishes between the set of all theoretical utility functions, that may include some myopic
preferences that Samuelson employs in his proof, and its subset, that includes all the eco-
nomically relevant utility functions, that may exclude some set of myopic preferences.
In the dispute between Markowitz and Samuelson, both relate to all theoretical legit-
imate preferences, and we shed some light on this dispute by conﬁning ourselves only to
all economically relevant preferences. If in the above example, there is a utility function
showing a preference for G we rule it out, as in practice it does not ﬁt the preference of
any investor. In contrast, Markowitz and Samuelson in their analysis do not rule out utility
functions revealing a preference for G in the above example. Using the FSD and AFSD rules
to analyze the dispute between Markowitz and Samuelson also allows us to introduce the
concept of the allowed FSD-violation area, which is the main ingredient of the AFSD rule.
Markowitz claims that the maximum geometric mean (MGM) portfolio is optimal for
all preferences for an indeﬁnitely long horizon (n →∞). Speciﬁcally, in the case n →
∞, Markowitz claims that the MGM portfolio is optimal also for all myopic preferences.
Samuelson proves mathematically that for the myopic preference, the MGM portfolio is not
optimal for all horizons including the case n →∞. Therefore in this study, we contrast the
GM rule with myopic preferences, not considering other possible utility functions.
As this inﬁnite horizon in practice is irrelevant, in this study we focus mainly on various
competing investment rules and the optimal choices by the myopic preferences for the long
but ﬁnite horizon, e.g., investing for retirement. We employ the AFSD investment rule for
various assumed investment horizons analyzing the following issues, related to the role of
the MGM portfolio in the long run and the economic relevancy of some myopic preferences
for various horizons:
1. Despite the irrelevancy in the practice of the inﬁnite long horizon, we ﬁrst employ the
First-degree Stochastic Dominance (FSD) rule to shed some light on the dispute between
the two Noble laureates, Harry Markowitz and Paul Samuelson, regarding the optimality
of the portfolio in the very long run, once when all theoretical preferences are considered,
and once when only all economically relevant utility functions are considered. Employing
the FSD rule allows us to introduce the concept of the FSD-violation area, which is
essential for the empirical employment of the AFSD rule.
2. In his argument Samuelson employs the myopic utility function,U(w) = w1−α/(1 −α),
where α is the risk aversion measure; the larger α the more risk averse the investor, namely
the investor tends to invest more in bonds rather in stocks. It is easy to prove that with
myopic preference with α ̸= 1 the MGM rule is not optimal regardless of the length of
the investment horizon. Friend and Blume (1975), employing cross-section data estimate
that the risk aversion parameter of the myopic preference is α ∼= 2, namely, they provide
empirical evidence rejecting the maximum MGM rule.
As we have a horse race between the optimal myopic and MGM portfolios, we examine
whether some myopic preferences are economically irrelevant for some horizons. We provide
an example where for one period prospect F has a larger expected utility than prospect G
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
265
with a myopic preference with risk aversion α = 2 (a similar example can be established
with other valuesα), yet F dominates G by the AFSD rule for all investment horizons longer
than 12 periods. Namely, this myopic preference, suggested by Friend and Blume (1975), is
economically irrelevant, at least for all investors with an investment horizon of 12 periods or
longer. Thus, the results of Friend and Blume may indicate that it is inappropriate to employ
cross-section data to measure the risk aversion parameter of individual investors.
3. We next examine optimal choices for inﬁnite, as well as ﬁnite horizons. We provide an
example with a horse-race between prospects G and F, where G has a larger geometric
mean than F, and F has a larger arithmetic mean (a larger expected value) than G, where
the asset with the largest arithmetic mean dominates all other assets by the AFSD rule
when n →∞, but not for a ﬁnite horizon,n. Given the one-period distributions of
this example, we ﬁnd that up to an investment horizon of about 40 years, F does not
dominate G by the AFSD rule. However, for longer investment horizons F dominates
G by the AFSD rule, namely G is not optimal for very long ﬁnite horizons, let alone
an inﬁnite horizon. This is seemingly a piece of strong evidence against the claim that
the MGM portfolio is optimal for the very long run. We show theoretically that for the
case n →∞the MGM portfolio is not optimal and also all myopic preferences are
economically irrelevant. Thus, we show that for the casen →∞, the claims of both,
Markowitz and Samuelson, are theoretically not intact. However, as the case n →∞is
in practice irrelevant, we focus on a long but ﬁnite n.
4. The most important results regarding the relevancy of the myopic preferences and the
optimality of the MGM portfolio relate to the application of the AFSD rule to actual
empirical stocks-bonds data with ﬁnite investment horizons. We employ annual rates
of return of stocks and bonds covering about a century, to ﬁnd the optimal myopic
diversiﬁcation for various risk aversion parameters α, and then compare this portfolio to
the MGM portfolio.
Assuming no short-selling, we ﬁnd that for all risk aversion parameters α < 1.7, investing
100% in stocks is optimal by the myopic preferences for all horizons. As stocks empirically
have a larger geometric mean than bonds, as well as a larger geometric mean than any
diversiﬁed portfolio (see below), it implies that the optimal myopic portfolio coincides with
the MGM portfolio. Thus, for α < 1.7 there is no empirical conﬂict between Markowitz and
Samuelson. Speciﬁcally, with myopic preference with α < 1.7, Samuelson cannot reject the
MGM rule.
With myopic preferences with risk aversion parameters α ≥1.7, we have a more complex
situation as the AFSD dominance of the pure-stocks portfolio (with the largest geometric
mean) over the optimal myopic portfolios is a function of the assumed horizon and the
assumed risk aversion parameter. First note that by the myopic preferences with α ≥1.7
diversiﬁcation between stocks and bonds is optimal, and the larger α, as expected, the larger
the bonds’ weight in the optimal portfolio. Yet, the 100% stocks portfolio dominates by the
AFSD rule all the myopic optimal portfolios for all horizons of about 12–15 years (depending
on the risk aversion parameter) and longer, implying, once again, that myopic preferences
with α ≥1.7 are economically irrelevant for relatively long horizons’ investors. Thus, the
MGM portfolio dominates by the AFSD rule all optimal myopic portfolios for relatively
long horizons. Thus, with long but ﬁnite horizons, Markowitz is empirically right when
stock-bonds portfolios are considered.
Note that this empirical result is in some contradiction to the result obtained in 3) above, but
this contradiction is not surprising: in 3) above we have an opposite prospect-ranking by the
arithmetic and geometric means, and the maximum arithmetic mean portfolio dominates by
123

266
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
the AFSD rule the MGM portfolio for very long horizons(n > 40 periods). With the empirical
stocks-bonds portfolios, such opposite ranking by the means does not exist, as 100% stocks
portfolio has both, larger arithmetic and geometric means than any diversiﬁed portfolio, hence
the MGM portfolio (that is identical to the maximum arithmetic mean portfolio) dominates
by the AFSD rule all other portfolios in the very long run.
In sum, with stocks-bonds portfolios, we have empirical support, albeit not theoretical
support, for Markowitz’s claim; with these portfolios, the MGM portfolio (100% weight in
stocks) coincides with the maximum expected myopic utility preference for all horizons as
long as α < 1.7. Hence, if Samuelson would use any myopic preference with α < 1.7 to
advocate his claim against the optimality of the MGM portfolio, he would not succeed, as he
would end up with the optimal portfolio that coincides with the MGM portfolio. If he used
myopic preferences with α ≥1.7, he would discover that for the very long run, the 100%
stocks, namely the MGM portfolio, dominates all optimal myopic portfolios. However, recall
that this dominance of the MGM portfolio over the optimal myopic portfolios, in the long run,
is due to the AFSD rule and not due to the Law of Large Numbers employed by Markowitz.
Finally, it is important to emphasize two important things:
a. That these results relate only to the stocks–bonds market. Although this is probably the
most important market segment for most investors, with other assets we may obtain
different empirical results. However, the basic ingredient of the analysis given in this
study is intact; as the investment horizon increases the asset with the largest arithmetic
mean tends to dominate all other assets by the AFSD rule, namely for all economically
relevantpreferences.Ifthisassethasalsothelargestgeometricmean,wehaveanempirical
case for the optimality of the MGM portfolio in the long run. Indeed, with stocks-bonds
portfolios, investing 100% in stocks yields both the largest geometric and arithmetic
means.
b. In the whole analysis it is assumed given distributions of return and compare various
investment rules applied to these distributions. There is no attempt to predict future
return or future efﬁcient frontier as done by various factor- models and other econometric
studies, see for example Miller et al. (2014).
In this study, we employ experimental evidence on subjects’ choices to test two competing
theoretical models. Speciﬁcally, to obtain the results reported in this study we employ the
theoretical AFSD rule developed by Leshno and Levy (2002), combined with experimental
results regarding the allowed FSD-violation area presented by Levy et al. (2010). Thus, the
experimental AFSD results play a crucial role in analyzing the two competing theoretical
models regarding the optimal investment in the very long run.1
As the purpose of the theoretical economic models is mainly to explain and predict human
decisions, particularly investment and consumption decisions, it is important to have support-
ing evidence for these models by experimental or empirical economics studies, reporting how
1 This study falls in the theoretical–experimental dispute arena. This is not the ﬁrst study conducted in
this framework. For experimental studies casting doubt on the validity of expected utility paradigm of von-
Neumann and Morgenstern (1953), see Markowitz (1952b), Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and Rabin (2000).
Nevertheless,beforeburyingexpectedutilityparadigmrecallthatmanytheoreticaleconomicresultsarederived
within this paradigm, results that cannot be derived with prospect theory model, e.g., Markowitz (1952a) Mean-
Variance analysis, the equilibrium prices of risky assets, like the Capital Asset Pricing Model developed by
Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965) and Mossin (1966), and the optimal capital structure and cost of capital analysis
of Modigliani and Miller (1958, 1969). Nevertheless, with normality, under some restrictions, some of these
models can be derived also in prospect theory framework (see Levy and Levy (2004)). However, some models
use the Mean-Variance rule without assuming normality, see Markowitz (1959), Levy and Markowitz (1979),
and Kroll et al. (1984). Thus, one needs to be aware of the expected utility paradigm shortcomings, but adheres
to this paradigm as long as there is no better substitute model.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
267
people, particularly investors, actually make decisions. We advocate that signiﬁcant experi-
mental results that contradict the theoretical model’s prediction indicate that the assumptions
underlying the theoretical models do not ﬁt human behavior in practice.
Although in most cases experimental and empirical studies test the validity of a given
theoretical model, in this study, we face two theoretical models with contradictory conclu-
sions, a case where the empirical and/or experimental studies may provide evidence in favor
of one of these two competing theoretical models, or may reject both of them altogether.
Speciﬁcally, we test the relevancy of the myopic preferences advocating that the investment
horizon does not matter, versus the MGM rule asserting the investment horizon does matter.
Thus, we shed light on this theoretical “investment horizon puzzle”.2
Note that although the claim of the optimality of the MGM rule in the very long run has
been introduced to the economic literature ﬁrst by Kelly in 1956, still in 2010 Markowitz
refers to it as an issue in disagreement. It is time to solve this investment horizon puzzle. We
employ the First-degree Stochastic Dominance (FSD) and the Almost FSD (AFSD) rule to
shed some light on this ongoing debate.
2 The commonly employed utility functions in economic studies
The utility paradigm is too general, therefore, to obtain some speciﬁc economic results,
most theoretical economic models need to assume some speciﬁc utility function. The main
four utility functions that are commonly employed in economic research that are also math-
ematically trackable are the quadratic preference, the exponential preference, the myopic
preference, and the prospect theory utility (value) function. Each of these utility functions
has its pros and cons, but the myopic utility function seems to be the most important one
from an economic point of view, hence it is widely employed in economic research. Let us
elaborate.
The quadratic preference is mathematically easy to employ, but its economic drawbacks
are that it has negative marginal utility for large values [see Hanoch and Levy (1970)] and
also reveals increasing absolute risk aversion [see Arrow (1971)]. The exponential preference
drawback is that it has a constant absolute risk aversion leading to the “blank check paradox”,
see Arrow (1971) and particularly Markowitz (2010). The Prospect Theory value function is
derived based on choices made by subjects in the lab, generally with small bets, hence does
not ﬁt the multi-period investment choice in practice that generally involves large outcomes.
Pratt (1964) and Arrow (1971)) derived a measure for absolute and relative risk aversion.
Decreasing absolute risk aversion (DARA) is widely accepted by economists, and there
is economic support, albeit not as strong as for the DARA, also for the constant relative
risk aversion (CRRA).3 Note that DARA also implies a preference for large skewness in
the distribution of returns, that has empirical supports [see Arditti and Levy (1975)]. The
2 We would like to stress at the outset that the investment horizon puzzle relates only to the contradictory
choices in the very long run. For short horizons it is not claimed that the MGM portfolio is optimal for all
preferences. However, by those advocating the MGM rule, the MGM portfolio is optimal in the long run for
all preferences, including the myopic preferences, while by the myopic preferences the MGM portfolio is
not necessarily optimal also for the very long run, hence the contradictory theoretical claims concerning the
optimal portfolio for the long run. Nevertheless, recall that the assumed investment horizon affects the size
and content of the efﬁcient set, albeit not the optimal portfolio, see Levy (1973).
3 The Hyperbolic absolute risk aversion (HARA) is the most general class of utility functions. However, we
focus in this study on the myopic utility function that is widely employed in economics, having CRRA and
DARA. It is worth mentioning that Levy (1994), in an experimental study, reports strong support for DARA
but not for CRRA.
123

268
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
drawbacks of the three preferences mentioned above, and the fact that the myopic preference
reveals a DARA and it is the only utility function revealing also CRRA, presumably accounts
for the popularity of this utility function in economic research.4
Indeed, the myopic preference plays a central role in economic research. Space does not
allow us to survey all academic studies that employ myopic preference, therefore, we mention
here only a few of these numerous studies. Friend and Blume (1975) empirically estimate
the risk aversion parameter,α, of the myopic preference. They employ cross-section U.S
empirical data, estimating the myopic risk aversion parameter to be about α = 2. One of
the most important issues in ﬁnancial economics is the well-known risk premium puzzle.
Mehra and Prescott (1985), in a very important and widely cited study, employ the myopic
preference suggesting an explanation for this puzzle. Numerous more studies employ the
myopic preference. To mention only a few more studies from the long list of studies that
employ the myopic preference, see Szpiro (1986), Meyer and Meyer (2005), Merton and
Samuelson (1974), Levhari and Srinivasan (1969), Samuelson (1994) and Levy and Nir
(2012). As the myopic utility function plays a central role in economic research, and as it
is employed by Merton and Samuelson (1974) to advocate that the MGM portfolio is not
optimal in the very long run, we devote this study to its characteristics and the drawbacks of
this function, based mainly on the AFSD rule and experimental results. Let us ﬁrst elaborate
on the opposite views regarding the relevancy of the investment horizon, as advocated by the
myopic preference and alternatively by the MGM rule.
3 The myopic preferences versus the MGM rule: the opposite views
The two contrasting models regarding the horizon effect on investment decisions are stated
formally as follows,
a. The myopic preference
The myopic utility function is given by,U(w) = w1−α/(1 −α) where w denotes wealth
and α > 0 denotes the risk aversion parameter. Merton and Samuelson (1974) have proved
that with the identical and independent return over time assumption (the common i.i.d
assumption) and with this utility function, the investment horizon does not matter: the investor
should optimally maximize the one-period expected utility even if the planned investment
horizon is very long, e.g., saving for retirement. The proof is mathematically correct, hence
with the myopic preference, the investment horizon does not matter [see also, Samuelson
(1994)]. Finally note that the argument made by Merton and Samuelson is mathematically
intact for every α > 0, except the value α = 1. For the case α = 1, the myopic preference
is reduced to the log utility function, hence, the expected utility function coincides with the
maximization of the geometric mean.
b. The MGM Rule
Kelly (1956), Latané (1959), Breiman (1960), and some modiﬁcations Markowitz (1976)
advocate that maximizing the geometric (GM) for the very long run is optimal for all investors,
risk-averse and risk-seeking alike, hence they advocate that in the very long run, the MGM
4 Epstein and Zin (1989) suggest a recursive utility function with two components: a time aggregator that
characterizes the preference in the absence of uncertainty and a risk aggregator given in term of the certainty
equivalent. The suggested preference is quite general but also mathematically less tractable than the myopic
preference.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
269
rule is optimal also for all myopic preference. Thus, by this claim, the investment horizon
does matter. Speciﬁcally, having two prospects F and G, if F has a larger GM than G, then
by the Law of Large Numbers the following holds,
Probability

WF, n > WG, n

→1
(1)
where the number of investment periods n increases indeﬁnitely, and WF, n, WG, n stand
for the terminal wealth of prospects F and G, respectively. Thus, it is advocated that the
prospect with the largest GM dominates all other prospects as it ends up with the largest
terminal wealth as long as n →∞. Thus, Eq. (1) is the base for the assertion that the MGM
portfolio is optimal in the very long run. This is known as the maximum geometric mean
(MGM) rule.
Merton and Samuelson (1974), advocate that despite the validity of Eq. (1), an investor with
a myopic preference who follows the MGM rule would make an economic mistake because,
with myopic preferences with α not near 1, the MGM portfolio is not optimal. Thus, the
MGM portfolio does not necessarily maximize the expected utility, according to Merton and
Samuelsson, who do not deny the validity of Eq. (1). They claim that there is a mathematical
mistake in the expected utility calculation that is based on Eq. (1). The mathematical error
occurs by moving the term limn→∞outside the integral of the expected utility formula.5
As this debate is still alive and kicking (see Markowitz, 2010), we ﬁrst address this issue,
showing that the MGM portfolio is indeed not optimal for all investors in the very long run
despite the validity of Eq. (1). We reﬁne the conﬂicting theoretical views regarding the horizon
effect on the optimal portfolio choice. Speciﬁcally, to show the mistake in the formula of
expected utility calculation for the long run, let us ﬁrst reformulate Merton and Samuelson’s
(1974) argument by employing the First-degree Stochastic Dominance (FSD) framework.
This FSD framework illuminates the difference between the FSD rule and the AFSD rule
and, even more importantly, allows us to introduce the concept of the allowed FSD-violation
area that paved the way for the AFSD rule employed in this study.
For two prospects with cumulative distributions F and G, Hadar and Russell (1969) and
Hanoch and Levy (1970), have shown that the difference in expected utility of these two
prospects can be rewritten as,
 ≡EFU(x) −EGU(x) =
b

a
[G(x) −F(x)]U ′(x)dx
(2)
where x is the one–period return and F and G are the cumulative distributions of the two
prospects under consideration. Thus, for the one-period case, if F(x) ≤G(x) for all values
x, and there is at least one strict inequality, then we have in eq.(2) ≥0 for all monotonic
non-decreasing utility functions, hence F dominates G by First-degree Stochastic Dominance
(FSD). The FSD relationships become less transparent with the multi-period case where the
number of periods n →∞, hence the theoretical conﬂicting views regarding the role that
the horizon plays arise.
For the same two prospects, with n−periods horizon, where n →∞, the expected utility
difference of F and G is given by,
 ≡limitn→∞

[G(xn) −F(xn)]U ′(xn)dxn.
(3)
5 They show the illegitimacy of interchanging limits by the following simple example where n
→
∞:limit
 b
a fn(x)dx = 1 but
 b
alimit f n(x)dx = 0, where fn(x) is the probability density function of the
return corresponding investment for n−periods.
123

270
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
Merton and Samuelson (1974) show that this term is not equal to,

U ′(xn)limitn→∞[G(xn) −F(xn)]dxn
(4)
(see footnote 5). Therefore, the fact that by the Law of Large Numbers, when n →∞, F
with the larger GM is located almost in the whole range of return to the right of G with the
lower GM, namely [G(xn))−F(xn)] is positive as n →∞for all xn, does not imply that the
expected utility of F is larger than the expected utility of G for all preferences. Thus, while
it is correct that limitn→∞[G(xn)) −F(xn)] > 0 for all xn implies that Eq. (4) is positive,
it does not imply that Eq. (3) is positive.
Mathematically the claim of Merton and Samuelson is compelling even though Eq. (1)
is also correct. The simple evidence in favor of the claim of Merton and Samuelson is that
for a myopic preference with risk aversion parameter α ̸= 1, the portfolio with the MGM
generally does not yield the largest expected utility, even though as n →∞with a probability
approaching 1 it yields a larger terminal wealth than any other portfolio.
The intuition behind the mathematical argument of Merton and Samuelson in the FSD
framework is as follows; by the correct expected utility calculation, each term [G(xn)) −
F(xn)] should be ﬁrst multiplied by U ′(xn) and only then the summation (or the integral) of
all these terms should be taken. For example, in the range with very large outcomes, where
[G(xn))−F(xn)] is positive and relatively large, one needs to multiply this term by relatively
small U ′(xn), as U ′(xn) of the myopic preference (that Merton and Samuelson employ) is
equal to 1/wα
n that may be very small for large outcomes. The opposite is intact for the range
where the term [G(xn))−F(xn)] is approaching zero from below when n →∞. In this case,
U ′ is very large, therefore Eq. (3) may be negative even when n →∞. Let us elaborate on
this intuitive explanation by focusing on the left-hand side of the distributions. This allows
us also to introduce the concept of the FSD-violation area, a violation area that is generally
located on the left-hand side of the distributions.
When one of the returns is negative, typical to investment in the stock market, the terminal
wealth may approach zero, when n →∞, albeit with a very small probability. In this case
the ﬁrst derivative of the myopic preferences approaches inﬁnity. To illustrate this point,
suppose that F denotes the cumulative distribution of the MGM portfolio corresponding to
the n-year horizon and G stands for the cumulative distribution of the portfolio selected by
the myopic preference, where the distributions correspond to large but ﬁnite n. Furthermore,
suppose that the two cumulative distributions of the one-period return intersect as given in
Fig. 1, and also the arithmetic mean of F is larger than the mean of G.
The difference in the one-period expected utility of F and G for any utility function,
including the myopic preference is given by,
 ≡EFU(x) −EGU(x) =
 b
a
[G(x) −F(x)]U ′(x)dx
(5)
(see Levy, 2022 p.141). This can be rewritten in our case as,
 ≡EFU(x) −EGU(x)
=

A
[G(x) −F(x)]U ′(x)dx +

B
[G(x) −F(x)]U ′(x)dx
(5a)
that we can rewrite as,
 ≡M + N
(6)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
271
Fig. 1 Two hypothetical
cumulative distributions: A is the
FSD-violation
Note that for a ﬁnite horizon, if F is located in the whole range below G (in the weak sense),
then F dominates G by First- degree Stochastic Dominance (FSD), namely this dominance
is for all preferences. Therefore, area A given in Fig. 1 is the FSD- Violation area. Thus, by
Eq. (6) M is negative which avoids the FSD of F over G. Suppose that as n increases area A
shrinks and becomes very small relative to areaB. Indeed, by Eq. (1) as n increases indeﬁnitely
the area A approaches zero. However, as the return approaches zero, a case that may occur
for a very large n with some negative rate of return,6 with myopic preference we also have
that U ′(x) →∞,7 therefore  may be negative as M may be larger in absolute value than N,
despite the inﬁnitesimally small areaA. This implies that the MGM portfolio may be inferior
to the maximum expected utility portfolio corresponding to the myopic preference, or any
other utility function with U ′ →∞as the return approaches zero. Thus, by the FSD rule the
MGM portfolio may not be optimal for all preferences even in the case n →∞despite the
validity of Eq. (1).
Nevertheless, we demonstrate below with a simple example that, despite the correct math-
ematical argument of Merton and Samuelson, the myopic preference may be in practice
economically irrelevant. Speciﬁcally, there is a small FSD-violation area that in practice all
investors ignore and choose F rather than G, despite not having FSD. We advocate in this
study that if area A is small enough there is AFSD, namely there is a dominance of F over G
for all economically relevant preferences. To show this claim we ﬁrst need to introduce the
concept of Almost First-degree Stochastic Dominance rule (AFSD). To this, we turn next.
6 Of course, to have a terminal wealth approaching zero the negative rate of return should occur with a high
frequency with a very low probability.
7 With the myopic preference we have U′(x) = −1/xα ,hence when x →0, U′(x) →∞.
123

272
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
4 The almost FSD (AFSD) rule: the experimental evidence
We employ the AFSD rule to show that some myopic utility functions are economically
irrelevant. Therefore, we need ﬁrst to elaborate on the logic of this rule and the experimental
evidence regarding the size of the allowed FSD-violation area.
Let us begin with a simple example, in the spirit of the one given in the introduction,
this time, with normal distributions, revealing the difference between the FSD rule and the
AFSD rule. Suppose that the return on prospect G is normally distributed with a mean of
5% and a standard deviation of 6%. The return on prospect F is also normally distributed
with a mean of 100% and a standard deviation of 7%. By the Mean–Variance rule as well
as by the expected utility paradigm prospect F does not dominate prospect G, as there is
a theoretical utility function for which G has a larger expected utility than F [Hanoch and
Levy (1970) and Leshno and Levy (2022)]. Thus, F does not dominate G by First- degree
Stochastic Dominance (FSD), as we obtain a situation similar to the one given in Fig. 1
where the two cumulative distributions intersect. Nevertheless, we speculate that with a very
large sample of subjects all of them would choose F, implying that all the theoretical utility
functions revealing a preference for G are economically irrelevant. Along this logic, but this
time with experimental evidence, we argue that the FSD rule is the optimal theoretical rule
as it is related to all possible theoretical utility functions, and the AFSD rule, discussed
below, is economically more relevant as it relates only to all economically relevant utility
functions, albeit not all theoretical utility functions. With this distinction between FSD and
AFSD rules, we show experimentally that some myopic preferences which are included in
the set of all theoretical preferences are not included in the set of all the economically relevant
preferences.8
BytheFirst-degreeStochasticDominance(FSD)rule,prospectFdominatesprospectGfor
allpossibletheoreticalmonotonicnon-decreasingutilityfunctionsifandonlyif F(x) ≤G(x)
for all values x and there is at least one strict inequality, where F and G denote the cumulative
distributions of the two prospects under consideration. Figure 1 provides two hypothetical
cumulative distributions of one–period returns of F and G, respectively. As the two cumulative
distributions intersect, neither F nor G dominates the other by FSD. However, we empirically
show below with stocks-bonds portfolios that as we shift from one-period distributions to
multi-period distributions, namely increasing the investment horizon, the FSD-violation area
denoted by A monotonically decreases with n. Thus, even if it is never equal to zero it
becomes negligible and investors ignore it, hence in practice all of them choose F rather than
G even though there is no FSD. By the AFSD rule, if the empirical FSD- violation area is
smaller than the allowed violation area (by all subjects), we have AFSD. Thus, the task of
the AFSD rule is to reveal the dominance of F over G for all investors in practice, despite the
intersection of the two cumulative distributions under consideration.
The above discussion introduces two concepts related to the AFSD rule: the empirical
FSD-violation area and the allowed FSD-violation area. By the AFSD rule, if the allowed
FSD-violation area is larger than the empirical FSD-violation area, then F dominates G by
the AFSD rule. Given two cumulative distributions, the empirical FSD-violation area can be
easily calculated. But how the allowed FSD-violation area is determined experimentally? To
illustrate how the allowed FSD-violation area is determined, let us provide one more example
of two prospects where the outcomes are given in dollars rather than percentages.
8 We demonstrate below the simple AFSD rule. For a generalization of the almost stochastic dominance rules
and many more interesting results, see Tsetlin et al (2015) and Tzeng et al (2013). For the employment of the
almost stochastic dominance rule in portfolio selection, see Bali et al (2009).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
273
Fig. 2 The FSD allowed violation area, ε =
A
A+B = 1.02%
Suppose that prospect F yields $1 or a million dollars with an equal probability and
prospect G provides $2 with certainty. There is no FSD of F over G, as one can ﬁnd a utility
function for which the expected utility of G is larger than the expected utility of F.9 However,
as in the previous examples, it is reasonable to assume that in practice all investors facing
these two prospects would choose prospect F. To overcome this drawback of the FSD rule,
Leshno and Levy (2022) suggest the AFSD rule allowing some small nagging FSD-violation
areas and showing that F may dominate G by all subjects even in the case that there is no
FSD.
Let us demonstrate how the allowed FSD violation area is determined experimentally.
Levy et al. (2010) (LL&L) provide an experimental framework for estimating the allowed
FSD violation area. To illustrate how this allowed violation area is experimentally determined
let us make the following changes in the above example; suppose that prospect G, as before,
yields $2 with certainty and prospect F yields either $1 or $x with an equal probability,
where x > 2. There is no FSD as the two cumulative distributions cross. In the experiment
conducted by LL&L, every subject is asked what the minimum required x such that she/he
would choose F. Suppose that the maximum required x across all subjects participating in
the experiment is $100. Of course, all those who required less than $100 a fortiori prefer
prospect F with x=$100 as their welfare only improved. Figure 2 provides the cumulative
distributions of F and G corresponding to this example with x=$100.
Area A is the nagging area avoiding the FSD of F over G. However, as all subjects
with x=$100 choose F, we have a dominance of F over G by the AFSD rule. The term
ε = A/(A + B) measures the relative violation area whose range is between 0 and 1. If
for the largest term,ε, all subjects choose F rather than G, this term is called the allowed
FSD-violation area. It is the allowed FSD violation area as all subjects are willing to ignore
this FSD -Violation area as they choose prospect F, even though there is no FSD. Of course,
for any smaller empirical value ε, a fortiori all subjects would choose F rather than G.
9 For example, choose a utility function U(x) = x up to x = 2 and forx > 2, U(x) = 2. For this preference
G has a larger expected utility than the expected utility of F.
123

274
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
In the above example, we have
A = (2 −1) · 1
2 = 1
2, and
B = (100 −2) · 1
2 = 49
hence the maximum allowed violation area in this hypothetical example is ε = .5/49 ∼=
1.02%. Obviously, with another sample, we may get a different allowed violation area, but
it is clear that no matter what sample is taken, there is a large enough value x for which all
investors would choose F rather than G. Thus, there is always some allowed FSD-violation
area.
With a similar case to the one given in Fig. 2 and with a sample of 400 subjects, Levy
et al. (2010) experimentally ﬁnd that the maximum allowed FSD- violation area is ε = 5.9%.
Thus, with this violation area we have AFSD but not FSD, implying that for all economically
relevant utility functions that ﬁt the investors participating in the experiment, F dominates
G. As mentioned before, in other hypothetical experiments we may obtain a different ε, but
the basic principle that we may not have FSD, yet all investors in practice choose prospect
F, justifying the AFSD rule, is still valid. In the rest of the paper, we refer to the 5.9% as a
benchmark for the allowed violation area, but we are aware of the fact that it may vary from
one sample to another. Nevertheless, if it is found in another experiment to be smaller than
5.9%, we simply need in the multi-period case discussed below, a larger number of periods,
n, to show that there is no FSD but there is AFSD. Indeed, with stocks-bonds portfolios,
we ﬁnd that when we increase the investment horizon the empirical FSD- Violation term
decreases monotonically, reaching a value much smaller than 5.9%.
We next provide a hypothetical example showing that the myopic preference with α = 2,
as estimated by Friend and Blume (1975), does not ﬁt in practice the preferences of investors
with relatively long horizons. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd a case where for one-period, as well as
with the multi-period, with this speciﬁc myopic preference prospect G is preferred to prospect
F, but in the multi-period case, F dominates G by AFSD. As the AFSD rule corresponds only
to economically relevant preferences we conclude that the myopic utility function with α = 2
does not ﬁt investors’ preferences.
5 Opposite ranking by myopic preference and by AFSD rule
We ﬁrst provide an example such that for a horizon of n = 1 period (that could be a day,
a month, or even a year), by the myopic function with α = 2, prospect G has a larger
expected utility than the expected utility of prospect F. Therefore, by the myopic character-
istics, prospect G has a larger expected utility than the expected utility of prospect F also
for all possible horizons, as with the myopic preference with i.i.d. the horizon is irrelevant.
In contrast, based on experimental results, we advocate that for a relatively long horizon, in
practice, all investors would choose prospect F rather than G, as there is AFSD of F over G,
in contradiction to what is predicted by the myopic preference. Thus, experimental results
suggest that in practice the myopic preference with α = 2 is economically irrelevant for rel-
atively long-horizon investors, although all theoretical results corresponding to the myopic
preferences and the horizon are mathematically correct. We selected the myopic preference
with a risk aversion parameter α = 2 because this is the risk-aversion parameter estimated
empirically by Friend and Blume (1975). However, similar examples can be produced for
other values α.
Before we turn to the example, it is worth mentioning that if the utility function under
consideration is unbounded or approaches −∞as wealth approaches zero (e.g., the log(w)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
275
utility function), it may lead to paradoxical results. (see, Arrow, 1974 and Aumann, 1977).
Therefore, to avoid these extreme situations, in the example given below, we selected the
minimum multi-period possible wealth to be 1 and the maximum wealth is not very large.
Thus, we report below a rejection of the myopic preference even in the absence of extreme
cases where wealth approaches zero or inﬁnity. Let us turn to the numerical example,
Example Suppose that the investor has to choose between two prospects F and G, with the
following payoffs,
G: 1.35 with a probability 1.
F: 1 or 2 with an equal probability of 0.5
First note that the arithmetic mean of F is larger than the arithmetic means of G (1.5 vs.
1.3), and similarly the geometric means of F is larger than the geometric mean of G (1.414 vs.
1.35).10 Yet, the expected utility of prospect G is larger than the expected utility of prospect F
with the myopic utility function U(x) = x1−α/(1-α), with a risk aversion parameter α = 2.
In the above example, as the lowest possible multi-period return is 1, the largest marginal
utility is U ′ = 1/xα = 1/12 = 1. Thus, we construct a numerical example free of possible
paradoxes mentioned above. Namely, the mathematical argument asserting that U ′ of the
myopic preference is very large and even approaches inﬁnity over the FSD-violation area is
ruled out, as the multi-period wealth is never smaller than 1. The only necessary condition
to achieve the AFSD of F over G in the very long run is that the arithmetic mean of F would
be larger than the arithmetic mean of G, as exists in our example. Let us elaborate on the
expected utility calculation.
With α = 2 we have U(x) = x1−α/(1 −α) = −1/x.
Hence,
EGU(x) = −1
1.35
∼= −0.741
and, EFU(x) = .5
 −1
1

+ .5
 −1
2

= −0.75
Therefore, with this myopic preference, prospect G has a larger expected utility than
prospect F. As G has a larger expected utility than F for the n = 1 period, with this myopic
utility function the preference of G over F holds for any number of periods n > 1.
Let us calculate the empirical FSD-violation area for various horizons. We present below
the detailed calculation corresponding to n = 1, n = 2 and n = 3 periods, showing that
indeed the calculated FSD-violation area decreases with n, albeit up to n = 3 the decrease
still does not justify the AFSD of F over G. The extension to a larger number of periods,
revealing the AFSD of F over G, is straightforward by employing the binomial distribution.
n = 1 period:
G(x) :
1.35 with probability 1 F(x) :
1 with a probability .5
2 with a probability .5
n = 2 period:
With an independence of returns over time, for n = 2 we have the following distributions,
G2(x) :
1.8225 with probability 1 F2(x) :
1 with a probability of .25
2 with a probability of .50
4 with a probability of .25
10 Levy (2023) proves that the asset with the largest arithmetic mean dominates all other assets by AFSD rule
when n →∞. For more details see Proposition 1 given in the next section.
123

276
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
Fig. 3 The cumulative distribution of F, G for n = 1,2, 3
Fig. 4 The cumulative distribution of F, G for n = 4, 8, 12
As expected by the characteristic of the myopic utility functions regarding the optimal
investment weights, also for the two periods G2(x) is preferred toF2(x) as the horizon does
not affect choices with myopic preferences.11
n = 3 periods:
We turn now to the case n = 3. Employing the binomial formula, we obtain for prospects
F and G the following distributions,
G3(x) :∼= 2.460 with probability 1 F3(x) 1 with a probability of 1/8
2 with a probability of 3/8
4 with a probability of 3/8
8 with a probability of 1/8
Figure 3 provides the cumulative distributions of prospects F and G corresponding to one-
period, two-period, and three-period, respectively, and the implied calculated FSD- violation
area as well as ε for each horizon.
As we can see for n ≤3 the calculated FSD-violation area is much larger than the allowed
FSD-violation area (5.9%), hence there is no dominance by the AFSD rule.
Figure 4 provides the cumulative distributions of the return on prospects F and G respec-
tively, calculated with the binomial probability function, and the implied calculated FSD
-violation area for several selected values n larger than 3.
Note that outcome 1 is the minimal value of prospect F, clearly be seen in the ﬁgures up to
n=4. However, for n=8 and n=12, the probability of this event is not seen in the Figure as the
probability of obtaining outcome 1 in all periods is very small (.58 and .512, respectively),
11 We have
EUG=.25

−1
4

+ .5

−1
12

+ .25(−1/36) ∼= −.111 and
EUF = .25(−1
1) + 50(−1
20 )
+.25(−1/400) ∼= −275, hence, as expected, G is preferred also in the two- period case. By the myopic
preferences this preferences of prospect G is intact for any number of periods.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
277
Table 1 The FSD violation term,ε for various horizons, n
n
4
8
12
15
20
25
ε
0.176
0.096
0.053
0.0369
0.0192
0.0101
hence it almost coincides with the horizontal axis. Nevertheless, the most important result is
that the calculated ε decreases monotonically with n, reaching 5.3% for n = 12.
As mentioned before, although LL&L (2010) report with a sample of 400 subjects that
the allowed FSD- violation area is 5.9%, some readers may legitimately argue that it is only a
benchmark to the allowed FSD violation area, and in another sample, this allowed violation
area may be different, speciﬁcally smaller than 5.9%, hence even up to n = 12 we may not
have AFSD of F over G. To handle this issue, we extend the calculated violation area for
n > 12. The results are reported in Table 1.
As we can see the empirical violation area decreases with n, reaching about 1% for n =
25 periods.
In sum, for horizons n=1 −8 periods the calculated FSD-violation area is relatively large
(see Fig. 3), hence for these horizons F does not dominate G by the AFSD rule. Therefore,
based on these horizons we cannot reject the myopic preference with α = 2. However, as n
increases the calculated ε decreases and for n = 25 it is about 1%. Thus, one can ﬁnd large
enough n, for which it is reasonable to conclude that prospect F dominates prospect G by the
AFSD rule, as the calculated violation area is substantially smaller than 5.9%. Thus, despite
the larger expected utility of G than the expected utility of F with the myopic preference that
holds for all possible horizons, the experimental results of LL&L (2010) accompanied by
the results reported in Table 1 strongly indicate that for relatively long horizons F dominates
G by AFSD, namely, for all economically relevant utility functions.
We next contrast directly two prospects with opposite rankings by the arithmetic and
geometric means, hence directly testing the optimality of the MGM portfolio as a function
of the assumed investment horizon.
6 Contrasting the Arithmetic and the Geometric Means for the Very
Long Run
We have explained above why the MGM rule is not optimal in the very long run for all utility
functions, e.g., not optimal for the myopic preferences. However, we also have shown that
the myopic preference with α = 2 is economically irrelevant for long-run investors. The next
natural question is whether there is an optimal rule for the case n →∞, which sheds light on
the dispute between Markowitz and Samuelson. In the proposition given below, we advocate
that the asset with the largest arithmetic mean dominates all other assets and portfolios in
the very long run by the AFSD rule, namely, by all relevant economic preferences. Therefore,
the MGM portfolio generally is not optimal when n →∞. Yet, it is possible that one needs
a very long and unrealistic number of years to achieve this AFSD, and for a long but relevant
horizon F with the largest arithmetic mean does not dominate all assets by the AFSD rule.
Proposition 1. Suppose that F is the asset with the largest arithmetic mean and G is
another asset or a portfolio that the investor considers. Then, for n →∞, F dominates G
by the AFSD rule as limn→∞εn = 0, much smaller than the allowed FSD violation area
123

278
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
observed in the experiment. Thus, for n →∞, specialization is optimal (dominates any
other possible diversiﬁcation policy) for all economically relevant utility functions.
WhiletherigorousproofisgiveninLevy(2023),letusprovideabriefintuitiveexplanation.
First note that we use the terms arithmetic mean and expected value interchangeably.
Denote by F the cumulative distribution of the prospect with the largest arithmetic means
and by G the cumulative distribution of any other prospect. The difference in the means is
given by,
 = EF(x) −EG(x) =
b

a
[G(x) −F(x)]dx ≡B −A
where B is the area where F is located below G and A is the area where G is located below
F, namely A is the FSD -violation area. From the above equation, we see that as n increases
the difference between the two means increases exponentially, hence ε = A/(A + B) →0
as →∞, namely F dominates G by the AFSD rule.
We shall see below with realistic example that ﬁts actual annual rates of return on ﬁnancial
assets, one needs a very large number of years to reject the MGM rule, hence this invest-
ment rule practically cannot be rejected, despite Proposition 1. Finally, recall that generally,
the asset with the largest arithmetic mean has also the largest geometric mean (as exists
empirically with stocks and bonds, see below), therefore to have a horse- race between the
arithmetic and geometric means we need an example with a contrasting ranking by these
two means. This is done in the following example. It is worth mentioning that in another
paper Levy shows that the MGM portfolio is optimal for an investment horizon of 30 years
or longer. However, as this MGM portfolio is composed of 100% stocks, namely from the
asset with the largest arithmetic mean, there is no contradiction between these results and
Proposition 1 (see Levy, 2016a, 2016b)).
Example Suppose that the investors face prospects F and G with the following one-period
annual returns (namely 1 + rate of return),
G : 1.1 with certainty
F : 0.8 or 1.5 with an equal probability of 0.5
The arithmetic and geometric annual mean rate of return on G is 10%, while the arithmetic
annual mean rate of return on F is 11.5% and the geometric annual mean rate of return is ∼=
9.5%. Thus, we have an opposite ranking of these two prospects by the two means.
By Proposition 1, F dominates G in the very long run. However, the calculation of the
FSD- violation term,ε, corresponding to this example reveals that one needs a very long and
unrealistic investment horizon to have this AFSD of F over G, as shown in Table 2.
We can see from Table 2 that the empirical value ε decreases monotonically with the
horizon but to have an empirical FSD-violation value close to the allowed violation area,
as reported in the experiment of LL&L (2010) (5.9%), one needs a very unrealistic long
Table 2 The FSD- violation term,ε, of a dominance of F Over G for various investment horizons
n(years)
1
10
20
30
35
40
45
50
ε
0.42
0.23
0.14
0.09
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
279
Table 3 The optimal 1-year
investment weights with myopic
preferences for various risk
aversion parameter α (the
numbers are rounded)
α
Stocks
Bonds
1
1
0
2
0.83
0.17
5
0.40
0.60
investment horizon of more than 40 years (in this case the violation term is 0.06 or 6%).
Thus, we conclude that with realistic annual rates of return, the MGM portfolio cannot be
ruled out for most investors. Indeed, for horizon n →∞, F dominates G by the AFSD rule,
but for all horizons smaller than 40 years, both F and G are included in the efﬁcient set.
When one compares the investment in stocks and bonds, generally the arithmetic and the
geometric mean return on stocks are both larger than the corresponding parameters of bonds,
hence there is no conﬂict between the investment ranking of these two means, as exists in
the above example. Similarly, when one compares various mixes of stocks-bonds portfolios,
empirically, the larger the stocks weight in the portfolio the larger both the arithmetic and
geometric means.
7 The AFSD empirical FSD-violation term,", with stocks-bonds
portfolios
We analyze next the more interesting case where actual historical annual rates of return on
stocks and bonds are employed to ﬁnd the optimal myopic portfolios, the relevancy of the
MGM portfolio, and the optimal portfolio by the AFSD rule. Using annual rates of return we
can estimate the horizon, measured in years, for having AFSD of the pure-stocks portfolio
over various optimal stocks-bonds portfolios corresponding to myopic preferences.
A comparison of the n-year portfolios composed of stocks and bonds to the n-year invest-
ment solely in stocks is presented, where the stocks –bonds optimal portfolios are derived
by maximizing the expected utility of myopic preferences (for n = 1 year) with various risk
aversion parameters. For stocks, we use the annual rates of return on the S&P 500 index and
for bonds, we take the 10-years Treasury bonds. We cover the period 1927–2022.12
Table 3 presents the optimal stocks-bonds portfolios with myopic preference (for any
horizon, n) for several risk aversion parameters, α.
As expected, the larger α, the more risk averse is the investor, hence the smaller the optimal
investment in stocks (see the ﬁgures in Table 3). Interestingly, the optimal myopic portfolio
corresponding to the parameter α = 1 is composed of 100% weight in stocks, hence also
for α < 1, investing 100% in stocks is optimal. As the pure-stocks portfolio has empirically
the largest MGM than any diversiﬁed portfolio (see below), it is obvious that with myopic
preferences the MGM portfolio is optimal also for all α ≤1 and not only for the trivial case
where α = 1. The more surprising result is that with stocks-bonds portfolios, investing 100%
in stocks is optimal also for all α ≤1.7(not reported in the table) hence the MGM portfolio
is optimal also for all myopic preferences with α ≤1.7. For α ≥1.7 diversiﬁcation by the
myopic preferences is optimal. Therefore, in the multi-period analysis, we focus only on the
dominance relationship between the pure-stocks portfolio and the optimal myopic diversiﬁed
portfolios only for α ≥1.7.
12 https://www.stern.nyu.edu/%E2%88%BC%20adamodar/pc/datasets/histretSP.xls.
123

280
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
To analyze AFSD possibilities for various horizons corresponding to myopic preferences
with α ≥1.7, we need ﬁrst to estimate the multi-period distributions of the return of the
optimal myopic portfolio and of the pure-stocks portfolio. As by the myopic preferences the
investment horizon is irrelevant, we need to employ only the -historical annual rates of return
to ﬁnd the optimal diversiﬁcation and these investment weights are optimal for all horizons.
Thus, having the 1-year optimal diversiﬁcation, we adopt these investment weights to revise
the portfolio in the second year. As the second-year return is random (sampled from the
historical data), to obtain the 2-year distribution of return we repeat this procedure 100,000
times, where each time we get a random second-year return. By the same procedure, we
obtain the n-year optimal myopic portfolios, where the 1–year optimal weights are kept at
the beginning of each year.
The 1–year distribution of the return on the pure-stocks portfolio is estimated by the histor-
ical annual rates of return. The 2-year distribution of the pure-stock portfolio is constructed
as follows: we ﬁrst sample 1-year return from the S&P 500 stock index historical returns,
denoted by R1. Then we sample another year (with repetitions) and denote the obtained return
by R2. The 2-year horizon return is given by R1R2. As the second-year sampled return is
random, as before, we repeat this procedure 100,000 to obtain the n = 2 years distribution
of return. By a similar procedure, we derive the n-year distributions for various values n.
Note that despite the large number of observations (100,000), we still may have a very small
deviation from the true unknown theoretical multi-period distributions.
We calculate the arithmetic and geometric means of the pure stocks and stocks-bonds
diversiﬁed portfolios. The fact that the pure stocks portfolio has a larger arithmetic mean than
any diversiﬁed portfolio is trivial as the mean return on stocks is larger than the mean return
on bonds. However, the empirical result revealing that also the geometric mean of stocks is
larger than the geometric mean of any diversiﬁed portfolio is not trivial. Nevertheless, with
about one century of annual returns, we empirically obtain that the geometric mean of the
pure-stocks portfolio is 1.0977%, and for 99% stocks and 1% bonds portfolio, it is 1.0974%.
This geometric means keeps decreasing as the weight of bonds in the portfolio increases. For
example, for the 5% investment weight in bonds, the geometric mean decreases to 1.0961%.
In the analysis of the AFSD results reported below, the minimum risk aversion parameter
is α = 1.7, as for α < 1.7 investing 100% in stocks is optimal. Therefore, for α < 1.7
there is no conﬂict between maximizing the expected utility of the myopic preferences and
investing in the portfolio with the largest geometric mean; both lead the 100% allocation to
stocks.
We analyze below the myopic optimal portfolios for four risk aversion parameters for
1.7,2,3 and 5. As the arithmetic mean return on the pure-stocks portfolio is larger than the
mean return on any diversiﬁed portfolio, the 100% stocks- portfolio dominates by AFSD
any diversiﬁed portfolio for n →∞(see Proposition 1). Table 4 reports the empirical
FSD-violation area ε for various ﬁnite n.
Let us focus ﬁrst on the empirical result reported in this table, and in the concluding
remarks section we provide various possible interpretations of these results.
As we can see from this table for a horizon of about 15 years the empirical FSD-violation
area is close to the allowed FSD-violation area (namely, 5.9%), as reported by LL&L (2010),
and for n = 20 years it is much lower than this allowed FSD-violation area. Thus, for n > 20
years, one can safely conclude that a pure-stocks portfolio, with the largest arithmetic and
geometric means, dominates the optimal myopic stocks-bonds portfolios by the AFSD rule,
for various risk aversion parameters, that empirically justify the results given in Proposition
1 (even for long but ﬁnite horizons, let alone an inﬁnite horizon), as well as the employment
of MGM rule (as an investment of 100% in stocks has the largest GM) for the long but ﬁnite
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
281
Table 4 The empirical FSD-violation term, ε, in percent, for various α and n (years): where the AFSD of a
pure-stocks portfolio over the optimal myopic portfolio is examined
n/α
α = 1.7
α = 2
α = 3
α = 5
2
11.1732
18.7121
23.9241
22.9135
4
15.4633
14.3472
17.0107
15.9061
8
5.7825
11.1566
10.4854
9.9413
12
2.3895
6.5539
7.8612
7.0902
15
0.4591
5.8429
6.4504
5.9525
20
1.1159
2.3714
2.1658
1.9695
30
0.277
0.2981
0.733
0.6608
horizon. This implies that for relatively long-horizon investors, the myopic preferences with
α ≥1.7 are economically irrelevant.
8 Concluding remarks
Is the maximum geometric (MGM) portfolio optimal for the long run? Markowitz says: yes,
Samuelson says: no. Markowitz employs the Law of Large Numbers to advocate his claim
and Samuelson employs the myopic preference to advocate his claim. The claims of both,
Markowitz and Samuelson, are not intact for an investment horizon n →∞, as the myopic
preferences employed by Samuelson are economically irrelevant, and the MGM portfolio
is not optimal for all preferences, speciﬁcally not for myopic preferences.
We employ in this study the Almost First-degree Stochastic Dominance (AFSD) rule
which considers only economicallyrelevant utility functions. By the AFSD rule, when
n →∞, the asset with the largest expected return dominates all other portfolios by the
AFSD rule, namely the portfolio with the largest GM and the portfolios that maximized the
myopic preferences are dominated by the asset with the largest arithmetic mean.
However, as the case n →∞is in practice irrelevant, we analyze in this study the two
contrasting claims for a large but ﬁnite horizon, n. We compare the MGM portfolio (suggested
byMarkowitz)withtheoptimalmyopicportfolios(suggestedbySamuelson)forvariousﬁnite
investment horizons and various risk aversion parameters. In this analysis, we employ the
Almost First-degree Stochastic Dominance (AFSD) rule (to distinguish from the First-degree
StochasticDominance(FSD)rule),andexperimentalevidenceaboutsubjects’choices.Bythe
AFSD rule prospect F may dominate prospect G for all economically relevant preferences
even when the cumulative distributions of the two prospects under consideration intersect,
namely the AFSD rule allows for some FSD-Violation area, where the size of the allowed
FSD-violation area is determined experimentally. Thus, by the AFSD rule, one prospect
may dominate another prospect by all economically relevant utility functions, but not by
all theoretical preferences. Therefore, the AFSD rule may be considered as the practical
version of the FSD rule, relating only to economically relevant utility functions.
With a hypothetical example, we show with the AFSD rule that for relatively long but
ﬁnite horizons the myopic preference with α = 2 suggested by Friend and Blume (1975) is
economically irrelevant. With another example, with realistic annual rates of return, where
therearetwoprospects,onewithalargerarithmeticmeanandtheotherwithalargergeometric
123

282
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
mean, we show that one needs more than 40 years’ horizon for the dominance of the maximum
arithmetic mean asset on the MGM portfolio, hence for virtually all investors, both assets are
included by the AFSD rule in the investment efﬁcient set. Hence, the MGM portfolio cannot
be ruled out by virtually all investors.
The more interesting results are obtained with the comparison of the optimal myopic
portfolio and the MGM portfolio with empirical stocks-bonds portfolios. With these two
assets, we distinguish between the case α ≥1.7 and the case α < 1.7. We obtain the
following results,
1. Comparing the optimal stocks-bonds diversiﬁed myopic portfolios withα ≥1.7, with the
portfolio composed of 100%-stocks(which is the MGM portfolio), we ﬁnd that investing
100% in stocks dominates by AFSD rule all the optimal myopic portfolios (that are
diversiﬁed portfolio) for horizons of 15–20 years or longer. Therefore, we conclude that
the MGM portfolio empirically dominates all myopic optimal portfolios suggested by
Samuelson. Thus, for these myopic preferences with stocks-bonds portfolios, Markowitz
is empirically right, although theoretically, the MGM portfolio is not always optimal
in the very long run. These empirical results may explain why practitioners and life
cycle mutual funds particularly those advocating "stocks for the long run" overlook the
optimal portfolios recommended by the myopic preferences [with α ≥1.7), and insist
that the investment horizon does matter: the longer the investment horizon a larger stocks
component in the portfolio is recommended by practitioners. Notwithstanding, it is worth
noting that not all researchers agree with the assertion “stocks for the long run”, e.g., see
Pástor and Stambaugh (2012)].
2. With all the myopic preferences with α < 1.7, the optimal myopic stocks-bonds portfolio
(for n = 1 as well as for n > 1) is composed of 100% stocks, where stocks have the MGM.
Thus, for α < 1.7 maximizing the geometric mean coincides with the maximization of
the expected utility of myopic preferences.
In sum, the MGM portfolio coincides with the maximum expected myopic utility functions
for some risk aversion parameters and dominates the optimal myopic portfolio for other risk
aversion parameters. We ﬁnd that for long but ﬁnite horizons that the myopic preferences are
economically irrelevant.
Is it possible that investors with relatively long horizons do not have a myopic prefer-
ence and investors with relatively short horizons may have myopic preferences? A more
challenging issue is regarding the change in the investment horizon. For example, what hap-
pens when an investor decides to shorten her/his investment horizon? Can she/he suddenly
become myopic, as the myopic preferences are not ruled out for relatively short horizons? A
more reasonable explanation for these results is that investors have a state-preference utility
function U(w, n), where n stands for the planned investment horizon.
Regarding the Markowitz–Samuelson dispute we conclude that for n →∞, the asset
with the largest arithmetic mean dominates by the AFSD rule all other assets. However, as
the case n →∞, is practically irrelevant we compare the MGM portfolio with portfolios
that maximize the myopic expected utility for long but ﬁnite horizons. We ﬁnd that for long
but ﬁnite horizons with stocks-bonds portfolios, Markowitz is empirically right as the MGM
portfolio dominates the portfolios that maximize the expected utility of myopic preferences.
Acknowledgements The author acknowledges the helpful comments of Moshe Levy, Jonathan Erell, and
three anonymous referees.
Funding Open access funding provided by Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
283
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The author certiﬁes that he has no afﬁliations with or involvement in any organization or
entity with any ﬁnancial interest or non-ﬁnancial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this
manuscript.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Arditti, F., & Levy, H. (1975). Portfolio efﬁciency analysis in three moments: The multipored case. The Journal
of Finance, 30, 797–809.
Arrow, K. J. (1971). Essays in the theory of risk bearing. North Holland.
Arrow, K. J. (1974). The use of unbounded utility functions in expected utility maximization: Response. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88(1), 136–138.
Aumann,R.J.(1977).TheSt.Petersburgparadox:Adiscussionofsomerecentcomments.JournalofEconomic
Theory, 14(2), 443–445.
Bali, T. G., Demirtas, K. O., Levy, H., & Wolf, A. (2009). Bonds versus stocks: Investors’ age and risk-taking.
Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(6), 817–830.
Breiman,L.(1960).InvestmentPoliciesforexpandingbusinessesoptimalinthelongrunsense.NavalResearch
Logistic Quarterly, 7(4), 647–651.
Epstein, L., & Zin, S. (1989). Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior of consumption and asset
returns: A theoretical framework. Economterica, 57(4), 937–969.
Friend, I., & Blume, M. E. (1975). The demand for risky assets. The American Economic Review, 65(5),
900–922.
Hadar, J., & Russell, W. R. (1969). Rules for ordering uncertain prospects. The American Economic Review,
59(1), 25–34.
Hanoch, G., & Levy, H. (1970). Efﬁcient portfolio selection with quadratic and cubic utility. Journal of
Business, 43(4), 181–189.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica,
47(2), 263–292.
Kelly, J. L. (1956). A new interpretation of information rate. Bell System Technical Journal, 35(4), 917–926.
Kroll, Y., Levy, H., & Markowitz, H. M. (1984). Mean-variance versus direct utility maximization. The Journal
of Finance, 39(1), 47–61.
Latané, H. A. (1959). Criteria for choices among risky ventures. Journal of Political Economy, 67(2), 144–155.
Leshno, M., & Levy, H. (2002). Preferred by “all” and preferred by “most” decision makers: Almost stochastic
dominance. Management Science, 48(8), 1074–1085.
Levhari, J. D., & Srinivasan, T. N. (1969). Optimal savings under uncertainty. The Review of Economic Studies,
36(2), 153–163.
Levy, M. (2023). relative risk aversion must be close to 1. Working paper, Hebrew University.
Levy, H. (2023). To revise or not to revise? This is the question. Annals of Operation Research (forthcoming).
Levy, H. (1973). Stochastic dominance, efﬁciency criteria and efﬁcient portfolios: The multi-period case.
American Economic Review, 63(5), 096–994.
Levy, H. (1992). Stochastic dominance and expected utility: Survey and analysis. Management Science, 38(4),
555–593.
Levy, H. (1994). Absolute and relative risk aversion: An experimental study. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
8, 289–307.
Levy, H. (2016a). Stochastic dominance. Springer Books.
Levy, H. (2016b). Aging population, retirement, and risk-taking. Management Science, 62(5), 1415–1430.
Levy, H. (2022). Stocks, bonds, and the investment horizon. World Scientiﬁc.
123

284
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 346:263–284
Levy, H., Leshno, M., & Leibovitch, B. (2010). Economically relevant preferences for all epsilon. Annals of
Operation Research, 176, 153–178.
Levy, H., & Levy, M. (2004). Prospect theory and mean-variance analysis. The Review of Financial Studies,
17(4), 1015–1041.
Levy, H., & Markowitz, H. M. (1979). Approximating expected utility by a function of man and variance.
American Economic Review, 69, 308–317.
Levy, M., & Nir, A. R. (2012). The utility of health and wealth. Journal of Health Economics, 31(2), 379–392.
Lintner, J. (1965). Security prices, risk, and maximal gain from diversiﬁcation. The Journal of Finance, 20(4),
587–615.
Markowitz, H.M. (1959). Portfolio selection: Efﬁcient diversiﬁcation of investments. Yale University Press.
Markowitz, H. M. (1952a). Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance, 7(10), 77–91.
Markowitz, H. (1952b). The utility of wealth. Journal of Political Economy, 60(2), 151–158.
Markowitz, H. M. (1976). Investment for the long run: New evidence for an old rule. The Journal of Finance,
31(5), 1273–1286.
Markowitz, H. M. (2010). World scientiﬁc. Selected Works.
Mehra, R., & Prescott, E. C. (1985). The equity premium: A puzzle. Journal of Monetary Economics, 15(2),
145–161.
Merton, R. C., & Samuelson, P. A. (1974). Fallacy of lognormal approximation for portfolio decision-making
over many periods. Journal of Financial Economics, 1(1), 67–94.
Meyer, D. J., & Meyer, J. (2005). Relative risk aversion: What do we know? Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
31, 243–262.
Miller, W., Xu, G., & Guerard, J. B. (2014). Portfolio construction and management in the barra aegis system:
A case study using the USER data. Journal of Investing, 2014, 1–10.
Modigliani, F., & Miller, M. H. (1958). The cost of capital, corporation ﬁnance and the theory of investment.
The American Economic Review, 48(3), 261–297.
Modigliani, F., & Miller, M. H. (1969). A comment on Modigliani–Miller cost of capital thesis: Reply. The
American Economic Review, 59(4), 592–595.
Mossin, J. (1966). Equilibrium in the capital market. Econometrica, 34, 768–783.
Pástor, ˇL, & Stambaugh, R. F. (2012). Are stocks really less volatile in the long run? The Journal of Finance,
67(2), 431–478.
Pratt, J. W. (1964). Risk aversion in the small risk and in the large. Econometrica, 32, 122–136.
Rabin, M. (2000). Risk aversion and expected-utility theory: A calibration theorem. Econometrica, 68(5),
1281–1292.
Samuelson, P. A. (1994). The long-term case for equities. Journal of Portfolio Management, 21(1), 15.
Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk. The Journal
of Finance, 19(3), 425–442.
Siegel, J. J. (2021). Stocks for the long run: The deﬁnitive guide to ﬁnancial market return long-term investment
strategies. McGraw-Hill Education.
Szpiro, G. G. (1986a). Measuring risk aversion: An alternative approach. The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 68, 156–159.
Tsetlin, I., Winkler, R. L., Huang, R. J., & Tzeng, L. Y. (2015). Generalized almost stochastic dominance.
Operations Research, 63(2), 363–377.
Tzeng, L. Y., Huang, R. J., & Shih, P. T. (2013). Revisiting almost second-degree stochastic dominance.
Management Science, 59(5), 1250–1254.
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, O. (1953). Theory of games and economic behavior (3rd ed.). Princeton
University Press.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123