TITLE: Analytical and agent-based extensions of supply chain viability modeling in intertwined supply networks
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07266-y
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07266-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Analytical and agent-based extensions of supply chain
viability modeling in intertwined supply networks
Dmitry Ivanov1
Received: 16 January 2026 / Accepted: 4 May 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
The foundational formulation of supply chain viability in intertwined supply networks (ISN)
is based on a dynamic game-theoretic modelling of a biological prey-predator system (i.e., the
trophic chain) with associated viability kernel computation. However, two important aspect-
s–network structural dynamics and decentralized coordination–have not been considered. In
this study, we close this research gap by extending the foundational model in two ways. First,
we extend the general viability model analytically through a control-theoretic lens, explic-
itly accounting for structural dynamics control. Second, we introduce a multi-agent system
(MAS) grounded in the differential game of the foundational model and demonstrate, both
conceptually and numerically, how viability is quantiﬁed at the agent level. Conceptually, the
MAS serves as a micro-foundation for viability theory, translating abstract set-valued dynam-
ics into agent-level decision processes. This allows to connect two major determinants of
supply chain viability, i.e., engineered variety (control model) and emergent adaptive behav-
iors (agent-based model). In addition, we introduce time-to-exit-viability as a performance
metric to quantify the conditions under which a network fails while preserving viability. The
proposed formulations enable analysis of how decentralized decisions affect supply chain
viability, the role of network structure in sustaining survivability, and coordination failures
and resulting viability losses. In particular, we show that the viability kernel characterizes
potential survivability and does not necessarily guarantee viability under non-coordinated
decision-making.
Keywords Supply chain viability · Supply chain · Differential game · Control · Multi-agent
system
1 Introduction
Supply chain viability (SCV) focuses on developing a new model for supply chain manage-
ment, prioritizing long-term survival and business continuity over short-term cost savings
(Ivanov, 2026a). This shift is driven by the change in the supply chain management context.
B Dmitry Ivanov
divanov@hwr-berlin.de
1
Department of Business Administration, Berlin School of Economics and Law, Badensche Str. 50-51,
10825 Berlin, Germany
123

Annals of Operations Research
While supply chain managers in the pre-pandemic world were mostly focused on balanc-
ing demand and supply at the lowest possible cost, they became crisis managers during the
pandemic and in the post-pandemic world, increasingly shaped by disruptions, uncertainties,
and global turbulence.
Viability suggests the supply chain be designed so adaptable and ﬂexible that it can
adjust to different conditions in day-to-day business (Ivanov, 2025a). Disruptions are thus
no longer considered an exceptional event after which normal conditions must be restored
as typically seen in supply chain resilience, but rather part of a dynamic system (Darmian
et al., 2025; Ruel et al., 2024). Recent global crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic,
container and semiconductor shortages, and geopolitical tensions, have shown that SCV is a
crucial capability for managing supply chains amid long-lasting, systemic, and structurally
transformative shocks (Abad et al., 2025; Broekaert et al., 2025; Ivanov, 2021, 2023a; Namdar
et al., 2021; Yildiz et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2019). Drawing on systems theory, cybernetics, and
biology, viability emphasizes the ability of a system to maintain control trajectories within
feasible operating bounds despite changing constraints and unknown future conditions (Liu
et al., 2025; Pu et al., 2026; Sawik, 2025; Ivanov, 2026c).
SCV has been conceptualized as “a behavior-driven property of a system with structural
dynamics. It considers system evolution through disruption-reaction balancing in the open
system context. The viability analysis is survival-oriented at a long-term scale” in ( & Dolgui,
2020). The second foundational work on SCV developed the Viable Supply Chain Model
(VSCM) and deﬁned viability as an “ability of a supply chain to maintain itself and survive
in a changing environment through a redesign of structures and replanning of performance
with long-term impacts” (, 2022).
SCV has been frequently considered on the level of intertwined supply networks (ISN)
rather than individual supply chains (Arumugam & Pitchaimani, 2025; Ghanei et al., 2023;
Ivanov,2025b).AnISNisanentiretyof“interconnectedsupplychainswhich,intheirintegrity
secure the provision of society and markets with goods and services” (Ivanov & Dolgui,
2020). Examples include automotive, healthcare, and electronics ecosystems securing supply
of essential needs for mobility (cars), health (pharmaceuticals), and communication (elec-
tronics) (Echefaj et al., 2024; Feizabadi et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Padovano & Ivanov,
2025).
The ISN framing increases modeling complexity. Non-linear disruption propagations
(i.e., a failure at one node does not automatically lead to resilience decrease because of
cross-network effects) and non-monotonous, non-stationary, multi-mode behaviors of ﬁrms
changing their roles (e.g., being a supplier in one network and a buyer in another one) are some
of the factors contributing to this additional complexity (Dolgui et al., 2024; Ivanov, 2023b;
Liu et al., 2023; Pu et al., 2026). The foundational formulation of SCV in ISN was based on a
decentralized, dynamic game-theoretic modelling of a biological prey-predator system, i.e.,
the trophic chain with associated viability kernel computation (Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020). The
viability-theoretic dynamic differential game provides a powerful analytical framework to
characterize the survivability of ISN (El Harraki et al., 2024). In this framework, suppliers,
focal ﬁrms, and markets are modeled as players whose strategies jointly determine inventory
dynamics, and SCV is deﬁned through the existence of at least one admissible trajectory that
remains within survivability thresholds over time.
In contrast, a centralized perspective often conceptualizes viability as a trajectory con-
trol problem (Gilani et al., 2025; Meafa et al., 2025). The objective is to maintain viability
through controlled adaptation. Instead of employing the viability kernel, the trajectory-based
approach deﬁnes boundaries for acceptable system states that support business continu-
ity while avoiding signiﬁcant losses (Sawik, 2023). For a speciﬁed portfolio of controls,
123

Annals of Operations Research
the boundaries of acceptable trajectories, such as those related to production control, are
determined based on objectives, including cost and customer service level. The decision
maker subsequently selects a production trajectory that falls between the cost-optimal and
service-optimal boundary trajectory. Nevertheless, two critical aspects, i.e., network struc-
tural dynamics and decentralized coordination have not yet been addressed.
We contribute to the literature by two extensions of the foundational model. First, we ana-
lyticallyextendthegeneralSCVmodelthroughacontroltheorylens,explicitlyaccountingfor
structural dynamics control. Second, we introduce a multi-agent system (MAS) grounded in
the differential game of the foundational model and show conceptually and numerically how
viability is quantiﬁed at the agent level. Conceptually, the MAS serves as a micro-foundation
for viability theory, translating abstract set-valued dynamics into agent-level decision pro-
cesses (Kim et al. 2024). In addition, we introduce time-to-exit-viability as a performance
metric to quantify under what conditions a network fails to preserve viability. The proposed
formulations enable analysis of how decentralized decisions affect ISN viability, the role of
network structure in sustaining survivability, coordination failures and cascading exits, and
the role of viability thresholds under bounded rationality.
These contributions matter because the foundational formulation remains widely role-
based and centralized. Viable strategies are deﬁned at the level of a focal supply chain ﬁrm,
and the viability kernel is a global object computed in the aggregate state space. Real ISNs,
by contrast, consist of many heterogeneous ﬁrms, each making decentralized decisions under
limited information, interacting locally through network connections. To bridge this gap, we
introduce a MAS extension that preserves the viability-theoretic foundations while explicitly
modeling ﬁrms as autonomous agents. The MAS serves as a micro-foundation of viabil-
ity, translating the abstract set-valued dynamics of the differential game into decentralized,
agent-level decision rules whose collective behavior generates (or fails to generate) viable
system trajectories. Conceptually, the MAS transforms the viability kernel from a static
mathematical object into a dynamic, emergent property of decentralized decision-making,
making the framework directly applicable to real-world ISNs. This allows to connect two
major determinants of supply chain viability, i.e., engineered variety (control model) and
emergent adaptive behaviors (agent-based model).
The remainder of this study is organized as follows. Section 2 is devoted to the literature
review. In Sect. 3, major analytical model formulations are presented. Section 4 describes
MAS. Numerical examples with the MAS follow in Sect. 5. We conclude in Sect. 6 by
summarizing the main outcomes and outlining a future research agenda.
2 Literature review
We build on and contribute to two research streams, i.e., SCV and ISN. We organize our
literature review accordingly.
2.1 Supply chain viability
In systems theory, cybernetics, and biology, viability refers to the capacity of a system to
operate within feasible limits despite changing constraints and uncertain future conditions
(Ashby, 1956; Aubin, 1991; Beer, 1979; Casti, 1979). In biological and ecological contexts,
viability denotes the ability of a system to sustain itself and persist in a dynamic environment
over time (Aubin, 1991). Cybernetic perspectives similarly view viable systems as adaptive
123

Annals of Operations Research
entities capable of learning, adjusting, and maintaining autonomous functioning within given
constraints (Beer, 1979).
Applied to supply chains, viability extends resilience thinking by shifting the focus from
short-term recovery to long-term survival and adaptation under deep uncertainty. While
resilience typically emphasizes preparedness and recovery toward a pre-disruption state,
viability focuses on sustained functioning through proactive structural and process adjust-
ments. This perspective aligns with Ashby’s law of requisite variety: “only variety absorbs
variety” (Ashby, 1956), which implies that a system’s survival depends on possessing suf-
ﬁcient response variety to cope with environmental complexity. Consequently, SCV can be
interpreted as a function of structural and operational variety, making the management of
complexity a central requirement for sustaining resilient and viable supply chains (Yildiz
et al., 2025).
SCV is not created in response to emergencies and must be designed proactively through
adaptable networks and reconﬁgurable processes that enable systems to operate across many
uncertain future scenarios without knowing them in advance (Ivanov, 2026a). Conceptually,
SCV is based on four major elements observed in biological systems and their adapta-
tion mechanisms, i.e., complexity and variety, information sharing, learning, and recovery
(Ivanov, 2025b). In practice, the implementation of SCV revolves around three key dimen-
sions: resilient operations, digital technologies, and emergent adaptation capabilities (Ivanov,
2025b). At the operational level, several capabilities support SCV, including scalability,
intertwining, repurposing, and substitution (Ivanov, 2021; Ruel et al., 2024). Scalability
refers to the capacity to rapidly adjust production or logistics volumes in response to chang-
ing conditions. Repurposing involves redirecting existing technological or organizational
resources toward new outputs, such as shifting manufacturing from automobiles to protective
equipment. Substitution, or structural reconﬁguration, entails replacing unavailable suppli-
ers, inputs, or transportation routes with viable alternatives. Finally, intertwining reﬂects
the ability of supply chains to connect with other networks or ecosystems, enabling mutual
support and survival during disruptions.
SCV is typically treated as a family of topics closely related to survival, performance per-
sistence, and adaptability, rather than a single, universally operationalized metric (Ruel et al.,
2024, Hashemi-Petrudi et al., 2024). SCV is concerned with disruption environments charac-
terized by long-term, systemic uncertainty with large-scale, unpredictable shocks (Darmian
et al., 2025; Pu et al., 2026). SCV is frequently motivated by prolonged crises, such as
pandemic-like disruptions, where supply chains must operate continuously under stress rather
than return to a pre-disruption baseline (Iftikhar et al., 2024; Ivanov, 2025b; Kumar et al.,
2024). This is where SCV extends beyond resilience by considering not only the recovery
of a supply chain to a “normal” state, but also whether its structure and processes allow to
maintain its purpose under unprecedented conditions.
Within this framing, a viable supply chain is one that maintains feasible operational tra-
jectories despite continuing disturbances (Meafa et al., 2025; Rahman et al., 2024; Sawik,
2023). Several studies emphasize that survivability depends not only on resource buffers but
also on the system’s ability to change structure over time (Liu et al., 2025; Mun et al., 2024;
Wang & Yao, 2023). Structural transitions, e.g., supplier base reconﬁguration, reallocating
capacities, or reconﬁguring logistics, are treated as central mechanisms for preventing col-
lapse. Another major theme in the SCV literature is the reframing of supply chain purpose
and performance. Rather than striving for efﬁciency or optimality, viability-oriented studies
emphasize persistence and adequacy, i.e., the ability to sustain operations above minimum
acceptable thresholds under crisis conditions (Sawik & Sawik, 2024; Yu et al., 2024; Zhan
123

Annals of Operations Research
et al., 2025). Performance is often operationalized through service level guarantees, bounded
losses, or survivability constraints rather than proﬁt maximization (Li et al., 2025).
Methodologically, optimization-based, simulation, and control theory approaches have
been used in SCV research. Network design and planning models have been extended by
embedding survivability constraints, service thresholds, or viability objectives (Sawik, 2023;
Zhan et al., 2025). Multi-objective optimization is commonly employed to explore trade-offs
between efﬁciency, resilience, sustainability, and viability (Yilmaz et al., 2025; Pu et al.,
2026). Uncertainty has been addressed through stochastic, robust, and data-driven optimiza-
tion formulations (Lotﬁet al., 2024; Sawik & Sawik, 2024). Control-theoretic models further
conceptualize supply chains as dynamical systems, where reconﬁguration decisions act as
control inputs that keep trajectories within viable regions (Meafa et al., 2025).
Simulation-based methods play a key role in SCV capturing dynamics, ripple effects, and
adaptation. Discrete-event simulation (DES) and stress testing are widely used to identify
survivability thresholds and collapse points under prolonged disruptions (Ivanov, 2023b; Liu
et al., 2025; Dolgui et al., 2024). Simulation methodologies, including scenario exploration
and stress-testing constructs, are employed to model ripple effects and adaptation dynamics
(Liu et al. 2025b). DES studies are visible in SCV research, particularly when the objective is
to assess performance and operational continuity under stress over time (Ivanov, 2023a). DES
enables the examination of supply chain evolution, the propagation of disruptions across net-
works, and the impact of various response strategies on survivability. DES, system dynamics,
Bayesian networks, and scenario-based stress testing are commonly used to analyze SCV
during prolonged crises, such as pandemics or large-scale capacity shortages (Liu et al.,
2025). An especially important application of simulation is stress testing, which involves
systematically exposing supply chains to shocks (Liu et al., 2023; Prathapage et al., 2025).
2.2 Intertwined supply networks
InISNs,multiplesupplychainssharenodes,capacities,andlogisticsinfrastructure(Feizabadi
et al., 2023). Moreover, ﬁrms may simultaneously change the roles of suppliers and buyers
across different supply chains (Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020). Viability, as the capability to maintain
feasible operational trajectories under prolonged crises and unknown–unknown conditions,
is a key analytical category in ISN-related literature (Dolgui et al., 2024; Echefaj et al., 2024).
Disruption management in the ISN setting has several peculiarities. For example, the ripple
effect, i.e., the propagation of disruptions through supply chain tiers, routes, and shared
suppliers, can lead to larger consequences compared to individual supply chains, causing
systemic vulnerability in ISNs (Ivanov, 2023a; Ren et al., 2024). Ren et al. (2024) focused on
strategies that reduce vulnerability to ripple effects in ISN, reinforcing that mitigation cannot
be designed solely for isolated ﬁrms and must account for network-wide interdependence.
Feizabadi et al. (2023) introduced a “jury-rigging” perspective, building on improvised,
resourceful adaptation, considering it an important behavioral mechanism for coping with
cascading disruptions in ISNs. Thus, viability in ISNs depends on both engineered variety
and emergent adaptive behaviors that exploit network adaptability when conditions change
(Feizabadi et al., 2023; Ghanei et al., 2023; Yue et al., 2023).
Another theme is structural adaptation and dynamics. In ISNs, viability is increasingly
treated as a property of systems that can reconﬁgure interrelated structures under evolving
constraints. This includes reallocating sourcing, repurposing capacities, rerouting logistics,
and reorganizing production portfolios. Dolgui et al. (2024) proposed a network-of-networks
123

Annals of Operations Research
adaptation concept for cross-industry manufacturing repurposing. They highlight that sys-
temic crises may require moving beyond intra-industry ﬂexibility to temporary cross-industry
redeployment of assets.
This perspective aligns with the emergency adaptation mechanisms proposed for ripple-
effect mitigation in ISNs, which use coordinated reconﬁguration to prevent network collapse
(Ivanov, 2023a, 2023b). Structural adaptation is also tied to sustainability-related transforma-
tions. circular and low-carbon supply networks introduce additional couplings (e.g., reverse
ﬂows, compliance constraints, carbon targets) that shape the feasible space of reconﬁgura-
tion, making viability inherently multi-objective and constrained (Choi, 2023; Echefaj et al.,
2024; El Harraki et al., 2024).
Methodologically, ISN viability research reﬂects a progression from static optimization
toward stochastic, dynamic, and control-oriented models that can represent disruption prop-
agation, coordination, and adaptation timing. Ghanei et al. (2023) exempliﬁed this direction
by formulating a two-stage stochastic collaborative ISN design under multiple disruptions,
emphasizing that collaboration and joint planning can improve survivability when disruptions
affect shared resources. Echefaj et al. (2024) developed optimization-based approaches for
resilient and viable sourcing in intertwined circular networks, explicitly capturing trade-offs
among resilience/viability and circularity objectives, and demonstrating how sourcing design
must be robust to disruption while maintaining circular ﬂows. These methods offer prescrip-
tive power but depend on scenario representations and therefore face limitations under deep
uncertainty.
Ivanov (2023b) used DES to examine collaborative emergency adaptation. El Harraki
et al. (2024) advanced the foundational study by Ivanov and Dolgui (2020) by integrating
data-driven control with a prey–predator model for sourcing decisions in low-carbon ISNs,
providing a biologically inspired mechanism to represent evolving competitive/cooperative
sourcing dynamics under constraints. This illustrates a broader movement toward models
that can represent adaptation as a continuous-time process shaped by data, feedback, and
state-dependent decisions rather than one-shot optimization.
2.3 Measuring supply chain viability
SCV is concerned with ensuring business continuity and long-term survival under changing
conditions. Conceptually, SCV can be compared to the notion of human health, i.e., a state
of being. Similar to health, SCV cannot be captured by a single indicator but instead reﬂects
a multidimensional system property. SCV emphasizes maintaining adaptability thresholds
and building sufﬁcient adaptation potential within the supply chain structure.
At the structural level, this potential can be assessed through entropy-based and system
variety measures. Ivanov (2025b) described entropy-based method to evaluate the adapt-
ability of supply networks by examining the degree of structural branching and decoupling
that enables alternative recovery options. In this context, adaptation potential represents a
structural attribute reﬂecting the ability of the network to respond to changes in the oper-
ating environment. Quantifying this potential allows to assess structural variety of supply
chain designs. From a survival perspective, maintaining at least one uninterrupted path to
downstream markets or customers is essential.
While entropy primarily focuses on structural connectivity, it does not sufﬁciently
addresses disruption dynamics and does not fully account for behavioral interactions among
supply chain actors. These limitations are addressed through the concept of the viability
kernel and time-to-adapt (TTA) (Ivanov, 2021; Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020). A viability kernel
123

Annals of Operations Research
characterizes sets of strategies that enable the long-term coexistence of suppliers, focal ﬁrms,
and markets. A supply chain remains viable as long as its operational state remains within
this kernel, meaning that all actors maintain inventories and operations above critical thresh-
olds. The viability kernel therefore represents the largest set of operational strategies such
as inventory policies that sustain survival conditions for all network participants. Solutions
outside this set ultimately lead to system failure through disrupted supplier competition,
unfavorable behavioral dynamics, or the inability to meet market demand.
Moreover, viability kernel analysis helps identify critical moments when strategic adjust-
ments are required for adaptation. Drawing inspiration from ecological modeling, Ivanov and
Dolgui (2020) applied the concept of trophic chains to represent supply chain interactions
and modeled SCV as a dynamic game in which the size of the viability kernel reﬂects the
degree of system viability. In addition to structural indicators, time-related measures have
also been introduced. For example, TTA metric, discussed by Ivanov (2021) and Dolgui
et al. (2024) captures the period between disruption detection and the initiation of adaptive
actions. TTA incorporates both the available reaction time before operational performance
deteriorates and the coordination time required to implement adaptation measures.
2.4 Summary and positioning of our study
Across several topics and methodologies, the literature converges on several implications.
First, ISN modeling requires a systemic lens based on viability that cannot be secured through
isolated ﬁrm-level policies (Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020; Ren et al., 2024). Second, viability
reframes objectives to maintain feasible trajectories under persistent turbulence, motivating
the establishment of survivability thresholds, adaptive policies, and structural transitions
(Dolgui et al., 2024; Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020). Third, methodological advances increasingly
combine prescriptive optimization with dynamic, feedback-enabled adaptation approaches
to reﬂect the structural dynamics in ISNs (El Harraki et al., 2024; Ghanei et al., 2023; Ivanov,
2023a, 2023b). Overall, the extant literature supports the view that viability in ISNs is an
emergent property of coordinated adaptation and structural reconﬁguration (Dolgui et al.,
2024; Feizabadi et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2024).
Supply chains are not just an operational concern. SCV enhances–or puts at risk–the via-
bility of entire ecosystems. This combination of individual and system levels is an important
SCV characteristic that has been insufﬁciently addressed in literature so far. SCV encom-
passes not only the survival of individual ﬁrms but also the continued functioning of ISNs and
essential ecosystems. This expanded scope is evident in studies that highlight the importance
of multi-stakeholder coordination (Taylor & Rosca, 2023) and business ecosystem viability
(Mun et al., 2024). For instance, a disruption in an automotive supply chain caused by a ﬁre
at an aluminum supplier constitutes an issue at the ﬁrm level. In contrast, the collapse of
global semiconductor production in certain regions due to natural or human-induced crises
threatens the viability of entire automotive and mobility ecosystems.
SCV analysis presumes heterogeneous stakeholders making decentralised decisions con-
sidering their own business viability. However, literature has not discussed how these
decisions can affect system-level viability. None of the existing studies have used MAS
to analyze SCV in ISN–a distinct and substantial contribution of our study that enhances
SCV theory by integrating AI and a decentralized modeling perspective. We build on the
foundational SCV framework, grounded in the differential game theory, which serves as a
conceptual basis for MAS.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Differential games provide a mathematical framework for modeling and analyzing
dynamic interactions among multiple decision-making agents whose actions jointly inﬂuence
the evolution of a shared system (Dockner et al., 2000). MAS, on the other hand, emphasize
distributed architectures, local information, communication constraints, and decentralized
control (Wooldridge, 2009). Integration of differential games and MAS enables a uniﬁed
treatment of strategic interaction, cooperation, and competition in networked dynamical sys-
tems.
Finally, we contribute to the literature on SCV assessment by introducing a new indicator,
time-to-exit-viability. This metric quantiﬁes the conditions under which the network fails to
preserve viability. Time-to-exit-viability for the realized trajectory is the ﬁrst time the system
violates at least one survivability constraint. Conceptually, this new metric builds on viability
kernel, entropy-based adaptation potential assessment, and TTA concepts. It encapsulates all
important features of SCV available in viability kernel, entropy-based adaptation potential,
and TTA individually, but never combined before. In particular, time-to-exit-viability reﬂects
viable strategies in the viability kernel, timing of adaptation and failure as in TTA, and
existence of at least one viable trajectory as in the adaptation potential method.
3 Models
This section begins with the presentation of the SCV baseline model developed in (Ivanov
& Dolgui, 2020) (Sect. 3.1). Section 3.2 presents its analytical extension, while Sect. 3.3
introduces time-to-exit-viability metric.
3.1 Baseline model
We illustrate the viability formation in an ISN through dynamic game-theoretic modelling
of an ecosystem in line with (Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020). Denote inventories at suppliers,
focal ﬁrms, and markets (customers) as vector functions x1(t), x2(t),x3(t), respectively. Equa-
tions (1)-(3) represent the dynamics of ﬁrm interactions and can be considered as a dynamical
game where suppliers, focal ﬁrms (factories), and customer constitute the three players, and
where u(t) ∈[umin, umax]  U, v(t) ∈[vmin, vmax]  V , and w(t) ∈[wmin, wmax]  W
represent the respective behavioral strategies of suppliers, focal ﬁrms, and customers, respec-
tively.
x1′(t)  x1(t)(1 −u(t)x1(t) −v(t)x2(t)) : f1(x(t), u(t), v(t), w(t))
(1)
x2′(t)  x2(t)(v(t)x1(t) −w(t)x3(t)) : f2(x(t), u(t), v(t), w(t))
(2)
x3′(t)  x3(t)(w(t)x2(t) : f3(x(t), u(t), v(t), w(t))
(3)
The dynamical game in Eqs. (1)-(3) consists in having the system change so that the ﬁrms
in an ISN can keep the possibility to survive jointly by selecting such strategies that allow
each player to continue playing the game, i.e., to survive. For example, behavioral strategies
u(t) ∈[umin, umax]  U, v(t) ∈[vmin, vmax]  V , and w(t) ∈[wmin, wmax]  W
would mean some operating policies (e.g., inventory control) at ﬁrms of different supply
chain echelons. State variables x(t) depend on decisions u(t), v(t), and w(t). For example,
ordering policy v(t) at the factory triggers deliveries from suppliers, and inventory levels at
factories x2(t) depend on inventory x1(t) at the supplier and ordering policy w(t) at customer.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Technically, the game consists of safeguarding at least one solution of the system (1)-(3)
that can be written into the differential inclusion (Eq. (4))
x′(t) ∈F(x(t))
(4)
under constraint (Eq. (5))
x(t) ∈K,
(5)
remaining in a ﬁxed closed set K, where
F(x(t)) : { f (x, u, v, w)|u(t) ∈U, v(t) ∈V , w(t) ∈W}
(6)
is a point-to-set map, also called correspondence (Eq. (6)).
The set K describes the strategies for co-existence of the entities in the ISN. The set K is
viable if suppliers, focal ﬁrms and markets maintain themselves above certain thresholds xi
and are able to co-exist under these conditions. In other words, there exists at least one solution
x(•)  (x1(•), x2(•), x3(•)) of the dynamical game (1)-(3) starting from x0 and satisfying the
threshold conditions. The viability kernel of the set ˜K is the largest closed viable set in K
under the dynamic F (Eq. 6) that represents the integrity of viable strategies for the ﬁrms in
the ISN. The strategies permitting the property shown in Eq. (7):
for all x(t) ∈˜K there exists u(t) ∈U, v(t) ∈V , w(t) ∈W,
such that

f1(x, u, v, w), f2(x, u, v, w), f3(x, u, v, w) ∈T ˜K (x)

(7)
can be called viable strategies of the ISN, where T ˜K (x) is the contingent cone in state x.
All the solutions outside the viability kernel lead to loss of viability. Moreover, the viability
approach makes it possible to highlight the timing when the strategy change is needed for an
ISN to preserve its existence.
3.2 Analytical extensions
In sub-Sects. 3.2.1 and 3.2.2, we introduce models of network structure dynamics control
and inventory dynamics, respectively.
3.2.1 Endogenous network structure (Adaptive ISN topology and structure dynamics
control)
We consider the system architecture of the ISN composed of suppliers, manufacturers (focal
ﬁrms), and markets in line with (Ivanov and Dolgui (2020)). The ﬁrst extension of the base
model (Eqs. (1)-(7)) we propose is to explicitly link the ISN structural dynamics so that links
between suppliers–focal ﬁrms–markets are described as state-dependent decision variables
using control theory. Let the network adjacency matrix A(t) become a control state variable.
Inventory dynamics can be written as Eq. (8).
˙xi(t)  fi(x(t), A(t), ui(t))
(8)
Viability kernel is now deﬁned in joint state–network space, i.e., the viability kernel is
deﬁned on hybrid continuous–discrete state spaces. The proposed extension makes the ISN
topology endogenous. Firms can rewire relationships (activate/deactivate links, change allo-
cation shares, switch suppliers), possibly with frictions, costs, and constraints. The viability
123

Annals of Operations Research
question becomes: From which initial conditions does there exist a joint trajectory of inven-
tories and network topology, generated by feasible strategies, that keeps all inventories above
survivability thresholds xi?
Equation (9) describes the inventory system:
x(t)  (x1(t), x2(t), x3(t)) ∈Rn1
+ × Rn2
+ × Rn3
+
(9)
where x1: suppliers’ inventories/capacity buffers,
x2: focal ﬁrms’ inventories/WIP,
x3: market/customer backlogs or inventories.
Let strategies be u(t) ∈U, v(t) ∈V , w(t) ∈W corresponding to suppliers, focal ﬁrms,
and markets. We deﬁne survivability thresholds (component-wise) as x 

x1, x2, x3

The
baseline viability set is deﬁned in Eq. (10):
K 

x : x ≥x

(10)
In terms of structural dynamics control (Ivanov et al., 2010), let σ(t)
∈
 be
a discrete “topology mode” indexing a ﬁnite family of feasible network structures
A(σ) 

ASF(σ), AF M(σ)

Switching (i.e., structural dynamics) is controlled by a net-
work reconﬁguration control η(t) ∈E, inducing transitions deﬁned in Eq. (11):
˙σ(t) ∈G(σ(t), x(t), η(t))
(11)
where G is set-valued to allow dwell-time, delays, or uncertainty.
3.2.2 Inventory dynamics
A generic mass-balance structure is shown in Eqs. (12)-(14).
Suppliers:
˙x1(t)  p1(x1(t), u(t)) −1T q SF(t) −d1(t)
(12)
where p1( · ) is production/replenishment quantity, 1T q SF sums outgoing shipments by
supplier, and d1(t) captures disruption losses.
Focal ﬁrms:
˙x2(t)  BSFq SF(t) −1T q F M(t) −c2(x2(t), v(t)) −d2(t)
(13)
where BSF is an incidence/aggregation operator mapping supplier shipments into each focal
ﬁrm’s inbound inventory.
Markets / customers:
˙x3(t)  B F Mq F M(t) −δ(x3(t), w(t)) −d3(t)
(14)
Where x3 is customer inventory.
3.3 Viability condition
Viability can be linked to inventory thresholds as shown in Eq. (15):
x(t) ∈Kx :

x : x ≥x

(15)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Network connectivity constraints can also be included in analysis in line with network
science studies (Li et al., 2020), e.g., a maximum degree constraint, limiting the number of
alternative suppliers (Eq. (16)):
degout
i

ASF
≤DSF
i
, degout
j

AF M
≤DF M
j
(16)
We propose using time-to-exit-viability (Eq. 17) as a performance metric to quantify
under what conditions the network fails in preserving viability. Let K ⊂Rn be the viability
constraint set (i.e., survivability thresholds), and let x( · ) be a solution of the dynamic game
(Eqs. (1)–(3)) (or the differential inclusion (4)) under a given strategy proﬁle (u( · ), v( · ),
w( · )). Then we deﬁne the time-to-exit-viability as shown in Eq. (17):
τK (x0; u, v, w) : inf{t ≥0 : x(t; x0, u, v, w) /∈K}
(17)
with the convention inf∅ +∞.
Time-to-exit-viability for the realized trajectory is τK and it is the ﬁrst time the system
violates at least one survivability constraint.
4 Multi-agent system (MAS)
The second extension of the base model (1)-(3) is the development of MAS. In a MAS setting,
each agent i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N} is characterized by its local state si(t), control input ui(t) and
information set Hi(t). The coupled dynamic system can be written as Eq. (18):
˙xi  φi(xi, x−i, ui, u−i), i  1, 2, . . . , N
(18)
where x−i and u−i denote the states and controls of all other agents. Differential games
formalize how agents select control strategies ui(t) to optimize individual or collective per-
formance objectives over time (Dockner et al., 2000). The integration of MAS and differential
games enables convergence of the underlying system in the presence of behavioral decision-
making (Bi et al., 2023). In differential games, system-level performance emerges from
agent-levelincentives.Thus,differentialgames–MASintegrationextendscontroltheoryfrom
single-decision-maker systems to strategic, networked, multi-decision-maker environments,
forming a natural bridge between control, game theory, and distributed systems (Kovalenko
et al., 2023).
Recall that the dynamic differential game (1)–(3) models the ISN as an interaction among
suppliers, focal ﬁrms, and markets whose strategies u(t), v(t), and w(t) jointly determine the
inventory dynamics x(t)  (x1(t), x2(t), x3(t)). The viability kernel of the constraint set K
characterizes the states from which at least one admissible strategy proﬁle keeps the system
above survivability thresholds for all future times, as formalized in (4)–(7). The dynamic
differential game formulation of SCV captures strategic interactions among suppliers, focal
ﬁrms, and markets through continuous-time inventory dynamics and viability constraints.
While analytically powerful, this formulation is aggregated and centralized. Each player
represents an entire echelon of ﬁrms, and strategies are implicitly coordinated at the echelon
level, and viability is assessed at the system level.
In real ISNs, however, decisions are taken by multiple autonomous ﬁrms, each with limited
information and local objectives. To bridge this gap, we now introduce a MAS formulation
that preserves the viability-theoretic foundation of the dynamic game while explicitly mod-
eling decentralized decision-making at the ﬁrm level. The MAS should be interpreted as a
distributed implementation of the dynamical game (1)–(3), whose collective behavior induces
123

Annals of Operations Research
trajectories of the differential inclusion (4). Each agent observes local inventory state, chooses
policy ui(t), and learns whether actions keep system viable. Agents do not know the viability
kernel ex ante.
4.1 Agents and roles
Let the ISN consist of a ﬁnite set of agents I  {1, 2, . . . , N} where each agent represents
a ﬁrm in the ISN. Each agent i is characterized by a role ri(t) ∈R : {supplier, focal ﬁrm,
market}, which may be ﬁxed or time-varying. This explicitly reﬂects the intertwined nature of
the network, where ﬁrms can simultaneously or sequentially play different roles in different
supply chains. Roles determine the agent’s admissible actions, its state variables, and the
interaction rules with other agents.
Each agent i has a local state (Eq. (19)):
si(t)  (xi(t), θi)
(19)
where xi(t) ∈R+ is the agent’s inventory or operational buffer, θi is a vector of ﬁxed
parameters (capacity, costs, service requirements, delivery reliability).
The global system state is shown in Eq. (20):
x(t)  (x1(t), . . . , xN(t)) ∈RN
+
(20)
which corresponds to the state vector used in the analytical viability formulation, but now
decomposed at agent level.
4.2 Agent actions and interactions
At each time t, agent i selects an action ai(t) ∈Ai(si(t), Ni(t)) where Ai( · ) is the agent’s
admissible action set, Ni(t) ⊂I is the set of neighboring agents connected to i in the
ISN. Actions may include production or replenishment decisions (suppliers), ordering and
allocation decisions (focal ﬁrms), consumption or demand-shaping decisions (markets), link
activation, deactivation, or reweighting (network adaptation). The ISN is represented as a
graph G(t)  (I, E(t)) where edges (i, j) ∈E(t) denote feasible transactional relationships
(material, information, or ﬁnancial ﬂows). The network may be ﬁxed, in which case MAS
dynamics evolve on a static graph, or adaptive, where agents can modify links subject to
costs and constraints. In the latter case, network allows agents to respond to disruptions by
reconﬁguring the ISN.
Each agent’s inventory evolves according to Eq. (21):
˙xi(t)  fi

xi(t), ai(t),

a j(t) : j ∈Ni(t)

(21)
where fi(·) captures inbound ﬂows from upstream neighbors, outbound ﬂows to downstream
neighbors, production, decay, or consumption processes.
This decentralized formulation is consistent with the original differential game (1)-(3),
but replaces centralized control vectors with local interaction terms.
MAS induces a coupled dynamical system in Eq. (22):
˙x(t)  F(x(t), a(t), G(t))
(22)
where a(t)  (a1(t), . . . , aN(t)).
123

Annals of Operations Research
This system can be interpreted as a distributed implementation of the differential inclusion
(4) with admissible velocities generated endogenously by agent decisions. Each agent i is
subject to a local viability constraint deﬁned in Eq. (23):
xi(t) ≥xi
(23)
representing minimum operational, ﬁnancial, or service thresholds.
The global viability set is deﬁned in Eq. (24):
K 

x ∈RN
+ : xi ≥xi∀i
 
(24)
In the MAS, agents are assumed to follow viability-oriented decision rules, meaning
that actions are admissible only if they do not knowingly lead to immediate violation of
survivability constraints. Formally, agent i selects ai(t) such that there exists at least one
continuation of the MAS dynamics satisfying condition in Eq. (25):
xi(τ) ≥xi, ∀τ ≥t
(25)
We interpret Eq. (25) as a heuristic or approximate foresight for a sufﬁciently long forecast
horizon, not exact viability computation. In contrast to the centralized version, agents do not
need to compute the global viability kernel in advance and they rely on local forecasts,
heuristics, or learned rules. The MAS viability kernel is deﬁned as the set of initial states
x0 ∈K for which there exists a proﬁle of decentralized agent policies such that the induced
MAS trajectory remains in K for all time.
5 Illustrative example
This section illustrates the proposed approach using a numerical example. First, we describe
conceptual and experimental settings (Sect. 5.1 and 5.2, respectively). Subsequently, numer-
ical examples are discussed in Sect. 5.3.
5.1 Conceptual setting
Figure 1 presents dynamic decision ﬂow chart between agents in MAS.
Our conceptualization is grounded into established literature on MAS and agent-based
modeling (Long, 2014; Roorda et al., 2010). Consider an ISN with two supplier agents, two
focal ﬁrm agents, and one market agent. Each agent has an inventory xi(t) with viability
threshold xi. Initially, all inventories lie above thresholds, but one supplier faces declining
inventory due to a disruption. In the analytical differential game, viability may be preserved
by reallocating orders to the unaffected supplier. In the MAS, each focal ﬁrm independently
decides whether to switch suppliers, switching is costly and information about the disrup-
tion is imperfect. If both focal ﬁrms delay switching, the affected supplier drops below its
threshold, triggering the ripple effect. Thus, although the initial state lies inside the analytical
viability kernel, the decentralized MAS trajectory exits K if the MAS policies are not guar-
anteed to select all admissible velocities in F(x). This illustrates how viability is an emergent
property depending on coordination and information, not merely on system-level feasibil-
ity. The viability kernel characterizes existence of viable strategies, not their decentralized
realization.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Dynamic decision ﬂow chart between agents in MAS
Agents do not have access to viability kernel information. Instead, they follow local,
viability-oriented heuristics. Suppliers replenish toward a target inventory level while respect-
ing capacity constraints. Focal ﬁrms allocate orders among suppliers based on observed
supplier inventories and switch suppliers only if local inventory risk becomes apparent. The
market agent realizes demand exogenously and does not coordinate with upstream agents.
These decentralized decision rules deﬁne the MAS policy proﬁle and determine which selec-
tions of the differential inclusion (Eq. (4)) are realized.
5.2 Numerical examples
Table 1 reports aggregate inventories at selected time steps in example 1. These numbers are
selected arbitrarily and used for illustration purposes in this article. In practice, inventory
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Aggregate inventory
levels in example 1
Time
Suppliers x1
Focal ﬁrms x2
Market x3
0
16.0
12.0
5.00
10
15.9
11.9
5.23
20
15.7
11.7
5.71
30
15.5
11.5
6.16
40
15.0
11.0
7.80
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0 
10
20
30
40
Aggregate inventory level
Time
Suppliers x1
Focal firms x2
Market x3
Market viability
threshold
Supplier viability
threshold
Fig. 2 Aggregate inventory levels and viability threshold in example 1 in time
levels can be obtained through analytical or simulation modeling. One unit inventory with
supplier is associated with one unit at the manufacturer level.
Remark 1: The agent-based part of this illustrative example is not rooted in a computer
simulation but is treated analytically based on the model (18)-(24). Presentation of a full-scale
MAS simulation is not the intent of this paper.
In Fig. 2, aggregate inventory levels and viability threshold in example 1 are presented in
time.
In this ﬁrst example, focal ﬁrms react promptly to early signals of supplier imbalance by
reallocating orders toward the more resilient supplier. As a result, supplier inventories remain
above x S, focal ﬁrm inventories stabilize above x F, and market demand is continuously
fulﬁlled above x M. The induced aggregate trajectory x(t) satisﬁes condition (26):
x(t) ∈K∀t ≥0
(26)
and thus constitutes a viable supply chain. This trajectory corresponds to a viable selection of
the differential inclusion (4) and satisﬁes the contingent cone condition (7) at all times. This
example demonstrates that decentralized MAS behavior can realize the theoretical viability
kernel when coordination emerges endogenously.
In the second example, all parameters and the initial state x0 remain unchanged. The only
difference is behavioral. Focal ﬁrms delay switching suppliers. Each focal ﬁrm assumes the
other will adjust ﬁrst. Order reallocation occurs only after a supplier inventory has fallen
signiﬁcantly. As a consequence, one supplier inventory falls below x S, forcing a reduction
in inbound shipments. This leads to declining of focal ﬁrm inventories and eventual inability
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Aggregate inventory
levels in example 2 (Coordination
Failure)
Time
Suppliers x1
Focal ﬁrms x2
Market x3
0
16.0
12.0
5.0
10
10.5
12.0
6.0
20
3.8
11.5
8.0
30
−20.0
11.0
12.0
40
−80.0
10.5
18.0
to satisfy market demand. Formally, the MAS trajectory satisﬁes (27):
x(t) /∈K for some ﬁnite t
(27)
even though x0 belongs to the theoretical viability kernel of the centralized game.
ThisexamplehighlightsastrictgapbetweentheoreticalviabilityandoperationalMASvia-
bility caused solely by decentralized decision-making. Although supplier inventories decline
over time, focal ﬁrm and market inventories remain buffered by adaptive ordering decisions.
The resulting aggregate trajectory satisﬁes x(t) ∈K∀t ∈[0, T ] illustrating sustained co-
existence of all ISN roles. These values conﬁrm that all components remain strictly above
their thresholds, illustrating persistent co-existence of suppliers, focal ﬁrms, and the market.
Example 2 depicts a non-viable MAS trajectory from the same initial state resulting from
coordination failure.
Table 2 reports the aggregate inventory values used to generate the non-viable MAS
trajectory shown in Fig. 3. The initial condition is identical to the viable case, but delayed
supplier reallocation and insufﬁcient replenishment cause supplier inventories to fall below
the survivability threshold, leading to exit from the viability set K.
Remark 1: The supplier survivability threshold is x1 ≥4. Viability is lost between t  20
and t  30, when x1(t) falls below this threshold. Although focal ﬁrm and market inventories
remain positive, violation of a single role’s constraint is sufﬁcient to exit K, in accordance
with deﬁnition given in Eq. (5).
Figure 3 compares two trajectories generated from the same initial state x0 ∈K, corre-
sponding respectively to a viable outcome (solid lines, example 1) and a non-viable outcome
under coordination failure (dashed lines, example 2). Figure 3 shows the evolution of aggre-
gate inventories x1(t), x2(t), and x3(t) generated by MAS starting from the same initial
conditions. Dashed horizontal lines indicate survivability thresholds deﬁning the viability set
K(cf. Equations (5) and (24)-(25)).
Aggregate inventories generated by the MAS start from an initial state x0 ∈K that belongs
tothetheoreticalviabilitykernelofthedynamicgame(1)–(7).Horizontaldottedlinesindicate
viability thresholds deﬁning the viability set K(Eq. (5)). Due to delayed supplier reallocation
and insufﬁcient replenishment, supplier inventories x1(t) fall below the viability threshold
in ﬁnite time, forcing the trajectory to exit the viability set K. This trajectory violates the
contingent cone condition (Eq. (7)) and therefore does not constitute a viable selection of the
differential inclusion (Eq. (4)).
Some key insights into the MAS extensions can be obtained from Fig. 3. The initial
condition lies inside the viability kernel of the centralized game. However, decentralized
agent behavior induces a trajectory ∃t∗< ∞s.t.x(t∗) /∈K implying loss of viability. In
contrast with Fig. 1, the feasible velocity set F(x(t)) still contains viable directions, but the
MAS fails to select them due to coordination delays and bounded rationality. Thus, Fig. 3
123

Annals of Operations Research
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
0 
10
20
30
40
Aggregate inventory level
Time
Suppliers x1 (viable)
Suppliers x1 (non-
viable)
Focal firms x2 (viable)
Focal firms x2 (non-
viable)
Market x3 (viable)
Market x3 (non-viable)
Fig. 3 Comparison of viable and non-viable MAS trajectories
illustrates the gap between theoretical and operational viability, showing that the viability
kernel characterizes potential survivability, not guaranteed viability under non-coordinated
decision-making.
Figure 4 illustrates the evolution of aggregate supplier inventory x1(t) along the non-
viable MAS trajectory (example 2) and identiﬁes the time-to-exit-viability t\∗. The dashed
horizontal line represents the supplier survivability threshold deﬁning the viability set K(cf.
Equation (5)). The dotted vertical line marks the exit time t\∗≈22 at which the trajectory
leaves K because x1(t) falls below the threshold (Fig. 4).
Aggregate supplier inventory x1(t)is generated by the MAS starting from an initial state
x0 ∈K. The dashed line denotes the survivability threshold. The dotted vertical line identiﬁes
the exit time t\∗≈22, at which the trajectory leaves the viability set K. Beyond this point, no
continuation of the trajectory satisﬁes the viability condition (7), and the ISN loses viability.
For t < t\∗, the MAS trajectory satisﬁes x(t) ∈
K even though supplier inven-
tories are declining. At t  t\∗, the contingent cone condition (7) is violated:
F

x

t\∗
∩TK

x

t\∗
 ∅The scalar quantity t\∗therefore provides time-to-exit-
viability. This metric is particularly useful for comparing alternative viability policies,
evaluating early-warning indicators, assessing the speed at which coordination failures prop-
agate into systemic collapse.
Remark 2: How the numerical value t\∗≈22 was obtained in Fig. 4? In the plotted points
we used:
123

Annals of Operations Research
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
0 
10
20
30
40
Aggregate inventory level
Time
Suppliers x1 (non-viable)
Supplier viability threshold
Fig. 4 Time-to-exit-viability under coordination failure
• x1(20)  3.8 < 4(already below threshold), but in Fig. 4 we drew a linear segment
between the plotted samples around the crossing.
• two nearest points around the threshold crossing in Fig. 4:
x1(20)  3.8
x1(25)  1.5
The crossing is between t  20 and t  25. Under linear interpolation,
t\∗≈20 + (25 −20) · 4 −3.8
1.5 −3.8  20 + 5 · 0.2
−2.3 ≈20 −0.435 ≈19.57
So, strictly, the crossing would be ≈19.6.
However, in Fig. 4, we marked t\∗≈22 as a visual/illustrative marker (a rounded “time-
to-exit” indicator), rather than the exact interpolated crossing. For consistency, we should
state either discrete-time exit (most consistent with simulations):
t\∗
  min{tk : x1(tk) < x1}  20
since the ﬁrst sampled time where x1 < 4 is t  20,
or continuous-time exit with interpolation:
t\∗ inf{t : x1(t) < x1} ≈19.6
5.3 Discussion
The existing analytical viability frameworks characterize the potential survivability of an ISN
through the existence of at least one admissible trajectory that remains within the constraint
set K. The associated viability kernel thus identiﬁes states from which coordinated strategies
(u(t), v(t), w(t)) can preserve co-existence of suppliers, focal ﬁrms, and markets. The MAS
simulations presented in Sect. 5 complement this analytical result by explicitly showing
123

Annals of Operations Research
how such trajectories are (or are not) realized under decentralized decision-making in case
of coordination success or failures. Figures 3 and 4 demonstrate that the same initial state
x0 ∈K, and therefore inside the theoretical viability kernel, may lead to fundamentally
different outcomes depending on how agent-level decisions unfold.
In particular, Fig. 2 illustrates a viable MAS trajectory, in which decentralized but respon-
sive agent behavior induces velocities belonging to the contingent cone TK (x), thereby
realizing a viable selection of the differential inclusion (4). By contrast, Figs. 3 and 4 show
that coordination failures among focal ﬁrms can induce trajectories that exit K in ﬁnite time,
despite the existence of viable strategies at the aggregate level. In this case, the MAS selects
admissible directions in F(x) that lie outside the contingent cone, violating condition (7).
The MAS extension provides a complementary modeling paradigm in which individual
ﬁrms are represented as autonomous, interacting decision-making entities. The MAS per-
spective allows to (i) represent heterogeneity in behavior, capabilities, and information, (ii)
model local interactions and decentralized decision-making, and (iii) study how global via-
bility properties emerge from micro-level dynamics. We stress that MAS does not replace the
viability-theoretic framework. It operationalizes it by embedding viability constraints into
agent behavior and interaction rules. In this extension, the viability kernel is no longer only
a theoretical object deﬁned in state space, but also an emergent feasibility region generated
by the collective behavior of agents operating under viability-oriented rules.
In terms of practical implementation, agents are capable of detecting disruptions, e.g.,
through text analytics and issuing timely alerts (AlMahri et al., 2026). As described in Ivanov
(2026b), two processing pathways are possible. In the ﬁrst, the alert is routed through a MAS
where other agents evaluate the signal before escalating it to a human decision-maker. For
instance, a risk agent may detect a ﬁre at a key supplier and initially classify it as a medium-
level (“yellow”) threat; a production agent can then run a stress test in a simulation model
and escalate the status to critical (“red”) if the time-to-recover exceeds the time-to-survive,
after which the alert is forwarded to the production manager. Alternatively, the system may
bypass intermediate agent processing and send the alert directly to the production or supply
chain manager.
Finally, we contribute to the SCV assessment literature by proposing a new metric, time-to-
exit-viability, which measures the moment when a supply chain trajectory ﬁrst violates at least
one survivability constraint. This indicator captures the conditions under which a network
can no longer maintain viable operations. Conceptually, the metric integrates key elements
from existing approaches, including the viability kernel, adaptation potential, and TTA. By
combining these perspectives, time-to-exit-viability reﬂects the availability of viable strate-
gies, the timing of adaptation or failure, and the presence of at least one feasible trajectory
that preserves system viability.
6 Conclusion
SCV and ISN are topics of increasing theoretical and practical importance. The existing
modeling approaches are predominantly based on stochastic optimization and dynamic
game-theoretic modelling. The criteria of viability are typically related to either viability
kernel or maintaining some trajectories within admissible thresholds and bounds. However,
two important aspects–network structural dynamics and decentralized coordination–have not
been considered so far.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In this study, we addressed this research gap by two relevant extensions of foundational
models. First, we extended the general viability model analytically, explicitly accounting for
structural dynamics control. Second, we introduced MAS grounded in the differential game
of the foundational model and show conceptually and numerically how viability is quantiﬁed
at the agent level. Conceptually, the MAS acts as a micro-foundation of viability theory,
translating abstract set-valued dynamics into agent-level decision processes. In addition, we
introduce time-to-exit-viability as a performance metric to quantify under what conditions
a network fails in preserving viability. The proposed formulations enable analysis of how
decentralized decisions affect ISN viability, the role of network structure in sustaining sur-
vivability, coordination failures and cascading exits, and the role of viability thresholds under
bounded rationality.
In summary, we highlight a fundamental distinction between theoretical viability, which
characterizes what is possible under ideal coordination and operational viability, which
depends on information, timing, and behavioral rules at the agent level. The MAS thus
serves as a bridge between abstract viability kernels and observed ISN resilience, showing
that survivability is not solely a property of the state space but also an emergent organizational
property of decentralized interactions.
Limitations exist as with any study. We examined a viability formulation based on discrete
topology switching (hybrid differential inclusion). A continuous relaxed topology (i.e., edge
weights as control) can be examined in future research. Moreover, the viability threshold in
the current model is associated with a one-dimensional state vector (i.e., inventory). Multi-
dimensional vectors can be explored in the future. Our example of MAS is small-scale and
introduced for illustration purposes. We encourage further research on large-scale instances,
building industry-driven MAS simulations for contextual cases and real-life applications.
For example, the role of contracts can be examined in decentralized control settings. Further
developments toward unknown-unknown uncertainty formulations are welcome as well.
Acknowledgements I thank the Associate Editor and three anonymous reviewers for providing a multitude
of excellent suggestions and stimulating ideas for the revision.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. This research is also funded by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)—Project-ID 528278755—FIP3.
The present work was also conducted in the framework of the project ACCURATE supported by the Horizon
Europe Framework Programme, under grant agreement number 101138269, HORIZON-CL4-2023-TWIN-
TRANSITION-01–07. This work is also supported by the CERERE project. CERERE (CEreals REsiliency
REvolution for agile supply chain management in the Mediterranean) is funded by the PRIMA Programme
2023–Sect. 1–Food Value-chain 2023—Topic 1.3.1 (RIA)—Increasing resilience of agri-food supply chain
(cereal) in the MENA region, Grant Agreement No. 2331.
Data availability Data related to this study is available in the article.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest No conﬂict of interest has to be declared.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research
References
Abad, A. R. K. H., Barzinpour, F., & Pishvaee, M. S. (2025). Toward agri-food supply chain viability under
pest spread risk. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 45, Article 100843.
AlMahri, S., Xu, L., & Brintrup, A. (2026). Enhancing supply chain visibility with knowledge graphs and
large language models. International Journal of Production Research, 64(6), 2178–2209.
Arumugam, D. G., & Pitchaimani, K. (2025). A system dynamics model for assessing the ripple effect of
intertwined supply networks. Journal of Simulation, 19(1), 24–38.
Ashby, W. R. (1956). An introduction to cybernetics. Chapman & Hall.
Aubin J.P. (1991). Viability Theory, Birkhäuser, Boston, 1991
Beer, S. (1979). The heart of enterprise. Wiley.
Bi, M., Kovalenko, I., Tilbury, D. M., & Barton, K. (2023). Dynamic distributed decision-making for resilient
resource reallocation in disrupted manufacturing systems. International Journal of Production Research,
62(5), 1737–1757.
Broekaert, J. B., Haﬁz, F., Jayaraman, R., & La Torre, D. (2025). Managing resilience and viability of supra-
national supply chains under epidemic control scenarios. Omega, 133, Article 103234.
Casti, J. L. (1979). Connectivity, complexity and catastrophe in large-scale systems. Wiley-Interscience.
Choi, T. (2023). The nature of supply networks. Oxford University Press.
Darmian, S. M., Sgarbossa, F., Fattahi, M., & Morande, J. P. (2025). Supply chain viability by integrating R-
imperatives, product development, and design decisions: A stochastic programming framework. Omega,
136, Article 103317.
Dockner, E., Jorgensen, S., Van Long, N., & Sorger, G. (2000). Differential Games in Economics and Man-
agement Science. Cambridge University Press.
Dolgui, A., Gusikhin, O., Ivanov, D., Li, X., & Stecke, K. (2024). A network-of-networks adaptation for
cross-industry manufacturing repurposing. IISE Transactions, 56(6), 666–682.
Echefaj, K., Charkaoui, A., Anass, A., & Ivanov, D. (2024). Design of resilient and viable sourcing strategies
in intertwined circular supply networks. Annals of Operations Research, 337(1), 459–498.
El Harraki, I., Abedin, M. Z., Belhadi, A., Kamble, S., Zkik, K., & Oudani, M. (2024). Data-driven control
and a prey–predator model for sourcing decisions in the low-carbon intertwined supply chain. Business
Strategy and the Environment, 33(8), 9141–9160.
Feizabadi, J., Gligor, D. M., & Choi, T. Y. (2023). Examining the resiliency of intertwined supply networks:
A jury-rigging perspective. International Journal of Production Research, 61(8), 2432–2451.
Ghanei, S., Contreras, I., & Cordeau, J.-F. (2023). A two-stage stochastic collaborative intertwined sup-
ply network design problem under multiple disruptions. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 170, Article 102944.
Gilani, H., Mohammadi, M., Van Woensel, T., & Sahebi, H. (2025). Data-driven robust intertwined wheat
supplychain:Redesigningaviablenetworkforlong-termgeopoliticalconﬂicts.EngineeringApplications
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 162, Article 112440.
Hashemi Petrudi, S. H., Badri Ahmadi, H. B., Azareh, Y., & Liou, J. J. H. (2024). Developing a structural
model for supply chain viability: A case from a developing country. Operations Management Research,
17(1), 324–339.
Iftikhar, A., Ali, I., Gölgeci, I., & Stevenson, M. (2024). Embracing supply chain complexity for enhanced
viability: The inﬂuence of strategic information ﬂow and network capability. IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, 71, 14963–14973.
Ivanov (2026a). The Viable Supply Chain. Springer
Ivanov, D. (2021). Supply chain viability and the COVID-19 pandemic: A conceptual and formal generalisation
of four major adaptation strategies. International Journal of Production Research, 59(12), 3535–3552.
Ivanov, D. (2022). Viable supply chain model: Integrating agility, resilience and sustainability perspectives—-
lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Annals of Operations Research, 319(1),
1411–1431.
Ivanov, D. (2023a). The Industry 5.0 framework: Viability-based integration of the resilience, sustainability,
and human-centricity perspectives. International Journal of Production Research, 61(5), 1683–1695.
Ivanov, D. (2025a). No risk, no fun? A bioinspired adaptation-based framework for supply chain resilience in
Industry 5.0. International Journal of Production Research, 63(19), 7153–7173.
Ivanov, D. (2025b). Introduction to supply chain resilience and viability. Springer.
Ivanov, D. (2026b). Agentic digital twins: Bridging model-based and AI-driven decision-making support for
a new era of supply chain and operations management. International Journal of Production Research.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2026.2630277
Ivanov, D. (2026c). Impacts of a global energy crisis on supply chain performance, ripple effects, and viability.
International Transactions in Operational Research, https://doi.org/10.1111/itor.70209
123

Annals of Operations Research
Ivanov, D. (2026d) Collaborative emergency adaptation for ripple effect mitigation in intertwined supply
networks. Annals of Operarions Research, 359, 1727–1743.
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2020). Viability of intertwined supply networks: Extending the supply chain
resilience angles towards survivability. A position paper motivated by COVID-19 outbreak. Interna-
tional Journal of Production Research, 58(10), 2904–2915.
Ivanov, D., Sokolov, B., & Kaeschel, J. (2010). A multi-structural framework for adaptive supply chain
planningandoperationscontrolwithstructuredynamicsconsiderations.EuropeanJournalofOperational
Research, 200(2), 409–420.
Kovalenko,I.,Balta,E.,Tilbury,D.,&Barton,K.(2023).Cooperativeproductagentstoimprovemanufacturing
system ﬂexibility: A model-based decision framework. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and
Engineering, 20(1), 440–457.
Kim, B., Kim, J. G., and Lee, S. (2024). A multi-agent reinforcement learning model for inventory transship-
ments under supply chain disruption. IISE Transactions, 56(7), 715–728.
Kumar, M., Raut, R. D., Ali, A., Masuna, M., & Kumar Choubey, V. K. (2024). Developing supply chain
capabilities through digitalization and viability for controlling the ripple effect. IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, 71, 10341–10357.
Li, M., Sodhi, M., Tang, C., & Yu, J. (2023). Preparedness with a system integrating inventory, capacity,
and capability for future pandemics and other disasters. Production and Operations Management, 32(2),
564–583.
Li, Q., Zhu, S., Choi, T.-M., & Shen, B. (2025). Maintaining e-commerce supply chain viability: Addressing
supply risks with a strategic live-streaming channel. Omega, 133, Article 103276.
Li, Y., Zobel, C. W., Seref, O., & Chatﬁeld, D. (2020). Network characteristics and supply chain resilience under
conditions of risk propagation. International Journal of Production Economics, 223, Article 107529.
Liu, M., Ding, Y., Chu, F., Dolgui, A., & Zheng, F. (2023). Robust actions for improving supply chain resilience
and viability. Omega, 123, Article 102972.
Liu, M., Liu, Z., Chu, F., Zheng, F., & Dolgui, A. (2025). Dynamic structural adaptation for building viable
supply chains under super disruption events. Transportation Research Part b: Methodological, 195,
Article 103190.
Long, Q. (2014). Distributed supply chain network modelling and simulation: Integration of agent-based
distributed simulation and improved SCOR model. International Journal of Production Research, 52(23),
6899–6917.
Lotﬁ, R., Hazrati, R., Aghakhani, S., Afshar, M., Amra, M., & Ali, S. S. (2024). A data-driven robust optimiza-
tion in viable supply chain network design by considering open innovation and blockchain technology.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 436, Article 140369.
Meafa, A.-E., Benabdellah, A., Zekhnini, K., & Fattah, Z. (2025). A control theory model for supply chain
viability. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 59(10), 2569–2574.
Mun, K. G., Cai, W., Rodgers, M., & Choi, S. (2024). A data-driven viable supply network for energy security
and economic prosperity. International Journal of Production Research, 62(24), 8988–9010.
Namdar, J., Torabi, S. A., Sahebjamnia, N., & Pradhan, N. N. (2021). Business continuity-inspired resilient
supply chain network design. International Journal of Production Research, 59(5), 1331–1367.
Padovano, A., & Ivanov, D. (2025). Towards resilient and viable supply chains: A multidimensional model
and empirical analysis. International Journal of Production Research, 63(17), 6252–6290.
Prathapage, H., Ivanov, D., & Ivanova, M. (2025). Methodological approaches and managerial insights in
supply chain stress testing. International Journal of Production Research, 63(24), 10791–10830.
Pu, W., Yan, X., & Ma, S. (2026). Adaptation strategies-based supply chain viability optimization under
bidirectional ripple effects. Omega, 140, Article 103467.
Rahman, T., Paul, S. K., Agarwal, R., Shukla, N., & Taghikhah, F. (2024). A viable supply chain model for
managing panic-buying related challenges: Lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic. International
Journal of Production Research, 62(10), 3415–3434.
Ren, H., Wang, C., Mu, D., Lim, M. K., Yue, X., Hu, X., Peng, R., & Tsao, Y.-C. (2024). Resilience strategies in
an intertwined supply network: Mitigating the vulnerability under disruption ripple effects. International
Journal of Production Economics, 278, Article 109419.
Roorda, M. J., Cavalcante, R., McCabe, S., & Kwan, H. (2010). A conceptual framework for agent-based
modelling of logistics services. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review,
46(1), 18–31.
Ruel, S., El Baz, J., Ivanov, D., & Das, A. (2024). Supply chain viability: Conceptualization, measurement,
and nomological validation. Annals of Operations Research, 335(3), 1107–1136.
Sawik, T. (2023). A stochastic optimisation approach to maintain supply chain viability under the ripple effect.
International Journal of Production Research, 61(8), 2452–2469.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Sawik, T. (2025). Economically viable reshoring of supply chains under ripple effect. Omega (Oxford, Eng-
land), 131, Article 103228.
Sawik, T., & Sawik, B. (2024). Risk-averse decision-making to maintain supply chain viability under propa-
gated disruptions. International Journal of Production Research, 62(8), 2853–2867.
Taylor, K. M., & Rosca, E. (2023). Sink, swim, or drift: How social enterprises use supply chain social capital
to balance tensions between impact and viability. J of Supply Chain Management, 59(2), 62–86.
Wang, M., & Yao, J. (2023). Intertwined supply network design under facility and transportation disruption
from the viability perspective. International Journal of Production Research, 61(8), 2513–2543.
Wooldridge, M. (2009). An introduction to multiagent systems. John Wiley & Sons.
Yildiz, H., Yan, T., Hatton, M., Fowler, J., Kull, T. J., & Sisk, L. (2025). When complexity meets complexity:
COVID-19-induced supply chain disruptions and strategy portfolio efﬁciency. Journal of Operations
Management, 71(1), 109–129.
Yılmaz, Ö. F., Guan, Y., Gürsoy Yılmaz, B. G., Yeni, F. B., & Özçelik, G. (2025). A comprehensive method-
ology combining machine learning and uniﬁed robust stochastic programming for medical supply chain
viability. Omega, 133, Article 103264.
Yu, W., Chávez, R., Liu, Q., & Cadden, T. (2024). Examining the effects of digital supply chain practices
on supply chain viability and operational performance: A practice-based view. IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, 71, 10413–10426.
Yue, X., Mu, D., Wang, C., Ren, H., & Ghadimi, P. (2023). Topological structure and COVID-19 related
risk propagation in TFT-LCD supply networks. International Journal of Production Research, 61(8),
2758–2778.
Zhan, S.-L., Ignatius, J., Ng, C. T., & Chen, D. (2025). Supply chain network viability: Managing disruption
risk via dynamic data and interaction models. Omega, 134, Article 103303.
Zhao,K.,Zuo,Z.,&Blackhurst,J.V.(2019).Modellingsupplychainadaptationfordisruptions:Anempirically
grounded complex adaptive systems approach. Journal of Operations Management, 65(2), 190–212.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123