TITLE: A reinforcement learning approach to dynamic portfolio optimization
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06649-x
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06649-x
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A reinforcement learning approach to dynamic portfolio
optimization
Maximilian Gollart1 · Yarema Okhrin1
Received: 19 May 2024 / Accepted: 5 May 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
This paper intends to bridge the gap between traditional and machine learning (ML) meth-
ods for dynamic portfolio optimization. We consider an investor who maximizes his utility
from terminal wealth by dynamically allocating between risky and risk-free assets over time.
Departing from the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm by Lillicrap et al.
(2016), we build a model-free reinforcement learning (RL) approach that is capable of deriv-
ing approximately optimal investment policies without any knowledge about the underlying
market dynamics. It is agnostic to rebalancing frequency, allows for easy implementation
of allocation constraints and requires low computational effort. For testing our algorithm
we benchmark it against the theoretically optimal solution. Considering a realistic market
model that is still theoretically feasible, enables us to show in detail the inherent connections
between RL and dynamic portfolio optimization. Based on that we discuss the economic
interpretability of this ML approach and the real-world applicability of such ML methods in
general.
Keywords Portfolio optimization · Reinforcement learning · Dynamic asset allocation ·
Machine learning · DDPG
1 Introduction
The topic of portfolio selection is one of the oldest and still one of the most discussed
research areas in ﬁnancial economics. One stream of research in this ﬁeld focuses on the
case of an investor who maximizes expected utility from terminal wealth by dynamically
allocating his wealth between risky assets and a risk-free asset each period until the end of
his investment horizon. One-period optimization problems are often solvable analytically.
Recent developments in stochastic control have also put forth analytic solutions for the more
realistic case of an investor changing his asset allocation dynamically over time.
To name some examples, Escobar-Anel et al. (2022) or Kraft (2005) propose a closed-
form optimal allocation formula considering a two asset case with one risky asset. The former
B Yarema Okhrin
yarema.okhrin@wiwi.uni-augsburg.de
Maximilian Gollart
maximilian.gollart@tum.de
1
Chair of Statistics and Data Science, Faculty of Business and Economics, University of Augsburg,
Augsburg, Germany
123

Annals of Operations Research
assume a spot asset whose variance follows the GARCH(1,1) process from Heston and Nandi
(2000) (HN-GARCH) while the latter’s risky asset is modeled by the Heston model from
Heston (1993). The advantages of analytic traceability are twofold. On the one hand, they
can help to gain a good conceptual understanding, for example by being able to determine
parameter sensitivities unambiguously. On the other hand, very low computational effort is
needed to calculate optimal allocations once all parameters are properly estimated. However,
eventhoughthereisanongoingefforttogeneralizeexistingmodels,likeforexampleEscobar-
Anel et al. (2021) who extend the solution from Escobar-Anel et al. (2022) to general afﬁne
GARCH models, or approaches like in Davis and Lleo (2021), Sass et al. (2017), Sass et al.
(2021) or Nagai (2023), who consider multiple risky assets and include features like expert
opinions, stochastic drift or incomplete information, closed-form methods are inherently
bound to their respective model setup. Furthermore, estimating model parameters robustly
and reliably is often far from trivial in practice.
To overcome these limitations, another stream of research focuses on the design of numer-
ical approaches. Simulation-based methods are one popular choice in academic literature.
Chen (2005) considers a multi-period multi-asset setting where the investor maximizes his
utility under constraints. They assume a multivariate GARCH model and obtain an approxi-
mate solution with a stochastic optimization procedure. Another seminal paper in this context
is Brandt et al. (2005). They derive an approximate value function that determines the
investors’ expected utility by a regression-based Monte Carlo (MC) approach. They generate
simulated returns assuming an arbitrary stochastic process and obtain the expectations via a
Longstaff and Schwartz (2001) inspired regression. In general, having a representation for
the value function allows to obtain the optimal investment strategy. Their work was recently
picked up by Zhu and Escobar-Anel (2022) and Zhu et al. (2022) who obtain a closed-form
representation of the value function and estimate its parameters via a polynomial regression.
The idea of approximating the functional relationship between variables is also widely
spread in the ﬁeld of machine learning (ML). Neural networks (NNs) have been widely used
as general function approximators as they do not require assumptions about the functional
form and are able to approximate any bounded continuous function as show by Cybenko
(1989). Zhu and Escobar-Anel (2021) apply this property to obtain a polynomial exponential
value function via a NN that was trained on simulated return data.
The ongoing rapid advances in the ﬁeld of ML beyond pure function approximation via
NNsprovidemanynewapproachestosolvingproblemsthathavenotbeenfeasiblebefore.For
example, Jiang et al. (2020) propose a method for predicting price trends by analysing images
of asset price charts. Another popular area of application is to extend traditional, mostly linear
asset pricing models by taking into account non-linear effects (e.g. Gu et al. (2018), Gu et al.
(2019)). For the particular task of multi-period portfolio allocation, it is necessary to ﬁnd an
optimal policy (i.e., investment strategy) that maximizes the future reward of an investor (i.e.,
his utility from terminal wealth). A class of algorithms that was designed particularly for this
kind of task is summarized under the term reinforcement learning (RL). A short introduction
to the literature that is of particular relevance for this paper is given in Section 3.
The potential advantages of RL for application in portfolio optimization are striking. First,
an optimal policy can be learned directly from observable market variables. There is no need
to rely on any assumptions or simpliﬁcations regarding market dynamics and risk estima-
tion. Second, RL can take a large number of observable market variables into account when
searching for an optimal policy. Due to these advantages and its successful application in
many other ﬁelds, RL has been of interest for researchers in portfolio optimization for a long
time with increasingly growing attention in recent years. Moody et al. (1998) and Moody
and Saffell (2001) are early articles in which researchers applied RL for deriving optimal
123

Annals of Operations Research
investment strategies for different performance metrics like terminal wealth, economic utility,
Sharpe ratios etc. and benchmark their algorithm against a Q-learning approach in historic
backtests for different asset classes. Building on Wang et al. (2020), Wang and Zhou (2020)
and Jia and Zhou (2022) propose methodologies for optimizing mean-variance portfolios
with one risky and one risk-free asset over time where the risky asset is assumed to follow
a geometric Brownian motion (GBM). Aboussalah and Lee (2020) tackle a similar problem
using real world data and incorporating market frictions like trading costs and short-selling
constraints. Opposite to the papers above, Bayraktar and Kara (2023) chose a more theo-
retical approach by proving certain bounds for the approximation error when discretizing
general continuous-time stochastic control problems (like for example dynamic portfolio
optimization problems) and solving them via Q-learning.
While it might be tempting to tackle very complex investment settings due to the ﬂexibility
of RL, this makes it hard to actually assess the obtained results. Most papers evaluate their
strategy on a historical backtest and benchmark it against other solutions. However, strategies
that are designed on the basis of backtests are usually not robust out-of-sample due to the
highly stochastic and time-varying nature of ﬁnancial markets. Moreover, when doing so there
is no notion of how optimal an obtained policy actually is. Even though considering complex
optimization settings is important and some of the proposed algorithms have demonstrated
a good performance in individual experiments, the trust in those results is mostly far from
being enough to actually base investment decisions on them. First, one needs to build a solid
foundation on how each aspect of RL behaves in a portfolio optimization setting. To make this
stream of research truly valuable for application in the real world one needs to convincingly
show that RL can work well in a realistic setting but one that still exhibits controllable
complexity. Weissensteiner (2009) is one rare example where RL is applied to a classical
dynamic portfolio optimization problem, namely the one introduced in Merton (1969). The
investor maximizes an expected von Neumann-Morgenstern utility from terminal wealth by
choosing from a discrete set of possible allocations in a binomial tree market. Q-learning
is applied to learn the optimal policy and value function. Moreover, Jiang et al. (2022) use
RL to better deal with estimation errors when deriving optimal Kelly strategies. Like other
papers mentioned above, they apply the entropy-regularization RL framework proposed by
Wang et al. (2020) in a market with one risky asset that follows a GBM. They even take
a short detour, to analyze the algorithms performance when the stochastic volatility model
from Heston (1993) is used as the data generating process. Both, Weissensteiner (2009) and
Jiang et al. (2022) take advantage of the availability of a closed-form solution to assess the
performance of their respective RL algorithm. For more resources regarding RL approaches
for stochastic optimization with a focus on ﬁnancial mathematics applications we refer the
reader to Jaimungal (2022).
We intend to contribute to the discussion on how robust and reliable we can expect such
kinds of algorithms to be. More speciﬁcally, this paper investigates the capabilities of RL in
deriving optimal dynamic investment strategies by applying it to realistic but still analytically
tractable market environments. We consider a discrete-time setting with a multi-dimensional
continuous state and action space. A class of RL algorithms that has proven to work par-
ticularly well in such environments are policy gradient (PG) methods. In particular, we use
the deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm proposed by Lillicrap et al. (2016)
as a starting point and show how it can be adopted to better cope with the speciﬁc chal-
lenges arising in the context of dynamic portfolio optimization. To assess the performance
of our algorithm we benchmark it against the theoretical optimal solution and show that the
optimum solution can be approximated to a reasonable degree of accuracy with low com-
putational effort. Further, the comparison to the analytic benchmark enables us to compare
123

Annals of Operations Research
various elements of the optimization problem allowing us to transfer the economic intuition
gained in the closed-form setting to RL. As an extension of the analytic benchmarking set-
ting, our approach is agnostic to rebalancing frequency and allows for easy implementation
of allocation constraints.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 formally introduces the
problem setting. Section 3 gives an overview of the relevant developments in RL. In Section
4 we develop a RL methodology for solving the portfolio optimization problem. Section 5
shows numerical results while Section 6 elaborates on their robustness. Section 8 summarizes
and concludes the paper.
2 Problem formulation
The problem of interest is to maximize the expected utility from terminal wealth, i.e., to ﬁnd
a strategy π∗that solves the optimal control problem1
0(v0, h1) = max
{πt}T−1
t=0
E0 [U (VT )] ,
V (0) = v0 > 0,
(1)
where U is a power utility function of the form U (v) = vη
η , η < 0, Vt is the portfolio
value at time t with v0 being the deterministic starting wealth and ht is the variance of the
risky asset. We will work in the space U[0, T ] of admissible strategies π := {πt}t∈{0,1,...T },
comprising of admissible actions πt from the set At satisfying the following conditions: πt
is Ft-progressively measurable and self-ﬁnancing, wealth is non-negative in [0, T ] and the
expectation in (1) is well-deﬁned. Further, the ﬁnancial market is deﬁned as follows. Let (,
F, P) be a complete probability space with ﬁltration {Ft}t∈{0,1,...T }. All stochastic processes
are deﬁned on this probability space.
As many authors mentioned in Section 1, we consider a market with one risky and one
risk-free asset. The proportion of wealth invested in the risky asset St at any time t is deﬁned
as πt. The remaining proportion of wealth (1 −πt) goes into the risk-free cash account Bt.
We further assume that the risky asset pays no dividends.
Stochastic control problems in discrete time such as in equation (1) can be solved recur-
sively. This approach relies on the so-called Bellman equation which expresses the value
function t as a function of its successor t+1, ∀t = 0, . . . , T −1 and a terminal condition
T . As per the Bellman principle (see e.g. (Seierstad, 2009) Theorem 1-13) optimizing each
individual t recursively, i.e., t = T −1, T −2, . . . t, yields the optimal value/ Bellman
function and the optimal policy π∗. 2
In our setting, the recursive Bellman equation can be written as
t (Vt, ht+1) = max
πt∈At Et

t+1 (T (Vt, ht+1, πt, zt))

,
(2)
with T denoting the transition function from state st = (Vt, ht+1, t) ∈S and action πt ∈At
to wealth Vt+1 depending on a random disturbance zt and an additional state variable ht+1
1 The dependence of VT on the investment strategy is omitted from the notation.
2 Note, the problem needs to satisfy some additional conditions for the Bellman principle to apply e.g. that
the value function remains in the same class of functions after taking expectations and maximizing. To avoid
unnecessary notation we refrain from formally specifying the problem in full with all necessary conditions as
an analytic solution via the Bellman principle is out of the scope of this paper.
123

Annals of Operations Research
as deﬁned in equation (5) below. It is given by the self-ﬁnancing wealth process and reads 3
T (Vt, ht+1, πt, zt) = Vt

πt
St+1
St
+ (1 −πt) Bt+1
Bt

.
(3)
Equation (2) and the corresponding policy π∗are the objects of interest in this paper. Only in
special cases can they be formulated explicitly and solved in closed form. This also requires
full knowledge of the underlying market dynamics. In the next sections, we demonstrate an
approach for learning both the optimal value function and the optimal policy without any
prior knowledge about the underlying stochastic processes.
For testing our approach we work with the following dynamics. The log of the risky
spot asset price Xt = log St is Ft-progressively measurable and follows the Heston-Nandi
GARCH (1,1) (HN-GARCH) model,
Xt = Xt−1 + r + λht +

htzt,
X(0) = x0 > 0,
(4)
ht = ω + βht−1 + α(zt−1 −θ

ht−1)2,
(5)
where x0 is non-random, r is the continuously compounded single-period risk-free rate, zt
is a standard normal disturbance and ht is the conditional variance of the log return of the
asset between t −1 and t with β + αθ2 < 1 ensuring stationarity. The long-term average
variance is given by
¯h =
α + ω
1 −β −αθ2 .
(6)
The second asset is the risk-free bank account Bt bearing the continuously compounded
interest rate r for the time interval from t to t + 1.
Continuous-time models are often used to obtain analytic solutions due to their nice
properties like no-arbitrage, completeness of the market or change of measure. Discrete-time
econometric time series models on the other hand sacriﬁce some of that analytic traceability
to focus more on an accurate reﬂection of statistical properties of real-world time series. The
advantages of continuous-time models presumably play a larger role in derivatives pricing
than in portfolio optimization. Especially, since RL does not depend on any assumptions on
the data-generating process, the realistic description of market returns seems more important
for our simulation use-case than formal parsimony. The fact that investors cannot trade in
continuous time but only at discrete points in time also appears to make discrete time models
the more natural choice for these kind of problems. Furthermore, Escobar-Anel et al. (2022)
show that the stochastic variance and its correlation to the spot-asset returns can signiﬁcantly
impact optimal investment decisions. Hence, we chose the HN-GARCH model outlined
above as an interesting example for the data-generating process.
In the following section we start deriving our methodology by ﬁrst summarizing previous
RL approaches and discussing their applicability to the problem outlined above.
3 Prior work on reinforcement learning
In this section, we discuss prior approaches that use reinforcement learning methods for
obtaining optimal policies. By doing so we will arrive at the DDPG algorithm as a suitable
point of departure for constructing our own methodology which will then be speciﬁcally
designed to tackle the problem at hand.
3 For notational convenience we do not state the dependence of T on r and other model parameters explicitly.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Reinforcement learning has predominantly been applied to playing Atari games at human-
level performance (e.g. Mnih et al. (2015), Lillicrap et al. (2016)) and complex robotics tasks
(e.g. Stafylopatis and Blekas (1998), van Rooijen et al. (2014), Kormushev et al. (2013)).
Due to its success many researchers have afterwards tried to take advantage of its capabilities
in other domains like logistics (e.g. Brammer et al. (2022), de Moor et al. (2022)) or even
predicting the behavior of terrorist organizations (cf. Jaspersen and Montibeller (2020)). For
a general overview on RL we refer the reader to Kiumarsi et al. (2018) and Chen (2021).
Within the portfolio optimization setting outlined in Section 2, we are in a domain where an
agent chooses from a continuous set of actions πt ∈R at discrete time steps t = 0, . . . , T −1
with T < ∞, based on his observation of the current state of the environment. As a result
of his action, he receives a reward which is governed by the transition function T. This is a
Markov decision process and thus at the core of reinforcement learning methods.
The dynamics of many of the environments from other applications are governed by
mechanical physics equations which makes them largely deterministic. This means that each
observed state of the environment has one corresponding action that is optimal. This is
signiﬁcantly different from the portfolio optimization problem we are considering. Here we
are dealing with a highly stochastic environment where the noise in each observation is
higher than the information it provides. So even when observing different realized states of
the environment due to stochastic noise, the same action might still be optimal if the signal in
the data remains constant. This makes such a problem much harder to solve as the algorithm
does not only need to derive a mapping between a state and an action but also to discriminate
between the signal and the noise in the data in order to obtain reasonable results.
Among the ﬁrst reinforcement learning methods that were successfully applied in a model-
free fashion, i.e., without knowledge of the data-generating process to solve real-world
problems, was the Q-learning algorithm by Watkins and Dayan (1992). Like other tabu-
lar methods, Q-learning only works on discrete action spaces with decreasing performance
for ﬁner action grids. Even though this is opposed to a portfolio allocation problem where the
investor can allocate a continuous fraction to different assets, Q-learning has been applied
for this kind of problem before. Weissensteiner (2009), for example, considers an investor
who can choose from a discrete set of allocations. Obviously, this might result in suboptimal
actions when the optimum lies between two discrete steps. Thus, the result of this approach
depends on the appropriateness of the chosen grid points, which cannot be known a-priori
per construction. Furthermore, Q-learning can only cope with low-dimensional state spaces
as outlined for example in Chen (2021). However, in the context of portfolio optimization
one might want to add multiple observable variables like multiple assets, their variance or
other explanatory variables increasing the dimensionality of the environment’s state space.
An improvement with respect to this was presented by Mnih et al. (2015) with their Deep
Q Network (DQN) algorithm. It allows for tackling problems with high dimensional state
spaces by using deep neural networks (DNNs) as function approximators for the value func-
tion but it is still limited to low-dimensional discrete action spaces. Finally, the algorithm
we choose to depart from is the DDPG algorithm by Lillicrap et al. (2016). It extends DQN
to high-dimensional continuous action spaces. Another advantage of this algorithm is that
it allows to impose action constraints in a straightforward manner, which is of utter impor-
tance to portfolio optimization as investors usually have constraints on their investments in
different assets. These might be due to regulatory requirements, views on certain assets or
other idiosyncratic risk preferences. Moreover, DDPG uses DNNs as function approximators
which are ﬂexible enough to model complex non-linear functions as the value function from
equation (1). Having an explicit approximation of the value function (which is not the case
123

Annals of Operations Research
for purely actor-based RL methods) also allows us to compare the learned solution better to
the theoretical optimum as is the goal of this paper.
To summarize, DDGP is a well suited algorithm for the problem at hand as it enables us
to consider multi-dimensional and continuous state and action spaces with an easy way of
imposing action constraints and while delivering a representation for the value function.
4 Extention of DDPG for Portfolio Optimization
4.1 Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
To better understand the possible limitations of the original DDPG algorithm for application
in portfolio optimization we want to quickly remind the reader of how the algorithm works
and summarize it in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 DDPG algorithm
Randomly initialize critic network Q

s, a | θ Q
and actor network μ
 
s | θμ
with weights θ Q and θμ
Initialize target networks Q′ and μ′ with weights θ Q′ ←θ Q, θμ′ ←θμ
Initialize replay buffer R
for epoch = 1, M do
Initialize a random process N for action exploration
Receive initial observation state s0
for t = 0, T do
Select action at = μ
 
st | θμ
+ Nt according to the current policy
and exploration noise
Execute action at and observe reward rt and observe new state st+1
Store transition
 
st, at,rt, st+1

in R
Sample a random mini batch of N transitions
 
si, ai,ri, si+1

from R
Set yi = ri + γ Q′ 
si+1, μ′ 
si+1 | θμ′
| θ Q′
Update critic by minimizing the loss:
L = 1
N

i

yi −Q

si, ai | θ Q2
Update the actor policy using the sampled policy gradient:
∇θμ J ≈1
N

i ∇a Q

s, a | θ Q
|s=si ,a=μ(si) ∇θμμ
 
s | θμ
|si
Update the target networks:
θ Q′ ←τθ Q + (1 −τ) θ Q′
θμ′ ←τθμ + (1 −τ) θμ′
end for
end for
As with any reinforcement learning algorithm, DDPG models an agent that interacts with
an environment. Generally speaking, an environment is a set of rules that deﬁne how actions
at taken by the agent change the state of a certain set of variables from st to st+1. The idea is
that by repeatedly interacting with the environment and observing its response or reward rt
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Relation between portfolio optimization and reinforcement learning framework
Portfolio Optimization Framework
Reinforcement Learning Framework
Variables
πt (allocation)
at (action)
Vt, ht+1, t (wealth, variance, time)
st (state tuple)
Objects
Vt
 
Vt−1, ht, πt, zt

(wealth process)
T (st, at, zt) (transition function)
π (investment strategy)
μ
 
st | θμ
(actor network)
t
 
Vt, ht+1

(value function)
Q

st, at | θ Q
(critic network)
U (VT ) (utility from terminal wealth)
rT (reward)
the agent can learn over time the best action for any given environment state. In the particular
case of DDPG, the decision rule of the agent is modelled by a neural network. This actor
network μ: s ∈S →R maps the current state of the environment to an action that tries to
maximize the expected reward. The expected reward, in turn, is again modelled by a different
neural network. This critic network Q : s ∈S × a ∈A →R maps the current state and
action (possibly chosen by the actor network) to an expected reward.
Conceptually, the workﬂow in Algorithm 1 goes as follows. At each time step t =
0, . . . , T −1 the agent represented by the actor network selects an action according to
the current state of the environment and observes a reward. Then the parameters of the critic
network, i.e., the approximation of the expected value, are updated based on a sample of past
actions and rewards. Finally, the parameters of the actor network are updated such that the
chosen actions maximize the expected reward predicted by the critic network. After arriving
at the terminal time step T , the environment state is reset and a new epoch starts. For more
details on DDPG we refer the reader to Chen (2021) and Lillicrap et al. (2016).
In the next section, we will link this general DDPG framework to the portfolio optimization
setting from Section 2.
4.2 DDPG for Portfolio Optimization
In this section we ﬁrst motivate why reinforcement learning is conceptually well ﬁt for the
application to dynamic portfolio optimization. Subsequently, we introduce modiﬁcations to
the original DDPG algorithm, speciﬁcally designed to address the unique challenges and
characteristics of these types of problems.
4.2.1 Analogies between DDPG and Dynamic Portfolio Optimization
Conceptually, there are two approaches to how one could tackle the task at hand. First, a
ﬁnanceresearcherorpractitionerwouldprobablystartbylookingattheportfoliooptimization
problem and then ﬁnd corresponding elements in the RL algorithm to use it for solving the
optimization task. A person with a ML background on the other hand would probably start
from the RL algorithm and view the portfolio optimization as an abstract task to solve. In
order to bridge the gap between both disciplines, we ﬁrst aim at very clearly pointing out the
analogy between RL and portfolio optimization.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 shows the correspondence between the most important elements in our setting.
The ﬁrst column lists the concrete elements from the portfolio optimization framework while
the second column gives the analogue elements in general RL speech. In the upper part of the
table we show some fundamental variables. The fraction invested into the risky asset at time t,
i.e., πt, corresponds to the action at, while the current state of the market, i.e., (Vt, ht+1, t), is
named the state tuple st. Note, that our approach is in principle able to incorporate an almost
arbitrary number of state variables. When considering a volatility model like the HN-GARCH
it is reasonable to consider volatility as an additional state variable. The lower part of the table
lists the more complex objects that comprise of the fundamental variables above. The wealth
process is a stochastic process that deﬁnes the dynamics of the portfolio value. For each
single time step it implicitly deﬁnes the transition function that governs the dynamics of the
environment. Analytical solutions can only be obtained for very speciﬁc conﬁgurations of this
stochastic process while our approach is completely agnostic with regard to those dynamics.
The investment strategy π is the policy or decision rule that tells the investor what fraction
of his wealth to invest into the risky asset at each point in time conditioned on the current
environment state. This decision rule is modelled by the actor networks μ: s ∈S →R that
aim to map the current state to the action that maximizes the expected reward. The reward rt
corresponds to the realized utility from terminal wealth after following a certain policy, i.e.,
rt = 0 ∀t < T and rt = U (Vt) for t = T . Note that this setup permits to incorporate
transaction costs or other costs by adjusting the reward accordingly. In this paper however, we
refrain from doing so to maintain comparability with the theoretical solution. This facilitates
the assessment of the algorithm’s proximity to the true optimum. Similar to the Q-learning
case in Weissensteiner (2009), the critic networks Q : s ∈S × a ∈A →R map the current
state and action to expected utility. They correspond to the value function (1) in the portfolio
optimization setting without taking the maximum over all actions, yet.4 The goal here is to
train the network parameters such that the networks approximate the optimal value function.
4.2.2 Algorithm Modiﬁcations
Now that we fully deﬁned in Section 2 the portfolio optimization problem we want to solve
and clariﬁed in Section 4.2.1 what element in RL can be used to model each element in
the portfolio optimization problem, we can now build the actual RL model for solving the
optimization next.
The biggest challenge in applying DDPG to portfolio optimization is the high degree of
randomness in the obtained rewards and the relatively low differences in average rewards
when selecting optimal vs. suboptimal allocations. This results in unstable critic losses L
between multiple learning steps which in turn lead to unstable critic network parameters, actor
parameters and ﬁnally actions. Hence, a convergence of the algorithm to optimal networks
might be jeopardized. To tackle this issue we take multiple measures which are presented
next. Our fully adopted methodology is summarized in Algorithm 2.
By means of the formula for L in Algorithm 1 one can decompose the loss into differ-
ent components and into two different sources of ﬂuctuation. The ﬁrst important source of
ﬂuctuation is the distribution of the sample that is drawn from the replay buffer in each opti-
mization step. If this distribution ﬂuctuates too much the outputs of the networks based on
these samples ﬂuctuate too. The second source of the ﬂuctuation in the L is the change in
4 Unlike for the value function t, the functional form of the Q network does not change with different t.
Here, t is modelled as part of the environment state. Hence, we do not put the subindex t on Q. The same
holds for the actor networks.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Algorithm 2 DDPG for Portfolio Optimization
Procedure:
Randomly initialize critic network Q

s, a | θ Q
and actor network
μ
 
s | θμ
with weights θ Q and θμ
Initialize target networks Q′ and μ′ with weights θ Q′ ←θ Q, θμ′ ←θμ
Initialize replay buffer R
for epoch = 1, M do
Initialize an OU process N with positive drift for action exploration
Receive initial observation state s0
for t = 0, T −1 do
Select actions a+
t
= μ

s+
t
| θμ + Nt

, a−
t
= μ

s−
t
| θμ + Nt

according to the current policy and exploration noise
Execute actions a+
t , a−
t and observe rewards r+
t , r−
t
and
new states s+
t+1, s−
t+1
Store transitions

s+
t , a+
t ,r+
t , s+
t+1

and

s−
t , a−
t ,r−
t , s−
t+1

in R
if 2×((epoch −1) × T + t) ≥N then
Randomly sample a mini batch of N transition
pairs
 
si, ai,ri, si+1

from R
Set yi = ri + γ Q′ 
si+1, μ′ 
si+1 | θμ′
| θ Q′
Update critic by minimizing the loss:
L = 1
N

i

yi −Q

si, ai | θ Q2
Update the actor policy using the sampled policy gradient:
∇θμ J ≈1
N

i ∇a Q

s, a | θ Q
|s=si ,a=μ(si) ∇θμμ
 
s | θμ
|si
if every k’th step then
Update the target networks:
θ Q′ ←τθ Q + (1 −τ) θ Q′
θμ′ ←τθμ + (1 −τ) θμ′
end if
end if
end for
end for
Output: μ
 
st | θμ
=π∗, Q

st, at | θ Q
=t
trainable network parameters θ. We ﬁrst focus on the efforts that can be made to overcome
the issue of ﬂuctuating sample distributions. Afterwards we will tackle the ﬂuctuation in
network parameters.
Biased Noise Process. Lillicrap et al. (2016) use an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process
with zero drift for their action noise. This means that on average the action that is used for
exploration corresponds to the currently learned action. In our portfolio optimization context,
however, it is beneﬁcial to explore more in areas with a higher allocation to the risky asset.
When looking at the transition function (3) one can see that the higher the allocation πt to
the risky asset, the higher the variance of the wealth over the next time step which means
that observed rewards, i.e., utilities from terminal wealth, ﬂuctuate more. Hence, one needs
more observations to get stable estimates for those actions. Therefore we add a positive drift/
bias to our OU action noise. Note that this can be done as DDPG is an off-policy algorithm
which means that the action for exploration, i.e., for populating the replay buffer, can be
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Replay Buffer
Observation
State (st)
Action (at)
Reward (rt)
New State (st+1)
Done Flag
1
s0
a0
0
s+
1
False
2
s0
a0
0
s−
1
False
3
s+
1
a+
1
0
s+
2
False
4
s−
1
a−
1
0
s−
2
False
...
...
...
...
...
...
2T −1
s+
T −1
a+
T −1
U

V +
T

s+
T
True
2T
s−
T −1
a−
T −1
U

V −
T

s−
T
True
...
...
...
...
...
...
from a different policy than the policy that is actually learned. If adding the noise causes the
resulting actions to be outside the speciﬁed action bounds the noise process is reset to zero.
Efﬁcient Sampling from the Replay Buffer. In the original DDPG algorithm, the batch of N
transition tuples (st, at,rt, st+1) is randomly sampled from the replay buffer to calculate the
critic loss. The loss is calculated as the mean squared error (MSE). As in classical statistics,
when estimating a statistic based on a sample we obtain an estimator with a certain variance
(and possibly some bias). This means, when re-calculating the estimator with different sam-
ples, one may obtain different results, depending on the distribution of the samples. For the
MSE in particular, the results are ﬂuctuating vastly. This problem lies at the core of classical
statistics and many procedures have been proposed to reduce the variance of estimators. For
example, when pricing options via MC simulations a common method for reducing the vari-
ance of the MC estimator is the antithetic variates approach (see e.g. Boyle (1977)). The basic
idea is to simulate one random number z and calculate the statistic under consideration using
+z and −z respectively. Repeating this procedure multiple times yields a balanced sample of
observations. Due to this balance, mean estimators, for example, exhibit considerably lower
variance. This method is numerically cheap as double the amount of observations can be
obtained without actually simulating more random numbers. Furthermore, the simplicity of
this approach makes it very ﬂexible for applications in various problems. Now notice, for
the critic loss we estimate the mean of the squared differences of two variables based on a
certain sample which is exactly the domain of the antithetic variates method. We apply this
by, at each t, observing the initial state st, taking an action at and observing two symmetric
new states s+
t+1 and s−
t+1 which are determined by the transition function T in eq. (3) which in
turn is obtained by simulating (4) and (5) with z+
t+1 and z−
t+1 respectively. These transitions
are then stored in the replay buffer as shown in Table 2.
Finally, when sampling from the replay buffer, both observations from one pair are picked
together. When calculating the MSE we get for the transitions pairs with non-zero rewards,
i.e., from T −1 to T ,
L = 1
K

i∈I

rT ,i + γ Q′ 
sT +1,i+2, μ′ 
sT +1,i+2 | θμ′
| θ Q′
−Q

sT ,i, aT ,i | θ Q2
+

rT ,i+1 + γ Q′ 
sT +1,i+3, μ′ 
si+3 | θμ′
| θ Q′
−Q

sT ,i+1, aT ,i+1 | θ Q2
123

Annals of Operations Research
= 1
K

i∈I

rT ,i −Q

sT ,i, aT ,i | θ Q2
+

rT ,i+1 −Q

sT ,i+1, aT ,i+1 | θ Q2
= 1
K

i∈I
⎡
⎢⎢⎣

U

V +
T ,i

−Q

s+
T ,i, a+
T ,i | θ Q2



:=A+
+

U

V −
T ,i+1

−Q

s−
T ,i+1, a−
T ,i+1 | θ Q2



:=A−
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
= 1
K/2

i∈I
A+ + A−
2
,
(7)
where I = {2T −1, 4T −1, . . . , M −1} with M being the size of the replay buffer and
K = |I| is the number of elements in the set of indexes I. This is exactly the deﬁnition of the
antithetic variates approach. Note, we only observe non-zero rewards in time step T , these
are the only learning steps where actual data is consumed. At any other learning step, we
merely calculate the difference between the output from the target critic and the evaluation
critic (even though based on different inputs). Hence, the learning steps where t = T are
of utter importance. Also note that the algorithm only starts learning when the number of
observations in the replay buffer is greater than the sample size. This initial population of
the replay buffer where no learning takes place can also be achieved faster by simulating
antithetic variance pairs providing a slight increase in efﬁciency.
Size of Sampled Batch. Finally, as for any consistent estimator, the variance approaches
zero as the sample size approaches the size of the whole population. In our context, this
means that the MSE shows less ﬂuctuation when N →M. Of course, there is a trade-off
between variance of the estimator and run time. The larger N the slower the optimization.
Hence, choosing an appropriate sample size is important.
In the following paragraphs we will discuss potential solutions for tackling the second
source of the ﬂuctuation in L, i.e., the change in trainable network parameters θ. This change
is a natural result of the learning process where all critic network parameters θ Q are updated
in each step t by applying Adam (cf. Kingma and Ba (2014)).
Network Parameter Updates. When setting learning rates for Q
 
si, ai | θ Q
or the update
speed of the target networks to high, this of course causes large ﬂuctuations in L. Therefore,
selecting appropriate learning rates is important. Furthermore, we choose to only update the
parameters of the target network every few steps instead of every step. After minimizing
the MSE against stable target values for a few periods one can update the target network
parameters with a higher τ. This increases stability further while still not sacriﬁcing too
much learning speed.
In addition to the adjustments and parameterization of the DDPG algorithm above tackling
the ﬂuctuation in critic loss, some more design choices are outlined next.
Network Architecture. For the sake of simplicity, we choose a simple feed-forward archi-
tecture for our networks. From the closed form solution in Theorem 1 in Escobar-Anel et
al. (2022), it is clear that the optimal policy is a purely deterministic function of t. Hence
we choose a simple network structure for the actor while sticking to the ﬂexible architecture
for the critic networks as they must be able to approximate the complex highly non-linear
value function. Both networks are depicted in Figure 1. The output layer of the actor network
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Architecture of critic and actor networks
depicted in Subﬁgure 1b gives the optimal action π∗
t and uses a sigmoid activation function
to bound actions to the closed interval [0, 1]. Note that one can scale the outputs from the
network to any other interval before applying the action to the environment and before saving
it to the replay buffer R. This way one can easily impose constraints on the portfolio weights.
Data Preprocessing. If inputs of DNNs live on different scales, this can cause problems
in learning (Lillicrap et al. (2016)). This is the case for out state variables, i.e., (Vt, ht+1, t).
Hence, we transform wealth to log-wealth, annualize variance and scale t to the interval
[0, 0.01].
5 Experiments
In this section, we conduct a simulation study similar to Weissensteiner (2009) and Jiang
et al. (2022) to test our algorithm against a realistic set of market parameters. We note that
there are multiple parameter sets for the HN-GARCH available in literature. Throughout this
section, we consider parameter estimates of daily S&P 500 returns from Christoffersen et al.
(2006) as a representative set of parameters for our market environment. To check whether the
results obtained under these parameters are representative, we also performed some additional
tests using different parameters. The parameters that impact the optimal allocation the most
are the ones that inﬂuence the relative attractiveness of the risky compared to the risk-free
asset the most. These are the risk premium λ, i.e., the additional expected return for each
unit of variance risk, and the risk aversion parameter η, i.e., the additional expected return
demanded by the investor in order to take one additional unit of risk. Therefore, in addition to
the parameters from Christoffersen et al. (2006) we also conducted experiments on permuted
sets of HN-GARCH parameters, especially of λ and η. Increasing λ and η simultaneously
increases the concavity of the expected value function causing a larger difference in expected
value between the optimal allocation and a suboptimal one. This simpliﬁes the function
approximation via the critic networks. All in all, the learning algorithm’s performance is
comparable across different HN-GARCH parameters and risk aversion levels (see Appendix
A for additional results on different risk aversion levels). For the remaining parameters, we
choose V0 = 1, r = 0.01/252, η = −8, T = 5 days and set the number of epochs to 10, 000.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Note that we also constrain the allocation to the risky asset to be between 0% and 100%.
In principle, this is not necessary to ﬁnd the optimal solution as in this case it is within this
boundary. However, it is common practice in portfolio optimization tasks to put no-short-
sales constraints on the asset weights. Furthermore, constraining the algorithm to a certain
action region helps achieve faster convergence as exploration is only done within this limited
action space. Hence, being able to easily implement constraints is practical from an economic
as well as from a numeric point of view.
Regarding the learning parameters, we used a batch size of N = 5000 transitions from the
replay buffer, discount factor of γ = 0.99, Adam learning rates for actor and critic network
of 0.02175 and 0.01 respectively. Furthermore, the target networks were updated every 10th
learning step with update weight τ = 0.01. The OU action noise process used dt = 0.01 for
discretization, mean-reversion level 0.01, mean-reversion speed 50, and standard deviation
parameter 0.25. A discussion of the robustness of these learning parameters can be found in
Section 6.
In the experiment, we iterate over 10, 000 epochs with an investment horizon of ﬁve
periods in each epoch. For this we simulate the returns of the risky asset with the HN-
GARCH parameters above. At each time step we let the algorithm choose a fraction of
wealth to invest into the risky asset. After the ﬁnal period, we observe the obtained wealth
and its utility.
The experiment was implemented in python using the Keras and TensorFlow library. It
was run on a regular 2.6GHz 6-Core CPU with 64GB RAM and no parallel computing. The
average run time for different conﬁgurations of learning rates and batch sizes is signiﬁcantly
below one hour for 10,000 epochs. Compared to approaches like in Aboussalah and Lee
(2020) who use a 40-Core machine with 368GB together with parallel computing on 20
12GBGPUswithatimebudgetof10hours,ourapproachissubstantiallylesscomputationally
expensive which makes it truly accessible for real-world application. For the parameterization
above for example we observe a learning time of approximately 20 minutes for the 5×10, 000
learning steps.5
5.1 Learned Strategy
Figure 2 shows the training progress of the learned action over the number of training steps.
Each training step is equivalent of investing over one period. After T learning steps, i.e.,
investment periods, the environment is resetted and a new investment cycle, i.e., epoch starts.
The parameters of the actor network are initialized such that the resulting action is in the
middle between both action bounds. Over the ﬁrst N/2 periods no learning takes place as the
replay buffer does not yet contain enough transitions to sample a full batch of size N. Hence,
the evaluation actor μ outputs the same actions that are used to populate the replay buffer
after adding the action noise. Once sufﬁciently many transitions are in the replay buffer, the
evaluation critic Q is updated by minimizing its loss L. L is the MSE between the target
values yi and the output of the current evaluation critic. In the beginning, L can be quite
small as μ′ outputs similar actions to those in the replay buffer ai and, being fed with similar
action, both critic networks output similar values as those are also copies of each other.
Recall, rewards are only received at the end of an investment cycle. Thus, most rewards ri
are equal to zero. Moreover, the discount factor γ is close to one. Hence, these additional
terms in the target values yi only have a small impact. Then, the actor network is updated
via the gradient shown in Algorithm 2. After some time the outputs of the evaluation actor
5 This number is an average over multiple runs with different random numbers.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Training process of learned action
μ depart from the ones of the target actor μ′ whose parameters change more slowly. Thus,
the distribution of actions in the replay buffer starts to change and the critic loss gets bigger
causing the evaluation critic network to depart from the target critic. All these loose parts
diverging from each other make the whole system quite unstable for some time. This causes
the large and rapid changes in the learned action in the ﬁrst third of the learning process
in Figure 2. Then after a while, the distribution of states and actions in the replay buffer
becomes somewhat balanced, stabilizing all the metrics calculated over different sample
batches before the algorithm eventually converges towards the optimal policy. The same
analysis for different risk aversion levels can be found in Appendix A. Note, Escobar-Anel
et al. (2022) show that, even when considering reinvestment opportunities at each point in
time and stochastic variance, the optimal theoretical solution suggests an almost constant
allocation here. This is because the level of the optimal fraction allocated to the risky asset
depends on the (constant) distribution of the variance (given by the parameters of the HN-
GARCH) but not on its actual realization.
5.2 Learned Value Function
In this subsection we investigate the ﬁt of the learned value function. For doing so we take
advantage of the fact that we have access to a closed-form solution for the true value function
and that we chose an actor critic approach that provides us with a representation of the learned
value function. Figure 3 shows the learned and true value function for different stages of the
learning process. Note that the value function depends on the states and the action. In our
case, our state input is three-dimensional (time, wealth and variance) and the action input
is one-dimensional. Hence, we can observe the ﬁt in four dimensions in total. The ﬁt in
the action dimension is obviously important for ﬁnding optimal policies. Regarding the state
dimensions, we know from Escobar-Anel et al. (2022) that the value function is most sensitive
to changes in wealth direction. This is an intuitive result as the value function measures the
expected value of terminal wealth. Therefore we chose to plot the value surface for ﬁxed
values of ht and t. For this, we chose the long term average variance ¯h from equation (6) and
123

Annals of Operations Research
t = 0, i.e., we observe the unconditional expectation. Subﬁgure 3a shows the value function
after 100 epochs. Remember, no learning takes place until epoch 500. Hence, this subﬁgure
shows the initial state of the critic network that estimates all terminal utilities to be equal to
zero. Then after 1000 epochs, one can observe that the learned value function approaches
the true one (Subﬁgure 3b). In particular at the starting wealth V0 = 1 the approximation
improved dramatically. For larger and lower wealth the approximation is still further away
from the true value. This seems reasonable as observing a certain value for the wealth gets
less likely the further away from the expected wealth those values are and thus there are less
of those observations in the replay buffer to learn from. In Subﬁgure 3c 2000 epochs have
passed and it can be seen that the approximation ﬁrst attains better estimations for wealth
larger than one. Here, the same argument applies as before. Wealth larger than one is more
likely than wealth below one due to the positive drift in the wealth process. Eventually, after
4000 epochs a reasonably good ﬁt of the true value function across different wealth and
actions is attained as can be found in Subﬁgure 3d.
To assess the ﬁt in more detail we plotted in Figure 4 the difference between the learned
and true value function normalized by the absolute level of the true value function. One
can see that for most regions the learned value function is slightly above the true one with
decreasing goodness of ﬁt for higher wealths. van Hasselt (2010) reports that it is common
for Q-Value function approximators to overestimate the action value. This is consistent with
our results. However, the bias of our adopted DDPG algorithm is far smaller than for example
the one of Q-learning in van Hasselt (2010).
Figure 5 shows a slice of the value function at the optimal action. Even at this degree of
detail, the critic network manages to recover the concavity of the true value function which
is an important feature as this is what makes the investor risk averse. Of course, the ﬁt is
far from perfect. Lillicrap et al. (2016) observe that even though their learned Q-Values are
not precisely predictive for realized rewards for more complex deterministic environments,
good policies can still be learned. This carries over to our setting with a highly stochastic
environment.
6 Robustness checks and parameter sensitivities
In this section we present further analyses to test the robustness of the results presented in
Section 5.
Note that we set a random seed in order to make the results from Section 5 reproducible.
Further, recall that our reinforcement learning algorithm is purely model-free and relies com-
pletely on the information it observes. More speciﬁcally, the internal optimization routines
are performed on samples of the replay buffer which is ﬁlled consecutively over time. This
bears the potential that the algorithm converges to a local optimum in case the simulated
observations suggest an underlying dynamic of the environment that is, by chance, very
different from its actual behavior. This is a typical problem of stochastic optimization tech-
niques and thus researchers often report average results over multiple runs within the same
environment (cf. Lillicrap et al. (2016)).
In Figure 6 we show the results for 32 randomly chosen random seeds in the range from
1 to 10,000. All other learning parameters are as in Section 5. The graph shows quantiles of
the learned actions over the course of learning. In order to obtain meaningful statistics while
preserving the temporal structure of the learning process, we calculate the quantiles over all
32 runs at each learning step. The ﬁrst thing to notice is that the median path of the learned
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Comparison between analytic and learned Q-value surface for different stages of the learning process
action converges toward the theoretical optimum. This corroborates the ﬁndings from Section
5. Note that the path in Figure 2 (or any other of the 32 paths) does not exactly match any of
the paths in Figure 6. Due to the fact that the quantiles are calculated individually for each
learning step, each quantile path is a combination of the 32 actually learned paths. However,
the median path resembles the one in Figure 2 which is an indication that the results presented
in Section 5 are representative within this set of random seeds. In addition to reporting the
average result, we also observe that at least 50% of all runs are still very close to the optimum.
Nevertheless, there are also sporadic cases where the learned action is further away from the
theoretical optimum. Like for any stochastic optimization routine, this is to be expected as
extreme environment behaviors can be observed occasionally.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Difference between learned and true Q-value surface normalized by the absolute level of the true
Q-value surface
Fig. 5 Slice of the Q-Value function at the optimal action
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Quantiles of learned action over 32 randomly chosen random seeds in the range of 1 to 10, 000
Fig. 7 Quantiles of learned action over the 32 random seeds from Figure 6 using the original DDPG algorithm
without the modiﬁcations from Section 4.2.2
For a direct comparison to the original DDPG algorithm we included Figure 7. It presents
the exact same analysis from Figure 6 without the modiﬁcations in Section 4.2.2. The param-
eters for the DDPG algorithm like for example, batch size, network architecture etc. are kept
as before. For most random seeds, the learned action diverges completely and gets stuck at
the action bounds. Only very few scenarios show some learning behavior and are getting
somewhat close to the actual optimum. This indicates that our adjustments to the original
DDPG algorithm actually appear to be useful for the problem at hand.
One of the advantages of DDPG is the relatively low number of tuning parameters. Even
though our modiﬁcations result in a few more free parameters, the algorithm is quite insensi-
tive to most of them. No excessive parameter tuning on the batch size, discount factor, update
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 Learned action for 24 different combinations of actor and critic learning rates. The dark line corresponds
to the setting from Section 5. The medium dark lines correspond to the top 5 actions from the grid search.
The actor learning rates are one of 0.0015, 0.00825, 0.015, 0.02175, the critic learning rates are one of 0.014,
0.012, 0.01, 0.008, 0.006, 0.004
frequency of the target networks or the parameters of the noise process was necessary to
obtain the results presented thus far. Usually, learning rates are more vital for successfully
training neural networks. To assess the robustness of our approach against changes in the
learning rates of the Adam optimization we perform a grid search on those parameters next.
As a ﬁrst step, we perform a random search to come up with a rough range of possible rea-
sonable learning rates. With this, we narrow down the parameters to a grid of four equally
spaced values between 0.0015 and 0.02175 for the actor networks and six equally spaced
values between 0.014 and 0.004 for the critic networks resulting in 24 different parameter
combinations. Again, all other parameters are unchanged. Figure 8 shows the results of this
grid search. The dark path corresponds to the original experiment from Section 5. One can
see that it is well within the set of paths giving another indication that these results are rep-
resentative also within this set of learning rate combinations. The medium-dark paths show
the ﬁve best results from the grid search. We observe that most of these exhibit even better
convergence behavior than in the original experiment meaning that they end up closer to
the theoretical optimum more quickly and ﬂuctuate less around it. On the other side of the
spectrum, the light paths depict parameter conﬁgurations that are either further away from the
optimum or ﬂuctuating more around it. Even though some convergence can still be observed
for those parameter combinations this means those are less suitable for the problem at hand.
Overall, the results are reasonably good for a considerable fraction of all tested learning rates.
When choosing a suitable parameter set very good results can be achieved.
Summingupthissection,wereportthatourapproachattainsgoodresultsforaconsiderable
range of reasonable parameters and is quite stable against observations that deviate from the
average environment behavior. This demonstrates, not only conceptually but also empirically,
that reinforcement learning algorithms have the potential of producing reliable results within
a portfolio optimization context.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 9 Training process of learned action in Merton (1969) market with risk aversion parameter γ = −3.8)
7 Application to diﬀerent market models
To further validate the robustness of our algorithm, we extend the analysis by applying it to
an alternative market model. While the previous sections focused on the HN-GARCH and
its closed-form portfolio solution from Escobar-Anel et al. (2022), this section demonstrates
the algorithm’s performance within the framework of the seminal portfolio optimization
task put forth by Merton (1969). By repeating key aspects of the earlier analysis, we aim
to evaluate the algorithm’s adaptability and effectiveness in capturing patterns in this new
context, thereby conﬁrming its potential generalizability beyond the HN-GARCH model.
For simulating the new data sample we use the following parameters in notation of Merton
(1969): W0 = 1, T = 5 days, γ = −3.8, r = 0.01/252, σ = 0.2/
√
252, α ≈0.14/252 and
we set the number of epochs to 10, 000. In this notation γ is the risk aversion parameter, r
is the return on the risk-free asset discretized to one day and σ and α are the risky asset’s
volatility and expected return discretized to one day respectively. We note that, as shown
by Escobar-Anel et al. (2022), the optimization problem above is a special case of the more
general problem covered in the previous section. However, as the algorithm is model free,
it is still not clear a priori, if it can discover this similarity and the optimal allocation being
feed a different set of observed variables generated from a different distribution.
Analogous to Figure 2, Figure 9 shows the training process of the learned action in the
Merton market alongside its theoretical optimum. As for the learning parameters we use the
exact same set as in Section 5 to gain an better understanding of their generalizeability. We
observe very similar results as for the HN-GARCH portfolio optimization task. After some
exploration, the learned action converges towards the theoretically optimal solution. Similar
behavior can be seed for differnt risk aversion parameters.
123

Annals of Operations Research
These results suggest that, even without new parameter tuning, our algorithm can be
applied to the problem of dynamic portfolio optimization across markets exhibiting different
dynamics.
8 Conclusion and further research
This paper develops a model-free reinforcement learning approach for solving multi-period
portfolio optimization problems.
For our methodology, we ﬁrst discuss in detail the pros and cons of different RL methods
and then depart from the DDPG algorithm by Lillicrap et al. (2016) and adapt it for applica-
tion in portfolio optimization. We test the algorithm by applying it to a realistic market model
that is still analytically traceable. We chose this setting to explicitly showcase the similarities
between RL and its economically interpretable analogues from classical portfolio optimiza-
tion. Further, we benchmark our solution to the theoretically optimal one and show that good
approximations can be achieved. Finally, we conduct some robustness checks and show that
the results are quite stable across different sets of hyper- and market parameters.
Even though machine learning methods have produced promising results in the context
of ﬁnance, there is still relatively little trust in such models among practitioners due to their
opaqueness and lack of conceptual intuition why they are actually able to produce those
results. By connecting well-understood traditional methods with our RL approach we aim at
contributing to bridge this disconnection.
Although there is much more to explore in this stream of research, our ﬁndings suggest that
there might be a well-deserved place for new ML methods for deriving optimal investment
strategies. An interesting extension to this paper could be to either design algorithms that
produce more stable and reliable results or to further analyze our algorithms applicability
to a wider range of market models. Once enough evidence is found that RL is reliably
applicable to well-known settings, one could start moving away from controlled experimental
environments and start exploring observed market prices and/or other observable variables
for deriving optimal investment policies.
Appendix A. Learned Action for Diﬀerent Risk Aversion Levels
The following ﬁgures show the learned action over time for different risk aversion levels
utilizing the exact same learning and model parameters as in Section 5. Note that, for com-
parability, we utilize the same random seed and initial network parameters. Hence, similar
course of the learned action can be observed over the ﬁrst part of the learning process. As
described in Section 5.1, only after some time the distribution of observations in the replay
buffer becomes representative and only then the algorithm begins to actually search for the
optimal action speciﬁc to each risk aversion level.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 10 Training process of learned action (η = −4.8)
Fig. 11 Training process of learned action (η = −4.2)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 12 Training process of learned action (η = −3.6)
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Declarations
Ethical approval this article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
Conﬂict of interest All authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Aboussalah, A. M., & Lee, C. G. (2020). Continuous control with stacked deep dynamic recurrent reinforce-
ment learning for portfolio optimization. Expert Systems with Applications, 140, 112–891.
Bayraktar, E., & Kara, A. D. (2023). Approximate Q learning for controlled diffusion processes and its near
optimality. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 5, 615–638.
Boyle, P. P. (1977). Options: A Monte Carlo approach. Journal of Financial Economics, 4, 323–338.
Brammer, J., Lutz, B., & Neumann, D. (2022). Permutation ﬂow shop scheduling with multiple lines and
demand plans using reinforcement learning. European Journal of Operational Research, 299, 75–86.
Brandt, M. W., Goyal, A., Santa-Clara, P., & Stroud, J. R. (2005). A simulation approach to dynamic portfolio
choice with an application to learning about return predictability. Review of Financial Studies, 18, 831–
873.
Chen, L. (Ed.). (2021). Deep learning and practice with MindSpore. Springer Singapore, Singapore: Cognitive
Intelligence and Robotics.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Chen, Z. (2005). Multiperiod consumption and portfolio decisions under the multivariate GARCH model with
transaction costs and CVaR-based risk control. OR Spectrum, 27, 603–632.
Christoffersen, P., Heston, S., & Jacobs, K. (2006). Option valuation with conditional skewness. Journal of
Econometrics, 131, 253–284.
Cybenko, G. (1989). Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of Control,
Signals, and Systems, 2, 303–314.
Davis, M. H., & Lleo, S. (2021). Risk-sensitive benchmarked asset management with expert forecasts. Math-
ematical Finance, 31, 1162–1189.
Escobar-Anel, M., Gollart, M., & Zagst, R. (2022). Closed-form portfolio optimization under GARCH models.
Operations Research Perspectives, 9, Article 100216.
Escobar-Anel, M., Spies, B., & Zagst, R. (2021). Expected utility theory on general afﬁne GARCH models.
Applied Mathematical Finance, 28, 477–507.
Gu, S., Kelly, B.T., & Xiu, D., (2018). Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. Chicago Booth Research
Paper No. 18-04, 31st Australasian Finance and Banking Conference 2018, Yale ICF Working Paper No.
2018-09 .
Gu, S., Kelly, B.T., & Xiu, D., (2019). Autoencoder asset pricing models. Yale ICF Working Paper No. 2019-04,
Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 19-24 .
Heston, S. L. (1993). A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications to bond
and currency options. Review of Financial Studies, 6, 327–343.
Heston, S. L., & Nandi, S. (2000). A closed-form GARCH option valuation model. Review of Financial
Studies, 13, 585–625.
Jaimungal, S. (2022). Reinforcement learning and stochastic optimisation. Finance and Stochastics, 26, 103–
129.
Jaspersen, J. G., & Montibeller, G. (2020). On the learning patterns and adaptive behavior of terrorist organi-
zations. European Journal of Operational Research, 282, 221–234.
Jia, Y., & Zhou, X. Y. (2022). Policy gradient and actor-critic learning in continuous time and space: Theory
and algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23, 1–50.
Jiang, J., Kelly, B.T., & Xiu, D., (2020). (Re-)imag(in)ing price trends. Chicago Booth Research Paper No.
21-01 .
Jiang, R., Saunders, D., & Weng, C. (2022). The reinforcement learning Kelly strategy. Quantitative Finance,
22, 1445–1464.
Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, preprint submitted to
arXiv1412.6980.
Kiumarsi, B., Vamvoudakis, K. G., Modares, H., & Lewis, F. L. (2018). Optimal and autonomous control
using reinforcement learning: A survey. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 29,
2042–2062.
Kormushev, P., Calinon, S., & Caldwell, D. (2013). Reinforcement learning in robotics: Applications and
real-world challenges. Robotics, 2, 122–148.
Kraft, H. (2005). Optimal portfolios and Heston’s stochastic volatility model: an explicit solution for power
utility. Quantitative Finance, 5, 303–313.
Lillicrap, T.P., Hunt, J.J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., Wierstra, D. & (Eds.), (2016).
Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning: 4th International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016.
Longstaff, F. A., & Schwartz, E. S. (2001). Valuing american options by simulation: A simple least-squares
approach. Review of Financial Studies, 14, 113–147.
Merton, R. C. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time case. The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 51, 247.
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M.,
Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., Petersen, S., Beattie, C., Sadik, A., Antonoglou, I., King, H., Kumaran,
D., Wierstra, D., Legg, S., & Hassabis, D. (2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning. Nature, 518, 529–533.
Moody, J., & Saffell, M. (2001). Learning to trade via direct reinforcement. IEEE transactions on neural
networks, 12, 875–889.
Moody, J., Wu, L., Liao, Y., & Saffell, M. (1998). Performance functions and reinforcement learning for
trading systems and portfolios. Journal of Forecasting, 17, 441–470.
de Moor, B. J., Gijsbrechts, J., & Boute, R. N. (2022). Reward shaping to improve the performance of deep
reinforcement learning in perishable inventory management. European Journal of Operational Research,
301, 535–545.
Nagai, H. (2023). Optimal consumption-investment under partial information in conditionally log-Gaussian
models. Probability, Uncertainty and Quantitative Risk, 8, 95–120.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Sass, J., Westphal, D., & Wunderlich, R. (2017). Expert opinions and logarithmic utility maximization for
multivariate stock returns with Gaussian drift. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance,
20, 1750022.
Sass, J., Westphal, D., & Wunderlich, R. (2021). Diffusion approximations for randomly arriving expert
opinions in a ﬁnancial market with Gaussian drift. Journal of Applied Probability, 58, 197–216.
Seierstad, A. (2009). Stochastic control in discrete and continuous time. US, Boston, MA: Springer.
Stafylopatis, A., & Blekas, K. (1998). Autonomous vehicle navigation using evolutionary reinforcement
learning. European Journal of Operational Research, 108, 306–318.
van Hasselt, H. (2010). Double Q-learning. In J. Lafferty, C. Williams, J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, & A.
Culotta (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates Inc.
van Rooijen, J. C., Grondman, I., & Babuška, R. (2014). Learning rate free reinforcement learning for real-time
motion control using a value-gradient based policy. Mechatronics, 24, 966–974.
Wang, H., Zariphopoulou, T., & Zhou, X. Y. (2020). Reinforcement learning in continuous time and space: A
stochastic control approach. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21, 1–34.
Wang, H., & Zhou, X. Y. (2020). Continuous-time mean-variance portfolio selection: A reinforcement learning
framework. Mathematical Finance, 30, 1273–1308.
Watkins, C. J. C. H., & Dayan, P. (1992). Q-learning. Machine Learning, 8, 279–292.
Weissensteiner, A. (2009). A Q-learning approach to derive optimal consumption and investment strategies.
IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20, 1234–1243.
Zhu, Y., & Escobar-Anel, M. (2021). A neural network Monte Carlo approximation for expected utility theory.
Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 14, 322.
Zhu, Y., & Escobar-Anel, M. (2022). Polynomial afﬁne approach to HARA utility maximization with applica-
tions to Ornstein Uhlenbeck 4/2 models. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 418, Article 126836.
Zhu, Y., Escobar-Anel, M., Davison, M., (2022). A polynomial-afﬁne approximation for dynamic portfolio
choice. Computational Economics , 1–37.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123