TITLE: Guaranteed funds’ replication by reinforcement learning
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06807-1
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 12 January 2025 / Accepted: 7 August 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
This paper is scheduled to appear in a special issue of the Annals of Operations Research in honor of 
Professor John Mulvey of Princeton University for his many and lasting contributions to the field of 
operations research and especially to optimization methods and modeling applications to business and 
government settings.
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Guaranteed funds’ replication by reinforcement learning
Giorgio Consigli1
 · Michael A. H. Dempster2 · Harvir Hansra3 · Michael Villaverde3
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06807-1
Abstract
Guaranteed funds provide an important protection vehicle for risk-averse investors dur­
ing times of increasing market volatility. Protection may be on the capital invested or 
its return or both: the associated market risk is then transferred onto fund managers and 
financial institutions, facing, as a result, an optimal hedging problem. In this article we 
focus on capital protection and address the fund manager replication problem relying on 
a reinforcement learning (RL) approach. The article clarifies the financial and method­
ological implications of the RL method and a case study is presented relying on a 1-year 
guaranteed fund, whose replication by the issuer is tested over the 2018–2024 period. A 
US fund manager is assumed with a decision space including cash, bond and equity assets, 
and the optimal replication of the guaranteed fund is formulated considering a telescoping 
horizon leading to quarterly portfolio revisions. By combining the learning process and 
the derivation of the optimal policy in a recursive manner, the RL method is able to solve 
the minimum guarantee fixed-mix problem in minutes, significantly improving classical 
solution times in stochastic optimization, yet considering a very rich uncertainty model 
based on a data-driven simulation method and consistent with arbitrage-free conditions 
in the market.
Keywords  Guaranteed return funds · Capital protection · Reinforcement learning · 
Multi-period stochastic programming · Portfolio replication · Arbitrage-free data-driven 
return model
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
1  Introduction
Guaranteed return funds were introduced in the 1990s in response to growing market vola­
tility and tightening of central bank monetary policy. At the time life insurance compa­
nies were also interested in providing forms of financial protection to investors, and indeed 
already in the early 1990s the EU commission issued a regulatory directive on the matter. 
This popularity has increased after the introduction of euro and over the last two decades 
due to the progressive switch in most OECD economies to defined-contributions pension 
schemes, transferring market risk from pension fund managers to the underwriters, thus 
leading to increasing demand of protection by the latter. As discussed in Sect. 1.1 an impor­
tant stream of contributions addressed the financial and methodological implications associ­
ated with this fund management sector. Already in the late 1990s several academic-industry 
cooperations supported the expansion of this market and this work is actually inspired by an 
early academic cooperation with a global fund manager, see Dempster et al. (2003, 2007). 
At the time an optimal asset management problem with a guaranteed return was solved 
relying on multistage stochastic programming (MSP) to derive an optimal Fixed-Mix (FxM) 
strategy: this approach has proven mathematically sound and effective in the definition of 
the required replicating portfolio by the institutional investor. It’s limitations, however, are 
known and may be related to the potential curse of dimensionality associated with MSP for­
mulations as the number of stages and scenarios increase and the potential lack of convexity 
of the FxM problem. From a financial perspective, also by the opportunity costs induced by 
rebalancing decisions too far out at times of volatile financial markets.
More recently, the persistence of extremely low if not negative interest rate scenarios and 
yet relevant phases of growing global market volatility have further increased the demand of 
this form of protection. The core motivation of this research is then to overcome some of the 
drawbacks experienced with the MSP approach and solve a capital guaranteed fund problem 
based on reinforcement learning (RL). We rely on recent developments and contributions 
on machine learning techniques for financial optimization problems, see the comprehensive 
treatment in Mulvey et al. (2020) and Consigli et al. (2024) in which an RL method has been 
presented to address the FxM problem over a very short investment horizon. See also the 
discussion in Sect. 1.1 and Table 1.
We propose here a data-driven methodology for a multi-period problem with 1-year 
investment horizon and quarterly revision of an optimal constant proportion investment 
policy (CPIP). A USD cash-bond-equity decision space is considered, with assets defined 
by exchange traded funds (ETF) for money-market, bond and equity instruments in the US 
market. The optimal guaranteed fund replication, enforcing in this context a multiperiod 
strategy, is determined through a set of recursive telescoping problems of decreasing hori­
zon, as clarified in Sect. 2.
1.1  State of the art
We limit our interest to selected contributions in the areas of dynamic financial planning 
with return or capital guarantees and associated asset pricing applications and then more 
specifically to recent advances of machine learning approaches in finance.
With reference to the former stream, early seminal contributions in this area date back 
to the 1970s thanks to Boyle and Schwartz (1977) and Brennan and Schwartz (1976), who 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
already focused on life-insurance contracts and framed the pricing problem taking the 
embedded option into account. Then over the last two decades or so, the interest broad­
ened to address financial economic and methodological implications of a growing market 
of instruments with tailored payoff profiles, very recently resulting in so-called structured 
products. Early contributions that clarified and established the financial implications of 
guaranteed products are due to Grosen and Jorgensen (2000), Consiglio et al. (2001), Boyle 
and Hardy (2003), Ammann (2003), Miltersen and Persson (2003) as well as Dempster et 
al. (2003), Dempster et al. (2007), these latter framing the hedging problem of the fund 
manager in terms of an optimal multi-period strategic asset allocation problem. The focus 
was on capital and return protections.
Pension funds and social security systems, increasingly over the last decades, have 
switched progressively from so-called defined benefit (DB) to defined contribution (DC) 
retirement schemes. We can also refer to such historical transition to motivate the increasing 
relevance of return guarantees related to such risk transfer to underwriters. Most DC pro­
Table 1  Selected recent contributions in portfolio management based on reinforcement learning
Work
Contribution
Methodology
A risk-return portfolio optimization 
based on expected maximum draw­
down (Almahdi & Yang, 2017)
The paper addresses a dynamic 
risk-return portfolio model 
and includes the Sharpe ratio 
maximization
The work utilizes recurrent 
reinforcement learning
AI-based portfolio trading system 
(Park et al., 2020)
Automated trading system based 
on Q-learning
Develops a deep Q-learning 
method
Continuous-time mean-variance port­
folio selection (Wang & Zhou, 2020)
Solves a dynamic mean-variance 
portfolio problem
Introduces the RL Explor­
atory Mean-Variance algo­
rithm with a methodological 
benchmarking
Dynamic goal-based wealth manage­
ment using reinforcement learning 
(Das & Varma, 2020)
Solves a dynamic goal-based 
portfolio problem with RL
The RL methodology 
discretizes the set of optimal 
actions and uses the deep Q 
- learning method to solve it.
Optimal dynamic portfolios of mean-
reverting assets (Mulvey et al., 2020)
Dynamic policies with trading 
and non-trading boundaries, RL-
based optimality
Develops a feed-forward 
method for optimal control 
under Gaussian assumptions
Multi-period risk-parity portfolio 
problem (Li et al., 2022)
Solution of dynamic risk-parity 
problem based on model predic­
tive control
Development of a model 
predictive computationally 
feasible approach
The reinforcement learning Kelly 
strategy (Jiang et al., 2022)
Solves a dynamic Kelly portfolio 
strategy using an RL approach
This work utilizes entropy-
regularization RL to solve 
the optimization problem
Reinforcement Learning with Dynamic 
Convex Risk Measures (Coache & 
Jaimungal, 2024; Coache et al., 2023)
The paper develops an algorithm 
to solve optimization problems 
with time-consistent dynamic 
risk measures. It also presents 
financial applications within this 
context.
The algorithm utilizes 
DDPG with a recurrent 
learning methodology to 
learn dynamic risk measures
Continual portfolio selection in 
dynamic environments via incremental 
RL (Liu et al., 2023)
Solution of a dynamic portfolio 
problem with time consistency
Develops the incremental 
reinforcement learning 
approach
Optimal dynamic fixed-mix portfolios 
based on reinforcement learning with 
second order stochastic dominance 
(Consigli et al., 2024)
A dynamic fixed-mix port­
folio strategy with stochastic 
dominance is solved using an RL 
approach
The optimization problem is 
solved by combining DDPG 
and Convex reinforcement 
learning methods
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
grams have indeed proposed minimum return products, offering from simple capital protec­
tion to more expensive (for the fund manager) risk premiums. Over long planning horizons, 
capital protection may in some cases be enforced in real terms, taking inflation into account 
to protect the income real value.
The relevance of DC schemes and the annual frequency of pensions evaluation provide 
a good motivation to rely on 1 year investment horizons and support the definition of port­
folio replication schemes based on frequent rebalancing. Early contributions relying on the 
definition of optimal hedging strategies by pension fund managers are Deelstra et al. (2004), 
Muermann et al. (2006) and the dynamic hedging of guaranteed contracts in a continuous 
time setting was proposed by Tse et al. (2008).
More recent works, related to the pricing and hedging of life insurance products and pen­
sion funds with guarantee, in the domain of multi-period stochastic optimization are due to 
Di Giacinto et al. (2011), Consiglio et al. (2015), Konicz and Mulvey (2015), Barro et al. 
(2019), Lauria et al. (2022). Either addressing the risk control problem faced by the issuer 
of the guarantee through multistage stochastic programming (MSP) or stochastic dynamic 
programming (SDP) or a combination thereof. The SDP method is particularly suitable in 
presence of Markov Decision Problems (MDP) and indeed this is the assumption under­
lying most recent reinforcement learning (RL) developments. A methodological trade-off 
between problem formulation accuracy and computational feasibility has been highlighted 
by several authors, since Dempster et al. (2003) then by many others, see Lauria et al. 
(2022), motivating the search of alternative approaches, among which of specific interest 
RL approaches. When solving a portfolio allocation problem in general and thus in particu­
lar for return guarantee type of applications, the characterization of the uncertainty underly­
ing the problem plays a relevant role.
In this article, we take a simple data-driven method to generate price and return scenarios 
to be adopted in the reinforcement learning algorithm, and that consistently with finance 
theory, should exclude the possibility of arbitrage opportunities in the market. Theoretical 
foundations of no-arbitrage pricing go back to Ross (1978), Harrison and Pliska (1981), with 
path-breaking contributions in financial economics, that opened the way to and grounded 
the modern theory of market equilibrium, see Merton and Samuelson (1992). In a discrete, 
scenario-based framework, Klaassen (1997, 2002) clarified the conditions to exclude arbi­
trage opportunities of the first and second type by focusing on the associated optimiza­
tion problems and key primal and dual pricing relationships. More recently (Topaloglou 
et al., 2008; Geyer et al., 2010; Consiglio et al., 2016; Barro et al., 2022) presented viable 
approaches to enforce arbitrage free conditions in multi-asset portfolio problems and clari­
fied the relationship between branching degree along the tree and financial market equilib­
rium. Even, as in this project, ruling out the possibility of short positions, Geyer et al. (2010) 
clarified the necessary requirement of a branching degree exceeding the number of eligible 
assets for investment to enforce arbitrage-free market conditions and unbiased optimal solu­
tions. We consider this requirement in the definition of the environment of the RL method. 
Progresses in the area of machine learning techniques, specifically on financial applications, 
have been substantial in recent times and we refer to the review articles by Dixon et al. 
(2020), Kolm and Ritter (2020), Goodell et al. (2021) for a thorough discussion on several 
types of financial optimization problems.
Table 1 provides a concise summary of RL-based contributions from 2017 to date, spe­
cifically relying on dynamic financial analysis, which preceded this contribution. It is hardly 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
meant to be an exhaustive account of a continuously evolving scientific domain, but surely 
it conveys the contributions we have considered in this project.
The introduction of guaranteed return funds further extends the scope of learning-based 
financial optimization and in the context of this research, helps analyzing the pros and cons 
relative to classical stochastic optimization methods. The methodological implications of 
the interface between stochastic optimization and reinforcement learning are indeed attract­
ing increasing interest, as also witnessed by the comprehensive treatment in Powell (2022) 
or specific contributions as in Lee et al. (2023) with several examples of financial applica­
tions and a discussion on RL convergence properties.
1.2  Contribution
This article is inspired by the early contributions of Dempster and Leemans (2006); Demp­
ster et al. (2007), in which in rather different financial domains an adaptive RL approach 
was developed for intraday FX trading, as well as a strategic asset allocation problem with 
return guarantee proposed relying on MSP. Two decades after we reconsider the guaranteed 
return fund problem and propose a solution method based on RL, yet leading to an optimal 
CPIP. The RL approach here implemented is also inspired by the incremental RL method 
proposed by Liu et al. (2023), in which, as time progresses and market information revealed, 
the learning process repeated to revise the current strategy.
The article intends to contribute as follows:
 –
Formulate and solve by RL a dynamic portfolio problem involving a risk-return trade-
off between shortfall minimization with respect to an investment capital protection and 
expected return maximization: this is a classical, practically very relevant decision prob­
lem in finance, to the best of our knowledge not yet explored in the RL literature. The 
optimal policy is shown to depend on a trade-off coefficient β, see problems (1) and (2), 
and on the guarantee at the end of a 1-year investment horizon.
 –
The methodology presented relies on a learning process involving several thousands 
scenarios, resulting into a very accurate approximation of a continuous probability 
space, a continuous action space and multiple stages, providing convincing evidence 
to overcome the curse of dimensionality typically affecting other approaches such as 
MSP or DSP. Relative to the recent (Consigli et al., 2024), we present new convergence 
results and computational evidence strongly supporting the methodology.
 –
Most of the contributions in Table 1 rely on model-based stationary stochastic environ­
ments defined by multivariate normal distributions (MVN). In this paper, to the best of 
our knowledge for the first time in an RL context, we employ a data-driven method to 
generate returns which comply with arbitrage free conditions and present comparative 
results under either the data-driven or the MVN assumptions.
 –
Following financial practice, and classical benchmarking strategies such as the 1/n 
or the 60–40 bond-equity strategies, we develop an in-sample validation analysis for 
alternative trade-offs, relying on a decision space including money market, bond and 
equity, whose return processes are verified to comply with arbitrage-free conditions in 
the economy. The optimal CPIP is tested in- and out-of-sample adopting a telescoping 
approach over a decreasing investment horizon, as clarified in Sects. 2 and 4.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The article, after this introduction evolves by first formulating in Sect. 2 the guaranteed 
return fund problem in discrete time and where the so-called telescoping horizon approach 
is explained. Then in Sect. 3, the adopted RL methodology is presented and it’s correspon­
dence to the optimization problem summarized, before presenting in Sect. 4 computational 
evidence in support of the methodology but also clarifying some of it’s limitations.
2  Dynamic portfolio management
The enforcement of a minimum return over a given investment horizon, or as here below of 
a capital protection objective, calls for the definition by a fund manager of a replicating port­
folio that in principle should exclude returns below a specified lower bound at the end of the 
contract. We assume without loss of generality (wlog) that in order to meet the obligation the 
fund manager will revise her/his FxM strategy over a discrete and finite planning horizon.
The formulation of this portfolio replication problem may accommodate a minimum 
guarantee directly as a feasibility condition to be satisfied almost surely (a.s.) or through 
the inclusion of a shortfall function in the objective function as further specified below. To 
enforce such constraint dynamically and preserve time-consistency, different approaches 
may be adopted. The MSP literature is rich in this respect with contributions consider­
ing also multi-horizon problems, characterized by the combination of short- and long-term 
planning, as discussed in Maggioni et al. (2020), Zhang et al. (2024). In this context, fur­
ther to the solution of an original T-periods planning problem and relying on increasing 
market information, a replicating strategy may be generated by the solution, thereafter, of 
a sequence of problems with decreasing horizon: T −1, T −2, . . . , 1, this latter corre­
sponding to a single period problem. We refer to this as multi-period telescoping (MPTLS) 
approach, see Sect. 2.3 for more details on the associated optimization problem formulation. 
The rationale of this approach follows Dempster et al. (2007) and leads to a sequence of 
optimal CPIP’s derived as more market information becomes available.
In a probabilistic setting let T := {0, 1, . . . , T} be the investment horizon and (Ω, F, P) 
a given probability space of investment returns. At t = 0, initial time and issuance of the 
guaranteed fund, an optimal fund replication problem arises, whose solution leads to CPIPs 
to be determined for decreasing τ = T, T −1, . . . , 1 time-to-horizon, or equivalently time-
to-maturity of the fund. Denoting with θt(τ) the constant proportion defined in stage t over 
the residual guarantee horizon τ, the sequence of optimal decisions and market information 
will then be:
 
F0 →θ0(T) →F1 →θ1(T −1), . . . →FT −1 →θT −1(1) →FT .
Here Ft for t ∈T captures the evolving market information and takes into account also the 
performance so-far attained by the fund manager.
The financial problem is thus genuinely dynamic. In an RL context, the fund manager 
will represent the agent, the reward function is associated with a risk-reward trade-off based 
on an expected shortfall and an expected return objective to be optimized under a given set 
of constraints captured by the RL environment specification. The dynamic portfolio evolu­
tion and CPIPs revision do characterize the states’ and actions’ spaces. In this project we 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
consider a random environment based on a data-driven return vector process, with results 
eventually compared, see in appendix, to the classical MVN setting.
The adopted model notation and random elements of the problem are clarified next. 
Given, from above t ∈T and τ = T −t, to denote the decision stages and residual time to 
reach the guarantee, the decision space includes I investment opportunities and xi,t defines 
the amount invested at time t in asset i ∈I = {1, 2, .., I}. We use bold characters to denote 
random variables here next. We will then make explicit the scenario dependence. For t ∈T , 
consider the random asset returns ri,t = ln(vi,t) −ln(vi,t−1) as a function of the price vari­
ation of asset i between time t −1 and t, with vi,t denoting the random price of asset i at 
time t as from t −1. A portfolio revision is attained by considering buying and selling 
decisions x+
i,t and x−
i,t respectively. A constant proportion policy is derived by requiring 
for every t: θi =
xi,t
∑
i∈I xi,t , thus θ = {θi}i∈I is a vector of portfolio weights summing to 
1. Following the MPTLS scheme, θt will denote the portfolio composition at time t ∈T 
belonging to the set Θ.
The compounded return generated by an investment strategy is denoted with Gt, t ∈T 
and a guaranteed return at the end of the investment horizon is denoted by ˆGT ∈R+: this 
can include either a pure capital protection or return guarantee with a premium. A minimum 
guarantee investment problem is formulated below and adapted to the MPTLS scheme dis­
cussed above.
2.1  Problem formulation
Consider a constant guarantee instrument at the horizon T. In principle the fund manager 
seeks to control the probability of the return at maturity falling below the guarantee. How­
ever, solving this problem directly results in a non-convex problem, due to the introduction 
on each scenario of an indicator function to assess the guarantee achievement probability. 
Following Dempster et al. (2003), the guarantee is enforced by minimizing an expected 
shortfall with respect to a contractual guarantee. The objective function is formulated as an 
affine combination of an expected terminal return maximization and a shortfall minimiza­
tion relative to the return guarantee. A parameter β ∈[0, 1] is introduced to formulate the 
problem with the desired combination of return at maturity and shortfall to the guarantee. 
As discussed above, the manager will solve a series of telescoping horizon problems. Ini­
tially, she/he will solve a problem with a time horizon of T. Subsequently with horizons 
T −1, T −2 and so on, until the last problem, corresponding to a one period problem. For 
each of these problems we denote the initial asset positions as ˆxi0 and the initial cumulated 
return at that time as G0. At t = 0, with T periods to go we will have G0 = 0, then after 
for t = 1, 2, .., T −1, the attained return so far will be an input to the current problem. Fur­
thermore let (x)−= min(x, 0). Here next problem (1) defines a genuine formulation of a 
self-financed mean-risk return guaranteed problem with a constraint enforcing the fixed-mix 
policy. In the following Sect. 2.2 we discuss the arbitrage-free conditions in the market and 
introduce a scenario-based formulation then considered in the solution by RL. 
 
max
θ
[
βE(GT ) + (1 −β)E(GT −ˆGT )−
]

(1a)
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
s.t.
Gt = G0 +
t
∑
τ=1
I
∑
i=1
xi,τ−1ri,τ
t = 1, . . . , T
(1b)
 
xi,0 = ˆxi,0 + x+
i,0 −x−
i,0
i = 1, . . . , I 
(1c)
 
xi,t = xi,t−1(1 + ri,t) + x+
i,t −x−
i,t,
i = 1, . . . , I,
t = 1, . . . , T,

(1d)
 
θi =
xi,t
∑I
i=1 xi,t
i = 1, 2, . . . , I,
t = 0, 1, . . . , T 
(1e)
 
xi,t, x+
i,t, x−
i,t ≥0,
i = 1, . . . , I,
t = 0, 1, . . . , T −1.

(1f)
 
x+
i,T ∗= x−
i,T = 0
∀i ∈I 
(1g)
Problem (1), from (1a) to (1g), considers the compounded return Gt leading at the end of 
the planning horizon to the total return GT . Equation (1c) defines an optimal root node 
decision, based on the input asset allocation ˆxi,0. We assume, without loss of generality that 
∑
i xi,0 = 1. In principle, as time progresses, for t = 1, .., T the previous stage allocation 
generates a return and leads to buying and selling decisions, x+
i,t, x−
i,t, respectively accord­
ing to (1d). As clarified in Mulvey (2004), Dempster et al. (2003) and more recently also 
discussed in Consigli et al. (2024), the enforcement of the constant proportion may lead to a 
non-convex problem. The constant proportion strategy is enforced through constraint (1e). 
Formally, through the parameter θ = (θ1, . . . , θI) ∈RI
+ where ∑
i θi = 1, the investment 
policy is defined. We clarify in Sects. 2.3 and 3.1, how a sequence of θt is derived prior to 
the fund maturity.
The feasibility conditions from (1c) to (1g) are standard in discrete multi-period portfolio 
models with the unique exception of the fixed-mix condition (1e) and the specific charac­
terization of the objective function, based on a predefined guaranteed return. The problem 
is formulated relying on a self-financing strategy and no cash in-flows are allowed over the 
investment horizon.
A varying β helps spanning alternative decision criteria: for β = 1, an optimal growth 
problem is formulated, while for β = 0 an expected shortfall minimization problem (Demp­
ster et al., 2003). For β ∈(0, 1) a trade-off, or mean-risk problem (Consigli et al., 2016) is 
formulated. Taking this perspective, a consistent formulation of problem (1) suitable for a 
solution approach based on a recursive learning method is discussed next.
2.2  Scenario formulation and arbitrage-free conditions in the market
Problem (1) provides a relatively canonical formulation of a multi-period stochastic pro­
gram to be further characterized in terms of underlying uncertainty, thus specifying the 
probability space in which random events are accounted for. Following Eqs. (1b) and (1d), 
we have ri,t = ri,t(ω), ω ∈(Ω, F, P). Following Geyer et al. (2010),Consiglio et al. (2016), 
Barro et al. (2022), to mention just a few, an unbiased solution of problem (1) requires the 
enforcement of arbitrage-free conditions on the return process.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
We adopt a data-driven scenario generation approach to determine the asset prices evo­
lution and verify for absence of arbitrage. As opposed to a model-based approach, a data-
driven approach relies on a given data history and without any filtering but only through 
bootstrapping, it generates the sample space of a vector tree price process. To preserve 
contemporary dependence between asset returns, we sample simultaneously from each past 
asset data path. The bootstrapping procedure is based on the generation of random outcomes 
from a uniform distribution and simultaneous extraction of corresponding realizations from 
the past history of assets’ returns. Once generated the scenarios are tested for absence of 
arbitrage according to Klaassen (2002), Barro et al. (2022).
Further to t = {0, 1, 2, .., T}, let ω = ωt,k, with k ∈K denote a finite and countable dis­
crete set of possible scenarios, leading to ri,t,k as a discrete random return process, whose 
dynamic should comply with arbitrage free conditions. Scenarios are given equal probabil­
ity pk of occurrence. Accordingly, from the problem specification (1), we have Gt = Gt,k 
for compounded returns, and by assuming ∑
i xi,0 = 1 we can simplify Eq. (1b) and write, 
for every t > 0 Gt,k = Gt−1,k + ∑I
i=1 θiri,t,k, with G0 = 0 in t = 0, and formulate the 
following optimization problem (2), that preserves the main properties of problem (1), and 
to be solved by RL. 
 
max
θ≥0
[
β
∑
k∈K
pkGT,k + (1 −β)
∑
k∈K
pk(GT,k −ˆGT )−
]

(2a)
 
s.t.
Gt,k = Gt−1,k +
I
∑
i=1
θiri,t,k
t = 1, . . . , T,
k = 1, 2, . . . , K
(2b)
 
I
∑
i=1
θi = 1

(2c)
Following formulation (2), we seek that optimal CPIP θ ∈Θ that, for given trade-off β 
will maximize (2a), under the given constraints. This formulation overcomes the convexity 
issue of problem (1) and allows, through Monte Carlo simulation, an easy evaluation of the 
shortfall distribution following Rockafellar and Uryasev (2002) and recently implemented 
in Consigli et al. (2024).
Consider the return scenarios ri,t,k across all k ∈K and time steps t ∈T . Over a single 
period, from t to t + 1, in our setting corresponding to a quarter, absence of arbitrage is 
verified by allowing short portfolio positions and checking the feasibility of the problem:
 
max
x
{ K
∑
k=1
I
∑
i=1
xi,tri,t,k|
I
∑
i=1
xi,t = 0,
I
∑
i=1
xi,tri,t,k ≥0, k = 1, 2, . . . , K
}

(3)
If problem (3) admits a positive solution despite the initial null investment then there will 
be an arbitrage opportunity in the market, while infeasibility would rule out such anomaly. 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
We enforce the condition moving backwards in time according to the adopted telescoping 
approach.
2.3  CPIP revision based on a telescoping horizon
Consider problem (2) and let T stages define the initial planning horizon and whose solution 
leads to the definition of an optimal CPIP θ0 in t = 0. It is assumed that the fund manager, after 
issuing the guaranteed contract (a liability), seeks an optimal replication strategy to generate 
ˆGT at the maturity of the contract by revising her policy at fixed times as more information 
becomes available: then for every t = 1, 2, .., T, given the sequence of optimal θt−1 alloca­
tion, a revised CPIP will be derived, for fixed T as explained above, over a decreasing invest­
ment horizon and updating the data-driven sample distribution accordingly. In order to verify 
the absence of arbitrage opportunities in the market, consistently with the MPTLS approach, 
for t = T −1, T −2, . . . , 0 we first verify (3) for infeasibility and then solve problem (2). We 
solve sequentially PT := P(rT |FT −1) for TT −1 = {T −1, T}, PT −1 := P(rT −1|FT −2) 
for TT −2 = {T −2, T −1, T}, . . . , P1 := P(r1|F0) for T0 = {0, 1, .., T}, where we use 
P(.|.) to denote a non parametric, data-driven distribution. In this setting, assuming quar­
terly stages, arbitrage free returns are generated from history and then verified for absence 
of arbitrage according to Eq. (3) over the last quarter and then backwards adding and ver­
ifying random returns at preceding stages t = T −1, T −2, .., t0. We present in Sect. 4 
graphical evidence of the generated probability distributions.
Under these assumptions the dynamics of the investment policy is generated by the asso­
ciated optimal CPIPs: {θ0, θ1, . . . , θT −1}. By keeping the initial planning horizon T as well 
as the guarantee ˆGT fixed, every θt will depend on Pt, the residual time T −t and the 
optimal θt−1 input from the previous iteration to the current problem instance. We show in 
Sect. 3 how this approach is adapted to a learning process. A major advantage of MPTLS 
comes from it’s low computational costs: see the evidence reported in Consigli et al. (2024), 
where the derivation of an optimal fixed mix strategy required hours. The implemented 
MPTLS RL approach relies also on an effective integration of the environment simulation 
and policy optimization, as advocated early on by Mulvey and Kim (2011).
3  Reinforcement learning methodology
We propose a deep reinforcement learning (RL) methodology to solve problem (2) and it’s 
stage dependent formulations induced by the MPTLS approach. Consider again the objec­
tive function (2a): it includes the expected compounded gain and the shortfall with respect 
to the guarantee, and combinations thereof. The objective can be captured through an 
action-value function Q(T, β, Gθ
T , ˆGT ) : T × [0, 1] × R × R+ →R. For decreasing hori­
zon τ = T −t, t ∈T and terminal compounded return we write Q(τ, β, Gθ
τ, ˆGT ). Under 
the MPTLS approach, the sequence of optimization problems associated with (2) can be 
written in a very compact way, under the given set of constraints, as
 
max
θt∈Θ Q(τ, β, Gθ
τ, ˆGT ),
(4)
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
where, for every t < T, we have a different problem and the maximization is over the set 
of investment policies θ, to represent the fixed-mix strategy, and Q is a positive expected 
terminal utility of compounded and guaranteed returns. Reinforcement learning provides an 
approach to solving the general problem (4) as further discussed below.
This section is organized in two parts. In the first one, we explain the reinforcement 
learning methodology adopted to solve problem 4. In the second part, we provide further 
details on the adopted algorithm.
3.1  Deep reinforcement learning
In this section, an approach based on the deterministic policy gradient method (DDPG) and 
convex reinforcement learning are proposed.
Let S the set of all possible states and denote by A the set of possible actions, assumed 
to be continuous. The initial state S0 = s0 is observable. As t = 1, 2, .., T the RL algorithm 
evaluates the value generated by actions At ∈A taken in states St ∈S and leading to a new 
state St+1 and a given reward ˆrt+1 = ˆr(St+1|St, At). As more information becomes avail­
able, the RL approach is applied relying first on an initial probability function P(ST |F0) 
of the terminal return distribution, then by updating this distribution to P(ST |Ft), as 
t = 1, 2, ..T −1. We adopt the Ft notation in this setting to express the information avail­
able in stage t and relevant to determine an action, in our context characterized as CPIP, over 
the residual time to T. Given the formulation of problem (2), the reward is a function of the 
adopted objective, thus depends on β and the associated trade-off between expected total 
return and expected shortfall E [
GT −ˆGT
]
−. The cumulative gain GT will depend on the 
arbitrage-free return vector process characterizing the RL environment.
Following the problem formulation (2), the RL process aims at evaluating the best pos­
sible constant proportion policy from the generic class of parametric policies {πθ}θ∈Θ, 
πθ : S →A as determined by parameter θ ∈Θ ⊆RI.
The objective of the agent, i.e., the fund manager in the MPTLS approach, is to find 
the set of optimal θ’s which maximize the action-value function Q(τ, β, Gθ
τ, ˆGT ) over the 
residual investment horizon, as a function of the guarantee and the introduced trade-off. 
Wlog consider the initial problem, under full uncertainty, with t = 0, τ = T.
The derivation of the optimal policy π∗
θ = argmax
θ
J(β, θ) relies on the definition of the 
value function J(β, θ) = EsT ∼P0[Q(β, Gθ, ˆGT )|F0], for given input θ0. The maximization 
is based on a stochastic gradient method with m = 0, 1, .., M possible iterations:
 
θm+1 = θm + η∇J(θm).
(5)
The computation of the gradient ∇J(θm) on the m-th iteration, as well understood in recent 
times, has relevant methodological implications from the theory of deterministic gradient 
policies (Zhang et al., 2020; Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2015), where it is derived as 
the expected action-value function evaluated at the current reward:
 
∇J(θ) = EsT ∼P[∇Q(β, Gθ, ˆGT )|F0],
(6)
The computation of ∇Q(β, Gθ, ˆGT ) depends on the random gain process G and its impact 
on the Q function. The deep Q-learning theory proposes a methodology in which a neural 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
network (NN) Lθ
ϕ, learns the action value function Q(β, Gθ, ˆG), from information derived 
from both the states and the policy, πθ. ϕ represents the weight parameters of the neural 
network tuned during the training process based on the provided training data.
For given guarantee and β, the updating rule for ϕ, further simplifying notation to Q(Gθ) 
is based on the convex reinforcement learning methodology by minimizing the error:
 
min
ϕ
Lθ
ϕ −
(Q(Gθ) + Lθ
ˆϕ)
2

2
,
(7)
where ˆϕ is the previous parameter before updating. This criterion allows the NN Lθ
ϕ to learn 
by averaging between past knowledge Lθ
ˆϕ and new information coming from the environ­
ment Q(Gθ), thus without forgetting. The technique is based on the concept of exploration-
exploitation described in Sutton and Barto (2018), Brandimarte (2021), Hazan et al. (2019), 
Repinek et al. (2013), Wei (2020) that has been already applied with good evidence in 
Consigli et al. (2024).
Following Eq. (7), the gradient ∇Q(W θ) is approximated by ∇Lθ
ϕ through the updat­
ing of parameter ϕ. The interaction between the parameters θ and ϕ reflects the actor-critic 
methodology proposed in Goodfellow et al. (2016), in which θ (the actor) and ϕ (the critic) 
learn dynamically from each other, see the Algorithm 1. The Monte Carlo (MC) method is 
adopted to generate K scenarios (sk
T )K
k=1 used to train the NN Lθ
ϕ: k is a scenario label for a 
trajectory, or sample path of the portfolio compounded return as follows. For every scenario 
k and action following the policy πθ, we generate the realization sk
T of scenario k in state 
ST , by sampling from the transition probability P(ST |S0 = s0, A0 = πθ(s0)). The gradient 
(6) is approximated by
 
∇J(θ) ≈1
K
K
∑
k=1
∇Lθ
ϕ(sk
T ).
(8)
Leading to the evaluation of θ at the next iteration according to (5). In the specific problem 
of optimal replication of a guaranteed fund, as mentioned repeatedly, the above process is 
repeated, leading to a set of CPIPs θt converging to the maturity of the fund. In the case 
problem studied in Sect. 4 a 1-year guaranteed return is studied and the fund manager is 
assumed to replicate this guarantee by revising her strategy quarterly. In the following sec­
tion we summarize the relationship between the RL functions and the formulation of the 
optimization problem (2).
3.2  RL-based problem formulation and algorithm evaluation
The objective function (2a) provides the fundamental reference to characterize the action-
value function of the RL algorithm. We have Q(T, β, Gθ
T , ˆGT ) in t = 0 leading to an opti­
mal action θ0 to be adopted over the planning horizon and whose definition requires the 
specification of the current state of the system S0 and the random environment through the 
initial probability distribution.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Algorithm 1 describes the pseudo-code adopted to solve one instance of the minimum 
guarantee problem as from t = 0. Of specific interest in this setting is the case β = 0 with 
full capital protection, in which the agent will aim at a minimal probability of failing the 
guarantee: P(Gθ
T ≥0) ≥1 −ϵ, for a given small tolerance ϵ. 
Algorithm 1  Reinforcement learning algorithm for optimal fixed-mix portfolios
The sample paths sk
t are generated according to the data-driven approach discussed in 
Sect. 2.2 and as a by-product of the RL methodology, given the specified β and the output 
θ, we can estimate the strategy expected return and probability of effectively protecting the 
capital, i.e., attaining a positive return with the given optimal strategy, resulting into the 
triple: (β, E[Gθ
T ], P(Gθ
T ≥ˆGT )). In Sect. 4 we rely on this triple to present an extended set 
of results. Further to the evidence presented in the following section, we present in appendix 
comparative results for the case in which an assumption of a multivariate normal distribu­
tion for asset returns is considered instead of the data-driven arbitrage-free distribution.
Following the discussion in Sect.  2, when applying the MPTLS approach, for 
t = 0, 1, . . . , T −1 and given β a sequence of optimal θt will be generated over decreasing 
investment horizons and fixed T, corresponding to the guarantee. The RL algorithm will 
accordingly rely on the information updating P(rt|Ft) and start the derivation of the current 
θt having as input the optimal θ from the previous run. This approach will be considered 
when validating the methodology out-of-sample.
4  Computational evidence
This final section aims at discussing and validating the contribution claims in Sect. 1.2 and 
summarizing the implications and pros and cons of the developed learning method. For, it 
is structured as follows:
Section 4.1 includes the details on the neural network parameters, RL parameters and 
capital protection problem formulation.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Section 4.2 presents the outcome of the data-driven arbitrage free scenario method and 
discusses relevant implications, focusing on the probability distributions at the end of 
a quarter.
Section 4.3 considers a 1-year guarantee problem and presents the evidence collected 
as the parameter β varies from 0 to 1 in terms of optimal investment strategy and risk-
reward trade-offs plus specific evidence for the case β = 0.
Section 4.4 analyses the policy updating within the MPTLS approach and the given 
CPIPs over the 1 year horizon when increasing slightly the β to 0.1. In this section, rely­
ing on 4 test-problems we also present specific information on the convergence of the 
RL algorithm and computation times. A set of out-of-sample results is also shown over 
the 2023–2024 period.
Section 4.5 provides the collected out-of-sample evidence when adopting the MPTLS 
scheme from 2019 to 2024 and implementing the sequence of optimal constant propor­
tions with quarterly rebalancing.
Section 4.6 eventually presents evidence on the pros and cons of the adopted methodol­
ogy, specifically in relationship with classical stochastic optimization techniques.
4.1  RL settings and experimental set-up
We consider here a capital protection problem over a 1 year planning horizon, with quarterly 
rebalancing, which implies T = 4 quarters. We focus on the case of capital preservation, or 
return guarantee of 0%, so ˆGT = 0.
The asset universe is composed of 5 assets: a cash instrument, a short- and a long-term 
bonds, a domestic (US) and an international emerging markets’ equity instruments. The fol­
lowing exchange traded funds (ETF) are adopted to determine the portfolio replication strat­
egy: the Xtracker USD Overnight Rate for cash; the ISHARES 1–3 year US Treasury for 
short term bonds; the ISHARES 20+ year US Treasury ETF for long-term bonds; the Spyder 
S&P 500 ETF for US equity and the ISHARES MSCI Emerging Markets ETF for emerging 
markets. Summary statistics for the returns of these instruments are given in Table 3.
We can notice from the evidence in Table 2 that surely over this extended time period 
equity investments in the US market would have mostly dominated those in emerging mar­
kets and money market investments overall had associated the highest average risk premium 
Cash
S-T 
bond
L-T 
bond
US 
equity
EM 
equity
Mean 
(annualized)
1.10%
1.54%
4.49%
11.70%
5.01%
Std (annualized)
0.84%
1.94%
16.68%
16.26%
20.53%
Sharpe ratio
1.30
0.79
0.27
0.72
0.24
Skewness
1.48
0.72
0.62
− 0.83
− 0.39
Kurtosis
1.00
2.06
1.32
0.5
0.98
Correlations
Cash
1
Short term bond
.0495
1
Long term bond
.0015
.5671
1
US equity
− .0206
.2425
− .3382
1
EM equity
− .0274
− .2301
− .2918
.8301
1
Table 2  Statistics of the asset 
returns using quarterly data from 
from 1 January 2007 to 1 July 
2024
Unit investments at the 
beginning of each quarter
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
based on the Sharpe ratios (annualized mean over standard deviation). Furthermore long-
term bond returns have been those with the highest negative correlation to US equity. The 
statistics in Table 2 also show that the return series are hardly consistent with a normality 
assumption, thus legitimating the adopted data-driven approach. We present in appendix a 
set of comparative results to convey the consequences of an assumption of asset returns’ 
multivariate normality (MVN). The evidence, we believe, is valuable as most of the current 
contributions employing RL methods rely on that parametric assumption, see Table 1.
All evidence in this final section, see Algorithm 1, relies on K = 126000 scenarios, a 
batch size of N = 2000, and M = 50 iterations. The critic neural network is trained for 
50 epochs during initialization and when updating ϕ in step 2 of Algorithm 1. We used the 
Adam optimizer and the mean-squared error (MSE) loss function which is defined as:
 
MSE = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(9)
N: Number of data points, yi: Actual i-th Q-value, ˆyi: Predicted i-th Q-value.
The critic network consists of four fully connected layers summarized below (Table 3).
where the activation functions are defined as:
 
tanh : f(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x 
(10)
 
linear : f(x) = x 
(11)
The first layer has six neurons to accommodate the input vector, which consists of the cumu­
lative portfolio return and the weights for the five assets. The two hidden layers use the 
tanh activation function to introduce non-linearity to the network, allowing it to learn any 
non-linear relationships in the data. The final layer outputs a single scalar value representing 
the network’s estimated Q-value for the given input state. It was observed that varying the 
number of neurons and number of layers for the tanh activation function had limited impact 
on the mean-squared error. We see that all combinations converged to a similar loss before 
epoch 50. We also observed that selecting other activation functions such as sigmoid and 
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) produced very similar results. Eventually two hidden layers 
and 30 neurons were adopted, see Fig. 1.
In Sects. 4.3 and 4.4 we present a comprehensive set of results associated with the solu­
tion of a 1 year problem from July 1, 2023 to June 30, 2024. We focus primarily on the 
probability of protecting the capital invested and it’s relationship with the expected portfolio 
return, as resulting from an optimal CPIP as β in Eq. (2a) in problem (2) changes. Under the 
given assumptions, the analysis develops considering the triple (β, E[Gθ
T ], P(Gθ
T ≥0)). It 
is then extended, selectively, to 5 years from July 2018 to June 2023. All results presented 
Layer
Number of neurons
Activation function
1
6
linear
2
30
tanh
3
30
tanh
4
1
linear
Table 3  Summary of the critic 
neural network architecture
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
consider a given unit investment at the beginning of a 12 month period with a capital protec­
tion goal set at the end of the subsequent 12 months. Assuming a quarterly policy revision, 
a multi-period CPIP is determined over a decreasing investment horizon from 1 year to a 
quarter. We analyze a set of problems for β ∈[0, 0.1; 0.01] and β ∈[0.1, 1; 0.1], with β 
increments motivated below, for a total of 20 instances, considered sufficient to validate the 
procedure.
4.2  Data-driven arbitrage-free scenarios
The solution of problems (3) discussed in Sect. 2.2 and then, according to a telescoping 
approach in Sect. 2.3, leads to the generation of arbitrage-free scenarios for the asset returns. 
In this section, we present statistical and graphical evidence of the adopted methodology.
In Table 4 we display summary statistics for every asset in the investment set result­
ing from the data-driven approach presented in Sect. 2.2, referred to as (DDAF) sampling, 
against Monte Carlo scenarios for multivariate normal (MVN) scenarios. In the last column 
for ease of comparison we report in italics the statistics from the history, see Table 2.
Table 4 includes evidence on the statistics generated by an application of a Monte Carlo 
method when assuming MVN returns. All evidence here refers to the 1  year planning 
horizon.
Figures  2 and  3 allow a comparison between the historical distribution of quarterly 
returns for each asset from January 2007 to June 2023 and the distribution of quarterly 
returns produced from 126,000 scenarios by the data-driven arbitrage free approach, also 
based on data from January 2007 to June 2023 as input.
The evidence in Figs. 2 and 3, and Table 4, we believe, does support the adoption of the 
DDAF approach in the RL algorithm 1. We present in the following Sects. 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5 
the main in- and out-of-sample implications of such choice. The analysis is completed in 
appendix, where selected evidence coming from an assumption of returns’ normality is 
discussed.
Fig. 1  Training loss with two hidden layers
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
4.3  Capital protection versus expected return: 2023–2024 results
We consider the problem of a manager trying to meet a 0% 1 year return guarantee over the 
period from July 2023 to June 2024, with quarterly re-balancing.
We apply the RL algorithm 1 for β ∈[0, 1] according to the scheme introduced above. 
For each choice of β and corresponding optimal strategy, we calculate the probability of 
falling below the guarantee and the expected terminal cumulative return. Given the optimal 
investment proportions, the former is computed by accounting the fraction of scenarios in 
which the terminal cumulative return is negative.
Figure 4 displays the behavior of the probability of not being able to attain the desired 
protection together with the portfolio expected returns as β increases. The set of solution 
pairs correspond to the 20 problems and for every such problem an optimal CPIP was com­
puted. The figure shows evidence of the positive relationship between an increasing β and 
the probability of missing the guarantee as well as the strategy expected return at termina­
tion. Furthermore such relationship vanishes out as β increases above 0.4.
For low levels of β between 0 and 0.1, the expected return remains stable around a 
positive 1% and the probability to miss the target oscillates around and below 10%. As β 
increases and more emphasis is placed on the expected return, resp. less on meeting the 
guarantee, the probability of missing the guarantee rises, as well as the expected return of 
the portfolio. It is interesting, in this setting, to present the information in a different way and 
focus on the resulting relationship between E(GT ) and P(GT ≤0). This is done in Fig. 5, 
Asset class
DDAF
MVN
Historical
Cash
Mean (Annualized)
1.04%
0.68%
1.10%
Std (Annualized)
0.81%
0.03%
0.84%
Skewness
1.52
− 0.05
1.44
Kurtosis
1.04
0.12
0.84
Short-term bonds
Mean (Annualized)
1.47%
1.17%
1.54%
Std (Annualized)
1.72%
0.52%
1.93%
Skewness
0.72
0.02
0.70
Kurtosis
2.34
− 0.05
1.83
Long-term bonds
Mean (Annualized)
4.02%
4.45%
4.49%
Std (Annualized)
14.2%
5.43%
16.56%
Skewness
0.04
0.02
0.61
Kurtosis
0.57
− 0.03
1.14
US equity
Mean (Annualized)
11.7%
10.23%
11.7%
Std (Annualized)
15.31%
7.17%
16.14%
Skewness
− 1.1
− 0.04
− 0.81
Kurtosis
4.54
0.08
0.38
EM equity
Mean (Annualized)
6.16%
5.02%
5.0%
Std (Annualized)
21.78%
10.23%
20.39%
Skewness
− 0.51
0.0
− 0.38
Kurtosis
4.7
0.02
0.82
Table 4  Arbitrage-free data-driv­
en (DDAF) and MVN scenarios’ 
statistics
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
with the latter in the x-axis and the former in the y-axis. These are the two components of the 
Q action-value function and the objective (2a) in problem (2): we interpret them as function­
als representing respectively the notions of risk and reward in classical risk-mean portfolio 
analysis. Every point in the scatter plot has an associated optimal constant proportion strat­
egy computed over a 1 year horizon and resulting into the maximal expected return—the 
reward—attainable at the given failure probability—the risk. From this perspective then, 
consistently with classical risk-reward portfolio problems, the plot may be interpreted as 
displaying the set of efficient CPIP that for given expected return have associated a minimal 
shortfall with respect to the capital protection.
Indeed, it is evident from Fig. 4 that we may restrict the analysis to the range β ∈[0, 0.4] 
and derive relevant information on the optimal portfolio replication as the fund manager 
moves slightly away from the shortfall component in the objective.
Figure 5, despite the scattered pattern, conveys the positive relationship between the 
expected return and probability to miss the target. On the bottom left part of the figure, how­
ever, we see that different β may lead to increasing failure probability despite very stable, 
low, expected return. As β increases, see also Fig. 4, the relationship becomes positive and 
with constant slope.
For each choice of 0 ≤β ≤1, we present in Fig. 6 the optimal θ that would guarantee 
the desired capital protection. Now, rather than a scatter plot, we adopt a line representation 
linking the underlying set of points. It is evident that as we move away from the shortfall 
minimization and increase β then the optimal 1-year CPIP changes resulting into increasing 
Fig. 2  Historical returns distribution
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4  Probability of missing the target and expected return for 0 ≤β ≤1
 
Fig. 3  Data-driven returns distribution
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6  Fixed-mix portfolio weights for 0 ≤β ≤1
 
Fig. 5  Probability of missing guarantee versus expected return
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
equity exposure and corresponding reduced exposure to bonds and money market. For β 
between 0.2 and 0.4, interestingly, the reduced investment in short-term bonds is compen­
sated by long-term bonds that eventually leave space to equity, for β ≥0.4.
We may also notice that, for β ≤0.4, rather small increases of β are sufficient to modify 
significantly the associated optimal policy. The absence of any policy bound in the portfolio 
problem plays a role here. In Sec 4.4 we present comparative results associated with β = 0 
and β = 0.1. In summary these results show that by varying the β parameter in Eq. (1a), the 
implemented RL framework can indeed produce strategies (θ) that trade-off the probability 
of missing the guarantee and the overall expected return of the portfolio.
In this context, the investor’s decision will focus on the trade-off between the probability 
of missing the target and the expected return. For example, if the manager was focusing 
on keeping the probability of missing the target to a minimum, they would choose β = 0 
leading to the CPIP displayed on the left plot of Fig. 7 and the portfolio terminal return 
distribution on the right:
Following Fig. 7, the probability of negative returns is low under the given fixed-mix 
and the expected portfolio return is 1.12%. Nearly 100% of the weight is on the less risky 
assets of cash and short terms bonds, which allows the manager to minimize the risk of not 
protecting the capital. In the next subsection the analysis is extended to allow for quarterly 
revision of the constant proportions based on the MPTLS approach.
4.4  Solution of 1 year problem with telescoping horizon
In this section we consider as above the problem of a fund manager with a 1 year capital 
protection goal, or equivalently of a guaranteed return of 0%, over the July.2023–June.2024 
period, in which, however, the strategy will be revised quarterly as more information 
becomes available. This approach is thus consistent with an assumption of fixed-investment 
horizon, namely the one associated with the guarantee, and quarterly monitoring of the 
ongoing strategy by the fund manager leading, typically, to a more effective portfolio rep­
lication strategy. As discussed above this is accomplished by solving an instance of the RL 
framework each quarter with a telescoping horizon. We first solve a problem as of July 1, 
2023 with 4 quarterly stages and implement the fixed-mix solution from July to September 
2023. Then, all statistical estimates are updated in the RL algorithm to solve the October 1, 
2023 problem with 3 residual quarterly stages and so forth, always including the optimal 
strategy of the previous run as input into the current problem. Finally a single stage problem 
is solved as of March 1, 2024 with a solution that will be implemented until the end of the 
last quarter. We discuss first in Sect. 4.4.1 the optimal strategies and their out-of-sample 
performances and then analyze in Sect. 4.4.2 the collected computational evidence.
4.4.1  2023–2024 MPIP with telescoping
Results are presented for two cases, β = {0, 0.1}: in this setting, the former correspond­
ing to maximal risk aversion and the latter to greater risk tolerance. From each solution we 
extract the optimal portfolio weights (Fig. 8) and the probability of missing the guarantee 
(Fig. 9).
We see that from a financial perspective, for β = 0, on the left, the optimal strategy 
adapts to the decreasing horizon relying on liquid investments only and the focus on capital 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
protection leads to a policy characterized by cash and short term bonds. As shown in Fig. 9 
this allows to reduce rapidly the probability of missing the target to 0 as the maturity of the 
guarantee approaches. On the right plot, for β = 0.1, we see that equity investments play a 
role and the proportion invested in cash and short-term bonds varies and remains relevant 
leading to the 0 failure probability at the beginning of the third quarter.
Fig. 9  Probability of missing the guarantee: 2023–2024, β = {0, 0.1}, left and right respectively
 
Fig. 8  Portfolio weights: 2023–2024, β = {0, 0.1} left and right respectively
 
Fig. 7  2023–2024 Optimal CPIP and terminal return distribution for β = 0
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
All the information so far is related to in-sample and validation evidence of the method­
ology and the results’ consistency with classical financial principles. We now present a set 
of out-of-sample results, based on the MPTLS approach where at the beginning of every 
quarter the fund manager is assumed to revise her/his strategy according to the optimal θt 
for t = 0, 1, 2, 3 quarterly steps.
When coming to assess ex-post financial performance of the optimal CPIPs, we see that 
the two strategies lead, over the year, to diverse out-of-sample results, in both cases result­
ing into positive, surely non negative outcomes.
The plots in Fig. 10 show the cumulative returns Gt of the strategies over the 1 year 
period. In this case, for β = 0, the CPIP leads to a positive return every quarter, and a 
cumulative return at the end of the year of 5.25%, safely above the guarantee of 0%. When 
increasing the β the resulting strategy becomes riskier than for β = 0 and despite a very 
moderate return in the first quarter, eventually a positive 4.5% annual return is attained at 
the end of the year.
Interestingly, in both cases the portfolio revision at the end of the first quarter leads to a 
significant improvement of the performance. The evidence on the left plot of Fig. 10 can be 
considered jointly with the results in appendix to validate the methodology from a financial 
perspective.
4.4.2  Computational evidence
Based on the same set of MPTLS problems as in Sect. 4.4.1, we present here next evidence 
of the RL convergence and solution times.
The algorithm is implemented using Python version 3.9.7 with NumPy and SciPy ver­
sions 2.0.2 and 1.13.1, respectively. And the neural network was implemented using Tensor­
Flow version 2.18.0. The Python code was ran on an Ubuntu 22.04 system using two AMD 
EPYC 9454P CPUs which total to 96 cores. Each β was limited to run on a single core, 
effectively allowing us to run up to 96 different configurations in parallel with the following 
running times given in seconds.
We present in Fig. 11 the paths over 50 iterations of the fixed-mix asset allocations’ L1 
norms, for t = 0, 1, 2, 3 when adopting the MPTLS scheme, thus for T −t = 4, 3, 2, 1, in 
the β = 0 case.
Approaching the last iterations, we see that all asset proportions converge to the constant 
case: we use this observation to support the algorithm convergence.
Fig. 10  Cumulative return: 2023–2024, β = {0, 0.1}, left to right
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The following Table 5 provides information on the solution times of the problems relying 
on the adopted RL algorithm.
The first four columns in Table 5 display solution times for 3 runs of the very same prob­
lem, here for β = 0, and for decreasing horizon along the rows. CPU times are very con­
centrated and indeed very little difference comes up even increasing the number of runs, the 
average CPU times are thus surely representative of the method computational cost which 
is slightly more than 2 and half minutes for every problem and around 10 min to derive the 
entire replicating strategy according to MPTLS, we remark independently of β.
In Sect. 4.5 the multi-period constant proportion strategy is implemented over several 
years always relying on the telescoping approach.
It is worth remarking that even if the number of stages is limited, on this see the com­
ments below, the characterization of the stochastic environment would be unsustainable by 
a classical stochastic optimization approach and solution times strongly support an opera­
tional adoption of a relatively simple RL methodology, as the one proposed here. Further­
more, when considering the evidence presented by Consigli et al. (2024), in which a CPIP 
problem was also formulated relying in the same number of stages, the computational gain 
Table 5  Average running times from three independent runs of the problem using β = 0 for different branch­
ing structures
Running times
Stage t
τ = T −t
Scenarios
Batch size
Iterations
 Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
Average
157
156
156
156.33
1
4
126,000
2000
50
163
160
156
159.66
2
3
126,000
2000
50
158
158
155
157
3
2
126,000
2000
50
153
158
156
155.66
4
1
126,000
2000
50
Fig. 11  L1 norm of change in θ over 50 iterations
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
is also relevant and attributed to an effective combination of the simulation method and the 
derivation of the optimal constant proportions.
4.5  Out-of-sample results: 2019–2024
In this section we present results from solving 1 year 0% guaranteed return problems with 
telescoping horizons from 2018 to 2023: these in a summary table are considered together 
with evidence 2023–2024 presented in Sect. 4.4 to span 6 years. The sequence of opti­
mization problems considers only 1 year horizons always starting on July 1 and ending 
on June 30 of the following year. Thus there are 6 non overlapping 1 year problems with 
corresponding labels RL(.-.): July 2018–June 2019 is RL(18–19), July 2019–June 2020 is 
RL(19–20), July 2020–June 2021 is RL(20–21), July 2021–June 2022 is RL(21–22), July 
2022–June 2023 is RL(22–23) and July 2023–June 2024 is RL(23–24). In appendix, we 
include all graphical analyses supporting the evidence in Table 6 for the test-problems from 
2018 to 2023. The settings presented in Sect. 4.1 still apply based on K = 126000 scenar­
ios, M = 50 iterations and gradient approximation based on N = 2000 random trajectories. 
Only the case of β = 0 is considered and solution times across all problem instances reflect 
Table 6  Optimal CPIP and out-of-sample results July 2018–June 2024, β = 0, all 1 year problems
Time t
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
RL(18–19)
RL(19–20)
Cash
0.49 0.48
0.25
0.49
Cash
0.21 0.49
0.22
0.76
Bond
0.49 0.49
0.74
0.49
Bond 0.77 0.49
0.76
0.23
Equity
0.02 0.02
0.01
0.01
Eq­
uity
0.01 0.01
0.02
0.01
Gt
0.003
0.0103 0.0203 0.0304
Gt
0.006
0.0113
0.0305
0.033
Max Gt
0.010
Max 
Gt
0.0193
Min Gt
0.003
Min 
Gt
0.0023
RL(20–21)
RL(21–22)
Cash
0.31 0.27
0.24
0.49
Cash
0.22 0.16
0.49
0.01
Bond
0.67 0.71
0.75
0.49
Bond 0.77 0.82
0.49
0.74
Equity
0.02 0.01
0.01
0.01
Eq­
uity
0.02 0.01
0.02
0.26
Gt
0.0025
0.0048 0.0040 0.005
Gt
− 0.001 − 0.001 − 0.019 − 0.065
Max Gt
0.0025
Max 
Gt
− 0.0009
Min Gt
− 0.0008 Min 
Gt
− 0.045
RL(22–23)
RL(23–24)
Cash
0.49 0.60
0.79
0.78
Cash
0.73 0.50
0.74
0.76
Bond
0.49 0.38
0.19
0.21
Bond 0.25 0.48
0.25
0.23
Equity
0.02 0.02
0.02
0.01
Eq­
uity
0.02 0.02
0.01
0.01
Gt
− 0.0084 0.0013 0.0145 0.0232
Gt
0.0096
0.0302
0.0409
0.0531
Max Gt
0.0132
Max 
Gt
0.0206
Min Gt
− 0.0084 Min 
Gt
0.0096
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
accurately the information provided in Table 5. Table 6 shows for every problem instance 
the optimal CPIP in every stage t = 0, 1, 2, 3 in terms of cash, bonds (thus short- and long-
term bonds together) and equity (US+Emerging markets). The compounded gains Gt at the 
end of each stage thus for t = 1, 2, 3, 4 and the maximum and minimum quarterly returns 
over the 4 quarters, displayed in column t = 4.
Table 6 allows several remarks. It should be read left to right, top to bottom to come on 
the bottom-right sub-table to the evidence discussed in Sect. 4.4.1. Every optimal FxM strat­
egy in columns t = 0, 1, 2, 3 generates the portfolio returns in the corresponding columns 
t = 1, 2, 3, 4. Then we compute the max and min returns taking the difference from one 
stage to the next into account.
 –
In all case problems, but one—RL(21–22)—the capital is protected and indeed the fund 
manager at T = 4 in all but one cases generates a premium, thus a gain that corresponds 
to a profit for the intermediary.
 –
As the investment horizon τ decreases, the CPIP for fixed target is surely stage depen­
dent: it remains stable and relatively non risky if the goal of protecting the capital is 
attained already in the early stages while it becomes increasingly risky if that is not the 
case. During the RL(21–22) case problem, persisting the low returns, then the optimal 
strategy increases to 26% the equity investment resulting into a significant loss at the 
end of the year. Thanks to the good performance of cash and bonds, see Table 2 on this, 
we see that in general the optimal FxM strategy relies only marginally on equity.
 –
The optimal CPIP in year 2021–2022 results in a negative return of 6.5%, yet surely to 
be considered tolerable in a very negative year for financial markets globally. We refer 
to the evidence in appendix for further evidence on this turbulent year in which an alter­
native probabilistic assumption would have led to a much worse outcome.
More generally, we also refer to the evidence in appendix and the remarks therein for further 
considerations.
4.6  Summary and practical adoption of the RL method
We summarize the key evidences collected in this computational section from both a finan­
cial and a methodological perspectives. The former can be related to the financial perfor­
mance of the replicating strategy employed by the fund manager and the range of problems 
that can be accommodated in the given framework. The latter to the computational effi­
ciency of the method in particular in relationship with alternative approaches under compa­
rable assumptions.
Financially, a 1-year problem with capital protection has been solved leading to an opti­
mal constant proportion investment policy with quarterly rebalancing, five assets represen­
tative of different market segments and a specification of the objective function in problem 
(1) with corresponding action-value function in the RL method, employing a trade-off 
between the expected compounded return and the expected shortfall with respect to the 
guarantee. The environment in the RL algorithm has been characterized through a data-
driven approach and tested to comply with equilibrium no-arbitrage conditions in the finan­
cial market.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 –
The adopted decision paradigm has been shown to be effective in terms of resulting 
portfolio diversification and probability to attain the target. As β increases from 0, the 
CPIP becomes more risky switching from money market and short term bonds to long-
term bonds and equity. Indeed as also reported in the appendix, mostly the fund manager 
generates ex-post a positive premium relative to the guarantee.
 –
For β = 0, in terms of capital protection, the results from the case studies are very posi­
tive and consistent over time with the exception of the July 2021–June 2022 period. 
For increasing β however, in absence of transaction costs and any policy bound, two 
evidences come up: the optimal CPIP is very sensitive to β, particularly for β ≤0.4, and 
the likelihood to replicate the guarantee is reduced.
 –
Problems (1) and (2) have been actually formulated in a general form, as a self-financing 
portfolio problems with a return guarantee. However, in this work only the case of 
capital protection for ˆG = 0 has been considered, varying β. A positive return guarantee 
turns out to define a more challenging problem and likely to require a larger asset base 
and/or a richer stage specification. See on this the methodological remarks below.
 –
In most cases, but, as reported in Sect. 4.5, not during the 2020–2021 COVID-related 
crisis, the adopted MPTLSC approach leads to significant improvements of the pre­
mium generated by the fund manager as the guarantee gets closer in time, supporting 
the adoption of the technique under the given assumptions. Following the evidence on 
Table 5 into account this remark is now related to the methodology.
From a methodological perspective, the RL algorithm is simple and the adopted approach 
combines the derivation of an optimal constant policy with the solution of a sequence of 
problem instances under the telescoping approach, originally proposed in Dempster et al. 
(2007). The model of uncertainty supporting the problem solution and the development 
of the RL algorithm relies on the data-driven method described in Sect. 2.2. We present 
in appendix an extended comparative analysis of the impact of such methodology against 
the canonical assumption of returns’ multivariate normal distribution, adopted by several 
authors in recent times, see Table 1 for reference. Absence of arbitrage has been advocated, 
rightly so, as a necessary requirement in the solution of financial optimization problems in 
a discrete setting (Klaassen, 2002; Geyer et al., 2010; Consiglio et al., 2016). It is shown 
in the appendix to actually lead to different results, even if the problem addressed here 
excludes the possibility of short positions. The evidence is consistent with the formulation 
and solution of multi-period problems formulated as multistage stochastic programs as in 
Barro et al. (2022). Yet, the evidence collected in this work proves computationally prefer­
able in terms of solution times and out-of-sample results. From a methodological perspec­
tive the following remarks can be put forward.
 –
In Consigli et al. (2024), an optimal CPIP was derived under general assumptions rely­
ing, as here on a 4-stage problem and, however, unlike in this work, learning the optimal 
fixed-mix portfolio composition from a different action-value function and enforcing the 
portfolio rebalancing over time, resulting into convergence after hours. Here by com­
bining MC simulation and the RL algorithm a sequence of optimal CPIPs are derived 
in minutes despite a much richer and dense characterization of the probability space 
supporting the problem specification.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 –
The proposed methodology and collected results have been also inspired by the early 
work by Mulvey and Kim (2011) in which simulation and policy optimization were 
integrated to solve a multistage stochastic optimization (MSP) problem and overcome 
the associated curse of dimensionality. Further to the previous point, also with respect 
to MSP formulations the computational times are dramatically improved in this setting, 
particularly considering the scenario set adopted to capture the problem uncertainty. 
The MSP approach remains preferable, despite the significant increase of computational 
costs in terms of possible, well-established, non-markovian type of problems and objec­
tive function specification and accuracy of the feasible region. Yet the possibility to inte­
grate the MC simulation with model-based RL and the derivation of optimal strategies 
generates a remarkable computational gain.
 –
All the above positive remarks, however, are derived from a relatively simple financial 
problem and under relevant simplifying assumptions with only 5 assets, yet representa­
tive of a canonical cash-bond-equity decision triple, and 4 decision stages over a 1 year 
horizon. The computational efficiency with increasing number of assets and rebalancing 
frequency is yet to be studied. We have presented in Sect. 4.4.2 convergence results 
based on the convergence over 50 iterations of a portfolio to a constant composition. No 
cases have been reported of early convergence. Overall, we can confirm that the main 
RL method limitation has to do with the difficulty to handle more general constraints in 
the problem formulation. As in several test-problems in the literature, here also the focus 
of the algorithm is on the objective/reward function.
We rely on all above remarks to discuss shortly the operational implications of the proposed 
methodology from the perspective of the issuer of a financial instrument with an embedded 
capital protection clause. In this contribution we haven’t considered regulatory constraints 
that may bind, depending on the instrument and the market, as in the case of life insurance 
contracts. We focus directly on the core capital protection objective and thus, implicitly, 
only on the hedging desk. Under this limitation and surely also assuming a liquid instrument 
and market completeness, then this work emphasizes:
 –
The adoption of the telescoping approach amounts to highlight the dependence of the 
constant proportions on the time to maturity of the instrument. The evidence in this 
respect is robust and an issue may be related to how frequent should be the revision, but 
we have shown that even a quarterly revision would be sufficient in- and out-of-sample.
 –
The employment of a simple machine learning approach has proven effective to derive 
a set of CPIPs to replicate 1 year guarantees. More extended guarantees requiring richer 
replicating asset sets have not been tested.
5  Conclusion
This research project was conceived and inspired by the early works of Dempster et al. 
(2007); Dempster and Leemans (2006) in which in different financial contexts, respectively, 
an MSP technique was adopted to address a minimum return guarantee problem (relying on 
the telescoping horizon approach) over a medium-long term horizon, and an RL approach 
was adopted to derive an optimal currency trading policy with a very short term horizon. 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Here we we propose a practical reinforcement learning method that, under possibly not 
so restrictive assumptions, leads to the solution of a capital protection problem by a fund 
manager after issuing a 1 year maturity guaranteed fund. The adoption of an horizon tele­
scoping approach characterizes the definition of a dynamic policy based on regular portfolio 
rebalancing over a 1 year horizon. Taking the initial contributions claims into account, see 
Sect. 1.2 and the remarks in Sect. 4.6, we may conclude as follows.
 –
The adopted decision paradigm and value function in the RL scheme, based on the 
trade-off between expected return and shortfall with respect to the guarantee, has been 
shown to lead to different risk profiles as β increases and the resulting portfolio replicat­
ing strategies are state- and time-dependent.
 –
The MPTLS approach has been shown to allow an effective guaranteed fund replication 
in most cases resulting in a positive replication profit for the fund issuer.
 –
The RL methodology presented here is simple and computationally rather efficient. 
Yet the problem solved has also been kept simple and the method validated through 
a sequence of 1 year capital protection problems with quarterly stages. Under these 
restrictive assumptions and relative to other possible methods, RL has been shown to 
provide a viable and operationally suitable methodology.
 –
An interesting analysis is included in appendix where comparative results are shown 
under alternative characterizations of the environment, either defined through a data-
driven arbitrage-free approach or based on a parametric multivariate normal assumption.
Future work will concentrate on generalizing the RL method to more complex dynamic 
portfolio problems and verify its potential over longer planning horizons.
Appendix: 2019–2024 out-of-sample results with graphical evidence
We present graphical evidence with comments associated with Table 6 in Sect. 4.5. Every 
subsection includes quarterly evidence for the corresponding year. Only telescoping results 
are presented assuming a capital protection over the next 12 months with quarterly portfolio 
revision as market information is revealed. Following the information in the main article, 
all the evidence in this appendix considers β = 0 in the objective and a capital protection 
objective over the entering year, thus ˆG = 0.
RL(1): optimal strategy and portfolio return over 7.2018–6.2019
Below are the plots of the cumulative portfolio return and portfolio weights over each of the 
4 quarters spanning July 1, 2018 to June 30, 2019. The first fixed-mix is determined with 
1 year horizon and will generate a return over the first quarter then a second optimal CPIP 
is determined with residual 9 months horizon with the same capital protection objective and 
so forth until the last quarter revision to be implemented over the April–June 2019 quarter 
(Fig. 12).
During the year we see that the optimal strategy relies mostly on a balanced equal 
investment in cash and short term bonds and only in the third quarter mostly on short term 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
bonds. The capital is protected throughout the year and eventually a 2% return is attained 
out-of-sample.
RL(2): optimal strategy and portfolio return over 7.2019–6.2020
Below are the plots of the cumulative portfolio return and portfolio weights over each of the 
4 quarters (Fig. 13).
As in the previous year, during 2019–2020, the strategy is concentrated on cash and 
short-term bonds with marginal investments in risky assets. The portfolio generates posi­
tive returns through the year and the strategy finishes above the guarantee with a 3% annual 
return.
RL(3): optimal strategy and portfolio return over 7.2020–6.2021
Here next the evidence for Q3,Q4-2020 and Q1,Q2-2021 (Fig. 14).
During this year, again the optimal CPIP attained a relevant positive return of almost 5% 
relying on short term bonds primarily and we see that the algorithm led indeed to a change 
of policy after a negative third quarter. Throughout the year the capital was fully protected.
Fig. 13  Cumulative return and portfolio weights: 2019, β = 0
 
Fig. 12  Cumulative return and portfolio weights: 2018, β = 0
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
RL(4): optimal strategy and portfolio return over 7.2021–6.2022
In Fig. 15 we display the cumulative portfolio return and portfolio weights over each of the 
4 quarters, last 2 of 2021 and first 2 of 2022.
The year 2021–2022 was reported in the computational section to present a very nega­
tive market turn across the Covid pandemic period. The optimal composition turned again 
to rely on short term bonds initially, then after a negative second quarter a balanced cash-
short term bond strategy was employed, whose negative outcome led in the fourth quarter to 
increase significantly the equity exposure, which however during the crisis further deepen 
the loss, During the last quarter, however, a large proportion was kept in the short term bond 
and eventually a pretty moderate loss of 6% was recorded.
RL(5): optimal strategy and portfolio return over 7.2022–6.2023
Consider the plots of the cumulative portfolio return and portfolio weights over each of the 
4 quarters in Fig. 16.
This year the strategy begins with a mix of cash and short term bonds, but loses on its 
short term bond position in the first quarter. It then shifts more weight into cash and main­
tains it majority cash weighting until maturity, finishing above the guarantee with a 2% 
premium.
The analysis over the 2018–2023 period can be extended to 2024 by considering the 
evidence in Sect. 4.3 from which we see that the CPIP led to a 5% ex-post return.
Fig. 15  Cumulative return and portfolio weights: 2021, β = 0
 
Fig. 14  Cumulative return and portfolio weights: 2020, β = 0
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Selected comparative data-driven versus multivariate normal results
This second appendix provides evidence on the sensitivity of the RL algorithm and key 
results to alternative statistical assumptions, Namely resulting from the dada-driven arbi­
trage-free (DDAF) method employed in the research project and the classical returns’ mul­
tivariate normal distribution (MVN) often assumed in RL applications. We present here 
next the probability distributions generated by the two methods together with the historical 
frequency distribution and then, an extended set of results, always considering the case of 
β = 0 in Eq. (2a).
Remark this second appendix includes a sequence of results, under the MVN assump­
tion, that were already presented in the original submission: they are included in blue, thus 
as if they were original or just modification of, only because part of a new appendix and type 
of analysis, unlike previously, here motivated by a comparative motivation.
From Fig. 17, for cash returns to Fig. 21 for emerging markets, we compare in each fig­
ure from top to bottom the frequency distributions from actual data, the data driven samples 
and the Monte Carlo MVN distribution at the end of the 12 month period. The intermediate 
and bottom histograms are both associated with 126,000 sample paths. The return distribu­
tions of all 5 assets are shown and it is of immediate evidence the rejection of an assump­
tion of normality for all assets. The figures reflect the information already discussed next to 
Table 4 (Figs. 18, 19, 20 and 21).
We see that cash, short- and long-term bonds in particular present significant skewness 
and multi-modality characteristics. It is worth noticing that rather many RL models do often 
assume a parametric multivariate normal distribution for the returns (Wang et al., 2020; Das 
& Varma, 2020; Mulvey et al., 2020; Consigli et al., 2024). We see indeed in what follows 
that a relevant model risk is associated with alternative probabilistic assumptions, thus moti­
vating the comparative evidence in the remaining part of this Appendix.
Capital protection versus expected return: 2023–2024 results
We always consider, throughout this appendix, the problem of a manager pursuing replicat­
ing a capital protection guarantee over the period from July 1, 2023 to June 20, 2024, with 
quarterly re-balancing.
The RL algorithm 1 is applied, for β ∈[0, 1], according to the scheme introduced above. 
For each choice of β and corresponding optimal strategy, the probability of falling below 
Fig. 16  Cumulative return and portfolio weights: 2022, β = 0
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
the guarantee and the expected terminal cumulative return are estimated. Given the optimal 
investment proportions, the former is computed by accounting the fraction of scenarios in 
which the terminal cumulative return is negative.
As β increases and more emphasis is placed on the expected return, resp. less on meet­
ing the guarantee, the probability of missing the guarantee rises, as well as the expected 
return of the portfolio. It is interesting, in this setting, to focus on the resulting relationship 
between E(GT ) and P(GT ≤0), depending on the adopted probabilistic assumptions. Fig­
ure 22 shows respectively the probability on the x-axis and the expected return on the y-axis.
Fig. 18  Short-term bonds returns
 
Fig. 17  Cash returns
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
When comparing the relationship between (in-sample) missing probability and expected 
returns under the alternative statistical assumptions (MVN left and DDAF right) we 
acknowledge in both cases a positive relationship, but in the latter only beyond a certain 
probability level close to 10%. The relevant implications of the alternatives can also be 
highlighted by the range of estimated probability levels, surely not very realistic in the 
MVN case.
For each choice of 0 ≤β ≤0.5 we present in Fig. 23 the optimal θ that would guarantee 
the desired capital protection, again under MVN and DDAF assumptions. Now, rather than 
Fig. 20  US equity returns
 
Fig. 19  Long-term bonds returns
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
a scatter plot, we adopt a line representation linking the underlying set of points. It is evident 
that as we move away from the shortfall minimization problem formulation and increase 
β then the optimal 1-year CPIP changes resulting into increasing equity exposure and cor­
responding reduced exposure to bonds and money market.
We may also notice that it is sufficient a rather small increase of β to modify significantly 
the associated optimal policy. The absence of any policy bound in the portfolio problem 
plays a role here. Figure 23 highlights the implication of calibrating the scenarios in the RL 
algorithm according to arbitrage-free conditions, particularly for low β’s. We see in Sect. 3 
below that indeed under DDAF the loss generated by the optimal strategy during the 2021–
2022 crisis is significantly reduced and overall the capital almost always well protected. In 
summary these results show that by varying the β parameter in Eq. (2a), the implemented 
RL framework can indeed produce strategies (θ) that trade-off the probability of missing the 
guarantee and the overall expected return of the portfolio.
Under, either canonical mean-variance analysis or as postulated in this work a data-
driven approach, depending on her/his risk profile, we assume that an investor would decide 
Fig. 22  Probability of missing guarantee versus expected return: MVN versus DDAF assumptions
 
Fig. 21  EM equity returns
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
which portfolio on the efficient frontier to select, thus which trade-off between expected 
return and risk exposure. In this context, the investor’s decision will focus on the trade-off 
between the probability of missing the target and the expected return. In the remaining part 
of this appendix we provide further evidence on this comparative results when focusing on 
the β = 0 case.
Solution of 1 year problem with telescoping horizon
Results are presented for the cases with β = 0 under either MVN or DDAF assumptions: we 
remind that β = 0, in our settings, correspond to the case of maximal risk aversion. From 
each solution under the telescoping approach, we extract the optimal portfolio weights, 
depending on the statistical assumption. We refer to Fig. 9 in the main body of this article 
for the associated probability of not achieving full capital protection. The evolution of the 
weights in each quarter, left for MVN and right for DDAF, are shown in Fig. 24.
We see that from a financial perspective, both figures reflect the choice of minimal risky 
investments in cash and short term bonds. Yet the optimal CPIPs do change under either 
assumptions as the optimal strategies adapt to the decreasing horizon, also depending on the 
protection generated thus far, see Fig. 25 here next.
All the information so far is related to in-sample and validation evidence of the method­
ology and the results’ consistency with classical financial principles. We now present a set 
of out-of-sample results, based on the MPTLS approach where at the beginning of every 
Fig. 24  Portfolio weights: 2023–2024, β = {0}. Left under MVN and right under DDAF assumptions
 
Fig. 23  Fixed-mix portfolio weights for 0 ≤β ≤0.5, MVN left and DDAF right
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
quarter the fund manager is assumed to revise her/his strategy according to the optimal θt 
for t = 0, 1, 2, 3 quarterly steps.
When coming to assess ex-post financial performance of the optimal CPIPs, we see that 
the two strategies, under MVN or DDAF assumptions, lead to diverse out-of-sample results, 
in both cases resulting into positive, surely non negative outcomes over the 2023–2024 year.
The plots in Fig. 25 show the cumulative returns Gt of the strategies over the 1 year 
period. In this case, for β = 0, the CPIP leads, under MVN, to a positive return every quar­
ter, and a cumulative return at the end of the year of 4.25%, safely above the guarantee of 
0%. The results under DDAF assumptions remain positive and reflect the different low-risky 
strategy learned by the agent, eventually generating a return over the year of 5.31%.
Interestingly, in both cases the portfolio revision at the end of the first quarter leads to 
a significant improvement of the performance while on the last two quarters, under either 
assumption the return attained so far is protected.
Out-of-sample simulations: 2019–2024
In this final section we present results from solving 1 year 0% guaranteed return problems 
with telescoping horizons from 2018 to 2024 spanning 6 years and compare the outcomes 
under the two statistical assumptions considered in this appendix. The sequence of optimi­
zation problems considers only 1 year horizons always starting on July 1 and ending on June 
30 of the following year. These are 6 non overlapping 1 year problems with corresponding 
labels RL(.-.): July 2018–June 2019 is RL(18–19), July 2019–June 2020 is RL(19–20), July 
2020–June 2021 is RL(20–21), July 2021–June 2022 is RL(21–22), July 2022–June 2023 
is RL(22–23) and July 2023-June 2024 is RL(23–24). Table 7 display the results under 
MVN, while Table 8 under DDAF scenarios. The settings presented in Sect. 4.1 still apply 
based on K = 126, 000 scenarios, M = 50 iterations and gradient approximation based 
on N = 2000 random trajectories. Only the case of β = 0 is considered and solution times 
across all problem instances reflect accurately the information provided in Table 5. The 
table shows for every problem instance the optimal CPIP in every stage t = 0, 1, 2, 3 in 
terms of cash, bonds (thus short- and long-term bonds together) and equity (US+Emerging 
markets) as already reported above. The compounded gains Gt at the end of each stage 
thus for t = 1, 2, 3, 4 and the maximum and minimum quarterly returns over the 4 quarters, 
displayed in column t = 4.
Table 8 shows the same information as Table 7 now when the data-driven scenario gen­
eration is adopted.
Fig. 25  Cumulative return: 2023–2024, β = 0, left MVN, right DDAF
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Remarking that these are all out-of-sample results, and the main relevant comparisons 
from an in-sample perspective have already being summarized above, we just highlight that 
in terms of annual protection results we have the following evidence for the DDAF versus the 
MVN case, in terms of attained final protection {DDAF,MVN}, respectively in every year: 
(1): 18−19 : {3.04%, 3.02%}; (2): 19−20 : {3.3%, 3.3%}; (3): 20−21 : {0.5%, 4.1%}; (4): 
21−22 : {−6.5%, −15.2%}; (5): 22−23 : {2.32%, 2.91%}; (6): 23−24 : {5.31%, 4.71%}. 
Eventually then, ex-post, with the relevant and noticeable difference in 2020–2021, pro­
vided positive outcomes when applied in a market environment.
Acknowledgements  We dedicate this research project to Professor John M Mulvey, whose past and cur­
rent outstanding scientific contributions keep inspiring us. Giorgio Consigli acknowledges the support from 
Khalifa University of Science and Technology, Grant FSU2022-010 award 000634-00001, Project No. 
8474000393.
Data availability  The data that support the findings of this study are openly available at ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​f​i​n​a​n​c​e​.​y​a​h​o​o​
.​c​o​m​, and upon request to the authors.
Table 7  Optimal CPIP and out-of-sample results July 2018–June 2024, β = 0, all 1 year problems—MVN 
results
Time t
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
RL(18–19)
RL(19–20)
Cash
0.47 0.17
0.81
0.26
Cash
0.38 0.21
0.97
0.23
Bond
0.51 0.81
0.18
0.84
Bond 0.62 0.79
0.03
0.77
Equity
0.02 0.02
0.01
0
Eq­
uity
0
0
0
0
Gt
− 0.0024 0.0091 0.0189
0.0302
Gt
0.019
0.024
0.0285
0.033
Max 
Gt
0.0115
Max 
Gt
0.019
Min Gt
− 0.0024 Min 
Gt
0.0045
RL(20–21)
RL(21–22)
Cash
0.13 0.22
0.15
0
Cash
0.40 0.18
0.78
0
Bond
0.87 0.78
0.85
0.77
Bond 0.60 0.82
0.22
0.51
Equity
0
0
0
0.33
Eq­
uity
0
0
0
0.49
Gt
0.0031
0.0022 − 0.009 0.041
Gt
0.0
− 0.0049 − 0.009 − 0.152
Max 
Gt
0.005
Max 
Gt
− 0.0049
Min Gt
− 0.012
Min 
Gt
− 0.143
RL(22–23)
RL(23–24)
Cash
0.23 0
0.80
0.49
Cash
0.23 0.78
0.82
0.50
Bond
0.77 0.55
0.20
0.49
Bond 0.77 0.22
0.18
0.50
Equity
0
0.45
0
0.02
Eq­
uity
0
0
0
0
Gt
− 0.018
0.0135 0.0263
0.0291
Gt
0.0038 0.020
0.0324
0.0471
Max 
Gt
0.0315
Max 
Gt
0.0162
Min Gt
− 0.018
Min 
Gt
0.0031
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors have no conflict of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this 
article.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and 
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. 
You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. 
The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, 
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative 
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, 
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​
t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/.
Table 8  Optimal CPIP and out-of-sample results July 2018-June 2024, β = 0, all 1 year problems
Time t
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
RL(18–19)
RL(19–20)
Cash
0.49 0.48
0.25
0.49
Cash
0.21 0.49
0.22
0.76
Bond
0.49 0.49
0.74
0.49
Bond 0.77 0.49
0.76
0.23
Equity
0.02 0.02
0.01
0.01
Eq­
uity
0.01 0.01
0.02
0.01
Gt
0.003
0.0103 0.0203 0.0304
Gt
0.006
0.0113
0.0305
0.033
Max Gt
0.010
Max 
Gt
0.0193
Min Gt
0.003
Min 
Gt
0.0023
RL(20–21)
RL(21–22)
Cash
0.31 0.27
0.24
0.49
Cash
0.22 0.16
0.49
0.01
Bond
0.67 0.71
0.75
0.49
Bond 0.77 0.82
0.49
0.74
Equity
0.02 0.01
0.01
0.01
Eq­
uity
0.02 0.01
0.02
0.26
Gt
0.0025
0.0048 0.0040 0.005
Gt
− 0.001 − 0.001 − 0.019 − 0.065
Max Gt
0.0025
Max 
Gt
− 0.0009
Min Gt
− 0.0008 Min 
Gt
− 0.045
RL(22–23)
RL(23–24)
Cash
0.49 0.60
0.79
0.78
Cash
0.73 0.50
0.74
0.76
Bond
0.49 0.38
0.19
0.21
Bond 0.25 0.48
0.25
0.23
Equity
0.02 0.02
0.02
0.01
Eq­
uity
0.02 0.02
0.01
0.01
Gt
− 0.0084 0.0013 0.0145 0.0232
Gt
0.0096
0.0302
0.0409
0.0531
Max Gt
0.0132
Max 
Gt
0.0206
Min Gt
− 0.0084 Min 
Gt
0.0096
Arbitrage free data driven results
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
References
Almahdi, S., & Yang, S. Y. (2017). An adaptive portfolio trading system: A risk-return portfolio optimiza­
tion using recurrent reinforcement learning with expected maximum drawdown. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 87, 267–279.
Ammann, M. (2003). Return guarantees and portfolio allocation of pension funds. Financial Markets and 
Portfolio Management, 17(3), 277.
Barro, D., Canestrelli, E., & Consigli, G. (2019). Volatility versus downside risk: Performance protection in 
dynamic portfolio strategies. Computational Management Science, 16, 433–479.
Barro, D., Consigli, G., & Varun, V. (2022). A stochastic programming model for dynamic portfolio manage­
ment with financial derivatives. Journal of Banking & Finance, 140, Article 106445.
Boyle, P., & Hardy, M. (2003). Guaranteed annuity options. ASTIN Bulletin: The Journal of the IAA, 33(2), 
125–152.
Boyle, P. P. & Schwartz, E. S. (1977). Equilibrium prices of guarantees under equity-linked contracts. Jour­
nal of Risk and Insurance, pp 639–660
Brandimarte, P. (2021). From shortest paths to reinforcement learning: A MATLAB-based tutorial on 
dynamic programming. Springer Nature
Brennan, M. J., & Schwartz, E. S. (1976). The pricing of equity-linked life insurance policies with an asset 
value guarantee. Journal of Financial Economics, 3(3), 195–213.
Coache, A., & Jaimungal, S. (2024). Reinforcement learning with dynamic convex risk measures. Math­
ematical Finance, 34(2), 557–587.
Coache, A., Jaimungal, S., & Cartea, Á. (2023). Conditionally elicitable dynamic risk measures for deep 
reinforcement learning. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 14(4), 1249–1289.
Consigli, G., Kuhn, D., & Brandimarte, P. (2016). Optimal financial decision making under uncertainty. In 
Optimal financial decision making under uncertainty (pp. 255–290). Springer.
Consigli, G., Gomez, A. A., & Zubelli, J. P. (2024). Optimal dynamic fixed-mix portfolios based on reinforce­
ment learning with second order stochastic dominance. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intel­
ligence, 133, Article 108599.
Consiglio, A., Cocco, F., & Zenios, S. A. (2001). The value of integrative risk management for insurance 
products with guarantees. The Journal of Risk Finance, 2(3), 6–16.
Consiglio, A., Tumminello, M., & Zenios, S. A. (2015). Designing and pricing guarantee options in defined 
contribution pension plans. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 65, 267–279.
Consiglio, A., Carollo, A., & Zenios, S. A. (2016). A parsimonious model for generating arbitrage-free sce­
nario trees. Quantitative Finance, 16(2), 201–212.
Črepinšek, M., Liu, S. H., & Mernik, M. (2013). Exploration and exploitation in evolutionary algorithms: A 
survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 45(3), 1–33.
Das, S. R., & Varma, S. (2020). Dynamic goals-based wealth management using reinforcement learning. 
Journal of Investment Management, 18(2), 1–20.
Deelstra, G., Grasselli, M., & Koehl, P. F. (2004). Optimal design of the guarantee for defined contribution 
funds. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28(11), 2239–2260.
Dempster, M., Germano, M., Medova, E., et al. (2007). Designing minimum guaranteed return funds. Quan­
titative Finance, 7(2), 245–256.
Dempster, M. A., & Leemans, V. (2006). An automated FX trading system using adaptive reinforcement 
learning. Expert Systems with Applications, 30(3), 543–552.
Dempster, M. A., Germano, M., Medova, E. A., et al. (2003). Global asset liability management. British 
Actuarial Journal, 9(1), 137–195.
Di Giacinto, M., Federico, S., & Gozzi, F. (2011). Pension funds with a minimum guarantee: A stochastic 
control approach. Finance and Stochastics, 15, 297–342.
Dixon, M. F., Halperin, I., & Bilokon, P. (2020). Machine learning in finance (Vol. 1170). Berlin: Springer.
Geyer, A., Hanke, M., & Weissensteiner, A. (2010). No-arbitrage conditions, scenario trees, and multi-asset 
financial optimization. European Journal of Operational Research, 206(3), 609–613.
Goodell, J. W., Kumar, S., Lim, W. M., et al. (2021). Artificial intelligence and machine learning in finance: 
Identifying foundations, themes, and research clusters from bibliometric analysis. Journal of Behav­
ioral and Experimental Finance, 32, Article 100577.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning. MIT Press.
Grosen, A., & Jørgensen, P. L. (2000). Fair valuation of life insurance liabilities: The impact of interest 
rate guarantees, surrender options, and bonus policies. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 26(1), 
37–57.
Harrison, J. M., & Pliska, S. R. (1981). Martingales and stochastic integrals in the theory of continuous trad­
ing. Stochastic Processes and Their Applications, 11(3), 215–260.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Hazan, E., Kakade, S., Singh, K., & Van Soest, A. (2019). Provably efficient maximum entropy exploration. 
In International conference on machine learning (pp 2681–2691). PMLR.
Jiang, R., Saunders, D., & Weng, C. (2022). The reinforcement learning Kelly strategy. Quantitative Finance, 
22(8), 1445–1464.
Klaassen, P. (1997). Discretized reality and spurious profits in stochastic programming models for asset/
liability management. European Journal of Operational Research, 101(2), 374–392.
Klaassen, P. (2002). Comment on generating scenario trees for multistage decision problems. Management 
Science, 48(11), 1512–1516.
Kolm, P. N., & Ritter, G. (2020). Modern perspectives on reinforcement learning in finance. Modern perspec­
tives on reinforcement learning in finance (September 6, 2019). The Journal of Machine Learning in 
Finance, 1(1).
Konicz, A. K., & Mulvey, J. M. (2015). Optimal savings management for individuals with defined contribu­
tion pension plans. European Journal of Operational Research, 243(1), 233–247.
Lauria, D., Consigli, G., & Maggioni, F. (2022). Optimal chance-constrained pension fund management 
through dynamic stochastic control. OR Spectrum, 44(3), 967–1007.
Lee, J., Bae, S., Kim, W. C., et al. (2023). Value function gradient learning for large-scale multistage stochas­
tic programming problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 308(1), 321–335.
Li, X., Uysal, A. S., & Mulvey, J. M. (2022). Multi-period portfolio optimization using model predictive 
control with mean-variance and risk parity frameworks. European Journal of Operational Research, 
299(3), 1158–1176.
Lillicrap, T., Hunt, J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., & Wierstra, D. (2015). Continuous 
control with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR.
Liu, S., Wang, B., Li, H., et al. (2023). Continual portfolio selection in dynamic environments via incremental 
reinforcement learning. International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 14(1), 269–279.
Maggioni, F., Allevi, E., & Tomasgard, A. (2020). Bounds in multi-horizon stochastic programs. Annals of 
Operations Research, 292(2), 605–625.
Merton, R. C. & Samuelson, P. A. (1992). Continuous-time finance.
Miltersen, K. R., & Persson, S. A. (2003). Guaranteed investment contracts: Distributed and undistributed 
excess return. Scandinavian Actuarial Journal, 4, 257–279.
Muermann, A., Mitchell, O. S., & Volkman, J. M. (2006). Regret, portfolio choice, and guarantees in defined 
contribution schemes. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 39(2), 219–229.
Mulvey, J. M. (2004). Financial planning via multi-stage stochastic programs. Computers & Operations 
Research, 31(1), 1–20.
Mulvey, J. M., & Kim, W. C. (2011). Multistage financial planning models: Integrating stochastic programs 
and policy simulators. In Stochastic Programming: The State of the Art In Honor of George B Dantzig 
(pp. 257–275).
Mulvey, J. M., Sun, Y., Wang, M., et al. (2020). Optimizing a portfolio of mean-reverting assets with transac­
tion costs via a feed-forward neural network. Quantitative Finance, 20(8), 1239–1261.
Park, H., Sim, M. K., & Choi, D. G. (2020). An intelligent financial portfolio trading strategy using deep 
q-learning. Expert Systems with Applications, 158, Article 113573.
Powell, W. B. (2022). Reinforcement learning and stochastic optimization: A unified framework for sequen­
tial decisions. Wiley.
Rockafellar, R. T., & Uryasev, S. (2002). Conditional value at risk for general loss distributions. Journal of 
Banking and Finance, 26, 1443–1471.
Ross, S. A. (1978). The current status of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM). The Journal of Finance, 
33(3), 885–901.
Lillicrap, T., Hunt, J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., & Wierstra, D. (2014). Determin­
istic policy gradient algorithms. In 31st International conference on machine learning, ICML, vol. 1.
Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT Press.
Topaloglou, N., Vladimirou, H., & Zenios, S. A. (2008). Pricing options on scenario trees. Journal of Banking 
& Finance, 32(2), 283–298.
Tse, W. M., Chang, E. C., Li, L. K., et al. (2008). Pricing and hedging of discrete dynamic guaranteed funds. 
Journal of Risk and Insurance, 75(1), 167–192.
Wang, H., & Zhou, X. Y. (2020). Continuous-time mean-variance portfolio selection: A reinforcement learn­
ing framework. Mathematical Finance, 30(4), 1273–1308.
Wang, H., Zariphopoulou, T., & Zhou, X. Y. (2020). Reinforcement learning in continuous time and space: A 
stochastic control approach. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(198), 1–34.
Wei, P. (2020). Exploration-exploitation strategies in deep q-networks applied to route-finding problems. 
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1684(1), Article 012073.
Zhang, H., Grossmann, I. E., & Tomasgard, A. (2024). Decomposition methods for multi-horizon stochastic 
programming. Computational Management Science, 21(1), 32.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Zhang, J., Koppel, A., Bedi, A. S., et al. (2020). Variational policy gradient method for reinforcement learning 
with general utilities. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 4572–4583.
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Giorgio Consigli1
 · Michael A. H. Dempster2 · Harvir Hansra3 · Michael Villaverde3
 
 Giorgio Consigli
giorgio.consigli@ku.ac.ae
Michael A. H. Dempster
mahd2@cam.ac.uk
Harvir Hansra
harvir@palekana.co.uk
Michael Villaverde
m.villaverde@hotmail.co.uk
1 
Department of Mathematics, CCMS, Khalifa University of Science and Technology, PO Box 
127788, Abu Dhabi, UAE
2 
Centre for Financial Research, Statistical Laboratory, Centre for Mathematical Science, 
Cambridge, England
3 
Pulsar Research LLC, London, England
1 3