TITLE: A methodology for developing evidence-based optimization models in humanitarian logistics
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04762-9
---

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04762-9
S.I.: DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT OF HUMANITARIAN SUPPLY
CHAINS
A methodology for developing evidence-based optimization
models in humanitarian logistics
Hossein Baharmand1,2
· Diego Vega2 · Matthieu Lauras3 · Tina Comes4
Accepted: 29 April 2022 / Published online: 23 May 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
The growing need for humanitarian assistance has inspired an increasing amount of academic
publications in the ﬁeld of humanitarian logistics. Over the pasttwo decades, the humanitarian
logistics literature has developed a powerful toolbox of standardized problem formulations to
address problems ranging from distribution to scheduling or locations planning. At the same
time, the humanitarian ﬁeld is quickly evolving, and problem formulations heavily rely on the
context, leading to calls for more evidence-based research. While mixed methods research
designs provide a promising avenue to embed research in the reality of the ﬁeld, there is a
lack of rigorous mixed methods research designs tailored to translating ﬁeld ﬁndings into
relevant HL optimization models. In this paper, we set out to address this gap by providing
a systematic mixed methods research design for HL problem in disasters response. The
methodology includes eight steps taking into account speciﬁcs of humanitarian disasters. We
illustrate our methodology by applying it to the 2015 Nepal earthquake response, resulting
in two evidence-based HL optimization models.
Keywords Humanitarian logistics · Mixed methods · Research design · Field research ·
Optimization · Case study
1 Introduction
As the number of people affected by disasters continues to grow each year, there is an
increase in academic publications that propose conceptual frameworks and optimization
models for humanitarian logistics (HL) problems (Banomyong et al. 2019; Dubey et al. 2019).
HL optimization models can support effective and efﬁcient decision-making, especially if
B Hossein Baharmand
hossein.baharmand@uia.no; hossein.baharmand@hanken.ﬁ
1
School of Business and Law, University of Agder, Grimstad, Norway
2
HUMLOG Institute, Hanken School of Economics, Helsinki, Finland
3
IMT Mines Albi, Industrial Engineering Department, University of Toulouse, 81000 Albi, France
4
Faculty of Technology, Policy and Management, TU Delft, 2628 BX Delft, the Netherlands
123

1198
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
problems are complex. However, a recent review shows that the current HL publications tend
to focus on traditional optimization problems without much consideration for the speciﬁc
disaster context (Besiou and Van Wassenhove 2020). Field-driven evidence in studies with
optimization models and optimization-driven decision support systems in the HL literature is
scant (Boonmee et al. 2017; Kovacs and Moshtari 2019; Banomyong et al. 2019; Besiou and
Van Wassenhove 2020): the majority of optimization models and decision support systems
are based on unveriﬁed assumptions and examined through hypothetical data. Moreover,
optimization, models have been criticized for not capturing the full complexity and rich
context of HL (Pedraza-Martinez and Van Wassenhove 2016; Kovacs and Moshtari 2019;
Kovacs et al. 2019; Besiou and Van Wassenhove 2020).
Several strategies have been suggested to address this gap, such as conducting multidis-
ciplinary research (Baharmand et al. 2016), contacting practitioners to formulate research
questions (Kunz et al. 2017), and following mixed methods research designs (Galindo and
Batta 2013; Gutjahr and Nolz 2016; Habib et al. 2016; Kovacs and Moshtari 2019) that use
ﬁeld research to develop optimization models for HL problems (Starr and Van Wassenhove
2014; Kunz et al. 2017; Kovacs and Moshtari 2019; Besiou and Van Wassenhove 2020). A
major challenge in this endeavor is combining qualitative and quantitative research traditions.
While also quantitative data can and has been collected in ﬁeld research, we focus on com-
bining qualitative methods that are frequently used in HL ﬁeld research with optimization
models.
There are two notable challenges for following mixed methods research design: (a)
methodologicalissues,wherebypublicationsoftendonotpresenttheirapproachoftranslating
qualitative ﬁndings into quantitative models and (b) a lack of consistency of the underlying
paradigms (Guba and Lincoln 1994). As a result, a lack of consistency between research
paradigm, data collection and model formulation can often be observed in research papers
that build optimization models from ﬁeld research (Holguín-Veras et al. 2013; Besiou et al.
2018). Our paper aims to address this gap by investigating the following research question:
• RQ: how can relevant and evidence-based optimization models for HL in disasters
response be developed?
Our objective is to propose a mixed methods research design that is adapted to the context of
HL. To this end, we designed a novel research methodology consisting of eight steps (seven
main steps plus one optional) to develop evidence-based models for HL problems (cf. Sect. 3).
For each step, we provide a detailed description about the methodological decisions involved
and recommend strategies for researchers to ensure rigor and relevance of their study. We
validate the proposed design by using the case of the 2015 Nepal earthquake and demonstrate
how two optimization models for location-allocation problems in HL can be developed from
ﬁeld research. Our rationale for the case selection is twofold: (i) the earthquake was one of
few recent natural disasters requiring system-wide emergency activation that we wanted to
study; (ii) we had the opportunity to conduct the ﬁeld study a few weeks after the earthquake
and observe humanitarian operations providing us with access to crucial data.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we provide an overview of
the relevant background. Our proposed research steps are presented in Sect. 3. In Sect. 4, we
show the application of our methodology to the Nepal case and present our location-allocation
models as a result of the analysis. In Sect. 5, we discuss the features of our evidence-based
models and the relevance of our proposed research methodology. Then, we conclude in Sect. 6
with implications and limitations of our study.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1199
2 Background and research contribution
Research design refers to a framework for planning research and answering research ques-
tions. Qualitative and quantitative research designs have different characteristics in terms of
the paradigm, the focus, objectives, data collection/analysis methods, and research outcomes
(Johnson et al. 2007; Guba and Lincoln 1994). Based on these characteristics, we provide an
overview of HL literature in this section with respect to three streams: quantitative research,
qualitative research, and mixed methods research. For this, we draw from 18 systematic liter-
ature reviews that have been published in the HL literature over the last 10 years (2011-2021)
(the list of considered review papers is provided in Appendix A). As Kovacs and Moshtari
(2019) argue, a detailed and rather extensive review of qualitative or quantitative methods
can often be found in HL review papers. We complement our overview with insights from
the wider operations management literature whenever relevant studies in the HL literature
are sparse.
2.1 Quantitative research in humanitarian logistics
The quantitative research design is often used to quantify a phenomenon. The main goal
of quantitative research design is to (dis-)prove existing theories by measuring variables
and their relations. Under this perspective, associated to positivism or post-positivism, the
reality exists (realism) or is assumed to exist (critical realism), the investigator is capable
of studying a phenomenon without inﬂuencing it or being inﬂuenced by it (objectivist), and
both entities are considered to be independent. In that sense, the research design is deductive
where questions and/or hypotheses are subject to empirical testing and replicable ﬁndings
are considered ‘true’ (Guba and Lincoln 1994).
According to recent reviews on HL literature, the majority of research papers that fol-
low a quantitative research design propose optimization models to address different HL
problems including location, allocation, routing, evacuation, scheduling, or combinations of
them (Galindo and Batta 2013; Anaya-Arenas et al. 2014; Behl and Dutta 2019; Banomyong
et al. 2019). However, as highlighted by Özdamar and Ertem (2015) and Besiou and Van
Wassenhove (2020), optimization models in HL face two challenges: ﬁrst, a lack of models
which analyze relevant problems in disasters with realistic features. Second, most HL mod-
els are computationally expensive and hardly correspond to the constraints of time pressure,
high workload, and presence of multiple stakeholders for decision making in the context of
disasters response (Baharmand et al. 2020). In fact, some review papers (e.g. Anaya-Arenas
et al. 2014; Kunz et al. 2017; Trivedi and Singh 2018) assert that a large part of optimization
models in HL research fail to address a speciﬁc disaster context although ignoring the context
will suggest solutions that may be useless or impossible to implement (Pedraza-Martinez and
Van Wassenhove 2016).
To address uncertainties and complex interactions, some papers combine simulation and
optimization. One common way of implementing such an approach is that simulation models
use inputs generated by optimization procedures to evaluate a solution (e.g., Fikar et al.
(2016) or Dufour et al. (2018)). The simulated output acts in the following step as an input
for the optimization procedure and this loop is repeated until a stopping criterion is met. HL
papers that use this combined approach mainly implement numerical experiments which are
developed randomly and lack evidence from the ﬁeld, as noted by Gutjahr and Nolz (2016).
Overall, the suit of optimization models used in HL research displays two other major
weaknesses despite their dominance in the literature. The ﬁrst is the validity of assumptions
123

1200
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
upon which the design and ﬁndings are based, given the complex nature of issues investigated
(Galindo and Batta 2013; Pedraza-Martinez and Van Wassenhove 2016; Kunz et al. 2017).
The second is the tendency in the literature to improve and combine optimization models to
address standard HL problems, while few scholars have tried to explore how models can be
used for new and emergent problems (Besiou and Van Wassenhove 2020). The narrow focus
of the optimization models has therefore limited their use to support practitioners in different
disasters contexts (Kunz et al. 2017; Kovacs and Moshtari 2019). As such, optimization
models have often been recommended for theory-testing or validation in logistics research
(Kovács and Spens 2007).
2.2 Qualitative research in humanitarian logistics
Qualitative research design is often used to understand concepts, thoughts or experiences. It
aims to create meaning, explore and investigate new, often social phenomena and develop
theory. Under this perspective, associated with constructivism, the reality is understood as
multiple mental constructions product of human intellects (relativism), the investigator cre-
ates knowledge through its interaction with the phenomenon (subjectivist) and thus, both
entities are interactively linked (Guba and Lincoln 1994). In that sense, this design is induc-
tive and often used for building theory and exploration. It adds the details and can also give
a narrative voice to the results.
The majority of qualitative research in HL are case and ﬁeld studies (Vega 2018). A ﬁeld
study provides access to rich data and offers opportunities to explore the interaction between
multiple actors (Spens and Kovács 2006). The common methods in qualitative studies are:
in-depth face-to-face and telephone interviews (Holguín-Veras et al. 2022), interviews with
ﬁeld observations (Van de Walle and Comes 2014), ﬁeld surveys (Zissman et al. 2014),
discussiongroups(Powell2011),orsimulationgames(LukoschandComes2019;Grallaetal.
2016). A method that has received increased attention from the HL community is qualitative
content analysis (QCA), a method that is suitable “for making inferences by objectively and
systematically identifying speciﬁed characteristics of messages” (Holsti 1969). The method
has been used in HL to conduct literature reviews (Kunz and Reiner 2012; Seifert et al.
2018), analyze content from websites (Vega and Roussat 2015), and NGO reports (Vega and
Roussat 2019). Three different approaches for QCA exist, namely conventional, directed and
summative (Hsieh and Shannon 2005). While the ﬁrst two follow an inductive or deductive
category development respectively, the latter aims at “identifying and quantifying certain
words or content in text with the purpose of understanding the contextual use of the words or
content". A similar approach to qualitative analysis is thematic analysis (Braun and Clarke
2006), a method for “identifying, analysing and reporting patterns (themes) within data".
Althoughbothareusedinterchangeably(SandelowskiandLeeman2012),themaindifference
relies on the identiﬁcation of the latent content of written text, as in content analysis themes
are reached based on word frequency, while in thematic analysis the themes emerge when
these capture something important in relation to the overall research question (Vaismoradi et
al. 2006).
An important point to notice is that the use of these methods is not mutually exclusive. In
Holguín-Veras et al. (2012b) (2010 Haiti earthquake), Laguna Salvadó et al. (2015) (Ebola
crisis), Comes (2016) (2013 typhoon Haiyan), Comes et al. (2020) (Syria Crisis) and Bahar-
mand et al. (2016) (2015 Nepal earthquake), researchers incorporate the following in their
ﬁeld study: a timeline of events, decisions, and information ﬂows; collecting and archiv-
ing relevant document for further review; interviews and focus groups with respondents at
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1201
different positions within distinct organizations; and observations. Using a combination of
above-mentioned methods, scholars aim to ensure they build or validate knowledge on post-
disaster HL with evidence from the ﬁeld (Chan and Comes 2014). Qualitative research in
HL based on ﬁeld studies aim to embrace the contextual richness of the ﬁeld, which is often
missing in studies that solely rely on quantitative models. Research that use data from ﬁeld
studies in disaster contexts usually address problems in the organizational and social settings
(e.g., Comes (2016), L’Hermitte et al. (2016), or Wolbers et al. (2018)).
Qualitative research designs show some drawbacks, particularly with respect to concretely
supporting decision-making in HL. First, due to the focus of qualitative studies on theory
building and understanding processes or phenomena (Sushil, 2019), their value for solving
concrete HL decision problems is limited. Second, the qualitative research process in dis-
aster contexts is often challenging (Vega 2018). For instance, researchers are subject to a
high degree of stress, severe time pressure, access problems, information overload, irregular
working conditions, or safety and security risks (Lukosch and Comes 2019; Chan and Comes
2014). Third, generalizing case study and ﬁeld study ﬁndings is a challenge given the speci-
ﬁcity of different contexts of disasters and humanitarian operations. One way to integrate
rich ﬁeld ﬁndings into modeling in HL research is using a mixed methods research design
(Kovacs and Moshtari 2019).
2.3 Mixed methods research in humanitarian logistics
Mixed methods research combines quantitative and qualitative research and thereby offers
more informed, complete, balanced and useful research results (Johnson et al. 2007). The
combination of qualitative and quantitative research can occur at any stage of a study cycle
(e.g., approaches, methods, data collection and analysis) (Akhtar 2018). With regards to
paradigm, mixed methods research offers four perspectives –i.e. pragmatism, transformative-
emancipation, dialectics, and critical realism– that inﬂuence research design, theory use,
relationships, inferences, and data reporting (Shannon-Baker 2016). While pragmatism can
be objective and/or subjective, transformative – emancipation tends to be more objective,
dialectics remains reﬂective and critical realism leans toward subjectivism. The methods
and inferences from data used by all four vary with the purpose, but the four share the
advantage of providing a better understanding, breadth, depth, validity, internal consistency
and generalization, as well as the ability to derive “bottom up" research questions.
There are two main categories of mixed methods designs (a) qualitative study informs a
quantitative analysis and (b) a quantitative analysis informs a qualitative study. Our study
belongs to the ﬁrst category: we aim to derive a method that allows to translate the results
of a ﬁrst qualitative part into a quantitative optimization model. Therefore, we review some
similar studies in this category.
In the HL literature, research papers often use data collected from ﬁeld studies to address
HL problems using optimization models in two directions: (a) using data to develop new
problem formulations, or (b) using data as input to parametrize, reformulate or extend existing
problems. Holguín-Veras et al. (2012a) highlight the importance of co-creation to develop
optimization models. As such, Charles et al. (2016) propose a model developed in close
collaboration with an HO for analyzing the impact of alternative sourcing strategies and
service level requirements on operational efﬁciency in humanitarian supply chains. Similarly,
Laguna-Salvadó et al. (2019) developed a multi-objective model in collaboration with the
Red Cross for managing sustainable humanitarian supply chains using information mainly
gathered from ﬁeld research. Also, Baharmand et al. (2019) and Baharmand et al. (2020)
123

1202
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
develop multi objective models in collaboration with the World Food Programme to locate
temporary distribution centers in the aftermath of sudden onset disasters where the models’
parameters, assumptions, and objectives have been derived from a ﬁeld study.
According to Kovacs and Moshtari (2019), a key challenge is the lack of clarity regarding
how mixed methods design is used in HL contexts; without clear research design, the studies
cannot be replicated. Mixed methods studies have been reported in several forms and types
with multiple levels and methods of data collection and analysis. This results in a lack of
speciﬁcity and detail, for instance, around methods of data analysis and procedures used in the
interpretation of ﬁndings (Kunz 2019). To address the gap, Kunz (2019) present an automated
quantitative content analysis approach that allows researchers to analyze secondary data (e.g.,
online reports and white papers) quickly and reliably to extract the contents’ quantiﬁable
aspects. However, Kunz (2019)’s approach does not support an exhaustive qualitative analysis
of primary and secondary data, neither does it offer any approach for interpretation to develop
new or inform previous optimization models. Moreover, some articles do not use theory
when presenting techniques used for data collection and analysis (Vega 2018; Oloruntoba et
al. 2019). This leads to two misconceptions: these studies are not methodologically rigorous
and the method maintains a bias toward veriﬁcation due to the lack of rigor (Pedraza-Martinez
and Van Wassenhove 2016).
We think if the aforementioned issues are properly addressed, the mixed methods design
could effectively examine HL problems, and facilitate the development of relevant and rigor
optimization models, as has also been noted in recent studies (e.g., Besiou and Van Wassen-
hove 2020; Kovacs and Moshtari 2019; De Vries and Van Wassenhove 2020).
2.4 Research contribution
The mixed methods research design can be used to gain a fuller picture and deeper under-
standing of the HL problems. Its main advantage is to relate complementary ﬁndings to each
other that are derived by using methods from the different methodological traditions of qual-
itative and quantitative research (Kelle 2006). However, our review revealed that the mixed
methods research design has not been documented in the HL literature in a reproducible way.
HL papers often give little space to the discussion of analysis, and do not make transparent
how they combine or analyse ﬁeld ﬁndings to inform quantitative models. Hence, a gap often
separates ﬁeld data from model formulation.
In this paper, we make a headway in addressing this gap. We aim to provide a methodology
that can help investigating HL problems that cannot be addressed by pure qualitative or quan-
titative research, such as the many complex decision problems that humanitarian logisticians
are facing. We design a step-by-step mixed methods research methodology for conducting
an evidence-based study in HL in the context of natural disasters response. We speciﬁcally
address the question how to translate the insights from a ﬁeld study into an optimization
model formulation. To show the application of our proposal, we demonstrate how we used
this methodology through a case study of the 2015 Nepal earthquake.
3 Proposed research methodology
To develop our proposed research methodology for using ﬁeld work to develop an opti-
mization model, we adapt existing mixed methods research design from the Johnson et al.
(2007)’s study. We focus on the quantitative dominant mixed methods research. As John-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1203
Fig. 1 Proposed research methodology
son et al. (2007) note “Quantitative dominant mixed methods research is the type of mixed
research in which one relies on a quantitative, postpositivist view of the research process,
while concurrently recognizing that the addition of qualitative data and approaches are likely
to beneﬁt most research projects." This design is particularly useful when a researcher needs
to identify important variables to study quantitatively, when the variables are unknown or
less-known (Tashakkori and Creswell 2007). To design the methodology, we combine prac-
tices of papers that study disaster settings qualitatively with those that develop optimization
models to address decision-making problems in HL.
Figure 1 shows our proposed research methodology, which is composed of four stages.
Every stage includes one or more steps. Two layers can be distinguished in each step: pro-
cess(es) (rectangle) and outcome(s) (ellipse). The initial pre-ﬁeld work stage focuses on the
literature and relevant theories to identify/analyze research gaps. The ﬁeld work, the second
stage, includes collecting and analyzing data from primary and secondary sources. The third
stage is the focal point of this design: the translation of the qualitative data into a new or
adapted optimization model. Finally the last stage, i.e., dissemination, is concerned with
validating the model and publishing the outcome.
The proposed research methodology is speciﬁcally intended for the HL context. HL
operates in an exceedingly uncertain and dynamic environment that is far beyond the uni-
directional, linear logistics in other contexts (Day 2014). Applying the proposed research
methodology to HL research has therefore the following merits. (a) The methodology bene-
ﬁts from ﬁeld study with qualitative methods. This has been noted as particularly appropriate
for understanding HL contexts “allowing researchers to deal with complexity, context and
persona and their multitude of factors, relationships and fuzzy phenomena" (Cassell and
Symon 2006). (b) The methodology uses mathematical modeling (optimization) which helps
to ensure generalizability of results while accounting for the context of study. The importance
of considering context in HL studies has been noted in many studies (e.g., Pedraza-Martinez
and Van Wassenhove (2016)).
In this section, we explain every step in detail except for Step 8, Paper compilation, which
has been widely covered in the literature.
123

1204
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
3.1 Step 1: Literature review
Whether the problem emerges from a sudden or slow onset disaster, or focuses on long-term
(protracted) crises, the literature review constitutes the starting point of the proposed research
methodology. This ﬁrst step helps to identify gaps in the literature and formulate the research
question and problem upon those gaps, or to inform or clarify a formulated research question
or problem coming from the ﬁeld. In both cases, the literature review may start before or
right after the event and can continue throughout the data collection (and sometimes data
analysis). The review consists of four main parts, some of which can be completed in parallel.
i For known problems, review the literature regarding the main problem that is going to be
studied in the ﬁeld. Distinguish the category of the decision problem (e.g., location, allo-
cation, transportation, routing, scheduling, etc. or a combination of them) that the model
will be developed for and recognize the contextual requirements. Several survey papers
that review multi-criteria models (e.g. Gutjahr and Nolz (2016)) can be used for posi-
tioning the problem category. Prepare an overview of available and relevant models for
the problem to understand how it is formulated. For new or emerging phenomena, review
relevant blog posts, whitepapers, and practitioners discussion papers in gray literature.
ii Collect secondary data related to the situation to get an overview of the context and get
a better understanding of what to expect in the ﬁeld. Situation reports, country proﬁles,
infographics and maps are some of the types of documents that can be reviewed at this
stage.
iii Deﬁne or reﬁne the research question, objectives and purpose.
iv Develop an early stage conceptual model of the problem based on literature review and
insights from the secondary data.
The purpose of the research as well as the type of question will determine the appropriate
qualitative method and data collection techniques, following Ellram (1996) and Handﬁeld and
Melnyk (1998) classiﬁcations. In HL literature, the case study is the most common qualitative
method (Jabbour et al. 2019), and has been used for exploratory, descriptive, explanatory and
even predictive purposes (Vega 2018). Other qualitative methods such as delphi studies or
focus groups have also been used in HL research but to a lesser extent. Therefore, for the
purpose of this article, the proposed design will focus on the case study method. As pointed
out by Gammelgaard (2017), the research design depends on the aim of the case and thus,
it is important to explicitly specify this issue to ensure rigor and argument that support the
following methodological choices.
3.2 Step 2: Field study design
The next step is to determine the case study design by asking two questions for crafting case
study research in HL: what and how practically (Vega 2018). The what question relates to
the unit of analysis (cf. Patton (2002)), which in HL can vary from people, to organization(s),
regions, crises, phases or a combination of those. Determining the focus of the study has
important implications on the generalizability of results and thus, the consecutive optimiza-
tion model. Therefore, the unit of analysis should be thoroughly described and argued.
Once the unit is deﬁned, the how practically question addresses case selection and the
related data collection techniques and analysis. Although a number of case sampling tech-
niques coming from social sciences can and have been implemented in HL research, in
many occasions case selection is a matter of access and opportunity. Flyvbjerg (2006) dif-
ferentiates case selection between random (i.e., to avoid systematic biases in the sample)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1205
and information-oriented (i.e., to maximize the utility of information from small samples
and single cases). Given the previously acknowledged restrictions regarding access to data,
the latter is often the best suited technique to undertake case studies in HL. This includes
extreme/deviantcases,maximumvariationcases,criticalcasesandparadigmaticcases.What-
ever the adopted technique, it is important to explicitly account for as data collection and
analysis techniques rely on it.
The remaining parts of this step relate to quality criteria and research protocol. According
to Halldorsson and Aastrup (2003), internal validity, external validity, construct validity
and reliability are commonly accepted criteria in logistics research (cf. Ellram (1996); Yin
(2009)). However, Guba and Lincoln (1989) put forth the concept of trustworthiness as
an alternative suitable quality criterion for logistics research. Trustworthiness is composed
of four dimensions (credibility, transferability, dependability and conﬁrmability) that echo
the conventional paradigm presented above. Guba and Lincoln (1989) conclude that these
dimensions can be expressed by three issues:
1. Truth-value: correspondence with ‘reality’ as interpreted by respondents (credibility) or
survival of falsiﬁcation attempts.
2. Transferability and contextualism.
3. Trackability and explicity: explicating and documenting the process and its decisions
(dependability), the sources of data and interpretations (conﬁrmability) as well as the
theories and questions underlying interpretations.
Following Pedrosa et al. (2012) and in accordance with Halldorsson and Aastrup (2003),
we suggest to follow the previous three criteria to ensure quality of case studies in HL.
Truth-value can be ensured through long-term ﬁeld work, pilot interviews or peer debrieﬁng.
Transferability can be reached by using purposive sampling techniques and data saturation.
Trackability can be ensured by a thorough description of the study methods and the estab-
lishment of a track record trial for both data collection and analysis.
Finally, the last step concerns the creation of the ﬁeld study protocol, a document that
outlines the procedures involved in the data collection. It normally entails an overview of the
case (background information, theoretical framework and research question), key concepts
and theories, data collection procedures (access to the site, data collection plan, privacy issues,
questionnaire / survey), a detailed line of questions or set-up and timing of focus groups or
experiments, and an outline for the ﬁnal report (Mills et al. 2010; Yin 2009).
3.3 Step 3: Data collection
The third step relates to data collection in the ﬁeld and remotely. There are different techniques
that have been used in qualitative inquiries such as direct observation, indirect observation
and the many types of interviews (Ellram 1996). The latter is the most common technique in
HL research (Vega 2018). In addition, data triangulation is used in most of the case studies
to complement interview data and observations, and to embed events or interviews into a
timeline. Ofﬁcial documentation and reports, guidelines, academic literature, press articles,
direct observations and presentations have been used as means to study a phenomenon from
different perspectives. For quantitative data collection in the ﬁeld (if required) to support the
qualitative inquiries, surveys or questionnaires have been suggested in the literature (Kovacs
and Moshtari 2019).
On-site and remote data collection must follow the prepared protocols. Regarding infor-
mants, a myriad of sampling techniques are found in the literature (e.g., Miles and Huberman
(1994)) but not all ﬁt the characteristics of the humanitarian context. As pointed out by Vega
123

1206
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
(2018b), when conducting case studies in HL, non-probabilistic techniques are more suitable
due to the limited knowledge of the population and the impossibility to determine the sample
in advance. A technique that is widely used in logistics and operations management research
is theoretical sampling (Manuj and Mentzer 2008), which favors a theory-driven choice of
informants over a representative one. Other sampling techniques (e.g. quota, snowball or
sequential) can be also used in addition to the theoretical (Vega 2018) as a means to cross-
validate preliminary results and to reach theoretical saturation, i.e., the point when additional
interviews do not reveal new insight (Manuj and Mentzer 2008; Gralla et al. 2016; Comes et
al. 2020).
An additional important source of evidence that is found in the aftermath of any disaster
is written documentation such as overviews, situation reports, information bulletins, updates,
daily ﬂashes and action plans, or graphic documentation such as infographics, dashboards and
mapsavailablethroughofﬁcialwebsites,suchasReliefweb.intorHumanitarianresponse.info.
Increasingly, also quantitative data is made available through platforms such as the Human-
itarianDataXchange website. Compared to the secondary data collection performed in the
ﬁrst step, here the search is delimited by the object of study, and the documents are used as
an additional source to ensure data triangulation.
This sort of data collection has been already used in logistics and supply chain management
research (Seuring and Gold 2012) as well as HL research (Seifert et al. 2018; Vega and
Roussat 2019). It follows a precise and rigorous process that ensures trackability and starts
with delimiting the material to be collected by identifying the source, deﬁning the search
criteria (e.g., scope, time, format) and ﬁlters that match the research objectives. Later on, the
material collected from all documentary sources, the decisions made during the process and
the ﬁnal sample to be analyzed is described. While observations and ﬁeld interviews need
to be done on-site, complementary online data collection, or Skype or phone interviews can
also be carried out remotely, or via back ofﬁce support (Chan and Comes 2014).
3.4 Step 4: Qualitative data analysis
The fourth step relates to ﬁnding similarities, differences or patterns that emerge from the
collected data, both from interviews and written documentation. This process known as
coding is a technique for organizing substantial amounts of qualitative data into conceptual
categories to make sense of the information collected. A code is thus a label to which units of
meaning, i.e. words, phrases or paragraphs, are assigned (Miles and Huberman 1994). The
importance in the process is put on the concept and its meaning, not the word or speciﬁc
phrasing. The process normally involves at least two levels of coding, and depending on the
source (i.e. interviews or documents) the approach can differ.
When analyzing interview data, several authors (Ellram 1996; Miles and Huberman 1994;
Strauss and Corbin 1990) refer to two levels of coding. The ﬁrst level (open) refers to organiz-
ing the data by categories that relate to research questions, hypotheses or research objectives.
A good advice is to prepare a list of provisional codes based on the ﬁrst results from the
literature review. At this stage, it is also possible to develop a sub-set of codes that belong
to the provisional list in order to structure the information found in each code. The second
level (pattern or axial) seeks to identify relations between the categories found during the
open coding, providing greater insights into the data. It also helps to identify which codes or
subsets need deeper consideration or are irrelevant and should be dropped. It is important to
understand that the coding process is iterative rather than sequential.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1207
Fig. 2 Suggested approach for qualitative data analysis
Analyzing written documents can also entail various levels. As previously explained,
two approaches can be adopted to analyze written documents, namely thematic and content
analysis. Thematic analysis focuses on identifying ‘themes’ that refer to something important
from the data with regards to the research question that represents meaning within the data set
(BraunandClarke2006).Itstartswithpreparingandgettingfamiliarwiththedata(i.e.reading
and re-reading the data), generating initial codes (i.e. interesting features) and searching for
themes (i.e. collating codes). Then, a ﬁrst level of analysis will focus on reviewing the themes
in relation to the coded extract, while a second level will do the same but in relation to the
entire data set to generate a thematic map. It ﬁnalizes with generating clear deﬁnitions and
names for the themes (Braun and Clarke 2006).
A summative content analysis, on the other hand, focuses on the objective, systematic,
quantitative and qualitative study of published information (Hsieh and Shannon 2005). The
ﬁrst level (manifest) refers to the search of occurrences of identiﬁed words or codes that
emerge from the literature review (Elo and Kyngäs 2008). Qualitative Data Analysis Software
like Atlas.ti or NVivo offer tools that can perform this analysis and return a list of the most
frequently used words from which the researcher should pick those in relation to the codes
established in the open coding. Another possibility is to use the software’s query tools and
perform a stemmed search of the keywords, looking to identify synonyms and related words.
In both cases, the resulting words become the starting point for the following level of analysis.
Latent content analysis, the second level, refers to the qualitative analysis of the content found
in the manifest content analysis. The goal of this level is to examine the context in which the
keywords were used to understand their meaning and further code them into the previously
established set of codes during the open coding. Recently, some tools have been developed
based on supervised machine learning for automated content analysis dealing with complex
interpretations of text (Pilny et al. 2019). However, we explain the manual approach here.
Either thematic or content analysis is adopted, an iterative process is required to compare
carefully the emergent unit of meaning with the evidence from previous steps in order to
assess how well or poorly it ﬁts the overall code. When a pattern from one data source is
corroborated by evidence from another, the ﬁnding is stronger and better grounded. When
evidence conﬂicts, we propose to reconcile the evidence through deeper probing of the
meaning of the difference. At other times, this conﬂict exposes random patterns or biased
thinking in the analysis. The analysis is complete when all keywords or codes are used and
further investigations are carried out. Resulting themes that are supported by other sources
are further used in the cross-case comparison step.
123

1208
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
3.5 Step 5 (optional): Cross case comparison
The aim of this optional step is to search for cross-case patterns. To ensure the generalizability
of ﬁndings from a case study and avoid reaching premature or false conclusions, mostly due to
limited data or different biases, literature suggests to search for cross-case patterns (Meredith
et al. 1989; Eisenhardt 1989) to improve the external validity of the ﬁndings and build
stronger evidence (Besiou and Van Wassenhove 2020). As De Vries and Van Wassenhove
(2020) argue, the diversity of humanitarian contexts makes the scope and characteristics of
HL problems highly case-dependent. As such, analysis of one case study, as often seen in
HL literature (Trivedi and Singh 2018; Banomyong et al. 2019), is generally insufﬁcient to
produce generalizable ﬁndings.
To ensure that the researcher captures novel ﬁndings that may exist in the data, Eisen-
hardt (1989) proposes three tactics for cross-case pattern searching. The ﬁrst tactic focuses
on selecting dimensions and use these to look for within-group similarities and intergroup
differences. The second tactic uses pairs of cases to list similarities and differences between
each pair. Finally, the third tactic relies on the division of data by data source and corrob-
oration of ﬁndings using evidence from different sources. Based on these three tactics, we
propose a cross-case pattern search approach which is illustrated in Fig. 3. The central idea
is that we constantly compare theory (academic literature) and best practices to support or
decline qualitative results. Beside academic literature, information for comparing cases can
be collected from ﬁeld reports and evaluations (e.g., via Reliefweb.intl, Humanitarianre-
sponse.info, HumanitarianDataeXchange) or white papers (e.g., from ALNAP, elrha) and
guidelines (from the HOs).
Using this approach, two directions are considered. The ﬁrst direction refers to those
insights from other cases that (a) support ﬁndings from ﬁeld study such as identiﬁed charac-
teristics, concepts or assumptions, or (b) provide basis for further examination of them.
The second direction refers to those ﬁndings that shape future research agenda. If after
carrying out data analysis, a researcher could not ﬁnd convincing material to interpret the
ﬁnding, we suggest to include the corresponding ﬁnding as a direction for future research.
Fig. 3 Suggested approach for cross-case comparison (adapted from Eisenhardt (1989))
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1209
3.6 Step 6: Developing the mathematical model(s)
This is the ﬁnal step in the Post- ﬁeld work phase. In this step, a researcher may choose to
developamathematicaloptimizationorsimulationmodelortoshapehypothesesforstatistical
analyses. In any case, further quantitative data may need to be collected (for instance through
surveys or questionnaires) (cf. Sect. 3.1). In this paper, we exclude quantitative data collection
from the step for the sake of brevity. We also assume that the researcher pursues developing
mathematical optimization models.
Due to the multiple criteria nature of most decision-making problems in HL (Gutjahr
and Nolz 2016; Gralla et al. 2014), we assume the multi-criteria decision analysis as the pre-
ferred methodology in the mathematical modeling phase. We acknowledge that the traditional
multi-criteria decision analysis cycle of problem formulation and preference elicitation can
be followed. However, we suggest the following approach adapted from Charles and Lauras
(2011) due to its simplicity (Gupta et al. 2016) (for a more generic paper, we refer to Tsoukiàs
(2008)). Charles and Lauras (2011) suggest three steps based on business process modeling
notion (BPMN) to convert conceptual information included in a BPMN model into quantita-
tive information. We adapt Charles and Lauras (2011)’s three steps into a four-step systematic
approach for developing multi-criteria models using outcome from previous steps.
i Apply adjustments to the problem deﬁnition and scope, and its contextual requirements,
e.g. data requirements or modeling approach, with respect to ﬁeld ﬁndings and supporting
evidence.
ii Extract the problem features (objectives, parameters, variables, and constraints) from the
literature summary and ﬁeld ﬁndings given the scope and the context of the problem.
iii Compare how the problem is modeled in the literature with how practitioners deal with it
in practice versus how it should be dealt with (as there might be a practical gap). If there
are divergences, look for evidence in qualitative ﬁndings regarding why practitioners
are acting differently. If they are doing so due to constraints in disaster contexts (lack
of access to sufﬁcient reliable data, time, and computational resources), then revise the
features and objectives of the model according to contextual requirements.
iv Develop the model for further quantitative analysis (this analysis will be carried out
through an experimental design).
The experimental design should be developed in connection to the research question(s). The
experimental design should reﬂect the motivation for the objective function, as well as the
procedure for testing which variations in variables and parameters are the most relevant. It
must answer questions related to why (motivation), what (purpose), and how (process). Our
review of several online templates revealed some common questions that are often used to
prepare an experimental design, as listed in Table 1.
3.7 Step 7: Model testing and validation
To investigates the relations between uncertain parameters of an optimization model, and the
stability of the observable outcome (Saltelli et al. 2008) sensitivity analysis is required. The
sensitivity analysis is recommended to be conducted on all the signiﬁcant parameters of the
optimization model that are subject to variation. Particularly the ones that intervene in the
objective function(s) of the model. An effective analysis should include univariate (simple)
analysis and multivariate analysis (Weathers et al. 2009). Moreover, a thorough sensitivity
analysis with regards to instance size is necessary to show the performance of the solution
method and the quality of results. Leiras et al. (2014) note that benchmarking HL models
123

1210
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
Table 1 Some example questions for developing the experimental design derived from online templates
Target
Example questions
Why? Clarifying the motivation.
Why would it be important for you to run this experiment with
such objective functions?
Why would it be important for others to run this experiment?
What are your expected outcomes?
What? Clarifying the purpose.
What are your variables (independent and dependent)?
What are key parameters and their data requirements?
What are your ideas on trying to solve the model?
How? Clarifying the roadmap.
What steps are included in the procedure?
How will you measure your independent variable?
How will you measure the resulting change in the dependent
variables?
How long do you expect to complete your experiment?
would be ideal to ensure that the proposed formulation is scalable and is robust to the input
in terms of computational performance. While sensitivity analysis can facilitate extracting
managerial insights, Pedraza-Martinez and Van Wassenhove (2016) contend that it should
be combined with validation by practitioners.
Validation aims to bridge rigor and relevance of optimization models in the HL research
and can be carried out through face validation, cross validation or historic validation (Balci
and Gass 2013). In our research methodology, the Step 7 addresses the following two actions:
evaluating and reﬁning. The main task in this step is to return to the practitioners to validate the
model results and potentially implement the study’s recommendations in practice. Pedraza-
Martinez and Van Wassenhove (2016) refer to this step as “closing the loop" and there
are some examples in the HL literature (e.g., Acimovic and Goentzel (2016) and Laguna-
Salvadó et al. (2019)). Pedraza-Martinez and Van Wassenhove (2016) assert that validating
results with practitioners facilitates building a trust which can allow researchers to convince
practitioners to spend more effort in collecting better data and in working more closely with
academia.
4 Application to the 2015 Nepal earthquake
On April 25, 2015, and a mere 17 days later, Nepal was hit by two major class earthquakes,
measuring 7.8 and 7.3 on the Richter scale, respectively. These earthquakes affected roughly
5.5 million people, leaving nearly 9,000 casualties, and caused approximately 7.1 billion
US dollars in economic damages (Government of Nepal 2015). On April 26, 2015, due to
the severe damages of the ﬁrst earthquake, the Government of Nepal declared the need for
humanitarian assistance.
During June 21-29, 2015, nearly eight weeks after the disasters and just before the begin-
ning of the recovery phase, a multidisciplinary research group conducted a ﬁeld study in
Nepal. The primary objective of the ﬁeld research was to study challenges and bottlenecks in
HL, speciﬁcally in relation to decision-making, information management, and coordination.
In this section, we explain how we followed the proposed research methodology to study
the relief distribution centers location-allocation problem in sudden-onset disaster response
and to develop a relevant optimization model based on ﬁeld-driven insights. In the location-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1211
allocation problem, to facilitate the distribution of the received relied items in the affected
country, the decision-makers (DMs) must determine the location for setting up the temporary
distribution centers, and decide the allocation of the scarce resources to them (Baharmand et
al. 2019).
4.1 Step 1: Literature review
We were ﬁnalizing a literature review on different literature streams in humanitarian supply
chains (Baharmand and Comes 2015) when the 2015 Nepal earthquake happened. Hence, we
did not have to conduct an ad-hoc review in the aftermath of the disaster. Here, we elaborate
on the relevant ﬁndings of the literature review (research gaps and the problem deﬁnition)
that informed the second step of our research methodology (cf. Fig. 1).
Research gaps: With respect to optimization models, our review revealed three main gaps in
the literature, partly supported by previously conducted literature reviews (Anaya-Arenas et
al. 2014; Galindo and Batta 2013). First, we found that scholars used unrealistic constraints
when proposing mathematical models for HL problems including unlimited capacities for
transportation and warehousing. Moreover, we noted that very few studies used multiple
objectives in their proposed models, despite the presence of several actors working in HL with
different mandates and objectives. Second, we found that scholars rarely considered multi-
period models for HL problems in the sudden-onset disasters response. Rather, researchers
mainly focused on static problems that discard the fact that characteristics of HL problems
(such as access to working road infrastructure) change over time, even during the relatively
short phase of disaster response. Third, we identiﬁed a lack of studies that accounted for
uncertain parameters of HL problems in disaster response in the mathematical models.
Problem deﬁnition and scoping: In the immediate aftermath of a sudden-onset disaster, one
of the ﬁrst tasks for the logisticians is to establish a network of facilities to distribute relief
items to beneﬁciaries in urgent need. Designing such networks involves taking critical deci-
sions under time pressure, whose time- and cost-efﬁciency affects the overall performance
of the response (Jabbour et al. 2019). Location-allocation decisions are central to the human-
itarian disasters response. These decisions determine the ideal location (and sometimes the
number) of the logistics hubs or distribution centers, and the quantity of resources allocated
to them for distribution. The requirements for the location-allocation decisions can differ
based on the characteristics of the disaster and the disaster phase.
4.2 Step 2: Field study
Following our research methodology, our preparation for the ﬁeld research continued by
carryingouttheﬁeldstudycheckstep.Figure4illustratesourrationaleforthecheckquestions
following Gammelgaard (2017) and Vega (2018).
Our ﬁeld research protocol aimed at investigating three main research questions. First,
how relief distribution networks are designed in practice. Second, what speciﬁc challenges
and bottlenecks exist in designing and implementing relief distribution networks. Third, what
best practices practitioners use (if any) to overcome such challenges and bottlenecks. Our HL
interview protocol included qualitative and quantitative questions covering aforementioned
three research questions 1. An early stage theoretical model of HL, illustrated in Fig. 5, was
1 The ﬁeld research and interview protocols can be shared upon request.
123

1212
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
Fig. 4 Illustration of ﬁeld study check questions
Fig. 5 The early stage theoretical model for relief distribution networks in Nepal
also developed before the trip. The model shaped the basis for investigating our ﬁrst and
second research objectives.
The Nepal case responds to both an opportunistic and an information-oriented selection.
While the former describes a case selection based on the emergence of a new case, the latter
helped us to conﬁrm the richness of the case with relation to the deﬁned problem. In that
sense, the 2015 Nepal earthquake case can be seen as a critical case from which logical
deductions can be drawn and potentially be applied to other similar cases Flyvbjerg (2006).
Following a combination of sampling techniques (i.e. theoretical, convenience, purposive
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1213
and snowball), we developed our ﬁrst contact list based on the pre-established connections
in local and international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) as well as UN-related
organizations in Nepal. The interviewee selection was done according to (1) expertise, expe-
rience, and background of the contact (logistics, information management, coordination) (2)
responsibility in targeted organization and being involved directly in Nepal response (3) pres-
ence in Nepal during the ﬁeld study. Our initial list was ﬁlled in with names of logisticians or
country managers collected from these online resources: ReliefWeb, HDX, and LogCluster.
Establishing the ﬁrst connection with contacts was done by sending emails containing a brief
explanation of research plan, team objectives, the time frame of presence at Kathmandu, and
the way that interviewee can contribute. After providing requested information for respon-
dents and under their conﬁrmation, ﬁrst schedule of interviews was set and the interviewee
list was uploaded through a shared folder. Eventually the ﬁrst interviewing plan was made.
We also established a remote expert team composed of senior scholars to support the
ﬁeld researchers. The expert team provided inputs regarding how to improve data collection
process, how to ﬁnd relevant contacts in the ﬁeld, and how to organize ﬁeld trips. We also
started to collect the situation-related information in early May 2015 from a variety of online
sources.
4.3 Step 3: Data collection
We carried out our on-site data collection in Kathmandu, Nuwakot, and Rasuwa districts in
close collaboration with local agencies. We conducted 31 interviews with key informants
based at multilateral agencies and international NGOs (iNGOs) between June 24th 2015
and July 10th, 2015 (some interviews were conducted remotely). Among them, 16 inter-
viewees were logisticians with at least ten years of experience in humanitarian response
(cf. Appendix B). At the time of our research, they were working at: multilateral agencies
(UNOCHA; WFP); Nepali branches of iNGOs (Oxfam; Cordaid; IFRC; World Vision Inter-
national (WVI); Handicap International; Islamic Relief Worldwide (IRW); Humedica); and
Nepal based NGOs (Kathmandu Living Labs (KLL); United Mission to Nepal (UMN); Nepal
Red Cross Society). All interviews took less than one and a half hours and they were recorded
after the consent of interviewee(s).
Furthermore, we complemented our ﬁeld interviews with notes taken during ﬁeld visits
to Kathmandu, Nuwakot and Rasuwa districts (June 23rd-29th, 2015). As shown in Fig. 6,
our ﬁeld trip focused on severely hit districts. Moreover, documents collected from online
sources and articles of local newspapers were considered. We used online sources (Reliefweb,
Logcluster, HDX, and MapAction) to collect meeting minutes, maps, reports, and white
papers. For newspaper articles, we collected those newspapers that were published in English
during the timeline of our stay: The Kathmandu Post, and The Himalayan Times. We note
that data from social media were not collected as the focus of our work was on HL. We argue
that social media data can be used to analyze the assessment gaps and sentiment (different
focus compared to HL) (Palen and Anderson 2016; Wamba et al. 2019; Giannakis et al.
2020), and requires a speciﬁc protocol for data collection, noise cleaning, data analysis and
data interpretation (Crumbly and Carter 2015; Tacheva and Simpson 2019).
4.4 Step 4: Qualitative data analysis
We combined our data sources for indexation, as shown in Fig. 7. This ﬁgure shows approx-
imately the share of each main theme from the categorized data. Some data that could be
123

1214
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
Fig. 6 Affected areas by 2015 Nepal earthquake and our visits during ﬁeld study (map from Government of
Nepal (2015))
Fig. 7 Categorized data for Nepal case
categorized under two or three themes, shown as ‘common’ in Fig. 7. To avoid biases, four
researchers did the categorization individually and conﬂicts were solved under the supervi-
sion of a senior researcher.
In the category of logistics, we had transcripts for 16 interviews; observation of relief
operations of ﬁve HOS namely UN WFP, IFRC, Humedica, Cordaid, and WVI noted through
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1215
three ﬁeld trips to severely affected areas in Kathmandu, Rasuwa, and Nowakut as well as
other data sources such as 18 maps, 74 documents, 388 photos, and summaries of 68 reviewed
articles.
For qualitative data analysis, we followed a hybrid approach, combining interpretive the-
matic analysis based on a coding schema and inductive coding based on emerging codes
(Fereday and Muir-Cochrane 2006). Coding schema was informed by our preparatory litera-
ture review where the following keywords were extracted: ‘location’, ‘locating’, ‘allocation’,
‘transportation’, ‘warehouse’, ‘hub’, ‘staging area’, ‘distribution center’, ‘relief distribution’,
‘relief network’, ‘humanitarian supply chain’, ‘humanitarian logistics’, ‘decision’, ‘decision-
making’, ‘decision support system’, ‘model’, and ‘scenario’.
Given the aforementioned keywords, we conducted the iteration process as explained in
Sect. 3.4. In the following, we present some qualitative results that emerged with respect to
our ﬁrst two research questions:
• Relief distribution networks in humanitarian response are established ad-hoc. They are
highly depend on the characteristics of the affected area.
• Locating temporary distribution centers and allocating resources to them (i.e., distribution
centers location-allocation) is one of the very ﬁrst critical decision that ﬁeld-based DMs
often make right after arrival.
• Locating staging areas and temporary distribution centers is often done by operational
decision-makers mainly based on experience from previous operations and in-place plan
from the preparedness. Key criteria include accessibility to the road network and avail-
ability of space.
• Despite the complexity of situation in the aftermath of disaster, practitioners show reluc-
tance to use mathematical models for location-allocation decisions. The reason could be
that the majority of models fail to account for ﬁeld constraints with respect to information,
capacities, etc.
• Several redundancies, delays, and backlogs were observed in the operations. The main
reason for redundancy was uncertainty. Another reason could be the lack of using decision
support models.
4.5 Step 5: Cross-case comparison
Given the results from the Nepal case, we carried out the cross-case comparison following
the steps explained in Sect. 3.5. We selected and used available reports for the following
cases to conduct the cross case comparison step: Haiti earthquake (2010), Typhoon Bopha
(2012), and Typhoon Haiyan (2013). Our rationale for selecting these cases was threefold.
First, all events were large-scale sudden-onset disasters, and shared this characteristic with
the Nepal earthquake. Second, they evolved into humanitarian emergencies, whereby inter-
national assistance was provided. Third, reports of the related humanitarian operations can
be downloaded from online sources such as Reliefweb.int.
Given the process outlined above, we identiﬁed some key evidence to be considered in
the next steps:
• Considering the context is of great importance when developing location-allocation opti-
mization models. Neglecting to mention which context the model is developed for and
under what circumstances, leads to models that are not practical in the ﬁeld.
• The information that ﬁeld-based DMs need for their location-allocation decision-making
processes gradually becomes available after the disaster. This entails differences between
how decisions are made in the ﬁrst weeks of immediate response, and thereafter. Thus, an
123

1216
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
exhaustive optimization model for the whole time-frame of the response cannot respond
to the contextual requirements.
• Considering multiple decision criteria is of great importance in location-allocation opti-
mization models. Some criteria that practitioners often referred to are: effectiveness, the
unsatisﬁed demand in all targeted affected areas; efﬁciency, logistics costs including
facility, human resource, and transportation costs; and responsiveness, supply-side travel
time, which contains the time required for shipping items from main entry points (MEPs)
to staging areas (SAs) and from SAs to points of demands (PODs).
• While in the later phase of the disaster, aid is prioritized based on needs assessments,
ﬁeld-based DMs initially rely on pre-disaster data, such as the latest census report for
estimating the demand. While using stochastic data modeling can assist decision-making
underuncertainty,suchdatamodelingapproachesarehardlyapplicableinitiallyduetothe
contextual constraints. Accordingly, we observed use of deterministic analyses (mainly
paper-based) with some scenarios for varied demand (location and size) or supply (type
and amount).
• The set of candidate sites for location decision is known. Practitioners considered only
locations that remained accessible through main roads and have access to a helipad.
4.6 Step 6: Developing location-allocation optimization models
The qualitative part informed our problem deﬁnition, data modeling, decision criteria, time-
line, assumptions, and other modeling requirements. According to our ﬁeld ﬁndings, the
location-allocation problem in the immediate response can be schematically illustrated as in
Fig. 8. In the immediate response, DMs must determine where to locate and set up distribution
centers (staging areas in our study) to store shipped items for last mile distribution and how
to allocate scarce resources to them. For logistics decisions in this phase, the supportive
evidence indicate that DMs often focus on response time and logistics costs. In the relief
phase, the problem changes to optimizing the location (keep or relocate staging areas) and
the resource allocation decisions given that after the immediate response: (i) more concrete
information regarding the demand catalog becomes available (need assessment results); (ii)
some new entry points may be opened or come back to operation; (iii) transportation status
may change (infrastructure or ﬂeets); and (iv) relief operation targets may change (priorities).
Our case ﬁndings support that DMs usually focus on response time, demand coverage and
logistics costs in the relief phase.
According to our ﬁndings, the location-allocation optimization model needs to take into
account following features:
• Using a deterministic approach in data modeling with ability to include scenarios that
are developed systematically;
• Considering two distinct (but related) time-frames: immediate-response and relief;
• Following a multi-criteria methodology given that for the immediate response phase, the
focus should be on response time and logistics costs objectives. The extent of demand
coverage is an additional key criterion in the relief phase.
• Using ﬂexible structures (decision variables, parameters, constraints) that could be
adapted given the problem characteristics in the ﬁeld.
To develop the models, we combined the outcome of Step 1 (cf. Fig. 1) with the afore-
mentioned evidence from our ﬁeld work and cross case ﬁndings (cf. Sects. 4.4 and 4.5).
From there, a set of assumptions was derived for developing the model. For instance, mobile
storage units (MSUs) were assumed as storing structures in the SAs. MSUs have been suc-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1217
Fig. 8 Schematic presentation of the location-allocation problem in the sudden-onset disasters response
(Baharmand et al. 2019)
cessfully and rapidly erected in recent response operations, and thus, they can expedite the
relief operations. We also assume that the act of erecting MSUs is conducted by volunteers
and does not impose any logistics costs (Baharmand et al. 2019, 2020).
Based on such assumptions and other information about the problem, we deﬁned the
following objectives:
Minimize total logistics costs = Ground transportation cost
+ Air transportation cost
+ Recurring cost
+ Human resource cost
Minimize total response time = MSU setup time + Operation time
Minimise total uncovered demand = T otal demands −T otal shipped items
While the ﬁrst two objectives were found critical for the immediate response phase,
we considered a model with the three objectives for the relief phase. A complete list of
assumptions as well as detailed mathematical formulations of our models can be accessed in
Baharmand et al. (2019) and Baharmand et al. (2020).
4.7 Step 7: Model testing and validation
We developed and tested our optimization models in close collaboration with practitioners
over a course of approximately two years. The experts were logisticians working on planning
the relief operations in UN agencies and HOs. After several iterative discussions, we were
able to identify the required capabilities, model them, and ensure that they are implemented
correctly. In the model development process, we compared the model calculations with prac-
titioners’ data, and investigated those cost or time components that were estimated differently
or were left un-modeled. Following the discussions with the practitioners, we ﬁnally ensured
that the un-modeled costs and times were integrated in the models.
For validation purposes, the data that we used was gathered from online resources. Such
data is often available for different type of disasters through information sharing platforms.
123

1218
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
Typically, HOs would be provided maps, distances, and logistics prices through the Logistics
Cluster in the early stages of response. Such information is also often shared on websites
such as ReliefWeb, LogCluster, and HumanitarianDataeXchange as open data. In situations
where data is not available or it is incomplete, practitioners use estimates, according to our
ﬁndings from the ﬁeld study.
Having collected information about decision-makers’ choices in our ﬁeld research, we
also explored the difference between our models’ results and the choices of the practitioners.
This helped us to investigate the reasons behind (potential) divergences (Baharmand et al.
2019). For instance, we noted that our models did not consider the fairness criterion although
this was mentioned a few times in our interviews. Our rationale for excluding fairness from
our models was that the practitioners’ approach to consider this criterion was not clear and
lacked transparency. We could not ﬁnd sufﬁcient evidence in our cross case comparison step
(cf. Sect. 3.5). Some practitioners referred to fairness as the priority of regions and targeted
groups whereas others mentioned the timeliness of the deliveries. That said, we found that
deﬁning an appropriate objective function for fairness would require a dedicated investigation
with practitioners. We acknowledge the few papers that have worked on measuring fairness
(e.g,. Holguín-Veras et al. (2013) or Holguín-Veras et al. (2016)), however, the introduced
measures in the literature are often data intense. Therefore, we considered working on the
fairness objective function as a future research direction for our study (cf. Fig. 3).
5 Discussion
In this section, we discuss two main matters. First, we elaborate on the relevance of the devel-
oped models. Second, we discuss the challenges that may arise by following the proposed
research methodology.
5.1 Relevance of developed models based on the proposed design
Relevance is deﬁned as "assess[ing] propositions for which practitioners seek stronger evi-
dence" (De Vries and Van Wassenhove 2020). Here, we discuss the evidence that support
relevance of our models given the following elements: decision criteria, contextual require-
ments, and experimental plan.
Only few papers can be found within the last decade that explicitly deal with multi-
criteria location-allocation problems in humanitarian response after a sudden onset disaster
(Anaya-Arenas et al. 2014). Interestingly, the majority of these optimization studies focus on
addressing demand coverage and logistics costs (Gutjahr and Nolz 2016; Trivedi and Singh
2018; Jabbour et al. 2019; Zandkarimkhani et al. 2020), while our ﬁeld research clearly
showed that minimizing the response time and logistics costs are of utmost importance for
the logisticians in the immediate response phase. Few studies take into account response time
and logistics costs for the immediate response, and address both objectives simultaneously
(Tzeng et al. 2007; Vitoriano et al. 2011; Lin et al. 2012; Ahmadi et al. 2015; Zokaee et al.
2016). For instance, Zokaee et al. (2016) propose a robust stochastic model to minimize the
total costs of the relief chain given a penalty to shortages of relief commodities. However,
the parameters of penalty functions are not justiﬁed. Overall, the justiﬁcation for selecting
criteria in HL location-allocation models for the disaster response is often missing.
Aforementioned models often fail to reﬂect critical constraints of the response due to
simplifying assumptions: unlimited capacity of locations (e.g., Lin et al. (2012)); single
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1219
Table 2 Differences between our ﬁeld-driven models and state-of-the-art
Research
characteristics
Existing location-allocation
models in HL literature for
sudden-onset disaster response
Our location-allocation models
Considered time-line
Single period (the whole
response phase)
Two phases (immediate response
+ relief phase)
Decision criteria
Mostly single objective
considering either demand
coverage, logistics costs,
response time, or a bi-objective
combination of demand
coverage and logistics costs.
Logistics costs and response time
for the immediate response, and
logistics costs, response time
and demand coverage for the
relief phase
Data modeling type
Both deterministic and stochastic
Deterministic with ability to run
quickly in multiple times in
different response stages when
new information becomes
available
Assumptions
Often lacking justiﬁcation such
as incapacitated locations or
transportation means
Justiﬁed with ﬁeld data and based
on discussions with
practitioners
Veriﬁcation approach
Numerical experiments
Numerical experiments +
benchmarking with
practitioners’ decisions in the
real case
commodity (e.g., Maharjan and Hanaoka (2018)); inﬁnite accessible vehicle for distribution
(e.g., Cao et al. (2018)); ﬁxed-number of distribution centers (e.g., Noyan et al. (2015)); single
period operation (e.g., Orgut et al. (2016)). We adapted our model’s assumptions according
to ﬁeld ﬁndings. For instance, we considered two periods in our model to explicitly reﬂect our
observations regarding the change of decision-making driven by information, and resulting
in different decision criteria and problem characteristics between immediate response and
response in the ﬁeld.
With respect to validation, we found that the majority of reviewed papers use numerical
experiments based of ﬁctional cases. Numerical experiments often lack a concrete basis and
are developed randomly (e.g., Noyan et al. (2015)). Despite the many calls for relevance,
HL literature still frequently uses numerical experiments while this approach brings limited
insights to practice (Leiras et al. 2014; De Vries and Van Wassenhove 2020). The limited
use of real data can be partly explained by the lack of access. However, owing to our ﬁeld
research, our models use real data for benchmarking and validation. Using data from real
operations in the 2015 Nepal earthquake response allowed us to compare our results with
decisions of practitioners, investigate the divergences, and revise the model accordingly (if
necessary).
Regarding the generalizability of the model, we acknowledge that this would require
checking the model results after applying it to several cases. By using the 2015 Nepal earth-
quake response case (Baharmand et al. 2019, 2020), we have demonstrated that the model
can support UN WFP’s decision makers with the staging areas location-allocation problem
by providing a wide range of balanced alternatives with respect to logistics costs and response
time. That said, we expect that our model is capable to support DMs who deal with simi-
lar problems in the context of sudden onset disasters response. We refer to checking model
123

1220
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
results for other cases as a future research direction (also mentioned by Baharmand et al.
(2019) and Baharmand et al. (2020)).
Table 2 summarizes the main differences between our ﬁeld-driven model and existing
literature.
5.2 Challenges of the proposed research methodology
The context of sudden onset disasters has speciﬁc characteristics that imposes limitations on
the possible ﬁeld research designs. By their very nature, time for preparation is short. If the
research design should not be ad-hoc, it needs to build on pre-existing insights and expertise
to identify clear research questions. Second, the richness of the data collection in the ﬁeld
can be overwhelming. Therefore, a clear scope and framing are indispensable. Third, access
to affected areas or to interviewees and DMs may be limited, especially in the early stages
of a disaster. Therefore, appropriate sampling strategies need ot be implemented. Lastly, in
a disaster, researchers necessarily engage with their interviewees and are immersed in the
experience, potentially invoking emotions or biases (Chan and Comes 2014). Here, back-
ofﬁce support can help in maintaining the neutral stance of an observer—and to reﬂect on
the challenges. In addition, qualitative data through interviews in the ﬁeld may need cross-
validation with other resources to avoid biases which can be time and effort consuming. We
note that the above-mentioned challenges can be arguably more difﬁcult to address when
conducting ﬁeld studies in conﬂicts contexts. As conﬂicts are not in the scope of our study,
we refer to working on the related challenges as a future research direction.
Methodologically, not all referred research methods in other disciplines for mixed methods
studies can be effectively applied in disaster settings. For instance, ﬁlling in surveys and
questionnaires requires dedicating enough time, commitment, and focus while practitioners
in the very early phase of a disaster response have other priorities. The semi-structured and
conversational interview has one main advantage: it provides more ﬂexibility for both sides to
share information without formalities and at the same time, it converts the interview meeting
into a story telling session that helps interviewees reﬂect on their experiences.
Also, our ﬁeld research showed that there are some main considerations that have to be
taken into account within the proposed design:
• Targeting interviewees for HL research must be done carefully since some of our respon-
dents, as also noted by Van de Walle and Comes (2014), only had speciﬁc knowledge
about their responsibility. Because they did not have a holistic perspective of other roles
in their corresponding HO, we had to see many people within one HO to obtain sufﬁcient
information.
• Combining qualitative data with quantitative approaches demands careful analysis with
several iterations for veriﬁcation and often requires follow-up communications with par-
ticipants.
The proposed research method follows Wacker (1998)’s general procedure for theory
building for case study research. We start by limiting the domain of the proposed methodol-
ogy to HL research, developed from studied cases, and demonstrating generalizability and
abstraction by pointing out wide possible application valid all times and places. We use
conceptual deﬁnitions from the literature without renaming them and using only short and
unique deﬁnitions. Further, the relationships between the different concepts were logically
explained, demonstrating possible new relations to explore without statistical techniques.
Finally, we address falsiﬁability by proposing ways to avoid unlikely results.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1221
5.3 Implications for theory
Our research has several implications for theory. First, it includes collecting detailed infor-
mation on problems from the ﬁeld and enables access to ﬁrst hand data through close
collaboration with practitioners to develop insightful research. Kovacs et al. (2019) note that
HL studies should be motivated by a practical problem either (1) by working with human-
itarian organizations or (2) by relying on previous explorative studies. Our methodology
supports both requirements. We show that a detailed, step-by-step transparent methodology
helps to develop evidence-based optimization models with realistic objectives, assumptions,
and constraints.
Moreover, our suggested methodology helps to mitigate challenges that may hinder an
effectivemixedmethodresearchinHL.KovacsandMoshtari(2019),BesiouandVanWassen-
hove (2020) and Besiou and Van Wassenhove (2021) highlight the difﬁculties in collecting
ﬁeld data in the humanitarian context. To address such challenges, recent HL research has
mainly focused on survey research (e.g., Behl et al. (2021); Dubey et al. (2020, 2021)). These
studies have used surveys for hypotheses testing, for collecting practitioners’ viewpoints on
the challenges in the humanitarian operations, and for capturing the opinions of stakeholders
in disaster-response performance reviews. Using surveys in HL research indicates that empir-
ical methods are of general interest to the HL researchers. However, using surveys (i) for
exploratory studies to inform analytical modeling and (ii) in studies for testing the models’
ﬁndings, as suggested by Kovacs and Moshtari (2019), is still scant in the HL literature. We
think that our methodology, can effectively support (i) and (ii) with small changes in Step 3
(substituting the ﬁeld work with surveys).
Furthermore, our study contributes to better understanding and positioning of explorative
mixed method research. (Yin 2009) highlight that explorative ﬁeld studies are especially
needed in research domains that are not adequately well developed, and they require a better
understanding of the actors, subjects, problems, and the interactions among them. In the
context of humanitarian operations, the problem or topic of the research should not only rely
on a gap in the literature review, but it should also be grounded in practice and structured
and deﬁned by a group of scholars and practitioners. (Gunasekaran et al. 2018). Our method
supports the development of (preliminary) conceptual frameworks and problem deﬁnitions
that can guide researchers in the subsequent research stages on the factors or dimensions that
require data collection.
Besides, our study has implications for research by suggesting how to evaluate qualitative
results in a scientiﬁc rigorous way and how to incorporate them in a transparent, accessible,
and replicable way. To the best of our knowledge, there are still a few HL-related papers that
use qualitative methods to inform mathematical modeling and optimization (e.g., Baharmand
et al. (2019)). If this is the case, the guidelines presented in this paper should help to increase
research rigor in the future. Our methodology can connect different possible qualitative
methods with the optimization. It could serve as a decision matrix for authors, editors, and
reviewers.
Other implications refer to future research directions, and to opportunities for conduct-
ing joint research on these directions. For instance, our methodology can be adapted for
other contexts/problems given the clariﬁcations that we presented regarding the methods,
constraints, and possible opportunities. With this, we acknowledge that the research-related
lessons learned from the 2015 Nepal earthquake case study should be carefully applied in
other settings, taking into consideration contextual differences.
123

1222
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
5.4 Implications for practice
Kovacs and Moshtari (2019) indicate that studying HL problems using mixed methods helps
to have stronger conclusion which would be more acceptable by practitioners. Our method-
ology not only supports achieving stronger conclusions, but also facilitates research that is
relevant for problems in the ﬁeld. By fostering relevant research, our methodology should
help practitioners to apply research outcomes in practice with more conﬁdence. Our study
also provides practitioners with more understanding of mixed methods design in HL research,
which they can use when calling for or evaluating such studies in their organizations.
Moreover, the design can encourage practitioners to engage more with research activities.
From a practical standpoint, the Nepal case showed a challenging concern with respect
to ﬁnding key informants from different HL stakeholders groups to participate in the ﬁeld
interviews. As HL problems often have a multidisciplinary nature, stakeholders’ involvement
and collaboration is key in HL research. That said, while the pre-ﬁeldwork step has to be
carried out carefully from the researcher side, practitioners participation can help to close
the loop more effectively.
6 Conclusions
Mixed methods studies have been described as a promising avenue to bridge the divide
between quantitative optimization models qualitative ﬁeld research in Humantiarian Logis-
tics (HL). Mixed methods research promises a deeper understanding of challenges, and
thereby allows researchers to develop more effective solutions. However, HL literature lacks
rigorous methodologies regarding how to use mixed methods research designs in the context
of humanitarian response. We provide a methodology with eight steps for using qualitative
ﬁeld research to develop optimization models. Most importantly, we describe in detail how
ﬁndings from a ﬁeld study can be translated into the problem deﬁnition and scope, objec-
tives, parameters, variables and constraints that are at the heart of optimization models. The
application of our proposed research methodology on Nepal case showcases the merits of
our methodology for developing an evidence-based quantitative decision support while con-
sidering the limitations of ﬁeld research in disasters response, such as the short-time for
preparation and access constraints.
Our research has some limitations, which opens avenues for future research. Suggestions
in this paper are based on implementing the methodology for one case, and adaptations to
other contexts may be needed. Guidelines and protocols for conducting ﬁeld research for slow
onset disasters or conﬂicts have to be different from the ones that are developed for sudden
onset context. Thus, some components of our research methodology, including protocols,
have to be adapted for other contexts. Moreover, our research concentrates only on ﬁeld
research; extending the methodology to other set-ups such as experiments or simulations /
exercises and games is another future research direction.
Acknowledgements We would like to express our sincere gratitude to all practitioners who participated in
our ﬁeld research and shared their knowledge and experiences with us. We also thank our Nepal research team
members who made this study possible.
Funding Open Access funding provided by Hanken School of Economics.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1223
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
A Considered review papers
A detailed list of review papers that have been considered in our study is provided in Table 3.
Table 3 List of review papers used in this study
No. Study
Focus
1
Besiou and Van Wassenhove (2020)
Humanitarian operations
2
De Vries and Van Wassenhove (2020)
Humanitarian operations
3
Agarwal et al. (2020)
Humanitarian supply chain management
4
Bruno and Haar (2020)
Humanitarian operations
5
Kovacs and Moshtari (2019)
Humanitarian operations
6
Agarwal et al. (2019)
Humanitarian supply chain management
7
Banomyong et al. (2019)
Humanitarian logistics and humanitarian supply
chain performance
8
Behl and Dutta (2019)
Humanitarian supply chain management
9
Jabbour et al. (2019)
Humanitarian logistics and humanitarian supply
chain management
10
Seifert et al. (2018)
Humanitarian supply chain management
11
Trivedi and Singh (2018)
Humanitarian relief
12
Boonmee et al. (2017)
Humanitarian logistics
13
Kunz et al. (2017)
Humanitarian logistics
14
Gutjahr and Nolz (2016)
Humanitarian aid
15
Özdamar and Ertem (2015)
Humanitarian logistics
16
Anaya-Arenas et al. (2014)
Relief distribution networks
17
Leiras et al. (2014)
Humanitarian logistics
18
Galindo and Batta (2013)
Disaster management
B Interviews information
Interviews details are provided in Table 4.
123

1224
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
Table 4 Details of interviews in the Nepal ﬁeld research
Interview no.
Interviewee position
Afﬁliated organization (2015)
1
Senior Logistics Assistant
Relief International
2
Head of mission
Cordaid
3
Head of mission
Humedica
4
Information Management Ofﬁcer
Islamic Relief
5
Logistics Ofﬁcer
WFP
6
Head of Emergency Operations
IFRC
7
Technical Director
Actionaid
8
Programme Manager
International Medical Corps
9
Liasion SHO response
Oxfam
10
Logistics Coordinator
World Vision International
11
Program Coordinator
CARE
12
Emergency Team Leader
IOM
13
Executive Director
Transparency International Nepal
14
Deputy Log cluster
Logistics Cluster
15
Information Coordinator
Save the Children International
16
Response Team Leader
British Red Cross
References
Acimovic, J., & Goentzel, J. (2016). Models and metrics to assess humanitarian response capacity. Journal of
Operations Management, 45, 11–29.
Agarwal, S., Kant, R., & Shankar, R. (2019). Humanitarian supply chain management frameworks: A critical
literature review and framework for future development. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 26(6),
1749–1780.
Agarwal, S., Kant, R., & Shankar, R. (2020). Humanitarian supply chain management: a systematic literature
review and directions for future research. International Journal of Emergency Management, 16(2), 111–
151.
Ahmadi, M., Seiﬁ, A., & Tootooni, B. (2015). A humanitarian logistics model for disaster relief operation
considering network failure and standard relief time: A case study on san francisco district. Transportation
Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 75, 145–163.
Akhtar P (2018) Challenges and opportunities for humanitarian researchers: Dreadful biases and heavenly
combinations of mixed methods. In: The Palgrave Handbook of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply
Chain Management, Springer, pp 121–147
Anaya-Arenas, A. M., Renaud, J., & Ruiz, A. (2014). Relief distribution networks: a systematic review. Annals
of Operations Research, 223(1), 53–79.
Baharmand H, Comes T (2015) A framework for shelter location decisions by ant colony optimization. In: The
12th International Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management (ISCRAM),
University of Agder, pp 941–948
Baharmand, H., Boersma, K., Meesters, K., Mulder, F., & Wolbers, J. (2016). A multidisciplinary perspective
on supporting community disaster resilience in nepal. In A. H. Tapia, P. Antunes, V. A. Banuls, K. Moore,
& J. Porto (Eds.), The 13th International Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and
Management (ISCRAM). Federal University of Rio De Janeiro.
Baharmand, H., Comes, T., & Lauras, M. (2019). Bi-objective multi-layer location-allocation model for the
immediate aftermath of sudden-onset disasters. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Trans-
portation Review, 127, 86–110.
Baharmand, H., Comes, T., & Lauras, M. (2020). Supporting group decision makers to locate temporary relief
distribution centres after sudden-onset disasters: A case study of the 2015 nepal earthquake. International
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 45(101), 455.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1225
Balci O, Gass S (2013) Veriﬁcation, validation and testing of models. Encyclopedia of operations research
and management science pp 1618–1627
Banomyong, R., Varadejsatitwong, P., & Oloruntoba, R. (2019). A systematic review of humanitarian opera-
tions, humanitarian logistics and humanitarian supply chain performance literature 2005 to 2016. Annals
of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 71–86.
Behl, A., & Dutta, P. (2019). Humanitarian supply chain management: a thematic literature review and future
directions of research. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 1001–1044.
Behl A, Dutta P, Luo Z, Sheorey P (2021) Enabling artiﬁcial intelligence on a donation-based crowdfunding
platform: a theoretical approach. Annals of Operations Research pp 1–29
Besiou, M., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2020). Humanitarian operations: A world of opportunity for relevant
and impactful research. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 22(1), 135–145.
Besiou M, Van Wassenhove LN (2021) System dynamics for humanitarian operations revisited. Journal of
Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management
Besiou, M., Pedraza-Martinez, A. J., & Wassenhove, L. N. V. (2018). Or applied to humanitarian operations.
European Journal of Operational Research, 269(2), 397–405.
Boonmee, C., Arimura, M., & Asada, T. (2017). Facility location optimization model for emergency humani-
tarian logistics. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 24, 485–498.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology,
3(2), 77–101.
Bruno, W., & Haar, R. J. (2020). A systematic literature review of the ethics of conducting research in the
humanitarian setting. Conﬂict and health, 14, 1–17.
Cao, C., Li, C., Yang, Q., Liu, Y., & Qu, T. (2018). A novel multi-objective programming model of relief
distribution for sustainable disaster supply chain in large-scale natural disasters. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 174, 1422–1435.
Cassell, C., & Symon, G. (2006). Taking qualitative methods in organization and management research seri-
ously. Qualitative research in organizations and management: an international journal, 1(1), 4–12.
Chan, J., & Comes, T. (2014). Innovative research design-a journey into the information typhoon. Procedia
Engineering, 78, 52–58.
Charles, A., & Lauras, M. (2011). An enterprise modelling approach for better optimisation modelling: appli-
cation to the humanitarian relief chain coordination problem. OR spectrum, 33(3), 815–841.
Charles, A., Lauras, M., Van Wassenhove, L. N., & Dupont, L. (2016). Designing an efﬁcient humanitarian
supply network. Journal of Operations Management, 47, 58–70.
Comes T (2016) Cognitive biases in humanitarian sensemaking and decision-making lessons from ﬁeld
research. In: Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and Decision Support (CogSIMA), 2016 IEEE
International Multi-Disciplinary Conference on, IEEE, pp 56–62
Comes, T., Van de Walle, B., & Van Wassenhove, L. (2020). The coordination-information bubble in
humanitarian response: theoretical foundations and empirical investigations. Production and Operations
Management, 29(11), 2484–2507.
Crumbly, J., & Carter, L. (2015). Social media and humanitarian logistics: The impact of task-technology ﬁt
on new service development. Procedia Engineering, 107, 412–416.
Day, J. M. (2014). Fostering emergent resilience: the complex adaptive supply network of disaster relief.
International Journal of Production Research, 52(7), 1970–1988.
De Vries, H., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2020). Do optimization models for humanitarian operations need a
paradigm shift? Production and Operations Management, 29(1), 55–61.
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., & Papadopoulos, T. (2019). Disaster relief operations: past, present and future.
Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 1–8.
Dubey R, Bryde DJ, Foropon C, Graham G, Giannakis M, Mishra DB (2020) Agility in humanitarian supply
chain: an organizational information processing perspective and relational view. Annals of Operations
Research pp 1–21
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Fosso Wamba, S., Roubaud, D., & Foropon, C. (2021). Empirical
investigation of data analytics capability and organizational ﬂexibility as complements to supply chain
resilience. International Journal of Production Research, 59(1), 110–128.
Dufour, É., Laporte, G., Paquette, J., & Rancourt, M. È. (2018). Logistics service network design for human-
itarian response in east africa. Omega, 74, 1–14.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of management review, 14(4),
532–550.
Ellram, L. M. (1996). The use of the case study method in logistics research. Journal of Business Logistics,
17(2), 93–138.
Elo, S., & Kyngäs, H. (2008). The qualitative content analysis process. Journal of advanced nursing, 62(1),
107–115.
123

1226
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
Fereday, J., & Muir-Cochrane, E. (2006). Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: A hybrid approach of
inductive and deductive coding and theme development. International journal of qualitative methods,
5(1), 80–92.
Fikar, C., Gronalt, M., & Hirsch, P. (2016). A decision support system for coordinated disaster relief distribu-
tion. Expert Systems with Applications, 57, 104–116.
Flyvbjerg, B. (2006). Five misunderstandings about case-study research. Qualitative Inquiry, 12(2), 219–245.
Galindo, G., & Batta, R. (2013). Review of recent developments in or/ms research in disaster operations
management. European Journal of Operational Research, 230(2), 201–211.
Gammelgaard, B. (2017). The qualitative case study. The International Journal of Logistics Management,
28(4), 910–913.
Giannakis M, Dubey R, Yan S, Spanaki K, Papadopoulos T (2020) Social media and sensemaking patterns
in new product development: demystifying the customer sentiment. Annals of Operations Research pp
1–31
Gralla, E., Goentzel, J., & Fine, C. (2014). Assessing trade-offs among multiple objectives for humanitarian
aid delivery using expert preferences. Production and Operations Management, 23(6), 978–989.
Gralla, E., Goentzel, J., & Fine, C. (2016). Problem formulation and solution mechanisms: a behavioral study
of humanitarian transportation planning. Production and operations management, 25(1), 22–35.
Guba, E., & Lincoln, Y. (1989). Fourth Generation Evaluation. Newbury Park: SAGE.
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1994). Competing paradigms in qualitative research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S.
Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research (pp. 105–117). California: Sage Publications.
Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Fosso Wamba, S., Papadopoulos, T., Hazen, B. T., & Ngai, E. W. (2018). Bridging
humanitarian operations management and organisational theory. International Journal of Production
Research, 56(21), 6735–6740.
Gupta, S., Starr, M. K., Farahani, R. Z., & Matinrad, N. (2016). Disaster management from a pom perspective:
Mapping a new domain. Production and Operations Management, 25(10), 1611–1637.
Gutjahr, W. J., & Nolz, P. C. (2016). Multicriteria optimization in humanitarian aid. European Journal of
Operational Research, 252(2), 351–366.
Habib MS, Lee YH, Memon MS (2016) Mathematical models in humanitarian supply chain management: a
systematic literature review. Mathematical Problems in Engineering
Halldorsson, A., & Aastrup, J. (2003). Quality criteria for qualitative inquiries in logistics. European Journal
of Operational Research, 144, 321–322.
Handﬁeld, R., & Melnyk, S. (1998). The scientiﬁc theory-building process: a primer using the case of tqm.
Journal of Operations Management, 16, 321–339.
Holguín-Veras, J., Pérez, N., Ukkusuri, S., & Wachtendorf, T. (2022). Brown B (2007) Emergency logis-
tics issues affecting the response to katrina: a synthesis and preliminary suggestions for improvement.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1, 76–82.
Holguín-Veras, J., Jaller, M., Van Wassenhove, L. N., Pérez, N., & Wachtendorf, T. (2012). On the unique
features of post-disaster humanitarian logistics. Journal of Operations Management, 30(7), 494–506.
Holguín-Veras, J., Jaller, M., & Wachtendorf, T. (2012). Comparative performance of alternative humanitarian
logistic structures after the port-au-prince earthquake: Aces, pies, and cans. Transportation research part
A: policy and practice, 46(10), 1623–1640.
Holguín-Veras, J., Pérez, N., Jaller, M., Van Wassenhove, L. N., & Aros-Vera, F. (2013). On the appropriate
objective function for post-disaster humanitarian logistics models. Journal of Operations Management,
31(5), 262–280.
Holguín-Veras, J., Amaya-Leal, J., Cantillo, V., Van Wassenhove, L. N., Aros-Vera, F., & Jaller, M. (2016).
Econometric estimation of deprivation cost functions: A contingent valuation experiment. Journal of
Operations Management, 45, 44–56.
Holsti, O. (1969). Content Analysis for the Social Sciences and Humanities. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Hsieh, H. F., & Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qualitative health
research, 15(9), 1277–1288.
Jabbour, C. J. C., Sobreiro, V. A., de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. L., de Souza Campos, L. M., Mariano, E. B.,
& Renwick, D. W. S. (2019). An analysis of the literature on humanitarian logistics and supply chain
management: paving the way for future studies. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 289–307.
Johnson, R. B., Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Turner, L. A. (2007). Toward a deﬁnition of mixed methods research.
Journal of mixed methods research, 1(2), 112–133.
Kelle, U. (2006). Combining qualitative and quantitative methods in research practice: purposes and advan-
tages. Qualitative research in psychology, 3(4), 293–311.
Kovacs, G., & Moshtari, M. (2019). A roadmap for higher research quality in humanitarian operations: A
methodological perspective. European Journal of Operational Research, 276(2), 395–408.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1227
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. M. (2007). Logistics theory building. The Icfai Journal of Supply Chain Management,
4(4), 7–27.
Kovacs, G., Moshtari, M., Kachali, H., & Polsa, P. (2019). Research methods in humanitarian logistics. Journal
of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 9(3), 325–331.
Kunz, N. (2019). An automated quantitative content analysis process for humanitarian logistics research.
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 9(3), 475–491.
Kunz, N., & Reiner, G. (2012). A meta-analysis of humanitarian logistics research. Journal of Humanitarian
Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 2(2), 116–147.
Kunz, N., Van Wassenhove, L. N., Besiou, M., Hambye, C., & Kovacs, G. (2017). Relevance of humanitarian
logistics research: best practices and way forward. International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, 37(11), 1585–1599.
Laguna Salvadó, L., Lauras, M., & Comes, T. (2015). Humanitarian value stream mapping: Application to
the ebola outbreak. In L. Palen, M. Buscher, T. Comes, & A. Hughes (Eds.), The 12th International
Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management (ISCRAM). University of
Agder.
Laguna-Salvadó, L., Lauras, M., Okongwu, U., & Comes, T. (2019). A multicriteria master planning dss for
a sustainable humanitarian supply chain. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 1303–1343.
Leiras, A., de Brito, Jr. I., Queiroz Peres, E., Rejane Bertazzo, T., & Tsugunobu Yoshida Yoshizaki, H. (2014).
Literature review of humanitarian logistics research: trends and challenges. Journal of Humanitarian
Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 4(1), 95–130.
L’Hermitte, C., Tatham, P., Bowles, M., & Brooks, B. (2016). Developing organisational capabilities to support
agility in humanitarian logistics. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 6(1),
72–99.
Lin, Y. H., Batta, R., Rogerson, P. A., Blatt, A., & Flanigan, M. (2012). Location of temporary depots to
facilitate relief operations after an earthquake. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 46(2), 112–123.
Lukosch, H., & Comes, T. (2019). Gaming as a research method in humanitarian logistics. Journal of Human-
itarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 9(3), 352–370.
Maharjan, R., & Hanaoka, S. (2018). A multi-actor multi-objective optimization approach for locating tem-
porary logistics hubs during disaster response. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain
Management, 8(1), 2–21.
Manuj, I., & Mentzer, J. (2008). Global supply chain risk management strategies. International Journal of
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 38(3), 192–223.
Meredith, J. R., Raturi, A., Amoako-Gyampah, K., & Kaplan, B. (1989). Alternative research paradigms in
operations. Journal of operations management, 8(4), 297–326.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook. Thousand
Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Mills, A. J., Durepos, G., & Wiebe, E. (2010). Encyclopedia of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE.
Government of Nepal G (2015) Nepal earthquake 2015: Post disaster needs assessment. Report, http://www.
reliefweb.it
Noyan, N., Balcik, B., & Atakan, S. (2015). A stochastic optimization model for designing last mile relief
networks. Transportation Science, 50(3), 1092–1113.
Oloruntoba, R., Hossain, G. F., & Wagner, B. (2019). Theory in humanitarian operations research. Annals of
Operations Research, 283(1–2), 543–560.
Orgut, I. S., Ivy, J., Uzsoy, R., & Wilson, J. R. (2016). Modeling for the equitable and effective distribution of
donated food under capacity constraints. IIE Transactions, 48(3), 252–266.
Özdamar, L., & Ertem, M. A. (2015). Models, solutions and enabling technologies in humanitarian logistics.
European Journal of Operational Research, 244(1), 55–65.
Palen, L., & Anderson, K. M. (2016). Crisis informatics-new data for extraordinary times. Science, 353(6296),
224–225.
Patton, M. (2002). Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Pedraza-Martinez, A. J., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2016). Empirically grounded research in humanitarian
operations management: The way forward. Journal of Operations Management, 45(1), 1–10.
Pedrosa, A., Näslund, D., & Jasmand, C. (2012). Logistics case study based research: towards higher quality.
International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 42(3), 275–295.
Pilny, A., McAninch, K., Slone, A., & Moore, K. (2019). Using supervised machine learning in automated
content analysis: An example using relational uncertainty. Communication Methods and Measures, 13(4),
287–304.
Powell, P. J. (2011). Post-disaster reconstruction: A current analysis of gujarat’s response after the 2001
earthquake. Environmental hazards, 10(3–4), 279–292.
123

1228
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
Saltelli, A., Ratto, M., Andres, T., Campolongo, F., Cariboni, J., Gatelli, D., Saisana, M., & Tarantola, S.
(2008). Global sensitivity analysis: the primer. John Wiley & Sons.
Sandelowski, M., & Leeman, J. (2012). Writing usable qualitative health research ﬁndings. Qualitative Health
Research, 22, 1404–1413.
Seifert, L., Kunz, N., & Gold, S. (2018). Humanitarian supply chain management responding to refugees: a
literature review. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 8(3), 398–426.
Seuring, S., & Gold, S. (2012). Conducting content-analysis based literature reviews in supply chain manage-
ment. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 17(5), 544–555.
Shannon-Baker, P. (2016). Making paradigms meaningful in mixed methods research. Journal of mixed meth-
ods research, 10(4), 319–334.
Spens, K. M., & Kovács, G. (2006). A content analysis of research approaches in logistics research. Interna-
tional Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 36(5), 374–390.
Starr, M. K., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2014). Introduction to the special issue on humanitarian operations
and crisis management. Production and Operations Management, 23(6), 925–937.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.
Newbury Park, CA: SAGE.
Sushil,. (2019). Theory building using sap-lap linkages: an application in the context of disaster management.
Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 811–836.
Tacheva, Z., & Simpson, N. (2019). Social network analysis in humanitarian logistics research. Journal of
Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 9(3), 492–514.
Tashakkori, A., & Creswell, J. W. (2007). Editorial: The new era of mixed methods. Journal of Mixed Methods
Research, 1(1), 3–7.
Trivedi, A., & Singh, A. (2018). Facility location in humanitarian relief: A review. International Journal of
Emergency Management, 14(3), 213–232.
Tsoukiàs, A. (2008). From decision theory to decision aiding methodology. European Journal of Operational
Research, 187(1), 138–161.
Tzeng, G. H., Cheng, H. J., & Huang, T. D. (2007). Multi-objective optimal planning for designing relief
delivery systems. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 43(6), 673–
686.
Vaismoradi, M., Turunen, H., & Bondas, T. (2006). Content analysis and thematic analysis: Implications for
conducting a qualitative descriptive study. Nursing & Health Sciences, 5(3), 398–405.
Vega, D. (2018). Case studies in humanitarian logistics research. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply
Chain Management, 8(2), 134–152.
Vega D (2018b) Conducting in-depth case studies in humanitarian logistics: The case of msfs. In: The Palgrave
Handbook of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, Springer, pp 179–202
Vega, D., & Roussat, C. (2015). Humanitarian logistics: The role of logistics service providers. International
Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 45(4), 352–375.
Vega, D., & Roussat, C. (2019). Toward a conceptualization of humanitarian service providers. International
Journal of Logistics Management, 30(4), 929–957.
Vitoriano, B., Ortuño, M. T., Tirado, G., & Montero, J. (2011). A multi-criteria optimization model for
humanitarian aid distribution. Journal of Global Optimization, 51(2), 189–208.
Wacker, J. G. (1998). A deﬁnition of theory: research guidelines for different theory-building research methods
in operations management. Journal of operations management, 16(4), 361–385.
Van de Walle, B., & Comes, T. (2014). Risk accelerators in disasters. In M. Jarke, J. Mylopoulos, C. Quix,
C. Rolland, Y. Manolopoulos, H. Mouratidis, & J. Horkoff (Eds.), Advanced Information Systems Engi-
neering (pp. 12–23). Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Wamba, S. F., Edwards, A., & Akter, S. (2019). Social media adoption and use for improved emergency
services operations: The case of the nsw ses. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 225–245.
Weathers, J., Luck, R., & Weathers, J. (2009). An exercise in model validation: Comparing univariate statistics
and monte carlo-based multivariate statistics. Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 94(11), 1695–
1702.
Wolbers, J., Boersma, K., & Groenewegen, P. (2018). Introducing a fragmentation perspective on coordination
in crisis management. Organization Studies, 39(11), 1521–1546.
Yin, R. (2009). Case Study Research - Design and Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Zandkarimkhani, S., Mina, H., Biuki, M., & Govindan, K. (2020). A chance constrained fuzzy goal pro-
gramming approach for perishable pharmaceutical supply chain network design. Annals of Operations
Research, 295(1), 425–452.
Zissman, M., Evans, J., Holcomb, K., Jones, D., Kercher, M., Mineweaser, J., Schiff, A., Shattuck, M., Gralla,
E., Goentzel, J., et al. (2014). Development and use of a comprehensive humanitarian assessment tool in
post-earthquake haiti. Procedia Engineering, 78, 10–21.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1197–1229
1229
Zokaee, S., Bozorgi-Amiri, A., & Sadjadi, S. J. (2016). A robust optimization model for humanitarian relief
chain design under uncertainty. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 40(17), 7996–8016.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123