TITLE: Exploring big data-driven innovation in the manufacturing sector: evidence from UK firms
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04077-1
---

Vol.:(0123456789)
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04077-1
1 3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Exploring big data‑driven innovation in the manufacturing 
sector: evidence from UK firms
Mujahid Mohiuddin Babu1 · Mahfuzur Rahman2   · Ashraful Alam3 · Bidit Lal Dey4
Accepted: 8 April 2021 / Published online: 21 April 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Although innovation from analytics is surging in the manufacturing sector, the understand-
ing of the data-driven innovation (DDI) process remains a challenge. Drawing on a sys-
tematic literature review, thematic analysis and qualitative interview findings, this study 
presents a seven-step process to understand DDI in the context of the UK manufacturing 
sector. The findings discuss the significance of critical seven-step in DDI, ranging from 
conceptualisation to commercialisation of innovative data products. The results reveal that 
the steps in DDI are sequential, but they are all interlinked. The proposed seven-step DDI 
process with solid evidence from the UK manufacturing and research implications based 
on dynamic capability theory, institutional theory and TOE framework establish the build-
ing blocks for future studies and industry practice.
Keywords  Big data analytics · Data-driven innovation (DDI) · Data products · Data 
governance
1  Introduction
The impact of big data analytics (BDA) on organizational outcomes, particularly in manu-
facturing and service contexts, has received incessant attention from both academia and 
practice. Different complementary trends and digital technologies, such as the diffusion of 
 * Mahfuzur Rahman 
 
marahman@lincoln.ac.uk
 
Mujahid Mohiuddin Babu 
 
ac44691@covenry.ac.uk
 
Ashraful Alam 
 
m.a.alam@salford.ac.uk
 
Bidit Lal Dey 
 
Bidit.Dey@brunel.ac.uk
1 
Coventry University, Coventry, UK
2 
University of Lincoln, Lincoln, UK
3 
Salford University, Manchester, UK
4 
Brunel University, London, UK

690
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
smart devices, social network platforms, the improvement and diffusion of cloud comput-
ing and Internet of Things have been considered relevant to enable and enhance the BDA 
phenomenon (e.g. Dumbill, 2013). In the current day business environment, BDA has been 
regarded as the fastest emerging momentum which has implications for various organiza-
tional opportunities such as, business intelligence and cognitive computing, business inno-
vation and overall performance (Akter et al., 2020; Davenport & Kudyba, 2016; Delen & 
Demirkan, 2013; Dubey et al., 2019; Moktadir et al., 2019).
The manufacturing literature broadly conceptualizes BDA as the organization’s analyti-
cal capability to collect, process, analyze and interpret large datasets to extract out insights 
relevant for effective decision making and operational performance (Akter et  al., 2016; 
Minelli et al., 2013; Moktadir et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018; Wang & Hajli, 2017). The 
traditional manufacturing industries are now transformed by the application of data-driven 
revolution and BDA. As a result, new manufacturing industries have better efficiency and 
accuracy that can have a positive impact across the entire organisation in terms of pro-
cess and product innovation and operational efficiency (O’Donovan, 2015). Because of the 
exponential advances in information and communication technology (ICT) such as artifi-
cial intelligence, blockchain, cloud computing and the internet of things (IoT), manufactur-
ing industry is inundated with vast amount of global data (Waller & Fawcett, 2013; Wang 
et al., 2016). Such a big amount of data enhances the manufacturing organization’s capabil-
ity not only to make informed decisions, alleviate risks, improve operational procedures but 
also to facilitate data-driven innovation such as, conducting market analyses for particular 
products, introducing new products or upgrading existing product lines (Dubey et al., 2016, 
2019; Moktadir et al., 2019; Schoenherr & Speier-Pero, 2015; Zhong et al., 2016).
Over the last decade, due to a more pervasive and ubiquitous diffusion of digital tech-
nologies, digital innovation has now entered its golden age (Fichman et al., 2014). BDA, 
Internet of Things and other technological developments allow companies to gather a 
considerable amount and variety of data which would trigger a meaningful direction to 
innovate within a company and have a significant impact on innovation management 
(Trabucchi & Buganza, 2019; Trabucchi et al., 2018). In the manufacturing sector, data is 
abundant in large volume due to the diffusion of smart technologies, devices, and applica-
tions. Moreover, the growth and ease of operations of cloud computing have enabled the 
organizations to gain access, store, retrieve big data. Furthermore, manufacturers can have 
large application, conditional and usage data from their produced smart products through 
IoT which converges different technology, objects, integrated technology, and semantic 
approach. Such a big amount of data and computational power have enabled the organiza-
tions to facilitate data-driven innovation. Despite the enormous growth of big data research 
in academia and practice, exploiting BDA for enhancing innovation in the manufacturing 
sector is still unexplored. Indeed, the extant literature has reported a dramatic decline of 
competitive advantage with big data analytics in recent years due to its lack of innova-
tion, value or productivity. Specifically, little is known about the effective utilisation of big 
data for developing data products in manufacturing. Consequently, this study is an initial 
attempt towards bridging this knowledge gap identified in the literature. More precisely, 
drawing on the recent research agenda, this study examines the following research ques-
tion: what is the data-driven innovation process in the manufacturing sector?
To answer the above mentioned research question, the paper presents a framework to 
understand the data-driven innovation process drawing on a systematic literature review, 
thematic analysis and qualitative interviews (n = 23). We propose a seven-step pro-
cess with examples in the manufacturing sector in the UK. The UK manufacturing sec-
tor plays a very significant role which is appreciated by the government particularly for 

691
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
the contribution to innovation and exports (Xu et al., 2018). During the Covid-19 Pan-
demic, many UK manufacturers renovated their factories to support ongoing health sys-
tem reforms. The UK government is now more committed to enhance the capacity of the 
manufacturing sector by incorporating the other sectors through inter-industry linkages and 
the employment of highly skilled labour. There are four major sections in the paper. First, 
we present the theoretical framework for data-driven innovation using dynamic capabil-
ity theory, institutional theory and technology–organisation–innovation theory. Second, we 
discuss the methodological foundations based on a systematic review, thematic analysis 
and in-depth interviews. Finally, we present the findings of data-driven innovation with a 
future research agenda.
Our study offers several contributions. First, this study applies the concept of BDA in 
the manufacturing sector. Manufacturing firms encompass multiple processes in develop-
ing a product, thereby they offer a distinct setting to analyze the application of BDA. Our 
paper finds that BDA can be utilized for enhancing innovation in the manufacturing sector. 
Second, we offer a theoretical contribution. We apply a multi-theoretical approach wherein 
DCT, institutional theory and TOE framework are utilized to understand DDI in manu-
facturing firms. Our findings suggest that organization’s capabilities and stakeholder fac-
tors play a part in DDI, thereby contributing to DCT and institutional theory respectively. 
Further, this study supports the view that the process, consisting of technology, organiza-
tion and environment, acts as a factor in DDI, which contributes to the TOE framework. 
Third, this study provides deeper insights into the seven-step process of DDI by apply-
ing triangulation. Such an approach involves multiple analysis methods, thereby provid-
ing more robust evidence on the seven-step process of DDI. Therefore, we also contribute 
to the DDI literature. Finally, this study makes methodological contributions by adopting 
multiple methods consisting of systematic literature review, thematic analysis and semi-
structured interviews. Combination of multiple methods confirms reliability and robustness 
of the research process.
2  Theoretical framework
2.1  Dynamic capabilities theory
The dynamic capability theory (DCT) suggests that the organizations build, integrate, 
reconfigure their internal and external resources and capabilities to effectively innovate 
its operational procedure or market offering with a view systematically innovates its way 
of doing things and adapt to changes in the marketplace (Ambrosini et al., 2009; Teece, 
2007; Zollo & Winter, 2002). DCT has been developed as an extension to resource-based 
view (RBV) to explain the underlying reasons and process how firms can be more innova-
tive in developing competitive advantage in response to the rapid changes in the business 
market (Eisenhardt & Martin, 2000; Kumar et al., 2016; Teece et al., 1997). According to 
RBV, firm resources could be categorized as managerial, input-based, transformational and 
output-based (Menguc & Auh, 2006). As an extension of the RBV, DCT posits that organi-
zations continuously develop new resources and/or new ways of utilizing existing resources 
to achieve new and innovative forms of a competitive advantage given their resources, path 
dependencies, and market positions (Teece et al., 1997).
The key to DCT is that it enables the organization to innovate constantly in environmen-
tal uncertainties, which are regarded as an important factor in the current age of data-driven 

692
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
technology. In the data-driven digital environment, BDA is regarded as one of the most 
valuable resources which will be key to design any innovation which has implications for 
the firm’s competitive advantage (Kumar et al., 2016). To facilitate innovation, DC, even-
tually, fosters new thinking within the firm by combining skills, data, technologies and 
expertise to create revenue-producing products and services (Braganza et al., 2017). The 
firm’s DC is enhanced when the firm uses novel consumer insight extracted from Big Data 
to understand and meet customers’ unmet needs. Manufacturing firms that are operating 
in a dynamic big data environment need to focus on developing strong analytics capabil-
ities with a view to adapting and innovating with market and technology developments 
(Teece, 2014). In BDA research, scholars have most commonly used RBV (Aydiner et al., 
2019), DCT (Akter et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2015), organizational information processing 
theory (Srinivasan & Swink, 2018) in achieving competitive advantage and performance. 
In a recent study, Dubey et al. (2019) have integrated three theoretical perspectives such as 
RBV, institutional theory and organizational culture to examine the relationship between 
institutional factors and resources of the firm and operational performance.
2.2  Institutional theory
The core of the Institutional theory explains changes in the organization while emphasizing 
the role of the institutional environment in shaping the actions of the organization (Tina 
Dacin et al., 2002). About the adoption of innovation, institutional theory highlights the 
effect of external environmental factors and the organization’s capability and organizational 
goals (Oliver, 1997). As a result, firms in the same industry, for example in a manufactur-
ing context, have to imitate the actions of industry leaders in designing and adopting inno-
vation to survive and succeed (Sun et al., 2018). According to this theory, also as evident 
in prior literature, pressures from stakeholders can potentially influence the organization’s 
decision to adopt big data which have implications for innovation (Dubey et al., 2019). 
Moreover, institutional theory advocates micro-sociological approaches which empha-
size on internal dynamic capabilities of the organization. There exists a strong connection 
between institutional theory, DCT and RBV as institutional theory assumes that external 
environmental factors have exerted significant influence on the organizations whereas, as 
per RBV and DCT, organizations try to develop their resources and capabilities to optimize 
the available economic opportunities. Dubey et al. (2019) argued that institutional pres-
sures affect positively firm resources, which further help the organization’s to build BDA 
capability to innovate.
3  Technology–organization–environment framework
The technology–organization–environment framework (TOE) would be another key fac-
tor to explain the theoretical context of this study. TOE suggests the process by which the 
organization’s innovation initiative is influenced by the technology, organization and envi-
ronment contexts (Tornatzky et al., 1990). The technology context comprises of necessary 
equipment and processes and their related internal and external technological capabilities 
and resources such as BDA, which have significant influence over the technological innova-
tion itself. The organization context refers to the organization’s resources, capabilities and 
other characteristics, whereas the environmental context encompasses the organization’s 
macroeconomic context (Sun et al., 2018). For this study, the TOE framework provides the 

693
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
overarching theoretical foundation for our analysis as it complements the DCT and institu-
tional theory.
For this study the dynamic capability theory (DCT) of firms would provide a useful 
theoretical framework for understanding the sources of firms’ strengths and the processes 
through which firms build, integrate, reconfigure their data-driven resources and capabili-
ties to effectively innovate its operational procedure or market offering (Ambrosini et al., 
2009; Teece, 2007; Zollo & Winter, 2002). Institutional theory is key as it considers the 
environmental factors and organization’s capability and goals in materializing DDI in 
the context of the manufacturing industry, in line with DCT. And TOE will provide an 
overarching framework which would emphasize the process, comprised of technology, 
organization and environment, to facilitate the organization’s innovation initiative. In BDA 
literature, several studies have adopted a multi-theory approach to explaining a complex 
process systematically (Dubey et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2018), therefore, we integrated the 
above-mentioned three approaches, DCT, institutional theory and the TOE framework, to 
explain organizational adoption and intra-organizational data-driven innovation diffusion 
more effectively.
4  Literature review
4.1  Definition of BDA
The growth of digital technology, the diffusion of smart devices, social network platforms, 
and cloud computing, and other growing trends such as the Internet of Things and Internet 
of People have played a key role as data generators (Trabucchi & Buganza, 2019). As a 
result, firms have to deal with huge sets of unstructured data along with structured data. 
These unstructured set of big data are being generated because of the users’ online activi-
ties that include web navigation, clicks, likes, links, blogging, voices; whereas, structured 
data are generated through the users’ demographic variables such as name, age, gender, 
date of birth, address, and preferences. One of the biggest challenges in the BDA environ-
ment is to deal with both types of data in order to generate meaningful insights (Akter & 
Wamba, 2016).
In the extant literature, BDA is generally defined as the vast and complex set of data that 
require specialized management tools to capture, store, manage and process efficiently (Hu 
et al., 2014; Madden, 2012; Manyika, 2011). Although the definition hardly does impose 
any restriction on the data size in terms of any quantifiable metrics, because of the tech-
nological advancement, it incorporates a dynamic aspect about the size and length of the 
data-set to qualify as big data (Lamba & Singh, 2017). While defining BDA, some authors 
emphasized the variety of data sources; whereas others stressed on storage and analysis 
requirements of dealing with big data (Akter & Wamba, 2016). In the absence of any con-
crete conceptual definition, researcher have attempted to define BDA from various perspec-
tives which resulted in that the concept has incorporated various dimensions which include 
greater scope and volume of information; new category of data and analysis; real-time 
information; data from non-traditional forms such as social media; new technology-driven 
data; the latest buzz word (Schroeck et al., 2012).
Akter and Wamba (2016) argued that the academicians and practitioners widely 
view that big data can be comprehended according to four Vs—Volume, Velocity, Vari-
ety and Value. These dimensions were later elaborated to six—Vs, including veracity, 

694
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
value, and variability (Gandomi & Haider, 2015). The volume attribute represents the 
vast magnitude of data that the firms collect from dynamic, heterogeneous, and ubiqui-
tous resources and devices. These diverse sources and devices enable the collection of 
‘varieties’ of data which are structured, semi-structured or unstructured in nature (Gan-
domi & Haider, 2015). Velocity refers to the speed at which data are generated, poten-
tially analysed and acted upon for further application (Akter et al., 2019). The value of 
big data refers to its economic value that can be extracted from structured and unstruc-
tured data. Variability refers to the variation in the speed of data flow which is caused 
by the inconsistent velocity of big data (Gandomi & Haider, 2015). Veracity refers to 
uncertainty and unreliability in the data set caused by the complex, inconsistent and 
anonymous nature of the data.
4.2  BDA and data driven innovation
Data-driven innovation (DDI) is regarded as an emerging approach by the academics 
and professionals, to enhance innovation in companies by acquiring, analyzing and act-
ing upon consumer data (Riikkinen et  al., 2018; Rindfleisch et  al. 2017). DDI refers 
to the innovation process that adopts techniques and technologies for processing and 
analysing big data using data-based decision processes. In this case, data plays a key 
role to the firm’s innovation activities by providing knowledge about manufacturing and 
operational processes, customers, human capital and technology significant to enter-
prise (Bharadwaj & Noble, 2015; McAfee et al., 2012). DDI relies on the context of 
knowledge-based capital associated with digital information, innovative capacity and 
economic aspects (OECD, 2015). This is quite evident that the analysis of big data pro-
vides insights to generate valuable knowledge which influences the performance of the 
organization by providing a competitive advantage in an enterprise through new ways 
of productivity, growth, innovation and consumer surplus (Manyika, 2011; McAfee 
et al., 2012; OECD, 2015). Organizations which have been most successful with analyt-
ics capitalized on analytics to create a competitive advantage and innovative ideas or 
marketing offer. For these organizations, data is a core asset generated from different 
sources such as customers, partners, suppliers and even competitors (Kiron et al., 2014).
Recent research findings have demonstrated the implication of BDA on different 
kinds of innovations, from process to product, from architecture to a modular base 
(Caputo et al., 2016; George & Lin, 2017; Ransbotham & Kiron, 2017; Trabucchi & 
Buganza, 2019). BDA can not only facilitate an open innovation strategy to explore 
various business opportunities but also expand the operation of the company by pursu-
ing business model innovation, customer centricity, data orientation management and 
the implementation of agile practices (Del Vecchio et al., 2018; Trabucchi et al., 2018; 
Troilo et al., 2017). Findings from Trabucchi and Buganza (2019) suggest that compa-
nies can leverage the opportunities provided by the BDA and the pervasive diffusion of 
sensors to gather a specific kind of data and therefore to design an entire system and 
business model around the need of data. Rindfleisch et al. (2017) argued that DDI ena-
bles the companies to exploit their value and enable a particular kind of product inno-
vation enabled by the chance to gather and analyze data. Companies, such as General 
Electric, Google, IBM, Airbnb, and Uber, Bridgestone and Nedbank Group Ltd, use 
strong analytics capabilities to carry out DDIs not only for existing operations but also 
in developing new processes, products, services, and entire business models.

695
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
Despite the positive implication of BDA for innovation, many firms failed to capi-
talize the idea on how they can leverage big data as a capability to generate innova-
tion success in dynamic marketplaces (Johnson et al., 2017). Apart from infrastructural 
issues, unavailability of skilled people is another significant obstacle to adopt a data-
driven approach through BDA. People, high levels of technical skills in statistics and 
IT play a key role to use and exploit these systems and to get valuable insights from big 
data (Kopanakis et al., 2016).
4.3  BDA in manufacturing
BDA is one of the recent technological advances which have strong applicability for DDI 
in almost every industry, including manufacturing (Babiceanu & Seker, 2016; Moktadir 
et al., 2019). Data-driven revolution promises to transform conventional manufacturing 
facilities into highly optimised smart manufacturing facilities that generate intelligence 
from a big scale of real-time data. These data support help the management to make 
an accurate and timely decision for the smooth operation of the company (O’Donovan 
et al., 2015). In modern-day manufacturing, BDA provides the critical technical sup-
port to acquire, store, manage and analyze data which help the organizations in demand 
forecasting, quality control, scheduling and maintenance (Bi & Cochran, 2014; Lamba 
& Singh, 2017). In the manufacturing sector, BDA has implications in various stages of 
the product’s life-cycle, design innovation, manufacturing intelligence, cost reduction, 
quality, efficiency, and making effective promotion strategies (Li et al., 2015). However, 
as suggested by Dubey et al. (2019) and Moktadir et al. (2019), DDI has become more 
evident in the context of supply chain management in the manufacturing sector.
There are several leading manufacturing companies which have improved their pro-
duction processes and enhanced operational performance through BDA (Yadegaride-
hkordi et  al., 2018). Rolls-Royce carried out DDI to produce a higher gear with the 
Engine Health Monitoring Unit (EHMU) that collects data by the use of specific sen-
sors (Zhong et al., 2016). Wahoo Fitness, based in Atlanta, Georgia, relies on analytics 
to design innovative sports and fitness products, including workout apps, smartphone-
connected fitness devices, heart rate monitors, indoor smart-bike trainers, and GPS bike 
computers. Gore, a manufacturer of advanced materials based in Newark, Delaware, 
applied a data-driven research process to design its Gore-Tex waterproof fabric (Rans-
botham & Kiron, 2017). Raytheon Corp, a major U.S. manufacturer of weapons and 
military and commercial electronics has capitalised BDA to establish smart innovative 
manufacturing plants Although there are several examples of manufacturers’ adoption 
of BDA in designing innovation; however, the application of BDA in DDI is still in 
nascent stage in the manufacturing sector (Yadegaridehkordi et al., 2018). Using insight 
generated from BDA, large scale manufacturers like Volvo, Toyota and Xerox imple-
mented process innovation, built physical proto-type accurately, forecast component 
failure in advance, lowered production cost, minimized wastage and improved customer 
service (Young & Pollard, 2012). Vaccine manufacturing firm Merck applied BDA 
technique to crunch huge amounts of data to innovate the production process to pro-
duce vaccines faster and reduce the discard rates (Henschen, 2014). The use of BDA 
may reveal unexpected insights and further opportunities to enhance performance for 
the manufacturing operations that are considered best in class. An established European 
maker of functional and specialty chemicals for a number of industries, including paper, 
detergents, and metalworking achieved unexpected insights when the company applied 

696
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
advanced BDA techniqued such as neural-network techniques. The chemical company 
was able to reduce its waste of raw materials by 20% and its energy costs by around 
15%, thereby improving overall yield. Similarly, a top-five biopharmaceuticals company 
applied BDA to significantly increase its vaccine production while incurring no addi-
tional capital expenditures (Auschitzky et al., 2014).
In case of facilitating innovation, in the context of manufacturing, internet of things 
(IoT) and BDA are connected to develop advanced manufacturing information system 
that not only generate an unprecedented level of data but also streamline the probable 
impediments and improve forecasting systems (Bi & Cochran, 2014; O’Donovan et al., 
2015). The core technologies of IoT such as RFID, Wireless Sensor networks, cloud 
computing play the key role (Yang et al., 2016). However from the manufacturing com-
pany’s point of view, the manufacturing facilities must be able to manage the demands 
of exponential increase in data production as there are many barriers to the adoption of 
BDA in manufacturing supply chains such as lack of infrastructure, complexity of data 
integration, data privacy, lack of availability of BDA tools and high cost of investment. 
The company must establish the infrastructure, recruit technical people and possess 
required analytical techniques to extract meaning from these large datasets (Moktadir 
et al., 2019; O’Donovan et al., 2015).
5  Methods
In this study, for collecting data, to identify the steps in DDI we adopted multiple methods 
consisting of systematic literature review, thematic analysis and semi-structured interviews. 
This enabled the triangulation of thematic analysis findings and 23 semi-structured inter-
views from the manufacturing sector in the UK to establish DDI steps. Triangulation is a 
robust method to reduce bias and ensure the validity of research findings through multiple 
analysis methods. For example, the findings from the thematic analysis were supported by 
qualitative interviews or people’s voices to capture rich insights and investigate how people 
interact with a particular setting, such as data-driven innovation in the manufacturing sec-
tor (Silverman, 2011; Skinner et al., 2000). Also, a combination of multiple methods estab-
lishes reliability and ensures methodological robustness in such research process (Fusch 
et al., 2018).
According to Schutt (2018, p. 13) “exploratory research seeks to find out how people 
get along in the setting under question, what meanings they give to their actions, and what 
issues concern them”—the aim is to understand “what is going on here”. Following the 
guidelines of Akter and Wamba (2016), Thomas and Leiponen (2016) in big data research 
and Tranfield et al. (2003) in management research, we first developed a systematic litera-
ture review approach to understand DDI. The objective at this stage was to discover and 
gather logical evidence pertinent to the research question. A robust systematic literature 
review method is critical to gather empirical and practical evidence regarding DDI (Sivara-
jah et al., 2017). As part of this process, the study uses the following research protocol in 
searching and identifying relevant publications from various databases.
First, we identified relevant search strings that consisted of the keywords ‘big data inno-
vation*’ and other related keywords, such as ‘new data product’ and ‘data-driven innova-
tion’ using wildcard symbols. The study focused on big data-driven innovation as a primary 
objective, and hence, search strings ‘analytics* AND innovation’, and ‘big data analytics* 
AND innovation’ were found relevant to address the research question. In Davenport and 

697
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
Kudyba’s (2016) proposed data product development approach, some aspects of data-
driven innovation such as conceptualisation, data acquisition and refinement, storage and 
retrieval are inherent. As part of capturing these critical constructs, search strings ‘big data 
innovation*’ in association with ‘data-driven innovation*’, ‘manufacturing*’ ‘big data ana-
lytics*’, and new data product*’ were established.
Applying the above mentioned search strings, the study identified relevant publications 
by exploring five relevant databases: Business Source Complete (EBSCOhost), Scopus 
(Elsevier), Web of Science (Thomson Reuters), ABI/Inform Complete (ProQuest) and Sci-
enceDirect (Elsevier). To ensure accuracy in search process, various inclusion and exclu-
sion criteria were followed, such as the inclusion criterion focused on the title, abstract and 
keywords and the exclusion criterion focused on avoiding various disciplines (e.g., geol-
ogy, physics or chemistry) which were not relevant to the study or research question. The 
database search resulted in 3331 hits. After a careful screening of selection criteria and 
duplicate publications, 91 publications were downloaded and 21 of them were found rel-
evant to the DDI. However, the study explored pertinent other publications to develop a 
detailed understanding of DDI.
As part of the thematic analysis following the procedures by Braun and Clarke (2006), 
the study explored the literature on DDI and found seven predominant steps. Thematic 
analysis is a robust analysis technique to identify recurrent themes running across phe-
nomena under investigation (Braun & Clarke, 2006) in which each theme is considered 
as a category or construct or dimension (Fereday & Muir-Cochrane, 2006). The findings 
of our thematic analysis are very much aligned with Davenport and Kudyba’s (2016) pro-
posed data product development approach. In order to embrace further rigour in the the-
matic analysis, the study used Krippendorff’s alpha (or, Kalpha) as a reliability measure 
(Krippendorff, 2004, 2007). Kalpha value was used to check the inter-rater reliability of the 
7 coded DDI steps following the guidelines of Hayes (2011) and De Swert (2012). Each 
of the 21 articles was coded independently by two academic judges using a 1 to 7 point 
categorical scale in which 1 = innovation conceptualisation 2 = data acquisition, 3 = refine-
ment, 4 = storage and retrieval, 5 = distribution, 6 = presentation, 7 = market feedback. We 
estimated a Kalpha value of 0.82 exceeding the threshold of 0.80 to confirm the validity of 
the thematic analysis. The next section discusses the findings of the review in detail.
A total of 23 interviews were conducted with data led innovation experts, including pro-
fessionals from various manufacturing industries in the UK, such as aviation, rail, electron-
ics, semiconductor, construction etc. (as detailed in Appendix 1).
Purposive sampling technique as applied for selecting the respondents because of their 
role and experience as key decision makers and in managerial positions and representation 
of a wide-range of sectorial areas. To ensure the right criteria of our respondents, all the 
interviewees were communicated through the researchers’ professional and personal con-
nections. Since we reached theoretical saturation point and due to continuous repetition 
of themes, we ceased interviewing after 23 respondents (Glaser & Strauss, 2017; Taylor 
& Bogdan, 1998). Before the interview, the respondents were informed of the details of 
the research following a two-way, open communication atmosphere. We ensured ethical 
issues and confidentiality and anonymity of interviewees during the interview data col-
lection process. The data collection and reporting process took due steps to ensure ethi-
cal standard, confidentiality and anonymity of interviewees. We undertook face-to-face 
interviews at convenient times and places confirmed by the respondents, with an assur-
ance of valuing their any opinion. Interview protocol works as an action plan in the studies 
where the experiential investigation is subjective as it plays a key role in operationalising 
the research, and data collection (Yin, 2014). In the this study, the interview guide was 

698
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
initially developed based on the themes identified in the literature (Appendix 2); however, 
during the interview sessions, the researchers had an open mind and applied probing sup-
plementary questions to note down deeper insights. Each interview lasted for 30–45, and 
the interview transcripts were analyzed using QSR NVivo 11 software to understand the 
data-driven innovation process.
We applied template analysis to identify and organize the recurrent themes in a mean-
ingful category from the interview transcriptions. In this research, we identified several 
broad themes such as Technology in manufacturing innovation, Role of BDA in facilitat-
ing data driven innovation and Challenges and outcome of BDA in manufacturing system 
which were subsequently broken down in codes, based on the research objectives, stream of 
data, key themes in the literature review and theory (Fereday & Muir-Cochrane, 2006). The 
relevant themese and codes are presented in Appendix 3. We applied triangulation once all 
the data were collected from a systematic literature review and semi-structured interviews. 
The process enabled the researchers to reduce bias and ensure the validity, to ensure that 
both the findings from the systematic literature review and interviews outcomes comple-
ment each other while capturing rich insights (Silverman, 2011; Skinner et al., 2000).
6  Findings
6.1  Step 1: Conceptualizing innovation
Conceptualizing the innovation and need of the market is regarded as a very crucial stage 
of DDI as it provides guidelines for the rest of the process. This process of conceptualiza-
tion should precede the acquisition, refinement, storage and distribution of data and fine-
tune with market feedback stage (Davenport & Kudyba, 2016). At this stage, the organiza-
tion assesses the market to identify a need to satisfy and to envision the innovation along 
with the available data sources required for that innovation. While assessing the market 
needs, the organization analyses the customers’ demographic, psychographic and behavio-
ral characteristics, their current consumption pattern, market trends, available technology, 
competitors’ strategies for innovation and changes in the environment. One of the partici-
pants suggested the role of data from the market and stakeholders in conceptualizing the 
innovation idea.
In our organization, innovation is a continuous process. Having said that, every inno-
vation, whether it is product innovation or process innovation, is initiated with and 
backed up by market data. We continuously monitor the market (customers, com-
petitors and other stakeholders) to innovate any product. …. in facilitating any of our 
innovation, market assessment and feasibility study is a key factor since it provides 
us so many important insights about the current market. This helps us to envision the 
future trend and trajectory of the market in which our innovation can fit it. (Male, age 
42 with 12 years of experience)
To conceptualize customer-centred innovation, the organization facilitates customer 
engagement to generate insight into the innovation and prototyping processes. Several 
manufacturers engage the customers through competition, artificial intelligence, telemat-
ics and other offline and online services which generate ample data to shape the innova-
tion process. Companies like Bridgestone conceptualize about data-driven innovation in 

699
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
its business process and product development through analytics generated from customer 
engagement (Ransbotham & Kiron, 2017). While emphasizing the role of the customer in 
data generation, one participant suggested that,
Although we follow a rigorous process to initiate a ground-up innovation project, we 
rely heavily on the data generated from the customers, particularly to understand the 
gap in the customers’ need fulfilment and to know their perception about competi-
tors’ products. Therefore, we engage the customers in generating analytics about their 
preference, perception, prediction and purchasing pattern which immensely support 
us to conceptualize innovation ideas. (Male, age 36 with 6 years of experience)
On a different note, large manufacturers have followed a more structured method for incu-
bating an innovation idea. They have a dedicated team who explore opportunities, analyze 
relevant data to shortlist any actionable idea. While commenting on the structured method, 
one participant suggested that,
Our innovation activity follows a rather systematic and organized structure which 
comprises of the large R&D team, extensive research work, the participation of 
stakeholders. In our organization, we very rarely deal with the consumers as we deal 
in B2B market where suppliers and other stakeholders also play an important role in 
the overall innovation process. Therefore, in our organization, the conceptualization 
process of any innovation is the outcome of another structured procedure, which can 
be labelled as ‘pre-conceptualization’ where several analyses and research are exe-
cuted to conceive any innovation idea. (Male, age 40 with eight years of experience)
At this stage, probable ideas of any innovation are generated and scrutinized to address 
various problems and explore untapped opportunities, following a structured or semi-struc-
tured method. The outcome of the assessment of various data will help the management to 
conceptualize the initial idea, scope and type of innovation which will determine the data 
and resources to drive the innovation. Moreover, this stage outlines the role of key enablers 
for market innovation, which shed light on the market need, portfolio fit, and product-capa-
bility fit in terms of taking a decision about innovation.
6.2  Step 2: Data acquisition
To facilitate DDI, the generation and acquisition of data would play an instrumental role 
(Ransbotham & Kiron, 2017). In the industrial manufacturing sector, data acquisition 
(DAQ) refers to a process that, using computer-based hardware, sensors and application, 
incorporates and measures physical or electrical phenomena such as noise, visual stimuli, 
pressure, temperature, voltage. With the advancement in technology and for the emergence 
of the industrial internet of things (IoT), the demand for industrial data acquisition systems 
has been facilitated. However, with the advancement in technology, powerful microproces-
sors are now used to perform complex data processing and represent the data as action-
able indicators. Data acquired from these sources, particularly from the machine source, 
are sent to the enterprise applications (e.g., ERP, EAM systems). While emphasizing the 
role of hardware, software, artificial intelligence, and technology several participants sug-
gested that,
Most data acquisition scenarios assume high-volume, high-velocity, high-variety, but 
low-value data, making it important to have an adaptable and time-efficient gather-

700
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
ing, filtering, and cleaning algorithms that ensure that only the high-value fragments 
of the data are actually processed by the data-warehouse analysis. (Male, Age, 55 
with 20 years of experience)
Like many other organizations in manufacturing sector, we follow a structured 
method and have applied several computer-based software and applications such as 
supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) which is a combined system of 
software and hardware that enables us to acquire, monitor, and process real-time data 
and later sent to the enterprise applications (e.g., ERP, EAM systems). (Male, Age, 
58 with 16 years of experience)
There exists a strong relationship between big data capabilities and Artificial Initia-
tive (AI) initiatives and both of them are influencing each other either way. AI has a 
significant role in providing the digital framework to acquire data in a large volume 
(big data). On the other hand, AI needs a large volume of data to develop its machine 
learning capability. (Male, Age, 51 with 17 years of experience)
The data acquisition and aggregation process should coincide with the organization’s 
advanced business model and functionalities and be adapted to the elaborative product 
architecture developed by the firm at the early stage of this model. In the current day of 
digital technology and big data, there is an explosion of data as people leave enormous 
footprints through their online activity. From a company’s perspective, data can be acquired 
generally from unstructured (e.g., social media activities, posts, tweets, blogs, image, and 
video data), structured (e.g., customers’ account data, retail transactions, and sensor data) 
and machine sources (wired and wireless smart sensors, cloud computing, crowdsourcing, 
wearable devices and the IoT) (Yang et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2017). The participants also 
underscored the role of algorithms and various devices and IoTs in this regard,
The emergence of IoT has facilitated the data acquisition process in an exponential 
manner. Data acquisition through IoT is a very complicated and technical process. 
However, as the project manager, anyone can have the liberty to be little ignorant 
about the technical side and focus mostly on the how the process works and to inter-
pret productively the conversations with the whole engineering process.” (Male, Age, 
49 with 11 years of experience)
In the pharmaceutical industry, predictive analytics algorithm can help in identify-
ing demographic factors to observe the incidence of diseases, their progression and 
outcomes…..…enabling to identify predictive biomolecular signatures of response to 
vaccination, vaccination will shift from the classical “one-size-fits-all” paradigm to 
a personalized approach and similarly, personalised medicine for individual. (Male, 
age 41 with 8 years of experience)
Many companies acquire data through the data sharing process. German automakers BMW, 
Daimler, and Volkswagen formed an alliance and acquired Berlin-based digital mapping 
company Here with a view to creating a crowdsourcing service. All the automakers were 
benefited from this company as it captured real-time data from drivers about detailed road 
conditions on a single platform (Ransbotham & Kiron, 2017). One of the participants also 
highlighted this point.
…….and sometimes, we need specialized data which we procure from third party 
suppliers. Like many other companies in the electronic and automobile industry, we 
acquire data through data sharing services, which save effort and budget for such 
quality data. Furthermore, through professional market research agencies, we collect 

701
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
a lot of market data about the customers and competitors. (Male, Age, 58 with 16 
years of experience)
For the DDI, an abundance of data is a key factor to initiate and facilitate the process. 
Companies acquire data from multiple structured and unstructured sources, including IoT 
and artificial intelligence. Some organizations even outsource the data acquisition process 
and share the resources with others. However, to be most effective about data acquisition 
and generation, data governance needs to be embedded in an organization’s culture.
6.3  Step 3: Refinement
Data refinement refers to a complex process of converting unstructured, uncategorized 
and unrefined sets of abstract data and eliminating data volatility and redundancy into 
the implementable structure or usable insights. Although Meyer and Zack’s data refine-
ment process remains quite relevant; however, Davenport and Kudyba (2016) argued 
that the data refinement process should rely on advanced analytic methods while facili-
tating new data sources. Rindfleisch et al. (2017) redefined data refinement as innova-
tion from data (IFD) which applies digital tools to acquire and analyze consumer data 
to enhance innovation by obtaining insight derived from digital data observing consum-
ers’ online behavior. For this purpose, firms require advanced modelling software and 
skilled people in a data-rich environment. While explaining the process of data refine-
ment, our participants commented that,
The challenge is to make sense of the data, reveal the patterns in it and use them 
for operational improvements and to support strategic decision making. Advanced 
modelling software, data mining tools and skilled people are the key factors in 
refining the large scaled data. Software programmes offer lots of modelling and 
visual presentation of data; however, down the line, it is the people’s technical and 
analytical skill and capability that is more instrumental in refining data. (Male, 
age 35 with 6 years of Experience)
Refinement of data is very vital to process and extract the crucial information/ 
data in a structured way so that it could be readily analysed. However, it is very 
important to ensure that data do not lose validity and accuracy in this process. It 
is advisable to include some technical features in BDA so that they could take 
into accounts the error models and well-recognised constraints. Cloud technology 
could incorporate these features while storing and refining them. (Male, age 41 
with 8 years of experience)
……..it is utmost important for the managers that they have to take into account 
huge volume of available data which they have to optimise for their activities. A 
number of intelligent techniques including fuzzy logic, neural networks, genetic 
algorithms, data fusion, clustering have evolved to be well-suited for textile 
manufacturing industry since they can effectively deal with huge data consider-
ing diverse and complex correlations and dependencies between them and uncer-
tainties related to sensory quality attributes, consumer behaviour, manufacturer’s 
knowledge, and so on. (Male, age 50 with 15 years of experience)
The data refinement and IFD process are significant because for its innovation process, 
firms actively acquire and analyze data from consumers who are largely passive data 
providers (Bharadwaj & Noble, 2015). This stage of the data management process bears 
sheer significance as the application of modelling tools extract out the insights which 

702
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
are instrumental for the rest of the process. The outcome of data refinement also helps 
the firm to redefine the process of innovation and understand customer perceptions. 
Moreover, the manufacturers can utilize the insights to reengineer their operational 
process and enhance supply chain efficiency. Walmart is actively seeking to build trust 
and loyalty through its data refinement by developing a program called One Version 
of Truth. Having partnered with the data firm Nielsen, Walmart ensured a smooth way 
for its manufacturers, vendors and supply chain partners for using its data to provide a 
consistent view of the market so they can leap on opportunities, reduce costs and also 
improve the shopper experience (Pearson, 2017).
In large corporations like ours, management people have constant access to large vol-
umes and sources of data which can feed Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithms to 
refine and organize them, to detect patterns and trends and to interpret stakeholders’ 
perception and behaviors. Rather than only relying on some subsets of data for analy-
ses, we need to integrate large volume of data, AI algorithms, and robust hardware 
and programmes to generate several outcomes. (Male, age 42 with 12 years of Expe-
rience)
Related to the big data management, the organization should not focus only on the 
data acquisition process rather it should develop and implement a comprehensive 
data strategy which would guide about the data collection (acquisition), volume of 
data, data refinement and processing. Guidance about data refinement is important 
as it would suggest about various issues of data management such as what type of, 
when, how and from where to collect and eventually how to interpret. (Male, age 51 
with 17 years of experience)
6.4  Step 4: Storage and retrieval
Storage and retrieval have become increasingly important in the emerging big data eco-
system. They provide the platforms to ascertain the variety, velocity, and volume of un-
purified and unpolished data, which in turn help to manage big data in an efficient man-
ner. Business value of data innovation needs to be appreciated for determining the storage 
strategy and planning. This might include compliance needs, data protection, removal of 
redundancy, access and response. Retrieval of big data takes in account of advancements 
in query and search processing capabilities with the use of algorithms to facilitate the raw 
data. Many organizations perform the acquisition and storage of data in rather unstructured 
formats and process them over time. As mentioned by a few participants,
It is pivotal to gather and store data into a database which is accessible and can be 
modified, combined, and furnished where appropriate. Otherwise, data become 
unproductive.” (Male, age 41 with eight years of experience)
Large manufacturers have developed a hybrid storage model for BDA which have 
been able to meet the scalability demands and have support for BDA solutions such 
as Hadoop, Cassandra etc. Generally, a storage architecture comprises of direct 
attached storage (DAS) pools and clustered network attached storage (NAS). Over 
time, object storage has evolved as it could incorporate high capacity files even over 
billions. An ideal storage system should ensure strong security measures with full 
control, facilitate migration to a cloud system and provide easy retrieval. (Male, age 
51 with 17 years of experience)

703
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
There are many different areas of supply chain management where previously stored 
data can be retrieved for further applications. Such as, warehousing and transporta-
tion are both areas where Big Data tools can be used with great Return on Invest-
ment. (Male, age 50 with 25 years of experience)
Cloud offers a powerful architecture to provide data storage, retrieval, and processing for 
a given organization, which integrates parallel data processing frameworks to access both 
cloud resources and execute programs (Gunarathne et al., 2013). Cloud computing, which 
comprises of various resources, i.e., end-user applications, personal data or Database Man-
agement Systems (DBMS) are provided by a third party over the internet like services. It 
provides opportunities for organizations to be flexible in their technology platforms and 
simplifies big data analytics (Davenport & Kudyba, 2016; Hashem et al., 2015). However, 
although cloud computing has received enormous attention, it carries risk related to data 
security and privacy since the data is stored in a scattered manner in different devices in 
different locations around the world. Therefore, many organizations are still reluctant to 
adopt this technology despite its advantages such as flexibility, efficiency, and scalability 
(Usmani et al., 2018). According to a participant
Amongst the storage system of large scale data, the latest technology is cloud com-
puting, which is omnipresent in almost all the large organizations. This technol-
ogy brings in various advantages such as huge capacity, scalability, efficiency and 
flexibility; however, we must not overlook the potential threat it carries in terms of 
security of data since the data are stored in a scattered way on various machines in 
various geographical areas. Therefore, we need to ensure a reliable and secured cloud 
environment to store these BDA. (Male, age 40 with 12 years of experience)
While considerable effort has been made to highlight the applications of big data from a 
service point of view, little is known about the importance of storage and retrieval BDA 
from the manufacturing point of view. Prior advancement on ICT has increased the effi-
ciency of data collection, storage and retrieval of publicly accessible secondary data by 
various innovations, such as cloud storage (Akter et al., 2019). This study puts forward the 
importance of efficient storage and retrieval mechanism of big data by different business 
units, including the manufacturing sector.
6.5  Step 5: Distribution
In today’s environment, the success of an organization is dependent on data innovation, 
data structure and data product life-cycle. With the advent of the Web, the distribution 
options of data products have been revolutionized. Near-real-time availability, access and 
updating of data products offer an expansion of business globally for many organiza-
tions. However, Web access by traditional computers has been superseded the evolution 
of mobile devices including smartphones and tablets etc. (Erraissi et al., 2017). This has 
necessitated the modification of format and designs of information products to suit the 
need of users. The participants pointed out that,
…. the distribution policy of BDA of an organization should ensure the availability 
of relevant data for decision making. Authorized users receive access to the central 
database (hardware and cloud-based) to generate and analyze real-time data about 
customers’ behavioral pattern, product’s usage pattern, and innovative design. Of 
these data, customers’ behavioral data should be made available in an encrypted way 

704
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
to comply with the general data protection regulations. (Male, age 48, with 13 years 
of experience)
The big datasets generally go through initial diagnostic, analytical techniques to gen-
erate descriptive and predictive findings before being available to the authorized per-
sonnel. The original datasets are also made available to various teams (distributed) 
for further analyses such as content analysis, time series modelling, geographical 
location clustering, text and/or visual content processing. However, the overall distri-
bution and analyses process of data could be a complicated matter depending on the 
organization’s data strategy in terms of the volume of data and data storage. (Male, 
age 51, with 17 years of experience)
Cloud computing has concurrently added a new dimension in order to leverage the scalable 
and cost-effective solution in big data analytics. It has enabled the organizations to gather 
the benefits by responding to users’ expectations and needs as well as alleviating complex-
ity in operation. For example, multinational companies use distribution channels to manage 
inventory in real-time so that they can connect retailers globally with synchronized data 
warehouses and manage commercial transactions in a completely automated fashion (Dav-
enport & Kudyba, 2016). Moreover, timing and frequency remain critical for distribution 
of data products in the digital economy so that it could take care of issues related to access 
and availability. Importance of data availability was highlighted by the participants-
Timing and frequency of data distribution is very important in a sense that required 
data are available at a right time and in right amount”. (Male, age 50 with 25 years of 
experience)
It can aid in running efficient clinical trials, for real time monitoring data. (Male, age 
41, with 8 years of experience)
Access to the real time data is very important for decision making at every stage of 
management and operations of innovation. Therefore, to us, (the professionals in the 
industry) the stored data should have been distributed and available at real-time or 
near real-time speed. To deal with the large volume of data, many organizations use 
Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) to organize and distribute data across paral-
lel computing clusters. (Male, age 58, with 16 years of experience)
Most of the organizations distribute the data after refining and conducting analyses. Before 
the data analysis, data are to be prepared through data mining, cleansing, aggregation and 
integration, which refers to extracting and cleaning diverse, vibrant, divergent, and inter-
related data (Chen et al., 2013; Sivarajah et al., 2017). There are several analytical meth-
ods available for analyzing big data such as Topic Modeling, MDS, K-Nearest Neighbors 
(k-NN) Clustering with data visualization using free online content for automated competi-
tor analysis, text mining, sentiment analysis and comparative analytics, algorithm analysis 
and machine learning. From a taxonomical standpoint, most scholars clarify BDA tech-
niques as descriptive, predictive and prescriptive (Delen & Demirkan, 2013; Wang et al., 
2016) and inquisitive, pre-emptive analytics, and diagnostic analytics (Sivarajah et  al., 
2017; Wedel & Kannan, 2016). However, organizations should identify relevant methods 
which are suitable for the problem at hand, and develop people skill (Akter et al., 2019).
To provide the business value of BDA, it is very important to distribute the data and 
findings to support specific as well as unspecific organisational units. In fact, the efficiency 
in distributional mechanism can play crucial role for searching and utilisation of exist-
ing BDA based knowledge across different functional units including the manufacturing 
department as contented by Mikalef et al. (2018: 571) “while some studies assume that 

705
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
leveraging BDA capabilities is sufficient to provide business value, it is important to exam-
ine the mechanisms of inertia that act in inhibiting their value.
6.6  Step 6: Presentation
In Big data analytics, context plays an important role in the presentation or application 
stage of information product. In this step, the performance of each of the preceding value-
added steps is scrutinized– for instance, it evaluates whether the user possesses appropriate 
context to make use of the content and information products corresponds to a distinctive 
segment of the market (Meyer & Zack, 1996). The user interface plays a significant role in 
the intended use of products-the simplicity of the information products to use adds more 
value in terms of payoff. However, analytics are preferred over simple data provision in the 
digital economy with some important constants.
Data should be readable and easily resolved by analytical methods and processes to 
facilitate query, modelling and subsequent analysis. In the data-driven innovation 
process, Big Data could be unreliable, dynamic and diverse in nature, which necessi-
tates that it should be readily accessible and integrated for the purpose of data analy-
sis and mining. (Male, age 41 with 8 years of experience)
DDI in the manufacturing sector will be successful if the presentation of data is 
effectively done. Properly presented data will improve the overall DDI in manufac-
turing. (Male, age 40, with 12 years of experience)
An increasing number of organizations are using or attempting to use an agile manufactur-
ing system that enables the manufacturing unit to respond quickly to customers’ expec-
tations and relevant market changes. Well-presented BDA can significantly contribute to 
controlling cost and maintaining quality by highlighting the changes through strategic 
information. While simple information products were appropriate for the majority of the 
users, more advanced and cutting-edge analytics-based products such as forecasts, predic-
tions, and probabilities provide organizations differentiation and competitive advantages 
over others (Davenport & Kudyba, 2016). The users of the data must be able to visualize 
the outcome of the raw data, which is a key factor for presenting the findings out of the 
large volume of data. If the executives have access to the voluminous latest data, it will 
benefit the organization which has the means and methods to process, analyse and pre-
sent this. Presenting and visualization of data is important as it helps to interpret the pat-
terns and trends that are present in the data. This has resulted in manufacturing companies 
investing a substantial amount in developing artificial intelligence and machine learning 
(Seddon & Currie, 2017). The importance of effective data presentation was stated by the 
participants-
Collecting large chunks of big data is worthless if we fail to harness the insights 
lying underneath for which visualization of data is the key. There are many visualiza-
tion tools available which work standalone or be integrated with another application. 
Established and big names in the industry use various updated software and applica-
tions such as D3, Datawrapper, Powerbi, Oracle Visual Analyze, Qlikview, Google 
chart etc. Every company prefers the tool that works best for them to convert the raw 
data into insight and identify the trends and patterns in order to make grounded deci-
sions. (Male, age 48, with 13 years of experience)

706
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
6.7  Step 7: Market Feedback
A mechanism for exploiting user feedback and information extraction process from market 
place empowers data-driven innovation industries to gain customer insights, informs the 
competitive nature of data products. The requirement for innovation and monitoring prod-
uct usage is usually supported by the availability of new data sources and maintaining judi-
cious assessment (Leibowitz et al., 2012). In the analytics-based product development pro-
cess, this step is consistent with a “lean start-up” context which puts emphasis on periodic 
refinement of the data products over time to support continuous innovation (Davenport & 
Kudyba, 2016). The connection between customer feedback and innovation was mentioned 
by a participant-
Customer feedback is important in case of DDI because this improves product and 
services, helps to measure customer satisfaction, creates a best customer experience, 
provides data for taking business decisions, becomes a source of information for 
other consumers and keeps customers. (Female, age 44 with 13 years of experience)
User feedback is acquired in market research and social media platforms can be effective 
in facilitating a feedback and information extraction process from the marketplace (Cal-
legaro & Yang, 2018). Many organizations monitor and catalog direct comments on social 
networks in addition to online polls and surveys to appreciate user satisfaction and needs. 
With A/B or multivariate online testing approaches, any online information product can 
be assessed in ease of time. Besides flash surveys, interactive blogs are capable of lever-
aging user impressions about existing information products. Bootstrapping Usability Test 
can be employed to simulate a real usage of an information product and acquire unbiased 
feedback, which can then be analyzed to enhance products continuously. At the same time, 
communicating user and analyzing digital metrics on product use, i.e. views, clicks, down-
loads, and bounces can facilitate continual innovation in a data-driven industry (Davenport 
& Kudyba, 2016). This was explained from a particular industry context by one of the 
participants-
We put a lot of emphasis on constructive feedback from every concerned stakeholder 
before the commercialization of our innovation. Even after the launch of the product/
service we put sincere importance on the customer feedback and strive to make con-
tinuous improvement of our innovation. We collect the market feedback following 
a reliable and comprehensive method which comprises of offline, online, in-person 
and real-time feedback as it enables us to receive large amount of data. (Male, age 39 
with 11 years of experience)
BDA assist fashion industry particularly with the market feedback which generates 
most value for the manufacturing process as it provides insight and assists decision 
making or information in the form of patterns. (Female, age 44 with 13 years of 
experience)
Although the strong association between BDA and market feedback is clear, it is important 
to differentiate between selling and manufacturing strategies. As such a manufacturing firm 
can be more resilient to respond to the market feedback is combining two different units of 
the organisation (e.g., marketing and production). Therefore, the assumption that the mar-
ket feedback is mainly related to marketing division is misleading, and it is significantly 
linked with the manufacturing firms/unit.

707
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
7  Discussion
The findings of this study have several theoretical implications, particularly for the manu-
facturing firms to consider data as a vital resource to design and implement DDI. Very few 
studies have investigated the role of BDA in data-driven innovation, particularly, in the 
context of manufacturing sectors. In the extant literature, there are several studies which 
have explored and examined the role of BDA in case of the manufacturing sector. However, 
the role of BDA in facilitating innovation in case of manufacturing industries have received 
very limited research attention although several scholars have highlighted the importance 
of adopting BDA for enhancing the performance of manufacturing firms while enhancing 
their competitive advantage (Dubey et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2018). In this study, we have 
adapted the seven-step process for data-driven innovation (Davenport & Kudyba, 2016; 
Meyer & Zack, 1996) and explored empirically how BDA would play a key role in the 
context of the manufacturing sector. The findings of this study would contribute to the lit-
erature of BDA and DDI.
In literature, there are several instances to emphasize the innovation process. To con-
ceptualize and materialize an innovation process, data plays the most important role since 
most of the leading organizations rely on data to create, refine, and generate innovative 
output (Davenport & Kudyba, 2016). The original process, suggested by Meyer and Zack 
(1996), addressed the issue from the viewpoint of information product development in 
which raw data sources provide inputs to the process of producing a product. Davenport 
and Kudyba (2016) adapted and moderated the process in consideration of the evolution of 
various technologies and data sources in today’s digital economy, particularly big data. Our 
findings have elaborated the framework in light of the empirical findings in every step of 
the process while isolating the significance of data analysis, which was not suggested in the 
original seven-step framework.
Data is regarded as the next most important resources to develop and implement any 
strategy. To ensure its proper application and avoid misuse and an unscrupulous business 
venture, several regulations are being applied. In the UK, with the GDPR in practice, the 
manufacturing companies have to be very careful in dealing with the source and identifica-
tion of data. This has influenced significantly the data collection, storage analysis and dis-
tribution process. Our findings suggest that most of the organizations conduct preliminary 
data analysis while storing the data. The final analysis carried out while distributing and 
presenting the data and strict regulations are being followed throughout the whole process. 
Depending on the organizational requirement, BDA analysis techniques could be descrip-
tive, predictive and prescriptive, inquisitive, pre-emptive analytics, and diagnostics.
The findings of the study also highlighted the role of multiple stakeholders for DDI in 
the manufacturing context. Throughout the DDI process, customers are regarded as the 
primary sources of data; however, in a manufacturing context, organizations have to con-
sider other stakeholders such as suppliers, retailers, strategic partners as important as the 
consumers for generating data to conceptualize any innovation idea.
Our findings suggest that to administer high-volume, high-velocity, high-variety data-
sets, the entire data management process is now completely machine-dependant due to the 
widespread availability of cloud computing, smart devices, artificial intelligence, internet 
of things, machine learning and deep learning. Considering the severity of competition, an 
abundance of data and strict regulations, the organizations need to develop and implement 
a comprehensive data strategy which would guide every step of the DDI framework, start-
ing from acquisition, refinement, analyzing, distribution and presenting.

708
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
The results of this study supplement the emerging and existing literature on big data 
analytics capability of the firms (Akter et al., 2016; Dubey et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2018; 
Trabucchi & Buganza, 2019). The role of DCT, institutional theory and the TOE frame-
work for the adoption of technological innovations is well discussed in the literature 
(Dubey et al., 2019; Zhang & Dhaliwal, 2009). The findings highlight the fundamental role 
of BDA in designing and implementing DDI in manufacturing firms which bears immense 
significance for the industry to streamline the organization’s data management proce-
dure to sense, seize and reconfigure its resources with a view to materialize innovation. 
Our findings also established that a manufacturing organization’s capabilities and digital 
resources are key to drive innovation initiatives. Organizations need to strive such innova-
tion constantly as a result of several stakeholder and institutional factors. Thus our findings 
have enhanced the theoretical application of DCT and institutional theory. Moreover, the 
findings enhance the overall TOE framework as it facilitates the DDI through technology, 
organization and environment factors. Another key theoretical implication of this study is 
that it has incorporated multi-theory approach to explain organizational adoption of data 
as resources and intra-organizational data-driven innovation diffusion more effectively. In 
BDA literature, very few studies have adopted a multi-theory approach, which should be an 
important consideration, in light of the complex nature of the digital business environment. 
In extant literature there are several studies which have adopted multiple theories as it pro-
vides the researchers to explore various contexts and opportunities of enlarged understand-
ing of the phenomenon (Dubey et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2018; Turunen & 
Finne, 2014; Zhou, 2011). Moreover, the use of multiple theories and frameworks provide 
a comprehensive view on the difficult and novel research issue to understand the problem 
and formulate the conceptual framework. The study of innovation is a complex issue and 
the present-day research problems are injecting various topics which are confounding the 
area of innovation. Therefore, to address such circumstances, adoption of multiple theories 
and framework remain suitable (Dalglish & Newton, 2002; Wolfe, 1994). In this study, the 
multiple theoretical lenses draw upon a rich set of established theories and framework such 
as DCT, Institutional theory and TOE framework which are interrelated and synergistic, 
as a result, they have enabled the authors to develop a more theoretically inclusive analy-
sis and a comprehensive understanding of resource integration and utilization in achiev-
ing innovation (Salonen & Jaakkola, 2015). Institutional theory, TEO and DCT are con-
nected with each other and provide a comprehensive theoretical framework to understand 
innovation in the manufacturing sector as a result of adoption cutting age technologies. 
This research has approached the complex topic of innovation which has become more 
complicated with the involvement of DDI and other technologies. The adoption of Institu-
tional theory, TEO and DCT enabled us to explore the organizational adoption and intra-
organizational data-driven innovation diffusion more effectively. Institutional theory plays 
the key role in consolidating the environmental factors and organization’s capability and 
goals to implement DDI in the context of the manufacturing industry. DCT suggests that 
organizations develop their resources and capabilities to optimize the available economic 
opportunities. And TOE create the all-encompassing framework and technology, would 
emphasize the process, to facilitate the organization’s innovation initiative. The findings 
and the theoretical framework are summarized in Fig. 1.
The practical implications of the findings from the present investigation in regard to big 
data analytics and data-driven innovation are to provide meaningful insight into the scopes, 
opportunities and challenges for implementation in manufacturing industries. Firstly, they 
can help policymakers to identify what type of skills are effective in terms of data ana-
lytics. There are a number of points that are important for the policymakers particularly 

709
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
the importance of skill development. The findings of this study emphasise the important 
role of skilled people for the best result from big data analytics in general and data refine-
ment (Step 3) in particular. Secondly, they can assist managers of manufacturing firms to 
be more competitive by the applications of big data. Overall findings will ultimately help 
their ability to understand the process of big data collection, processing, analysis and inter-
pretation in greater depth and provide the key to understanding a phenomenon and validly 
interpreting as well as managing the feedback for the manufacturing processes. The find-
ings will help managers and business owners in devising strategies to use big data analytics 
to understand their business better and improve their decision making more efficiently. The 
findings have also provided the basis on a critical view of the new tools and opportuni-
ties to advance the science of measuring and influencing human thoughts, emotions, and 
actions to drive innovation. The findings show that people and technology are complemen-
tary resources and bring the best result when support each other to implement three key 
steps—big data collection, processing, analysis (Mikalef et al., 2018).
8  Conclusions
The findings of our study confirm that manufacturing organisations with robust analyti-
cal capabilities can use big data not only for exploiting the existing operations but also for 
exploring new products and business models. The findings also highlight the critical steps 
of how big data are being used in manufacturing from conceptualisation to commerciali-
sation of data products. Throughout the process of innovation, stakeholder involvement 
and the dynamic analytical capability are critical to address the intellectual, marketing and 
legal issues, such as data privacy, ownership and use. The findings also reveal that manu-
facturing firms with strong data governance culture enable data sharing within and across 
the industry, which facilitates the innovation process. Overall, in the manufacturing, big 
data-driven AI and machine learning have emerged as an exciting platform to accelerate 
innovation, value and productivity.
Fig. 1   Conceptual framework of how DDI

710
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
9  Limitations
This study has several limitations. First, the study was conducted in the UK context. DDI in 
manufacturing can vary context to context. As such, future studies should take into account 
the role of situational variables in generalizing the findings to a new context. However, 
the proposed DDI process in the manufacturing sector, i.e., conceptualizing the innovation, 
data acquisition, refinement, storage and retrieval, distribution, presentation and market 
feedback should be similar across the contexts. Future studies with new contextual applica-
tions will confirm our results and add new knowledge. Second, this study is only limited to 
DDI in manufacturing in the UK. Similar explorations with other countries and their differ-
ences might reveal interesting findings. Finally, due to the nature of the qualitative cross-
sectional study, one-time data collection is based on convenience/judgement sample which 
may not be representative of the population. We recommend a longitudinal study with a 
large sample size to validate our findings using other research methods such as surveys/
experiments.
Appendix 1
Sample distribution
Count (n = 23)
Count (n = 23)
Age
Gender
35–40 years
12
Male
19
41–45 years
3
Female
4
46–50 years
5
Experience
Over 50 years
3
Below 6 years
3
Industry
6–10 years
8
Construction equipment
2
11–15 years
8
Aerospace
2
Over 15 years
4
Automotive
4
Education
Electronics and electrical
2
Postgraduate
18
Chemical
1
Doctorate
5
Textile
4
Organizational position
Manufacturing consultancy
2
Manager
7
Pharmaceutical
1
Middle management level
11
Information technology
2
Senior Management level
5
Food and beverages
1
Industrial engineering
2
Appendix 2
Interview Guide

711
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
1. To what extent are you aware of the applications of BDA in manufacturing industry? 
How do these BDA work in manufacturing industry? Could you please explain a few in 
the context of your company?
2. What benefits do you see in the use of BDA in manufacturing industry? Do you think 
that the benefits of using BDA command the investment in new technologies to adapt 
current production?
3. Discuss the role of BDA in facilitating data driven innovation
4. Step 1: Conceptualizing the innovation and the process:
• How does the company assess the market needs and conceptualize the innovation?
• Discuss the significance of this step for rest of the DDI process
5. Step 2: Data Acquisition:
• Discuss about various processes and methods of data acquisition for innovation?
6. Step 3: Refinement:
• Does the refinement process rely on advanced analytic methods and skilled people 
while facilitating new data sources?
• What are the probable outcomes of data refinement process (e.g., process innovation 
and understanding customer perceptions)?
7. What do you think about/do in practice about the storage, distribution and presentation 
of data that facilitate DDI in manufacturing sector?
• How do they affect the overall DDI process in manufacturing?
• How important is the timing and frequency of distribution of data?
8. Step 7: Market Feedback
• How are the market feedback collected and applied in case of DDI?
Appendix 3
Relevant themes and codes for data analysis.
Research themes
Theory driven
Data driven
Technology in manufacturing 
innovation
Manufacturing and operational 
technologies for innovation
AI, BDA, IoT, computer-based 
software and applications for 
managing volume of data, data 
sharing services
Role of BDA in facilitating data 
driven innovation
Steps of DDI process: Conceptu-
alization, refinement, applica-
tion, Feedback
Pre-conceptualization, dynamic 
capability
Challenges and outcome of BDA 
in manufacturing system
Infrastructural, Management and 
Resources
Resources availability, Skilled 
people, Management Policy, 
Integration of organization’s 
view, Automation, Operational 
Efficiency, innovative outcomes 
and environmental issues

712
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Akter, S., Bandara, R., Hani, U., Wamba, S. F., Foropon, C., & Papadopoulos, T. (2019). Analytics-based 
decision-making for service systems: A qualitative study and agenda for future research. International 
Journal of Information Management, 48, 85–95
Akter, S., Michael, K., Uddin, M. R., McCarthy, G., & Rahman, M. (2020). Transforming business using 
digital innovations: The application of AI, blockchain, cloud and data analytics. Annals of Operations 
Research. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10479-​020-​03620-w.
Akter, S., & Wamba, S. F. (2016). Big data analytics in E-commerce: A systematic review and agenda for 
future research. Electronic Markets, 26(2), 173–194
Akter, S., Wamba, S. F., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2016). How to improve firm perfor-
mance using big data analytics capability and business strategy alignment? International Journal of 
Production Economics, 182, 113–131
Ambrosini, V., Bowman, C., & Collier, N. (2009). Dynamic capabilities: An exploration of how firms renew 
their resource base. British Journal of Management, 20, S9–S24
Auschitzky, E., Hammer, M., & Rajagopaul, A. (2014). How big data can improve manufacturing. McKin-
sey & Company, 822.
Aydiner, A. S., Tatoglu, E., Bayraktar, E., Zaim, S., & Delen, D. (2019). Business analytics and firm per-
formance: The mediating role of business process performance. Journal of business research, 96, 
228–237
Babiceanu, R. F., & Seker, R. (2016). Big Data and virtualization for manufacturing cyber-physical systems: 
A survey of the current status and future outlook. Computers in Industry, 81, 128–137
Bharadwaj, N., & Noble, C. H. (2015). Innovation in data-rich environments. Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 32(3), 476–478
Bi, Z., & Cochran, D. (2014). Big data analytics with applications. Journal of Management Analytics, 1(4), 
249–265
Braganza, A., Brooks, L., Nepelski, D., Ali, M., & Moro, R. (2017). Resource management in big data ini-
tiatives: Processes and dynamic capabilities. Journal of Business Research, 70, 328–337
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 
3(2), 77–101
Callegaro, M., & Yang, Y. (2018). The role of surveys in the era of “big data”. In The Palgrave handbook of 
survey research (pp. 175–192). Palgrave Macmillan.
Caputo, A., Marzi, G., & Pellegrini, M. (2016). The internet of things in manufacturing innovation pro-
cesses: Development and application of a conceptual framework. Business Process Management 
Journal, 22(2), 383–402
Chen, D. Q., Preston, D. S., & Swink, M. (2015). How the use of big data analytics affects value creation in 
supply chain management. Journal of Management Information Systems, 32(4), 4–39
Chen, J., Chen, Y., Du, X., Li, C., Lu, J., Zhao, S., & Zhou, X. (2013). Big data challenge: A data manage-
ment perspective. Frontiers of Computer Science, 7(2), 157–164
Dalglish, C., & Newton, C. (2002). The relationship between firm survival and innovation: An introduction 
to the literature. Innovation, 4(1–3), 209–214
Davenport, T. H., & Kudyba, S. (2016). Designing and developing analytics-based data products. MIT Sloan 
Management Review, 58(1), 83
De Swert, K. (2012). Calculating inter-coder reliability in media content analysis using Krippendorff’s 
Alpha. Center for Politics and Communication, 1–15.
Del Vecchio, P., Di Minin, A., Petruzzelli, A. M., Panniello, U., & Pirri, S. (2018). Big data for open innova-
tion in SMEs and large corporations: Trends, opportunities, and challenges. Creativity and Innovation 
Management, 27(1), 6–22

713
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
Delen, D., & Demirkan, H. (2013). Data, information and analytics as services. Decision Support Systems, 
55(1), 359–363
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Wamba, S. F., & Papadopoulos, T. (2016). The impact of big 
data on world-class sustainable manufacturing. The International Journal of Advanced Manufactur-
ing Technology, 84(1–4), 631–645
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Blome, C., & Papadopoulos, T. (2019). Big data and predictive 
analytics and manufacturing performance: Integrating institutional theory, resource-based view and 
big data culture. British Journal of Management, 30(2), 341–361.
Dumbill, E. (2013). Making sense of big data. Big Data, 1(1), 1–2
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Martin, J. A. (2000). Dynamic capabilities: What are they? Strategic Management 
Journal, 21(10–11), 1105–1121
Erraissi, A., Belangour, A., & Tragha, A. (2017). A comparative study of Hadoop-based big data architec-
tures. International Journal of Web Applications, 9(4), 129–137
Fereday, J., & Muir-Cochrane, E. (2006). Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: A hybrid approach 
of inductive and deductive coding and theme development. International Journal of Qualitative 
Methods, 5(1), 80–92
Fichman, R. G., Dos Santos, B. L., & Zheng, Z. (2014). Digital innovation as a fundamental and powerful 
concept in the information systems curriculum. MIS Quarterly, 38(2), 329-A15
Fusch, P., Fusch, G. E., & Ness, L. R. (2018). Denzin’s paradigm shift: Revisiting triangulation in qualita-
tive research. Journal of Social Change, 10, 19–32
Gandomi, A., & Haider, M. (2015). Beyond the hype: Big data concepts, methods, and analytics. Interna-
tional journal of information management, 35(2), 137–144
George, G., & Lin, Y. (2017). Analytics, innovation, and organizational adaptation. Innovation, 19(1), 16–22
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (2017). Discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research. 
London: Routledge.
Gunarathne, T., Zhang, B., Wu, T. L., & Qiu, J. (2013). Scalable parallel computing on clouds using Twist-
er4Azure iterative MapReduce. Future Generation Computer Systems, 29(4), 1035–1048
Hashem, I. A. T., Yaqoob, I., Anuar, N. B., Mokhtar, S., Gani, A., & Khan, S. U. (2015). The rise of “big 
data” on cloud computing: Review and open research issues. Information systems, 47, 98–115
Hayes, A. F. (2011). My macros and code for SPSS and SAS. http://​afhay​es.​com/​spss-​sas-​and-r-​macros-​
and-​code.​html. Retrieved September 27 2011.
Henschen, D. (2014). Merck optimizes manufacturing with big data analytics: Information week connecting 
the business technology community. Retrieved May 1, 2019, from https://​www.​infor​matio​nweek.​com/​
strat​egic-​cio/​execu​tive-​insig​hts-​andin​novat​ion/​merck-​optim​izes-​manuf​actur​ing-​with-​big-​data-​analy​
tics/d/​d-​id/​11279​01.
Hu, H., Wen, Y., Chua, T. S., & Li, X. (2014). Toward scalable systems for big data analytics: A technology 
tutorial. IEEE access, 2, 652–687
Johnson, J. S., Friend, S. B., & Lee, H. S. (2017). Big data facilitation, utilization, and monetization: 
Exploring the 3Vs in a new product development process. Journal of Product Innovation Manage-
ment, 34(5), 640–658
Kiron, D., Prentice, P. K., & Ferguson, R. B. (2014). The analytics mandate. MIT Sloan Management 
Review, 55(4), 1
Kopanakis, I., Vassakis, K., & Mastorakis, G. (2016). Big Data in Data-driven innovation: The impact 
in enterprises’ performance. In Proceedings of 11th annual MIBES international conference (pp. 
257–263)
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Reliability in content analysis: Some common misconceptions and recommenda-
tions. Human Communication Research, 30(3), 411–433
Krippendorff, K. (2007). Computing Krippendorff’s alpha-reliability. Annenberg School for Communica-
tion Departmental Paper 43.
Kumar, V., Dixit, A., Javalgi, R. R. G., & Dass, M. (2016). Research framework, strategies, and applications 
of intelligent agent technologies (IATs) in marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 
44(1), 24–45
Lamba, K., & Singh, S. P. (2017). Big data in operations and supply chain management: Current trends and 
future perspectives. Production Planning & Control, 28(11–12), 877–890
Leibowitz, J., Ungerman, K., Masri. M. (2012). Know your customers wherever they are, Harvard Business 
Review. Accessed at https://​hbr.​org/​2012/​10/​know-​your-​custo​mers-​where​ver-t on 15 March 2019.
Li, A. Q., Kumar, M., Claes, B., & Found, P. (2020). The state-of-the-art of the theory on Product-Systems. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 222, 107491
Li, J., Tao, F., Cheng, Y., & Zhao, L. (2015). Big data in product lifecycle management. The International 
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 81(1–4), 667–684

714
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
Madden, S. (2012). From databases to big data. IEEE Internet Computing, 16(3), 4–6
Manyika, J. (2011). Big data: The next frontier for innovation, competition, and productivity. Retrieved May 
1, 2019 from http://​www.​mckin​sey.​com/​Insig​hts/​MGI/​Resea​rch/​Techn​ology_​and_​Innov​ation/​Big_​
data_​The_​next_​front​ier_​for_​innov​ation.
McAfee, A., Brynjolfsson, E., Davenport, T. H., Patil, D. J., & Barton, D. (2012). Big data: The manage-
ment revolution. Harvard Business Review, 90(10), 60–68
Menguc, B., & Auh, S. (2006). Creating a firm-level dynamic capability through capitalizing on market ori-
entation and innovativeness. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 34(1), 63–73
Meyer, M. H., & Zack, M. H. (1996). The design and development of information products. MIT Sloan 
Management Review, 37(3), 43.
Mikalef, P., Pappas, I. O., Krogstie, J., & Giannakos, M. (2018). Big data analytics capabilities: A system-
atic literature review and research agenda. Information Systems and e-Business Management, 16(3), 
547–578
Minelli, M., Chambers, M., & Dhiraj, A. (2013). Big data, big analytics: Emerging business intelligence 
and analytic trends for today’s businesses. (Vol. 578)Wiley.
Moktadir, M. A., Ali, S. M., Paul, S. K., & Shukla, N. (2019). Barriers to big data analytics in manufac-
turing supply chains: A case study from Bangladesh. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 128, 
1063–1075
O’donovan, P., Leahy, K., Bruton, K., & O’Sullivan, D. T. (2015). Big data in manufacturing: a systematic 
mapping study. Journal of Big Data, 2(1), 20
Oliver, C. (1997). Sustainable competitive advantage: combining institutional and resource-based views. 
Strategic management journal, 18(9), 697–713
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2015). Data-driven innovation: Big data 
for growth and well-being. OECD Publishing.
Pearson, B. (2017). Walmart Is Investing In Shopper Data: How That Will Change The Grocery Aisle. 
Forbes Magazine, available online at: https://​www.​forbes.​com/​sites/​bryan​pears​on/​2017/​12/​21/​
walma​rt-​is-​inves​ting-​in-​shopp​er-​data-​how-​that-​will-​change-​the-​groce​ry-​aisle/#​3f1a5​cbf37​0d 
(Accessed: 1st April 2019).
Ransbotham, S., & Kiron, D. (2017). Analytics as a source of business innovation. MIT Sloan Manage-
ment Review, 58(3), 1–16.
Riikkinen, M., Saarijärvi, H., Sarlin, P., & Lähteenmäki, I. (2018). Using artificial intelligence to create 
value in insurance. International Journal of Bank Marketing, 36, 1145–1168
Rindfleisch, A., O’Hern, M., & Sachdev, V. (2017). The digital revolution, 3D printing, and innovation 
as data. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 34(5), 681–690
Salonen, A., & Jaakkola, E. (2015). Firm boundary decisions in solution business: Examining internal 
vs. external resource integration. Industrial Marketing Management, 51, 171–183
Schoenherr, T., & Speier-Pero, C. (2015). Data science, predictive analytics, and big data in supply chain 
management: Current state and future potential. Journal of Business Logistics, 36(1), 120–132
Schroeck, M., Shockley, R., Smart, J., Romero-Morales, D., & Tufano, P. (2012). Analytics: The real-
world use of big data. IBM Global Business Services, 12(2012), 1–20
Schutt, R. K. (2018). Investigating the social world: The process and practice of research. Sage.
Seddon, J. J., & Currie, W. L. (2017). A model for unpacking big data analytics in high-frequency trad-
ing. Journal of Business Research, 70, 300–307
Silverman, D. (2011). Interpreting qualitative data, a guide to the principles of qualitative research. (4th 
ed.). Sage.
Sivarajah, U., Kamal, M. M., Irani, Z., & Weerakkody, V. (2017). Critical analysis of Big Data chal-
lenges and analytical methods. Journal of Business Research, 70, 263–286
Skinner, D., Tagg, C., & Holloway, J. (2000). Managers and research: The pros and cons of qualitative 
approaches. Management Learning, 31(2), 163–179
Srinivasan, R., & Swink, M. (2018). An investigation of visibility and flexibility as complements to sup-
ply chain analytics: An organizational information processing theory perspective. Production and 
Operations Management, 27(10), 1849–1867
Sun, S., Cegielski, C. G., Jia, L., & Hall, D. J. (2018). Understanding the factors affecting the organiza-
tional adoption of big data. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 58(3), 193–203
Taylor, S. J., & Bogdan, R. (1998). In-depth interviewing. Introduction to Qualitative Research Meth-
ods, 3, 87–116
Teece, D. J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: the nature and microfoundations of (sustainable) 
enterprise performance. Strategic Management Journal, 28(13), 1319–1350

715
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716 
1 3
Teece, D. J. (2014). The foundations of enterprise performance: Dynamic and ordinary capabilities in an 
(economic) theory of firms. Academy of Management Perspectives, 28(4), 328–352
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic 
Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533
Thomas, L. D. W., & Leiponen, A. (2016). Big data commercialization. IEEE Engineering Management 
Review, 44(2), 74–90
Tina Dacin, M., Goodstein, J., & Richard Scott, W. (2002). Institutional theory and institutional change: 
Introduction to the special research forum. Academy of Management Journal, 45(1), 45–56
Tornatzky, L. G., Fleischer, M., & Chakrabarti, A. K. (1990). Processes of technological innovation. 
Lexington Books.
Trabucchi, D., & Buganza, T. (2019). Data-driven innovation: Switching the perspective on Big Data. 
European Journal of Innovation Management, 22(1), 23–40
Trabucchi, D., Buganza, T., Dell’Era, C., & Pellizzoni, E. (2018). Exploring the inbound and outbound 
strategies enabled by user generated big data: Evidence from leading smartphone applications. 
Creativity and Innovation Management, 27(1), 42–55
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed 
management knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of Management, 14(3), 
207–222
Troilo, G., De Luca, L. M., & Guenzi, P. (2017). Linking data-rich environments with service innovation 
in incumbent firms: A conceptual framework and research propositions. Journal of Product Inno-
vation Management, 34(5), 617–639
Turunen, T., & Finne, M. (2014). The organisational environment’s impact on the servitization of manufac-
turers. European Management Journal, 32(4), 603–615
Usmani, S., Rehman, F., Umair, S., & Khan, S. A. (2018). A review of security challenges in cloud storage 
of big data. In Handbook of research on big data storage and visualization techniques (pp. 175–195). 
IGI Global.
Waller, M. A., & Fawcett, S. E. (2013). Data science, predictive analytics, and big data: A revolution that 
will transform supply chain design and management. Journal of Business Logistics, 34(2), 77–84
Wamba, S. F., Akter, S., Edwards, A., Chopin, G., & Gnanzou, D. (2015). How ‘big data’can make big 
impact: Findings from a systematic review and a longitudinal case study. International Journal of 
Production Economics, 165, 234–246
Wamba, S. F., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Ren, S. J. F., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2017). Big data analytics 
and firm performance: Effects of dynamic capabilities. Journal of Business Research, 70, 356–365
Wang, G., Gunasekaran, A., Ngai, E. W., & Papadopoulos, T. (2016). Big data analytics in logistics and sup-
ply chain management: Certain investigations for research and applications. International Journal of 
Production Economics, 176, 98–110
Wang, Y., & Hajli, N. (2017). Exploring the path to big data analytics success in healthcare. Journal of 
Business Research, 70, 287–299
Wang, Y., Kung, L., & Byrd, T. A. (2018). Big data analytics: Understanding its capabilities and potential 
benefits for healthcare organizations. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 126, 3–13
Wedel, M., & Kannan, P. K. (2016). Marketing analytics for data-rich environments. Journal of Marketing, 
80(6), 97–121
Wolfe, R. A. (1994). Organizational innovation: review, critique and suggested research directions. Journal 
of Management Studies, 31(3), 405–431
Xu, L. D., Xu, E. L., & Li, L. (2018). Industry 4.0: State of the art and future trends. International Journal 
of Production Research, 56(8), 2941–2962
Yadegaridehkordi, E., Nilashi, M., Nasir, M. H. N. B. M., & Ibrahim, O. (2018). Predicting determinants of 
hotel success and development using structural equation modelling (SEM)-ANFIS method. Tourism 
Management, 66, 364–386
Yang, C., Shen, W., & Wang, X. (2016). Applications of Internet of Things in manufacturing. In 2016 IEEE 
20th international conference on computer supported cooperative work in design (CSCWD) (pp. 670–
675). IEEE.
Yin, R. L. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods (applied social research methods). Sage.
Young, M., & Pollard, D. (2012). What businesses can learn from big data and high performance analytics 
in the manufacturing industry. Big Data Insight Group.
Zhang, C., & Dhaliwal, J. (2009). An investigation of resource-based and institutional theoretic factors in 
technology adoption for operations and supply chain management. International Journal of Produc-
tion Economics, 120(1), 252–269

716
 
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:689–716
1 3
Zhong, R. Y., Newman, S. T., Huang, G. Q., & Lan, S. (2016). Big Data for supply chain management in the 
service and manufacturing sectors: Challenges, opportunities, and future perspectives. Computers & 
Industrial Engineering, 101, 572–591
Zhou, T. (2011). Understanding online community user participation: A social influence perspective. Inter-
net Research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, 21(1), 67–81.
Zhu, J. J., Li, S. Y., & Andrews, M. (2017). Ideator expertise and cocreator inputs in crowdsourcing-based 
new product development. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 34(5), 598–616
Zollo, M., & Winter, S. G. (2002). Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities. Organiza-
tion Science, 13(3), 339–351
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.