TITLE: Data-driven innovation development: an empirical analysis of the antecedents using PLS-SEM and fsQCA
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04873-3
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04873-3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Data-driven innovation development: an empirical analysis
of the antecedents using PLS-SEM and fsQCA
Mohamamd Alamgir Hossain1,2
· Mohammed Quaddus3
·
Md Moazzem Hossain4 · Gopika Gopakumar5
Accepted: 15 July 2022 / Published online: 8 December 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Data-driven innovation (DDI) is a primary source of competitive advantage for ﬁrms and
is a contemporary research priority. However, what facilitates the development of DDI has
largely been understudied in literature. Through a systematic literature review, this study ﬁnds
technological, organizational, and environmental variables under the TOE framework, which
would drive effective DDI development. We thus develop a research model, which is tested
using survey data from 264 Australian ﬁrms engaged in DDI development. The data have
been analysed using both symmetric (partial least squares based structural equation modelling
(PLS-SEM)) and asymmetric (fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA)) methods.
The mixed method enhances the conﬁdence in our empirical analyses of the antecedent vari-
ables of DDI development. PLS-SEM has revealed that technological readiness (i.e., data
quality and metadata quality), and organizational absorptive capacity and readiness (i.e.,
technology-oriented leadership and availability of IT skilled professionals) affect DDI devel-
opment. Our fsQCA results complement and extend the ﬁndings of PSL-SEM analysis. It
reveals that quality of data and metadata, technology-oriented leadership, and exploitation
capacity individually are necessary—but are not sufﬁcient—conditions for high DDI devel-
opment. Further, it identiﬁes three different solutions each for small, medium, and large ﬁrms
by combining the TOE factors. Additionally, this study suggests that the TOE framework is
B Mohamamd Alamgir Hossain
mohammad.hossain@rmit.edu.au
Mohammed Quaddus
m.quaddus@curtin.edu.au
Md Moazzem Hossain
m.hossain@murdoch.edu.au
Gopika Gopakumar
gopika.gopakumar@pwc.com
1
School of Accounting, Information Systems, and Supply Chain, RMIT University, Melbourne,
Australia
2
Business & Human rights (BHRIGHT) centre, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
3
School of Management and Marketing, Curtin University, Perth, Australia
4
Murdoch Business School, Murdoch University, Perth, Australia
5
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Melbourne, Australia
123

896
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
more applicable to small ﬁrms, on DDI context. Findings of our study have been related with
theoretical and practical implications.
Keywords Data-driven innovation (DDI) · Open data · TOE framework · SEM-PLS ·
fsQCA
1 Introduction
Innovation is crucial to the advancement of a society and an economy. Data-driven innova-
tion (DDI)—producing innovative outputs from data—is one among the latest innovations
(Deloitte, 2016). According to The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop-
ment (OECD), DDI “forms a key pillar in twenty-ﬁrst century sources of growth” (OECD,
2015a). Given that data is the most important raw material for DDI, ﬁrms compete with
each other accessing data (Hernaes, 2021). In general, bigger ﬁrms have more access to
resources including data (Karlsson, 2021). Therefore, small-to-medium ﬁrms demand data
to be made public so that any ﬁrm could translate data into economic and social value (Khur-
shid et al., 2020). Along this line, meanwhile—especially in last two decades—a demand for
non-sensitive data (e.g., trafﬁc or weather data) to make freely available to everyone to use,
reuse, and republish has been observed (Hossain et al., 2022). Consequently, governments
of many countries have been releasing open data in reusable formats and without restrictions
from copyright and monetary obligations to reuse or distribute (Hossain et al., 2016a, 2016b).
As the products and/or interpretations of data are sometimes more attractive than the
original data (Serra, 2014), ﬁrms collate, combine, and enhance open data to produce DDI
applications (Jetzek et al., 2014). Since the open data came into existence, it was expected that
data-driven applications would emerge not only from the large ﬁrms but also from small-
to-medium start-up communities (Andersen & Pedersen, 2021). All ﬁrms, irrespective of
their size, would develop DDI applications by using data from government (e.g., bureau
of statistics), business organisations (e.g., retailers), and individuals (e.g., consumer data)
(DPMC, 2016). Unfortunately, “DDI is still at the early stage of development and adoption”
(Luo, 2022, p. 5) and therefore its success is yet to realise in a larger scale (Deloitte, 2016).
At the same time, overall, empirical research on DDI is limited (Saura et al., 2021). Nev-
ertheless, academic research on its drivers is emerging. A major stream of research on DDI
has paid efforts on its processes to facilitate decision-making (e.g., Babu et al., 2021), and
the economic and social values of it (e.g., Glass et al., 2015; OECD, 2014, 2015b; Saura
et al., 2021). Nonetheless, few studies have discussed DDI from technological perspective
and identiﬁed some associated variables including data and technology (e.g., Babu et al.,
2021; Sultana et al., 2022a, 2022b) and user privacy (Saura et al., 2021). Studies also suggest
that the success of DDI cannot be achieved without a proper combination of organisational
resources and capabilities (Babu et al., 2021; Chatterjee et al., 2021). Extant literature has
examined its external environmental (hereafter “environmental”) factors including techno-
logical infrastructure (e.g., Lafferty, 2019) and legal issues (e.g., Witjas-Paalberends et al.,
2018). However, an integrated approach combining the technological, organizational, and
external environmental (TOE) perspectives of DDI drivers is scarce, which is the fundamen-
tal research gap that this study addresses. The other research gap this current study intends
to handle emanates from the following extant studies. In a recent study Jetzek et al. (2019)
suggest a research agenda on organizational-level research (than macro industry level) to
study the ‘complex’ relationship of the variables that explain how value can be generated
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
897
using data-driven applications. Instead of the net effect, they suspect ‘interplay’ of the related
variables (p. 722). Similarly, Jetzek et al. (2014) have explored the drivers (which can be
explained with TOE framework) of DDI mechanism and suggest that, “authors [should]
examine which conﬁgurations of identiﬁed enabling factors actually lead to an observed
successful outcome” (p. 117) i.e., DDI development. Recent literature also suggest that one
of the fundamental limitations of the studies that have applied the TOE framework is “The
underlying assumptions are that the [antecedent] factors are mutually independent, and no
interaction and coordinate relationship exists among various factors” (Zhao & Fan, 2021,
p. 3). Although the name TOE itself suggests a triadic relationship of T-O-E variables, IS
studies overlook such an integrative approach, which reminds us ‘the blind men and the ele-
phant’ story (see Saxe, 1873). Meanwhile, explaining a complex phenomenon, scholars have
established that, in a complex world, individual factors rarely operate in isolation. Rather,
“reality usually includes more than one combination of conditions that lead to high values
in an outcome condition” (Woodside, 2013, p. 464). For TOE, nonetheless, Hossain et al.
(2022) and Zhao and Fan (2021) show complex conﬁgurational trade-off effects among TOE
variables, However, no study has been conducted on DDI ﬁeld that empirically identiﬁes the
conﬁgurations of the drivers of DDI development and thus remains an important research
gap. Due to the complexity of DDI (Jetzek et al., 2019), identifying the different causal rela-
tionships among the DDI drivers is important for better theoretical and policy implications.
Against this backdrop, we develop the following research questions (RQs)
RQ1: What are the technology-organization-environment drivers of DDI, and how they
individually affect development of DDI applications by ﬁrms?
RQ2: How the technology-organization-environment conﬁgure to explain high DDI devel-
opment.
To answer the ﬁrst question, we have identiﬁed the TOE variables from a systematic
literature review and investigated their effects on DDI development by using partial least
square based structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM). Our results suggests that the tech-
nological and organisational but environmental variables have signiﬁcant individual effects
on DDI development. To respond to the second research question, we have applied fuzzy
set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA) technique because it deals with the complex
conﬁgurational trade-off effects of the antecedent factors, providing a more realistic repre-
sentation of a complex phenomenon (Woodside, 2014). Moreover, Hossain et al. (2022) have
recommend that “fsQCA can successfully reveal which combinations of TOE variables are
important” (p. 14). Based on complexity theory (Woodside, 2014), we consider that DDI
development is not dependent on the net individual effects of the antecedent factors, but on
their speciﬁc conﬁgurations (i.e., the “gestalt” effect). From the fsQCA analysis, we ﬁnd the
technological variables, and ﬁrms’ exploitation capacity and technology-oriented leadership
individually are necessary for DDI development, but not sufﬁcient. For sufﬁcient conditions,
fsQCA suggests three solutions where the TOE variables are differently combined.
This paper thus contributes to the literature in several ways. First, the major contribution
of this paper is to apply an integrated i.e., TOE framework to the research ﬁeld of DDI by
integrating DDI drivers identiﬁed from a SLR. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst study attempting to investigate context-speciﬁc antecedents of DDI, thereby expanding
our understanding of our phenomenon of interest. Second, our study’s ﬁndings conﬁrm that
a multi-method approach, identifying both the net and conﬁgurational effects of the vari-
ables, offers richer insights explaining DDI development. Our fsQCA results suggest that
the individual drivers have complex trade-off effects and that their certain combinations act
as sufﬁcient conditions for DDI. Finally, methodologically, we contribute to DDI research
123

898
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
domain by using complexity theory via fsQCA. It is noted that fsQCA uses both qualitative
and quantitative methods within its process. Although it does not speciﬁcally optimizes the
combination of antecedents to produce the best outcome, it provides sufﬁcient and neces-
sary conditions for DDI development using conﬁgurations of various antecedents. We hence
argue that fsQCA has the basic tenet of soft operational research (OR) approach. Mingers
(2011) mentions that soft OR deals with “wicked problems or messes”—as we are dealing
with complex problem of DDI development using fsQCA, we argue that this approach is a
legitimate soft OR method.
2 Background
2.1 Data driven innovation: a brief discussion
Datadriveninnovation(DDI)“issimplyaboutusingdataforinnovation”(Curley&Salmelin,
2017, p. 123). It can also be deﬁned as “the use of data and analytics to improve or foster
new products, processes, organisational methods and markets” (OECD, 2015b, p. 21). Stud-
ies understand DDI as the analysis of large volumes of data, by private and public sector
organisations, to make better decisions and create new products and services, and thus gener-
ating economic and social values (e.g., Glass et al., 2015). In short, “Innovation that creates
real business value and stems from data processing and analysis is known as data-driven
innovation or DDI” (Deloitte, 2016, p. 27).
Data for DDI development may come from different sources—closed versus open. For
example, Google, Amazon, and Facebook use the customer/user data for DDIs both for their
customers/users and advertisers; such data may not be released to other organisations, and
thus are called as closed data (Zuiderwijk & Janssen, 2015). On the contrary, data may come
from open sources with ‘open licencing’, which are called as open data. “Open data is data
that has been made publicly available for use in an accessible format, along with sufﬁcient
metadata to understand and analyse the data, and the legal freedom to use it for most or
any purpose without asking for further permission” (Glass et al., 2015, p. 70). For instance,
Terbine collects global Internet-of-things (IoT) raw data from different type of machines (e.g.,
vehicle, satellite) and makes it searchable by and available to any ﬁrms/users to develop DDI
e.g., for precision agriculture, smart transportation (Babu et al., 2021). Similarly, Dawex
and Caruso provide data exchange platforms that share in-vehicle data of different vehicle
manufacturers (Fetene et al., 2017). Recently, Amazon Web Service (AWS) has made it easier
for DDI-developing ﬁrms to use data from world leading data providers (Hejazi, 2020).
Other than private sector businesses, open data may come from government agencies that,
while serving the citizens, produce and collect enormous amount of data including trafﬁc,
weather, census, and crime data. This is called open government data (OGD), a sub-set
of open data. Many countries understand that public data (which are not privacy-sensitive
and not related to state security) should not be captivated but set free and thus mandate
public departments and agencies to release data in ‘open’ format (i.e., without any further
copyright obligation to reuse or distribute) (Hossain et al., 2022). Such OGD principle focuses
on releasing data for use and re-use by public and private organisations (i.e., DDI developer
communities) to promote innovation (Chatterjee et al., 2021). Governments realise that if data
is not open, DDI will become the exclusive province of large ﬁrms (Deloitte, 2016), where
small-to-medium ﬁrms will have difﬁculty in surviving. By opening its datasets, governments
thus encourage DDI and facilitate the realization of its potential.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
899
Combining open data from both private and government agencies (hereafter “open data”),
ﬁrms develop DDI applications that facilitate access to existing public services and/or provid-
ing innovative services to the users (Babu et al., 2021). For DDI to take place, organisations
use different techniques and technologies to deﬁne and capture relevant data, process and
analyse it to produce innovative products and services, optimising organisational processes,
enhancing research and development, and more (OECD, 2014).
2.2 DDI initiatives using open data
Open data are used to develop a very wide range of DDI applications including web-based
portals and applications for smart phones and mobile devices. For example, the Open Data
Cube (ODC) (https://www.opendatacube.org/) is a global initiative where anyone can access,
use and reuse satellite data to increase the value and use of it. ODC also provides users
with access to free and open data management technologies and software for data analy-
sis. PatientsLikeMe—“the world’s largest integrated community, health management, and
real-world data platform” (www.patientslikeme.com/about) connects patients with similar
diseases (or symptoms) so they can share experience or information (e.g., hot spots in cities
that trigger asthma attacks) (Hendler et al., 2012). It also provides “an evidence base of
personal data for analysis and a platform for linking patients with clinical trials” (OECD,
2015b, p. 30). The Woozy1 app is one of the top health apps in the USA that updates most
recent recalls issued by different government agencies including the Food & Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA), US Department of Agriculture. Additionally, users can customise their feed to
allergies (Adida et al., 2010). Similarly, as a classic example showing “how data can help to
revolutionise a sector”, SoilEssentials2 employ data to help farmers optimise their businesses,
leading to precision agriculture (Scottish-enterprise, n.d.). In Nigeria where no ofﬁcial trafﬁc
feed exists, for smart trafﬁc decisions (to enable users to check the trafﬁc information in
real-time), Tsaboin crowdsources trafﬁc data from individual passengers around bus stops
in Lagos (OECD, 2015b). Similarly, Openbaarvervoer in the Netherlands or Tågtavlan in
Sweden shows real-time trafﬁc information (van Oort et al., 2015). Finally, Närmaste pro-
vides location-based information about local services and companies (libraries, pharmacies,
gas stations etc.) in Sweden. The list can go longer reporting similar applications.
2.3 Theoretical foundation of DDI development
The theoretical development of DDI and its related factors e.g., its adoption, diffusion are
still emerging. Historically, innovation is considered as the key to organizational success
(Chaudhuri et al., 2021) whereas design and development of data-driven innovative services
is a key to survival in today’s market (OECD, 2015a). To explain DDI use in organizations,
literature appears to use several theories. Among them the dynamic capability view (DCV)
(Teece et al., 1997) is popular (e.g., Kozak et al., 2021). Over the past few decades, numerous
studieshaveidentiﬁedDCVasoneoftheprominenttheoriesinthedomainofformulatingﬁrm
strategies, especially in the area of innovation and new product development (Sultana et al.,
2022a). Taking the principle of DCV, Kozak et al. (2021) suggest that not organizational
resources but the processes that transform these resources into business operations in a
dynamic business environment are critical for the success of an organization.
1 Precisely, Woozy: Recall & Safety Alerts app, to differentiate with other Woozy app/s.
2 Initiated in Scotland but now serve the global farming community.
123

900
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
The constituent elements of DCV leverage technological and organizational capabilities
required for improving organizational DDI. Accordingly, few studies (e.g., Chatterjee et al.,
2022; Sultana et al., 2022a, 2022b) have integrated DCV with the resource-based view (RBV)
(Barney, 1991). RBV suggests that ﬁrms need to utilize different capabilities; more precisely,
they need to technologically innovative, to survive and grow. From an empirical study con-
ducted in Australia, Sultana et al. (2022a) ﬁnd DDI capability as a third-order construct,
reﬂected by market-oriented, infrastructural, and innovation-talent capabilities, which are
further reﬂective by six ﬁrst-order capabilities. They further suggest that, DDI capability
directly as well indirectly (mediated via competitive performance) increases organizations’
strategic market agility. Similarly, from a systematic literature review, Sultana et al. (2022b)
propose that DDI capability is dependent on organizations’ management, infrastructural,
and talent capabilities. In both studies, the ‘infrastructural capability’ is related to ‘data
and technological capabilities’ whereas the other capabilities are directly related with orga-
nizational resources. Sultana et al. (2022b) understand ‘data’ as an internal capability of
an organization to explore and exploit big data for effective decision-making by manager
whereas ‘technology’ as a generic capability to utilize hardware and software to analyse
data. However, Sultana et al. (2022a) have not elaborate the nature of ‘data and technology
capability’ and how they contribute to ﬁrms’ infrastructural capability. Nevertheless, both
studies suggest that, to handle the fast and unprecedented changes within business environ-
ment, organizational capabilities are necessary and the constituent elements of DCV and RBV
leverage organizational and technological capabilities required for improving organizational
DDI. Meanwhile, Chatterjee et al. (2022) have found that DDI capability (IT, and R&D)
and techno-functional capability (remote work, and CRM technology) increase the supply
chain (SC) management capability of Indian ﬁrms. Moreover, technology-oriented leadership
moderates the relationship between ﬁrms’ SC capability and SC performance. Interestingly,
their approach is different; they understand the causal effects of DDI and techno-functional
capabilities on SC management capability, whereas other studies (e.g., Sultana et al., 2022a,
2022b) consider ‘capability’ as a higher-order construct.
Babu et al. (2021) have combined DCV with institutional theory (DiMaggio & Pow-
ell, 1983) and technology-organisation-environment (TOE) framework (Tornatzky et al.,
1990), and applied a mixed method of research approach (SLR, thematic analysis, and
semi-structured interview). They have proposed a seven-step DDI process, including con-
ceptualizing innovation, data acquisition, data reﬁnement, data storage and retrieval, data
distribution, data presentation, and market feedback. Similarly, applying SLR and thematic
analysis, Sultana et al. (2021) suggest a ‘standardized’ seven-step process for DDI, including
data product conceptualization, data acquisition, data reﬁnement, data storage and retrieval,
data product distribution, data product presentation, and market feedback. Although these
two studies have used different keywords in different databases for the SLR, and applied
different research methods, both studies suggest an exact seven-step process of DDI, which
is interesting.
While there is a consensus about the complex nature of DDI and its associated variables,
there is no agreement on how the antecedents of DDI can consistently explain it i.e., DDI.
Subsequently, we witness inconsistencies in the literature. For instance, Luo (2022) concep-
tualize that strong leadership is a driver of DDI. However, Chatterjee et al. (2022) do not
suspect a direct effect of IT leadership on DDI capability but on the relationship between SC
capability and SC performance. Similarly, Chatterjee et al. (2021) have found that leadership
is a moderator between DDI and ﬁrm performance. Moreover, while there are several studies
suggest the independent inﬂuence of the driver of DDI but their conﬁgurational effects are
not identiﬁed yet. This is oversimplifying a complex process like DDI where examining the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
901
net effects of its antecedents does not explain the phenomenon entirely. Furthermore, for a
complex technology e.g., DDI, one factor is rarely sufﬁcient to explain its success; rather,
a conﬁguration of factors is extremely likely. Therefore, we argue that the constellations of
DDI drivers can offer more accurate and consistent answer, and add valuable insights.
3 The research model explaining DDI development
Our research model explains the drivers of DDI development by ﬁrms. In order to ﬁnd
out the drivers of DDI development, we have conducted a systematic literature research by
following Saura et al. (2021) and Sultana et al. (2022b). Prior studies (e g., Webster & Watson,
2002) suggest that a literature review can be effectively identify emerging issues that could
potentially beneﬁt our theoretical foundation. Following Sultana et al. (2022b) in the DDI
domain, our study had three main phases for the systematic literature review process: (a)
planning and searching, (b) screening and extraction, and (c) synthesizing.
In the planning and searching phase, we have started searching on Scopus database due to
its comprehensiveness and inclusion of major articles from other databases (Bhimani et al.,
2019). We have used the keywords: “Data driven innovation” OR “Data-driven innovation”
only in article titles. The search includes papers within any timeline, which produce 134
papers. In screening and extraction phase, we have extracted 67 papers that include confer-
ence paper, book chapter, editorial, review etc. and kept only the journal articles as these
reﬂect state-of-the-art of a research topic (e.g., Olanrewaju et al., 2020). Furthermore, we
have excluded 10 papers from unrelated ﬁelds including medicine, physics, nursing and sim-
ilar. In the ﬁnal synthesis phase, we have screened the abstract of the papers and extracted
29 paper because their non-relevance with the current topic of this paper. Finally, we review
28 papers that are presented in Table 1. Figure 1 depicts the summary of entire step-by-step
process for the SLR.
ThereviewedpapersfromourSLRsuggestthatDDIisdependentonvarioustechnological,
organisational, and environmental variables (see Table 1). Speciﬁcally, “DDI integration is
not an easy task. It requires learning, knowledge and recognition of the need, qualifying
personnel and, of course, the existence of both internal and external datasets” (Deloitte, 2016,
p. 11). Therefore, the TOE framework (Tornatzky et al., 1990) can be used as a signiﬁcant
theoretical lens to understand our current research. The TOE framework is an attempt to
developing a uniﬁed framework for explaining the organisational adoption of a technological
innovation suggesting technological, organizational, and environmental dimensions. It is
considered that the framework is an integration of several IS theories including Technology
Acceptance Model (TAM), Innovation Diffusion Theory (IDT), and Institutional theory, and
thus effective to explain an IS/IT phenomenon including DDI (Hossain et al., 2017).
3.1 Technological variables
“The key to DDI is in fact the data itself” (Deloitte, 2016, p. 17). In other words, data
is essential for DDI; however, more data does not simply mean more innovation (Gupta,
2022). Prior DDI studies accuse several technological barriers for its low and slow adoption,
that include the availability, accessibility, and quality of data and metadata (Jetzek et al.,
2014), compatibility, processability, licensing, and lack of standards of open data (see, for
123

902
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Table 1 The papers from systematic literature review on DDI antecedents
Reference and research type
Theory
Key constructs/theme
Summary of ﬁndings
Chatterjee et al. (2022); empirical
RBV and DCV
Sustainable supply chain for SMEs using
DDI
IT capability enhances supply chain
capability (SSC), which eventually
increases ﬁrm performance (PER).
In addition, IT leadership moderates
between SSC and PER
Luo (2022); conceptual
–
Impediments of DDI adoption: lack of
readily available DDI methods, tools, and
expert systems
Availability and quality of data
People and organization, strong
leadership, organizational culture,
knowledge and skill professional
Deﬁne DDI as a process by
distinguishing its difference from
related terms e.g., data-based
innovation. Also, presented DDI
with a two humps—opportunity and
design spaces
Sultana et al. (2022a); empirical
RBV, DCV
Market orientation capability: customer
orientation and competitor orientation
Infrastructure capability: data and
technology
Innovative talent capability: knowledge,
and training & development
They consider DDI capability as a
reﬂective third-order construct.
They further investigated the
inﬂuence of DDI capability on
strategic marketing agility and
strategic competitive performance
Sultana et al. (2022b);
SLR
RBV, DCV
Management: customer orientation,
competitor orientation, cross-functional
integration
Infrastructure: data, technology
Talent: technical knowledge, data-driven
business model knowledge
Mostly deal with DDI capabilities,
which is considered as a formative
construct consisting management,
infrastructure, and talent capability
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
903
Table 1 (continued)
Reference and research type
Theory
Key constructs/theme
Summary of ﬁndings
Babu et al. (2021)
SLR, thematic analysis and qualitative
interview
DCV, Institutional theory, and TOE
Comprehensive data strategy to ensure data
quality and to conduct data analytics.
Organizational capability and resources.
Lack of infrastructure, unavailability of
skilled people
DDI as seven-step sequential but
interlinked processes
(conceptualization, data acquisition,
reﬁnement, storage and retrieval,
distribution, presentation, and
market feedback). Discussed the
role of technology and
organizational capabilities
managing the processes
Bresciani et al. (2021), SLR
–
Big data as a source of DDI (data quality),
organisational skills and resources,
organisation size, customer engagement,
strategic and organisational change
From a literature review, they
identiﬁed three thematic clusters to
expose research gaps on DDI
research ﬁeld: big data as a strategic
asset for DDI, customer engagement
on DDI processes, and big data as
an enabler of the co-creation and
co-innovation process
Chatterjee et al. (2021), empirical
DCV
Leadership support, data-driven culture,
ﬁrm performance
The ﬁndings show that ﬁrm’s DDI
culture impact its product and
process innovation and according
contributes to the better ﬁrm
performance and provides better
competitive advantages
Gillan (2021), conceptual
–
Data governance and related challenges
The author presented how data
governance brings beneﬁt to the
businesses such as making data
consistent, of a higher quality, and
more accurate. It supports
employees to focus on innovation
matters
123

904
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Table 1 (continued)
Reference and research type
Theory
Key constructs/theme
Summary of ﬁndings
Kozak et al. (2021), empirical
DCV
Instead of looking at dynamic capabilities at
organisational level, they propose a
machine-learning-based method that
provides organisation managers a set of
alternative solutions that allow for the
matching actions to the current
decision-making situation
They examined the impact of a
goal-oriented computational
intelligence algorithm for DDI in
customer churn management
Mihaljevic et al. (2021), use cases
-
Trafﬁc data for DDI policies
Considering privacy is a concern and
using DDI approach, they show how an
integrated people- and privacy-centred
planning and development process can be
structured and applied for Smart City
technologies
Using a use case (trafﬁc counting),
they propose a privacy-centric
planning and development approach
for smart city technologies
Saura et al. (2021), SLR, interviews, and
data-mining
–
Protecting user privacy that affect DDI,
mostly for marketing operations
Based on SLR, interviews, and
topic-modelling techniques, they
propose 14 research agenda where
DDI tools can be used
Sultana et al. (2021), SLR
SLR and DCV, SLR
–
Propose DDI as a seven-step process
consisting product
conceptualization, data acquisition,
data reﬁnement, data storage and
retrieval, data product distribution,
data product presentation, and
market feedback
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
905
Table 1 (continued)
Reference and research type
Theory
Key constructs/theme
Summary of ﬁndings
Yu et al. (2021), interview
Global innovation system (GIS)
framework
Data (the ‘foundation-level’ resource),
knowledge, investment, market, and
legitimacy (the ‘system function-level’
resources), organisational skills
Examine how DDI industry emerges
in China considering its social and
institutional contexts
Firms apply various strategies to
produce, collect and exploit data for
knowledge creation, market
formation and investment
mobilization
DDI entails the exploitation of data
to create value
Mikalef et al. (2020), empirical
RBV, Information Governance
Effective communication infrastructure
regarding policy effectiveness
Big data analytics capabilities
(BDACs) have a positive and
signiﬁcant effect on both
incremental and radical innovative
capabilities
Ramos & Blind (2020), empirical
Regulatory inﬂuence
User acquisition is essential for business
ﬁnancial success and is an important part
of DDI
This study analyses the effect of data
portability driven by competition on
the data-driven innovation (DDI)
response of online platforms such as
Spotify, Google, and Facebook
McLoughlin et al. (2019); narrative review
of relevant policy & interviews
Informal Institutional theory
There are some social factors inﬂuence the
data quality as data does not ‘speak for
itself’ and public managers need to accept
that they will have less monopoly over its
interpretation
Using recent developments in
Australasia as illustration, the paper
explores how different stakeholders
see the opportunities and challenges
involved in DDI and the issues and
problems to be overcome
123

906
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Table 1 (continued)
Reference and research type
Theory
Key constructs/theme
Summary of ﬁndings
Rizk et al. (2020); case studies
–
DDI does not follow other digital
innovation process but has its own set
Traditional four-stage i.e., discovery,
development, diffusion and
post-diffusion) does not account for
the explorative nature of data
analytics and DDI. Proposed two
modes of DDI: (1) asynchronous,
i.e. data acquired before
development and (2) synchronous,
i.e. data acquired after (or during)
development
Lafferty (2019); empirical
–
Absence of technological infrastructure is
most critical barrier for Industry 4.0
DDI for Industry4.0
Trabucchi & Buganza (2019), empirical
–
Deep understanding of the kind of data
needed to solve the innovation issue
Data is a by-product of the entire
innovation process and not the
primary output
Witjas-Paalberends et al. (2018), mixed
method (interview, survey, and
focus-group discussion)
TOE3
Technology: Data volume, data variety, data
quality, data security, risk of
re-identiﬁcation
Organization: Data sharing, data
management, value, data access,
conservatism, skills
Ethical-Legal (environment): Privacy
regulation, privacy debate, informed
consent, and gaps in data
In investigating DDI in healthcare,
ﬁfteen key constructs are identiﬁed
via expert interviews and survey.
Data variety, lack of data sharing,
and data skills are identiﬁed as
major inhibitors
Zhan et al. (2018), empirical
–
To harvest great values from big data, data
quality and data accuracy is important
The ﬁndings reveal that big data can
offer customer involvement so as to
provide valuable input for
developing new products
3Even though they identiﬁed TOE variables, they did not explicit used the TOE framework.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
907
Table 1 (continued)
Reference and research type
Theory
Key constructs/theme
Summary of ﬁndings
Abella et al. (2017), technical
Metadata quality
The paper demonstrated how the data
released by the smart cities creates
value for the citizens and society
Cheah & Wang (2017), case study
RVB
Three elements of Data driven business
model: Perspectives; Business model
process, and Big DD business model
innovation
The framework comprises three
elements: perspectives, business
model processes and big data-driven
business model innovations. As we
apply the framework on to three
Chinese companies, it is evident that
the mechanisms of business model
innovation based on big data is a
progressive and dynamic process
Chien et al. (2016), empirical
–
The data collected needs to be integrated
from multiple platforms into coherent data
store
This study proposes a framework of
data-driven product design for
capturing product visual aesthetics
UX to effectively identify the useful
design concepts from consumer
preferences to consumer response
123

908
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Table 1 (continued)
Reference and research type
Theory
Key constructs/theme
Summary of ﬁndings
Jetzek et al. (2014), case study
Transparency and Efﬁciency
Technological barriers such as Data quality
and metadata
Findings show that DDI and the
nomological network links between
the external and internal enabling
factors in the context of
organizational innovation from data,
the innovation mechanism itself and
the resulting value
Hemerly (2013), conceptual
–
Data quality is the important privacy
principle and data driven economy
depends on the metadata
Regulation has impact on the DDI
development
Kusiak (2009), conceptual
–
The DDI development such as development
of new knowledge and artefacts—is of
interest to engineering, business, and
social and behavioural sciences
The authors introduced a new
framework of DDI that select the
most promising alternative(s)
enhances innovation and
dramatically reduces the failure rate
of the invention–innovation path
RBV resource-based view; DCV dynamic capability view theory; SLR systematic literature review; TOE technology-organization-environment framework
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
909
Databases: SCOPUS
Search strings: TITLE ( data-driven AND innovation OR data AND driven AND innovation )
Search Timeline: 2000-2022
Planning & screening
Total references found: 134 
Journal articles found: 67
Selected after quality appraisal: 57
Total sample articles selected: 28
Excluded 67 articles that were duplicated, non-peer-
reviewed journals, technical reports, , business reports, 
book chapters, case studies, and conference papers
Excluded 10 articles that were from unrelated fields 
including medicine, physics, nursing and similar
Excluded 29 articles after checking the abstract
Screening & extraction
Synthesis
Fig. 1 The systematic literature review process
example Janssen et al., 2012). As DDI development is highly dependent on open data,4 its
success is highly dependent on the attributes of open data. By deﬁnition, open data are freely
accessible online, available without technical restrictions to re-use, and provided under open
access license that allows the data to be re-used without limitation” (Jetzek et al., 2014,
p. 102). Hence, the technological attributes including availability, accessibility, and open
license are already captured by the deﬁnition of open data and therefore have not been
considered in our study. As the quality of data and metadata are consistently considered as
critical for open data (e.g., Hossain et al., 2016a, 2016b, 2022b; Purwanto et al., 2020) and
so for DDI (e.g., Hemerly, 2013; Witjas-Paalberends et al., 2018), we consider these as our
technological dimensions driving DDI development.
3.1.1 Data quality
Data is the most important input of value creation through DDI and is considered as the
‘foundation-level’ resource (Yu et al., 2021). Data quality is a ‘technical attribute’ of data
(Purwanto et al., 2020), which can be deﬁned as the extent to which “data that are ﬁt for use by
data consumer” (Wang & Strong, 1996, p. 6). Availability of data and lack of data quality are
consistent concerns of DDI stakeholders (Glass et al., 2015; Luo, 2022). In general, quality
data improves DDI (Chatterjee et al., 2021). Prior studies suggest that good quality data, in
general, eases developing DDI (e.g., Cronholm et al., 2017). On the contrary, poor quality
data is as good as with no data. Following the ‘garbage in garbage out’ principle, in DDI
context, poor-quality data leads to the fusion chain of wrong interpretation and to reduced
DDI quality. In addition, insufﬁcient data quality may increase the cost of accessing and
interpreting data and reduce re-use opportunities (OECD, 2015b).
4 DDI can use data other than open data; in this study, we capture the only DDIs that use open data as the raw
materials.
123

910
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
3.1.2 Metadata quality
Metadata refers to data about data; it describes some other data (or dataset) and the structure
of the data in question. Metadata provide structured information that makes data/datasets
easier to retrieve and use (Open Data Support, 2014). It also may include supplementary
data/information about the records in a dataset (Glass et al., 2015) including title and descrip-
tion of data, method of collection, author/publisher, area and time period covered, licensing
criteria, and date and frequency of release (Lisowska, 2016). High quality metadata allows
the users to ﬁnd the context of the data in a simple and accessible way. Contrarily, poor meta-
data may merely state the existence of a dataset without deﬁning the relationships between
datasets. The issues of metadata and their quality is a common concern for DDI development
(Morabito, 2015). For a good quality DDI to develop, it is essential that the open datasets
have adequate and quality metadata to aid both discoverability and usability of the data by
the application developers (Abella et al., 2017; Jetzek et al., 2014). It is often observed that,
“there are metadata quality issues that could disrupt the success of Open Data” (Neumaier
et al., 2016, p. 25) and thus DDI development. Lack of metadata quality makes it difﬁcult
for developers to ﬁnd relevant dataset, understand the dataset, and perform data analyses
to develop DDI applications (Kubler et al., 2018; Villanova University, 2019). On the con-
trary, availability of ‘satisfactory’ metadata offers better data acquisition and analytics, which
ensure successful DDI development (Morabito, 2015).
3.2 Organisational variables
DDI initiatives are organization driven. Because of the variance of organizational variables,
the success story of DDI initiatives may vary among organisations. Hence, DDI literature paid
signiﬁcant attention on the organizational dimensions. Among the organisational variables,
the common aspect is the capability and capacity of ﬁrms in terms of acquiring, analysing,
and exploiting knowledge in general and more speciﬁcally, data (e.g., Babu et al., 2021;
Kozak et al., 2021; Sultana et al., 2021). The next important organisational capabilities for
DDI development are strong leadership (e.g., Chatterjee et al., 2021; Luo, 2022) and skilled
professional (e.g., Babu et al., 2021; Luo, 2022). Therefore, this current study considers three
organisational dimensions that drive DDI development: absorptive capacity, technology-
oriented leadership, and skilled professional.
3.2.1 Absorptive capacity
Absorptive capacity refers to “a ﬁrm’s ability to identify, assimilate, transform, and apply
valuable external knowledge” (Roberts et al., 2012, p. 625). While the classical absorptive
capacity literature mostly focuses on knowledge, some studies relate it with data/information
acquisition, exploitation etc. that eventually generate knowledge (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990).
For example, in DDI context, Yu et al. (2021) suggest that ﬁrms apply various strategies to
produce, collect and exploit data for knowledge creation, market formation and investment
mobilization. Precisely, Chatterjee et al. (2021) demonstrate that acquisition of data, its
assimilation, synthesisation, and exploitation are associated with absorptive capacity, and
assist ﬁrms towards DDI.
In extant literature, “absorptive capacity is treated as a second-order construct composed
of three or four ﬁrst-order reﬂective constructs” (Cooper & Molla, 2017, p. 396). For exam-
ple, Cohen and Levinthal (1990, p. 128) suggests three components including acquisition,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
911
assimilation, and exploitation of knowledge. Later, Roberts et al. (2012) have summarised
identiﬁcation, assimilation, and application of external knowledge as the components/sub-
dimensions of absorptive capacity. Our study adopts Cooper and Molla (2017)’s notion that
modelled absorptive capacity as a second-order formative construct consisting four ﬁrst-order
constructs including acquisition, assimilation, transformation, and exploitation.
First, acquisition of data and knowledge is critical in DDI context. For example, identifying
and acquiring data from various sources is prerequisite of generating new ideas and applica-
tions (Chatterjee et al., 2021). Next, organisations need prior related knowledge to assimilate
and use new knowledge (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990). Hence, assimilation i.e., analysing,
understanding and interpreting data and knowledge obtained from external sources is impor-
tant (Cooper & Molla, 2017). Transformation capabilities help ﬁrms to develop and reﬁne the
existing processes that facilitate integrating its existing knowledge with the newly acquired
and assimilated knowledge (Cooper & Molla, 2017). The ﬁnal is exploitation capacity. DDI is
related with business initiative that is based on exploiting data and generating values (Jetzek
et al., 2014). Since the revolution of open data, data is now an accessible resource but often
“is not sufﬁciently exploited”; the ﬁrms that “know how to exploit it wisely will enjoy huge
economic and social advantages” (Deloitte, 2016, p. 5). Recent studies, in general, ﬁnd a
direct association between absorptive capacity and organisation’s innovation capacity (e.g.,
Sancho-Zamora et al., 2022). In DDI context, extant literature reports that DDI requires the
exploitation of data to create value through data acquisition, data analysis, data curation, data
storage and data usage (e.g., Bresciani et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021).
3.2.2 Technology-oriented leadership
Current studies suggest strong leadership in general (e.g., Luo, 2022) and IT leadership in
speciﬁc (e.g., Chatterjee et al., 2022) as important organizational variables for DDI. More
speciﬁcally, “leadership around data-driven decisions was crucial: if the CEO makes it clear
that data is required to support every decision, then the organisation can orient around mea-
sured reality rather than around hunches about the way the world actually is” (Glass et al.,
2015, p. 35). In open data environment, although all ﬁrms have similar access to data, not all
can use it because of difference in technology-oriented leadership (e.g., Jetzek et al., 2014).
Therefore, the utilisation of data to create innovative applications needs strong technology-
oriented leadership for DDI. This speciﬁc type of leadership entails integrating IT effort with
business purpose and operations, and deciding procedures and designing workﬂows related
to DDI development (OECD, 2015c). Contrary to general leadership, technology-oriented
leadership focuses speciﬁcally on management’s IT and technology-oriented leadership—a
pattern of CIO-type positions in the business leadership structure of a ﬁrm. The technology-
oriented leadership suggests managers with open data and DDI awareness and knowledge
who place DDI initiatives into the overall business of the ﬁrm, set effective strategy, and
assign appropriate level of authority and resources (adapted from Hossain et al., 2016a,
2016b). They further establish strong IT strategies including directing training, research and
innovation (Chatterjee et al., 2021; Feeny & Willcocks, 1998). Form DDI context, Chatter-
jee et al. (2022) have found that technology-oriented leadership moderates the relationship
between ﬁrms’ SC management capability and SC performance. Deloitte (2016) suggests
that ﬁrms having strong technology-oriented leadership produce more DDI applications than
their counterparts do.
123

912
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
3.2.3 IT skill
DDI development demands different IT skills, for example, to collect data, make sense of the
data, and analysing and applying data for application development (Kopanakis et al., 2016).
“The anticipated beneﬁts in productivity growth from DDI depend on several enabling and
complementary factors, including in particular (i) the level of skills available to organisations,
and (ii) the readiness of organisations” (OECD, 2014, p. 8). As DDI is relatively new, the
skilled workforce is not readily available in the market (LaValle et al., 2011). “Lack of
people with the right skills was the real constraint on DDI” (Glass et al., 2015, p. 35). Recent
DDI studies have found that skilled professionals (Bresciani et al., 2021; Luo, 2022; Witjas-
Paalberends et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2021) are critical for DDI as their unavailability disrupts
DDI development (Babu et al., 2021; OECD, 2015b).
3.3 Environmental variables
3.3.1 Communication infrastructure
In the current context, communication infrastructure is deﬁned as the extent to which a ﬁrm
can access the required technological systems to collect data from various open sources,
process it to develop applications, and bring the applications into market. DDI develop-
ment is not easy without an effective technical communication infrastructure (Jetzek et al.,
2019). An effective data communication infrastructure facilitates easy data exchange between
government agencies, private ﬁrms, and the users (Jetzek et al., 2014). To develop an appli-
cation, developer-ﬁrms need data that are distributed across different sources (e.g., weather,
geographical, and population data, spatial planning, trade and ﬁnance). Therefore, a strong
communication infrastructure, which will ensure that different datasets can communicate
with each other, is required (Zuiderwijk & Janssen, 2014). Moreover, for DDI applications
to run, continuous communication between the users’ device (‘client’) and the (database)
server/s is required, which require effective communication infrastructure. Recent DDI stud-
ies (e.g., Babu et al., 2021; Lafferty, 2019) suggest that the lack of effective technological
and communication infrastructure is a signiﬁcant barrier for DDI.
3.3.2 Multiple platform
In general, “a platform is a group of technologies that are used as a base upon which other
applications, processes or technologies are developed” (Techopedia, n.d.). More speciﬁcally,
digital platform refers to an environment (or a technical architecture) upon which a DDI
application is supported, developed and/or run. “The future of innovation will involve data-
driven innovation based on new digital platforms” (Andersen & Pedersen, 2021, p. ix). They
further discuss speciﬁcally about two different types of platforms that support DDI: “one is
a broad platform, such as the platform offered by CBInsights (delivers industry reports at
macro level) and the other type of platform, such as the one offered by Valuer.ai (operates
solely at the micro level). The availability of different digital platforms is important for DDI
because they “enable a data-driven world” (Bendor-Samuel, 2018). The data for DDI to
develop need to be available in multiple platforms including web and mobile, Windows or
Mac, or smartphone and tables with Windows, Apple, or Android. Similarly, DDI developers
develop applications that allow end-users to run on multiple platforms.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
913
The research model, integrating the TOE variables as the antecedents of DDI development,
is presented in Fig. 1.
4 A conﬁgurational model of DDI development
The majority of TOE studies assume the relations between TOE variables are symmetric.
However, Hossain et al. (2022) and Zhao and Fan (2021) suggest that technology adop-
tion is quite complex where one variable by itself cannot explain the adoption phenomenon
fully; rather, more than one variable together inﬂuence the outcome variable in question.
Regression models e.g., PLS-SEM partially addresses this issue by employing moderation
(aka interaction) effect but cannot handle multiple variables in a single moderating effect.
Moreover, ‘one-model-ﬁts-all’ approach seldom works; we often see that two studies con-
ducted in a same context and applying similar regression methods produce different results
(Hossain et al., in press). It happens because these models assume an independent variable
(IV) as both a necessary and sufﬁcient condition to predict the dependent variable (DV),
and relations between the DV and IV are symmetric (Pappas et al., 2020). However, this
is extremely optimistic and misleading because the relationship between two variables is
unlikely to be symmetric (Woodside, 2014). Rather, one IV may be necessary for a DV but
not always be sufﬁcient; it rather may need to be combined with other IVs with different
combinations. Therefore, a conﬁgurational approach is required to identify the asymmetric
relations between the IVs (‘condition’) to predict the DV (‘outcome’).
We posit that DDI development is a complex phenomenon because it depends on the
different conﬁgurations of TOE factors (Petter et al., 2007). On DDI, Jetzek et al. (2014)
suggested a research agenda to investigate the “conﬁgurations of [the] … enabling factors”
leading to DDI (p. 117). Our conﬁgurational research model (see Fig. 2) posits that DDI
developmentdependsontechnological(i.e.,dataqualityandmetadataquality),organisational
Absorptive Capacity
Acquisition
Assimilation
Transformation
Exploitation
Technology-oriented 
Leadership
IT Skill
Organization
DDI Development
Communication 
Infrastructure
Multiple Platform
External Environment
Technology
Data Quality
Metadata Quality
Denotes Absorptive Capacity as a 
second-order formative construct
Control variable:
size and type of firm
Fig. 2 The research model predicting DDI development
123

914
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Fig. 3 A conﬁgurational view of DDI development
(i.e., absorptive capacity, technology-oriented leadership, and IT skill), and5 environmental
(i.e., communication infrastructure and multiple platform) factors. When identifying the
detailed nature of the conﬁgurations of the TOE variables, we speciﬁcally look at three
propositions, which have been developed from the tenets of complexity theory (Woodside,
2014).
Proposition 1 A TOE factor individually may be necessary but is rarely sufﬁcient for pre-
dicting high scores in DDI development.
Proposition2 Outcomesofinterestrarelyresultfromasingleconditioni.e.,causalconditions
rarely operate in isolation. Hence, a combination of two or more TOE factors may suggest
sufﬁcient condition for a consistently high score in DDI development.
Proposition 3 Not just one deterministic solution, but disparate conﬁgurations of causal
factors (i.e., conditions) are equiﬁnal in leading to in an outcome condition. It means high
scores in DDI development can be achieved through different conﬁgurations of the TOE
variables.
5 Research method
5.1 Measures
For reliability, our measures are based on previously developed indicators. Data quality
is often discussed with its attributes (Wang & Strong, 1996) including accuracy, currency,
openness, accessibility, and completeness (Roa et al., 2019). In open data and DDI context,
data quality is characterised with completeness, correctness, ease of linking, and consistency
of data. Therefore, to measure data quality, we adopt scales from Purwanto et al. (2020).
Similarly, using the scale from Hossain et al. (2022), metadata quality has been measured
5 Here, “and” refers to contrary to the individual effects of these variables but a meaningful conﬁgurations of
them.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
915
with four items: consistent, easy to understand, structured, and well-documented features of
metadata available on open datasets.
Following the scholars, “absorptive capacity is modelled as a second-order reﬂective-
formative construct” (Cooper & Molla, 2017, p. 396). Therefore, to be consistent with prior
studies (e.g., Cooper & Molla, 2017; Sancho-Zamora et al., 2022), our lower-order constructs
(LOC) (i.e., acquisition, assimilation, transportation, and exploitation) of the higher-order
construct (HOC) i.e., absorptive capacity are measured with reﬂective items. The items of
acquisition, assimilation, transportation, and exploitation have been adopted from Jansen
et al. (2005) and Flatten et al. (2011). As absorptive capacity is a HOC, it does not have
any items to measure but uses the items of its LOC as reﬂective measures (see Hair et al.,
2021 for detail). Technology-oriented leadership has been measured with ﬁve items. Its ﬁrst
item, adapted from Feeny and Willcocks (1998), identiﬁes the managers’ knowledge, on
DDI. The following three items have been taken from Hossain et al. (2022) that reﬂect if the
management endorses, and develops and communicates DDI, and provide training on it. The
ﬁnal item (management’s innovative ideas) has been obtained from Deloitte (2016), which is
not validated but consistently reported by DDI studies (e.g., Sultana et al., 2022a). Similarly,
IT skill has used four items from Hossain et al. (2022).
Because of scarcity, this current study has developed the measures of environmental factors
(i.e., communication infrastructure and multiple platform), and DDI development. From
extant studies (e.g., Hossain et al., 2022; Jetzek et al., 2014) and industry reports (e.g.,
Deloitte, 2016), we have initially identiﬁed the items of respective constructs. The items
then have been reviewed by a convenient sample of three academics (working in IS ﬁeld)
and two PhD students (on data analytics) to ensure consistency, ease of understanding, and
relevance to the context. In this process, we checked the content validity of the items, applying
derivate of Q-Methodology (Van Exel & De Graaf, 2005) and item matrix vs. construct rating
(MacKenzie et al., 2011). We grouped and placed the items horizontally, and the columns
represented the constructs. All the respondents have correctly allocated the item groups to
their respective constructs, which express the adequacy of the content validity of the items.
Before ﬁnalising, we have had a one-on-one session with these experts to ensure content
validity. Table 4 contains our construct measures.
All these items have been rated based on 5-point Likert scale ranging from ‘strongly
disagree’ to ‘strongly agree’ because “literature suggests that ﬁve-point scale appears to be
less confusing and to increase response rate” (Bouranta et al., 2009, p. 280). All indicators
are reﬂective in nature. We have demographic variables: size (i.e., number of employee),
type (private, not-for proﬁt, and others) (Chaudhuri et al., 2021), industry category (e.g.,
technology, healthcare), and business model (e.g., B-2-B, B-2-C) (Hallikainen et al., 2020),
and the position of the respondent (e.g., senior and mid-level manager) (Chaudhuri et al.,
2021). To measure ﬁrm size, we use the OECD (2005) deﬁnition, i.e., by assigning ﬁrms
into the categories of 1–49 employees (small), 50–249 employees (medium-sized), and more
than 250 employees (large).
5.2 Data collection
The empirical context of our research is Australian organisations engaged in DDI devel-
opment using open data. Australia has been chosen for this study because it is one of the
forerunners that “make public data openly available and support its use to launch commercial
and non-proﬁt ventures … [and] make data-driven decisions” (DPMC, 2016, p. 25). In 2013
alone, DDI added $67 billion to Australian economy (Keating, 2014). For data collection, we
123

916
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
have obtained a list of the name and website address of Australian private organisations from
various sources including https://data.gov.au/ and the Open Data 500 Global Network. From
their respective homepage, the contact email address has been obtained. An email (invita-
tion letter), along with the link of the online survey, was sent to each organisation asking to
forward to the people who are engaged on DDI movements. In the invitation letter, we have
explained the purpose of the study and any future use of data collected promising utmost
data conﬁdentiality. Moreover, two authors have browsed each of the websites and collected
email addresses, where possible, of potential respondents. We also requested the participants
to pass the questionnaire to other colleagues if they believed that their colleagues qualify to
respond the survey. Thus, we have allowed multiple responses from one organisation, which
is common in DDI research ﬁeld (e.g., Chatterjee et al., 2021). In fact, “Numerous authors
in the management and marketing literature have called for using multiple, as opposed to
single, respondents per organization” (Balloun et al., 2011, p. 288). Hence, have applied a
combination of convenience and snowball sampling for data collection.
The online survey, administered by a research assistant, using Qualtrics platform was
launched in March 2021. After two weeks, a reminder email was sent to the same email
addresses. It can be noted here, in order to secure privacy, we did not use any code to the
web link or did not record the IP address of the respondents. Through two waves of data
collection over four weeks, we obtained 264 complete and usable responses. The proﬁles of
the responding ﬁrms and the respondents are summarized in Table 5. It can be mentioned
that, in the questionnaire, we intentionally kept ‘annual revenue’ as non-mandatory (i.e.,
optional) so that they do not feel any information-discloser threat or social desirability bias.
Consequently, more than 41% respondents did not answer this; therefore, we discarded
‘annual revenue’ from data analysis.
5.3 Common method bias
This study has used remedies to minimise common method bias (CMB). As the procedural
remedies, measurement items used in this study have been taken from previously developed
and applied studies, where possible. In the questionnaire, some items have been reverse-
coded. Next, the instructions of the survey questionnaire have been kept as simple and direct
aspossible.Inaddition,respondentshavenotbeenallowedtorevisitthequestionstheyalready
attempted. Regarding statistical remedies, ﬁrst, we compared respondents in the ﬁrst wave
(n  155) with later respondents (n  109) on all measures through a t-test. The t-test results
do not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant difference at a signiﬁcance level of 5%. Next, following Lindell and
Whitney (2001), a marker variable “that is theoretically unrelated to substantive variables and
for which its expected correlation with these substantive variables is 0” (Williams et al., 2010,
p. 478) has been included in the model. The marker (“I like blue to other colours”), which
is theoretically unrelated to the nomological network shows an insigniﬁcant effect on DDID
(β  0.056, t  1.552, p  0.121), which suggests that CMB was negligible in this study.
Moreover, the correlation of the marker variable is 0.108, 0.105, 0.145, and 0.112 with DDID,
communication infrastructure, technology-oriented leadership, and IT skill, respectively. The
results suggest that CMB was negligible in this study (Williams et al., 2010).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
917
6 Data analysis
Our research model has been validated employing two complementary methods namely
partial-least-square based structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) and fuzzy set qualitative
comparative analysis (fsQCA); such approach is growing (e.g., Fang et al., 2016; Mikalef
& Pateli, 2017). PLS-SEM “allows the testing of theoretical frameworks from a prediction
perspective and the analysis of complex models with latent constructs” (Rasoolimanesh
et al., 2021, p. 2). Alternatively, fsQCA “offers an alternative for—or complement to—linear
regression analysis that is particularly suitable for the kinds of complex phenomena and
causal relationships” (Fainshmidt et al., 2020, p. 456).
6.1 PLS-SEM analysis
For PLS data analyses, we have used SmartPLS 3.3.3. Following standard PLS procedure, the
validity of the constructs was established by examining their reliability, convergent validity,
and discriminant validity. For internal consistency, composite reliability (CR) and Cronbach’s
alpha (α) for each construct were calculated. As shown in Table 6, all the values for CR and
α are greater than the threshold of 0.70. In order to evaluate convergent validity of the
constructs, outer loadings of the items and the average variance extracted (AVE) have been
checked (Hair et al., 2021). Following Igbaria et al. (1995), one item having < 0.6 has been
discarded (see Table 4). Similarly, the AVE values of all constructs are well above the required
minimum level of 0.50 (see Table 6). Discriminant validity has been ﬁrst assessed based on
both Fornell-Larcker criterion (see Table 6). The square root of each construct’s AVE is
greater than its highest correlation with any other construct (Henseler et al., 2009). Next,
the HTMT values are lower than the conservative threshold value of 0.85 (Hair Jr et al.,
2021). The collective evidence suggests that the constructs and the items demonstrate good
measurement properties. Further, the VIF values of the items (ranging between 1.127 and
2.9) are below the threshold value of 5; thus, collinearity has not reached to critical levels in
any of our constructs.
Next, we assess the higher-order scale of absorptive capacity. It is found that the CR, α, and
AVE of absorptive capacity are 0.839, 0.745, and 0.523, respectively, which provide evidence
of reliable higher-order measures. The results conﬁrm that each of the ﬁrst-order construct
acquisition (β  0.320; t  16.084), assimilation (β  0.215; t  5.246), transformation (β
 302; t  10.402), and exploitation (β  0.501; t  15.442) has a strong association with
the second-order construct (i.e., absorptive capacity). Further, they explain 99.6% absorptive
capacity. Hence, we conclude that the four LOCs statistically explain the HOC i.e., absorptive
capacity.
To assess the structural model, we ﬁrst examine the R2 values of DDID is almost substan-
tial (65.5%) (Henseler et al., 2009). Then, we evaluate the direct effects of the TOE variables.
The results show in Table 2 show that the technological and organisational variables have
signiﬁcant positive impact on DDID. Next, the LOCs of absorptive capacity also have sig-
niﬁcant indirect effect (through absorptive capacity) on DDID. However, we could not ﬁnd
any inﬂuence of the control variables on DDID.
An additional analysis has been performed to control for the effect of the ﬁrm size and
respondent’s position on DDID. To test the effect of respondent’s job position, we have
grouped the executives and senior managers under ‘senior manager’, and the operations
manager, data analysts, and operations ofﬁcer under ‘mid-level manger’. The bootstrapping
results show that the ﬁrm size and respondent’s position have statistically non-signiﬁcant
123

918
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Table 2 The structural model results showing the inﬂuence of the driver of DDI development
β value
SE
t value
p value
Data quality
0.116
0.057
2.030*
0.046
Metadata quality
0.152
0.058
2.633*
0.009
Absorptive capacity
0.246
0.052
4.768***
0.000
Technology-oriented leadership
0.211
0.075
2.832**
0.005
IT Skill
0.269
0.061
4.446***
0.000
Communication infrastructure
−0.006
0.056
0.111
0.912
Multiple platform
0.023
0.055
0.422
0.673
Lower-order constructs of absorptive capacity (indirect effect)
Acquisition
0.075
0.017
4.442***
0.000
Assimilation
0.059
0.017
3.457***
0.001
Transformation
0.069
0.015
4.619***
0.000
Exploitation
0.116
0.025
4.628***
0.000
CI conﬁdence interval
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.005, ***p < 0.001
effects (β  0.023; t  0.626; p  0.532), and (β  0.025; t  0.624; p  0.533), respectively,
on and DDID.
6.2 fsQCA analysis
To test the proposed conﬁgurational model (Fig. 2), have applied asymmetric modelling using
fsQCA (Ragin, 2000, 2018). This method examines the relationships between the outcome
variable (i.e., DDI development) and all possible combinations of binary states, i.e., presence
or absence of its conditions (i.e., TOE variables). For our analysis we follow guidelines and
recommendations from recent papers in IS (Mattke et al., 2021; Pappas & Woodside, 2021;
Park et al., 2020). The fsQCA analysis has been carried carried out using the software fsQCA
3.0 (Ragin, 2018); the reason for the choice is that the software supported all the required
calculations for the analysis.
Using fsQCA software (from www.fsQCA.com), we ﬁrst have conducted data calibration.
We have rescaled the latent variable scores produced by PLS-SEM into fuzzy values (values
between 0 and 1) (Rasoolimanesh et al., 2021). It requires calibrating the standardized latent
variable scores between −3 (i.e., full-set non-membership) and 3 (full-set membership),
whereby 0 (zero) is the crossover point (intermediate-set membership) (Rasoolimanesh et al.,
2021). Similarly, to calibrate size, three values i.e., 3, 1, and 2 correspond to full-set member-
ship, full-set non-membership, and intermediate-set membership, respectively. Calibration
is not required for organisation type where 1 is used for “private” and 0 for “non-private”
ﬁrms (Olya & Akhshik, 2019).
Next, the calibrated data have been incorporated into a fuzzy-set truth table. The truth table
lists all possible conﬁgurations of the conditions. In reﬁning the truth tables, we delete rows
with no cases (Ragin, 2008). In addition, for conﬁgurations with a PRI consistency of < 0.75,
the outcome in the truth table has been set to “0” to ensure that the sufﬁcient conﬁgurations
exhibit a satisfactory quality (Mattke et al., 2021; Ragin, 2008). Furthermore, from the truth
table,wehaveremovedthealternativesolutionswithlessthantwocases(Pappas&Woodside,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
919
Table 3 The diagrammatic
representation of the
conﬁgurational solutions
Conditions
Conﬁgurational solutions
S1
S2
S3
Data Quality
Metadata quality
Acquisition
●
●
●
Assimilation
⊗
Transformation
●
Exploitation
Technology-oriented leadership
IT Skill
●
●
Communication Infrastructure
●
Multiple Platform
Size
⊗
●
Raw coverage
0.590
0.467
0.471
Unique coverage
0.025
0.014
0.007
Consistency
0.987
0.986
0.986
Solution coverage
0.612
Solution consistency
0.983
Key: ●High level of a condition ⊗Low level of a condition
Necessary condition (high level); blank, ‘do not care’
2021; Ragin, 2008). For a conﬁguration to be considered as ‘sufﬁcient’, its consistency and
coverage6 values need to be >  0.75 (Pappas et al., 2020) and >  0.2, respectively
(Rasoolimanesh et al., 2021). The diagrammatic representation of the sufﬁcient solutions for
modelling high DDI development are outlined in Table 3. The results in Table 3 show that
data quality, exploitation, and leadership are common in every solution. At this stage, using
fsQCA software, we have run the necessary conditions test for high DDI development. For
a condition to consider as ‘necessary’, the consistency and coverage values should be equal
or higher than 0.8 (Roy et al., 2018). Based on results from necessary condition test and
the solutions in Table 3 (Mattke et al., 2021), we have identiﬁed that data quality (coverage
 0.861; consistency  0.863), metadata quality (coverage  0.868; consistency  0.871),
exploitation capacity (coverage  0.869; consistency  0.870), and technology-oriented
leadership (coverage  0.868; consistency  0.869) are necessary conditions for the high
score of DDID. It can be interpreted that DDID cannot occur without them.
The ﬁndings from the fsQCA on the conﬁgurations for DDID are presented in Table 3.
Every combination (i.e., solution) is able to explain the same outcome i.e., DDID at a speciﬁc
amount where a condition (i.e., variable) may be present, negated, or absent (no inﬂuence) on
a particular solution. The overall solution coverage shows that, 61.2% of DDID is explained
by the three solutions (S1, S2, and S3).
6 Consistencyshowsthedegreethatarelationshiphasbeenapproximated,andcoverageevaluatestheempirical
relevance of a consistent subset (Ragin, 2006).
123

920
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
7 Discussion
7.1 Findings
7.1.1 PLS results
The purpose of PLS-SEM method is to understand if the technological, organisational, and
environmental factors affect DDI development. From technology perspective, our results
suggest that data readiness (i.e., quality of data and metadata) is a signiﬁcant predictor of
DDI development. Speciﬁcally, data quality has positive effect on DDI development, which is
in line with recent researches that show that data is the foundation-level (Yu et al., 2021) and
essential resource for DDI (Gupta, 2022). Others show that overall quality of data is a concern
for open data (Jetzek et al., 2019) and DDI (Witjas-Paalberends et al., 2018). Similarly, DDI
development is dependent on metadata quality of open data, which is reiterated by prior
studies (Hossain et al., 2022, 2016a, 2016b; Trifacta, 2015). Combining these, this study
conﬁrms that the quality of data and metadata strongly increase DDI development of a ﬁrm.
Prior studies advocate that high-quality data and metadata drive high performance of open
data; equally, low-quality data and metadata hindered it (Sadiq & Indulska, 2017). Therefore,
to inspire the maximization of using open data for DDI development, the providers of open
data (e.g., government agencies) need to make sure and provide high quality and consistent
data (Bresciani et al., 2021). Accordingly, they need to work on enhancing quality of data
and metadata by applying contemporary tools and techniques (McCord et al., 2022; Wahyudi
et al., 2018).
Looking at the hierarchical model, all dimensions of the LOC i.e., acquisition, assimila-
tion, transformation, and exploitation signiﬁcantly contribute to their HOC i.e., absorptive
capacity. This is consistent with extant literature (e.g., Cooper & Molla, 2017). As far the
organisational variables are concerned, it is found that absorptive capacity is a strong pre-
dictor of DDI development. With a deeper look, exploitation and transformation capacities
had the strongest effects on DDI development, followed by data acquisition. Extant studies
(e.g., Belissent, 2018; Gupta, 2022) explain that the value of data is not situated on the data
itself but in what ﬁrms can do with it. While data quality establishes that data is ﬁt for use,
ﬁrms need to ensures that its use is acquiescent (Chaudhuri et al., 2021), exploited, and
streamlined. When both data quality and absorptive capacity work together, ﬁrms can create
immense value from data i.e., develop DDI applications (Gupta, 2022).
Moreover, both technology-oriented leadership as well as IT skill signiﬁcantly contribute
to organisational readiness. Earlier literature shows that technology-oriented leadership inﬂu-
ences organisational performance and readiness through innovation (Chatterjee et al., 2022).
It means that leaders with technological knowledge and expertise can support in develop-
ing and deploying big-data-based applications. This ﬁnding suggests for technology-oriented
leadershipthantraditionone(Chatterjeeetal.,2022).Althoughpreviousstudieshavereported
a positive inﬂuence of environmental factors on DDI development (e.g., Babu et al., 2021;
Jetzek et al., 2014), our results reject it.
7.1.2 Results of fsQCA analysis
Our results suggest that data quality, technology-oriented leadership, and exploitation capac-
ity individually is necessary but none of them individually is sufﬁcient to predict high DDID
scores. Rather, the solutions consist of several conditions (see solution 1–3). Therefore, our
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
921
proposition 1 is supported. This is consistent with prior studies (e.g., Hossain et al., 2022;
Zhao & Fan, 2021) that suggest that no single TOE variables is sufﬁcient. However, Hos-
sain et al. (2022) ﬁnd different necessary conditions for high performance of OGD e.g., IT
skill. Supporting the second proposition, the conﬁgurations shown in Table 3 combine more
than one TOE variable predicting high DDID. This supports the conﬁgurational approach,
contrary to net effects, in explaining a complex phenomenon. In line with our study, prior
studies (Hossain et al., 2022; Zhao & Fan, 2021) too derive conﬁgurations combining the
TOE variables for OGD performance. It implies that ﬁrms should pay simultaneous focus
on the TOE variables. According to proposition 3, to explain an outcome, there can be alter-
native models, not just one. Our fsQCA results offer three causal models predicting high
DDID scores; thus, proposition 3 is supported. Like ours, Hossain et al. (2022) and Zhao
and Fan (2021) suggest four conﬁgurations for high OGD. It implies that the same outcome
(e.g., DDID) can be obtained with more than one deterministic conﬁguration of the TOE
conditions (Woodside, 2014). In other words, there are more than one alternative models for
simulating high DDID; for example, S1 is a sufﬁcient but it is not necessary because there are
two alternative models (i.e., S2 and S3) that sufﬁciently explain conditions leading to high
DDID, as far as the TOE variables are concerned. From these supported propositions, we
surmise that DDI development is a ‘causally complex’ phenomenon (Misangyi et al., 2017)
where the ideal combinations of TOE variables are required.
Before we explain the individual solutions (i.e., solution 1–3), we ﬁrst report an inter-
esting ﬁnding. The solution 1 and 3 imply that, in general, the TOE variables have almost
similar roles for medium and large ﬁrms. They do not care environmental factors as long as
they possess technological and organisational readiness. This validates our PLS results that
suggest a non-signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the environmental factors on DDI development. This is
in line with a recent research from Hossain et al. (2022) that suggest the importance of man-
agement leadership and organisational skill for OGD initiatives in Australian government
agencies. However, contrary to our solution 1 and 3, they suggest strong inﬂuence of external
environmental factors. Therefore, contrary to a “one-size-ﬁts-all” approach, our study shows
that the TOE variables have differential effects on ﬁrms depending on their size.
The fsQCA results report three distinct conﬁgurations that sufﬁciently predict high DDID
where data quality, metadata quality, acquisition, exploitation, technology-oriented leader-
ship and skills present in all conﬁgurations. Moreover, acquisition capacity is common in
every solution, which suggests its importance on DDI. Out PLS results also suggest the
stronger effects of acquisition and exploitation—both on absorptive capacity and DDI devel-
opment. Although all ﬁrms can implement the solution 1 to enhance DDI development, small
ﬁrms can alternatively implement the second solution, and big ﬁrms the third one.
Solution 1 does not take into account ﬁrm size. In other words, all ﬁrms can implement
the ﬁrst combination of technological-organisational variables to enhance DDI development.
This conﬁguration further indicates that any ﬁrm can achieve DDI provided it has developed
transformation capacity (do not care assimilation) and high IT skill, along with the common
factors. This solution supports our PLS-SEM results and in line with prior studies that ﬁnd
the individual effects of these conditions (e.g., Chatterjee et al., 2022; Roberts et al., 2012).
Our second solution suggests a different combination of TOE variables for small ﬁrms. In
this conﬁguration, communication infrastructure is sufﬁcient for DDI development when it
is combined with the common conditions, even with low assimilation capacity. This solution
suggests improving underlying infrastructure for communicating data and high-quality DDI
applications. This is in line with recent research showing that small ﬁrms do not care multiple
platforms for successful DDI as they cannot afford different platforms (The Cheap Squad,
2020). On the contrary, because of their size, which can be related with less resource, they
123

922
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
depend on the infrastructures developed by external bodies. Moreover, their no transformation
or low assimilation capacity do not affect their DDI performance as long as they possess high
acquisition and exploitation capacities. They rather struggle to develop DDI in case of low
data quality, and metadata quality (Ataccama, 2021). Interestingly, this is the only solution
that suggests the convergence of TOE variables for DDI development, which implicitly
derives that the full TOE model works better for smaller ﬁrms.
Conﬁguration 3 shows that large ﬁrms, without assimilation and transformation capacities,
and even skilled people still can be successful for DDI development when they possess the
common factors. The non-signiﬁcant effect of assimilation and transformation for big ﬁrms
is plausible as data integration etc. are routinized in bigger ﬁrms (Melovic et al., 2020).
Similarly, bigger ﬁrms usually possess high skilled workforce, and enjoy access to skilled
workforce than smaller ﬁrms (Dupuy & de Grip, 2002); therefore, our ﬁnding is reasonable
and is consistent with extant studies (Melovic et al., 2020).
7.2 Implications for research
Although previous studies have enumerated the failures of DDI, we still do not know much
why such initiatives fail (Dominic, 2019; Saulles, 2018). Our research implications are based
on revealing the black box in this phenomenon. Furthermore, this study complements other
studies that have demonstrated the relevance of combining SEM and fsQCA in explaining
complex phenomena (e.g., Rasoolimanesh et al., 2021) e.g., open data (e.g., Hossain et al.,
2022). The study contributes to TOE research in general and DDI research in speciﬁc in three
different ways.
Firstly, the fundamental TOE believes that “slack is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for
innovation” (Tornatzky et al., 1990, p. 161); we extend this traditional approach. Our PLS
analysis suggest that data quality, metadata quality, exploitation capacity, and technology-
oriented leadership individually has positive signiﬁcant effects on DDI development. The
fsQCA result ﬁnd that these are necessary for DDI—for any ﬁrm. Therefore, growth of DDI is
not possible without these technological and organizational resources. We further strengthen
the traditional view of TOE by suggesting that not only organisational resources, in fact,
no single TOE variable is sufﬁcient for DDI. This means the TOE variables cannot explain
DDI development when working individually (Zhao & Fan, 2021). Rather, the organizational
variables have to combine with technological drivers for medium-to-large ﬁrms; whereas,
these variables need to combine with environmental variable(s) for small ﬁrms. This respond
to a research agenda of prior studies (e.g., Bresciani et al., 2021) and extends our current
knowledge on DDI (Luo, 2022).
Secondly, TOE does not provide us the ‘sufﬁcient’ conditions for technology adoption.
Extending TOE, this study offers three fsQCA solutions/conﬁgurations to predict high DDI
development. All solutions suggest that, DDI is not only a technological move but also is
dependent on organizations variables. This extends our current knowledge and contributes to
the body of knowledge on the interplay between TOE variables to predict DDI development,
speciﬁcally in the developed countries. Moreover, in the literature review on TOE, Baker
(2012) summarizes that the relationship between ﬁrm size and innovation is inconclusive. Our
study suggests a few variations to it. For instance, difference in IT skills plays a critical role
for small-to-medium organizations; communication infrastructure is a major driver of DDI
only for small ﬁrms. Our study thus deepens existing knowledge on the possible differences
on the DDI drivers on the basis of ﬁrm size. This opens a future research avenue to identify
different equiﬁnal solutions combining TOE to predict a given outcome. It further encourages
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
923
prior studies to revisit their models and check if a conﬁgurational model can better explain
their research problem and the context.
Thethirdtheoreticalimplicationofthepresentstudystemsfromaninnovativeapproachwe
employed to explain the drivers of DDI development. In technology development contexts,
scenarios are often complex and unique since a factor can have a differential effect from
one organization to another, especially with the difference in availability of resources. Thus,
regression-based methods like PLS-SEM oversimplify the relationship between variables
(Pappas et al., 2020). This study therefore uses fsQCA to capture the complex relationships
between TOE variables and thus differentiates from the majority of the studies that are based
on variance-based methods (e.g., Chatterjee et al., 2021). As mentioned earlier fsQCA is a soft
OR method. Hence, the explicated conﬁgurations are the best possible conﬁgurations in terms
of necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for successful DDI development. Our fsQCA results
suggest asymmetric relationships between TOE variables and DDI development, leading to
the creation of new hypotheses suggesting differential effects of these variables and thereby
contributing to theory development.
7.3 Implications to practice
It is understood that DDI is transforming the economy and society of many countries, and
is emerging as an essential tool to improve growth and prosperity (Andersen & Pedersen,
2021). A signiﬁcant growing interest is also observed among users of DDI that incorporate
open data in usable formats e.g., for Smart mobility (e.g., Yadav et al., 2017). Such prospects
drive a growing interest to many organisations and researchers on how DDI initiatives can
be encouraged. Our study contributes to ongoing discussions on DDI by identifying its
drivers—from TOE perspective. Such research can enable ﬁrm managers and policymakers
to get insights that can help to understand the topic better.
Our ﬁrst practical implication guides ﬁrm managers and government agencies who need
to understand the value of high quality data and metadata for DDI. Primarily, this study
demonstrates that both data quality and metadata quality are necessary conditions to develop
DDI applications. That means, without them DDI is not possible to ﬂourish. High quality
data effectively can save lives if properly used and presented through data-driven applications
(Peled, 2011). Therefore, our research suggests that, as data readiness—in terms of data
quality and metadata quality—is essential for successful DDI development, government
agencies (as a big source of open data) should ensure quality data and metadata. The same
implication is valid for the other open data providers as well e.g., World Bank, World Health
Organization, and Google (Public Data Explorer).
The second practical implication target ﬁrm executives. Our results suggest that orga-
nizational dimensions are important for DDI. Considering absorptive capacity, exploitation
of data is necessary while assimilation is appreciated—for any organization irrespective of
size. This is historically evident (e.g., Ndiege et al., 2012). Therefore, ﬁrms need to exploit
employees’ knowledge on data and establish strategies to advance the use of it. Such strategy
may include practicing data-driven culture (Chatterjee et al., 2021) and ‘democratise’ data
within organizations so that anyone can make sense of the data and use/re-use it (Glass et al.,
2015).
The third implication can be useful for executives and governments. In terms of organi-
zational readiness, technology-oriented leadership is necessary for DDI. This is reiterated
by prior studies on DDI (e.g., Jetzek et al., 2019) that advocate that organizations must pro-
mote DDI through leadership. Thus, for successful DDI development, organizations should
123

924
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
emphasize on technology-oriented leadership over conventional leadership. The managers
should promote DDI to greater extent and train its workforce with data and IT matters. On the
contrary, skilled IT workforce—the other aspect of organizational readiness—is important
for small and medium organizations. “The availability of skilled workers affects the ability
of organizations to create shared digital content and digital products and services” (Jetzek
et al., 2019, p. 708). With the growing interest on data analytics, Big Data, and DDI, the gap
between the supply and demand for skilled professionals (e.g., data scientists, data analysts)
is evident and is predicted to continue (Jetzek et al., 2019). Our ﬁnding is echoed by extant
studies, e.g., “many more people must be equipped with the skills to develop, deploy and
operate DDI services” (Analysis-Mason, 2016, p. 36). Therefore, government (in liaison with
universities) must develop policies producing more graduates on this ﬁeld. In addition, gov-
ernment need to ensure an affordable-access of high skilled workforce to small and medium
ﬁrms.
Finally, we highlight that communication infrastructure plays an important role for DDI
development for small ﬁrms in particular. Our ﬁnding is in line with Jetzek et al. (2019). They
demonstrate that while OGD is a prime source of data for ﬁrms to develop DDI applications,
the actual value-generation depends on the digital infrastructure of a given country. It is plau-
sible that small ﬁrms possess resource constraints and therefore rely on external resources
including IT infrastructure. Our implication extends prior research e.g., Mosig et al. (2021)
that discuss how appropriate digital infrastructure of small business and start-up ﬁrms can
be developed through internal and external resources to realize the true value of DDI. There-
fore, to inspire successful DDI development, external bodies including governments and
third-party technology providers play signiﬁcant roles to ensure an efﬁcient communication
infrastructure, especially for the small ﬁrms.
7.4 Limitations and future research
Despite its signiﬁcant implications, our study has several limitations that recommend future
research directions. The ﬁrst limitation is related to generalisability of our model. While
our studied antecedents to predict DDI development are informed by a systematic literature
review, some other factors could have been overlooked. For instance, privacy and security
challenges of DDI application is a continuing concern7 (Saura et al., 2021), which could
be considered as technological issues. Also, organisational variables are dynamic in nature;
for example, different sets of analytical capability may decide the success of DDI by ﬁrms
(Sultana et al., 2021; Wamba et al., 2017). This is even more critical for fsQCA model, which
runs various conﬁgurations of a given set of causal factors. Consequently, the solutions are
sensitive to the range of factors included in the model—adding or removing factors may
lead to signiﬁcantly different solutions (Ordanini et al., 2014). Therefore, the conﬁgurational
solution might differ if other sets of TOE variables are included. The other issue regarding
generalizability of the results is collecting data from one country i.e., Australia. The drivers
and thus their conﬁgurations to predict DDI development may differ especially in the devel-
oping countries where open data movement is yet to be realised in greater scales (Kassen,
2019). Nonetheless, future studies could apply other relevant TOE variables and check if our
7 However, most open data do not include individual-speciﬁc data and thus most DDIs are free from privacy
violation—any information relating to an identiﬁed or identiﬁable individual; yet, privacy might be a concern
in the other side e.g., while using the DDI application (if the application accesses privacy data and transmits
to other accounts/applications).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
925
variables participate in their conﬁgurations as well. In addition, annual revenue could be an
important factor for ﬁrms to invest in DDI.
Second, our dependent variable was DDI development. The actual underlying variable of
interest in this context is successful development of DDI applications, which could be an
objective measure. In our study, we had no practical way of accessing this, and we antic-
ipated great difﬁculty in gathering such data in a survey and thus had to use subjective
measures. Therefore, we suggest research that is more engaged in the context—e.g. ethno-
graphic studies—that can enlighten us on the phenomenon. Further, apart from the supply
side, investigating this phenomenon from the user side of DDI ecosystem may deepen our
knowledge on DDI mechanisms.
Finally, we have collected cross-sectional data at a given time; conducting longitudinal
studies potentially will assess the varied nature and effects of the variables, if there is any.
In this regard, we could compare the effects of TOE variables at different stages of DDI
development lifecycle e.g., emerging, growth, maturity, and saturation (Riserbato, 2021). It
is likely that in early stage, the internal as well as external stakeholders do not realise the
potential of DDI and thus ﬁrms may experience a shortage in resources. As DDI matures over
time, the TOE variables may change or new variables may emerge (Hossain et al., 2016a, b).
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
Data availability Availability of data will be provided upon request (as supplementary document).
Declarations
Ethical approval Ethics approval has been obtained from one of the author’s institution.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix
See Tables 4, 5 and 6
123

926
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Table 4 The measures of the constructs
First-order constructs
Items
Loadings
Data Quality
1. In most cases, open data are exhaustive (i.e.,
complete)
0.844
2. In most cases, the free from errors
0.852
3. In most cases, it is easy to link/combine a
dataset to/with open data
0.867
4. In most cases, open data are well-formatted or
consistent across (different) datasets
0.841
Metadata Quality
1. Most data have consistent or high-quality
metadata
0.688
2. Most metadata are easy to understand
0.812
3. Most metadata are structured
0.837
4. Most metadata are excellently-documented
0.791
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
927
Table 4 (continued)
First-order constructs
Items
Loadings
Acquisition
Please specify to what extent your company obtain
knowledge for DDI:
1. The search for relevant open data is every-day
business in our company
0.838
2. Our management motivates the employees to
acquire data
0.879
3. We organize periodical meetings with different
parties to acquire new data
0.819
Assimilation
Please rate to what extent the following statements
ﬁt the knowledge assimilation in your company:
1. In our company, data are communicated across
units
0.824
2. In our company, there is a quick data ﬂow, e.g.,
if a business unit obtain important idea, they
communicates it promptly to all other relevant
units
0.862
3. Our management demands periodical
cross-departmental meetings to interchange new
developments related to DDI
0.831
4. We quickly analyse and interpret changing
market demands regarding DDI
0.723
Transformation
Please specify to what extent the following
statements ﬁt the knowledge processing in your
company:
1. We regularly consider the consequences of
changing market demands
0.869
2. We store newly acquired data for future
reference
0.843
3. Our employees successfully link existing data
with new insights
0.767
4. Our employees are able to apply new data in
their practical work
0.718
Exploitation
Please specify to what extent the following
statements ﬁt the commercial DDI exploitation in
your company:
1. We have a clear division of roles and
responsibilities
0.874
2. We constantly consider how to exploit data
0.833
3. Our management supports the development of
DDI prototypes
0.902
4. Our company reconsiders technologies
accordant to new data
0.799
Technology-oriented leadership
1. Our managers have profound knowledge on
technologies related to DDI
0.829
2. Our management actively endorses/appreciates
DDI initiatives
0.837
3. Our management develops and communicates
DDI plans
0.784
123

928
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Table 4 (continued)
First-order constructs
Items
Loadings
4. Our management provides IT training to the
staff
0.805
5. Our managers have innovative ideas regarding
DDI
0.660
IT Skills
1. We have staff with sufﬁcient expertise on DDI
0.917
2. We have sufﬁcient staff who can produce DDI
0.773
3. Our staff are skilled on DDI technicality
0.934
4. Our management allocates resources needed to
facilitate DDI initiatives
0.910
Communication infrastructure
1. The infrastructure is good permitting data
exchange between government agencies and
private ﬁrms
0.709
2. The infrastructure is efﬁcient ensuring that
different datasets can communicate with each
other
0.807
3. The infrastructure is effective to process large
datasets
0.800
4. The infrastructure is good to respond queries
from users’ device
0.687
Multiple platform
1. Most platforms (e.g., mobile, web) support DDI
applications
0.712
2. Set of standards are available to develop DDI
applications for different platforms
0.820
3. Data can be accessed via different platforms
0.855
4. Data can be analysed using different platforms
(e.g., mobile, web)
0.603
5. Data can be organised in different platforms
(e.g., mobile, web)
0.687
DDI Development
1. Developing DDIs is a main function/regular
practice of our ﬁrm
0.864
2. DDIs are important for current world
0.873
3. DDI development is critical for our ﬁrm
0.820
4. DDIs are important for developing new products
or services
0.859
The bold diagonals values represent the square root of respective variable’s AVE
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
929
Table 5 Respondents’ proﬁle
Category
%
Size of ﬁrm
Small (1–49)
18.12
Medium (50–249)
44.54
Large (250 +)
37.34
Organisation type
Private
71.07
Non-proﬁt
15.51
Other (e.g., social enterprise)
13.42
State the ﬁrms are located
NSW
32.75
VIC
25.88
QLD
14.32
ACT
9.67
WA
7.84
SA
6.22
TAS
3.32
Organisation category (industry)
Data/technology
33.31
Healthcare
13.72
Consultancy
13.36
Construction
11.64
Mining/manufacturing
10.54
Geospatial
7.35
Insurance
5.25
Others
5.03
Business model of ﬁrms
B-2-B
34.32
B-2-C
26.41
B-2-G
14.57
Advertising
13.74
B-2-B and C and G
5.53
Others (e. g., community service)
3.61
Subscription
1.82
Participant’s role in organisation
Executive (CTO, CIO etc.)
14.1
Senior Manager (data security etc.)
28.7
Business Operations Manager
21.7
Data Analyst
13.0
Operations Ofﬁcer
22.5
123

930
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Table 5 (continued)
Category
%
Participant’s gender
Male
167
Female
97
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
931
Table 6 The psychometric and discriminant validity tests
Construct
Psychometric property
Fornell-Larcker Criterion for Discriminant Validity
CR
Alpha
AVE
DQ
MDQ
ACQ
ASM
TRN
EXP
ITL
ITS
COMI
MulP
DDI
DQ
0.913
0.873
0.724
0.851
MDQ
0.864
0.795
0.615
0.565
0.784
ACQ
0.883
0.801
0.715
0.413
0.488
0.846
ASM
0.885
0.826
0.659
0.096
0.201
0.181
0.812
TRN
0.8770
0.813
0.643
0.285
0.325
0.384
0.201
0.802
EXP
0.914
0.874
0.727
0.511
0.538
0.602
0.226
0.457
0.853
ITL
0.889
0.844
0.617
0.680
0.549
0.426
0.209
0.350
0.560
0.786
ITS
0.936
0.906
0.785
0.498
0.583
0.406
0.110
0.286
0.535
0.538
0.886
COMI
0.839
0.746
0.566
0.498
0.412
0.391
0.130
0.311
0.463
0.526
0.430
0.753
MulP
0.860
0.782
0.608
0.573
0.512
0.399
0.243
0.376
0.524
0.609
0.479
0.574
0.780
DDI
0.915
0.876
0.729
0.610
0.639
0.554
0.232
0.349
0.639
0.666
0.660
0.461
0.554
0.854
CR composite reliability; alpha Cronbach’s alpha; AVE average variance extracted
The bold diagonals values represent the square root of respective variable’s AVE
123

932
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
References
Abella, A., Ortiz-de-Urbina-Criado, M., & De-Pablos-Heredero, C. (2017). A model for the analysis of data-
driven innovation and value generation in smart cities’ ecosystems. Cities, 64, 47–53.
Adida, B., Sanyal, A., Zabak, S., Kohane, I.S., & Mandl, K.D. (2010). Indivo x: Developing a fully substitutable
personally controlled health record platform. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings.
Analysis-Mason. (2016). Data-driven innovation for emerging Asia–Paciﬁc: supporting economic trans-
formation, protecting consumers https://report.analysysmason.com/ddi_emerging_apac/DDI%20in%
20emerging%20APAC%20-%20Final%20report%20-%202016%2008%2006%20-%20FINAL.pdf
Andersen, M. M., & Pedersen, T. (2021). Data-driven Innovation: Why the data-driven model will be key to
future success. Routledge.
Ataccama. (2021). Data: Nearly 8 in 10 Businesses Struggle with Data Quality, and Excel is Still a Roadblock.
PR Newswire. Retrieved 28 April from https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/data-nearly-8-in-10-
businesses-struggle-with-data-quality-and-excel-is-still-a-roadblock-301263583.html
Babu, M. M., Rahman, M., Alam, A., & Dey, B. L. (2021). Exploring big data-driven innovation in the
manufacturing sector: evidence from UK ﬁrms. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-021-04077-1
Baker, J. (2012). The technology–organization–environment framework. In Y. K. Dwivedi, M. R. Wade, &
S. L. Schneberger (Eds.), Information systems theory (pp. 231–245). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4419-6108-2_12
Balloun, J. L., Barrett, H., & Weinstein, A. (2011). One is not enough: The need for multiple respondents in
survey research of organizations. Journal of Modern Applied Statistical Methods, 10(1), 26.
Barney,J.(1991).Firmresourcesandsustainedcompetitiveadvantage.JournalofManagement,17(1),99–120.
Belissent,
J.
(2018).
Your
Data
Is
Worth
Nothing
Unless
You
Use
It.
Forbes.
Retrieved
17
April from https://www.forbes.com/sites/forrester/2018/05/02/your-data-is-worth-nothing-unless-you-
use-it/?sh=5a803ffe15d1
Bendor-Samuel, P. (2018). What is a digital platform? Enterprisers Project. Retrieved 10 June from https://
enterprisersproject.com/article/2018/12/what-digital-platform
Bhimani, H., Mention, A.-L., & Barlatier, P.-J. (2019). Social media and innovation: A systematic literature
review and future research directions. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 144, 251–269.
Bouranta, N., Chitiris, L., & Paravantis, J. (2009). The relationship between internal and external service
quality. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 21(3), 275–293.
Bresciani, S., Ciampi, F., Meli, F., & Ferraris, A. (2021). Using big data for co-innovation processes: Mapping
the ﬁeld of data-driven innovation, proposing theoretical developments and providing a research agenda.
International Journal of Information Management, 60, 102347.
Chatterjee, S., Chaudhuri, R., Shah, M., & Maheshwari, P. (2022). Big data driven innovation for sustaining
SME supply chain operation in post COVID-19 scenario: Moderating role of SME technology leadership.
Computers & Industrial Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.108058
Chatterjee, S., Chaudhuri, R., & Vrontis, D. (2021). Does data-driven culture impact innovation and perfor-
mance of a ﬁrm? An empirical examination. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-020-03887-z
Chaudhuri, R., Chatterjee, S., Vrontis, D., & Thrassou, A. (2021). Adoption of robust business analytics for
product innovation and organizational performance: the mediating role of organizational data-driven
culture. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04407-3
Cheah, S., & Wang, S. (2017). Big data-driven business model innovation by traditional industries in the
Chinese economy. Journal of Chinese Economic and Foreign Trade Studies, 10(3), 229–251. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JCEFTS-05-2017-0013
Chien, C.-F., Kerh, R., Lin, K.-Y., & Yu, A.P.-I. (2016). Data-driven innovation to capture user-experience
product design: An empirical study for notebook visual aesthetics design. Computers & Industrial Engi-
neering, 99, 162–173.
Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innovation.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1), 128. https://doi.org/10.2307/2393553
Cooper,V.,&Molla,A.(2017).InformationsystemsabsorptivecapacityforenvironmentallydrivenIS-enabled
transformation. Information Systems Journal, 27(4), 379–425.
Cronholm, S., Göbel, H., & Rittgen, P. (2017). Challenges concerning data-driven innovation. In The 28th
Australasian Conference on Information Systems, Hobart Australia.
Curley, M., & Salmelin, B. (2017). Open innovation 2.0: The new mode of digital innovation for prosperity
and sustainability. Springer.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
933
Deloitte. (2016). The value of DDI (Data Driven Innovation). G. Israel. https://www.pdfﬁller.com/jsﬁller-
desk16/?requestHash=1fbf6126ec436813a79067fd1f23703fab2578e76fc67dcced8a5ec7c2986891&
projectId=939942089&loader=tips&replace_gtm=false#b155f9c0bd3249f5a3aeeb91408206db
DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited institutional isomorphism and collective
rationality in organizational ﬁelds. American Sociological Review, 48, 147–160.
Dominic, B. (2019). Misconceptions That Lead to a Data-Driven Innovation Failure! Cogneesol. Retrieved
12 June from https://www.cogneesol.com/blog/misconceptions-lead-data-driven-innovation-failure/
DPMC. (2016). Australia’s ﬁrst Open Government National Action Plan 2016–18. https://www.
opengovpartnership.org/wp-content/uploads/2001/01/Australia_NAP_2016-2018_0.pdf
Dupuy, A., & de Grip, A. (2002). Do Large Frims Have More Opportunities to Substitute between Skill
Categories than Small Firms?. (June 14, 2002). CLS Working Paper No. 02-01, Available at SSRN:https://
ssrn.com/abstract=325220
Fainshmidt, S., Witt, M. A., Aguilera, R. V., & Verbeke, A. (2020). The contributions of qualitative comparative
analysis (QCA) to international business research. Journal of International Business Studies, 51(4),
455–466.
Fang, J., Shao, Y., & Wen, C. (2016). Transactional quality, relational quality, and consumer e-loyalty: Evidence
from SEM and fsQCA. International Journal of Information Management, 36(6), 1205–1217.
Feeny, D. F., & Willcocks, L. P. (1998). Core IS capabilities for exploiting information technology. Sloan
Management Review, 39(3), 9–21.
Fetene, G. M., Kaplan, S., Mabit, S. L., Jensen, A. L., & Prato, C. G. (2017). Harnessing big data for estimating
the energy consumption and driving range of electric vehicles. Transportation Research Part D: Transport
and Environment, 54, 1–11.
Flatten, T. C., Engelen, A., Zahra, S. A., & Brettel, M. (2011). A measure of absorptive capacity: Scale
development and validation. European Management Journal, 29(2), 98–116.
Gillan, A. (2021). Governance: The key driver for data-driven innovation. Computer Fraud & Security, 2021(4),
10–13.
Glass, H., Livesey, A., & Davies, P. (2015). Data driven innovation in New Zealand. https://srgexpert.com/
wpcontent/uploads/2017/11/Data_Innovation_Report_WEB.pdf. Accessed 12 August 2022.
Gupta, A. (2022). Fostering data innovation with data quality and governance. Collibra. Retrieved 17 April
from https://www.collibra.com/us/en/blog/fostering-data-innovation-with-data-quality-and-governance
Hair, J. F., Jr., Hult, G. T. M., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2021). A primer on partial least squares structural
equation modeling (PLS-SEM). Sage publications.
Hallikainen, H., Savimäki, E., & Laukkanen, T. (2020). Fostering B2B sales with customer big data analytics.
Industrial Marketing Management, 86, 90–98.
Hejazi, F. C. (2020). Digital Technologies in Supply Chain: The Amazon Case. Retrieved 12 March 2021 from
https://morethesis.unimore.it/theses/available/etd-07062020-124420/
Hemerly, J. (2013). Public policy considerations for data-driven innovation. Computer, 46(6), 25–31.
Hendler, J., Holm, J., Musialek, C., & Thomas, G. (2012). US government linked open data: Semantic. Data.
Gov. IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, 27(03), 25–31.
Henseler, J., Ringle, C. M., & Sinkovics, R. R. (2009). The use of partial least squares path modeling
in international marketing. In R. R. Sinkovics & P. N. Ghauri (Eds.), New challenges to interna-
tional marketing (pp. 277–319). Emerald Group Publishing Limited. https://doi.org/10.1108/S1474-
7979(2009)0000020014
Hernaes. (2021). Do you have what it takes to become data-driven? Hernaes.com. Retrieved 17 April from
https://hernaes.com/2021/11/08/do-you-have-what-it-takes-to-become-data-driven/
Hossain, M. A., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Rana, N. P. (2016a). State-of-the-art in open data research: Insights
from existing literature and a research agenda. Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic
Commerce, 26(1–2), 14–40.
Hossain, M. A., Quaddus, M., & Islam, N. (2016b). Developing and validating a model explaining the assim-
ilation process of RFID: An empirical study. Information Systems Frontiers, 18(4), 645–663.
Hossain, M. A., Rahman, S., Quaddus, M., Hooi, E., & Olanrewaju, A.-S. (2022). Factors affecting perfor-
mance of open government data initiatives: a multi-method approach using sem and FSQCA. Journal of
Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce. https://doi.org/10.1080/10919392.2021.2018258
Hossain, M. A., Standing, C., & Chan, C. (2017). The development and validation of a two-staged adoption
model of RFID technology in livestock businesses. Information Technology & People. https://doi.org/
10.1108/ITP-06-2016-0133
Igbaria, M., Guimaraes, T., & Davis, G. B. (1995). Testing the determinants of microcomputer usage via a
structural equation model. Journal of Management Information Systems, 11(4), 87–114.
Jansen, J. J., Van Den Bosch, F. A., & Volberda, H. W. (2005). Managing potential and realized absorptive
capacity: How do organizational antecedents matter? Academy of Management Journal, 48(6), 999–1015.
123

934
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Janssen, M., Charalabidis, Y., & Zuiderwijk, A. (2012). Beneﬁts, adoption barriers and myths of open data
and open government. Information Systems Management, 29(4), 258–268.
Jetzek, T., Avital, M., & Bjorn-Andersen, N. (2014). Data-driven innovation through open government data.
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 9(2), 100–120.
Jetzek, T., Avital, M., & Bjorn-Andersen, N. (2019). The sustainable value of open government data. Journal
of the Association for Information Systems, 20(6), 6.
Karlsson, J. (2021). Firm size and growth barriers: A data-driven approach. Small Business Economics, 57(3),
1319–1338.
Kassen, M. (2019). Open data politics: A case study on Estonia and Kazakhstan. Springer.
Khurshid, M. M., Zakaria, N. H., Rashid, A., Ahmad, M. N., Arfeen, M. I., & Shehzad, H. M. F. (2020).
Modeling of open government data for public sector organizations using the potential theories and
determinants—a systematic review. Informatics, 7(3), 24. https://doi.org/10.3390/informatics7030024
Kopanakis, I., Vassakis, K., & Mastorakis, G. (2016). Big data in data-driven innovation: the impact in enter-
prises’ performance. In Proceedings of 11th Annual MIBES International Conference.
Kozak, J., Kania, K., Juszczuk, P., & Mitr˛ega, M. (2021). Swarm intelligence goal-oriented approach to data-
driven innovation in customer churn management. International Journal of Information Management,
60, 102357.
Kubler, S., Robert, J., Neumaier, S., Umbrich, J., & Le Traon, Y. (2018). Comparison of metadata quality in
open data portals using the analytic hierarchy process. Government Information Quarterly, 35(1), 13–29.
Kusiak, A. (2009). Innovation: A data-driven approach. International Journal of Production Economics,
122(1), 440–448.
Lafferty, C. (2019). Sustainable Industry 4.0: Product decision-making information systems, data-driven inno-
vation, and smart industrial value creation. Journal of Self-Governance and Management Economics,
7(2), 19–24.
LaValle, S., Lesser, E., Shockley, R., Hopkins, M. S., & Kruschwitz, N. (2011). Big data, analytics and the
path from insights to value. MIT Sloan Management Review, 52(2), 21–32.
Lindell, M. K., & Whitney, D. J. (2001). Accounting for common method variance in cross-sectional research
designs. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 114.
Lisowska, B. (2016). Metadata for the open data portals. Development Initiatives. Retrieved 22 November
from http://devinit.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Metadata-for-open-data-portals.pdf
Luo, J. (2022). Data-driven innovation: What is it? IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2022.3145231
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2011). Construct measurement and validation proce-
dures in MIS and behavioral research: Integrating new and existing techniques. MIS Quarterly, 35 (2),
293–334.
Mattke, J., Maier, C., Weitzel, T., Gerow, J. E., & Thatcher, J. B. (2021). Qualitative comparative analysis
(QCA) in information systems research: status quo, guidelines, and future directions. Communications
of the Association for Information Systems., 50, 8. https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.05008
McCord, S. E., Welty, J. L., Courtwright, J., Dillon, C., Traynor, A., Burnett, S. H., Courtright, E. M., Fults,
G., Karl, J. W., & Van Zee, J. W. (2022). Ten practical questions to improve data quality. Rangelands,
44(1), 17–28.
McLoughlin, I., McNicoll, Y., Cornford, J., & Davenport, S. (2019). Data-driven innovation in the social
sector in Australasia—data ecosystems and interpretive communities. Public Money & Management,
39(5), 327–335.
Melovic, B., Rondovic, B., Mitrovic-Veljkovic, S., Ocovaj, S. B., & Dabic, M. (2020). Electronic customer
relationship management assimilation in Southeastern European companies—cluster analysis. IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2972532
Mihaljevic, H., Larsen, C. J., Meier, S., Nekoto, W., & Zirfas, F. M. (2021). Privacy-centred data-driven
innovation in the smart city. Exemplary use case of trafﬁc counting. Urban, Planning and Transport
Research, 9(1), 425–448. https://doi.org/10.1080/21650020.2021.1950044
Mikalef, P., Boura, M., Lekakos, G., & Krogstie, J. (2020). The role of information governance in big data
analytics driven innovation. Information & Management, 57(7), 103361.
Mikalef, P., & Pateli, A. (2017). Information technology-enabled dynamic capabilities and their indirect effect
on competitive performance: Findings from PLS-SEM and fsQCA. Journal of Business Research, 70,
1–16.
Mingers, J. (2011). Soft OR comes of age—but not everywhere! Omega, 39(6), 729–741.
Misangyi, V. F., Greckhamer, T., Furnari, S., Fiss, P. C., Crilly, D., & Aguilera, R. (2017). Embracing
causal complexity: The emergence of a neo-conﬁgurational perspective. Journal of Management, 43(1),
255–282.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
935
Morabito, V. (2015). Managing change for big data driven innovation. In V. Morabito (Ed.), Big data and
analytics (pp. 125–153). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10665-6_7
Mosig, T., Lehmann, C., & Moeslein, K. M. (2021). Business model innovation in the insurance industry:
Barriers faced by incumbents. International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management,
25(6), 391–419.
Ndiege, J. R., Herselman, M. E., & Flowerday, S. V. (2012). Absorptive capacity: Relevancy for large and
small enterprises. South African Journal of Information Management, 14(1), 1–9.
Neumaier, S., Umbrich, J., & Polleres, A. (2016). Automated quality assessment of metadata across open data
portals. Journal of Data and Information Quality (JDIQ), 8(1), 1–29.
OECD. (2005). OECD SME and entrepreneurship outlook 2005. OECD. https://doi.org/10.1787/
9789264009257-en
OECD. (2014). Data-driven Innovation for Growth and Well-being: Interim Synthesis Report. https://www.
oecd.org/sti/inno/data-driven-innovation-interim-synthesis.pdf
OECD. (2015a). Data-driven innovation: Big data for growth and well-being (Vol. https://www.oecd.org/sti/
data-driven-innovation-9789264229358-en.htm (Retrieved 21 Janauray 2021)). Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development.
OECD. (2015b). Data-driven innovation: Big data for growth and well-being (9264229353). https://doi.org/
10.1787/9789264229358-en
OECD. (2015c). Open Government Data Review of Poland: Unlocking the Value of Government Data (OECD
Digital Government Studies, Issue. O. Publishing
Olanrewaju, A.-S.T., Hossain, M. A., Whiteside, N., & Mercieca, P. (2020). Social media and entrepreneurship
research: A literature review. International Journal of Information Management, 50, 90–110.
Olya, H. G., & Akhshik, A. (2019). Tackling the complexity of the pro-environmental behavior intentions of
visitors to turtle sites. Journal of Travel Research, 58(2), 313–332.
Open Data Support. (2014). Introduction to metadata management European Commission, Euro-
pean Commission. https://www.europeandataportal.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/d2.1.2_training_module_1.4_
introduction_to_metadata_management_en_edp.pdf
Ordanini, A., Parasuraman, A., & Rubera, G. (2014). When the recipe is more important than the ingredients: A
qualitativecomparativeanalysis(QCA)ofserviceinnovationconﬁgurations.JournalofServiceResearch,
17(2), 134–149.
Pappas, I. O., Papavlasopoulou, S., Mikalef, P., & Giannakos, M. N. (2020). Identifying the combinations
of motivations and emotions for creating satisﬁed users in SNSs: An fsQCA approach. International
Journal of Information Management, 53, 102128.
Pappas, I. O., & Woodside, A. G. (2021). Fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis (fsQCA): Guidelines for
research practice in information systems and marketing. International Journal of Information Manage-
ment, 58, 102310.
Park, Y., Fiss, P. C., & El Sawy, O. A. (2020). Theorizing the multiplicity of digital phenomena: The ecology
of conﬁgurations, causal recipes, and guidelines for applying QCA. MIS Quarterly, 44(4), 1493–1520.
Peled, A. (2011). When transparency and collaboration collide: The USA open data program. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 62(11), 2085–2094.
Petter, S., Straub, D., & Rai, A. (2007). Specifying formative constructs in information systems research. MIS
Quarterly, 31(4) 623–656.
Purwanto, A., Zuiderwijk, A., & Janssen, M. (2020). Citizens’ trust in open government data: a quantitative
study about the effects of data quality, system quality and service quality. In The 21st Annual International
Conference on Digital Government Research.
Ragin, C. C. (2000). Fuzzy-set social science. University of Chicago Press.
Ragin, C. C. (2008). Redesigning social inquiry: Fuzzy sets and beyond. University of Chicago Press.
Ragin, C. (2018). User’s guide to fuzzy-set/qualitative comparative analysis 3.0. Department of sociology.
University of California.
Ramos, E. F., & Blind, K. (2020). Data portability effects on data-driven innovation of online platforms:
Analyzing Spotify. Telecommunications Policy, 44(9), 102026.
Rasoolimanesh, S. M., Ringle, C. M., Sarstedt, M., & Olya, H. (2021). The combined use of symmetric
and asymmetric approaches: partial least squares-structural equation modeling and fuzzy-set qualitative
comparative analysis. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management. 6Vol. 33 No. 5,
pp. 1571–1592. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJCHM-10-2020-1164
Riserbato, R. (2021). The 6 Stages of the Product Life Cycle. HubSpot. Retrieved April 18 from https://blog.
hubspot.com/marketing/product-life-cycle
Rizk, A., StAhlbröst, A., & Elragal, A. (2020). Data-driven innovation processes within federated networks.
European Journal of Innovation Management, 25(6), 498–526. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-05-2020-
0190
123

936
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
Roa, H. N., Loza-Aguirre, E., & Flores, P. (2019). A Survey on the problems affecting the development of
open government data initiatives. In 2019 Sixth International Conference on eDemocracy & eGovernment
(ICEDEG).
Roberts, N., Galluch, P. S., Dinger, M., & Grover, V. (2012). Absorptive capacity and information systems
research: Review, synthesis, and directions for future research. MIS Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.2307/
41703470
Roy, S. K., Balaji, M., Quazi, A., & Quaddus, M. (2018). Predictors of customer acceptance of and resistance
to smart technologies in the retail sector. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 42, 147–160.
Sadiq, S., & Indulska, M. (2017). Open data: Quality over quantity. International Journal of Information
Management, 37(3), 150–154.
Sancho-Zamora, R., Hernández-Perlines, F., Peña-García, I., & Gutiérrez-Broncano, S. (2022). The impact of
absorptive capacity on innovation: The mediating role of organizational learning. International Journal
of Environmental Research and Public Health, 19(2), 842.
Saulles, M. D. (2018). 5 reasons why data-driven innovations fail. CIO. Retrieved 12 June from https://www.
cio.com/article/3315616/5-reasons-why-data-driven-innovations-fail.html
Saura, J. R., Ribeiro-Soriano, D., & Palacios-Marqués, D. (2021). From user-generated data to data-driven
innovation: A research agenda to understand user privacy in digital markets. International Journal of
Information Management, 60, 102331.
Saxe, J. G. (1873). The Blind Men and the Elephant. Common Lit. Retrieved 17 April from https://www.
commonlit.org/en/texts/the-blind-men-and-the-elephant
Scottish-enterprise. (n.d.). The SoilEssentials story: How data is revolutionising farming. Scottish Enter-
prise. https://www.scottish-enterprise.com/support-for-businesses/develop-products-and-services/data-
driven-innovation
Serra, L. E. C. (2014). The mapping, selecting and opening of data: the records management contribution to
the open data project in Girona city council. Records Management Journal, 24(2), 87–98.
Sultana, S., Akter, S., & Kyriazis, E. (2022a). How data-driven innovation capability is shaping the future
of market agility and competitive performance? Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 174,
121260.
Sultana, S., Akter, S., & Kyriazis, E. (2022b). Theorising data-driven innovation capabilities to survive and
thrive in the digital economy. Journal of Strategic Marketing. https://doi.org/10.1080/0965254X.2021.
2013934
Sultana, S., Akter, S., Kyriazis, E., & Wamba, S. F. (2021). Architecting and developing big data-driven
innovation (DDI) in the digital economy. Journal of Global Information Management (JGIM), 29(3),
165–187.
Techopedia. (n.d.). Dictionary: platform. Janalta Interactive. Retrieved 30 June from https://www.techopedia.
com/deﬁnition/3411/platform-computing
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic management. Strategic
Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533.
The_Cheap_Squad. (2020). Why Small Businesses Can’t Afford NOT To Have an IT Provider. The Cheap
Squad. Retrieved 28 April from https://thecheapsquad.com/why-small-businesses-cant-afford-not-to-
have-an-it-provider/
Tornatzky, L. G., Fleischer, M., & Chakrabarti, A. K. (1990). Processes of technological innovation. Lexington
books.
Trabucchi, D., & Buganza, T. (2019). Data-driven innovation: Switching the perspective on Big Data. European
Journal of Innovation Management, 22(1), 23–40. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-01-2018-0017
Trifacta. (2015). Why a Data-Driven World Needs a New Approach to Metadata. Trifacta. Retrieved 17 April
from https://www.trifacta.com/blog/why-a-data-drive-worlds-needs-a-new-approach-to-metadata/
Van Exel, J., & De Graaf, G. (2005). Q methodology: A sneak preview.
van Oort, N., Sparing, D., Brands, T., & Goverde, R. M. (2015). Data driven improvements in public transport:
The Dutch example. Public Transport, 7(3), 369–389.
Villanova University. (2019). Metadata and Its Importance in a Data Driven World. https://www.villanovau.
com/resources/bi/metadata-importance-in-data-driven-world/
Wahyudi, A., Kuk, G., & Janssen, M. (2018). A process pattern model for tackling and improving big data
quality. Information Systems Frontiers, 20(3), 457–469.
Wamba, S. F., Gunasekaran, A., Akter, S., Ren, S.J.-F., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2017). Big data analytics
and ﬁrm performance: Effects of dynamic capabilities. Journal of Business Research, 70, 356–365.
Wang, R. Y., & Strong, D. M. (1996). Beyond accuracy: What data quality means to data consumers. Journal
of Management Information Systems, 12(4), 5–33.
Webster, J., & Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a literature review
(p. Xii–XXiii). MIS quarterly.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:895–937
937
Williams, L. J., Hartman, N., & Cavazotte, F. (2010). Method variance and marker variables: A review and
comprehensive CFA marker technique. Organizational Research Methods, 13(3), 477–514.
Witjas-Paalberends, E., van Laarhoven, L., van de Burgwal, L., Feilzer, J., de Swart, J., Claassen, E., &
Jansen, W. (2018). Challenges and best practices for big data-driven healthcare innovations conducted
by proﬁt–non-proﬁt partnerships–a quantitative prioritization. International Journal of Healthcare Man-
agement, 11(3), 171–181.
Woodside, A. G. (2013). Moving beyond multiple regression analysis to algorithms: Calling for adoption of
a paradigm shift from symmetric to asymmetric thinking in data analysis and crafting theory. Journal of
Business Research, 66, 463–472.
Woodside, A. G. (2014). Embrace• perform• model: Complexity theory, contrarian case analysis, and multiple
realities. Journal of Business Research, 67(12), 2495–2503.
Yadav, P., Hasan, S., Ojo, A., & Curry, E. (2017). The role of open data in driving sustainable mobility in nine
smart cities. In The 25th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Guimaraes, Portugal.
http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2017_rp/81
Yu, Z., Liang, Z., & Xue, L. (2021). A data-driven global innovation system approach and the rise of China’s
artiﬁcial intelligence industry. Regional Studies. https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2021.1954610
Zhan, Y., Tan, K. H., & Perrons, R. K. (2018). A proposed framework for accelerated innovation in data-driven
environments: Evidence and emerging trends from China. Industrial Management & Data Systems.
https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-11-2017-0542
Zhao,Y.,&Fan,B.(2021).Understandingthekeyfactorsandconﬁgurationalpathsoftheopengovernmentdata
performance: Based on fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis. Government Information Quarterly,
38(3), 101580.
Zuiderwijk, A., & Janssen, M. (2014). Open data policies, their implementation and impact: a framework for
comparison. Government Information Quarterly, 31(1), 17–29.
Zuiderwijk, A., & Janssen, M. (2015). Towards decision support for disclosing data: Closed or open data?
Information Polity, 20(2–3), 103–117.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123