TITLE: Satellite big data analytics for ethical decision making in farmer’s insurance claim settlement: minimization of type-I and type-II errors
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03793-4
---

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03793-4
S.I.: BUSINESS ANALYTICS AND OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Satellite big data analytics for ethical decision making
in farmer’s insurance claim settlement: minimization
of type-I and type-II errors
Narayan Prasad Nagendra1 · Gopalakrishnan Narayanamurthy2
· Roger Moser3
Accepted: 9 September 2020 / Published online: 24 September 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Farmers submitclaims to insurance providers when affected by sowing/planting risk, standing
crop risk, post-harvest risk, and localized calamities risk. Decision making for settlement of
claims submitted by farmers has been observed to comprise of type-I and type-II errors. The
existence of these errors reduces conﬁdence on agri-insurance providers and government in
general as it fails to serve the needy farmers (type-I error) and sometimes serve the ineligible
farmers (type-II error). The gaps in currently used underlying data, methods and timelines
including anomalies in locational data used in crop sampling, inclusion of invalid data points
in computation, estimation of crop yield, and determination of the total sown area create
barriers in executing the indemnity payments for small and marginal farmers in India. In
this paper, we present a satellite big data analytics based case study in a region in India and
explain how the anomalies in the legacy processes were addressed to minimize type-I and
type-II errors and thereby make ethical decisions while approving farmer claims. Our study
demonstrates what big data analytics can offer to increase the ethicality of the decisions
and the conﬁdence at which the decision is made, especially when the beneﬁciaries of the
decision are poor and powerless.
Keywords Big data analytics · Satellite imagery · Ethical decision making · Agriculture ·
Farmer · Insurance · India
B Gopalakrishnan Narayanamurthy
g.narayanamurthy@liverpool.ac.uk
Narayan Prasad Nagendra
narayan.nagendra@fau.de
Roger Moser
roger.moser@mq.edu.au
1
Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Lange Gasse 20, Sekretariat Zi. 4.428,
90403 Nuremberg, Germany
2
University of Liverpool Management School, Chatham Street, Liverpool L69 7ZH, UK
3
Graduate School of Management, Macquarie University, 99 Talavera Rd, Macquarie Park, NSW 2113,
Australia
123

1062
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1 Introduction
Small and marginal farmers are operating under risk and uncertainty due to the rainfed
dependence of agriculture in India. Crop insurance is a tool that has been widely utilized
to reduce ﬁnancial risks for small and marginal farmers (Gill and Singh 2006). Given the
rainfed dependence of agriculture in India, managing risk and uncertainty are quintessential
features of architecting any such insurance measures. The Government of India has instituted
crop insurance as a tool to mitigate the risk of indebtedness against the threat of natural
calamities to cultivators. These include prevented sowing or germination risk due to adverse
seasonal effects and weather conditions including deﬁcit rainfall, standing crop risk due to
non-preventable risks such as droughts, ﬂoods, inundation, pests/disease attacks, landslides,
natural ﬁres, lightening, storm, hailstorm and cyclone from the period of sowing to harvesting,
and post-harvest risk due to natural calamities and attack by wild animals (Ministry of
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 2016).
The challenge is not in the coverage of the risks but in the settlement of claims, which is
reported to be delayed by nine to twelve months or more due to inertia in the collection of data
for underwriting (Nair 2010). Further, poor quality of the collected data for the underwriting
process adds to the lack of trust (Gulati et al. 2018). Lack of timeliness and trust questions the
ability of the process adopted to differentiate a farmer who has actually suffered losses from
another farmer who has not. These issues in the execution of the indemnity calculations and
payments question the ethicality of the decision made as these decisions have immediate real
world consequences by restricting farmers from gaining access to formal credit for ﬁnancing
their next subsequent crop cycles (Mahul et al. 2012).
Research in normative ethics provides us a basis to review decision making which in a
simple model can be described as studying the interactions between intentions driving actions
which lead to consequences (Harrison 2005). While the intentions are positive in the case of
trying to use crop insurance as a tool to support small and marginal farmers in covering the
risks they face, the loop holes in decision making have unintended consequences. We believe
that creating efﬁciency in the process of settling crop indemnity will contribute to better
ethical decision making by bridging the gap between good intentions leading to unintended
consequences for small and marginal farmers. Within the context of this study, the ethical
aspects in decision making mainly are of concern when the farmers who have lost yield
are not served (type-I error) while the farmers who have not lost yield are served (type-II
error). The source of type-I and type-II errors in India’s crop insurance sector arises from the
loopholes in the data gathered to administer the insurance.
India has adopted area yield as a metric for insurance where the basis risk for the farmers
depend on the size and heterogeneity of the unit of area chosen. Area yield is an estimated
measure of the total crop yield over a geographic area. Presently, the metric is determined
by manually harvesting crops in randomly chosen locations through a process called Crop
Cutting Experiment (CCE) (sampling process by which crop yields are statistically estimated
in each insurance unit) (Sinha 2004). The assumption behind this type of assessment is that
annual average crop yield of a given area is agro-climatically homogeneous, that is spatially
equivalent with that of its adjacent areas due to common weather conditions and geological
features (Dandekar 1976). However, due to the assumption of homogeneity, the basis risk
used in area yield creates a mismatch between claim payments and losses incurred (Rao
2010).
In addition, CCEs are the single source of data used for determining the average yield
of a given unit area. But, CCE based sampling process is prone to several inaccuracies.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1063
According to a report by the government’s own task force on enhancing technology use in
agriculture insurance (Aggarwal et al. 2016), the CCE data used as the basis for underwriting
crop insurance has issues with credibility owing to complexities, human bias, measuring
errors, and high labor, time and cost intensive design. CCE data also has limitations in
covering spatial and temporal basis risks, and objective monitoring, reporting and veriﬁcation
processes (Aggarwal et al. 2016). Simply put, the indemnity payouts being homogenized to
a unit area based on CCE data creates a lack of checks and balances leading to the moral
hazard of providing grievance to ineligible cultivators (type II error) with the needy farmers
staring at long latencies for redressal (type I error). This forms the basis to provide attention
to ethical decision making in the underwriting process.
Using methods that are prone to corruption to compute individual farmer’s losses is an
impediment to develop trust among the stakeholders servicing them. These not only bear
direct effects of exposing farmers to a residual risk that creates a probability of not being
indemniﬁed even when losses occur but also create indirect effects of lack of trust for the
uptake of crop insurance itself (Elabed and Carter 2015). The use of spatial data to architect-
ing effective decision making has been showcased in developing countries (Gomes and Lins
2002) and provide timely responses in decision making (Liu and Yi 2018a). We believe tech-
nologies such as big data analytics carry such approaches forward and can solve challenging
problems by managing data complexity (complex types, complex structures, and complex
patterns make the perception, representation, understanding and computation challenging),
processing complexity (multi-sources, huge volume, and fast-changing) and system complex-
ity (high computational complexity, long duty cycle, and real-time requirements) (Jin et al.
2015). Within the ethics context, the open and independent availability of the data sources (i.e.
several satellites from various providers can independently map areas of interest and make
it available to everyone) creates possibilities for multiple independent assessments. We cap-
ture how this ‘democratic access’ to data (availability of open and independent sources) can
improve the consciousness in the process of farm insurance claims settlement by addressing
the below-stated research question:
RQ:How can satellite big data analytics potentially assist ethical decision making in
farm insurance claims settlement process by avoiding type I and type II errors?
This paper is organized as follows. The challenges in the operating environment of a small
and marginal farmer in India is described with the support of evidence from research in
socio-economics of Indian agriculture. We then review the risks involved in decision making
in the administration of crop insurance and discuss the social effects of the current operating
environment. This foundation allows us to project the current challenges in ethical decision
making which includes a review of the current method being used to collect, collate and
disseminate data in administering crop insurance. We highlight the case for why the use
of analytics has been challenging so far and how it could be leveraged to achieve ethical
decision making. We then utilize the case of Sirsa, a region from the state of Haryana in
India, which predominantly has cotton farmers to systematically discuss the mistrust among
stakeholders involved in administering crop insurance and their ethical implications on the
overall socio-economic landscape. We provide an overview of the underlying metrics and
mechanics which create bottlenecks for ethical decision making and how satellite big data
analytics can resolve them. We conclude our research by analyzing the broader role that
satellite data analytics can play in ethical decision making in the administration of the crop
insurance and moving forward, how it can be scaled to achieve trust among stakeholders.
123

1064
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
2 Literature review
Understanding the socio-economic status of Indian farmers becomes an important precedent
to understanding the need for crop insurance and the importance of effectively administering
it. According to the latest data, an average farm household in India makes Rs. 6426 per month
(~$100) with over half of agricultural families indebted with an average loan outstanding
per household being Rs. 47,000 (~$725) (Datta et al. 2018). This is in the context where
two-thirds of the farm households in India are cultivating in farms measuring less than or
equal to one hectare (Birthal et al. 2015) with the average annual income generated from
one hectare of net cultivated area touted to be Rs. 80,800 ($1250) to a farmer (Saxena et al.
2015, pp. 2011–2012). The poor ﬁnancial state of farmers in India is highlighted by the
fact that growth in farm income after 2011–2012 is only 1% with research suggesting that
this low growth rate is associated with the increase in agrarian distress (Saxena et al. 2015,
pp. 2011–2012). Essentially, the number of farmers’ suicides have increased during this
period of low growth and is expected to decrease if farm income increases at a higher rate.
Several studies have indicated dexterously architected and administered index insurance
for shock coping in agriculture can positively affect its adoption at the bottom of the pyramid
in developing countries to deliver higher productivity and minimize risk to small and marginal
farmers (Miranda and Farrin 2012; Lensink et al. 2016; Mahul and Charles 2010). Given the
various threats from natural calamities to a successful harvest, crop insurance is used as one
of the tools to alleviate ﬁnancial risk for farmers (Vyas 2004) by providing cover to natural
calamities and farming associated risks.
The latest drive by the Government of India is the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
(PMFBY), a comprehensive scheme positioned as a farmer’s maximum ﬁnancial protection
against non-preventable natural risks that include prevented sowing due to inclement weather,
mid-seasonadversitiesduetoﬂoods,droughtspell,unseasonalrains,etc.,localizedcalamities
such as hailstorm, inundation and landslides, and coverage for post-harvest losses (Press
Information Bureau 2017). According to latest media reports, of the 8,100,000 farmers said
to have registered under the PMFBY for the 2017 Kharif (monsoon) season, 4,500,000
are estimated to have made claims to the indemnities. However, only 8% of them received
indemnity payouts with an estimated 3-month delay (Kakodkar 2018).
The delay in indemnity payments has real world consequences for small and marginal
farmers. This can be understood by reviewing the credit side constraints. Strong evidence
exists from developing countries that formal credit institutions providing access to ﬁnance
have a bearing on the ability of the farmers to procure farm inputs (such as fertilizers, tractors,
etc.) (Narayanan 2016). A study based on a survey done with farm households indicate that
74% of Chinese households and 78% of Indian households experience credit constraints
resulting in a reduction of agricultural inputs, which lead to lost productivity and a positive
shadow price for credit (Kumar et al. 2013). In addition, the risk perceived by formal credit
institutions in India are high due to the fact that 40% of the food grains produced in India are
being rainfed.
Garnering success in the agriculture sector for any institutional ﬁnancial service is heavily
dependent on having a reliable foundation to check for adverse selection and moral hazard.
Seasonality, external production risks and volatility of managing the risk structure creates a
negative perception towards agricultural businesses and introduces resistance to participate
in ﬁnancial services industries (de Nicola 2015). The information asymmetry in agriculture is
due to the lack of ability to measure risks and collect data for monitoring producer behaviour
(Mahul and Charles 2010).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1065
The information collection and decision making in administering crop insurance in India
is based on the involvement of the States in data collection with the co-observation of the
insurers. The joint participation and consultations of the State with insurers come to a con-
clusion on the indemnity levels of high, moderate and low-risk level for notiﬁed crops and
areas. The indemnity levels are derived on the basis of comparing the average yield of the
current season with the historical yield of the crop called the threshold yield. The threshold
yield of the crop is calculated based on the average yield of the crop for the past seven years
(excluding up to two declared calamity years). Average yield is generated by conducting
CCEs at the level of unit area in locations generated using stratiﬁed multi-stage random
sampling (Mahul et al. 2012). CCEs based yield estimation is a manual process of harvesting
crops in a 5 m×5 m (25 sq. m) area selected based on the random sampling.
Given the fact that it is too expensive and time-consuming to have CCEs conducted on each
and every individual farm, the crop insurance in India adopts of what is referred to as an ‘area-
based approach’, which is accepted to mitigate adverse selection and moral hazard problems
(Halcrow 1949). The area-based approach works on the premise that geo-climatic conditions
in adjacent farms are similar (similar soil and weather conditions prevail in adjacent farms)
and therefore CCEs done in blocks of ‘similar areas’ (a collection of farms in a village) are
clubbed together to provide a reasonable estimate of the yield of a crop that can be used as
the basis for average yield per farm (Nair 2010). The current mandate by the government in
India is to conduct at least 4 CCEs per insurance unit (village level) (Ministry of Agriculture
& Farmers Welfare 2016). Upon the collation of the CCE data collected at all the insurance
units, the extent of indemnity payments are computed on the basis of the average yield of the
historically available data and the average yield of the year in question for the given insurance
unit. Therefore, the accuracy of the average yield (of the latest season as well as historical)
drives the decision making in paying out the indemnities to the affected farmers.
Government of India’s own task force acknowledges the fact that CCEs create the basis for
several discrepancies (Aggarwal et al. 2016) which needs to be addressed. Within the context
of this study, we describe four different bottlenecks created for ethical decision making below:
• Cost-based bottleneck: With at least four CCEs per crop to be conducted at the insurable
unit level, the total number of CCEs to be conducted for covering the entire agrarian land
in India as a part of the General Crop Estimation Survey (GCES) stands over 900,000.
This represents 230,000 such units (representative of total villages) where CCEs need to
conduct with the estimated minimum cost of $16 (Rs. 1000) per CCE. Apart from the
laborious process involved, the incentives for the manpower involved in conducting CCEs
are based on the volume. This may skew the results as the goal is not to be accurate to earn
more rather it is to conduct more CCEs.
• Sample-based bottleneck: Researchers have assessed that the prescribed four CCEs per
crop per village does not capture the scale and diversity of crop loss with farmers expressing
concern that the actual loss does not reﬂect the CCE derived loss (Bhushan and Kumar
2017). The ambiguity in the data may lead to situations where farmers affected ﬁelds don’t
fall in the selected four samples in the village which will lead to no one in that particular
village being eligible for any claim.
• Location-based bottleneck: There are reports of cases where the location of the CCE
generated by random sampling is not accessible to the ofﬁcials due to lack of infrastructure.
In such situations, although government asks its ofﬁcers to conduct CCEs in locations
generated by random sampling (Government of Telengana 2017), the practical difﬁculty
push the ofﬁcials to a completely different location (however reported as conducted in the
prescribed location) or having data reported by not conducting CCEs at all.
123

1066
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
• Time-based bottleneck: The window to conduct CCEs is highly constrained by the harvest
season with the recommended time period to be about two weeks before the harvest (Direc-
torate of Economics & Statistics 2017). The state task force and insurers have reported the
non-availability of trained manpower and co-observers respectively to be the bottleneck in
conducting the CCEs to the extent to cover all geographies. The constrained timelines to
conduct CCEs and the lack of ability to have co-observers by the insurer for all the CCEs
conducted by the state introduces trust deﬁcit in the data collected.
Due to the above-listed bottlenecks, integrity of data collected through CCE sits on top of
human bias and measurement errors. Apart from these bottlenecks, there are other inherent
challenges to ethical decision making such as the entire process is vulnerable to corrup-
tion leading to reporting of bogus CCEs (Currie 2000), conducting eye-estimation based
assessments (Banik 2007) and treating the process intended as just formalities on paper.
The information asymmetry not only creates type-I and type-II errors but also festers an
opportunityforexploitationcausingrippleeffects.Forexample,astudyontheroleofﬁnancial
institutions in agriculture discusses how pressure from political vested interest to appease vote
banks add to further weakening of the quality and sustainability of the ﬁnancial institutions
(Akoijam 2012). Similarly, a study on access to credit during elections in India indicates a
5–10% increase in lending from public sector banks and at the same time loan write-offs to
be linked with electoral success by the winning party (Cole 2009). The 5–10% growth in
agricultural credit from public sector banks observed during the election year is substantially
higher than the average annual growth rate in non-election years. At the same time, the
decisions on write-offs in districts of electoral success is not a phenomenon experienced
prior to elections. Clearly, the ethical problems that arise out of the information asymmetry
also go beyond just the type-I and type-II errors within the crop indemnity settlement process.
Therefore, addressing the foundation of the information asymmetry causing type-I and type-II
errors has value beyond the crop indemnity settlement process discussed in this paper.
3 Methodology, data and analysis
Our research deals with studying the real-life problems faced due to type-I and type-II errors
which are bearing negative effects in the lives of small and marginal farmers in India. These
challenges primarily arise from the use of handcrafted resource-intensive models currently
being used in the crop indemnity settlement process. In order to set the boundary conditions
to studying the problems in ethical decision making, we choose to focus the lens on a single
real-life instance experienced by small and marginal farmers in India. This allows us to
arduously study and comprehensively analyze the effects of information asymmetry of the
legacy approach and capture the need for satellite big data analytics to achieve ethical decision
making.
We ﬁnd that the works of Eisenhardt (1989) and Yin (1994) provide us the methodological
foundations to be able to conduct such a study and allow us to use the single real-life instance
to assess the potential of satellite big data analytics in addressing the ethical challenges by
minimizing the type-I and type-II errors arising out of the current crop indemnity claims
settlement process used in India. Kaplan and Duchon (1988) argue that despite normative
nature of such research, the case study approach nevertheless provides the grounds to rig-
orously study the effect of information systems on users, organizations or the society. In
their review of ethics in operations management and management science, Brans and Gallo
(2007) call for taking viewpoints of people affected in the process of decision making and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1067
call to use decision aids which can address unforeseen inﬂuences taking place. In our case
study research, we study the utility of satellite big data analytics to understand how it can
contribute to answering the research question on the minimization of type-I and type-II errors
and thereby address the ethical challenges currently being faced (Siggelkow 2007).
Our choice of a single-case study to address the research question allows us to tackle
different forms of arguments such as “how”, “what” and “why” through which we are able
to sustain evidence for the current operational challenges in ethical decision making and
minimize type-I and type-II errors. In discussing the operationalization of the satellite big data
analytics, there are several technicalities to the algorithms in processing the openly available
satellite data1 used within this research. We intentionally do not focus on describing the
engineering technicalities of each of the processes adopted to extract the information from
the satellite images. However, we have provided a nominal scientiﬁc brief to the process
involved in extraction of the information relevant in the conﬁnes of this study. Within the
purview of the research question raised, we believe it is more meaningful to discuss as to
how the results of the satellite data analytics post such technicalities is operationalized in the
decision-making process to remove the barriers faced by the stakeholders highlighted in the
paper.
3.1 Exploratory case study methodology
The present case study is based on the experience of cotton cultivators in the district of Sirsa
(area: 4277 sq. km.; population: 1,295,189; villages: 3292) in the state of Haryana in India.
Cotton is one of the major crops in Haryana with rice and bajra (pearl millet) being the other
major crop (Sethi 2011). As a cash crop, cotton is a popular choice in Haryana with media
reports suggesting a record sowing of cotton in 2017 of 630,000 ha, which is over a quarter
more than the 500,000 ha of the sown area of 2016 (Jayan 2017). The cotton yield for the
district of Sirsa was reported lower than expected for the Kharif (monsoon) season of 2017.
We are presenting a case of dissection of the lower yield claims made in the case of Sirsa from
the perspective of the farmers and the insurers under the lens of ethical decision making.
3.2 Satellite data and analysis
Big data analytics has emerged to be established as a part of decision making in supply
chains (Liu and Yi 2018b). The use of satellites as a source for big data has been enabled
by the evolution of Moore’s law in achieving better resolutions (smaller patches of land
being mapped), increasing number and quality of sensors, better data rates for storage and
transmission, and creating a big data ecosystem for applications in sectors such as agriculture
(Nagendra and Segert 2017). Satellite data analytics is primarily enabled by the emergence
of satellite constellations that provide the capacity to generate imagery on a daily basis for
the entire globe (Houborg and McCabe 2016). The development of satellite data analytics is
fundamentally driven by satellites providing volume, velocity, veracity and variety of imagery
data alongside the slash in prices and increased computational power (Toth and Jó´zków
2016). The alignment of drivers of cost, computational power and access to the data has led
to variety of applications development through the adoption of satellite big data analytics
1 Sentinal open satellite data portal available at https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/sentinel-data-access (last
accessed on 9 August 2020).
2 Accessed from Government of Haryana’s website for District Sirsa. Available at https://sirsa.gov.in/ (las-
taccessed on 15 July 2020).
123

1068
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
in a range of industries. Researchers have recently highlighted examples across industries
such as correlation studies for disease outbreaks in healthcare sector (Bauhoff and Busch
2018), site assessment of solar photovoltaic projects (Nagendra et al. 2020a), humanitarian
relief operations (Nagendra et al. 2020b), monitoring of critical energy networks in power
sector (Downey et al. 2017), monitoring of the revegetation of oil sands exploration well
pads in oil and gas sector (Dacre et al. 2017), and enabling new algorithms/methods to assess
climate change (Manogaran and Lopez 2018). Within the agriculture context, researchers
have indicated the potential that use of such algorithmic applications based on data analytics
is maturing (Devalkar et al. 2017) and there is potential to use models built on the basis
of scientiﬁc data such as satellite imagery (Rembold et al. 2013) and weather (temperature,
pressure, humidity, etc.) (Römer and Musshoff 2017). In the case of Sirsa, data from European
and American optical mapping satellites Sentinel-2B and Landsat 8, which are carrying high-
resolution multispectral cameras and providing open access to the imagery, is used to predict
crop yields and acreage.
The satellite imagery between June to November of 2016–2017 is procured based on the
Region of Interest (ROI) and time of interest which in this case is based on Sentinel 2B and
Landsat-8 satellite imagery for the Sirsa region. Satellite imagery from Landsat 8 allows
mapping the location of the CCEs conducted to start with basic checks such as presence of
crops in that location and absence of settlements, roads, and barren lands. This cross-checking
helps in conﬁrming the authenticity of the CCE data reported for a particular location. Once
the location of the CCE data is conﬁrmed, the satellite imagery from Sentinel 2B is used to
calculate the crop area and the yield estimate.
The calculation of the area of the vegetation of the crop and its yield is based on the
estimation of Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). NDVI is arrived at using
the equation NDVI  (NIR −RED)/(NIR + RED), where the Near-Infrared (NIR) and the
RED are derived based on the light reﬂected from vegetation, which is gathered through the
satellite imagery (Reed et al. 1994). Essentially satellites capture the light reﬂected from the
surface of the vegetation. Crops which are healthy tend to absorb a major part of visible light
and reﬂect a large part of near-infrared light and crops that are unhealthy or if the vegetation
is scarce then such an area typically reﬂects visible light and a lesser part of near-infrared
light. Very simply put, the satellite data from Sentinel 2B is used to calculate the NDVI
(characteristic of the chlorophyll of the crops). NDVI can be used to compute the acreage
and crop yield, which can be keyed in for estimating losses and settling claims. The NDVI
derived from satellite data is used to arrive at an independent assessment of the crop area and
yield status, which can then be compared to the data provided by the government to capture
the nature of type-I and type-II errors.
4 Results and discussion
Inordertoclearlyunderstandthepotentialofsatellitebigdataanalyticsinremovingtype-Iand
type-II errors, we would like to discuss the results by comparing the decision making on the
crop indemnity as pre-analytics claim settlement outcomes and analytics-based assessment
of claim settlement outcomes. This allows us to narrate how satellite big data analytics can
be leveraged to create mitigation strategies in removing type-I and type-II errors.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1069
4.1 Pre-analytics claim settlement outcomes
In the present case, the points of contention that restrict insurer from decision making are:
(a) Reporting of lower yield: The CCE data published for the district of Sirsa indicate that
825 CCEs were conducted for the cotton planted in Kharif 2017. Of these, less than
10% of CCEs were co-witnessed by the representatives of the insurer and the ﬁnal
reports indicate a lower crop yield even with favorable climatic conditions (monsoon
rains) reported during the season. The lower yield across all blocks within the district
of Sirsa despite favorable conditions for a good harvest is a cause for concern of the
integrity of the underlying data. The exact locations of the CCEs were not captured
through robust sources such as smartphone geo-location which would have alleviated
concerns among the insurers despite their ofﬁcials not being present to witness the CCE
process. Therefore, the validity of the reported yield ﬁgures has come under the lens of
speculation.
(b) Reporting of higher crop acreage: Determination of the total crop acreage of every
season is an important metric since the indemnity payouts are based on per acre basis.
The government has reported an estimate of 198,800 ha of planted area for cotton in
Sirsa. The process of determining the total crop acreage is conducted based on physical
surveys conducted by the government ofﬁcials. The total crop acreage based on historical
trends seemed to have been reported to be signiﬁcantly higher for Kharif 2017, which
calls for an independent analysis on assessing the estimated acreage. Given that the total
yield estimates were already seen as contentious, the claims on the higher crop acreage
also seem accentuated to the insurers.
To understand these points of contention in detail, the nature of the data, its basis and the
processes involved in collecting and collating them have to be studied. The aberrations in the
reported estimates above are not just in the case of Sirsa. Independent researchers from the
Centre for Science and Environment (Bhushan and Kumar 2017) have reported several cases
of anomalies that are created due to the holes in the proper execution of the CCE process.
The anomalies include non-reportage of CCEs leading to no indemnity claims, improper
reportage of CCEs even though losses were evident, change in the insurance unit leading to
confusion in insurers, and bottlenecks in the ability to conduct CCEs leading to incomplete
datasets, whose details are documented in Table 1.
4.2 Analytics based assessment of claim settlement outcomes
The key points of contention for decision making in the case of Sirsa that were conﬁrmed
using satellite big data analytics include:
(a) Anomaly in locational data used in calculation of average yield: As the satellite imagery
was procured and a reverse analysis of plotting the CCE locations and average yield
prescribed by ofﬁcial data was conducted, it was noticed that locational coordinates
provided by the ofﬁcial data had eleven of the CCE points used in the determination of
the average yield fall outside the boundary of Sirsa district (Fig. 1).
Outcome: As the sample contained CCEs from a different population, it creates an
anomaly in the eventual declaration of average yield for the blocks that consider these
locational coordinates. A fault in location of a lower yield reported included in the
calculation of indemnity payments mean a type-I error and the reverse is a type-II
123

1070
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
Table 1 Anomalies in the execution of CCE process
Anomalies
Description
Non-reportage of CCEs leading to no indemnity
claims
Farmers in Haryana who faced losses reported that
no CCEs were conducted by state ofﬁcials in
their village. No farmer received any indemnity
claim in the village as CCE records failed to
reﬂect the losses
Improper reportage of CCEs even though losses
were evident
During the Kharif planting of 2016, the paddy
farmers of Ghazipur, Uttar Pradesh were affected
by ﬂoods. The insurer paid a claim of 25% of
expected crop loss later discovered that the CCE
data submitted by government ofﬁcials did not
reﬂect any losses
Change in the insurance unit leading to confusion
in insurers
In Kharif 2016, agricultural ofﬁcials in Tamil Nadu
changed the basic insurance unit for the CCEs to
block or district level from revenue village level,
which led to confusion and delay in indemnity
settlements
Bottlenecks in the ability to conduct CCEs leading
to incomplete datasets
Manpower crunch led to signiﬁcant reduction in
the number of CCEs actually being conducted in
a district in Haryana. For example, out of the
2200 CCEs for paddy, only 1600 were
conducted. This reduction is attributed to the
pressure of conducting 200–300 CCEs every day
in each district in the peak of crop harvesting
period within a span of 10–12 days
Fig. 1 CCE coordinates falling outside of area of interest
error. Similarly, the converse is also true for a higher yield used in calculation based
on a fault in location. In simple terms, a farmer who lost crop but got reported as
having higher yield stands to lose and a farmer who had higher yield but gets reported
to have reaped a lower yield stands to gain. Therefore, faults in CCE locations can
cause both type-I and type-II errors depending on the reported data for the CCEs.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1071
Mitigation: The insurer can take a decision to carry forward the unbiased data into the
underwriting process and at the same time request the concerned ofﬁcials to accept
a recalculation of the average yield for the affected blocks. This assures that the
process of underwriting is not completely halted for the entire district and only the
blocks affected by the error are revisited. More importantly, adopting satellite big
data analytics solutions can completely eliminate the need for conducing CCEs in
each and every village to estimate average yield. Given that satellite images capture
location data into which farms can be embedded, it will give complete conﬁdence to
all the stakeholders on the validity of the yield estimated for different locations.
(b) Invalid CCE points reported in yield estimation: Satellite data allows to check individual
CCE points and conﬁrm the crop and its status. Satellite data was used to conduct an
analysis on CCE points where cotton was reported to be sown. It was found that 47 CCE
points were not lying on the cotton crop classiﬁed ﬁelds with many of these CCE points
being over human settlements, barren land, or roads (Fig. 2). Therefore, a total of 58
CCE points provided by the government were found to be faux data.
Outcome: This discrepancy is a cause for concern of the authenticity of the underlying
CCE data. The deviations reported lead to both type-I and type-II errors depending
on the value reported at the location causing potential losses to either the farmer or
the insurer. Here again, the discrepancy in the CCE data leads to a farmer who lost
crop but got reported as having higher yield stands to lose and a farmer who had
higher yield but gets reported to have reaped a lower yield stands to gain. Such errors
noticed by underwriters introduce a bottleneck in the underwriting process until there
is suitable remedy or explanations derived for the discrepancy in the data.
Mitigation: A simple week on week time series analysis using satellites images per-
formed over the locations of the areas of interest can provide the basis to challenge the
reported data. The time series analysis will reveal the entire crop cycle starting from
the planting to the harvest period and therefore provides an opportunity to identify
the reason for the deviation. This again provides the opportunity for the insurer to
carry forward the underwriting process for those blocks where there are no concerns
in the crop being sown and deviations are deemed acceptable and non-anomalous.
(c) Estimation of crop yield: The NDVI indicators using the satellite big data analytics need
to show a correlation between the crop productivity estimated using the CCE data at
the village level in order to corroborate the accuracy of the data collected in the CCE
process. The government reported estimates suggests that there are a signiﬁcant number
of villages that have lower yield. One of the ways to verify these claims is to compare
the NDVI at peak bloom of cotton crop at village scale with the yield values provided
by the government for the year before. The deviation between change in NDVI values in
the Kharif seasons of 2016 and 2017 and the change in the reported cotton yield values
during the same period were inconsistent for Sirsa (Fig. 3). The variation in NDVI (crop
condition indicator) determined by the analytics process against that of the CCEs data
lacked correlation. It can be attributed to the incorrectly reported CCE cotton yield in
these blocks.
Outcome: Using CCEs as the basis of calculating the average yield includes a sig-
niﬁcant opportunity to generate single points of failure since every CCE conducted
has a bearing on the result of average yield of a block. Without the bandwidth for
the insurer to co-observe every CCE conducted, the trust gap only widens when the
123

1072
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
Fig. 2 Human settlements, barren lands or roads reported as cotton sown areas
-150.000
-100.000
-50.000
0.000
50.000
100.000
150.000
% Deviation
Villages
NDVI Deviaon (2016-17) v/s Actual Yield Deviaon (2016–17)
Deviaon in Actual Yield Village Wise
 NDVI Deviaon
Fig. 3 NDVI deviation (2016-17) v/s Actual yield deviation (2016–17)
collated results considering the historical performance and information of the season
in question point to having no reason for any signiﬁcant drop in productivity.
Mitigation: Satellite big data analytics can act as a tool to determine the causal link
for the change in crop health and productivity over the season. This goes beyond
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1073
Table 2 Total disputed land acreage for 2017
Year
Estimated cotton acreage (Ha)
Dispute (Ha)
Dispute (%)
2017
163,226
34,074
17
Table 3 Block-wise disputed land acreage for 2017
Tehsil/block
Satellite acreage (000 s Ha)
Error (Ha)
Error (%)
Sirsa
39.9
−24,400
−157.4
Nathusari
13.7
21,000
60.5
Baragudha
12.0
20,200
62.7
Rania
22.3
600
2.6
Ellenabad
10.9
2500
18.7
Dabwali
36.8
13,800
27.3
Odhan
27.6
1900
6.4
Total
163.2
35,600
17.9
the traditional means of depending on simple weather reports, land-based surveys,
or media reports as the basis for assessing the productivity of a harvest. Satellite
big data analytics provide the possibility of localization of crop yield to the level of
an individual farm level which translates to having the ability to avoid both type-I
and type-II errors by analyzing the plausible source of crop damage and its extent
suggesting lower yield. This provides the basis for decision making by undertaking
the indemnity process for the rest of the villages where the insurer does not want to
challenge the CCE data and at the same time provides the impetus for a faster claims’
clearance process for the affected farmers in the subset of these villages.
(d) Determination of the total sown area: The appropriate estimation of the total sown
area of the crop in question is important since the metric for indemnity payments are
based on average yield as well as total sown area of the crop. The total sown area
being determined by physical land surveys by government ofﬁcials reported 198,900
in 2017. The satellite big data analytics based computation of cotton acreage for 2017
was estimated at 163,226 ha (Table 2). The difference in the cotton sown area estimates
computed using NDVI (with the government claiming higher crop acreage) stand at
17% (Table 3).
Outcome: A block-wise analysis performed shows the negative deviations (larger
sown area reported) in at least three blocks to be over 25%. These directly indicate a
type-II error where farmers who have technically not sown cotton stand to beneﬁt from
indemnity payments. At the same time, one block was observed to have a positive
deviation (with the government claiming lower crop acreage) which indicates a type-I
error where farmers are not being compensated to the extent of the damage occurred.
Mitigation: The ambiguity over the increase in total sown area by relying on single
source of data again creates a gap in trust and thereby delays decision making by the
insurer. The satellite big data analytics provides the insurer with a tool to not only
challenge the government to possibly reconsider the estimation of the cotton sown
area data but also provides an opportunity to the insurer to fast-track the underwriting
123

1074
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
process for the blocks where the deviation is at acceptable margins. The insurer can
choose to process the indemnity claims in a two-step process where the underwriting
process for the claims of crop acreage veriﬁed by satellite big data analytics can be
settled and the underwriting process for the disputed acreage can be performed post
deliberations with the government. This allows avoidance of both type-I and type-II
errors while the process followed ensures timely relief for the farm community by
releasing indemnity payments allowing them to carry forward planning their next
harvest.
Based on the results presented above, it is evident that the stakeholders involved in the
agri-ﬁnancial services supporting the farmers have a lack of trust in the entire process of data
collection,collationanddissemination.Thisintroducesseriousoperationalbottleneckswhich
ultimately affect the small and marginal farmers. The adoption of satellite big data analytics
has immense potential to bridge this gap as satellite imagery is a completely democratized
data source. The nature of the democratization arises due to the fact that satellite data is
originating from an independent source and it also allows equal access to the data to all the
stakeholders in the value chain.
Further, satellite big data analytics allows a clear time series analysis where snapshots of
the entire season (e.g. week on week analysis) can be carried out to build up a transparent
ground reality of the entire harvest. This can completely eliminate the dependency on one-off
efforts to rush to assess the yield and acreage using traditional method of CCEs and also save
valuable resources of all the stakeholders (government and the insurers) in deriving such
estimates. It is often observed that such radical transitions at large scales may not occur due
to the vested infrastructure and interests in the legacy approaches. Even in this case, satellite
big data analytics can act as an alternative source of truth to hold the legacy data collection,
collation and dissemination approach accountable and create moral and ethical barriers for
the stakeholders involved in administration of the crop insurance.
Transparency created through the satellite big data analytics not only monitors the actions
of the stakeholders responsible for the administration of the crop insurance but also the
small and marginal farmers themselves. For example, recent media reports from India have
indicated that farmers are willfully defaulting on loans in the hope of waivers (The Times
of India 2017). This is not only a problem of creating an environment for opportunism by
exploitingmoralhazardsthroughpoliticizingtheunderlyingissuesbutanyriseindelinquency
rates due to intentional defaulting have severe implications on the overall health of the
economy in a country like India which heavily depends on farm income (Iyer 2019). The
use of satellite data analytics has the potential to also hold the stakeholders who are being
served equally accountable for their actions since they provide independent evidence on the
performance of the farmers themselves.
Timing in claims settlement also becomes a key challenge to be addressed since access
to ﬁnancial services for small and marginal farmers is a major challenge due to the stringent
processes followed to establish creditworthiness (Gouri and Mahajan 2017). The lack of
data to establish a credit history and the necessary capabilities to access the information of
creditworthiness of low-income families in emerging economies is a barrier to the expansion
of access to ﬁnancial services (Kshetri 2014). This opens the door to informal lenders who
can harass small and marginal farmers with very high interest rates. Over 40% of agricultural
credit in major farming states such as Punjab in India are coming from the informal lending
sector (Gill 2016). The interplay of the forcefulness of the creditors in repayment is one of the
biggest factors in farmer suicides. A study of the suicide scenario in Maharashtra indicated
that 44% of the farmers were harassed for repayment of the loan with the creditor insisting
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1075
on immediate repayment in 33% of those cases (Mishra 2006). Given the credit crunch, the
timing of the payment of indemnities from crop insurance play a critical role in recovering
losses of a previous season and provisioning ﬁnances for the most basic inputs (e.g. seeds,
fertilizers) for the next season. Here again the use of satellite data analytics has the potential
to serve the needy farmers with timely settlement of indemnities to not suffer credit crunch
for following seasons.
We would also want to highlight an important aspect of the utility of satellite big data
analytics in its ability to transform other immediate adjacent ethical problems within the agri-
culture context. For example, complexity in decision making starts as information available
to ﬁnancial institutions reduce, reducing the ability to undertake any risk in lending to farm-
ers. A study conducted in China indicates that the lack of creditworthiness of low-income
families are merely because banks and ﬁnancial institutions have information opacity and
face high transaction costs to assess the creditworthiness of low-income families (Kshetri
2016). The ability to screen borrowers with a high degree of accuracy face bottlenecks due
to information asymmetry and transaction costs in developing countries, which ultimately
plays to the advantage of informal lenders who can then use the leverage to impose their
own terms (e.g. high interest rates) (Pal 2015). The lack of a credit history and repayment
record may force formal credit institutions to use indeterminate variables such as household
expenditure, owned land and agricultural machinery which directly creates the possibility
of wealthier households receiving credit, even though they may have little need for it (Foltz
2004). The foundation of using analytics in decision making is the ability to move away from
unreliable or not sufﬁcient information sources towards using independent and democratized
sources. This can help create trust in the ability of the data to reveal the ground truth and
enable modeling and analysis to develop a structured approach for decision making (Jagadish
et al. 2014). Therefore, the utility of satellite data analytics stands to improve the basis for
ethical decision making signiﬁcantly not just in one part of the value chain but across the
board.
5 Conclusions
Providing crop insurance as a tool to mitigate the risk of indebtedness against the threat
of natural calamities to cultivators in developing countries such as India is essential to the
socio-economic well-being of its cultivators. Our case study highlights the ethical challenge
arising in the execution of such welfare schemes. The gaps in currently used underlying
data, methods and timelines including anomalies in locational data used in crop sampling,
inclusion of invalid data points, estimation of crop yield, and determination of the total sown
area create barriers in executing the indemnity payments for small and marginal farmers in
India. Manual and legacy methods such as CCEs not only form the basis of ethical problems
in decision-making but also have tremendous real-world costs to farmers. This not only bear
direct effects of exposing the cultivators to a residual risk that creates a probability of not
being indemniﬁed even when losses occur, but also create indirect effects of lack of trust
for the uptake of crop insurance itself. The use of satellite data analytics has the potential to
improve the basis for ethical decision making by creating transparency through democratized
data sources and scientiﬁcally veriﬁable methods.
123

1076
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
5.1 Research implications
Management researchers have recently highlighted the potential use of data science in agri-
supply chains for timely information to farmers, traders, and policymakers (Devalkar et al.
2017). Similarly, researchers have corroborated the application of satellite big data in the
longitudinal assessment of crop yield, health (Azzari et al. 2017) and evaluated the possibility
for development of ﬁnancial products aimed at small and marginal farmers in developing
countries (Burke and Lobell 2017).
We have observed that research focused on the use of analytics and its ethics related
implicationsoftenturnstocapturinginsightsfromtheperspectiveofcriticizingthedevelopers
of analytics for various end user applications. The ethics discussion in such research is based
on the immediate consequences of analytics (Danna and Gandy 2002), rather than the use
of analytics in solving existing ethical conﬂicts. For example, a recent paper continues to
pursue this line of research by assessing the smartphone application development ecosystem
and then debates the various ethical aspects of the technical development settings in interplay
between the application makers and the mobile platform hosts (Shilton and Greene 2019).
Our study can be treated as an inverse of these types of studies (i.e. ethical issues of analytics)
where a ‘real world’ example is used to debate the potential of using analytics in solving a
persistent ethical problem. In this paper, we are questioning if big data analytics (i.e. satellite
data) can assist ethical decision making by avoiding type I and type II error.
There is tremendous potential for the use of information systems to provide a better basis
for ethical decision support (Mathieson 2007) to avoid type I and type II errors in crop
insurance claim settlement. The avoidance of type I and type II errors have a direct bearing
on addressing the reasonable needs of the distressed. Such errors also need to be addressed
to enable the greater adoption of crop insurance, which is likely to increase in response to
climate change (Falco et al. 2014). Moreover, the avoidance of type I and type II errors has
the potential to trickle back to the credit side which suffers from providing only 20% of the
loans in agriculture in India without using land as collateral (Krishnan and Panchapagesan
2016).
5.2 Practice implications
In the case of Sirsa, satellite big data analytics has provided sufﬁcient grounds to overcome
the challenges posed by the CCE data which then translates to overcoming type-I and type-II
errors. The metric of average yield as collected and collated from the CCE data provides
the basis for the determination of the extent of losses or deviation in the yield for the season
(considering the historical performance of the farms). Given that the calculation of indemnity
payments depend on the threshold yield determined by a moving average of the average yields
for the last 7 years, any anomaly in the underlying data of average yield for a season stands
to affect the future decision making on indemnity payments. Similarly, the total crop acreage
as determined by land-based physical surveys inevitably lead to type-II error and affects the
performance of the insurer in the process. The avoidance of the type-II error becomes crucial
for the ﬁnancial institutions to gain more conﬁdence in the reliability of underlying data to
then increase their commitment to expansion of their activities.
By tackling these errors, satellite big data analytics provide support to the voice of the
suppressed marginal farmers in the matters of agri-ﬁnancial services. The legacy processes
that involve manual and laborious processes create severe bottlenecks in the operational
efﬁciency, which lead to gap in trust between the stakeholders involved. The case study in
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1077
this research illustrates how the stakeholders can now engage with digital platforms that use
several sensors (e.g. smartphones, satellites, Internet of Things) to make conﬁdent decisions
without questioning the reliability of the underlying data.
Application of satellite big data has the potential to not only replace the currently used
CCEs as the basis of data for deriving the average yield in designated insurance units, but
provide an opportunity to leapfrog the basis risk towards individual farms using a biomass
index (Rao 2010). Further, circling back the analytics to the creditors who form another
important part of the agri-ﬁnancial industry will allow smoothening of decision making in
credit services. The products of analytics holds the potential to inﬂuence decision making by
policy makers towards achieving better sustainability, food security as small and marginal
farmers will need to adapt and adopt climate-smart agriculture (Wolfert et al. 2017).
5.3 Limitations
The case study presented here is localized to a limited geography of a district in India and
utilizes open source satellite data which are limited in numbers. The scaling effects to decision
making by capturing an entire State or the landmass of India can pose some challenges
including possible input costs of commercial satellite imagery due to unavailability of open-
source imagery, scaling of algorithms, and computing cost and complexities. As the solution
gets adopted and scaled, a focused empirical study on the scaling effects shall uncover its
impact on decision making.
There may be several ethical challenges posed by the use of big data analytics as it may
create harmful effects of value destruction and diminished rights for stakeholders (Martin
2015). Research scholars with an interest in the intersection of big data and agriculture
have already indicated possible cultural, political, ecological and material complexities with
data ownership stimulating further inequity between agri-value chain players (Bronson and
Knezevic 2016). Our research limits to capturing the positive effects of utilizing big data for
ethical decision making. However, we hope that the big data community would address these
gaps in the future.
5.4 Future research
There are several inherent challenges to scaling the cover of the crop insurance such as only a
few major crops (e.g. cereals, pulses and oilseeds) are being covered, subsidizing premiums
for better adoption, and inability of states to move down to the lower insurance units (villages)
as a measure to reduce basis risk (Nair 2010). There is scope to study the ability of satellite
big data analytics to support the expansion of the crop insurance into lower land units as well
as larger number of crops.
More interestingly, there is tremendous scope to further study the adoption of satellite
data analytics for ethical decision making in other parts of the agriculture value chain. One
example of this is addressing the problems in the access to credit for small and marginal
farmers. Researchers have found that caste, class and their location effects has a bearing on
the social interactions in the matters of credit availability for rural agriculture (Guérin et al.
2013). The impact of caste and class discrimination is found to be not limited to accessing
informal lending, but extends to agriculture credit provided by formal institutions as well
(Kumar 2013). The foundation of this discrimination is the ability of creditors to trust lenders
with increased quantity of credit and a perceived reduced default due to cultural complexity
(Fisman et al. 2017). This dependency on such alternative methods to establish trust between
123

1078
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
creditors and farmers is mainly due to the existing information bottlenecks in the ability
of creditors to establish creditworthiness and conduct risk management. We believe that
satellite big data analytics has the potential to resolve the information asymmetry on credit
history and performance, and therefore can support ethical decision making for improving
the contracting outcomes between loan ofﬁces and the small and marginal farmers.
Acknowledgements We authors would like to thank the ﬁrm ‘SatSure’ for allowing us to access the big data
analytics cloud platform and interact with their employees. Thorough observations of the team which built
and deployed the technology platform for agri-insurance providers were conducted. We appreciate the efforts
of Mr. Prateep Basu in explaining the underlying data structure and technicalities involved.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Aggarwal, P. K., Chand, R., Bhutani, A., Kumar, V., Goel, S. K., Rao, K. N., et al. (2016). Report of the Task
Force on Enhancing technology use in agriculture insurance. Monograph. http://eprints.cmfri.org.in/12
312/. Accessed 16 June 2018.
Akoijam, S. L. S. (2012). Rural credit: A source of sustainable livelihood of rural India. International Journal
of Social Economics, 40(1), 83–97. https://doi.org/10.1108/03068291311283454.
Azzari,G.,Jain,M.,&Lobell,D.B.(2017).Towardsﬁneresolutionglobalmapsofcropyields:Testingmultiple
methods and satellites in three countries. Remote Sensing of Environment, 202, 129–141. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rse.2017.04.014.
Banik, D. (2007). Starvation and India’s democracy. London: Routledge.
Bauhoff, S., & Busch, J. (2018). Does deforestation increase malaria prevalence? Evidence from satellite data
and health surveys (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 3149887). Rochester, NY: Social Science Research
Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3149887. Accessed 17 June 2018.
Bhushan, C., & Kumar, V. (2017). Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana—An assessment. New Delhi: Centre
for Science and Environment. http://cdn.cseindia.org/attachments/0.99958400_1505369720_Pradhan-
Mantri-Fasal-Bima-Yojana-Report.pdf. Accessed 16 June 2018.
Birthal, P. S., Roy, D., & Negi, D. S. (2015). Assessing the impact of crop diversiﬁcation on farm poverty in
India. World Development, 72, 70–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.02.015.
Brans, J.-P., & Gallo, G. (2007). Ethics in OR/MS: Past, present and future. Annals of Operations Research,
153(1), 165–178. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-007-0177-1.
Bronson, K., & Knezevic, I. (2016). Big Data in food and agriculture, Big Data in food and agriculture. Big
Data & Society, 3(1), 2053951716648174. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951716648174.
Burke, M., & Lobell, D. B. (2017). Satellite-based assessment of yield variation and its determinants in
smallholder African systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(9), 2189–2194.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1616919114.
Cole, S. (2009). Fixing market failures or ﬁxing elections? Agricultural credit in India. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1), 219–250. https://doi.org/10.1257/app.1.1.219.
Currie, B. (2000). The politics of Hunger in India: A study of democracy, governance and Kalahandi’s poverty.
Berlin: Springer.
Dacre, C. K., Palandro, D. A., Oldak, A., Ireland, A. W., & Mercer, S. M. (2017). High-resolution satellite
imagery applied to monitoring revegetation of oil-sands-exploration well pads. Environmental Geo-
sciences, 24(4), 167–182. https://doi.org/10.1306/eg.07071717001.
Dandekar, V. M. (1976). Crop insurance in India. Economic and Political Weekly, 11(26), A61–A80.
Danna, A., & Gandy, O. H. (2002). All that glitters is not gold: Digging beneath the surface of data mining.
Journal of Business Ethics, 40(4), 373–386. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1020845814009.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1079
Datta, S., Tiwari, A. K., & Shylajan, C. S. (2018). An empirical analysis of nature, magnitude and determinants
of farmers’ indebtedness in India. International Journal of Social Economics, 45(6), 888–908. https://
doi.org/10.1108/IJSE-11-2016-0319.
de Nicola, F. (2015). Handling the weather: Insurance, savings, and credit in West Africa. Washington: The
World Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-7187.
Devalkar, S. K., Seshadri, S., Ghosh, C., & Mathias, A. (2017). Data science applications in Indian agriculture.
Production and Operations Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12834.
Directorate of Economics & Statistics. (2017). Manual on Crop Estimation Survey (Crop Cutting Experiment).
Government of Meghalaya. http://megplanning.gov.in/statistics/Manual%20of%20Crop%20Cutting%2
0Experiment.PDF. Accessed 15 July 2018.
Downey, I., Segovia, M., & Harrison, C. D. (2017). Opportunities to use satellite technologies for asset
condition monitoring of power networks under the European Space Agency’s Integrated Applications
Promotion programme. CIRED - Open Access Proceedings Journal, 2017(1), 376–379. https://doi.org/
10.1049/oap-cired.2017.0835.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management Review, 14(4),
532–550. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1989.4308385.
Elabed, G., & Carter, M. R. (2015). Compound-risk aversion, ambiguity and the willingness to pay for microin-
surance. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 118, 150–166. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2
015.03.002.
Falco, S. D., Adinolﬁ, F., Bozzola, M., & Capitanio, F. (2014). Crop insurance as a strategy for adapting to
climate change. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 65(2), 485–504. https://doi.org/10.1111/1477-955
2.12053.
Fisman, R., Paravisini, D., & Vig, V. (2017). Cultural proximity and loan outcomes. American Economic
Review, 107(2), 457–492. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20120942.
Foltz, J. D. (2004). Credit market access and proﬁtability in Tunisian agriculture. Agricultural Economics,
30(3), 229–240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agecon.2002.12.003.
Gill, A. (2016). Agricultural credit in Punjab: Have policy initiatives made a dent in informal credit markets?
In Economic Transformation of a Developing Economy (pp. 165–182). Springer, Singapore. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-981-10-0197-0_8
Gill, A., & Singh, L. (2006). Farmers’ suicides and response of public policy: Evidence, diagnosis and alter-
natives from Punjab. Economic and Political Weekly, 41(26), 2762–2768.
Gomes, E. G., & Lins, M. P. E. (2002). Integrating geographical information systems and multi-criteria
methods: A case study. Annals of Operations Research, 116(1), 243–269. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:10
21344700828.
Gouri, K. V., & Mahajan, V. (2017). Different models of ﬁnancing small farmers’ agricultural value chains.
In Financing agriculture value chains in india (pp. 33–53). Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.100
7/978-981-10-5957-5_3
Government of Telengana. (2017). Crop estimation surveys on food and non-food crops. Government of
Telengana. http://ecostat.telangana.gov.in/PDF/ACT_Manual/CS.PDF. Accessed 1 August 2018.
Guérin, I., D’Espallier, B., & Venkatasubramanian, G. (2013). Debt in rural South India: Fragmentation, social
regulation and discrimination. The Journal of Development Studies, 49(9), 1155–1171. https://doi.org/1
0.1080/00220388.2012.720365.
Gulati, A., Terway, P., & Hussain, S. (2018). Crop insurance in India: Key issues and way forward (Working
Paper No. 352). Working Paper. https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/176379. Accessed 16 June 2018.
Halcrow, H. G. (1949). Actuarial structures for crop insurance. American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
31(3), 418–443. https://doi.org/10.2307/1232330.
Harrison, M. (2005). An introduction to business and management ethics. London: Macmillan International
Higher Education.
Houborg, R., & McCabe, M. F. (2016). High-resolution NDVI from Planet’s constellation of earth observing
nano-satellites: A new data source for precision agriculture. Remote Sensing, 8(9), 768. https://doi.org/
10.3390/rs8090768.
Iyer, A. (2019). Farm loan defaults rise as banks brace for big write-offs. Livemint. https://www.livemint.
com/Money/zGCwqSp6LUfw8rP6Vg48SO/Agriculture-loan-defaults-increase-as-banks-brace-for-big-
wr.html. Accessed 18 April 2019.
Jagadish, H. V., Gehrke, J., Labrinidis, A., Papakonstantinou, Y., Patel, J. M., Ramakrishnan, R., et al. (2014).
Big data and its technical challenges. Communications of the ACM, 57(7), 86–94. https://doi.org/10.11
45/2611567.
Jayan,
T.
V.
(2017).
Why
cotton
sowing
is
surging
in
Haryana.
The
Hindu
Business
Line.
Sirsa. https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/why-cotton-sowing-is-surging-in-
haryana/article9747237.ece. Accessed 31 July 2018.
123

1080
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
Jin, X., Wah, B. W., Cheng, X., & Wang, Y. (2015). Signiﬁcance and challenges of big data research. Big Data
Research, 2(2), 59–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bdr.2015.01.006.
Kakodkar, P. (2018). Only 7% insurance claims for 2017 kharif crop paid in Maharashtra. The Times
of India. Mumbai. https://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/only-7-insurance-claims-for-2017-
kharif-crop-paid-in-maha/articleshow/64337029.cms. Accessed 20 July 2018.
Kaplan, B., & Duchon, D. (1988). Combining qualitative and quantitative methods in information systems
research: A case study. MIS Quarterly, 12(4), 571–586. https://doi.org/10.2307/249133.
Krishnan, K. P., & Panchapagesan, V. (2016). Distortions in land markets and their implications for credit
generation in India (Working Paper). Indian Institute of Management Bangalore. http://research.iimb.
ernet.in/handle/123456789/7781. Accessed 30 July 2018.
Kshetri, N. (2014). The emerging role of Big Data in key development issues: Opportunities, challenges, and
concerns. Big Data & Society, 1(2), 2053951714564227. https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951714564227.
Kshetri, N. (2016). Big data’s role in expanding access to ﬁnancial services in China. International Journal
of Information Management, 36(3), 297–308. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2015.11.014.
Kumar, S. M. (2013). Does access to formal agricultural credit depend on caste? World Development, 43,
315–328. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.11.001.
Kumar, C. S., Turvey, C. G., & Kropp, J. D. (2013). The impact of credit constraints on farm households:
Survey results from India and China. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 35(3), 508–527. https://
doi.org/10.1093/aepp/ppt002.
Lensink, R., Winkel, A., Bulte, E., Marr, A., & van Asseldonk, M. (2016). Adoption and impact of index-
insurance and credit for smallholder farmers in developing countries: A systematic review. Agricultural
Finance Review, 76(1), 94–118. https://doi.org/10.1108/AFR-11-2015-0050.
Liu, P., & Yi, S. (2018a). A study on supply chain investment decision-making and coordination in the Big
Data environment. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1), 235–253. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-01
7-2424-4.
Liu, P., & Yi, S. (2018b). Investment decision-making and coordination of a three-stage supply chain consid-
ering Data Company in the Big Data era. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1), 255–271. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10479-018-2783-5.
Mahul, O. S., & Charles, J. (2010). Government support to agricultural insurance. Washington: The World
Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/978-0-8213-8217-2.
Mahul, O., Verma, N., & Clarke, D. J. (2012). Improving Farmers’ Access to Agricultural Insurance in India.
Washington: The World Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-5987.
Manogaran, G., & Lopez, D. (2018). Spatial cumulative sum algorithm with big data analytics for cli-
mate change detection. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 65, 207–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compeleceng.2017.04.006.
Martin, K. E. (2015). Ethical Issues in the Big Data Industry (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 2598956).
Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2598956. Accessed
27 July 2018.
Mathieson, K. (2007). Towards a design science of ethical decision support. Journal of Business Ethics, 76(3),
269–292. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-006-9281-4.
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare. (2016). Operational guidelines of “Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima
Yojana” (PMFBY). Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare. http://www.agri-
insurance.gov.in/PMFBY.aspx. Accessed 6 July 2018.
Miranda, M. J., & Farrin, K. (2012). Index insurance for developing countries. Applied Economic Perspectives
and Policy, 34(3), 391–427. https://doi.org/10.1093/aepp/pps031.
Mishra, S. (2006). Farmers’ suicides in Maharashtra. Economic and Political Weekly, 41(16), 1538–1545.
Nagendra, N. P., Narayanamurthy, G., & Moser, R. (2020b). Management of humanitarian relief operations
using satellite big data analytics: The case of Kerala ﬂoods. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10479-020-03593-w.
Nagendra, N. P., Narayanamurthy, G., Moser, R., & Singh, A. (2020a). Open innovation using satellite imagery
for initial site assessment of solar photovoltaic projects. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2019.2955315.
Nagendra, N. P., & Segert, T. (2017). Challenges for NewSpace commercial earth observation small satellites.
New Space, 5(4), 238–243. https://doi.org/10.1089/space.2017.0014.
Nair, R. (2010). Crop insurance in India: Changes and challenges. Economic and Political Weekly, 45(6),
19–22.
Narayanan, S. (2016). The productivity of agricultural credit in India. Agricultural Economics, 47(4), 399–409.
https://doi.org/10.1111/agec.12239.
Pal, D. (2015). Linking credit with other markets: A review of the issues in rural economies. Forum for
Development Studies, 42(1), 159–178. https://doi.org/10.1080/08039410.2014.974666.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
1081
Press Information Bureau. (2017). Beneﬁts of new Crop Insurance Schemes. Government of India - Ministry
of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare. http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=169927. Accessed
20 July 2018.
Rao, K. N. (2010). Index based crop insurance. Agriculture and Agricultural Science Procedia, 1, 193–203.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aaspro.2010.09.024.
Reed, B. C., Brown, J. F., VanderZee, D., Loveland, T. R., Merchant, J. W., & Ohlen, D. O. (1994). Measuring
phenological variability from satellite imagery. Journal of Vegetation Science, 5(5), 703–714. https://doi.
org/10.2307/3235884.
Rembold, F., Atzberger, C., Savin, I., & Rojas, O. (2013). Using low resolution satellite imagery for yield
prediction and yield anomaly detection. Remote Sensing, 5(4), 1704–1733. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs50
41704.
Römer,U.,& Musshoff,O.(2017).Can agriculturalcreditscoring for microﬁnance institutionsbe implemented
and improved by weather data? Agricultural Finance Review, 78(1), 83–97. https://doi.org/10.1108/AFR-
11-2016-0082.
Saxena, R., Chand, R., & Rana, S. (2015). Estimates and Analysis of Farm Income in India, 1983–84 to
2011–12. Economic and Political Weekly, 50(22). https://www.epw.in/journal/2015/22/special-articles/
estimates-and-analysis-farm-income-india-1983-84-2011-12.html. Accessed 4 August 2018.
Sethi, R. M. (2011). Socio-economic Proﬁle of Rural India (series II): North and central India (Punjab,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh). Delhi: Concept Publishing Company.
Shilton, K., & Greene, D. (2019). Linking platforms, practices, and developer ethics: Levers for privacy
discourse in mobile application development. Journal of Business Ethics, 155(1), 131–146. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10551-017-3504-8.
Siggelkow, N. (2007). Persuasion with case studies. Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 20–24. https://
doi.org/10.5465/amj.2007.24160882.
Sinha, S. (2004). Agriculture insurance in India: Scope for participation of private insurers. Economic and
Political Weekly, 39(25), 2605–2612.
The Times of India. (2017). farmers loan waiver: Farmers wilfully defaulting on loans in hope of waiver. The
Times of India. https://timesoﬁndia.indiatimes.com/india/farmers-wilfully-defaulting-on-loans-in-hope-
of-waiver/articleshow/59117193.cms. Accessed 18 April 2019.
Toth, C., & Jó´zków, G. (2016). Remote s ensing platforms and sensors: A survey. ISPRS Journal of Pho-
togrammetry a nd Remote Sensing, 115, 22–36.
Vyas, V. S. (2004). Agrarian distress: Strategies to protect vulnerable sections. Economic and Political Weekly,
39(52), 5576–5582.
Wolfert, S., Ge, L., Verdouw, C., & Bogaardt, M.-J. (2017). Big data in smart farming—A review. Agricultural
Systems, 153, 69–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.023.
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
Narayan Prasad Nagendra received his doctoral degree from the Chair of Supply Chain Management at
Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany with his doctoral research being supported
by the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (German Academic Exchange Service). He researches at
the intersection of satellite imagery analytics, decision intelligence and supply chain management.
Gopalakrishnan Narayanamurthy is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Operations and Supply Chain
Management at the University of Liverpool Management School, UK. He is also an External Research
Partner at the India Competence Centre in University of St. Gallen, Switzerland and a visiting faculty at
LM Thapar School of Management, India. He completed his doctoral studies from the Indian Institute of
Management Kozhikode, India. During his doctoral studies, Gopal has been a Fulbright-Nehru Doctoral
Research Fellow at Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota. He researches in the area
of transformative service research, healthcare operations management, operational excellence, digitization,
decision intelligence, and sharing economy. His research has been accepted for publication in Journal of Ser-
vice Research, International Journal of Operations and Production Management, Journal of Business Ethics,
International Journal of Production Economics, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, Techno-
logical Forecasting and Social Change, and Computers & Operations Research among others.
123

1082
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 315:1061–1082
Roger Moser is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Management at the Macquarie University, Australia.
He is also Adjunct Professor of Strategic Management at the Indian Institute of Management Udaipur. His
research focuses on how senior executives improve their decision making based on the concept of “Deci-
sion Intelligence”. In particular, he researches how senior executives use small data and big data to improve
their “Framework Proﬁciency” and extend their “Intelligence Access”. He has published in Journal of Oper-
ations Management, Journal of Service Research, Journal of Supply Chain Management, Journal of Business
Research, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, International Journal of Production Economics and
European Journal of Operational Research among others.
123