TITLE: Natural language processing analysis of online reviews for small business: extracting insight from small corpora
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05816-2
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05816-2
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Natural language processing analysis of online reviews for
small business: extracting insight from small corpora
Benjamin J. McCloskey1 · Phillip M. LaCasse1
· Bruce A. Cox1
Received: 29 March 2022 / Accepted: 22 December 2023 / Published online: 27 January 2024
This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the US; foreign copyright protection may
apply 2024
Abstract
Receiving and acting on customer input is essential to sustaining and growing any ser-
vice organization, particularly a small family business whose livelihood depends on strong
relationships with its customers. The competitive advantage offered by advanced analyti-
cal approaches for supporting decisions is not trivial, and enterprises across virtually all
domains of society are investing heavily in this emerging discipline. Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) is a subset of computer science that employs computational approaches to
analyze human language; it is effective at extracting insight from text data but frequently
requires large corpora to train its models, in the scale of thousands or millions of documents.
This restricts its accessibility to those large enterprises with the capability to capture, store,
manage, and analyze such corpora. This research explores a pilot study that applies NLP
approaches, speciﬁcally topic modeling and large language models (LLM), to assist a small,
family-owned business in assessing its strengths and weaknesses based on customer reviews.
The relevant corpora of online Facebook, Google Reviews, TripAdvisor, and Yelp reviews
is far smaller than ideal, numbering only in the hundreds. Results demonstrate that coherent
and actionable insights from big-data approaches are obtainable and that small organizations
are not automatically excluded from the beneﬁts of these advanced analytical approaches,
with complementary employment of both topic modeling and LLM presenting the greatest
potential for similarly-positioned organizations to exploit.
Keywords Natural language processing · Topic modeling · Large language models ·
ChatGPT · Online reviews
B Phillip M. LaCasse
phillip.lacasse@aﬁt.edu
Benjamin J. McCloskey
benjamin.mccloskey.3@us.af.mil
Bruce A. Cox
bruce.cox@aﬁt.edu
1
Department of Operational Sciences, Air Force Institute of Technology, 2950 Hobson Way,
Wright-Patterson AFB 45433, OH, USA
123

296
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
1 Introduction
On December 8, 2004, United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld visited deployed
U.S. Army servicemembers assigned to the 278th Regimental Combat Team in Kuwait as
they prepared for onward movement into Iraq. During a question and answer period, the
former Secretary was asked a pointed question about equipment preparedness. His response
was candid, perhaps gruff: You go to war with the Army that you have, not the Army you
might want or wish to have at a later time.
Approximately a century prior, the oil magnate John D. Rockefeller, Sr. was one of the
wealthiest individuals in the United States and the world. In a likely apocryphal story, Mr.
Rockefeller was asked by a journalist how much money was enough. His purported response:
Just a little bit more.
These two seemingly unrelated quotations, one broadcast live to the world by a government
ofﬁcial and the other, possibly ﬁctitious, by an oil magnate, ﬁnd a curious synergy in the
plight of the small business seeking to employ cutting edge analytical approaches to make
data driven decisions. The ﬁrst quote might be rephrased, you perform your analysis with the
data that you have, not the data you might want or wish to have at a later time. The second
quote, instead of pertaining to an insatiable desire for wealth, can be contextualized in the
insatiable desire for data and the need for advanced machine learning algorithms to utilize
massive sets of data for model training. How much data is enough? How much data do we
need before we are satisﬁed? Just a little bit more.
The reality is that a small business likely does not have the capabilities of a Google or a
Microsoft to capture, engineer, store, manage, and analyze the data relevant to its decisions
in limitless quantities. Big data inequality is a relatively recent phenomenon that can be
understood in two different ways: application and access. Application refers to the context
in which the big data is collected and/or analyzed. Access refers to the degree to which the
beneﬁts of big data are distributed equitably across different groups.
Application has been explored in a number of diverse domains including policing (Brayne,
2017), privacy rights (Stewart, 2019), or social inequality (Hacker & Petkova, 2017). Like-
wise, availability is a matter of context such as underrepresented class (Schradie, 2017) or
gender (Prietl, 2019). This study relates to the latter but not on the basis of some demo-
graphic factor. Rather, it is contextualized in the reality that large, well-resourced entities
have a greater capacity to leverage advanced analytical approaches than small or medium
sized businesses. One reason for this is structural: large organizations generate sufﬁciently
large quantities of data and they have a vested interest in analyzing it. A second reason is that
large organizations possess resources and infrastructure that smaller organizations do not.
This research explores a pilot study in utilization of natural language processing (NLP)
approaches to assist a small, family-owned business in assessing its strengths and weaknesses
based on customer reviews. The corpus of customer reviews is far smaller than preferable;
the question to be explored is whether the beneﬁt derived from such analysis is worth the
risk that its conclusions may be overly dependent on the idiosyncrasies of a small dataset.
The contribution offered by this research is threefold.
1. This research applies NLP approaches to provide targeted feedback to a single small busi-
ness. The insights obtained from this analysis are not primarily intended to be generalized
to any small business or customer base, although it is logically possible this research
could be incorporated into larger efforts toward that end. Rather, the intent is to provide
support to one speciﬁc small business as it seeks to continuously improve its operations
and customer experience. This is in contrast to much of the relevant literature in which
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
297
a researcher may apply NLP techniques to a web scrape of tens of thousands of online
reviews in order to draw some general conclusion about customer behavior.
2. Second, this research demonstrates that coherent solutions are attainable when the data
landscape is less than ideal. It will also be shown that keywords extracted from topic mod-
eling analysis on the small dataset used in this study can be comparable to the keywords
extracted from much larger corpora.
3. Finally, it provides a template for other small businesses, particularly those in the food
industry, for use when initiating similar in-house efforts to those undertaken in this study.
The decision for a small business to incorporate advanced analytical techniques into its
operations may be intimidating, particularly when the small business owners do not have a
robust technical background. This study demonstrates a low-cost and low-risk NLP effort,
and the speciﬁc details on techniques utilized and software employed are included as a
starting point for similarly situated businesses to imitate.
1.1 Background
Altomonte’s Italian Market is a small business located in the suburbs of Philadelphia, PA.
Altomonte’s has two locations: a smaller store in Warminster, PA and a larger store in
Doylestown, PA. The store’s business model revolves around providing customers with
authentic and genuine Italian Cuisine as well as a ﬁrst-class dining and shopping experience.
Various departments in the Altomonte’s enterprise include a catering department, butcher
department, cheese and wine department, grocery department, delicatessen, as well as in-
house dining or to-go food. Customers can dine on site and try various wine and sandwich
pairings or opt to take food to-go from a menu of hot bar, sandwich, and pizza options.
While Altomonte’s does have a customer service department, the bulk of the stores’
reviews are gathered from online resources: Yelp, TripAdvisor, Google Reviews, and Face-
book. The process to review and take correction based on the content of these reviews is
manual and ad hoc.
1.2 Motivation
The motivation of this research is to provide tractable, applicable support for small businesses,
especially those in the food industry, to begin incorporating advanced analytical approaches to
extrapolate information that might otherwise be missed by their customer service departments
executing surface-level analysis. Altomonte’s currently uses no NLP techniques for in-house
analysis, and this pilot study represents the ﬁrst time that a multivariate analysis approach
was used for the business’s research and development.
1.3 Research questions
This study seeks to answer the following research questions:
1. Can NLP approaches, speciﬁcally topic modeling, provide a small business such as
Altomonte’s with a candidate set of its core business processes or offerings for focused
attention? That is, is topic modeling useful to identify either deﬁcient areas for which
improvement efforts may be focused or areas of strength that indicate directions in which
the business may expand its offerings?
123

298
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
2. Dolargelanguagemodels(LLM)suchasChatGenerativePre-TrainedTransformer(Chat-
GPT) provide equal or superior results to topic modeling without requiring the technical
skills needed to implement topic modeling?
1.4 Organization
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section2 provides an overview of relevant
NLP approaches and their utilization in literature. Section3 details the process of using
various NLP techniques and methods to gather insight on the reviews. Section4 presents and
discusses the results, and Sect. 5 closes with conclusions and recommendations for future
study.
2 Related work
This section discusses the relevant NLP techniques that were performed on the Altomonte’s
Italian Market online reviews corpus. In addition, applicable prior research is included to
emphasize the importance of the research and provide a resource for small businesses in the
food industry to adopt these ML methods of data extrapolation.
2.1 Topic modeling
In NLP, the term corpus, or its plural corpora, refers to all of the documents contained in the
data set of interest. A document is a collection of strings. Documents in turn are made up of
terms or tokens which represent an individual component of the data set. Topic modeling in
NLP seeks to ﬁnd similarities beneath the context of a corpus or corpora. An assumption for
topic modeling is that the observed documents and terms interact with latent parameters and
they do so according to some probabilistic distribution that can be employed to extract the
unidentiﬁed characteristics of the corpus (Vayansky & Kumar, 2020).
There exists a reasonably broad and growing body of relevant literature to topic modeling.
To illustrate, consider the values in Table 1, obtained via a simple ScienceDirect query for
“topic modeling” and “topic modeling” + “online reviews” in the abstract, title, or keywords
from 2013 through 2022.
Examining simply the raw numbers yields three observations. First, and not terribly con-
troversial, is to observe that topic modeling research has grown moderately over the past 10
years but not explosively or dramatically. Second, the subset of topic modeling research that
speciﬁcally explores online reviews represents a tiny subset of the body of work. Finally,
replacing “online reviews" with “small business" in Query 2 yields exactly zero results. The
implication is that, as previously hinted in Sect. 1, this study has an opportunity to address a
gap in the current body of work.
A closer look at the speciﬁc content of the articles yields two relevant patterns. The ﬁrst
pattern is that the research employs large corpora to train its models. Consider the following
examples:
• 697,076 Yelp reviews to analyze the relationship between star rating and sentiment
(PRITHIVIRAJAN et al., 2015)
• 24,367 customer reviews of hotels in India (Piramanayagam & Kumar, 2020)
• 47,172 hotel reviews in Las Vegas (Sanchez-Franco et al., 2019)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
299
Table 1 Growth of topic
modeling research 2013–2022
Year
Query 1
Query 2
“Topic modeling”
“Topic modeling”
“Online reviews”
2013
40
0
2014
39
1
2015
62
1
2016
83
2
2017
89
2
2018
119
4
2019
156
9
2020
180
7
2021
254
15
2022
272
12
• 2,799,420 Airbnb reviews exploring customer experiences (Zhang, 2019)
• 538,000 TripAdvisor reviews relating customer experience with embedded photographs
(An et al., 2020)
• 35,401 Tweets to analyze factors inﬂuencing successful start-ups (Saura et al., 2019)
• 1,048,576 Amazon reviews of grocery products (Heng et al., 2018)
• 311,550 online automobile reviews to analyze customer sentiment (Park et al., 2021)
The second observed pattern is that applications of NLP are broadly focused versus tar-
geted to a speciﬁc organization. For example, studies often queried large corpora stratiﬁed by
industry group such as the hospitality industry (Aktas-Polat & Polat, 2022; An et al., 2020;
Piramanayagam & Kumar, 2020; Sanchez-Franco et al., 2019; Zhang, 2019), product reviews
(Luo et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2014), entertainment (Lee & Kim, 2017),
general consumer behavior (Krestel & Dokoohaki, 2015; Kwon et al., 2020; PRITHIVIRA-
JAN et al., 2015), or employee satisfaction (Sainju et al., 2021). Another common behavior
was to apply a model such as SERVQUAL to a speciﬁc industry (Ding et al., 2020; Marcolin
et al., 2021; Palese & Usai, 2018).
The implication is that this study represents a relatively underexplored application of topic
modeling. Kumar et al. (2021) provide support for this intuition in their systematic literature
review of text mining in service management. Identiﬁed areas of emphasis include social
media analysis, market analysis, competitive intelligence, risk management, and fake content
detection (Kumar et al., 2021). Absent from the list is process or business model improvement
for an individual customer. This gap in literature may be explained by the competitive nature
of the business marketplace; a small business may not wish for its feedback to become part
of the body of knowledge. Rather, it may prefer to quietly identify and incorporate feedback
for maximum competitive advantage.
2.2 ChatGPT
ChatGPT (2023) is a novel, disruptive advancement in natural language processing, the
implications of which are not yet fully clear (Haleem et al., 2022). Initially published in
November 2022 by the Open Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) initiative, ChatGPT allows users to
enter conversational text strings and receive responses.
123

300
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
The body of scholarly work concerning ChatGPT is new but growing explosively. In the
ScienceDirect database, there is exactly one article containing ChatGPT in the abstract, title,
or keywords in 2022; as of 28 July 2023, that number had grown to 298 total articles, of
which 93 are research papers.
The research articles are in the disciplines of medicine/dentistry (42), social sciences
(19), business (15), computer science (12), economics (7), engineering (7), and several other
categories (ﬁve or fewer each). Because an article may fall into more than one category, the
numbers do not sum to 93.
Of immediate interest in the emerging ChatGPT research are the academic implications
such as student classroom assignments (Yanfang et al., 2023; Keiper, 2023), literature review
(Wu & Dang, 2023), coding (Yilmaz & Yilmaz, 2023), and linguistics (Lin, 2023).
In the business domain, initial research efforts have focused on applications such as
autonomous trip planning (Wong et al., 2023), generation of recommendations to consumers
(Kim et al., 2023), generation of enterpreneurial rhetoric (Short & Short, 2023), and creation
of policy (Dwivedi et al., 2023; Howell & Potgieter, 2023).
Given the current state of ChatGPT research, two relevant implications are apparent.
First, as was observed in Sect. 2.1, small business does not appear to be a signiﬁcant area
of interest. Second, more generally, the literature consistently provides scenarios such that
ChatGPT presents the appearance of a quick and easy solution but, upon further examination
or exploration, there is concern about the veracity or usefulness of the results. One speciﬁc
example is the literature review case study cited previously in Wu and Dang (2023).
3 Methodology
This research employs a blend of the approaches taken in the reviewed literature. The Python
programming language, Version 3, was used with several specialized libraries throughout
this work. The NLP modules that Python offers are NLTK (Bird et al., 2009) and Gensim
( ˇReh˚uˇrek & Sojka, 2010); other libraries used extensively were TensorFlow (Abadi et al.,
2016), Keras (Chollet, 2015), NumPy (Harris et al., 2020), and Pandas (McKinney, 2010).
For running experiments, the Python library AxClient was utilized. Jupyter Notebook was
the Integrated Development Environment (IDE) that supported the code’s execution.
3.1 Data
The data for this research consists exclusively of online reviews for Altomonte’s Italian
Market from Google Reviews, TripAdvisor, and Yelp.
The information was scraped from the three online sources and placed into a.csv ﬁle via
a manual process. That is, reviews were manually copied and pasted into the ﬁle. The ﬁle
contains four columns: year, review, rating, and platform. The.csv ﬁle was then loaded into
a Jupyter notebook and partitioned into four different dataframes: one containing all reviews
and one each for Yelp, Google Reviews, and TripAdvisor. Table 2 contains the number of
reviews from each source, ranging from 176 to 253 for a total of 644 reviews.
3.2 Data preprocessing
Data preprocessing consists of a series of steps common to many NLP analyses: stop word
removal, lemmatization, and tokenization.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
301
Table 2 Number and source of
reviews
Source
Number
Google reviews
215
TripAdvisor
253
Yelp
176
Total
644
In NLP, a stop word is a commonly occuring word that typically provides little value to
the analysis. Examples include deﬁnite and indeﬁnite articles, forms of the verb to be, or
joining words such as and, but, and or. These words, as well as any word with fewer than
three characters, were removed from each review.
Lemmatization is the process that converts differently-inﬂected words to their common
root form or lemma. This process does not simply omit preﬁxes or sufﬁces but rather accounts
for details such as parts of speech or other elements of the word’s internal structure. An
example might be the conversion of the words perform, performed, and performing to the
lemma perform but retaining performer as performer due to its status as a noun versus a
verb. This research employed Spacy and the model en_core_web_sm for lemmatization.
Tokenization is the process of splitting the document into individual, word-level units
called tokens. The tokens comprise a dictionary of words from which the topic modeling
algorithm performs its groupings.
Upon completion of these steps, the reviews were converted into a document term matrix
using Gensim’s doc2bow function.
3.3 Topic modeling
To address the ﬁrst research question from Sect. 1.3, this study employs Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA), a topic modeling approach that breaks a data set into words, topics, and
documents. LDA views documents as the result of some randomized mixture of hidden
topics, and those topics can be modeled as probability distributions whose support is the
set of words in the corpus (Vayansky & Kumar, 2020). LDA is preferable for this research
to Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) because LSA employs a process called single value
decomposition to determine the similarity of each document and group them into categories.
This study is not interested in similarity between reviews; rather, the interest is in the topics
contained therein.
Figure 1 provides an overview of the LDA process. The hyperparameter for the Dirichlet
Distribution is denoted by α, which is the prior count of how many times a topic appears
in the document. The parameter θ is the mixture proportion of K topics that come from the
prior Dirichlet Distribution. The hyperparameter β denotes the number of times a word is
sampled from a topic prior to the corpus, z is the probability distribution associated with each
topic, and w represents the ith word in a sequence that formulates the matrix of a document.
Finally, M and N represent, respectively, the repeated sample executed on the corpus and
the repeated sampling conducted on each document.
Assumptions for LDA include a known and ﬁxed value of K and that words and documents
contained in a corpus are independent. Picking a value for K is an iterative process and one
way to obtain this value is to compare the resulting model on the basis of some metric
such as the perplexity score (the normalized log-likelihood calculated on a held-out test
data set), which measures how probable the new data is given the postulated model. To
illustrate perplexity, consider a fair coin versus an unfair coin. The perplexity score will be
123

302
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
Fig. 1 LDA Process, adapted from Vayansky and Kumar (2020)
higher for the fair coin because its outcome is harder to predict, whereas the unfair coin
has a lower perplexity score because the result is easier to predict when one outcome has
a higher probability of occurrence than the other. Perplexity scores will be generated for
models associated with each prospective K value. The independence of topics follows from
the independence of words and documents.
Algorithm 1 Topic Model Analysis: LDA Process
1. Remove stopwords, lemmatize and tokenize reviews
2. Create a bag of words from reviews, forming a dictionary
3. Run LDA model
4. Compute perplexity
5. Compute coherence score
6. Choose number of topics based on perplexity and coherence
7. Interpret topics
Algorithm 1 contains the LDA approach to identify unobserved topics and characteristics
of the reviews. Perplexity supports the analysis by quantifying the ease with which topic
predictions are made from the underlying probability distributions. Coherence score is used
as a measure for quality between the topics and words. Low perplexity and high coherence
scores are desirable.
3.4 ChatGPT
To address the second research question in Sect. 1.3, this study attempted to obtain topics,
topic summaries, and other useful information from the corpus of reviews using ChatGPT.
Initially hoping to directly copy and paste the reviews into ChatGPT, this was not successful
because,despitethecorpusbeingsmallbyNLPstandards,thereweretoomanyreviewsforthe
free ChatGPT interface. The successful approach was to create a public Github repository
with the reviews in a.csv ﬁle, from which ChatGPT can read the data and respond to the
following inquiries:
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
303
1. Can you give me 5 topics from this CSV File [sic]
2. Can you put each of these topics into a sentence for me?
3. Do this again but by year. Can you also provide an in-depth description of the sentiment
by year
4. Open the csv [sic] from the link I provided before. based [sic] off the reviews, what is one
product we should improve upon?
5. Open the csv [sic] from the link I provided before. Which product that we offer do you
believe is best based off the reviews?
6. Open the csv [sic] from the link I provided before. What are our top 5 best products?
7. Open the csv [sic] from the link I provided before. What products should we work on
improving?
4 Results and analysis
4.1 Corpus statistics
Theﬁrststepofthisanalysiswastocalculatekeystatisticstogatherinsightintohowcustomers
have perceived Altomonte’s through their ratings in the last 10 years. The statistics calculated
for the data are the number of reviews by source, average review rating, and distribution of
stars.
The results in Table 3 show that, of all corpora, Yelp had the lowest average rating of
reviews with 3.64. The overall corpus average review was calculated to be 4.23. There is
approximately an even split of reviews contributing to the entire corpus as well: 27% of
reviews from Yelp, 39% of reviews from TripAdvisor, and 24% of reviews from Google
Reviews.
After calculating the average ratings for the reviews, the frequency distribution of words in
each corpus was extracted. As shown in Table 4, the most common words portray Altomonte’s
as a, “good, even great, Italian Market that is known for its sandwiches.” Therefore, the
process of how the sandwich counter operates and the consistency of its sandwich production
Table 3 Corpus statistics skew positively across all sources, with Yelp the most balanced
Corpus
1-Star
2-Star
3-Star
4-Star
5-Star
Mean
All
39
44
49
101
411
4.230
Yelp
26
21
23
27
79
3.640
Trip advisor
4
6
19
56
168
4.49
Google reviews
9
17
7
18
164
4.410
Table 4 Top words by frequency are largely consistent across sources
Corpus
Word 1
Word 2
Word 3
Word 4
Word 5
All
Food
Italian
Good
Great
Sandwich
Yelp
Good
Italian
Food
Store
Great
Trip advisor
Food
Italian
Good
Sandwich
Great
Google reviews
Italian
Food
Store
Good
Great
123

304
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
Table 5 Featured words allow inference of topic summaries
Word 1
Word 2
Word 3
Word 4
Word 5
Topic (inferred)
Great
Italian
Pizza
Item
Food
Pizza
Food
Good
Fresh
Italian
Selection
Fresh
Food
Selection
Great
Italian
Sandwich
Selection
Place
Sandwich
Selection
Food
Italian
Great
Selection
Store
Italian
Food
Selection
Food
Good
Store
Italian
Place
Atmosphere
Good
Food
Italian
Quality
Great
Food
Quality
should be viewed as a core strength and leveraged, perhaps through sandwich specials to
entice more customers into the store.
4.2 Topic modeling results
The Topic Model analysis identiﬁes seven topics that could describe reviewers’ underlying
perceptions about Altomonte’s. Table 5 lists the different topics with their associated featured
words, sorted by level of importance from greatest to least. Note that the topic name is
not provided by the LDA algorithm. Rather, it is inferred based on the featured words in
conjunction with the domain knowledge of the subject matter expert. In this case, the topics
align both to high-level customer observations such as atmosphere or food quality as well as
to speciﬁc offerings such as pizza or sandwiches.
Selecting K = 7 topics results in the highest coherence value for all ranges of topics,
achieving a value of 0.40. While not an especially high value, it is acceptable for a small
corpus. In addition, these same seven topics had the lowest perplexity score of −6.81. The
topics in the underlying distribution of words all focus on the food menu, showing that
customers perceive that Altomonte’s has great tasting sandwiches and pizza as well as a
variety of Italian products to offer.
Examining the association of featured words with each topic also provides actionable
insight that could be useful to Altomonte’s. For example, while the topics “Pizza” and “Italian
Food Selection” are associated ﬁrst with the word “Great”, the topic “Atmosphere” is only
ever associated with the word “Good”. Taken into consideration with results from Huang et
al. (2014), this may indicate that additional effort in décor would address a possible weakness.
It may also be useful to note which of Huang et al.’s criteria (service, value, takeout, décor,
and healthiness) do not appear in corpus topics or associated words. Such examination of
LDA corpus statistics quickly provides easily actionable insights for small business owners,
although there is often some nuance to the results. For example, a negative review might make
a comment about slow service. However, service may be slow simply because the restaurant
is busy and not because employees work slowly.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
305
Table 6 Featured words from large-corpus topic modeling in PRITHIVIRAJAN et al. (2015)
Word 1
Word 2
Word 3
Word 4
Word 5
Word 6
Great
Ordered
Maggianos
Chicken
Just
Restaurant
Great
Good
Place
Table
Also
Well
Food
Place
Service
One
Ive [sic]
Good
Food
Good
Great
Maggianos
Just
Like
Food
Good
Service
Place
Maggianos
Just
Good
Great
Food
Maggianos
Place
Time
Food
Great
Good
Really
Back
Delicious
The implication is that a seemingly negative topic can be an indicator for an overall
positive business outcome. The key to recognizing whether the feedback is rooted in some-
thing positive or negative is the human-in-the-loop review of the customer feedback by a
knowledgeable party.
One may observe that the set of featured words in Tables 4 and 5 is relatively small,
with substantial repetition of common words such as good, great, food, or Italian. On this
basis, it is fair to question the usefulness of the topic modeling approach in extracting insight
from the corpus. Two thoughts may be given in response. The ﬁrst is to acknowledge the
limitation in the study. Clearly, a larger corpus might be expected to contain more variety in
its words. Additionally, a larger corpus would give the luxury of designating certain terms
such as Italian as stop words. Because the business is named Altomonte’s Italian Market, it
is entirely reasonable to expect that the word Italian would feature prominently in any topic
modeling result and that the analysis may be better served by removing it from consideration.
A second thought, however, is that customers, when writing reviews, likely tend to choose
from a relatively small set of descriptive words in their vocabulary. To express satisfaction
with an experience, the words good or great would likely be frequent word choices. In support
of this notion, consider the topic modeling results in Table 6. This table, reproduced in part
from PRITHIVIRAJAN et al. (2015), contains the top words from a topic modeling analysis
of 50,000 restaurant customer reviews.
Comparing Tables 5 and 6, it is notable that the same three words appear as the most
common word in each topic: great, good, food. There is also strong consistency with the
second most frequent word. Both analyses add place; Table 5 adds Italian and Table 6 adds
ordered. We only begin to see greater variation in the identiﬁed words farther down the
precedence list.
4.3 ChatGPT results
ChatGPT produces responses to the queries that appear plausible on a surface level. However,
a closer look reveals nuance that requires careful consideration for small businesses seeking
to use this resource.
Consider the summary topics summarized in Fig. 2, which is a screen snip of the ChatGPT
response to the ﬁrst two inquiries provided in Sect. 3.4.
Comparing these topics to the topics extracted by LDA in Table 5, there is clearly a
consistency between them. However, a closer look at the details reveals one discrepancy.
Speciﬁcally, Topic 5 generated by ChatGPT describes the gelato at Altomonte’s. There is no
123

306
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
Fig. 2 Four of ﬁve topics generated by ChatGPT are plausible but one (Topic 5) is suspect
gelato-related topic in the LDA results, and a search of the corpus of reviews reveals that the
word gelato does not appear in a single review. Yet, for some reason, ChatGPT produced a
plausible-sounding statement implying that gelato is a customer favorite.
Consider also Fig. 3, which contains the ChatGPT-generated response to the third inquiry
from Sect. 3.4.
Each of the summaries, without considering the actual numbers of positive, negative, and
neutral reviews, is plausible and consistent with the statistics of review ratings in Table 3.
However, the counts of positive, negative, and neutral reviews provided by ChatGPT in Fig. 3
are incorrect. For example, ChatGPT received 103 reviews written in 2018, whose counts by
star rating were 71 (ﬁve stars), 14 (four stars), six (three stars), four (two stars), and eight (one
star). It is difﬁcult to reconcile these actual values with the counts of positive (40), negative
(10), and neutral (5) reviews stated by ChatGPT.
One ﬁnal illustrative example will sufﬁce. Figure4 contains the response to the ﬁnal
inquiry from Sect. 3.4, which asks for areas of improvement.
As has been the observation thus far, ChatGPT provides reasonable narratives for each
area of improvement that it identiﬁes, and it even includes a disclaimer at the end of the
response. However, as before, the statements made by ChatGPT do not align with the actual
text of the reviews, most notably in the third (Soup) and fourth (Bread) item on the list. For
example, in the entire corpus there are 83 one-star and two-star reviews. In those 83 reviews,
the word bread appears in only eight, of which two are critiques of the dryness (one) and
ﬂavor (one). In those 83 reviews, the word soup appears exactly once, and the context is a
mistaken order and not ﬂavor or seasoning as stated by ChatGPT.
4.4 Theoretical implications
Topic modeling results are ﬁrmly grounded in the actual text of the reviews by virtue of
the LDA algorithm. However, there is a certain baseline level of expertise that is required
to employ LDA. For example, the number of topics, K, is a hyperparameter that must be
set either arbitrarily or via some defensible process. As described in Sects. 3.3 and 4.2, this
research employs coherence and perplexity.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
307
Fig.3 ChatGPT generates yearly summaries of customer attitudes that are plausible in appearance but incorrect
in the details
ChatGPT results, however, are simply the result of the probabilistically-determined next
word in the string. Additionally, ChatGPT is pre-trained on a large corpus containing many
thousands of words. As a result, words not found in the corpus of reviews may be identiﬁed as
the highest probability next word by ChatGPT. This is why ChatGPT identiﬁes, for example,
poorly-ﬂavored soup as an area to improve when that feedback does not actually appear in a
single online review.
Taken together, the previous two observations nicely illustrate the primary theoretical
implication of this case study, which is the relationship of the human agent in the entire
process. In autonomous systems, a human-in-the-loop (HITL) system is one in which the
autonomous system may only act independently for a time after which it must stop and await
approval from the human agent before proceeding (Nahavandi, 2017). This is in contrast to a
human-on-the-loop (HOTL) system in which the autonomous system fully operates but the
human agent serves in a monitoring or supervisory role (Nahavandi, 2017). The suitability
of an HITL versus HOTL approach is relevant to weapons system targeting (Scharre &
Horowitz, 2015) as well as other disciplines such as asset management (Chen et al., 2021).
In this case, the LLM approach is not terribly well suited for HITL controls, and the
results of this study demonstrate that it cannot be blindly trusted. For this reason, the HOTL
approach is perhaps appropriate. This is consistent with other research into LLMs such as
123

308
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
Fig.4 ChatGPTgeneratesrecommendedareastoimprovethatareplausibleinappearancebutarenotsupported
by the actual text of the reviews
Wu and Dang (2023). One could argue that selection of the hyperparameter K in the LDA
algorithm is a HITL step, although that process could certainly be automated with minimal
difﬁculty.
A secondary theoretical implication is that this research demonstrates, as illustrated by
Tables 5 and 6, that a large corpus is not necessarily a prerequisite for obtaining reasonable
topic summaries using LDA. That is, featured words from this small-corpus study were not
terribly dissimilar to the featured words in the large-corpus study in PRITHIVIRAJAN et al.
(2015).
The reasonable explanation is that customers tend frequently to use a relatively small set
of common words, and a large corpus is not necessary to extract them. A larger sample size of
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
309
reviews may be needed in order to determine the subtleties for what prompted those common
words, but as demonstrated in this study even a small corpus was able to provide speciﬁcity
for Altomonte’s by highlighting its pizza, fresh food, and sandwich offerings in the identiﬁed
topics.
4.5 Practical implications
The practical implication of this research is that insight can in fact be gained from a small
corpus, notwithstanding the preference that large corpora be used to train NLP models. There
is risk associated with exclusively employing a LLM such as ChatGPT in that the conclusions
may be incorrect. In this study, there is risk that ChatGPT feedback might prompt a thorough
review of the business’s soup offerings when, in fact, that feedback was not sourced in the
actual data.
In spite of that, incorporation of a LLM such as ChatGPT in conjunction with a traditional
topic modeling approach such as LDA is entirely suitable with HOTL serving as the check
and balance. The LDA topics, extracted directly from the corpus of reviews, may be compared
to the LLM results. If the topics are consistent, then the analyst or human agent can have
conﬁdence in the more user-friendly ChatGPT output. If there are disrepancies, then the
human agent is free to investigate as warranted. This investigation could employ additional
advanced analytical approaches or, as in the case of this study, a simple, manual keyword
check of the raw review data.
5 Conclusion
This study attempts to address a gap in the growing body of NLP literature, speciﬁcally
that of tailored application to a speciﬁc entity of interest under the conditions of a smaller
than ideal corpus. The entity of interest for this study is a small, family-owned delicatessen,
Altomonte’s Italian Market.
The ﬁrst research question asks whether NLP approaches, speciﬁcall topic modeling, can
be useful for a small business. The answer is a cautiously optimistic yes. Subject matter
experts from the small business reviewed the topic modeling results and afﬁrm that LDA did
extract topics that are relevant and consistent with their domain knowledge.
The second research question asks whether emerging large language model applications
such as ChatGPT can produce comparable results without the technical skills required for
implementing traditional NLP approaches. The answer here is more nuanced. It is true that
employing ChatGPT does not require technical skills in advanced analytical approaches such
as those required for NLP. However, obtaining the results in Sect. 4.3 required more than
entering some simple keystrokes into the ChatGPT prompt.
For example, as previously discussed in Sect. 3.4, it was necessary to create a public Github
repository with the reviews consolidated in a.csv ﬁle. Depending on the technical skill of
the user, this may or may not be a trivial task. Secondly, ChatGPT was initially resistant to
opening the.csv ﬁle and performing the requested tasks; its default response was something
to the effect that it does not have access to the.csv ﬁle.
Ultimately, these challenges did not prevent this study from obtaining its results, but it
required perserverence and carefully crafted prompts. At one point, upon stating in the prompt
that I own the CSV and you have permission to open it, ChatGPT was subsequently able to
perform the requested task.
123

310
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
The real challenge with the ChatGPT results in Sect.4.3 is that the ChatGPT responses are
not always consistent with the reviews. This is extremely damaging to the usefulness of this
tool because the entire purpose of the exercise is for a small business to obtain insight from
its own customers’ reviews. ChatGPT can provide plausible-sounding, general feedback.
Unfortunately, that feedback is grounded in the probability associated with the next word in
the string and not necessarily grounded in the actual content of the reviews that the user cares
about.
5.1 Recommendations
The ﬁrst recommendation to Altomonte’s or to any small business aspiring to incorporate
advanced analytical approaches such as those utilized in this study is to take intentional steps
towards value-added data collection. The data analyzed in this study was collected passively
over a period of ten years by online forums. While the study demonstrated modest results, it
is clear that having more data is preferable to having less data.
The customer service department could begin requesting more reviews and feedback, to
include providing incentives such as a discount on products or a promotional deal. This
approach could risk artiﬁcially inﬂated review ratings, but the risk can be partially mitigated
through how the survey is crafted. For example, free-text questions that speciﬁcally address
areas of improvement give the opportunity for satisﬁed customers to give ideas for how the
store can become even better. They also provide an easy mechanism to identify and review
constructive criticism; responses to such questions can automatically forward to management
for review and action.
Related, data collection efforts may be geared towards training future models. Obtaining
reviews with ratings would be extremely helpful for training a review classiﬁcation model
that could predict unrated reviews. While Altomonte’s is currently a small-enough business
to manually read and action on customer feedback, prudent planning for future growth can
and should include the data landscape.
5.2 Future work
Future research could consider other NLP or ML techniques such as Chat Bots in the customer
service department or web scraping for real-time monitoring of reviews. It may also be value
added to explore time series analysis of the reviews. This would be particularly helpful to
quantify the degree to which the business can effectively respond to customer feedback in
addressing opportunities for improvement.
Data availability All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published article (and
its supplementary information ﬁles).
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest All authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
311
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., Devin, M., Ghemawat, S., Irving, G., Isard, M., &
Kudlur, M. (2016). Tensorﬂow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In 12th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 16) (pp. 265–283).
Aktas-Polat, S., & Polat, S. (2022). Discovery of factors affecting tourists’ ﬁne dining experiences at ﬁve-star
hotel restaurants in Istanbul. British Food Journal, 124(1), 221–238.
An, Q., Ma, Y., Qianzhou, D., Xiang, Z., & Fan, W. (2020). Role of user-generated photos in online hotel
reviews: An analytical approach. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management, 45, 633–640.
Bird, S., Klein, E., & Loper, E. (2009). Natural language processing with Python: analyzing text with the
natural language toolkit. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Brayne, S. (2017). Big data surveillance: The case of policing. American Sociological Review, 82(5), 977–1008.
Chen, J., Lim, C. P., Tan, K. H., Govindan, K., & Kumar, A. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence-based human-
centric decision support framework: An application to predictive maintenance in asset management
under pandemic environments. Annals of Operations Research, 1, 1–24.
Chollet, F. (2015). Keras. https://github.com/fchollet/keras.
Ding, T., Chen, L., & Chen, G. (2015). Automatic multi-way domain concept hierarchy construction from
customer reviews. Neurocomputing, 147, 472–484.
Ding, K., Choo, W. C., Ng, K. Y., & Ng, S. I. (2020). Employing structural topic modelling to explore perceived
service quality attributes in Airbnb accommodation. International Journal of Hospitality Management,
91, 102676.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Kshetri, N., Hughes, L., Slade, E. L., Jeyaraj, A., Kar, A. K., Baabdullah, A. M., Koohang,
A., Raghavan, V., Ahuja, M., et al. (2023). So what if ChatGPT wrote it? Multidisciplinary perspectives
on opportunities, challenges and implications of generative conversational AI for research, practice and
policy. International Journal of Information Management, 71, 102642.
Hacker, P., & Petkova, B. (2017). Reining in the big promise of big data: Transparency, inequality, and new
regulatory frontiers. Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property, 15, i.
Haleem, A., Javaid, M., & Singh, R. P. (2022). An era of ChatGPT as a signiﬁcant futuristic support tool: A
study on features, abilities, and challenges. BenchCouncil Transactions on Benchmarks, Standards and
Evaluations, 2(4), 100089.
Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., Gommers, R., Virtanen, P., Cournapeau, D., Wieser, E.,
Taylor, J., Berg, S., Smith, N. J., Kern, R., Picus, M., Hoyer, S., van Kerkwijk, M. H., Brett, M., Haldane,
A., del Río, J., Fernández, W., Mark, P., … Travis, E. (2020). Array programming with NumPy. Nature,
585(7825), 357–362. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2
Heng, Y., Gao, Z., Jiang, Y., & Chen, X. (2018). Exploring hidden factors behind online food shopping from
amazon reviews: A topic mining approach. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 42, 161–168.
Howell, B. E., & Potgieter, P. H. (2023). What do telecommunications policy academics have to fear from
GPT-3? Telecommunications Policy, 1, 102576.
Huang, J., Rogers, S., & Joo, E. (2014). Improving restaurants by extracting subtopics from yelp reviews.
iConference 2014 (Social Media Expo).
Keiper, M. C. (2023). Chatgpt in practice: Increasing event planning efﬁciency through artiﬁcial intelligence.
Journal of Hospitality, Leisure, Sport and Tourism Education, 33, 100454.
Kim, J., Kim, J. H., Kim, C., & Park, J. (2023). Decisions with ChatGPT: Reexamining choice overload in
ChatGPT recommendations. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 75, 103494.
Krestel, R., & Dokoohaki, N. (2015). Diversifying customer review rankings. Neural Networks, 66, 36–45.
Kumar, S., Kar, A. K., & Ilavarasan, P. V. (2021). Applications of text mining in services management:
A systematic literature review. International Journal of Information Management Data Insights, 1(1),
100008.
Kwon, W., Lee, M., & Back, K.-J. (2020). Exploring the underlying factors of customer value in restaurants:
A machine learning approach. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 91, 102643.
Lee, S., & Kim, W. (2017). Sentiment labeling for extending initial labeled data to improve semi-supervised
sentiment classiﬁcation. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 26, 35–49.
Lin, P. (2023). ChatGPT: Friend or foe (to corpus linguists)? Applied Corpus Linguistics, 3, 100065.
Luo, Z., Huang, S., & Zhu, K. Q. (2019). Knowledge empowered prominent aspect extraction from product
reviews. Information Processing and Management, 56(3), 408–423.
123

312
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 341:295–312
Marcolin, C. B., Becker, J. L., Wild, F., Behr, A., & Schiavi, G. (2021). Listening to the voice of the guest:
A framework to improve decision-making processes with text data. International Journal of Hospitality
Management, 94, 102853.
McKinney, W. (2010). Data structures for statistical computing in python. In Proceedings of the 9th python in
science conference, Vol. 445 (pp. 51–56). Austin, TX.
Nahavandi, S. (2017). Trusted autonomy between humans and robots: Toward human-on-the-loop in robotics
and autonomous systems. IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Magazine, 3(1), 10–17.
OpenAI. ChatGPT (2023). https://chat.openai.com/auth/login.
Palese, B., & Usai, A. (2018). The relative importance of service quality dimensions in e-commerce experi-
ences. International Journal of Information Management, 40, 132–140.
Park, S., Cho, J., Park, K., & Shin, H. (2021). Customer sentiment analysis with more sensibility. Engineering
Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 104, 104356.
Piramanayagam, S., & Kumar, M. P. S. (2020). Determinants of customer’s dissatisfaction: A content analysis
of negative online customer reviews on budget segment hotels in India. African Journal of Hospitality,
Tourism and Leisure, 9(1), 1–9.
Prietl, B. (2019). Big data: Inequality by design? In Weizenbaum Conference (p. 10). DEU.
Prithivirajan, M., Lai, V., & Shim, K. J. (2015). Analysis of aspects and star ratings in consumer reviews.
ˇReh˚uˇrek, R., & Sojka, P. (2010). Software framework for topic modelling with large corpora. In Proceedings
of the LREC 2010 workshop on new challenges for NLP frameworks (pp. 45–50). Valletta: ELRA. http://
is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en
Sainju, B., Hartwell, C., & Edwards, J. (2021). Job satisfaction and employee turnover determinants in for-
tune 50 companies: Insights from employee reviews from indeed. com. Decision Support Systems, 148,
113582.
Sanchez-Franco, M. J., Cepeda-Carrion, G., & Roldan, J. L. (2019). Understanding relationship quality in
hospitality services: A study based on text analytics and partial least squares. Internet Research, 29(3),
478–503.
Saura, J. R., Palos-Sanchez, P., & Grilo, A. (2019). Detecting indicators for startup business success: Sentiment
analysis using text data mining. Sustainability, 11(3), 917.
Scharre, P., & Horowitz, M. C. (2015). Autonomy in weapon systems. In Center for a new American security
working paper.
Schradie, J. (2017). Big data is too small: Research implications of class inequality for online data collection.
In: Media and Class (pp. 200–213). Routledge.
Short, C. E., & Short, J. C. (2023). The artiﬁcially intelligent entrepreneur: ChatGPT, prompt engineering,
and entrepreneurial rhetoric creation. Journal of Business Venturing Insights, 19, e00388.
Stewart, L. (2019). Big data discrimination: Maintaining protection of individual privacy without disincen-
tivizing businesses’ use of biometric data to enhance security. BCL Review, 60, 349.
Vayansky, I., & Kumar, S. A. P. (2020). A review of topic modeling methods. Information Systems, 94, 101582.
Wang, T., Cai, Y., Leung, H., Lau, R. Y. K., Li, Q., & Min, H. (2014). Product aspect extraction supervised
with online domain knowledge. Knowledge-Based Systems, 71, 86–100.
Wong, I. K. A., Lian, Q. L., & Sun, D. (2023). Autonomous travel decision-making: An early glimpse into
ChatGPT and generative AI. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management, 56, 253–263.
Wu, R. T., & Dang, R. R. (2023). ChatGPT in head and neck scientiﬁc writing: A precautionary anecdote.
American Journal of Otolaryngology, 44, 103980.
Yanfang, S., Lin, Y., & Lai, C. (2023). Collaborating with ChatGPT in argumentative writing classrooms.
Assessing Writing, 57, 100752.
Yilmaz, R., & Yilmaz, F. G. K. (2023). Augmented intelligence in programming learning: Examining student
views on the use of ChatGPT for programming learning. Computers in Human Behavior: Artiﬁcial
Humans, 1(2), 100005.
Zhang, J. (2019). Listening to the consumer: Exploring review topics on Airbnb and their impact on listing
performance. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 27(4), 371–389.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123