TITLE: Game-based modeling of delayed risk contagion in cryptocurrency exchanges
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06557-0
---

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06557-0
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Game-based modeling of delayed risk contagion in
cryptocurrency exchanges
Mauro Aliano1
· Stefania Ragni1
Received: 20 June 2024 / Accepted: 26 February 2025 / Published online: 19 March 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
During the last years, ﬁnancial market contagion has become a critical concern for policy-
makers and investors, particularly with respect to the ﬁnancial stability of cryptocurrency
platforms. This paper explores the contagion effect among crypto exchanges employing
the Susceptible–Infected–Recovered (SIR) model with time delay and investigates possible
cooperative strategies. The SIR dynamical system is integrated with the replicator equation of
evolutionary game theory to study the interplay between the spread of risk and the propensity
of cryptocurrency platforms to become cooperative under the pressure of ﬁnancial contagion.
Different equilibrium points which correspond to both pure and mixed cooperative strategies
characterize the resulting model. We carry out a theoretical analysis of the problem by study-
ing the asymptotic behavior in the steady state. In addition, using extensive cryptocurrency
market data from 2017 to 2023, we identify the key factors driving contagion and assess
the dynamics of cooperative versus non-cooperative behavior. Our ﬁndings point out that
cooperative strategies are essential to ensure ﬁnancial stability, particularly in the long term,
as they mitigate systemic risks and foster resilience. These results provide critical insights
for policy makers and investors, offering actionable strategies to enhance the robustness of
crypto markets and address the growing challenges of ﬁnancial contagion in the digital asset
ecosystem.
Keywords Evolutionary game · Cooperative actions · SIR model · Risk contagion ·
Spillover effect · Cryptocurrency
1 Introduction
Crypto platforms have experienced unprecedented growth in recent years, largely fueled
by their expanding market capitalization (see Samueal, 2023). However, concerns about
exploitative practices have also grown in conjunction with this expansion, especially in regard
to those that impact the Global South (see Howson, 2020). In response to these negative
B Stefania Ragni
stefania.ragni@unife.it
Mauro Aliano
mauro.aliano@unife.it
1
Department of Economics and Management, University of Ferrara, Via Voltapaletto 11, 44121 Ferrara,
Italy
123

278
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
impact, scholars and practitioners alike have proposed alternative governance structures, such
as platform cooperatives, as viable solutions to counterbalance such inequalities. At the heart
of these platforms, blockchain technology underpins the ﬁnancial sector by fostering trust
and reducing the reliance on traditional intermediaries through consensus-based veriﬁcation
mechanisms (see Renduchintala et al., 2022). Although cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin
and Ethereum have been heralded as decentralized systems, developers and academics have
shown concerns about the real level of decentralization of these systems (see Barbereau et
al., 2022).
The COVID-19 pandemic’s outbreak has further transformed both the cryptocurrency and the
broader ﬁnancial markets. During that volatile period, sentiment analysis has pointed out the
effectiveness of advanced predictive models like CNN-LSTM (see Washington, 2023). At the
same time, the pandemic brought attention to the short-term beneﬁts of investing in cryptocur-
rencies, as they often outperform conventional ﬁnancial instruments for risk-seeking investors
(see Waspada et al., 2022). However, regulators noticed this rapid growth and, as a result,
more stringent regulatory frameworks for crypto-assets have been developed. These frame-
works require service providers to obtain formal authorization before commencing operations
(see Wronka, 2024), with the objective of improving transparency and accountability within
crypto exchanges. These evolving regulations have, in turn, directly inﬂuenced investors’
decision-making processes and their willingness to engage in cryptocurrency markets (see
Prasetyo & Kurniasari, 2023).
Even though cryptocurrency platforms are still showing a considerable growth and poten-
tial, there are still a number of important issues that need to be ﬁxed. Key issues include
exploitative practices, questions surrounding true decentralization, the evolving regulatory
landscape, and external disruptions such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Building a more
trustworthy and sustainable cryptocurrency system requires addressing these challenges
with a combination of more regulation, alternative governance strategies, and improved
transparency.
1.1 Financial risk contagion in cryptocurrency exchanges
Contagion is crucial for the so-called “systemic risk” in the ﬁnancial literature, where a
big cascade of crises could be determined by both endogenous and exogenous factors. In
particular, if a ﬁnancial intermediary approaches a crisis or precrisis state, it may cause a crisis
or precrisis situation for other intermediaries, beginning with an outbreak that has a cascading
impact (see Haldane & May, 2011). Interdependencies within ﬁnancial networks can be
considered as a mechanism of contagion transmission and are one of the most signiﬁcant
factors inﬂuencing the spread of defaults (see Roukny et al., 2013). In this framework, due
to the worries that have arisen recently regarding ﬁnancial service providers which operate
outside of standard schemes in decentralized ﬁnance, we focus on the spreading of risk
in relation to cryptocurrency exchanges. The issue of ﬁnancial risk inside cryptocurrency
markets is extensively discussed in the literature. For instance, Aramonte et al. (2021) points
out that decentralized ﬁnance is a new type of intermediation in cryptocurrency markets
that has certain weaknesses which could threaten ﬁnancial stability; actually, the need of
governance lets a certain degree of centralization be inevitable. High leverage, liquidity
mismatches, and the absence of shock absorbers like banks can make these vulnerabilities
extremely serious. Concerns regarding customer safety also exist, and they include issues
such as operational platform failures and cyberattacks, volatility and usage of leverage (see
Bains et al., 2022).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
279
In this framework, the issue of managing a potential evolution of risk contagion among
cryptocurrency exchanges can be addressed by applying a dynamic compartmental strat-
egy based on the Susceptible–Infected–Recovered (SIR) classiﬁcation. This mathematical
approach was introduces in the study of epidemiological models as helpful tool for assessing
how an infection develops from its ﬁrst outbreak onward (see Kendall 1956 and Kermack
and McKendrick 1927). The modeling approach based on SIR dynamics has the great poten-
tial to also be applicable to other contexts other than epidemiology. Actually, based on the
analogy existing between ecosystems and ﬁnancial systems, this approach has also proved
useful for describing risk contagion in economics and ﬁnance: Cao and Zhu (2012) and
Fanelli and Maddalena (2020) apply SIR methodology to crisis contagion thorough banking
networks; Garas et al. (2010) exploits SIR perspective to analyze ﬁnancial crises among
different nations; Zhao et al. (2021) describes credit risk contagion of Internet peer-to-peer
lending platforms by the epidemiological approach.
We are inspired by the literature and describe risk contagion phenomenon by applying a
compartmental model based on a speciﬁc time delay differential system, which has been
proposed by Kyrychko and Blyuss (2005) in a biological context to simulate the dynamics
of disease spread in the SIR perspective. The inclusion of temporal delay, which accounts
for latency or immunity and enhances the realism of infection transmission dynamics, is one
of its key features. In this regard, the model is revisited within the framework of ﬁnance in
order to explain the evolution of contagion with respect to crash risk at low and high levels
inside cryptocurrency markets. Although this SIR model is not a novelty, the application to
cryptocurrency markets may be considered as worthy of attention due to the growing interest
in ﬁnancial services out of classical schemes. The key idea is that low risk cryptocurrency
platforms are susceptible to contagion upon interaction with high risk platforms within the
infected compartment. After contagion, some of the infected platforms recover and obtain
ﬁnancial immunity for a period of length τ > 0. From a mathematical point of view, the
whole dynamics is temporally delayed by this parameter τ. On the other hand, from a ﬁnancial
point of view, several stakeholders-stockholders, ﬁnancial intermediaries, customers, and
regulatory bodies-take action to temporarily prevent future ﬁnancial troubles following an
initial or recurring ﬁnancial distress event. For example, in the wake of a ﬁnancial crisis,
consumers are probably going to keep a closer eye on things, and regulators would tighten
up their supervision, so they are kind of like ﬁnancial watchdogs. Furthermore, following
ﬁnancial difﬁculties, reputation-building is essential as it reinforces market resilience. This is
similar to developing immunity, as it acts as a safeguard against future ﬁnancial hardships. The
time delay parameter τ models the duration of the steps performed to stop ﬁnancial instability
from happening again. In this respect, immunity is not lifelong in the SIR dynamics but it
ends after period τ: while some recovered cryptocurrency platforms might exit the market,
others might revert to be susceptible of contagion again.
1.2 Cooperation and evolutionary games
In the framework of risk spreading by contagion, we investigate the collaborative initia-
tives among cryptocurrency platforms; in particular, we focus on the cooperative efforts
endorsed by international authorities. This cooperation is centered around implementing
policies designed to prevent abuse and protect investors, with the aim of mitigating risks
associated with ﬁnancial instability and crises. The Financial Stability Board emphasized
the need for cross-border collaboration in a 2022 report due to the inherently global nature
123

280
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
of cryptocurrencies, presenting substantial regulatory, supervisory and enforcement chal-
lenges. Divergent regulatory classiﬁcations across different jurisdictions and the inadequacy
of current cross-border frameworks to handle the complexities inherent in crypto-assets are
the causes of these challenges. The same cryptocurrency may be classiﬁed differently in
different jurisdictions due to inconsistent regulatory classiﬁcations, which may result in reg-
ulatory arbitrage or evasion. This disparity leads certain entities to structure their operations
in ways that exploit the variances in regulatory requirements. Moreover, current cross-border
regulatory cooperation frameworks have been primarily tailored for traditional ﬁnancial insti-
tutions and activities, and they frequently lack the adaptability required to accommodate the
unique characteristics of crypto-assets. A reevaluation of these frameworks is essential to
determine their effectiveness in facilitating information sharing and coordination in the regu-
lation, supervision, and enforcement of crypto-assets, especially when activities span various
sectors and jurisdictions. International authorities have started working together on stable-
coins, especially because of their importance to small economies in the Global South. The
applications of speciﬁc stablecoin arrangements are diverse and continually evolving. The
Financial Stability Board’s February 2022 report points out several common use cases for
stablecoins, including: i) serving as a bridge between traditional ﬁat currencies and volatile
digital assets; ii) acting as collateral in derivative transactions involving crypto-assets; and
iii) facilitating various activities such as trading, lending, and borrowing, particularly within
decentralized ﬁnance (DeFi) ecosystems. In addition, in 2022, the Bank for International
Settlements’ Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and the Interna-
tional Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) has issued guidance indicating that
stablecoin arrangements should adhere to international standards for payment, clearing, and
settlement systems. This guidance applies the principle of “same risk, same regulation” to
stablecoins, by extending international standards to cover systemically important stablecoin
arrangements. Platform collaboration would serve two purposes: it would mitigate spillover
effects and help safeguard interconnected entities.
As a novel issue in this framework, we provide a model that integrates the standard SIR
system with the replicator equation to describe how cooperation changes over time in the ﬁeld
of Evolutionary Game Theory (see Weibull, 1995). The two models are joined by assuming
that the parameters of the game payoff matrix depend on the strength of the risk spread at any
time. It means that the higher is the gravity of crisis, the higher is the propensity to cooperate.
The primary conclusions of the study center the evidence that long-term cooperation lowers
systemic risks and promotes trust, which are two factors essential for a stable ﬁnancial
environment. The degree of cooperative behavior tends to rise in response to the intensity of
contagion diffusion in the short-term.
1.3 Outline of the analysis
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. The mathematical framework of the
SIR model for risk contagion is described in Sect.2. Particular focus is placed on how risk
contagion may inﬂuence the behavior of cryptocurrency platforms in Sect.2.1, where the
replicator dynamics is described. As the next step, Sect.2.2 introduces the risk infection game
model obtained by coupling the SIR dynamics and the replicator equation. In Sect.3 we focus
on the analysis of the game based model in terms of steady state behavior. In particular, we
focus on dynamics that are affected by the existence of a mixed-strategy steady state which
is feasible. Actually, we are interested in scenarios where the mixed-strategy equilibrium
is viable and stable and hence observable in the practice. In this framework, we provide
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
281
the conditions for mixed-strategy equilibrium viability together with its stability analysis
in Sects.3.1 and 3.2, respectively. Furthermore, in Sect.4 we simulate the dynamics of risk
contagion under a cooperation action among the governance tokens in a speciﬁc data sample
by employing a classical numerical procedure for approximating the solution of a differential
system with constant delay. Finally, we draw our concluding remarks in Sect.5.
2 The contagion dynamics
Three distinct compartments are considered inside a given market: the class of susceptible
platforms with density S(t), the class of infected platforms with density I(t), and the class
of recovered with density R(t), at each time t ≥0. Then, total density is equal to N(t) =
S(t) + I(t) + R(t) at any time t. Since some cryptocurrency platforms may exit the market,
N(t) decreases with the elimination rate from the market, denoted by γ with 0 < γ < 1,
while it increases over time under the assumption that more susceptible platforms will enter
the market at a speciﬁc growth rate b > 0.
On one hand, the risk spread is modelled by a bilinear incidence term a S(t)I(t), where a > 0
represents the removal rate as a result of contagion and measures the interconnections among
the exchanges. In this respect, the contagion grows linearly according to both susceptible and
infected densities. On the other hand, a portion of infected platforms may be recovered from
high risk: they become able to keep their risk at a low level, so that they are no longer
infectious for a time period of length τ > 0. In this regard, τ is a form of ﬁnancial immunity,
whereas parameter δ, with 0 < δ < 1, denotes the recovery rate from the high risk to the
low one. When τ expires, some cryptocurrency platforms that have recovered may revert
susceptible to infection once more: they correspond to the portion δe−γ τ I(t −τ).
Under the previous statements, the following SIR dynamics models risk transmission
through the market:
˙S(t) = b −γ S(t) −a S(t) I(t) + δe−γ τ I(t −τ),
(1)
˙I(t) = a S(t) I(t) −(γ + δ)I(t),
(2)
˙R(t) = δI(t) −γ R(t) −δe−γ τ I(t −τ),
(3)
completed by the initial value for the recovered compartment corresponding to
R(0) = δ
 0
−τ
eγ s I(s) ds,
(4)
and the following initial conditions prescribed for susceptible and recovered classes:
S(0) = S0 > 0,
(5)
I(s) = I0(s) ≥0,
for all s ∈[−τ, 0],
with I0(0) > 0,
(6)
where the history function I0(·) is continuous in [−τ, 0]. Under these assumptions, there
exists a unique solution of the previous differential system (see Hale, 1977). It can be proved
that, as the dynamics starts from positive initial values, then S(t), I(t) and R(t) remain
positive at any time t > 0 (see Kyrychko & Blyuss, 2005). In addition, the total density N(t)
can be integrated according to the following relationship:
˙N(t) ≤b −γ N(t),
t ≥0.
123

282
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
It follows that there exists a constant value
M = max{N0 := N(0); b/γ },
such that N(t) ≤M at each t ≥0. This bound on N(t) is inherited by the different
compartments so that
0 ≤S(t) ≤M,
0 ≤I(t) ≤M,
0 ≤R(t) ≤M,
(7)
for any time t ≥0. This ﬁnding implies that contagion does not diverge but instead it remains
bounded from above; indeed, the density related to each compartment does not exceed the
upper bound M.
As a further remark, once the infected dynamics I(t) is known, then the recovered one
can be integrated to get
R(t) = δ
 t
t−τ
eγ (s−t)I(s) ds;
(8)
therefore, equation (3) can be omitted without loss of generality and the model reduces to
the ﬁrst two equations. As a result, it is possible to only focus on system (1)-(2), which is
completed by initial conditions (5)-(6).
2.1 How risk contagion influences cryptocurrency platforms’behavior
The adoption of restrictions and control mechanisms set forth by international laws may
encourage cryptocurrency platforms to embrace more ethical conduct, especially with regard
to customers. Unfortunately, when making decisions under pressure, such as in the early
phases of a pandemic or when there is a risk of infection, the necessary actions may arouse
selﬁsh inclinations in both individuals and economic operators, such as the impulse to take
advantage of others and the aversion to being duped. This framework inspires the investigation
of assessing cooperative and non-cooperative actions in light of a new legal context. As an
analogy with the study developed in Madeo and Mocenni (2021) where the SIR epidemic
model is involved in the framework of an evolutionary game to study the interplay between
the COVID-19 spreading and the propensity of people to become cooperative, we model a
possible cooperation action for a more ethical behavior inside the cryptocurrency platforms’
market.
In this respect, we assume that every cryptocurrency platform has the option to choose to
cooperate or not by implementing only one of the two strategies. Then, we denote the share
of cooperators by x ∈[0, 1], whereas the share of non-cooperators is deﬁned by z = 1 −x.
In the ﬁeld of Game Theory (see Weibull, 1995), the decision-making process is determined
by a payoff matrix that establishes the outcome of the interactions between pairs of players
which are randomly selected. We deﬁne this payoff matrix as:
B =
 1 ¯S
T 0

where Player 1’s payoffs for cooperation are listed in the ﬁrst row and his reward for defection
or non-cooperation is shown in the second. In an analogous way, Player 2’s decisions are
reﬂected in the columns of the payoff matrix. More precisely, ¯S represents the “sucker’s
payoff,” or the fear of being betrayed by others, and T stands for the temptation to defect.
For example, Player 1 receives 1 if both players cooperate, T if he defects and the other
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
283
player cooperates, ¯S if he cooperates and the other player defects, and 0 if neither player
cooperates.
In a given population of platforms that is assumed to be large and well-mixed.1, the
dynamical evolution of cooperative and non-cooperative strategies can be described by the
Replicator Equation (see Weibull 1995, Hofbauer and Sigmund 2003), which corresponds to
the following system
˙x = x(πC −¯π),
(9)
˙z = z(πN −¯π),
(10)
where πC and πN are the average payoffs collected by the share of cooperative and non-
cooperative platforms, respectively, such that
 πC
πN

= B ·
 x
z

=
 x + ¯Sz
T x

,
while ¯π represents the average payoff of the whole cryptocurrency market and is deﬁned as
¯π = xπC + zπN = x2 + (T + ¯S)xz.
In a dynamic context, it is worthwhile to notice that the levels of both Infected and Susceptible
may provide a reasonable estimate of platforms’ perceptions of the risk contagion strength;
as a consequence, it is reasonable to suppose that the ruling parameters T and ¯S may vary
according to the ratio (I −S)/M which may work as a “game-switching” term. Actually, we
assume that matrix B is dependent of both I and S and deﬁne the net payoffs for defection
and cooperation as
¯S = I −S
M
,
T = 1 −¯S;
therefore, the resulting payoff matrix
B(S, I) =

1
I−S
M
1 −I−S
M
0

.
(11)
According to the value of ratio (I −S)/M, the game switches from being a Prisoner’s
Dilemma to a Harmony game when the infected level I exceeds the susceptible one S. Indeed,
for I −S < 0, B(S, I) represents a Prisoner’s Dilemma game due to the fact that T > 1
and ¯S < 0. That is to say, defection is the “natural” choice of action when the contagion
is sufﬁciently low, as the implementation of any containment measures is not justiﬁed by a
perceived weakness in the risk spread. In this instance, limitations and control mechanisms
naturally wane until the current crisis intensiﬁes again to the point where infection is so high
that I −S > 0. Then, it holds that T < 1 and ¯S > 0 so that B(S, I) turns to a Harmony
1 The assumption that the population of cryptocurrency platforms is large and well-mixed is supported by
several studies highlighting the extensive nature and interconnectedness of the cryptocurrency market. For
instance, the cryptocurrency market has experienced signiﬁcant growth, with thousands of active cryptocur-
rencies contributing to a diverse ecosystem that exhibits characteristics of a large population (see Abbasi et
al., 2021) This extensive market size allows for the application of statistical models that assume a well-mixed
environment, where interactions among platforms can be analyzed without signiﬁcant bias from structural
limitations (see Bogdan, 2023). Furthermore, research indicates that the behaviors of traders within this mar-
ket, such as herding and feedback trading, reﬂect dynamics which are typical of large, well-mixed populations
(see Bouri et al. 2019 and King and Koutmos 2021). The high volatility and liquidity of cryptocurrencies also
suggest that price movements are inﬂuenced by collective behaviors across a broad spectrum of platforms,
reinforcing the notion of a well-mixed population (see Dutta & Bouri, 2022).
123

284
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
game. In this respect, the payoff matrix can be interpreted as incentives for doing what seems
the right thing in the right situation in the framework of a “perfect right dynamics”.
In the various ﬁelds of application related to behavioral epidemiology, a similar but differ-
ent approach based on a dynamic structure of the payoff matrix is proposed by Madeo and
Mocenni (2022) and Báez-Sánchez (2018): they rely on the capability of networked popula-
tions to self-regulate the behavior when a higher common good should be preserved because
of individual awareness. Based on the analogy between ﬁnancial systems and ecosystems, in
our framework individuals correspond with cryptocurrency platforms which aim to preserve
the higher common good given by preventing abuse and safeguarding investors to mitigate
the risks of ﬁnancial instability.
Under the assumption that the payoff matrix is deﬁned in (11), it is not so difﬁcult to verify
that the Replicator Equations (9)–(10) reduces to
˙x = x(1 −x) I −S
M
,
(12)
as the equation with respect to z is omitted since relationship z = 1 −x can be exploited for
evaluating the dynamics of the share of non-cooperators.
2.2 The risk contagion game-based model
As already mentioned, cooperation entails the adoption of best practices which are meant
to lessen the transmission of risk, like facilitating various activities such as trading, lending,
borrowing, and acting as collateral within DeFi ecosystem. As a result, the behavior of
platforms inﬂuences the contagion rate a in the SIR dynamics. Actually, cooperation lowers
the contagion rate, while defection increases it. In this framework, we assume that contagion
rate a linearly depends on the cooperation share x according to the rule
a(x) = a0(1 −x),
(13)
where a0 represents the “natural” rate of contagion. Precisely, a0 captures the way throughout
one platform inﬂuences each other in absence of cooperation. This phenomenon can be
identiﬁed as an interconnection among the platforms in the market and parameter a0 is
measured by the net-spillover index according to Diebold and Yilmaz (2012), Diebold and
Yilmaz (2014), Diebold and Yilmaz (2016).
We notice that determining the contagion rate based on (13) yields that no new infected
platforms would arise if the whole cryptocurrency market adopted cooperative conduct;
indeed, a(x) > 0 for 0 ≤x < 1 and a(1) = 0.
Based on the SIR dynamics (1)–(2)–(3) with contagion rate deﬁned by (13) and on the
Replicator Equation (12), we propose the following delayed model
˙S(t) = b −γ S(t) −a0(1 −x(t)) S(t) I(t) + δe−γ τ I(t −τ),
(14)
˙I(t) = a0(1 −x(t)) S(t) I(t) −(γ + δ)I(t),
(15)
˙R(t) = δI(t) −γ R(t) −δe−γ τ I(t −τ),
(16)
˙x(t) = x(t)(1 −x(t)) I(t) −S(t)
M
,
(17)
equipped with suitable initial conditions (4)–(5)–(6) joint with x(0) = x0 setting x0 ∈[0, 1].
A schematic representation of the model is shown in Fig.1.
Under the previous assumption that I0(·) in (6) is continuous over the lag interval [−τ, 0],
there exists a unique solution of the previous delayed differential system (see Hale, 1977).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
285
Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the game-based model. The SIR model and the Replicator Equation are
coupled by two feedback mechanisms: (1) the densities S and I inﬂuence the cooperation dynamics by
changing the ratio (I −S)/M (green arrows); (2) the cooperation x inﬂuences the contagion rate a(x) inside
the spreading of risk (red arrow). (Color ﬁgure online)
Moreover, it can be proved that the bounds stated in (7) still hold under the same argument
discussed in the previous Sect.2. In this respect, we notice that the “game-switching” term
is bounded such that −1 ≤(I(t) −S(t))/M ≤1 for any time. According to the properties
of the Replicator Equation, it holds that 0 ≤x(t) ≤1 for each t ≥0.
3 Analysis of the delayed game model
As already stated in the previous Sect.2, once the infected dynamics is evaluated, R(t) can be
directly integrated according to (8); for this reason, equation (16) can be omitted. Therefore,
we focus on the analysis of the reduced coupled model (14)–(15)–(17). It is characterized by
four steady states:
• E∗
1 = (b/γ, 0, 1) which represents the pure game strategy of always pursuing the
cooperation strategy.
• E∗
2 = (b/γ, 0, 0) which represents the pure game strategy of always pursuing the non-
cooperation strategy in the case where risk spread tends to disappear from the market.
• E∗
3 = (S∗
3, I ∗
3 , 0), with S∗
3 = (δ + γ )/a0 and I ∗
3 = (b −γ S∗
3)/(γ + δ −δe−γ τ); this
equilibrium point represents the pure game strategy of always pursuing non-cooperation
strategy in the case when risk spread tends to be endemic in the market.
• E∗
4 = (S∗
4, I ∗
4 , x∗
4), with S∗
4 = I ∗
4 = b/(2γ + δ −δe−γ τ) and x∗
4 = 1 −(δ + γ )/(a0 S∗
4);
this equilibrium point corresponds to a mixed-strategy in the game.
A crucial role in the dynamics is played by the so-called “basic reproduction number”
ρ0 =
a0b
γ (δ + γ ),
(18)
which has a cutoff value that marks the boundary of a region where a mixed-strategy equi-
librium exists and there are no stable pure strategy equilibria. In the sequel, we refer to the
viability of the mixed-strategy equilibrium as the condition that deﬁnes this region.
123

286
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
3.1 Viability of the mixed-strategy equilibrium
The mixed-strategy equilibrium E∗
4 is considered viable if it is feasible (i.e. 0 < x∗
4 < 1),
when the pure strategy equilibria E∗
1, E∗
2 and E∗
3 are unstable (see Wettergren, 2023). Since
the mixed-strategy is not observed when the dynamics are attracted by the pure strategies,
the attention is focused on scenarios in which the pure strategy equilibria are asymptotically
stable. In this respect, we ﬁnd that long-term stable dynamics that do not approach one of
the pure strategies require the existence of a mixed-strategy equilibrium which is feasible.
Actually, the behavior of the pure game strategies in the steady state can be addressed in
terms of local asymptotical stability and is inﬂuenced by the level of the parameter ρ0, as
already mentioned.
In this framework, we start from assessing the stability of the pure game strategies by
employing the classical tools of delay differential system analysis. We notice that E∗
1 and E∗
2
are always feasible; in addition, their steady state behavior is characterized by the following
results.
Proposition 1 The steady state E∗
1 is unstable for any combination of the parameter ρ0 and
the time delay τ ≥0.
Proof We linearize system (14)–(15)–(17) near the steady state E∗
1 and focus on the
characteristic equation with respect to λ deﬁned as
det(J0(E∗
1) + e−λτ Jτ(E∗
1) −λJ) = 0,
(19)
where J is the identity matrix and
J0(E∗
1) =
⎛
⎝
−γ
0
0
0
−δ −γ
0
0
0
b/(γ M)
⎞
⎠,
Jτ(E∗
1) =
⎛
⎝
0
δe−γ τ
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
⎞
⎠.
Equation (19) is solved by real eigenvalues corresponding to λ1 = −γ , λ2 = −δ −γ and
λ3 = b/(γ M). We have λ1 < 0 and λ2 < 0, but λ3 > 0; this condition implies that E∗
1 is
unstable in correspondence with any values of ρ0 and τ.
⊓⊔
Proposition 2 The following statements hold:
• if ρ0 < 1, then the risk-free equilibrium E∗
2 is locally asymptotically stable, E∗
1 is unstable
and the other equilibrium points are unfeasible;
• in the opposite case when ρ0 > 1, then E∗
2 is unstable.
Proof The linearization of system (14)–(15)–(17) near E∗
2 yields the following characteristic
equation with respect to λ:
det(J0(E∗
2) + e−λτ Jτ(E∗
2) −λJ) = 0,
(20)
where J is the identity matrix, Jτ(E∗
2) = Jτ(E∗
1) and
J0(E∗
2) =
⎛
⎝
−γ
−a0b/γ
0
0
(δ + γ )(ρ0 −1)
0
0
0
−b/(γ M)
⎞
⎠.
The solution of equation (20) corresponds to the real eigenvalues λ1 = −γ , λ2 = (δ +
γ )(ρ0 −1) and λ3 = −b/(γ M).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
287
Under the assumption that ρ0 < 1, we get λ1 < 0, λ2 < 0 and λ3 < 0. It follows that E∗
2 is
locally asymptotically stable. In addition, on one hand we notice that the equilibrium points
E∗
3 and E∗
4 are not feasible, due to I ∗
3 < 0 and x∗
4 < 0. On the other hand, E∗
1 is always
unstable due to Proposition 1.
In the opposite case when ρ0 > 1, we get λ1 < 0, λ3 < 0 and λ2 > 0. It follows that E∗
2 is
unstable. Then, the proof is completed.
⊓⊔
We remark that the ﬁrst two equilibrium points E∗
1 and E∗
2 are characterized as risk-
free, indicating that the system can reach a stable state without ongoing risk. It means that
at these points, neither the susceptible nor the infected platforms present a threat, likely
due to effective control mechanisms or eradication of the problem being modeled. In this
respect, according to the previous Proposition 1, we may state that it is not realistic to provide
incentives for any kind of cooperative activity to prevent the spread of risk in the absence
of real long-term risk. On the other hand, Proposition 2 states that the absence of long-term
cooperation is justiﬁed only if the force of infection is low and ρ0 is below the threshold 1,
since the equilibrium E∗
2 is risk-free.
The following result deals with the stability of the endemic equilibrium point E∗
3 in the
absence of cooperation. It exploits the polynomial function deﬁned by
p(ω) = ω2 −2δω + γ 2,
for any ω ∈R.
Proposition 3 The following statements hold:
• If 1 < ρ0 < 2 + (δ −δe−γ τ)/γ , then E∗
1 and E∗
2 are unstable, while E∗
4 is unfeasible;
moreover, the risk-free equilibrium E∗
3 is locally asymptotically stable in correspondence
with the ﬁxed time delay τ ≥0 under the further assumption that the following condition
is satisﬁed:
p0 := p(a0I ∗
3 ) ≥0.
(21)
• In the other case when ρ0 > 2 + (δ −δe−γ τ)/γ , then E∗
1, E∗
2 and E∗
3 are unstable.
Proof By following the same approach as in the previous propositions, the linearization of
system (14)–(15)–(17) is carried out near E∗
3. As a result, the characteristic equation with
respect to λ is deﬁned as
det(J0(E∗
3) + e−λτ Jτ(E∗
3) −λJ) = 0,
where J represents again the identity matrix, Jτ(E∗
3) = Jτ(E∗
1) and
J0(E∗
3) =
⎛
⎝
−γ −a0I ∗
3
−δ −γ
a0S∗
3 I ∗
3
a0I ∗
3
0
−a0S∗
3 I ∗
3
0
0
(I ∗
3 −S∗
3)/M
⎞
⎠.
An eigenvalue corresponds to
¯λ = I ∗
3 −S∗
3
M
=
γ (δ + γ )
Ma0(γ + δ −δe−γ τ)

ρ0 −

2 + δ −δe−γ τ
γ

,
while the other two eigenvalues solve the following equation
λ2 + (γ + a0I ∗
3 )λ + (γ + δ −δe−(λ+γ )τ)a0I ∗
3 = 0.
(22)
123

288
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
On one hand, we suppose that ρ0 > 2+(δ −δe−γ τ)/γ which also yields ρ0 > 1. Under this
assumption, E∗
1 and E∗
2 are unstable according to the results proved in Propositions 1 and 2.
As an additional consequence, condition ρ0 > 2 + (δ −δe−γ τ)/γ assures that ¯λ > 0 which
yields E∗
3 is unstable.
On the other hand, we suppose that 1 < ρ0 < 2 + (δ −δe−γ τ)/γ . Again, this assumption
implies E∗
1 and E∗
2 are unstable, as in the previous case. Furthermore, the same assumption
yields ¯λ < 0; therefore, the location of the roots of equation (22) in the plane affects the
stability for steady state E∗
3. In particular, the stability of this equilibrium changes as the root
values move from the left half of the plane into the right half. With the aim of investigating
this possibility, ﬁrst we notice that when τ = 0, equation (22) reduces to
λ2 + (γ + (δ + γ )(ρ0 −1))λ + γ (δ + γ )(ρ0 −1) = 0;
then, it admits roots with negative real parts, since its coefﬁcients are positive. Hence, con-
dition 1 < ρ0 < 2 + (δ −δe−γ τ)/γ implies that E∗
3 is locally stable when τ = 0. In the
general case where τ > 0, we argue about the existence of purely imaginary eigenvalues;
therefore, we apply the substitution λ = iv (v > 0) to (22) and obtain
−v2 + (γ + a0I ∗
3 )iv + (γ + δ)a0I ∗
3 −a0I ∗
3 δe−γ τe−ivτ = 0.
Separating the real and imaginary components leads to the following system of equations
−v2 + (γ + δ)a0I ∗
3 = a0I ∗
3 δe−γ τ cos(vτ),
(γ + a0I ∗
3 )v = −a0I ∗
3 δe−γ τ sin(vτ),
which are squared and added in order to obtain
v4 + p0v2 + (a0I ∗
3 )2 (γ 2 + 2γ δ + δ2(1 −e−2γ τ)) = 0,
(23)
where we have p0 := p(a0I ∗
3 ). We notice that the sign of coefﬁcient p0 deﬁned by condition
(21) is crucial since it assures that equation (23) has positive coefﬁcients and cannot be
solved. It implies that the eigenvalues corresponding to E∗
3 do not move from the left half of
the plane into the right half, hence E∗
3 is locally stable. Thus the proof is complete.
⊓⊔
These results are essential for examining the contagion behavior around the pure strategy
equilibrium E∗
3 as well as the viability of the mixed-strategy equilibrium. Actually, regarding
steady state E∗
3, we assume that
1 < ρ0 < 2 + (δ −δe−γ τ)/γ,
(24)
for τ ≥0 and notice that the discriminant = 4(δ2 −γ 2) of the polynomial function p(·)
determines the sign of the term p0. Indeed, if γ ≥δ, then ≤0 and p(ω) ≥0 for any value
ω ∈R. This yields condition (21) is satisﬁed in correspondence with any value of time delay
τ ≥0. Therefore, condition (24) and γ ≥δ ensure that E∗
3 is locally asymptotically stable
for any τ, due to Proposition 3. In the opposite case γ < δ, we get > 0 and p(ω) ≥0 for
any ω ∈(−∞, ω1] ∪[ω2, +∞) with
ω1 = δ −
 
δ2 −γ 2,
and
ω2 = δ +
 
δ2 −γ 2.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
289
We focus on both conditions a0I ∗
3 = ω1 or a0I ∗
3 = ω2 which correspond to
e−γ τ = 1 + γ
δ −γ (δ + γ )
ω1
(ρ0 −1),
(25)
and
e−γ τ = 1 + γ
δ −γ (δ + γ )
ω2
(ρ0 −1),
(26)
respectively. In this respect, it is worth noting that the time delays deﬁned by equations
(25) or (26) together with conditions (24) and γ < δ represent critical values that may
deﬁne a transition between stability and instability of steady state E∗
3 giving rise to to Hopf
bifurcations in the dynamics plane.
On the other hand, the viability of the mixed-strategy equilibrium is affected by the results
stated in the previous propositions. Indeed, it has been proved how the threshold ρ0 >
2 + (δ −δe−γ τ)/γ for τ ≥0 implies that all steady states E∗
1, E∗
2 and E∗
3 are asymptotically
unstable, moreover the mixed-strategy steady state is admissible. This implication can be
reversed by a straightforward argument. Thus, the following result is obtained.
Proposition 4 The mixed-strategy equilibrium E∗
4 is viable for the dynamics related to a ﬁxed
time delay τ ≥0 if and only if the following condition holds:
ρ0 > 2 + (δ −δe−γ τ)/γ.
(27)
3.2 Stability analysis of the mixed-strategy equilibrium
Assuming a scenario where (27) holds so that the mixed-strategy equilibrium is viable with
respect to the ﬁxed time delay τ ≥0, we focus on a stability analysis around the equilibrium
point E∗
4 with the aim of determining conditions which ensure that the mixed-strategy steady
state is stable and hence observable in practice.
In this respect, by the same approach as in Sect.3.1, system (14)–(15)–(17) is linearized near
E∗
4; thus, the characteristic equation with respect to λ is
det(J0(E∗
4) + e−λτ Jτ(E∗
4) −λJ) = 0,
where J is again the identity matrix, Jτ(E∗
4) = Jτ(E∗
1) and
J0(E∗
4) =
⎛
⎝
−2γ −δ
−δ −γ
a0S∗
4 I ∗
4
δ + γ
0
−a0S∗
4 I ∗
4
−x∗
4(1 −x∗
4)/M
x∗
4(1 −x∗
4)/M
0
⎞
⎠.
Since a0(1 −x∗
4)S∗
4 I ∗
4 = (δ + γ )I ∗
4 and S∗
4 = I ∗
4 , the previous characteristic equation is
equivalent to
λ3 + (2γ + δ)λ2 + Aλ + B = δe−(γ +λ)τ(δ + γ )
 x∗
4 S∗
4
M
+ λ

,
(28)
where we set
A = (δ + γ )

2 x∗
4 S∗
4
M
+ δ + γ

,
B = (2γ + δ)(δ + γ ) x∗
4 S∗
4
M .
Under assumption (27), we notice that x∗
4 S∗
4 corresponds to the following term
x∗
4 S∗
4 =
γ (δ + γ )
a0(2γ + δ −δe−γ τ)

ρ0 −

2 + δ −δe−γ τ
γ

> 0.
123

290
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
The stability of the mixed-strategy equilibrium is described by the location of the roots of the
characteristic equation (28) in the plane. Actually, E∗
4 is locally asymptotically stable in the
case when the eigenvalues lie on the left side of the plane. Some sufﬁcient conditions for the
stability of the mixed-strategy steady state are provided by the following result. In particular,
eigenvalues’ location depends on the following polynomial functions:
ψ(ω) = 2γ 2 −δ2 −2ω,
and
ϕ(ω) = ω2 −(2γ 2 −δ2)ω + (δ + γ )4,
deﬁned for ω ∈R
Proposition 5 Suppose that (27) and 2γ 2 −δ2 ≥0 hold. The mixed-strategy equilibrium E∗
4
is locally asymptotically stable in correspondence with the ﬁxed time delay τ ≥0 under the
further assumption that the following conditions are both satisﬁed:
ψ(x∗
4 S∗
4/M) ≥0,
(29)
and
ϕ(x∗
4 S∗
4/M) ≥δ2(δ + γ )2e−2γ τ.
(30)
Proof We focus on the roots of equation (28) and investigate their location in the plane. With
this aim, ﬁrst we note that when τ = 0, equation (28) reduces to
λ3 + (2γ + δ)λ2 + (δ + γ )
δ + γ
a0
(ρ0 −2) + γ

λ + γ (δ + γ )2
a0
(ρ0 −2) = 0,
that is equivalent to
(λ + γ )

λ2 + (δ + γ )λ + (δ + γ )2
a0
(ρ0 −2)

= 0.
It follows that an eigenvalue corresponds to ¯λ = −γ < 0, while the other two eigenvalues
solve the following equation
λ2 + (δ + γ )λ + (δ + γ )2
a0
(ρ0 −2) = 0,
which admits roots with negative real parts under assumption (27), since its coefﬁcients are
positive. Therefore, condition (27) implies that E∗
4 is locally stable when τ = 0. In the general
case where τ > 0, it is possible to verify that ¯λ = −γ < 0 is a root of equation (28). Hence
¯λ = −γ < 0 once more represents an eigenvalue in correspondence with τ > 0. As a result,
the stability of E∗
4 is determined by the location of the other eigenvalues, which are the other
roots of the characteristic equation. Actually, stability changes as eigenvalues move from the
left half of the plane into the right half. Then, we argue about the existence of other purely
imaginary eigenvalues; hence, we insert λ = iv (v > 0) into (28) and obtain
−iv3 −(2γ + δ)v2 + Aiv + B = δe−γ τ(δ + γ )e−ivτ
 x∗
4 S∗
4
M
+ iv

.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
291
After separating the real and imaginary components, the following system of equations is
obtained
B −(2γ + δ)v2 = δe−γ τ(δ + γ )

 x∗
4 S∗
4
M cos(vτ) + v sin(vτ)

,
Av −v3 = δe−γ τ(δ + γ )

v cos(vτ) −x∗
4 S∗
4
M sin(vτ)

.
Both sides of the previous relationships can be squared and added, thus we get
v6 + C1v4 + C2v2 + C3 = 0,
(31)
where we set
C1 = (2γ + δ)2 −2A = ψ(2(δ + γ )x∗
4 E∗
4/M),
C2 = A2 −2B(2γ + δ) −δ2(δ + γ )2e−2γ τ = ϕ(2(δ + γ )x∗
4 E∗
4) −δ2(δ + γ )2e−2γ τ,
C3 = B2 −δ2(δ + γ )2e−2γ τ(x∗
4 S∗
4/M)2.
In addition to the fact that C3 > 0, conditions (29) and (30) yield C1 ≥0 and C2 ≥0 as
well. It implies that equation (31) does not admit any solution since all of its coefﬁcients are
positive. It follows that no eigenvalue corresponding to E∗
4 moves from the left half of the
plane to the right half, hence E∗
4 is locally stable. In this way, the proof is completed.
⊓⊔
We notice that the time delays at which the assumptions of the previous Proposition are
not veriﬁed and equation (31) admits possible solutions represent critical values that may
deﬁne a transition between stability and instability of the mixed-strategy at the steady state
giving rise to Hopf bifurcations.
4 A simulation of cooperation dynamics
We examine governance tokens that have recently become associated with the most popular
cryptocurrency trading platforms. Our selection is based on trading volume as of early 2023,2
focusing on the most capitalized platforms while acknowledging that the crypto market is
vast, encompassing numerous platforms. Using the Yahoo Finance data source, we retrieved
daily unbalanced values of each currency from 2017 to 2023. Our database is a hand-curated
compilation of publicly available data, arising from Yahoo Finance, where token prices are
expressed in US dollars. Our simulation is initiated with these values. In our analysis, we
explore potential connections across platforms and estimate the factors included in the SIR
model by measuring spillover impacts, identifying risks, and assessing public attention to
understand how risk may spread throughout the market. The dynamics of risk are projected
into the future, focusing on long-term contagion in a possible stable steady state.
First we use the Granger causality framework to explore the theory of interconnection
among cryptocurrency platform tokens. The studies provided in Diebold and Yilmaz (2012),
Diebold and Yilmaz (2014), Diebold and Yilmaz (2016) describe an approach that is useful to
determine the way information ﬂows among platforms. It enables us to evaluate the potential
impact of modiﬁcations to the predictive distribution of one group of time series variables,
referred to as cause variables (CV), on another group, referred to as effect variables (EV). This
analysis’s primary goal is to determine how the EV projections affect the mean squared error.
As established in the literature, ensuring that the time series of the variables are stationary
is crucial to our analysis. If stationarity is lost, appropriate adjustments to the statistics must
2 See https://coinmarketcap.com The website has been visited on March 13, 2024.
123

292
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
be made. In order to study Granger causality among the return series, we start with the
dataset and employ the vector autoregression (VAR) model ﬁtting technique, depending on
the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). We ﬁnd the latency that yields the lowest AIC
score after testing the VAR model with lags ranging from 1 to 4 days. To ascertain if one
variable functions as a Granger cause of another, we then run Granger causality tests on
every variable and equation inside the VAR framework. This is achieved by evaluating the
null hypothesis using a Chi-square test that is based on a leave-one-out methodology. The
ﬁndings of this causality analysis support our initial hypothesis about interconnectedness
by showing that the governance tokens of the platforms under investigation have substantial
relationships with one another. To quantify the inﬂuence of spillover on risks and returns,
we estimate the degree of interconnection by establishing spillover indices. The analysis
developed in Diebold and Yilmaz (2012), Diebold and Yilmaz (2014), Diebold and Yilmaz
(2016) refers to an extended breakdown of the forecast-error variance of the VAR model as
a means of achieving this. Derived from the Diebold and Yilmaz technique, the net spillover
index allows us to estimate the interconnectivity parameter pertinent to the previously stated
SIR dynamics. This research validates that there is a substantial level of interconnectedness
among the platform governance tokens that are being considered, which validates our initial
hunch about interconnectedness. The impact of spillover effects on risks and returns is then
examined in order to assess the degree of this interconnectivity. Speciﬁcally, the spillover
index, which is derived from the ﬂuctuations in governance token prices, showcases the
interconnectivity and the ability of several platforms to inﬂuence one another.
This spillover index is evaluated as a0 = 0.5554 which corresponds with the interconnec-
tion parameter involved in the coupled system (14)–(15)–(17) describing the cooperation
dynamics.
We calculate risk indicators by considering the residual from regressing daily token returns
in an expanded index model, as suggested by Dumitrescu and Zakriya (2022) and Habib et
al. (2018), after estimating token-speciﬁc daily returns according to the following estimate
r j,t = α j + βa, jrm,t−2 + βb, jrm,t−1 + βc, jrm,t + βd, jrm + βe, jrm,t+1 + β f , jrm,t+2 + ε j,t,
where r j,t represents the daily return of the token i-th on day t, while rm,t corresponds to
the market index return for the same period. We use the S&P Cryptocurrency Broad Digital
Market Index as the reference, given its global scope and suitability in the absence of a more
speciﬁc benchmark. In addition, we account for market ﬂuctuations by incorporating both
forward and lagged returns, extending the model to include returns from one and two days
prior, as well as two days ahead, following the methodology of Hutton et al. (2009). To address
the issue of skewed residuals in token returns, we adjust them by deﬁning W j,t = ln(1+ε j,t)
to correct daily returns for the skewed residuals ε j,t, which helps to normalize daily return
distributions.
The down-to-up volatility measure (the so called DUVOL) of the crash likelihood is the
indicator of crash risk. Token-speciﬁc daily returns are divided into two groups for each token
j throughout a ﬁscal-year period t: “down” days, or when returns are below the annual mean,
and “up” days, or when returns are above the monthly mean. For each of these two categories,
the standard deviation of daily returns that are token-speciﬁc is computed independently. The
natural logarithm of the ratio between the standard deviation on “down” days and the standard
deviation on “up” days is known as DUVOL:
DUV OL j,t = ln

(n −1)

down W 2
j,t
ndown −1

up
W 2
j,t

.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
293
Fig. 2 The dashed red line corresponds to the plot of history function I0(·) in the whole sample period
[−5, 0]. Black bullets represent the nodal values which are obtained by relating the entries of the vector
(8, 6, 5, 1, 1, 0) to the initial number of companies N0 = 18 operating at t = 0. (Color ﬁgure online)
While we assert that “Susceptible” tokens are associated with platforms that are quoted in
the market, we also need to provide a standard for determining which tokens are “Infected”
and when they are “Recovered”. In this regard, we anticipate that infection will be assessed
based on DUVOL. More speciﬁcally, we use the risk assessment method that estimates the
Negative Conditional Skewness of the stock return variance (see Dumitrescu and Zakriya
2022 and Habib et al. 2018).
In this framework, on one hand we notice that risk identiﬁcation allows for setting the
parameters involved in the dynamics: indeed, we ﬁnd b = 0.1444, γ = 0.1277 and δ =
0.044. On the other hand, the identiﬁcation of infected platforms allows for constructing the
history function I0(t) involved in the initial condition (6). It is evaluated in the lag period
[−5, 0], that is the time horizon we are considering, which runs from August 2017 to January
2023. More precisely, the number of infected cryptocurrency platforms in the data sample
are collected in the vector vI = (8, 6, 5, 1, 1, 0) whose entries represent the number of
high risk platforms measured at each time node t = −5, −4, . . . , 0. According to the data,
the dynamics starts with N0 = 18 platforms at t = 0, which corresponds to the last date
January 2023 in the sample; then, each entry of vI is normalized with respect to N0 in order
to obtain the nodal values for I0. The built-in MATLAB function polyfit is applied to
asses a polynomial representing the best ﬁt (in a least-squares sense) for the normalized nodal
values provided by vI ./N0. The degree of the best ﬁt polynomial is set at p = 5: actually, we
have empirically veriﬁed that this choice allows us to ﬁt the data by following their trend well
as it is shown in Fig.2, where we plot the resulting history function I0. Moreover, according
to the data, the dynamics starts at S0 = 0.53.
As a further remark, we notice that time delay is not measured by the available data;
anyway, different values are considered for τ with the aim of simulating risk dynamics under
different assumptions on the length of ﬁnancial immunity. According to the data, we ﬁnd that
the minimum period between one infection and the next one of the same platform corresponds
to three years, throughout the sample; thus, we argue that τ does not exceed the threshold 3.
123

294
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
Fig. 3 Risk contagion dynamics in absence of cooperation, i.e. without game. The dynamics is obtained in
correspondence with different lengths for temporary ﬁnancial immunity: τ = 0.5 on the left, τ = 1 in the
middle, τ = 2 on the right. The solid blue line describes susceptible dynamics, the dashed red line corresponds
to infected dynamics. (Color ﬁgure online)
Crypto crashes on platforms have increased in recent years; therefore, it is natural to suppose
that in the absence of policy and regulatory intervention, the immunity period is short with
respect to this threshold. In this framework, given that technology has let trading in a market
happen quickly, it seems sense to compare the dynamics of very brief periods of immunity
and longer intervals. Under this argument, we account for three different scenarios. Firstly,
we assume that temporary immunity is very short and set τ = 0.5; then we consider a longer
time delay and choose τ = 1. The third scenario assumes a very long ﬁnancial immunity so
that we set τ = 2.
We remark that the risk spread dynamics is nonlinear and it cannot be written in closed-
form, hence an approximation must be determined: we carry out a numerical simulation by
exploiting the built-in function dde23 in MATLAB environment.
As a ﬁrst step, risk contagion is simulated in absence of cooperation. In this respect, the
Susceptible-Infected system (1)–(2) without game is numerically integrated and its approx-
imated dynamics is shown in Fig.3 where, in correspondence with the different values for
τ = 0.5, τ = 1 and τ = 2, the results are provided on the left, in the middle and on the right,
respectively. We notice that model (1)–(2) without game admits the risk-free equilibrium
ˆE0 = (b/γ, 0) and one more non-zero steady state ˆEτ =

ˆSτ, ˆIτ

with ˆSτ = (δ + γ )/a0
and ˆIτ = (b−γ ˆSτ)/(γ +δ −δe−γ τ). This non-trivial equilibrium ˆEτ represents an endemic
or not-free-risk steady state. Due to the values of the parameters involved in the simulation,
the basic reproduction number deﬁned by (18) exceeds threshold 1, i.e. ρ0 > 1; as a con-
sequence, the not-free-risk steady state ˆEτ is feasible. Moreover, it is possible to verify that
ˆEτ is asymptotically stable in correspondence with any time delay τ ≥0, according to the
results provided in Aliano et al. (2024) due to the fact that δ < γ so that (γ + δ)/2 < γ .
As expected, not-free-risk equilibrium endemically attracts Susceptible-Infected trajecto-
ries in each case related to the different time delays under consideration. It suggests that risk
infection persistently exists over time for the long run. The infection tends to be so widespread
that the density of the infected platforms is more than twice as high as the density of the
susceptible ones.
As next step, our focus consists of simulating the effect of cooperation in the risk spreading
related to Susceptible-Infected dynamics completed by Replicator equation. With this aim,
we suppose that the cooperation action begins at a relatively low level, i.e. x0 = 0.005.
This assumption enables us to understand how the propensity for cooperation may impact
the dynamics of contagion when the platforms initially exhibit no cooperative behavior but
they are under threat from infection. In this framework, the coupled model (14)–(15)–(17) is
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
295
Fig. 4 Risk contagion dynamics in presence of cooperation. The dynamics is obtained in correspondence
with different lengths for temporary ﬁnancial immunity: τ = 0.5 on the left, τ = 1 in the middle, τ = 2
on the right. The solid blue line describes susceptible dynamics, the dashed red line corresponds to infected
dynamics. (Color ﬁgure online)
Fig. 5 Dynamics of propensity to cooperate x(t). The plots are obtained by employing different lengths for
temporary ﬁnancial immunity: τ = 0.5 on the left, τ = 1 in the middle, τ = 2 on the right
numerically solved. Then, the corresponding dynamics given in terms of densities S(t) and
I(t) is plotted in Fig.4; furthermore, the temporal evolution of cooperation among platforms
related to the different values for τ = 0.5, τ = 1 and τ = 2 is shown in Fig.5.
It is worthwhile to mention that, in this real case, viability condition (27) holds in cor-
respondence with every ﬁnancial immunity period τ under consideration. As a result, all
equilibrium points are feasible even if E∗
1, E∗
2 and E∗
3 are unstable. The results in Figs.4
and 5 point out that the mixed-strategy equilibrium E∗
4 endemically attracts the trajectories
of SIR solution and cooperative dynamics in each case related to the different time delays
under consideration. From a ﬁnancial perspective, it implies again that risk infection remains
endemically in the market among cryptocurrency platforms for the long run; however, in this
scenario including games, platforms opt to collaborate together in order to control the spread
of risk and preserve equal levels of susceptible and infected densities. In this framework, in
contrast to the results in Fig.3, the game effect mitigates the strength of the infection and
is mainly evident at the steady state level since ˆSτ < S∗
4 = I ∗
4 < ˆIτ: this is due to the
cooperative activity among platforms in terms of adoption of best practices like facilitating
various activities such as trading, lending, borrowing, and acting as collateral within the DeFi
ecosystem, as already mentioned.
The central role that ﬁnancial immunity plays is pointed out if we focus on the short-term
dynamics shown in Fig.3. In particular, ﬁnancial immunity is signiﬁcant especially when its
level is set to τ = 2. In this case, there is a beneﬁcial condition since the density of susceptible
platforms grows faster than the one of infected platforms. The plot on the right of Fig.4, where
the ﬁnancial immunity period is once more τ = 2, displays a similar dynamics. Anyway,
cooperation becomes essential over time in the long run as it yields an equilibrium where the
densities of susceptible and infected platforms overlap to the same level. In the short term,
123

296
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
ﬁnancial immunity acts as a stabilizing factor. Actually, it lets the susceptible number grow
faster than the infected one; as a result, ﬁnancial risk can be contained, thus further spread
of ﬁnancial distress is prevented. Maintaining this level of immunity can mitigate immediate
disruptions within the system, offering a buffer against sudden crises.
However, cooperation over time becomes the driving force in achieving a sustainable equi-
librium. The system keeps a balance through collective efforts, with a larger density of
susceptible platforms with respect to the infected one. While short-term immunity provides
immediate relief, long-term stability relies on cooperation among various actors, such as insti-
tutions, markets, and regulators. The analysis suggests that both ﬁnancial immunity in the
short term and cooperation in the long term are essential components in achieving enduring
ﬁnancial stability.
The plots point out that cooperative conduct is essential for maintaining ﬁnancial stability,
particularly in the long run. Over extended periods, the data demonstrate a strong connection
between sustained cooperative behavior among ﬁnancial institutions and overall economic
resilience. This long-term cooperation contributes to a stable ﬁnancial environment by fos-
tering trust and reducing systemic risks. In the short term, the plots show that the level of
cooperative behavior tends to increase in response to the severity of contagion diffusion.
During periods of heightened ﬁnancial stress or crises, such as during a rapid spread of eco-
nomic shocks across markets, entities within the ﬁnancial system are more likely to engage
in collaborative efforts to mitigate risks and stabilize the situation. This reactive increase
in cooperation is driven by the immediate need to contain the spread of ﬁnancial distress
and prevent a cascading effect that could lead to widespread economic turmoil. In the ﬁnan-
cial sector, cooperation can take many forms, including information sharing, coordinated
regulatory measures, and joint efforts to mitigate risks.
5 Concluding remarks
Predictive modeling of the temporal spread of risk among the exchanges can be a useful
tool for understanding the dynamics of risk contagion in a cryptocurrency market at the
long run. In this respect, the starting point is the analogy between risk spread in ﬁnancial
markets and an epidemic outbreak through ecosystems. Actually, in the framework of SIR
dynamics, we employ a suitable time delay differential system for risk diffusion among the
most popular trading cryptocurrency platforms, by modelling contagion evolution in terms of
crash risk with low and high levels. SIR models are frequently employed in biomathematics,
but their use in the ﬁnancial setting is new and worthy of attention, especially with regard
to Decentralized Finance. As an original issue, we integrate the risk spread dynamics and
evolutionary games. Actually, the SIR system is coupled with the replicator equation with
the aim of describing the propensity of cryptocurrency platforms to cooperate and adopting
the measures taken to control the risk spread. A stability analysis of the resulting model
equilibria has been carried out. Moreover, due to the fact that the overall model is nonlinear,
then its solution is not available in closed form; as a consequence, it is necessary to provide
an approximation and simulate the dynamics.
Our theoretical and numerical ﬁndings highlight that the steady-state solutions have signif-
icant policy implications for ﬁnancial stability, particularly in the context of cryptocurrency
platforms. When the basic reproduction number related to the dynamics is very high, then
the system tends to settle into an endemic risky equilibrium, indicating persistent ﬁnancial
instability. This scenario is particularly concerning for risky cryptocurrency platforms, which
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
297
can contribute to broader ﬁnancial instability within the cryptocurrency market. For inter-
national policymakers, it is crucial to focus on reducing the basic reproduction number to
very low levels, even in situations involving cooperative activities between different ﬁnancial
policymakers. Supervisory authorities can play a pivotal role in mitigating these risks. By
implementing stringent oversight measures and leveraging clearing house mechanisms, they
can help to alleviate and reduce the reproduction rate of the risk spread. This intervention
is necessary to prevent the ﬁnancial ecosystem from entering and maintaining a state of
persistent risk.
While ﬁnancial immunity is a speciﬁc activity related to the economic actor (i.e., in
our case, the cryptocurrency platform) and thus has a more microeconomic connotation,
cooperation has a broader macroeconomic scope as it involves the market structure as a whole.
This distinction highlights the different levels at which ﬁnancial immunity and cooperation
operate. The concept of ﬁnancial immunity pertains to the ability of individual actors, such as
ﬁrms or platforms, to withstand shocks and be resilient. It involves measures that safeguard
the speciﬁc entity from market volatility or ﬁnancial contagion, reﬂecting a microeconomic
perspective.Ontheotherhand,cooperationisasystemicapproachthatrequirestheinteraction
of multiple market participants and stakeholders. It encompasses all market participants and
goes beyond individual actors in its pursuit of establishing stability through shared efforts.
This broad macroeconomic perspective guarantees that the market may reach equilibrium
and maintain long-term health by implying that, although ﬁnancial immunity is essential for
individual actors, market stability as a whole depends on collaboration.
Cooperation is a crucial factor in shaping policies within the cryptocurrency market plat-
forms for long-term sustainability. International cooperation among regulatory bodies is
essential to formulate comprehensive policies that effectively tackle global ﬁnancial chal-
lenges. By fostering collaborative behavior among stakeholders, the ﬁnancial system can
enhance its resilience to shocks and better navigate the complexities inherent in the global
cryptocurrency economy. Policy implications in the crypto market platforms extend beyond
regulatory frameworks. Updating accounting guidance on cryptocurrencies can contribute
to a more robust market by providing informative approaches to measurement and report-
ing (see Hubbard, 2023). Additionally, assessing “crypto-friendliness” in policymaking can
evaluate the extent to which policies accommodate blockchain development, inﬂuencing the
overall ecosystem (cfr. Novak (2019)). In conclusion, policy implications in the crypto mar-
ket platforms underscore the importance of cooperation, regulatory updates, environmental
considerations, risk management avenues, and sustainable practices. Aligning policies with
these key aspects can help policymakers foster a more resilient, transparent, and sustainable
cryptocurrency ecosystem.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Ferrara within the CRUI-CARE
Agreement.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no conﬂict of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
123

298
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abbasi, G., Tiew, L., Jin-quan, T., Goh, Y., & Ramayah, T. (2021). The adoption of cryptocurrency as a dis-
ruptive force: Deep learning-based dual stage structural equation modelling and artiﬁcial neural network
analysis. Plos One, 16(3), e0247582.
Aliano, M., Cananà, L., Ciano, T., Ragni, S., & Ferrara, M. (2024). On the dynamics of a SIR model for a
ﬁnancial risk contagion. Quality & Quantity. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-024-02009-2
Aramonte, S., Huang, W., & Schrimpf, A. (2021). DeFi risks and the decentralisation illusion. BIS Quarterly
Review.
Báez-Sánchez, A. D. (2018). A mathematical model for behavioral epidemiology: A numerical approach.
Proceeding Series of the Brazilian Society of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 6(1).
Bains, P., Ismail, A.F.M., & Sugimoto, N. (2022). Regulating the crypto ecosystem: The case of unbacked
crypto assets. FinTech Notes No 2022/007, International Monetary Fund.
Barbereau, T., Smethurst, R., Papageorgiou, O., Rieger, A., & Fridgen, G. (2022). DeFi, not so decentralized:
The measured distribution of voting rights. In Conference: Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences.
Bogdan, S. (2023). Impact of liquidity and investors sentiment on herd behavior in cryptocurrency market.
International Journal of Financial Studies, 11(3), 1–17.
Bouri, E., Gupta, R., & Roubaud, D. (2019). Herding behaviour in cryptocurrencies. Finance Research Letters,
29, 216–221.
Cao, H. H., & Zhu, J. M. (2012). Research on banking crisis contagion dynamics based on the complex network
of system engineering. Systems Engineering Procedia, 5, 156–161.
Diebold, F. X., & Yilmaz, K. (2012). Better to give than to receive: Predictive directional measurement of
volatility spillovers. International Journal of Forecasting, 28, 5–66.
Diebold, F. X., & Yilmaz, K. (2014). On the network topology of variance decompositions: Measuring the
connectedness of ﬁnancial ﬁrms. Journal of Econometrics, 182, 119–134.
Diebold, F. X., & Yilmaz, K. (2016). Trans-Atlantic equity volatility connectedness: U.S. and European
ﬁnancial institutions. Journal of Financial Economics, 14, 81–127.
Dumitrescu, A., & Zakriya, M. (2022). Governance, information ﬂow, and stock returns. Journal of Corporate
Finance, 72, 102168.
Dutta, A., & Bouri, E. (2022). Outliers and time-varying jumps in the cryptocurrency markets. Journal of Risk
and Financial Management, 15(3), 128.
Fanelli, V., & Maddalena, L. (2020). A nonlinear dynamic model for credit risk contagion. Mathematics and
Computers in Simulation, 170, 45–58.
Garas, A., Argyrakis, P., Rozenblat, C., Tomassini, M., & Havlin, S. (2010). Worldwide spreading of economic
crisis. New Journal of Physics, 12(11), 30–43.
Habib, A., Hasan, M. M., & Jiang, H. (2018). Stock price crash risk: Review of the empirical literature.
Accounting & Finance, 58, 211–251.
Haldane, A. G., & May, R. M. (2011). Systemic risk in banking ecosystems. Nature, 469, 351–355.
Hale, J. (1977). Theory of functional differential equations. Springer-Verlag.
Hofbauer, J., & Sigmund, K. (2003). Evolutionary game dynamics. Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society, 40, 479–519.
Howson, P. (2020). Climate crises and crypto-colonialism: Conjuring value on the blockchain frontiers of the
global south. Frontiers in Blockchain, 3.
Hubbard, B. (2023). Decrypting crypto: Implications of potential ﬁnancial accounting treatments of
cryptocurrency. Accounting Research Journal, 36(4/5), 369–383.
Hutton, A. P., Marcus, A., & Tehranian, H. (2009). Opaque ﬁnancial reports, R2, and crash risk. Journal of
Financial Economics, 94(1), 67–86.
Kendall, D. G. (1956). Deterministic and stochastic epidemics in closed populations. In Proceedings of the
Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability: Contributions to Biology and
Problems of Health (Vol. 4, pp. 149–165).
Kermack, W. O., & McKendrick, A. G. (1927). A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics. In
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical
Character (Vol. 115, No. 772, pp. 700–721).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 356:277–299
299
King,T.,&Koutmos,D.(2021).Herdingandfeedbacktradingincryptocurrencymarkets.AnnalsofOperations
Research, 300(1), 79–96.
Kyrychko, Y. N., & Blyuss, K. B. (2005). Global properties of a delayed SIR model with temporary immunity
and nonlinear incidence rate. Nonlinear Analysis: Real World Applications, 6(3), 495–507.
Madeo, D., & Mocenni, C. (2021). Evolutionary game theoretic insights on the SIRS model of the COVID-19
pandemic. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 54(17), 1–6.
Madeo, D., & Mocenni, C. (2022). Identiﬁcation and control of game-based epidemic models. Games, 13(1),
10.
Novak, M. (2019). Crypto-friendliness: Understanding blockchain public policy. Journal of Entrepreneurship
and Public Policy, 9(2), 165–184.
Prasetyo,T.,&Kurniasari,F.(2023).Theinﬂuenceofsubjectivenorms,ﬁnancialliteracy,trust,andgovernment
regulation on behavioral intention to invest in crypto assets. Economics and Finance, 11, 16–34.
Renduchintala, T., Alfauri, H., Yang, Z., Pietro, R., & Jain, R. (2022). A survey of blockchain applications in
the ﬁntech sector. Journal of Open Innovation Technology Market and Complexity, 8(4), 185.
Roukny, T., Bersini, H., Pirotte, H., Caldarelli, G., & Battiston, S. (2013). Default cascades in complex
networks: Topology and systemic risk. Scientiﬁc Reports, 3, 2759.
Samueal, S. (2023). Blockchain in banking: A study on central bank digital currency. Multidisciplinary Science
Journal, 5, 2023ss0302.
Washington, P. (2023). Analyzing inﬂuence of COVID-19 on crypto & ﬁnancial markets and sentiment analysis
using deep ensemble model. Plos One, 18(9), e0286541.
Waspada, I., Salim, D., & Krisnawati, A. (2022). Horizon of cryptocurrency before vs during COVID-19.
Investment Management and Financial Innovations, 20(1), 14–25.
Weibull, J. (1995). Evolutionary game theory. MIT Press.
Wettergren, T. A. (2023). Replicator dynamics of evolutionary games with different delays on costs and
beneﬁts. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 458, 128228.
Wronka, C. (2024). Crypto-asset regulatory landscape: A comparative analysis of the crypto-asset regulation
in the UK and Germany. Journal of Asset Management.
Zhao, C., Li, M., Wang, J., & Ma, S. (2021). The mechanism of credit risk contagion among internet P2P
lending platforms based on a SEIR model with time-lag. Research in International Business and Finance,
57, 101407.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123