TITLE: Industry 4.0 and circular economy for emerging markets: evidence from small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in the Indian food sector
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05404-4
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05404-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Industry 4.0 and circular economy for emerging markets:
evidence from small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
in the Indian food sector
Stella Despoudi1
· Uthayasankar Sivarajah2 · Konstantina Spanaki3
·
Vincent Charles2 · Vel Kandhan Durai4
Accepted: 16 May 2023 / Published online: 29 August 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
The linear economic business model was deemed unsustainable, necessitating the emergence
of the circular economy (CE) business model. Due to resource scarcity, increasing popula-
tion, and high food waste levels, the food sector has been facing signiﬁcant sustainability
challenges. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), particularly those in the food sec-
tor, are making efforts to become more sustainable and to adopt new business models such
as the CE, but adoption rates remain low. Industry 4.0 and its associated technological appli-
cations have the potential to enable CE implementation and boost business competitiveness.
In the context of emerging economies facing signiﬁcant resource scarcity constraints and
limited technology availability, CE principles need to be adapted. CE could create a new job
economy in emerging economies, bringing scale and a competitive advantage. This study
explores the enablers of and barriers to Industry 4.0 adoption for CE implementation in fruit
and vegetable SMEs in India from a resource-based perspective. The purpose is to develop
an evidence-based framework to help inform theory and practice about CE implementation
by SMEs in emerging economies. Fifteen semi-structured interviews were conducted with
experts in food SMEs. The interview transcripts were ﬁrst subjected to thematic analysis. The
analysis was then complemented with sentiment and emotion analyses. Subsequently, hier-
archical cluster analysis, k-means analysis, and linear projection analysis were performed.
Among others, the ﬁndings suggest that Industry 4.0 plays a key role in implementing CE in
SMEs in emerging economies such as India. However, there are speciﬁc enablers and barriers
that need to be considered by SMEs to develop the resources and capabilities needed for CE
competitive advantage.
B Uthayasankar Sivarajah
u.sivarajah@bradford.ac.uk
Stella Despoudi
sdespoudi@uowm.gr
1
School of Economic Sciences, University of Western Macedonia, Grevena, Greece
2
School of Management, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK
3
Audencia Business School, Nantes, France
4
Warwick Manufacturing Group: WMG, Coventry, UK
123

454
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Keywords Circular economy · Industry 4.0 · SMEs · Emerging markets · Food industry ·
Thematic analysis · Sentiment analysis · Cluster analysis
1 Introduction
The current economic system, which is based on a linear supply chain operating model, is
certainly unsustainable (Despoudi, 2019). Due to the need for organisations to become more
sustainable by preventing depletion of resources, closing energy and material loops, and
facilitating sustainable development, the concept and model of the circular economy (CE)
has recently emerged in supply chains (Patwa et al., 2021). The CE concept states that an
industrial system is restorative or regenerative by intention and design, and that it replaces the
‘end-of-life’ concept with restoration, leading to zero waste (Yamoah et al., 2022). The imple-
mentation of CE in food supply chains (FSCs) is even more critical due to the sustainability
pressures faced by the latter. According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO,
2019), these sustainability pressures are related to the availability of fewer natural resources,
limited agricultural land, population growth, global food insecurity, climatic change, dietary
changes, governance of the FSC system, and food waste. CE principles can be applied to
prevent food waste in the ﬁrst place, recover resources from food waste, recycle the materials
used for food packaging, and increase food availability (Despoudi, 2020). Many companies
are successfully implementing sustainability and CE in their supply chains through improved
products/services and processes; however, this is not the case for small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) (Dey et al., 2020). SMEs are one of the largest employers worldwide,
accounting for more than 90% of all businesses. Emerging economies are critical contributors
to national income (GDP), accounting for 40% of total GDP (World Bank, 2021). However,
in the context of sustainability practices, SMEs are a major polluter, and only a few of them
have environmental management systems and CE practices in place (Johnson & Hörisch,
2022). There has been little research on CE implementation from the SMEs’ perspective
(Pereira et al., 2022).
Fruit and vegetable SMEs in India are the second largest producers of perishables in
the world (IFP Bureau, 2021). However, the linear nature of their supply chains results in
signiﬁcant waster, amounting to approximately £13 million. The lack of proper sustainability
practices has resulted in a variety of issues, such as inadequate infrastructure, packaging, and
storage facilities, as well as fragmentation and a lack of transparency (Govindan et al., 2014).
Further, in the absence of adequate technology, food SMEs are bound to face deterioration in
product shelf life, quality issues, improper adherence to safety standards, and an increase in
lead time (Lezoche et al., 2020). CE implementation in India’s food SMEs will address the
aforementioned CE issues (Michelini et al., 2017). Due to resource constraints in emerging
economies such as India, CE practices must be tailored to their speciﬁc context to achieve
their full potential. The CE could enable food SMEs to scale up and grow while also creating
a new job economy.
One of the critical issues that companies face when implementing CE is the lack of
efﬁcient information systems to effectively manage their CE involvement and objectives
(Khan et al., 2021; Vacchi et al., 2021). For CE implementation to be successful, effective
data management and a strong underlying technological infrastructure are required. Industry
4.0 may enable CE implementation and boost business competitiveness (Khan et al., 2021).
The link between the physical and digital worlds can also be achieved through Industry 4.0
applications, which make CE implementation feasible, robust, and transparent for companies
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
455
(Lezoche et al., 2020). This also allows companies to be more sustainable, as they can recycle,
reduce, and reuse at a faster rate (Rajput & Singh, 2021). However, the role of Industry 4.0
applications in CE implementation from the perspective of SMEs in emerging economies
has not yet been explored.
According to the resource-based view (RBV) theory, resources and capabilities provide
ﬁrms with a strategic competitive advantage, allowing them to capitalise on opportuni-
ties and avoid threats in their operating business environment, and thus become more
competitive (Barney, 1991). The term ‘resources’ refers to physical, human, capital, and
organisational resources (Barney, 1991). Industry 4.0 technological applications can be seen
as organisational resources that will develop capabilities to support CE implementation. CE
implementation could boost the competitiveness of SMEs in emerging countries because the
sector can scale up. However, SMEs in emerging countries face unique challenges in terms
of technology adoption and CE implementation. Therefore, this study explores the enablers
of and barriers to Industry 4.0 adoption for CE implementation in fruit and vegetable SMEs
in India from the RBV perspective. This is the ﬁrst study to explicate Industry 4.0 barriers
and enablers in relation to CE implementation at the SME level in an emerging market in the
food industry. Interviews were conducted with food experts from Indian SMEs. Their views
are used to build a framework for understanding CE implementation in SMEs in develop-
ing countries and the role of Industry 4.0. SMEs could utilise the proposed evidence-based
framework in other developing countries with similar resource constraints.
The paper is organised as follows: Sect. 2 presents the literature review, Sect. 3 discusses
the research methodology, Sect. 4 presents the interview ﬁndings, and Sect. 5 discusses the
results and ﬁndings. Section 6 concludes the paper and provides directions for future research.
2 Literature review
This section presents a review of the existing literature in terms of CE and Industry 4.0. It
begins by examining the deﬁnition and principles of CE. It then delves into Industry 4.0 and
its applications, as well as its relationship with CE, which includes enablers and barriers.
The importance of CE to the food sector is outlined, along with the indicators of fruits and
vegetables in India.
2.1 The principles of the circular economy
CE is deﬁned as a system that reinstates the ‘end of life’ theory through sustainability, recy-
cling, and reuse at the macro, micro, and meso levels to attain value, prosperity, environmental
protection, and ensure future growth expansion (Henry et al., 2021). CE is primarily based
on the main principles known as the 3Rs: reduce, reuse, and recycle (Acerbi & Taisch, 2020;
Reh, 2013). The primary goal of the ‘reduction’ principle is to maximise production and con-
sumption efﬁciency. This is accomplished by producing higher-value products with a lower
economic impact, using fewer resources, and avoiding products that can damage the ecosys-
tem (Acerbi & Taisch, 2020). Eco-efﬁciency can be achieved by encouraging more frugal
methods, such as essential packaging, smaller and lighter raw materials, and the promotion
of environmentally friendly technologies (Acerbi & Taisch, 2020; Patwa et al., 2021). The
‘reuse’ principle refers to practices in which products are not discarded as waste but are reused
for the same purpose for which they were designed (Dora, 2019; Fatimah et al., 2020). Reuse
can only be successful if the products are designed to be long-lasting for multiple phases
123

456
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
of use (Sumter et al., 2020). This process can be encouraged by providing subsidies and
educating customers about the importance of reusing products (Sumter et al., 2020; Vlajic
et al., 2018). The ‘recycling’ principle refers to how used products are not discarded as waste
but are instead recycled into functional or usable substances. However, it applies only to
natural products and cannot be used with fossil fuels (Dora, 2019). The main beneﬁts of
recycling include resource conservation, reduced use of landﬁlls and incinerators, better use
of domestic resources, and energy savings (Upadhyay et al., 2021).
2.2 Industry 4.0 enablers and barriers for the circular economy
Vaidya et al. (2018) and Pereira and Romero (2017) deﬁned Industry 4.0 as a tool that uses
evolving technology and machine improvement to cope with global changes, making produc-
tion more efﬁcient, improving quality, and resulting in easier maintenance. By implementing
Industry 4.0 applications, companies can improve their operational competence, enhance
data ﬂow, increase efﬁciency, and reduce waste (da Xu et al., 2018; Vaidya et al., 2018; Yin
et al., 2018).
There are multiple beneﬁts stemming from the Industry 4.0 paradigm, which have also
been highlighted in recent research on CE enablers (Sanders et al., 2016; Schmidt et al., 2015;
Vaidya et al., 2018). In terms of the energy used for manufacturing processes, Industry 4.0
technologies have the potential to reduce the levels of consumption and input by leveraging
clear and scalable manufacturing expertise (Sanders et al., 2016). There are also opportunities
to identify and classify materials and products that can be reused and repaired, as well as
waste tracking systems for data collection on the amount of waste and its various types,
which support more informed decision making (Chauhan et al., 2021; Fatimah et al., 2020).
The applications of Industry 4.0 can provide reliable data to management, reduce potential
breakdowns, and avoid manufacturing failures (Gunasekaran et al., 2017). Industry 4.0 is
designed for self-restoration, which can beneﬁt CE principles and ensure process continuity
(Azadegan et al., 2020). It ensures that various data forms are prioritised for managing
resources for CE to improve quality across the entire network. Industry 4.0 can be used
to integrate equipment and streamline processes for optimal asset and resource utilisation
(Oesterreich & Teuteberg, 2016). Lastly, Industry 4.0 applications have continuous learning
processes that can leverage the constant stream of data and provide a tailored experience for
consumers’ needs, and therefore instantly and simultaneously improve efﬁciency (Schmidt
et al., 2015).
Some of the main issues that CE principles face during implementation are related to
disparities and data inconsistencies (Kazancoglu et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2021; Vacchi et al.,
2021). The lack of interactive platforms and designs to support circularity are the main
reasons for the need to involve advanced technologies (Vacchi et al., 2021). The primary
obstacle is that existing materials need to be discarded because they were not developed from
the perspective of reuse or recycling due to a lack of technology. Most countries lack the
ability to provide high-quality remanufactured products (Henry et al., 2021). The issue of
transparency can lead to inadequate data on the product (Henry et al., 2021). This can have
an impact on a company’s operations due to a lack of knowledge regarding the type of raw
materials used in the ﬁnal product. This becomes even more problematic when many dealers
obtain products from unknown sub-dealers (Khan et al., 2021). The lack of adequate expertise
on how to use technology and the kinds of skills that should be adopted are also issues that
must be addressed (de Angelis, 2021). Further, some linear technologies are well established
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
457
in the economy, making the introduction of new circular systems even more difﬁcult (Han
et al., 2020).
However, with Industry 4.0, companies can employ CE with the help of three main drivers:
knowledge of the location, knowledge of the condition, and knowledge of availability (Dag-
ilien˙e et al., 2021). Companies can gain an advantage by monitoring the location of assets
or data using feedback loops, allowing them to optimise routes, assess storage, and ensure
proper maintenance (Spanaki et al., 2021). By obtaining appropriate information about the
conditions of their assets, companies can improve their uptime. Lastly, by recognising the
capability of a speciﬁc asset, companies can ensure optimal resource utilisation, which can
also aid in circularity (Mangla et al., 2018). All of the above seemed far-fetched initially, but
with the advent of IoT and cloud computing, these drivers can now be easily accomplished
(Rajput & Singh, 2021). Thus, a deeper examination of the various Industry 4.0 enablers and
barriers can aid in determining the relationship between CE implementation and Industry 4.0
applications (Rajput & Singh, 2021). Table 1 shows the enablers and barriers of Industry 4.0
for CE implementation.
Industry 4.0 technologies have been found to enable CE implementation through improved
energy efﬁciency and waste management systems, enhanced process reliability and uptime,
increased resilience, improved quality, improved infrastructure, and self-optimisation. How-
ever, companies appear to face challenges when using Industry 4.0 technologies to aid in CE
implementation. The analysis of the literature revealed the following barriers to Industry 4.0
implementation for CE: interconnectedness and collaboration issues, data safety and security
issues, high investment costs, and infrastructure and incompatibility issues. The present study
takes into account all of the identiﬁed enablers and barriers and examines their presence at
the SME level in emerging countries.
2.3 The circular food supply chain
With growing environmental concerns, it is almost mandatory to apply CE principles to
the food supply chain to extend the lifespan of resources and ensure their recycling and
reprocessing (Hamam et al., 2021). Prior to the emergence of the CE concept, food waste was
commonly disposed of in large quantities. However, since this concept has been introduced,
recovered resources have been effectively reused rather than discarded (Batista et al., 2021;
Despoudi, 2019). CE not only reduces material costs but also boosts economic growth and
operational efﬁciency. Food waste or loss occurs at various points along the supply chain, and
can be divided into upstream and downstream steams (Despoudi, 2019). Losses in emerging
countries are referred to as upstream losses, while losses in developed countries are referred
to as downstream losses. The loss in upstream food can be further subdivided into production,
handling, storage, and distribution losses. Downstream losses include those experienced by
retailers, consumers, and post-consumer food (Despoudi, 2020). Food loss is recognised
as consumable foods that are abandoned or disposed of and identiﬁed as losses or residues
(Despoudi, 2019; Irani et al., 2018). To be sustainable in the future, signiﬁcant efforts must be
made to avoid this waste. Therefore, by introducing CE, wasteful products can be converted
into raw materials that can be used to produce other products, signiﬁcantly reducing waste
(Dora, 2019; Irani & Sharif, 2018).
The circular food supply chain reduces purchase costs by reusing products that would
otherwise be discarded (Genovese et al., 2014). Here, basic raw materials are replaced with
recycled goods. If the goods are reprocessed, the overall emission levels will also be sig-
niﬁcantly reduced. The circular food supply chain process tracks the activities that cause
123

458
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Table 1 Summary of Industry 4.0 enablers and barriers in relation to CE
Factors
Description
References
Enablers
Improved energy efﬁciency and waste management
systems
Through clear and scalable manufacturing expertise,
Industry 4.0 technologies can reduce energy
consumption and input by identifying and classifying
materials and products that can be reused and repaired.
Waste tracking systems can be developed to collect
information on the amount of waste and its various
types to enable effective decision making
Chauhan et al. (2021) and Fatimah et al. (2020)
Enhanced process reliability and uptime
Industry 4.0 applications can enable human-to-machine
and machine-to-machine communication, which can
predict machinery maintenance and breakdown, and
resources can be spent only when needed. Interaction
between devices is enabled, process reliability is
increased, and material waste can be reduced. Before
actual changes occur, simulations can visualise the
changed processes based on CE. This can provide
management with more reliable data, reduce possible
breakdowns, and prevent manufacturing failures
Reh (2013), Trstenjak and Cosic (2017) and Zambon
et al. (2019)
Increased resilience
CE is designed for self-restoration. The introduction of
Industry 4.0 helps build interconnections that will
enable the transformation of the current business model
to produce value and innovation. Thus, this can beneﬁt
the CE principles and ensure process continuity
Behzadi et al. (2020), Brusset and Teller (2017),
Gunasekaran et al. (2015), Pettit et al. (2019) and
Scholten et al. (2019)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
459
Table 1 (continued)
Factors
Description
References
Improved quality
CE aims to maintain the quality of the materials and
processes involved in CE implementation. Industry 4.0
ensures that various data forms are prioritised for
resource management in order to improve quality
across the entire network. This allows for the transfer
of large amounts of data in a reliable and efﬁcient
manner, which improves quality. The use of cameras or
other visioning software, for example, can monitor and
detect deviations in a process. As deviations are
detected in seconds, companies can reduce costs while
maintaining product safety levels
Batista et al. (2021), Corallo et al. (2018), Giannakis
et al. (2019), Rajput and Singh (2021) and
Upadhyay et al. (2021)
Improved infrastructure
CE is founded not only on upfront design and asset
utilisation, but also on other infrastructures, such as
operations, maintenance, and disposal. Industry 4.0 can
help with equipment integration and process
streamlining. Industry 4.0’s autonomous
decision-making processes can also improve vertical
and horizontal integration with real-time connected
value-creation networks. As a result, CE
implementation could be achieved by sharing processes
for reusing and recovering materials with other
businesses in the sector
Edwin Cheng et al. (2021), Fatimah et al. (2020) and
Govindan (2018)
123

460
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Table 1 (continued)
Factors
Description
References
Self-optimisation
Continuous learning processes in Industry 4.0
applications can help companies be highly robust and
handle unexpected behaviours and sudden production
changes. This not only makes supply chains more
resilient but also helps with CE implementation by
allowing for different consumer expectations and
product service/variations across different territories.
The transition to fully automated systems facilitated by
a constant stream of data can enable companies to meet
consumers’ needs instantly while also improving
efﬁciency
Camacho-Otero et al. (2018), Dey et al. (2020),
Korhonen et al. (2018), Prieto-Sandoval et al. (2018)
and Sumter et al. (2020)
Barriers
Interconnectedness and collaboration issues
Due to the interconnection of applications in the real and
cyber worlds, changes in one world will result in a
series of changes in the other. When interacting with
humans, precautions must be taken, because even
minor changes can lead to physical damage. With high
levels of autonomy and authentication, standardisation
must be improved to ensure that it can handle unique
obligations. Lack of collaboration can impede the
implementation of CE principles due to a lack of trust,
making it even more challenging to determine when
and with whom to collaborate
Despoudi et al. (2018), Dora (2019), Papaioannou
et al. (2020) and Vlajic et al. (2018)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
461
Table 1 (continued)
Factors
Description
References
Data safety and security issues
Interlinking devices and technologies may exacerbate
security issues. Given that everyone has access to the
internet, there is a need to safeguard, monitor, and
inspect the data that is regularly uploaded. When
devices do not share the same level of technology or
skills, issues regarding authorisation tend to arise. Data
integrity must be considered, because information
should not be altered when transferred from one device
to another. Interactions with humans and machines will
occur during CE implementation. The company will
face several challenges in ensuring workplace safety
and data safety
Bechtsis et al. (2021), Belaud et al. (2019), Corallo
et al. (2018), Papadopoulos et al. (2021) and
Spanaki et al. (2021)
High investment cost
Signiﬁcant initial investments are required to systematise
the foundation of Industry 4.0 applications. As the
adoption of Industry 4.0 applications does not
guarantee an immediate return on investment, some
businesses, particularly SMEs, may lack access to
ﬁnancial resources. The market’s readiness for circular
products has yet to be realised; hence, companies are
discouraged from making such large investments.
These costs are not limited to the initial step-up but also
include other maintenance costs. There is a constant
need for the upkeep of machinery and software, as well
as high salaries for the employees who operate them
Almada-Lobo (2016), Oesterreich and Teuteberg
(2016), Papadopoulos et al. (2021), Pereira and
Romero (2017), Rajput and Singh (2021), Sony and
Naik (2019) and Xu et al. (2018)
123

462
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Table 1 (continued)
Factors
Description
References
Infrastructure and incompatibility issues
Several compatibility issues arise when implementing
CE, including conﬂict of interest, awkward business
models, inadequate services, lack of network support,
and machinery incompatibility. When implementing
CE through technological advancements, companies
may need to redesign their processes and services.
Certain issues arise when these new technological
applications are incompatible with their existing
technological infrastructures
Ivanov and Dolgui (2020), Kazancoglu et al. (2021),
Oesterreich and Teuteberg (2016), Papadopoulos
et al. (2021), Pereira and Romero (2017) and Vacchi
et al. (2021)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
463
emissions and seeks new ways to reduce them by tracking their performance (Reh, 2013). It
encourages cooperation among suppliers to reduce emissions at various supply chain stages
(Genovese et al., 2014). Reverse logistics is the process of converting waste products into
usable products so that producers can take them back and reuse them. This is used not only
to recycle general food waste but also to recover unutilised packaging material.
2.4 The need for circular economy implementation in the Indian fruit and vegetable
supply chain
India is the world’s second largest producer of fruits and vegetables, trailing only China
(IFP Bureau, 2021). SMEs in India produce an assortment of fruits and vegetables, such
as onions, potatoes, brinjals, lemons, apples, bananas, mangos, papayas, and oranges (IFP
Bureau, 2021). In terms of fruit and vegetable exports, India accounts for only 1% of the
global market. The United Kingdom, United Arab Emirates, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh,
and the Netherlands are among the important countries to which they are exported. However,
fruits, and vegetables are also imported from a variety of countries, including the United
States, Iraq, and Pakistan. The main reason India is forced to import is due to post-harvest
loss, which accounts for up to 30% to 40% of total fruit and vegetable losses (IFP Bureau,
2021).
Despite having a diverse range of fruits and vegetables, India wastes almost Rs13.30
million in fresh produce each year (IFP Bureau, 2021). Rural infrastructure is relatively
poor due to difﬁculties in setting up warehouses and storage, resulting in a 40% loss (IFP
Bureau, 2021). Fragmentation issues arise because of the presence of a large number of
middlemen, forcing farmers to reduce their share. Other factors, such as poor packaging,
contribute signiﬁcantly to fruit and vegetable waste. SMEs are struggling to adapt to the high
cost of packing the product, resulting in poor and insufﬁcient packing. A lack of cold storage
facilities across the country, as well as ﬁnancial issues such as price ﬂuctuations, farmers’
low-income levels, and a lack of transparency, are all causes of waste (Kazancoglu et al.,
2021). Further, approximately 25% of food losses are attributed to improper handling. This
is becoming one of the main causes of the rise in the level of hunger. India ranks 103rd out of
199 countries in the Global Hunger Index (GHI). The cumulative loss of fresh produce ranges
from 4.58 to 15.88% (FAO, 2019). This can be prevented by introducing the CE concept,
which takes responsibility for reducing food waste and implementing recycling measures.
Some of the main threats to the fruit and vegetable sector are related to product shelf life,
supply lead time, and deterioration rate (Lezoche et al., 2020). Improper management of
perishables eventually results in safety, condition, quantity, and depletion issues. Therefore,
introducing advanced Industry 4.0 technologies could help prevent these problems (Lezoche
et al., 2020). The implementation of a more digitalised supply chain in the fruit and veg-
etable sector will allow for a more ﬂexible, robust, and resilient process (Lezoche et al., 2020).
Industry 4.0 can help with data management, forecasting, and product tracking, allowing busi-
nesses to place more accurate orders, have greater visibility, and reduce the risk of overstock
(Rogerson & Parry, 2020). Industry 4.0 also aids in the integration of older technologies.
This will allow companies to evaluate historical data and information ﬂows, helping them
adapt to changing market conditions (Lezoche et al., 2020). Most small-scale companies in
the Indian fruit and vegetable sector use traditional methods due to ﬁnancial instability and a
lack of knowledge of advanced technologies (IFP Bureau, 2021). Consequently, by adopting
Industry 4.0 applications, the Indian fruit and vegetable sector may beneﬁt by shortening the
123

464
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
production cycle and the time it takes for the product to reach the market, thereby increasing
efﬁciency, control, and cost savings (Corallo et al., 2018; Miranda et al., 2019).
2.5 Resource-based view of the circular economy
The RBV of a ﬁrm describes an organisation as a bundle of resources, and the best utilisation
of those resources can lead to competitive strategies (Barney, 1991). To adapt to changing
circumstances, companies need to reconﬁgure their resource bundles. However, this may not
always be possible, because their existing resources and capabilities limitnew resource invest-
ment directions. CE implementation can help build and complement a company’s resources
and capabilities, thereby providing a sustainable advantage. This is because a company’s
resources can be reconﬁgured by combining them, adding new ones, and substituting old
ones. To this end, new resources and capabilities are needed to collect or source otherwise-
wasted materials and resources and convert them into new added-value resources/materials
or design processes that can extend product life.
However, there are several challenges in CE implementation that could be overcome by
investing in Industry 4.0 applications (Kazancoglu et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2021; Vacchi
et al., 2021). CE adoption levels remain low, and the role of Industry 4.0 applications in CE
implementation has not yet been explored at the SME level in emerging countries. SMEs in
emerging economies face resource constraints, and competitive advantages may emerge as a
result of CE requirements, such as resource reconﬁguration. A ﬁrm’s resources can be classi-
ﬁed as either tangible or intangible. Examples of tangible resources are assets and machines,
whereas intellectual capital, organisational knowledge, and staff skills are examples of intan-
gible resources (Barreto, 2010; Teece & Pisano, 1994). Organisational capabilities can be
developed based on these resources, including collaborative capability, ﬁnancial capabil-
ity, automation capability, predictive capability, self-learning capability, and agile capability
(Mikalef & Pateli, 2017; Mikalef et al., 2019).
The collaborative capability of a ﬁrm can be developed through Industry 4.0 applications.
The high visibility of crucial information allocations generates high trust, which can improve
decision making and coordination processes (Williams et al., 2013). Information technology,
such as cloud and blockchain, enables large amounts of critical information, such as trans-
action information and customer information, to be instantly shared, communicated, and
secured, resulting in an intimate cooperation relationship (Giannakis et al., 2019). Financial
capability is a key capability that is required for Industry 4.0 technologies, as investments in
new equipment and updates to existing ones are essential for success. Predictive capability
is an essential advantage gained from implementing Industry 4.0, as it can pinpoint future
demand and supply changes (Gunasekaran et al., 2017; Hazen et al., 2016; Ilie-Zudor et al.,
2015). When Industry 4.0 takes full advantage of its inimitable information and knowledge
resources, as well as advanced data analysis technology, to predict unexpected demands and
events, it will produce a superior resilient advantage in operation (Shefﬁ& Rice, 2005). IT
automation, AI, and other subjects from Industry 4.0 enable self-learning with the lowest
possible human costs (Oesterreich & Teuteberg, 2016). Innovative activities centred on the
concept of Industry 4.0 will require new ways of updating product systems on a continuous
basis. With advanced self-learning capability, human labour is maximised, and products are
manufactured 24 h a day (Oesterreich & Teuteberg, 2016).
Companies will be more ﬂexible and adaptable to volatile environments as a result of
the agile capability brought about by Industry 4.0. Authentic market information is gathered
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
465
throughout the supply chain, and supplier performance improves through greater end-to-
end engineering integration (Wong et al., 2015). Real-time assessment capability, which
increases information transparency between different partners, is one way that enterprises
can gain a competitive advantage through Industry 4.0. As a result, trust is built for long-term
cooperation (Delbufalo, 2012). One of the greatest beneﬁts of Industry 4.0 is its automation
capability, that is, real-time assessment/sharing capability, which is identiﬁed as a magniﬁcent
enabler in this study. Massive amounts of data are required and exchanged with a large
number of SC players. Therefore, transparency and visibility are guaranteed throughout
the operational and management processes (Spanaki et al., 2018). Based on the barriers
and enablers of Industry 4.0 in CE implementation for Indian fruit and vegetable SMEs, this
study identiﬁes tangible and intangible resources, as well as capabilities. Relative enablers are
considered competitive advantages, while barriers are considered competitive disadvantages.
Hence, the aim of this study is to explore the enablers and barriers of Industry 4.0 adoption
for CE implementation in fruit and vegetable SMEs in India from an RBV perspective, and
then propose a framework for CE implementation for SMEs in emerging economies based
on the insights.
2.6 Research gap
Industry 4.0 has played a crucial role in improving existing technology and has the potential
to support CE principles (Khan et al., 2021). The enablers of Industry 4.0 with regard to
CE are improved energy efﬁciency and waste management systems, enhanced reliability and
uptime, enhanced resilience, improved quality, improved infrastructure, and self-optimisation
(Chauhan et al., 2021; Fatimah et al., 2020; Kazancoglu et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2021;
Rajput & Singh, 2021; Vacchi et al., 2021). The barriers to Industry 4.0 relating to CE are
interconnectedness and collaboration issues, data safety and security issues, high investment
costs, and infrastructure and incompatibility issues (Almada-Lobo, 2016; Rajput & Singh,
2021). Various studies have investigated the principles, enablers, and barriers to CE and
Industry 4.0 applications. However, the enablers and barriers of Industry 4.0 as a resource
from the RBV point of view that will bring competitive advantage through CE in emerging
market SMEs remain unexplored. The aim of this study is to address this research gap through
interviews with food SME experts in the Indian fruit and vegetable sector, as well as to answer
the following research question:
• What are the enablers and barriers of Industry 4.0 that could facilitate CE principle imple-
mentation in SMEs in emerging economies, particularly in the Indian fruit and vegetable
supply chain, from the RBV perspective?
3 Research methodology
Given the exploratory nature of this study, a ﬁeld study approach was used to identify Industry
4.0 enablers and barriers to CE implementation in the emerging market of fruit and vegetable
SMEs. This allows for an in-depth exploratory investigation of the phenomenon under study,
which leads to theory development (Ketokivi & Choi, 2014; Yin, 2009). The aim of this study
was to add to the existing literature and further elaborate on the theory of CE in SMEs in
emerging economies by focusing on Industry 4.0 as an enabler of CE implementation. The
study is multifaceted, drawing on evidence from existing academic research while combining
the explicit and tacit knowledge of experienced ﬁeld professionals (Bryman & Bell, 2011)
123

466
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
to represent the perspectives of the Indian food industry context. The approach falls under
elicitation studies (Edgar & Manz, 2017), employing an exploratory qualitative ﬁeld research
design.
The aim of the study’s data collection was to capture knowledge from experts in the ﬁeld
(Suri, 2011); thus, purposeful sampling was used (Coyne, 1997; Patton, 2002; Suri, 2011).
Industry professionals from the Indian food industry were identiﬁed based on their experience
in the ﬁeld, as well as their expertise in the vegetable and fruit industry (Table 2). Qualitative
interviews engage investigators and respondents in a variety of dialogues and discussions in
Table 2 Information about the participants in this study
Interviewee code
Position
Experience
(Years)
Number of
employees
Products
I1
Managing director
17
30
Coconuts
I2
Proprietor
7
35
Lemons
I3
Director
16
20
Peas, Corn, and
Cabbage
I4
Senior manager
9
50
Carrots, Cabbage,
and Spinach
I5
Managing director
5
20
Bananas and
Coconuts
I6
Sales and stock manager
8
60
Mangoes,
Jackfruit,
Cherries,
Pumpkins, and
Tomatoes
I7
Head of quality control
14
70
Papayas,
Drumsticks,
Bottle gourd,
and Brinjals
I8
Head of ﬁnance and
accounts
7
40
Potatoes, Beans,
Onions, Garlic,
Ginger, Guava,
and Sapota
I9
Proprietor
40
40
Amla, Mangoes,
Lemons, and
Coconuts
I10
Manager
6
50
Mangoes,
Bananas, and
Coconuts
I11
Director
10
30
Mangoes and
Coconuts
I12
Senior manager
7
60
Guava, Mangoes,
and Cherries
I13
Proprietor
16
50
Papayas and
Mangoes
I14
Manager
20
40
Potatoes, Onions,
and Garlic
I15
Proprietor
15
20
Peas, Lemons,
and Cabbage
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
467
which the topic is documented and examined (Bryman & Bell, 2011; Patton, 2002). This is
useful for learning about another person’s understanding, opinions, objectives, stance, and
difﬁculties. For the purposes of this study, semi-structured interviews were carried out with 15
senior professionals from food SMEs in India. Semi-structured interviews involve prepared
questions guided by identiﬁed themes that are consistently and systematically interposed
with probes designed to elicit more detailed responses. The focus is on the interview guide,
which incorporates a series of broad themes to be covered during the interview to help direct
the conversation towards the topics and issues that the interviewers want to learn more about
(Hennink et al., 2017). Hence, this was the most suitable option for investigating the enablers
and barriers of Industry 4.0 for CE in countries such as India. It enables researchers to obtain
detailed information, good response levels, and an in-depth understanding of the issue.
Before commencing the interview process, a series of questions were prepared to gather
information about the topic. The questions were ﬂexible, allowing the scope of enquiry to be
broadened and adjusted according to changing responses to the interview material (Patton,
2002). These questions were designed to improve existing knowledge and provide insights
into the interviewees’ perceptions (Patton, 2002). The questions were planned in accordance
with the aim of the study, which began with the implementation of CE principles and Industry
4.0 technologies, which served as the foundation for the entire study. Questions concerning
the relationship between Industry 4.0 and CE principles were also developed to determine
whether Industry 4.0 applications aided or hampered the implementation of CE principles
in the context of the study (Rajput & Singh, 2021). Lastly, demographic questions were set
up. Overall, the interview guide helped examine the relationship between Industry 4.0 and
CE principles implementation, as well as their enablers and barriers, in the Indian fruit and
vegetable sector.
As there is no speciﬁc list with the names of fruit and vegetable producers in India, the
non-probability snowball sampling technique was selected to identify respondents for this
study. The researchers’ personal contacts were used as an initial pool of respondents, followed
by reaching out to the contacts of the initially interviewed food supply chain SME experts
as a second pool of respondents. Respondents included businesses involved in the supply of
fruits, vegetables, frozen food, and groceries, which allowed for capturing views from various
areas of the sector. Fifteen interviews were conducted with food supply chain SME experts.
The number of interviews was decided based on saturation (Guest et al., 2006; Hennink
et al., 2017) and the importance of having 20 or fewer participants to improve information
exchange (Fontana & Frey, 1994).
The goal of the study was to identify the enablers and barriers of Industry 4.0 for CE imple-
mentation. Therefore, conducting interviews speciﬁcally on this topic allowed the researchers
to achieve the desired results. The interviews were conducted online via Skype. Table 2 pro-
vides detailed information about the participants, as well as their experiences and the types
of products they dealt with. Interviews were conducted with people in various positions with
experience ranging from 5 to 40 years to generate diverse perspectives on the topic. Further,
ﬁrms that sell single products, as well as those that sell fruit and vegetable assortments, were
considered.
The interviews lasted 40 min to an hour, and the respondents agreed to be audio-recorded.
Prior to the interviews, each interviewee was given an informed consent form and a con-
ﬁdentiality agreement. During the interview, respondents were encouraged to elaborate on
their answers and anything else that they thought was relevant to the topic in order to explore
any other issues in depth (Fontana & Frey, 1994). The interview recordings were analysed
using thematic analysis with coding (Boyatzis, 1998; Braun & Clarke, 2006). The themes
for the data analysis were the CE practices, the Industry 4.0 applications, and the various
123

468
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
barriers and enablers of Industry 4.0 identiﬁed through the literature review. As soon as the
data were collected, two researchers coded each interview, ﬁrst to identify whether additional
interviews were required, and second to send the transcripts to the interviewees for review.
To ensure reliability and validity, the researchers provided background information on all
the participants who agreed to be interviewed. Prior to the commencement of the interviews,
the researchers provided 24 h’ notice in accordance with the requirements for participation
shared with the participants for consent prior to participation in this study. This increased
trust because they had the option to withdraw at any time if they felt uncomfortable. During
the interviews, the researcher’s questions were strictly about the study; no other information
was gathered. As a result, the validity and reliability of the research were ensured.
The data analysis was complemented with a sentiment and emotion analysis of the inter-
view transcripts to identify the sentiments and emotions of the interviewees regarding CE
practices, Industry 4.0 applications, and the various barriers and enablers of Industry 4.0. The
analyses were carried out using IBM Watson Natural Language Understanding (NLU) cloud
native software, which uses deep learning to extract sentiment, emotion, and other text-based
metadata. The IBM Watson NLU sentiment analysis identiﬁes attitudes, opinions, or feelings
in text. The NLU analyses sentiments based not only on the polarity of individual words but
also on the text’s sequence. The results are displayed through sentiment labels of positive
(score 0 to 1), neutral (score 0), and negative (score −1 to 0). By contrast, emotion analysis
allows for going beyond polarity to detect emotions, such as joy, sadness, fear, disgust, and
anger, which ensures more granularity. Subsequently, hierarchical cluster analysis, k-means
cluster analysis, and linear projection analysis were performed to identify the group of SMEs
that shared the same features in terms of CE principles and Industry 4.0 applications. Figure 1
depicts the ﬂowchart of the approach followed in this study.
Fig. 1 Flowchart of the approaches to data analysis
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
469
4 Research ﬁndings and analysis
This study sought to understand the enablers and barriers of Industry 4.0 for CE principles
implementation by SMEs in an emerging market in the food sector, namely fruit and vegetable
SMEs in India. Hence, the interviewees were asked questions about the following aspects:
CE practice implementation, Industry 4.0 practice implementation, and Industry 4 barriers
and enablers in CE implementation.
4.1 Circular economy practices in the Indian fruit and vegetable sector
Accordingtotheliterature,CEprinciplesaredividedintothreemaincategories:reduce,reuse,
and recycle. When asked about the application of these principles, all of the interviewees
stated that they engaged in the CE practices of recycling, reducing, and reusing products.
In terms of reducing waste and resource practices, the interviewees stated that they used
water efﬁciency methods, such as rainwater wastewater, temperature control warehouses,
collaborations with wholesalers, and recyclable packaging. A few of the interviewees stated:
Along with these, we have contracted check dams to harvest rainwater, which increases
groundwater level and acts as a useful water resource for our produce in times of need.
(I3)
Sometimeswecannotsellallourproductsinthelocalmarkets;therefore,weestablished
collaborations with wholesalers who can immediately collect our produce and sell it
somewhere else. Some buyers require that we package our fruit, and in collaboration
with them we developed recyclable packaging (I9)
Regarding reusing products, the interviewees reported that they reused fruits and veg-
etables in a variety of ways, including creating value-added products, such as marmalade
juice, using the exterior of the fruit as food packaging, animal feed, organic fertiliser, and
plant-growing enhancement ingredients. Some of the interviewees mentioned:
Coconuts are sold for retail or any other purpose; the outer unused shells are taken back
by the company and are being reused for growing plants and used as containers. We
also have leaf extracts that can be used instead of chemical pesticides and insecticides.
This helps to avoid insects. (I6)
Fruits like mangoes that are damaged while being transported are used for juices, in
which we remove the damaged part of fruit and use the rest effectively. At times, we
also send these fruits to companies that also make jams. Vegetables like tomatoes that
are damaged are reused in such a way that we carefully extract the ﬂawed portion and
use the rest for making salads or for juices. (I11)
The majority of the participants engaged in recycling practices, converting their food
waste into natural compost or using it to generate biogas. This helped them in multiple ways,
including environmental security and pollution reduction. A few instances of recycling that
the participants mentioned were as follows:
In our farming company, we have a huge recycling plant that is used for converting
coconuts and other unused food products into manure, which we use for our own crops
and sell to other farmers who are in need of organic fertilisers. We also have leaf extracts
123

470
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Table 3 CE principles
implemented by the interviewees
Interviewee code
CE principles
Reduce
Recycle
Reuse
I1
X
✓
✓
I2
X
✓
X
I3
✓
✓
X
I4
X
✓
✓
I5
✓
✓
X
I6
X
✓
✓
I7
X
✓
X
I8
✓
✓
X
I9
✓
✓
✓
I10
X
✓
✓
I11
✓
✓
✓
I12
✓
✓
X
I13
X
✓
✓
I14
X
✓
✓
I15
✓
✓
X
that can be used instead of chemical pesticides and insecticides. This helps to avoid
insects. (I5)
We generate lots of renewable energy in the form of biogas which avoids wastage and
if there are products which are further leftover, those are used as manure which goes
back to the ﬁeld thereby completing the cycle. (I12)
The products we mainly use are perishables like fruits and vegetables that don’t last
for 3 to 4 days, which causes more wastage than other ﬁelds of business. So, we take
steps to convert the wastage into manure, which we use for the fruits and vegetables
that we grow in our own warehouse. (I14)
Table 3 provides a comprehensive overview of the various CE principles applied by the
participants. According to the table, 7 of the 15 participants used reduction, 8 reused, all
incorporated recycling, and only 2 used all 3 CE principles. This demonstrates that partici-
pants understand CE principles, which can aid in the implementation of CE principles in the
Indian fruit and vegetable sector.
Sentiment analysis further identiﬁed the sentiments of the interviewees regarding the
concept of CE and its principles. The interviews revealed a generally positive sentiment,
although the tendency was towards neutrality. For example, interviewees indicated that CE
offered several beneﬁts, such as minimal wastage, reuse of resources, extension of the life-
cycle of products, business sustainability, renewable energy, and pollution reduction. In this
respect, the interviewees adopted a positive vocabulary in characterising their perceptions of
the CE concept and its principles. This highlights that the interviewees had a positive attitude
towards CE implementation in the fruit and vegetable sector, even though they did not all
adopt all CE principles in practice. The tendency towards a neutral sentiment is relevant,
however, and this can be explained by the fact that these interviews were characterised by a
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
471
greater emphasis on deﬁnitions and descriptions, which lowered the level of sentimentality
displayed.
4.2 Industry 4.0 applications in the Indian fruit and vegetable sector
As previously stated in the literature review, Industry 4.0 applications include IoT, cloud
computing, big data, augmented reality, and cyber-physical systems and security. Nine of the
15 participants employed Industry 4.0 applications in their ﬁrms, particularly cloud comput-
ing and IoT, because they felt these applications improved the level of control, they had over
their ﬁrms. The majority of the interviewees stated that a common cloud computing issue
they faced was poor purchase plans. However, some of the candidates also mentioned the
following:
We do use cloud technologies to control purchase because we have many vendors across
different cities, and in the earlier days, we had issues regarding demand and supply.
There was demand, and we were ready to supply, but there was no link between them.
(I1)
Thus, with the introduction of cloud computing, their efﬁciency in handling data increased,
allowingthemtosavemoneybykeepingbettertrackoftheirordersandincreasingtheirmobil-
ity. Cloud technologies provide high levels of authentication, supervision, and encryption;
they assist in keeping their data secured while scaling up their operations. As a result, it
helped ensure scalability and security. The interviews highlighted these beneﬁts, as shown
in the following excerpts:
We implemented a cloud-based technology where an online platform was set up to
feed the demand, which helps our company get orders in real time. These orders are
processed in such a way that we avoid wastage. (I3)
While sending and receiving orders, we use cloud computing, which helps us to keep
track of the orders and store them safely. We are using cloud computing so that it can
be accessed from different places and at any time. (I8)
Other than cloud computing, applications such as IoT can be used for ﬁne-tuning opera-
tions, better control, and an improved ordering system. One of the interviewees mentioned:
As of now, we are using the internet of Things (IoT) for LAN [local area network]
and WAN [wide area network] to connect all our business operations from the ﬁeld to
the store. We manage to send notiﬁcations on our customers’ mobile phones through
IoT applications when their orders are ready for collection. We have buyers from other
cities, and we can better understand the demand. (I11)
Further, some of the participants took the initiative to introduce more Industry 4.0 appli-
cations in the future. However, 6 of the 15 interviewees did not install any applications or
new technologies, as they felt that India’s fruit and vegetable sector was traditional. They
did, however, recognise the enormous potential for these technologies to be introduced in the
future. Participants indicated that:
Indian agriculture is still very traditional, at least the banana and coconut cultivation
are still being traditional, so we don’t have much application of Industry 4.0 as of now.
But in the near future, we are looking forward to using applications like big data, which
123

472
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Table 4 Usage of Industry 4
applications per interviewee
Interviewee code
Type of Industry 4.0 application
Cloud computing
IoT
I1
✓
X
I2
X
X
I3
✓
✓
I4
X
✓
I5
X
X
I6
X
X
I7
X
X
I8
✓
X
I9
✓
✓
I10
X
X
I11
✓
✓
I12
X
✓
I13
X
X
I14
✓
X
I15
✓
X
could help in computing data, analysing past trends, forecasting, and understanding
relationships between other external factors. (I5)
We are also planning to install cloud computing when we start expanding our retail
branches to more locations in the near future. We are just moving forward with Industry
4.0 technology with respect to processing and reaching out to the customer. (I6)
Participants who had not yet implemented these technologies were not opposed to novel
technologies or machinery inventions. They employed several types of machinery for chop-
ping their vegetables and irrigating crops. A related example from the participants is as
follows:
We use solar pumping motors for supplying water on the farm during sowing; then we
use precision drip irrigation to irrigate the crops and the trees. (I10)
Based on the above analysis, it can be concluded that some companies in the Indian fruit
and vegetable sector have adopted Industry 4.0 applications. In total, 9 of the 15 participants
used at least one Industry 4.0 application. Cloud computing and IoT were predominantly used
compared to other applications. Table 4 summarises the Industry 4.0 applications used by
each interviewee. As shown in the table, 7 of the 15 are using cloud computing applications,
5 are using IoT applications, and 3 are using both.
A sentiment analysis regarding the use of Industry 4.0 applications revealed a positive
sentiment among participants across all applications. This result highlights that the inter-
viewees held a positive attitude towards the use of Industry 4.0 applications in the fruit and
vegetable sector, with an average score of 0.54 positive sentiment. Figure 2 shows the average
emotion scores with regard to the Industry 4.0 applications discussed by the interviewees.
The results show that the positive sentiments were driven by the perceived beneﬁts brought
about speciﬁcally by “cloud computing” (average score of 46.09% joy) and “cloud-based
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
473
Fig. 2 Participants’ average emotion scores on Industry 4.0 applications
technology” (average score of 70.06% joy), “online platforms” (average score of 70.06%
joy), “new technology” (average score of 63.52% joy), “dig data” (average score of 65.32%
joy), and “IoT” (average score of 55.87% joy), and solar pumping motors, with an average
score of 57% joy). Even though not all respondents had implemented all these applications,
the results showcase their awareness of the beneﬁts that come with their adoption, which is
indicative of them being very likely to adopt these in the future.
The interview transcripts were further subjected to cluster analysis to identify patterns
in the full dataset of CE principles implemented by the various SMEs in India’s fruit and
vegetable sector, as well as the use of Industry 4.0 applications. In stage 1, we computed
the number of clusters using hierarchical clustering. We used the cosine distance metric
to obtain hierarchical clustering based on average linkage to compute the mean distance
between the elements in any two clusters. The outputs are illustrated in Fig. 3, a visualisation
of the formation of clusters, and Fig. 4 (hierarchical clustering), a dendrogram that reveals
the existence of four clusters.
We then used k-means cluster analysis in stage 2 to optimise the group resolution for
each cluster. The scatter plot of the k-means cluster in Fig. 5 considers the silhouette width,
which was implemented for computing the optimal number of clusters in the k-means cluster
analysis. It takes into account how perfectly the ‘elements’ are clustered, and it also measures
theaveragedistancebetweentheclusters.Itisworthnotingthatthenumberofclustersremains
constant, at four.
The visual analysis in Fig. 5 identiﬁes, therefore, four clusters to which the following
‘elements’ (three CE principles and two Industry 4.0 applications) belong:
• Cluster 1 of objects I4, I6, I10, and I13. This cluster shows SMEs that implemented the
‘recycle’ and ‘reuse’ CE principles but did not implement the ‘reduce’ principle and did
not use IoT applications.
• Cluster 2 of objects I3, I9, I11, I12, and I15. This cluster shows SMEs that implemented
only the ‘reduce’ and ‘recycle’ CE principles.
• Cluster 3 of objects I1, I8, and I14. This cluster shows SMEs that implemented the ‘recycle’
CE principle and used ‘cloud computing’ but did not use ‘IoT’ applications.
123

474
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Fig. 3 Distance map—cluster with ordered leaves
Fig. 4 Hierarchical clustering
• Cluster 4 of objects I2, I5, and I7. This cluster shows SMEs that implemented the ‘recycle’
CE principle but did not implement the ‘reuse’ principles and did not use either ‘cloud
computing’ or ‘IoT’ applications.
The identiﬁed clusters reveal interesting insights. The clusters group SMEs that share
common characteristics in terms of implementing CE principles and using Industry 4.0
applications. Various combinations of CE principles and Industry 4.0 applications can be
noted (also depicted in Figs. 6, 7); however, there is no cluster of SMEs that implements
all three CE principles or both Industry 4.0 applications. This highlights the still-emerging
nature of CE principles and Industry 4.0 applications in practice, supporting previous insights
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
475
Fig. 5 Scatter plot of the k-means cluster
obtained from the thematic analysis. This outcome is also indicative of the work that needs
to be done to remove barriers to their implementation.
4.3 Enablers and barriers of Industry 4.0 applications for circular economy
principles implementation in the Indian fruit and vegetable sector
The impact of Industry 4.0 applications on the implementation of CE principles has its own
set of enablers and barriers. The literature review analysis indicated the following enablers
of Industry 4.0 for CE implementation: improved energy efﬁciency and waste management,
enhanced process reliability and uptime, increased resilience, improved quality, improved
infrastructure, and self-optimisation. The interviewees were asked their opinions about each
of the enablers.
Industry 4.0 provides a wide range of applications that ensure that operating systems are
continuously improved and updated. High levels of collaboration and constant product track-
ing can help companies save energy and reduce waste. This will ultimately help reduce overall
costs and be more proﬁtable, as products are optimally utilised. Some of the interviewees
mentioned:
The one enabler that comes to the top of my mind is energy and waste recovery. As I
said earlier, wastage could be reused to produce organic manure, as organic farming is
becoming very popular nowadays. I feel it is even starting to attract more youngsters
123

476
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Fig. 6 Linear projection of interviewees based on different combinations of implemented CE principles and
the usage of Industry 4.0 applications
to the agricultural sector. So, energy and waste recovery would be one enabler, as we
have the chance though the use of technology to reuse and recycle the product. (I4)
Through the application of Industry 4.0, process reliability and uptime can be improved.
Companies can now beneﬁt from using machines and moving to automation, which is more
consistent and faster than using labour. Some of the interviewees mentioned:
The technological applications that we use for demand planning help us control our
wastage levels and plan our orders more efﬁciently. Since we started using online
systems to inform our customers about their orders, we were able to schedule more
deliveries at a shorter time as the order processing time was improved. (I11)
Industry 4.0 applications are dynamic and can instantly adapt to changes, which helps
companies adapt. Subsequently, these applications can also predict machine failures before
they occur, which helps companies make decisions based on them. These qualities improve
the overall resilience of companies. One of the interviewees mentioned:
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
477
Fig. 7 Linear projection of interviewees based on implemented CE principles and usage of Industry 4.0 appli-
cations
With the help of these efﬁcient data processors, more accurate decisions can be made,
thereby increasing ﬂexibility as companies can cope up with changes easily. Espe-
cially in the vegetable sector in India, the demand and supply of vegetables are highly
uncertain. (I3)
Industry 4.0 enhances a product’s perceived quality, which allows companies to increase
customer satisfaction. Companies now beneﬁt from improving the quality of products by
being cost-efﬁcient, environmentally friendly, and productive. Some of the participants said:
With the use of technology, we can track and process our customer orders more
efﬁciently and effectively with reduced errors. This is very important for fruit and
vegetables because they have limited shelf life and in case of errors they may be
wasted. (I12)
Due to improved infrastructure, companies can cater to the speciﬁc needs of their cus-
tomers and make the best use of the space available to them. The interviewees also reported
123

478
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
that by improving the current infrastructure, they would be able to accommodate new systems
and concepts. One of the interviewees indicated that:
According to our natural farm, I think the biggest enabler would be infrastructure.
For example, it would help to improve the production, help us to manage the water
efﬁciently, it would help us to provide minimal labour at maximum yield and can be
used for saving energy. (I1)
This will, in turn, increase the performance of the production process by making it more
dynamic and responsive. Having level processors allows companies to store and retrieve
data independently without human interference, which frees up time to focus more on their
core values and future opportunities, as these self-organised machines take care of recurring
activities. One of the interviewees stated:
Another important beneﬁt is self-optimisation, as these technologies can cope with
change and learn at the same time. So, don’t have the burden of changing the systems
and mainframes from time to time. Along with that, since these technologies can self-
organise itself, the responsibility of reprogramming the data or devices will come down.
(I9)
Regarding the interviewees’ sentiments on the enablers of CE principle implementation
with the greatest impact, the sentiment analysis revealed a positive sentiment, with an average
score of 0.39 positive sentiment across all interviews (with joy as the predominant emotion,
with an average score of 38.11%). A further breakdown of scores at the construct level (see
Fig. 8), considering the predominant emotions associated with each of the main enablers,
revealedthattheintervieweesweremostcontentwiththebeneﬁtsofculturalenablers(average
of 54.02% joy) and regulatory enablers (average of 40.81% joy). The emotions were mixed
with regard to ﬁnancial enablers (average of 27.16% joy and 22.48% sadness) and internal
enablers (average of 26.18% joy and 12.91% sadness). Interestingly, the analysis also revealed
the presence of fear, with an average score of 13.78% associated with regulatory enablers
and 12.32% associated with cultural enablers, which can be explained by the fact that they
Fig. 8 Participants’ average emotion scores on enablers of CE implementation
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
479
are the most difﬁcult to deal with because they require structural changes, although they have
the greatest potential to make a signiﬁcant positive difference in practice.
Although Industry 4.0 applications appear to enable CE implementation, certain barriers
must be addressed. Based on the literature review analysis, these are related to intercon-
nectedness and collaboration issues, data safety and security issues, high investment costs,
infrastructure, and incompatibility issues.
According to the interviewees, interconnectedness and collaboration issues are major
barriers because of the lack of standardised software across the sector. This presents a disad-
vantage for a company that has installed cutting-edge technology because it will be unable
to connect with other similar companies, leading to difﬁculties in placing orders and selling
products on the market. The participants felt that:
We could not share the data or information with other companies as they did not have
the standardised medium for the data to be sent. Since there was no standardisation,
we could not measure the abnormalities, which cost us a lot. Similarly, this reduced
the collaboration, as we were not able to connect with other companies. (I8)
Accordingtotheinterviewees,thereareseveralissueswithdatasafetyandsecuritybecause
people can now afford to access this at any time, and a lack of knowledge will make people
prone to injuries if they are not trained in how to use these technologies. According to some
of the participants, external factors, such as animals, rainfall, and scarcity in India, have an
impact on the safety of these applications. They said that:
When it comes to safety and security, people will need to be trained, and at the moment,
they are not trained to handle these technologies that use all this data. People will not
be afraid to use new machinery if they know how to handle it. Safety and security are
non-negotiable. If you have no personnel in charge of the safety and security of the
equipment concerns, I think it is never going to work out. (I5)
Companies will have to incur massive investment costs to implement these technologies.
They will also have to bear the burden of regularly checking applications to ensure maximum
performance, which will incur ongoing maintenance costs. Given that the farming community
in India is at the lower end of proﬁtability, most farmers will face affordability issues.
The present barrier is again related to cost, which is the ﬁnancial barrier. Compared
to other countries, the cost of doing business in India is quite high. Even though
liberalisation has helped us get more money now, the cost remains high. To invest in
new technologies, we need ﬁnance. At this stage, the technology in our country is not
quite affordable for MSMEs [micro, small, and medium enterprises]. (I14)
Again, the majority of companies lack the basic infrastructure required to accommodate
these advanced technologies. Thus, they will have to make signiﬁcant changes to their current
CE implementation efforts, which are not favoured in India due to the country’s minimalistic
culture. Another challenge will be for companies to convert all of their applications uni-
formly in order to facilitate data transfer. The participants felt that this problem would again
lead to issues with the network and communication with other companies. One interviewee
mentioned:
Most of the systems in our company are still lacking the conﬁgurations of the latest
technologies, and if we install the brand-new technology in one outlet, it won’t be able
to connect with the other outlets as they are still outdated. (I8)
123

480
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Fig. 9 Participants’ average emotion scores on barriers to CE implementation
The most common enablers mentioned by the interviewees were enhanced resilience,
improvedinfrastructure,andself-optimisation.Thesethreeenablersweresaidtoplayacrucial
role in implementing CE for Industry 4.0. Similarly, almost all participants mentioned three
of the four major investment cost barriers. This indicates that the greatest obstacle to Industry
4.0 in aiding CE is cost or total expenditure. This barrier, however, can be overcome if similar
companies pool their resources and co-create or depend on the government to initiate and
offer subsidies for the implementation of CE.
According to the sentiment analysis of the barriers to CE principle implementation with
the greatest impact, the interviews expectedly revealed a general negative sentiment, with
an average score of −0.53 negative sentiment across all interviews; the dominant emotion
was sadness, with an average overall score of 38.02%. A further breakdown of scores at
the construct level (see Fig. 9), considering the predominant emotions associated with each
of the main barriers, revealed that interviewees expressed the most sadness with ﬁnancial
barriers (61.59% average score) and technical barriers (42.61% average score). The least
sadness was displayed regarding technological barriers (30.36% average score). The positive
feelings towards technological barriers can be explained by the fact that all interviewees had
already adopted some form of technology in their operations; therefore, their perception of
this element being a barrier was low. The emotions were mixed with regard to cultural barriers
(average of 35.90% joy and 33.46% sadness), market barriers (average of 30.93% joy and
32.70% sadness), and sectoral barriers (average of 33.80% joy and 34.03% sadness). The
greatest level of fear was detected in relation to regulatory barriers (average score of 32.83%),
followed by ﬁnancial barriers (average score of 19.33%) and sectoral barriers (average score
of 18.64%).
5 Discussion
This study aimed to explore the enablers and barriers of Industry 4.0 adoption for CE imple-
mentation in fruit and vegetable SMEs in India from the RBV perspective and, based on
that, to propose a framework for CE implementation for SMEs in emerging economies. To
this end, the adoption of CE principles and Industry 4.0 applications in a speciﬁc context
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
481
was explored. CE consists of three principles: recycling, reusing, and reducing (Reh, 2013).
Recycling is not throwing away products after they have been used but rather repurposing
them to be functional again. Similarly, reuse is a principle that ensures that products are not
disposed of as waste and are instead consumed for the same purpose (Camacho-Otero et al.,
2018). By contrast, reduction is the process of increasing production efﬁciency by optimis-
ing resources and avoiding goods that are harmful to society (Kazancoglu et al., 2021). On
analysing these principles in relation to the implementation of CE in India, the interview data
showed that all participants had incorporated at least one of these principles into their supply
chains, proving that traces of these practices already exist in India. Out of these, recycling
was the most common principle adopted by the participants.
Industry 4.0 refers to a new industrial revolution that has digitally transformed the sup-
ply chain of industries. Industry 4.0 applications include IoT, cloud technology, big data,
augmented reality, and cyber-physical systems and security (Almada-Lobo, 2016; Oester-
reich & Teuteberg, 2016; Vaidya et al., 2018). According to the ﬁndings, Indian SMEs are
already embracing a few Industry 4.0 applications, with efforts being made by food SMEs
to implement CE and adopt some Industry 4.0 applications. The two most commonly used
Industry 4.0 applications are cloud computing and IoT, with forecasting, optimisation, and
efﬁciency enhancement applications needed for CE. This will lead to the improvement of
current systems by making them smarter, more uniﬁed, and more regulated. This, in turn,
will help companies adopt more sustainable practices, leading to the implementation of CE.
Figure 10 depicts the process of how Industry 4.0 contributes to CE.
This study aimed to identify the tangible and intangible resources and capabilities needed
for CE implementation using Industry 4.0 applications. These were identiﬁed as enablers
(that will serve as competitive advantages) and barriers (that will serve as competitive dis-
advantages) of Industry 4.0 for CE implementation. According to RBV theory, the needed
capabilities can be delineated by identifying tangible and intangible resources. The ﬁndings
of this study conﬁrm the competitive advantages identiﬁed in the literature review analy-
sis, which are as follows: improved energy and waste management, enhanced process and
reliability uptime, enhanced resilience, improved quality, improved infrastructure, and self-
optimisation (Fatimah et al., 2020; Kazancoglu et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2021; Vacchi et al.,
2021) This study adds to the existing literature by conﬁrming the existence of these enablers
or other competitive advantages in Indian fruit and vegetable SMEs. Table 5 summarises
the enablers/competitive advantages and barriers/competitive disadvantages of Industry 4
implementation for CE, as well as the respective resources and capabilities required or lack-
ing from the perspective of SMEs, using RBV theory. Industry 4.0 applications have been
mentioned as a means to develop speciﬁc capabilities, such as collaborative capability, ﬁnan-
cial capability, automation capability, predictive capability, self-learning capability, and agile
capability (Mikalef & Pateli, 2017). Thus, this study conﬁrms that Industry 4.0 technologies,
particularly IoT and cloud computing, can assist SMEs in developing these capabilities, and
further extends the literature by indicating that this will enable CE implementation.
Industry 4.0 promotes efﬁcient practices that can reduce consumption while maintaining
low levels of energy input to provide clear and scalable manufacturing expertise (Papadopou-
los et al., 2021; Stock & Seliger, 2016). Such technologies can be programmed to identify
products with the potential to be reused, thereby indirectly extending the good’s life. This
study conﬁrmed that Industry 4.0 applications could indeed reduce energy consumption and
facilitate waste reduction and management, enabling CE implementation at the SME level
in India. This can be achieved through the use of both tangible and intangible resources
(see Table 5). These tangible resources include tracking and tracing technologies, as well
as ﬁnancial resources. Knowledge and expertise, by contrast, are intangible resources, as is
123

482
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Fig. 10 The process of determining how Industry 4.0 impacts the circular economy based on the speciﬁc
context. Source: Developed by the authors
supplier relationship management. Indian SMEs could develop collaborative and ﬁnancial
capabilities based on these two sets of resources.
According to the ﬁndings of this study, the cloud computing and IoT applications of Indus-
try 4.0 could also enhance the process reliability and uptime of Indian fruit and vegetable
SMEs for CE implementation. For this, tangible resources, such as updated machinery, online
ordering systems, and demand and supply systems, are required. The intangible resources
required are knowledge, expertise, and cumulative experience. All of these will contribute to
the development of automation capabilities (see Table 5). CE could beneﬁt from Industry 4.0
applications because it can enhance business resilience by establishing interconnections that
transform the current business model to increase innovation and ensure business continuity
(Azadegan et al., 2020). This study found that this is the case for Indian SMEs. It will be pos-
sible, however, only when machines are interconnected, proper demand and supply systems
are in place, food supply chain visibility is present, and a changing culture is embedded. This
would allow Indian SMEs to develop predictive capabilities.
Industry 4.0 applications for CE implementation efforts could help improve quality. This
is because all data and resources are tracked and traced, and relevant information about their
conditions is shared across the network (Spanaki et al., 2021). This study found that IoT and
cloud computing applications can improve product quality in CE implementation when SMEs
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
483
Table 5 Enablers and barriers of Industry 4 implementation for CE and their respective resources and capabil-
ities. Source: Developed by Authors
Tangible resources
Intangible resources
Capabilities
Enablers/competitive advantages
Improved energy and
waste management
systems
Tracking
and
tracing
technologies
Financial resources
Knowledge and exper-
tise
Supplier relationship
management
Collaborative
capabil-
ity
Financial capability
Enhanced process
reliability and uptime
Updated machinery
Online ordering systems
Demand and supply
planning systems
Knowledge and exper-
tise
Cumulative experience
Automation capability
Enhanced resilience
Demand and supply plan-
ning systems
Connected machinery
Food supply chain visi-
bility
Change culture
Predictive capability
Improved quality
Tracking
and
tracing
technologies
Updated and connected
machinery
Customer
relationship
management skills
Skilled workforce
Self-learning capability
Improved
infrastructure
Updated technical equip-
ment
Efﬁcient resource
management
Customer
relationship
management skills
Technological
know-how
Technological
capability
Self-optimisation
Updated and connected
technological
equipment
Data management
techniques
Agile capability
Barriers/competitive disadvantages
Interconnectedness and
collaboration issues
Lack of standardised
software
Insufﬁcient network
collaborations
Lack of collaboration
capability
Data safety and
security issues
Inappropriate
technolo-
gies
Insufﬁcient data safety
and security measures
Lack of training
Lack of knowledge on
handling new
technologies
Lack of self-learning
capability
High investment cost
Budget constraints
Lack of funding
Absence of affordable
technologies
Insufﬁcient network
relationships
Lack of collaboration
capability
Lack of ﬁnancial
capability
Infrastructure and
incompatibility issues
Insufﬁcient infrastructure
for new technologies
Shortage of new
technologies in the
country
Insufﬁcient
technological
know-how
Lack of technological
capability
have tracking and tracing technologies, updated machinery, customer relationship manage-
ment skills, and a skilled workforce to operate the machinery effectively and efﬁciently.
These technologies will enable the development of self-learning capabilities. Infrastructure
improvements are also possible with Industry 4.0 in CE because it streamlines processes
and ensures equipment integration (Adeyeri et al., 2015). This study found that at the SME
level, this is possible when speciﬁc tangible resources, such as updated technical equipment
and efﬁcient resource management, as well as intangible ones, such as customer relationship
123

484
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
management skills and technological know-how, are in place, resulting in a technological
capability for CE implementation. Industry 4.0 technologies for CE implementation can pro-
vide a self-optimisation advantage because they can handle sudden changes, adapt to them,
and optimise current processes (Ivanov & Dolgui, 2020). Industry 4.0 can indeed bring the
advantage of self-optimisation when implementing CE in Indian SMEs (Rajput & Singh,
2021). The resources needed for that are updated and connected technological equipment
and data management techniques for building an agile capability.
Although the interviews revealed that Industry 4.0 comes with many enablers, also known
as competitive advantages, certain barriers were found to be present in the speciﬁc context
at the level of CE implementation. The barriers suggested by the literature are related to
insufﬁcient network collaborations, a lack of appropriate technological infrastructure, a lack
of access to technologies, a lack of technical training for staff, and a lack of funding for new
investments (Kazancoglu et al., 2021). This study conﬁrms that these barriers, also known
as competitive disadvantages, are present in Indian fruit and vegetable SMEs.
Industry 4.0 technologies are interconnected, and information is shared across the net-
work, enabling the CE principles of reducing, reusing, and recycling (Reh, 2013). Thus,
given that authentication requirements and trust complications among shared networks can
disrupt the technologies, interconnectedness and collaboration issues may arise (Spanaki
et al., 2018). This study found that interconnectedness and collaboration issues are present in
the speciﬁc context of CE implementation via Industry 4.0. This is due to a lack of resources,
speciﬁcally a lack of standardised software and insufﬁcient network collaboration, which
results in a lack of collaboration capability. Interlinked devices and shared networks could
be prone to cyberattacks. During CE implementation using Industry 4.0 applications, data
safety and security issues may arise (Spanaki et al., 2021). Indeed, this study found that
the aforementioned issues are present at the SME level in India as a result of inappropriate
technologies, insufﬁcient data safety and security measures, lack of employee training, and
a lack of knowledge about how to handle these new technologies. All of these factors inhibit
the development of self-learning capabilities.
The high investment cost of Industry 4.0 adoption for CE, which has been mentioned as
a barrier by different researchers (Rajput & Singh, 2021), was conﬁrmed in this study to
be a major competitive disadvantage for these technologies for CE implementation. This is
due to SMEs’ budget constraints, a lack of other sources of funding for these technologies, a
lack of affordable technologies in the country, and insufﬁcient network relationships that will
allow these costs to be reduced through resource-sharing activities. As a result, SMEs face
a lack of collaboration and ﬁnancial capabilities. Researchers and companies have indicated
that Industry 4.0 infrastructure and compatibility issues are common, which may inhibit
CE implementation (Upadhyay et al., 2021). According to the ﬁndings of this study, this is
due to SMEs lacking adequate infrastructure for these new technologies, a scarcity of new
technologies in India, and a lack of technological know-how in the country.
Based on the above analysis, Fig. 11 depicts a conceptual framework that could be used
by SMEs in emerging countries seeking to implement CE with Industry 4.0. According to the
framework, SMEs must have certain tangible and intangible capabilities that will be acquired
through the adoption of Industry 4.0 technologies to achieve this goal. These resources, gained
through Industry 4.0 technologies, will enable the development of certain capabilities, giving
CE a competitive advantage.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
485
Fig. 11 Industry 4.0 resources and SME capabilities for CE competitive advantage in emerging economies.
Source: Developed by the authors
6 Conclusions
India is the world’s second largest producer of fruits and vegetables, trailing only China (IFP
Bureau, 2021). Even though the country is prospering in terms of production and exports,
one of the major drawbacks it has been facing in recent times is the wastage of perishable
goods. Poor infrastructure, inadequate packaging, improper handling, and a lack of cold
storage facilities are some of the major causes of waste (Despoudi, 2019). Thus, incorporating
CE principles into the supply chain can help the country reduce waste while improving its
sustainability practices.
This study explored the enablers of and barriers to Industry 4.0 adoption for CE imple-
mentation in fruit and vegetable SMEs in India from the RBV perspective. The enablers
and barriers were considered competitive advantages and disadvantages, respectively. Inter-
views were conducted with 15 food SME experts from the Indian fruit and vegetable supply
chain. This study explored the various CE principles, as well as the enablers and barriers to
implementation. It further analysed the different applications of Industry 4.0 and the various
enablers and barriers of Industry 4.0 that will impact the implementation of CE principles.
The ﬁndings show that CE principles could be successfully implemented in India because
the country has already been exploring several principles in its supply chain. Industry 4.0 is
expected to play a crucial role in assisting the overall CE implementation process.
Based on the ﬁndings, a conceptual framework for CE implementation using Industry
4.0 applications for SMEs in India was developed. According to the framework, for SMEs
to achieve a CE competitive advantage, they need to have speciﬁc tangible and intangible
resources, as well as SME capabilities, in place. SMEs that aim to become more sustainable
should consider implementing Industry 4.0 applications because they could give them a
competitive advantage. Closing the loop of the linear economy and adopting Industry 4.0
will support the implementation of CE.
123

486
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
6.1 Managerial implications
The ﬁndings of this study offer insights into the various enablers and barriers to implementing
a circular economy using Industry 4.0, which can be used by supply chain managers or SMEs
to improve their competitive position in the market, highlighting the importance of adopting
a problem-centric thinking approach to decision making (Charles et al., 2022). SMEs must
adopt new business models to improve their environmental performance while remaining
ﬁnancially sustainable. Industry 4.0 applications, despite apparent drawbacks, such as high
investment costs and infrastructural issues for SMEs, have the potential to bring signiﬁcant
beneﬁts and enable CE implementation. Managers of SMEs should seek to secure a reliable
source of ﬁnance from investors, the government, or banks, among others. There is a need for
increased focus on training and educating people on how to use these new technologies and
their beneﬁts. To ensure interconnectivity, SME managers should choose applications based
on the company’s needs and equipment. Adopting Industry 4.0 beneﬁts the supply chain in
general because it provides much-needed ﬂexibility and improves the overall infrastructure.
Therefore, implementing CE with the help of Industry 4.0 will reduce waste and extend the
lifetime of resources by reducing, reusing, and recycling, thus bringing the company to a
more viable state.
6.2 Limitations and future research
This study provides a broad overview of CE implementation in the Indian fruit and vegetable
sector,aswellasitsrelationshipwithIndustry4.0.However,thestudyhaspotentiallimitations
that could serve as a foundation for future research. The ﬁrst limitation relates to the industry
chosen, as this study focused on Indian fruit and vegetable SMEs rather than on the entire
fruit and vegetable supply chain. Future studies could examine Industry 4.0 and CE at the
overall food supply chain level. As this study focused on SMEs in a speciﬁc sector and
country, the ﬁndings are limited to this context. More studies are also needed to determine
whether the identiﬁed resources and capabilities exist in SMEs in other sectors and countries.
The data for this study were gathered through interviews with 15 food SME experts. In the
future, a survey could be deployed to collect more data and broaden the generalisability of
the ﬁndings.
Acknowledgements The authors are thankful to the Editor and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful
comments and suggestions on an earlier version of this manuscript.
Author contributions Conceptualization: SD, US, VKD; Methodology: SD, KS, VC, VDK; Formal analysis
and investigation: KS, VC; Writing—original draft preparation: SD, US, VDK; Writing review and editing:
SD, US, KS, VC; Resources: SD, US, VC, VKD; Supervision: SD, KS, Visualisation: SD, US, VC; Software:
KS, VC. All authors made a signiﬁcant contribution to this study. All authors have read and approved the ﬁnal
version of the manuscript.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no conﬂict of interest in this manuscript.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
487
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Acerbi, F., & Taisch, M. (2020). A literature review on circular economy adoption in the manufacturing sector.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 273, 123086. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123086
Adeyeri, M. K., Mpofu, K., & Olukorede, T. A. (2015). Integration of agent technology into manufacturing
enterprise: A review and platform for industry 4.0. https://doi.org/10.1109/IEOM.2015.7093910
Almada-Lobo, F. (2016). The Industry 40 revolution and the future of Manufacturing Execution Systems
(MES). Journal of Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.24840/2183-0606_003.004_0003
Azadegan, A., Mellat Parast, M., Lucianetti, L., Nishant, R., & Blackhurst, J. (2020). Supply chain disruptions
and business continuity: An empirical assessment. Decision Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12395
Barney,J.(1991).Firmresourcesandsustainedcompetitiveadvantage.JournalofManagement,17(1),99–120.
Barreto, I. (2010). Dynamic capabilities: A review of past research and an agenda for the future. Journal of
Management, 36(1), 256–280.
Batista, L., Dora, M., Garza-Reyes, J. A., & Kumar, V. (2021). Improving the sustainability of food supply
chains through circular economy practices—A qualitative mapping approach. Management of Environ-
mental Quality: An International Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/MEQ-09-2020-0211
Bechtsis, D., Tsolakis, N., Iakovou, E., & Vlachos, D. (2021). Data-driven secure, resilient and sustainable
supply chains: Gaps, opportunities, and a new generalised data sharing and data monetisation framework.
International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.1957506
Behzadi, G., O’Sullivan, M. J., & Olsen, T. L. (2020). On metrics for supply chain resilience. European Journal
of Operational Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.04.040
Belaud, J. P., Prioux, N., Vialle, C., & Sablayrolles, C. (2019). Big data for agri-food 4.0: Application to
sustainability management for by-products supply chain. Computers in Industry. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.compind.2019.06.006
Boyatzis, R. E. (1998). Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code development. Sage.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology,
3(2), 77–101.
Brusset, X., & Teller, C. (2017). Supply chain capabilities, risks, and resilience. International Journal of
Production Economics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2016.09.008
Bryman, A., & Bell, E. (2011). Interviewing in qualitative research. In E. Bell, A. Bryman, & B. Harley (Eds.),
Business research methods (3rd ed., pp. 464–499). Oxford University Press.
Camacho-Otero, J., Boks, C., & Pettersen, I. N. (2018). Consumption in the circular economy: A literature
review. Sustainability (Switzerland). https://doi.org/10.3390/su10082758
Charles, V., Emrouznejad, A., Gherman, T., & Cochran, J. (2022). Why data analytics is an art. Signiﬁcance,
19(6), 42–45. https://doi.org/10.1111/1740-9713.01707
Chauhan, A., Jakhar, S. K., & Chauhan, C. (2021). The interplay of circular economy with industry 4.0 enabled
smart city drivers of healthcare waste disposal. Journal of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2020.123854
Corallo,A.,Latino,M.E.,&Menegoli,M.(2018).FromIndustry4.0toagriculture4.0:Aframeworktomanage
product data in agri-food supply chain for voluntary traceability. International Journal of Nutrition and
Food Engineering. https://doi.org/10.1109/ieem.2014.7058728
Coyne, I. T. (1997). Sampling in qualitative research. Purposeful and theoretical sampling; merging or clear
boundaries? Journal of Advanced Nursing, 26(3), 623–630.
da Xu, L., Xu, E. L., & Li, L. (2018). Industry 4.0: State of the art and future trends. International Journal of
Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1444806
Dagilien˙e, L., Varani¯ut˙e, V., & Bruneckien˙e, J. (2021). Local governments’ perspective on implementing the
circular economy: A framework for future solutions. Journal of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2021.127340
de Angelis, R. (2021). Circular economy and paradox theory: A business model perspective. Journal of Cleaner
Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124823
Delbufalo, E. (2012). Outcomes of inter-organizational trust in supply chain relationships: A systematic liter-
ature review and a meta-analysis of the empirical evidence. Supply Chain Management. https://doi.org/
10.1108/13598541211246549
Despoudi, S. (2019). Optimized food supply chains to reduce food losses. Saving Food. https://doi.org/10.
1016/b978-0-12-815357-4.00008-0
123

488
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Despoudi, S. (2020). Green supply chain. The Interaction of Food Industry and Environment. https://doi.org/
10.1016/b978-0-12-816449-5.00002-3
Despoudi, S., Papaioannou, G., Saridakis, G., & Dani, S. (2018). Does collaboration pay in agricultural supply
chain? An empirical approach. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2018.1440654
Dey, P. K., Malesios, C., De, D., Chowdhury, S., Abdelaziz, F., & ben. (2020). The impact of lean management
practices and sustainably-oriented innovation on sustainability performance of small and medium-sized
enterprises: Empirical evidence from the UK. British Journal of Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/
1467-8551.12388
Dora, M. (2019). Collaboration in a circular economy: Learning from the farmers to reduce food waste. Journal
of Enterprise Information Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-02-2019-0062
Edgar, T. W., & Manz, D. O. (2017). Descriptive study. In T. W. Edgar & D. O. Manz (Eds.), Research
methods for cyber security (Vol. 70, pp. 131–151). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805349-
2.00005-4
Edwin Cheng, T. C., Kamble, S. S., Belhadi, A., Ndubisi, N. O., Lai, K., & Kharat, M. G. (2021). Linkages
between big data analytics, circular economy, sustainable supply chain ﬂexibility, and sustainable perfor-
mance in manufacturing ﬁrms. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2021.1906971
FAO. (2019). The state of food and agriculture 2019. Moving forward on food loss and waste reduction.
Rome. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. In FAO. 2019. The State of Food and Agriculture 2019. Moving
forward on food loss and waste reduction. Rome. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. https://doi.org/10.
4324/9781315764788
Fatimah, Y. A., Govindan, K., Murniningsih, R., & Setiawan, A. (2020). Industry 4.0 based sustainable circular
economy approach for smart waste management system to achieve sustainable development goals: A
case study of Indonesia. Journal of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122263
Fontana, A., & Frey, J. H. (1994). The Art of Science. In: N. a. Y. L. Denzin (Ed.). The Handbook of Qualitative
Research, Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications (pp. 361–376)
Genovese, A., Koh, S. C. L., Kumar, N., & Tripathi, P. K. (2014). Exploring the challenges in implement-
ing supplier environmental performance measurement models: A case study. Production Planning and
Control, 25, 1198–1211. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2013.808839
Giannakis, M., Spanaki, K., & Dubey, R. (2019). A cloud-based supply chain management system: effects on
supply chain responsiveness. Journal of Enterprise Information Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JEIM-05-2018-0106
Govindan, K. (2018). Sustainable consumption and production in the food supply chain: A conceptual frame-
work. International Journal of Production Economics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2017.03.003
Govindan, K., Azevedo, S. G., Carvalho, H., & Cruz-Machado, V. (2014). Impact of supply chain management
practices on sustainability. Journal of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.05.068
Guest, G., Bunce, A., & Johnson, L. (2006). How many interviews are enough?: An experiment with data
saturation and variability. Field Methods, 18(1), 59–82. https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X05279903
Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., Wamba, S. F., Childe, S. J., Hazen, B., & Akter, S. (2017).
Big data and predictive analytics for supply chain and organizational performance. Journal of Business
Research, 70, 308–317. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.08.004
Gunasekaran, A., Subramanian, N., & Rahman, S. (2015). Supply chain resilience: Role of complexities
and strategies. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2015.
1093667
Hamam, M., Chinnici, G., di Vita, G., Pappalardo, G., Pecorino, B., Maesano, G., & D’Amico, M. (2021).
Circular economy models in agro-food systems: A review. Sustainability (Switzerland). https://doi.org/
10.3390/su13063453
Han, J., Heshmati, A., & Rashidghalam, M. (2020). Circular economy business models with a focus on
servitization. Sustainability (Switzerland). https://doi.org/10.3390/su12218799
Hazen, B. T., Skipper, J. B., Ezell, J. D., & Boone, C. A. (2016). Big data and predictive analytics for
supply chain sustainability: A theory-driven research agenda. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 101,
592–598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2016.06.030
Hennink, M. M., Kaiser, B. N., & Marconi, V. C. (2017). Code saturation versus meaning saturation: How
many interviews are enough? Qualitative Health Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732316665344
Henry, M., Schraven, D., Bocken, N., Frenken, K., Hekkert, M., & Kirchherr, J. (2021). The battle of the buz-
zwords: A comparative review of the circular economy and the sharing economy concepts. Environmental
Innovation and Societal Transitions, 38, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2020.10.008
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
489
IFP Bureau. (2021, October). India second-largest producer of horticulture in world. https://Www.Ifp.Co.
in/10651/India-Second-Largest-Producer-of-Horticulture-in-World-Union-Minister-Narendra-Singh-
Tomar
Ilie-Zudor,E.,Ekárt,A.,Kemeny,Z.,Buckingham,C.,Welch,P.,&Monostori,L.(2015).Advancedpredictive-
analysis-based decision support for collaborative logistics networks. Supply Chain Management, 20(4),
369–388. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-10-2014-0323
Irani, Z., & Sharif, A. M. (2018). Food security across the enterprise: A puzzle, problem or mess for a circular
economy? Journal of Enterprise Information Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-03-2017-0045
Irani, Z., Sharif, A. M., Lee, H., Aktas, E., Topalo˘glu, Z., van’t Wout, T., & Huda, S. (2018). Managing food
security through food waste and loss: Small data to big data. Computers and Operations Research. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2017.10.007
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2020). A digital supply chain twin for managing the disruption risks and resilience
in the era of Industry 4.0. Production Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2020.
1768450
Johnson, M. P., & Hörisch, J. (2022). Reinforcing or counterproductive behaviors for sustainable entrepreneur-
ship? The inﬂuence of causation and effectuation on sustainability orientation. Business Strategy and the
Environment. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2925
Kazancoglu, Y., Ozkan-Ozen, Y. D., Sagnak, M., Kazancoglu, I., & Dora, M. (2021). Framework for a sustain-
able supply chain to overcome risks in transition to a circular economy through Industry 4.0. Production
Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2021.1980910
Ketokivi, M., & Choi, T. (2014). Renaissance of case research as a scientiﬁc method. Journal of Operations
Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2014.03.004
Khan, I. S., Ahmad, M. O., & Majava, J. (2021). Industry 4.0 and sustainable development: A systematic
mapping of triple bottom line, Circular Economy and Sustainable Business Models perspectives. Journal
of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126655
Korhonen, J., Nuur, C., Feldmann, A., & Birkie, S. E. (2018). Circular economy as an essentially contested
concept. Journal of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.111
Lezoche, M., Panetto, H., Kacprzyk, J., Hernandez, J. E., & Alemany Díaz, M. M. E. (2020). Agri-food 40: A
survey of the supply chains and technologies for the future agriculture. Computers in Industry. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103187
Mangla, S. K., Luthra, S., Mishra, N., Singh, A., Rana, N. P., Dora, M., & Dwivedi, Y. (2018). Barriers to
effective circular supply chain management in a developing country context. Production Planning and
Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2018.1449265
Michelini, G., Moraes, R. N., Cunha, R. N., Costa, J. M. H., & Ometto, A. R. (2017). From linear to circular
economy: PSS conducting the transition. Procedia CIRP. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2017.03.012
Mikalef, P., Boura, M., Lekakos, G., & Krogstie, J. (2019). Big data analytics capabilities and innovation:
The mediating role of dynamic capabilities and moderating effect of the environment. British Journal of
Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.12343
Mikalef, P., & Pateli, A. (2017). Information technology-enabled dynamic capabilities and their indirect effect
on competitive performance: Findings from PLS-SEM and fsQCA. Journal of Business Research, 70,
1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.09.004
Miranda, J., Ponce, P., Molina, A., & Wright, P. (2019). Sensing, smart and sustainable technologies for
Agri-Food 4.0. Computers in Industry, 108, 21–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.02.002
Oesterreich, T. D., & Teuteberg, F. (2016). Understanding the implications of digitisation and automation in the
context of Industry 4.0: A triangulation approach and elements of a research agenda for the construction
industry. Computers in Industry, 83, 121–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2016.09.006
Papadopoulos, T., Singh, S. P., Spanaki, K., Gunasekaran, A., & Dubey, R. (2021). Towards the next generation
of manufacturing: Implications of big data and digitalization in the context of industry 4.0. Production
Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2020.1810767
Papaioannou, G., Mohammed, A. M., Despoudi, S., Saridakis, G., & Papadopoulos, T. (2020). The role
of adverse economic environment and human capital on collaboration within agri-food supply chains.
International Journal of Information Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102077
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative interviewing. In M. Q. Patton (Ed.), Qualitative research and evaluation
methods (3rd ed., pp. 339–429). Sage.
Patwa, N., Sivarajah, U., Seetharaman, A., Sarkar, S., Maiti, K., & Hingorani, K. (2021). Towards a circular
economy: An emerging economies context. Journal of Business Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusres.2020.05.015
Pereira, A. C., & Romero, F. (2017). A review of the meanings and the implications of the Industry 4.0 concept.
Procedia Manufacturing. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2017.09.032
123

490
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
Pereira, V., Nandakumar, M. K., Sahasranamam, S., Bamel, U., Malik, A., & Temouri, Y. (2022). An
exploratory study into emerging market SMEs’ involvement in the circular Economy: Evidence from
India’s indigenous Ayurveda industry. Journal of Business Research, 142, 188–199. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jbusres.2021.12.053
Pettit, T. J., Croxton, K. L., & Fiksel, J. (2019). The evolution of resilience in supply chain management: A
retrospective on ensuring supply chain resilience. Journal of Business Logistics. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jbl.12202
Prieto-Sandoval, V., Jaca, C., & Ormazabal, M. (2018). Towards a consensus on the circular economy. Journal
of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.224
Rajput, S., & Singh, S. P. (2021). Industry 4.0 model for integrated circular economy-reverse logistics network.
International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications. https://doi.org/10.1080/13675567.2021.
1926950
Reh, L. (2013). Process engineering in circular economy. Particuology, 11(2), 119–133. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.partic.2012.11.001
Rogerson, M., & Parry, G. C. (2020). Blockchain: Case studies in food supply chain visibility. Supply Chain
Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-08-2019-0300
Sanders, A., Elangeswaran, C., & Wulfsberg, J. P. (2016). Industry 4.0 implies lean manufacturing: Research
activities in industry 4.0 function as enablers for lean manufacturing. Journal of Industrial Engineering
and Management (JIEM), 9(3), 811–833
Schmidt, R., Möhring, M., Härting, R. C., Reichstein, C., Neumaier, P., & Jozinovi´c, P. (2015). Industry 4.0 -
Potentials for Creating Smart Products: Empirical Research Results. In: W. Abramowicz (Ed.), Business
Information Systems. BIS 2015. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, vol. 208. Springer,
Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-19027-3_2
Scholten, K., Stevenson, M., & van Donk, D. P. (2019). Dealing with the unpredictable: Supply chain resilience.
International Journal of Operations and Production Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-01-
2020-789
Shefﬁ, Y., & Rice, J. B. (2005). A supply chain view of the resilient enterprise. MIT Sloan Management Review,
47, 41–48.
Sony, M., & Naik, S. (2019). Critical factors for the successful implementation of Industry 4.0: A review and
future research direction. Production Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2019.
1691278
Spanaki, K., Gürgüç, Z., Adams, R., & Mulligan, C. (2018). Data supply chain (DSC): Research synthesis
and future directions. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2017.1399222
Spanaki, K., Karaﬁli, E., & Despoudi, S. (2021). AI applications of data sharing in agriculture 4.0: A framework
for role-based data access control. International Journal of Information Management. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijinfomgt.2021.102350
Stock, T., & Seliger, G. (2016). Opportunities of sustainable manufacturing in Industry 40. Procedia CIRP.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2016.01.129
Sumter, D., de Koning, J., Bakker, C., & Balkenende, R. (2020). Circular economy competencies for design.
Sustainability (Switzerland). https://doi.org/10.3390/su12041561
Suri, H. (2011). Purposeful sampling in qualitative research synthesis. Qualitative Research Journal, 11(2),
63–75.
Teece, D., & Pisano, G. (1994). The dynamic capabilities of ﬁrms: An introduction. Industrial and Corporate
Change, 3(3), 537–556.
Trstenjak, M., & Cosic, P. (2017). Process planning in Industry 40 environment. Procedia Manufacturing.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2017.07.303
Upadhyay, A., Laing, T., Kumar, V., & Dora, M. (2021). Exploring barriers and drivers to the implementation of
circular economy practices in the mining industry. Resources Policy. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.
2021.102037
Vacchi, M., Siligardi, C., Cedillo-González, E. I., Ferrari, A. M., & Settembre-Blundo, D. (2021). Industry
4.0 and smart data as enablers of the circular economy in manufacturing: Product re-engineering with
circular eco-design. Sustainability (Switzerland). https://doi.org/10.3390/su131810366
Vaidya, S., Ambad, P., & Bhosle, S. (2018). Industry 4.0—A Glimpse. Procedia Manufacturing. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.promfg.2018.02.034
Vlajic, J. V. J. V., Hsiao, H. H.-I., & Ireland, N. (2018). Collaboration in circular supply chains. In Logistics
network conference.
Williams, B. D., Roh, J., Tokar, T., & Swink, M. (2013). Leveraging supply chain visibility for responsiveness:
The moderating role of internal integration. Journal of Operations Management, 31(7–8), 543–554.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2013.09.003
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 350:453–491
491
Wong, C. W. Y., Lai, K.-H., & Bernroider, E. W. N. (2015). The performance of contingencies of supply chain
information integration: The roles of product and market complexity. International Journal of Production
Economics, 165, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.03.005
World Bank. (2021). Small and medium enterprises ﬁnance. https://www.Worldbank.Org/En/Topic/
Smeﬁnance
Yamoah, F. A., Sivarajah, U., Mahroof, K., & Peña, I. G. (2022). Demystifying corporate inertia towards
transition to circular economy: A management frame of reference. International Journal of Production
Economics, 244, 108388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2021.108388
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed., Vol. 5). Sage.
Yin, Y., Stecke, K. E., & Li, D. (2018). The evolution of production systems from Industry 2.0 through Industry
4.0. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1403664
Zambon, I., Cecchini, M., Egidi, G., Saporito, M. G., & Colantoni, A. (2019). Revolution 4.0: Industry vs.
agriculture in a future development for SMEs. Processes. https://doi.org/10.3390/pr7010036
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123