TITLE: DIKEDOC: a multicriteria methodology to organise and communicate knowledge
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04711-6
---

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04711-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
DIKEDOC: a multicriteria methodology to organise
and communicate knowledge
Maria Franca Norese1 · Diana Rolando2
· Rocco Curto2
Accepted: 5 April 2022 / Published online: 21 May 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
DIKEDOC is a knowledge-based multicriteria methodology that is here proposed to organ-
ise dispersed knowledge about a complex problem when a decision process has not yet been
activated, or is latent, and to generate an interaction space that produces new knowledge.
An integrated use of logical and analytical tools is proposed, ﬁrst for use at a technical level
to organise any dispersed knowledge in a way that generates insights that can be communi-
cated, and then in a participative context, to create an opportunity to interact, share personal
points of view and experiences and to explore spaces of action, where such tools facilitate
understanding, criticism and proposals. A pilot study was developed, by an interdisciplinary
research team, in relation to the enhancement process of the “Ivrea, industrial city of the
twentieth century” UNESCO site, which still needs to be activated after a long and com-
plex decision process that led to the inclusion of the site in the World Heritage List. Several
research activities and enhancement projects have been developed in the last few years, but
a series of critical conditions have limited their implementation. A new perspective is now
necessary to identify and control the uncertainties that have emerged, guide the incremen-
tal development of knowledge and foster relationships, decisions and policies. The paper
presents DIKEDOC, a new knowledge organisation and problem description methodology,
and the conducted pilot study, which led to the proposal of a constructive vision of decision
aiding that logically and analytically “described” the space of action and its uncertainties.
Keywords DIKEDOC methodology · Dispersed knowledge · Decision aiding · ELECTRE
methods · Ivrea UNESCO site · Economic enhancement
1 Introduction
Decision aiding is the activity of a person who, through the use of explicit, but not necessarily
complete formalised models, helps another person or group of people to obtain elements of
B Diana Rolando
diana.rolando@polito.it
1
Department of Management and Production Engineering, Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli
Abruzzi 24, 10129 Turin, Italy
2
Department of Architecture and Design, Politecnico di Torino, Viale Mattioli 39, 10125 Turin, Italy
123

1050
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
responses to questions posed by a stakeholder of a decision process (cf Deﬁnition 2.2, Roy,
1996).
The complexity and uncertainty elements of a decision problem and the nature and evo-
lution of a decision process determine the character of a decision aid process and, therefore,
the activities that have to be implemented and their sequence. Several factors can guide an
analyst towards a speciﬁc methodological approach: the state of development and evolution
of the decision process, the organisational complexity of the decision system and the opera-
tional complexity, above all the structuring level of the problem situation, the multiplicity and
interdependency level of the problem issues and the resource state, with reference in partic-
ular to the time and to the availability and reliability of the data, information and knowledge
(Norese, 2020a).
During a decision process, a great number of knowledge elements from disparate sources
have to be organised and produced and then communicated through various modes of expres-
sion. Acquiring and organising these different kinds of knowledge could be critical decision
aiding activities.
In recent years, knowledge has become a prominent theme in organisational literature (see,
for instance, Kogut & Zander, 1996; Brown & Duguid, 2001; Carlile, 2004) and in strategic
management literature (e.g., Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995; Spender, 1996). Knowledge can
be distinguished, in a decision aiding ambit, as formal knowledge about the use of tools
and techniques, informal knowledge about social interactions, contingent knowledge about
the nature, complexity and uncertainty of immediate situations, tacit knowledge about the
process and history of the problem and experiences previously acquired, and meta-knowledge
about the broader organisational, social and cultural setting (Keys, 2007). “The epistemology
assumed in the literature tends to privilege the individual over the group, and the explicit over
the tacit (as if, for example, explicit and tacit knowledge were two variations of one kind
of knowledge, not separate, distinct forms of knowledge)” (Cook & Brown, 1999). The
previous authors indicated that considering knowledge and knowing as mutually enabling,
i.e. knowledge as a tool of knowing, can help explain how individuals and groups draw
on all the different forms of knowledge and, more importantly, how the interplay between
knowledge and knowing can generate new knowledge and new ways of knowing.
Modelling is the central activity of a decision aiding intervention, and the construction
of models is a knowledge production activity (Déri et al., 1993). Acquiring and integrating
different kinds of knowledge in a model are central decision aiding activities. However, such
activities require signiﬁcant cognitive efforts (Kolfschoten et al., 2014), not to mention the
timing and costs associated with an investigation and knowledge organisation, which are not
always consistent with the resources of a decision aiding intervention.
A model can be considered as the representation of a complex but well-deﬁned reality or
as a communication and reﬂection tool that allows the actors of a decision aid process to talk
about a problem and to propose individual and/or organisational knowledge (Genard & Pirlot,
2002). The adoption of the former or latter interpretation may depend on the different decision
aiding approaches: normative, descriptive, prescriptive or constructive (Tsoukiàs, 2007). The
MultiCriteria Decision Aid (MCDA) methodology (see Roy & Vanderpooten, 1996 and
the http://www.cs.put.poznan.pl/ewgmcda/ web site of the EURO Working Group MCDA)
adoptsaconstructivistapproach,wheretheasconstructedmodel,theconcepts,theprocedures
and their results become keys that are capable of opening certain locks for the decision process
actors, and of allowing them to proceed in accordance with their objectives and systems of
value (Roy, 1993). The concepts, models, procedures and results are developed, shared and
criticised as a body of knowledge that evolves during the decision aid process. The analyst has
the task of stimulating, orienting and monitoring the dynamics of this decision aid process.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1051
Decision processes are often complicated, not only in terms of the participants, who may
have different roles and attitudes, but also because interruptions and/or important changes in
the decision system may characterise the process (Mintzberg et al., 1976; Nutt, 1993). Such
a decision system includes decision makers and the actors involved in a decision process,
as well as a decision structure that is formalised to a certain extent, with the actors’ roles
being recognised by the involved organisations and speciﬁc rules being implemented in the
process. A limited formalisation level of the decision structure has a negative impact on the
Decision Aid (DA) process, above all concerning uncertainty about the tasks and the action
space.
Some DA interventions develop without having any direct relationship with a decision
system, which the client of a DA intervention may know well because he/she habitually
interacts with this system but has the aim of effectively proposing something completely new
(see, for instance, Norese & Carbone, 2014). A DA intervention may also develop in relation
to a decision system that is latent, because the decision process is in an initial pre-decisional
state, or one that has not yet been activated because there is a difﬁculty that needs to be
overcome in order to pass on to a decisional state of the process (Norese, 2020a). This may
also occur because the decision process has been stopped, or it does not formally exist, while
it has informally been activated in separate tables (Tsoukiàs, 2007). In these situations, the
client may be someone who perceives the possibility of activating a new decision process
or the need of reactivating or ofﬁcially activating a process, or an actor in another related
decision process, who perceives the need of a change in a decision system and in its overall
vision of the problem.
Modelling through a constructivist approach consists in constructing a model with the
person being aided to decide (Tsoukiàs, 2007), therefore different modelling and communi-
cation activities have to be implemented in relation to a latent or not yet activated decision
system, to ﬁrst create an interaction space between the analyst and knowledge sources and
then with and between the possible actors in a new or re-activated decision process.
A methodology that is based on the agile and integrated use of logical and analytical tools is
here proposed to operate in these situations, at a technical level, where knowledge is organised
and validated, and at a participative level, where the technical results are communicated in
order to be discussed and new knowledge is developed to generate a shared description of
the decision problem and some hypotheses of action. Such a methodology may be used in
different contexts, but it is above all oriented towards situations that belong to a new ﬁeld that
is called “policy analytics” (see Tsoukiàs et al., 2013; Abi-Zeid & Tremblay, 2016; Daniell
et al., 2016; De Marchi et al., 2016). However, the aim of such a methodology is that of being
a driving force in a process that is not one of designing or evaluating policies but rather of
allowing and facilitating the deﬁnition of a space of action and a decision system that wants
to or has to design a policy.
Some MCDA interventions were characterised in the past by a request for new modelling
and communication activities in relation to a latent or not yet activated decision system
(see, for instance, Norese, 2009; Norese & Carbone, 2014; Norese et al., 2015a, 2015b), or
innovative uses of multicriteria methods were requested by experts in speciﬁc domains who
had acquired a great deal of data in relation to a project and needed to generate knowledge and
transform data into information (see Balestra et al., 2001; Cavallo & Norese, 2001; Norese,
2020b). These past experiences created the basis for a general approach and facilitated the
studyandaction,andthentheproposalofanewmethodology,whenarequestarrivedfromone
of the technical actors in the long and complex decision process that resulted in the inclusion
of the “Ivrea, industrial city of the twentieth century” site in the UNESCO World Heritage List
123

1052
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
in 2018. This important result, which was considered an opportunity for the complex socio-
economic context of the city and its surrounding area, could now be lost because of a series
of critical conditions, including some economic and political constraints which have been
exacerbated by the COVID-19 emergency. The process needs to be reactivated to enhance
this site of great historical, architectural and environmental value, but a decision system is
latent.
Several useful knowledge elements were acquired in the years between 2014 and 2018:
data on the built environment and on the socio-economic and cultural context and territory,
documents pertaining to the candidacy process, the points of view of the involved actors
and the needs and goals of the organisations that could now play a possible role in the site
enhancement process.
A pilot study was activated by an interdisciplinary research team, in response to a request
for a methodological aid in the activation of the site enhancement process, to organise the
dispersed knowledge and to use the results to communicate with the potential actors of the
new process.
The ﬁrst section of the paper describes the proposed knowledge organisation and commu-
nication methodology, in relation to literature dealing with the subject. The second section
presents the problem that stimulated the pilot study and this work. Some knowledge organi-
sation results that had been achieved at the end of a technical application of the methodology
are included in the third section, as they were presented to the Municipality of Ivrea. An
example of how multicriteria models can integrate, visualise and communicate organised
knowledge, and how multicriteria methods can indicate possible uses of this knowledge, is
presented in the fourth section. Some considerations on the nature of this approach and on
the results of the pilot study are proposed in the ﬁfth section and in the conclusions.
2 The methodology
The methodology proposes an approach that logically and analytically deals with contingent
knowledge about the nature, complexity and uncertainty of a complex problem situation,
to “describe” the space of action and its constraints and uncertainties and to propose this
description in a participative context, where tacit knowledge in relation to the history of the
problem and experiences previously acquired, and informal knowledge about social inter-
actions can be expressed and included in a description, to change and improve it until a
legitimate description is generated.
Disparate sources of knowledge can be present in relation to a complicated problem (in
literature on the ﬁeld or other connected ﬁelds, in the involved organisations and the terri-
tory, in the practice of some of the stakeholders and so on), and can be expressed through
different modes (documents, norms, newspaper articles, analyses and reports, storytelling;
interviews, diagrams, ideas, images, networks; structured or unstructured data about design
concepts, assertions, proposals, suspects, protests, judgements and so on) and through differ-
ent languages (social, political, juridical, scientiﬁc, technical, economic, administrative and
so on). Only an integrated and agile use of different tools can generate an organisation of
different kinds of knowledge, languages and expression modes, and its structured inclusion
in models that can be easily communicated, discussed, validated or improved, used to foster
relationships between people and organisations, and to generate new knowledge, models,
discussions and elaboration of stimuli for an enhancement action.
Methodologies and tools have been proposed in literature to help analysts and decision
makers to understand the visions and perceptions, purposes and motivations, values, resources
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1053
and relationships of a complicated problem context. Hermans and Thissen (2009) proposed
several actor analysis methods in relation to the different ways of focusing on the speciﬁc
characteristics of the actors. Analyses have been developed to understand why the current
practices work effectively in facilitating shared understanding, mutual learning and rigorous
analysis of knowledge frameworks, and how they can be further improved (see for instance
Kolfschoten et al., 2014; Ormerod, 2014). Visualisation techniques, ranging from modelling
languages (such as SADT, Structured Analysis and Design Technique, or UML, Uniﬁed
Modelling Language) to different kinds of diagrams, can be used to organise and describe
knowledge.
Acquiring and integrating different kinds of knowledge are decision aiding activities.
Visualisation tools and Problem Structuring Methods (PSMs) are used for these purposes
in the ﬁeld that is called soft Operations Research (soft OR), while analytical models and
applications of methods are developed to integrate knowledge in the hard or classic OR ﬁeld.
KotiadisandMingers(2006)describedtheparadigmsthatarethebasisofthetwoﬁeldsand
analysed the barriers and potentialities of a multimethodology that includes both soft and hard
approaches. Combining methodologies of a different nature may facilitate decision aiding,
but also implies that the stakeholders must understand and acquire different languages and
ways of thinking. A multimethodology could generate difﬁculties and misunderstandings in
the decision context, for example when some components of a PSM are used and integrated
with another PSM and could require speciﬁc attention to cognitive and cultural obstacles
(Mingers & Brocklesby, 1997; Rosenhead & Mingers, 2001).
PSMs are being used more and more frequently to satisfy the cognitive aim of clarifying
and formulating a decision problem in complex situations (see, for instance, Rosenhead,
1989; Mingers & Rosenhead, 2004; White, 2009). Multicriteria decision analysis methods
are often combined with PSMs (see Belton & Stewart, 2010 and the review by Marttunen
et al., 2017). The sequence of a multicriteria application, after the structuring contribution of
a PSM, draws attention to the complementarity of these approaches (see, for instance, Belton
et al., 1997; Bana e Costa et al., 1999; Montibeller et al., 2008; Norese et al., 2004, 2008;
Stewart et al., 2010; Ferreira et al., 2011).
The methodology that is here proposed underlines the need for an integrated (and not
sequential) use of logical and analytical tools, not to obtain elements of responses to questions
posed by a decision maker in a decision process but to organise the available or acquired
dispersed knowledge in relation to a problem situation and to put the description problematic
(P.δ) into operation. P.δ “poses rather than solves a problem”, deﬁnes and formulates the
problem “properly in terms that are acceptable to the various actors” and “allows the effort
to be constructed rigorously and systematically, yet in a fashion that is straightforward and
understandable by most of the actors” (Roy, 1996). Multicriteria models allow knowledge
to be translated into intelligible syntheses that analytically deal with different aspects in a
transparent and formal language (Genard & Pirlot, 2002). These models are used to make
a shared vision explicit or to analytically express multiple points of view and preferences
produced by the development of a decision process (Ostanello, 1997), although they are
above all used in this methodology as models of concepts, which do not have the aim of
representing an external reality but only how things may be seen from a technical point of
view, and how a shared or multiple vision may be expressed and discussed in a participated
context (Mingers & Brocklesby, 1997).
Models and applications of methods are used in the proposed methodology to identify
what elements of knowledge are not present in the problem description or those that have to
be redeﬁned. They describe how a decision maker can deal with a problem and what elements
of a preference system should be elicited and used to analyse the consequences of a decision
123

1054
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
implementation (Norese, 2009) and how working hypotheses (Ostanello, 1997; Roy, 2010)
can be described, starting from the available or collected empirical knowledge, and without
any preference expression of the decision maker(s) (Bouyssou et al., 2006).
Multicriteria (MC) methods are used in decision aiding to compare the actions that are
evaluated in MC models, in relation to a speciﬁc request or problem statement (to choose the
best compromise, rank the actions or assign them to categories) (Roy, 1996). Different MC
methods have been proposed in literature (see, for instance, Figueira et al., 2004; Ehrgott
et al., 2010) and should be chosen in relation to the nature of the decision problem and the
expected results, and to a set of speciﬁc requirements in relation to the decision context and its
sources of information and knowledge (Roy & Słowinski, 2013). The proposed methodology
ﬁrst resorts to outranking methods that allow multiple languages, each one associated with a
criterion that expresses a technical, social, political, juridical or administrative aspect, to be
used directly and visualised.
Theformal,explicitandtransparentlanguageofmulticriteriamodelsandmethods,ininter-
action with logical and visualisation tools, is here proposed to organise dispersed knowledge,
when the methodology is activated at a technical level, and to describe the resulting knowl-
edge at a participative level, to produce new knowledge in a sequence of learning cycles and
to generate a shared description of the decision problem and possible actions of a decision
system.
DIKEDOC (DIspersed KnowledgE: Describe, Organise, Communicate) is the acronym
of a methodology that is associated with a constructivism path and is based on the commu-
nicative vision of rationality that contributes to the reﬂexive decision aid approach (Meinard
& Tsoukias, 2018). DIKEDOC focuses on elements of knowledge (concepts, models, pro-
cedures and results) that become “tools for developing convictions and allowing them to
evolve, as well as for communicating with reference to the bases of these convictions” (Roy,
1993).
2.1 DIKEDOC (DIspersed KnowledgE: describe, organise, communicate)
A DIKEDOC application includes two different phases, both of a collaborative nature, the
ﬁrst of which is developed at a technical level and the second at a participative level. Com-
munication and recursive activation activities of previous steps are present in both phases.
When DIKEDOC is activated at a technical level, three main steps and several activities
are developed. Logical and visualisation tools are used to acquire and synthesise a confused
set of knowledge, from different sources and in relation to the problem situation. In the
second step, the same tools allow the analysed knowledge to be organised, visualised and
tested. The two steps produce new knowledge, whose quality is discussed at a technical level
until it can be summarised in a manageable way and reused in a different context (Majchrzak
et al., 2004).
The activities of the third step allow the organised knowledge to be transferred to analytical
models, through a continuous passage from organised and visualised knowledge to local
formalisation of some aspects and their integration in analytical models. MC models and
methods are used in this step to verify the consistency of the knowledge included in the
models, and to validate the quality, completeness and usability of the available knowledge
or to orient new activities of knowledge acquisition and/or organisation.
The technical phase of DIKEDOC produces different kinds of results: problem formu-
lation, complexity simpliﬁcation, uncertainty elimination (or at least understanding and
control), knowledge testing, as achieved through its use in relation to a model and speciﬁcally
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1055
to the deﬁnition of actions and criteria, and applications of MC methods, in terms of ana-
lytical procedures and their results to propose for discussion in technical and non-technical
contexts. All the different results, when validated at a technical level, are communicated and
proposed for discussion in the participative phase.
Theactivitiesoftheﬁrststepofthenewphaseconsistincollectivelyanalysingtheelements
of the problem formulation, by means of logical and visualisation models, and validating or
improving them at a participative level, with the creation of an interaction space. Participants
can reﬂect on single elements and on their overall consistency, quality and completeness.
The second step activities mainly consist in analysing the MC model(s) and MC method
application(s) and results, which have been constructed at a technical level without any
expression of preference parameters (or with some declared parameters that are only con-
nected to technical needs of uncertainty control and balance between the main aspects of
the model). These activities have multiple aims: the analysis of the multiplicity of points of
view, made explicit during the analysis of the problem formulation, and of any expressed
need of uncertainty control, a critical analysis of models and results, the proposal of a new
MC modelling (possibly in relation to a new problem formulation) with explicit expressions
of visions and preferences, the understanding of the potential use of the organised knowledge
by means of models and methods, generation and deﬁnition of a speciﬁc action space and
identiﬁcation of some hypotheses of action.
MC models and methods are used in DIKEDOC as schemas that have been built in a
simulative way (Norese, 2020b), in a learning context of understanding construction (Brown
& Duguid, 1991), to propose and test some working hypotheses, which Roy (1993) described
using the metaphor of “a set of keys which will open doors for the actors”. Models, and the
application of methods and results, can easily be submitted to critical discussion because
they lead to dialogue, conditions of mutual understanding and mutual learning (Genard &
Pirlot, 2002).
When this path produces results, speciﬁc questions in relation to the validity of these results
require a formal, transparent and “quick” answer, at both a technical and a participative level.
When, for example, a result consists of an identiﬁed decision scheme, which could become
a consistent and effective strategy, and some projects can be activated in relation to this
strategy, their evaluation and comparison could conﬁrm the validity of the strategy or suggest
its improvement. MC methods and their SW tools are applied to facilitate “quick” answers.
The integration of different tools is facilitated by the proposal of a unifying language that
proposes a criterion and its modelling to any knowledge source or stakeholder as an example
of how a perception, concern or doubt can be formally dealt with, when these elements could
be neglected because not numerically signiﬁcant.
Such a unifying language indicates that the conﬂictual points of view can co-exist in a
model, while contradictions have to be identiﬁed, analysed and resolved.
The logical and analytical tools used for such an integration are consistent since they share
the same basic assumptions, ways of thinking and knowledge vision, and their procedural
logic is ﬂexible and compatible with the aim of developing, testing and evolving a knowledge
base that facilitates the elimination or control of the most preeminent uncertainties, the com-
prehension of a clariﬁed situation and some proposals of activities and new relationships. The
procedural rationality of MC methods facilitates a description of how organised knowledge
can be used and how a method can produce valid results, but also of how speciﬁc knowledge
conditions or actors’ behaviour may imply the exclusion of a method or orientate the user
towards a different procedure or method.
The organisation and representation steps ﬁrst allow the analysts and knowledge sources,
and then the stakeholders to explore the nature of the problem, to distinguish and recognise
123

1056
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
its main elements and to be involved in a process of interpretation and communication. The
results of a continuous shift from one kind of tool to another, in both the DIKEDOC phases,
are an incremental knowledge organisation and problem formulation.
A complex problem of site enhancement is presented in the next section, together with an
introduction to the pilot study in relation to the problem.
3 The Ivrea UNESCO site enhancement problem
Adriano Olivetti was the founder of an innovative ‘community’ company model (Olivetti,
1945). He not only created new products (such as the Lettera 22 portable typewriter, which is
on show at the MoMA in New York, and the P101, the ﬁrst personal computer in the world),
but also had a wealth of ideas about work and culture and proposed the concept of a factory
as a place that should put people, their aspirations, skills and values at its centre. Olivetti’s
factories were designed with in-built spaces for cafeterias, playgrounds, rooms for debate
and ﬁlm screenings, and libraries with tens of thousands of books and magazines. In addition
to the Olivetti factory, a series of buildings were built for the workers and managers, and an
extended network of social services was created, including nursery schools, the ﬁrst hospital
in Ivrea and a leisure centre.
The “Ivrea, industrial city of the twentieth century” UNESCO site is a large unitary urban
system of high historical, architectural and environmental value, consisting of more than
100 well-preserved buildings that represent manifold expressions of Modern Heritage and
different building types (some examples of which are shown in Fig. 1). The Olivetti built
heritage is outstanding (see http://www.fondazioneadrianolivetti.it/index.php), since Olivetti
commissioned out the works to famous architects, who were representative of the Italian
“Modern Movement”, and who designed different building typologies that were closely
integrated with their surrounding outdoor spaces, green areas and infrastructures.
Currently, 98% of the assets belong to private subjects, while just the kindergarten and a
space in the factory are public properties that belong to the Ivrea Municipality. The owners
of the assets obviously want to obtain the maximum proﬁt from their properties and the
Municipality of Ivrea is playing a mediating role between them and the Superintendence,
who controls the application of the imposed constraints. It has been decided that the several
residential buildings have to be restored without any changes to their original use. Most of
Fig. 1 Some of the “Ivrea, an industrial city of the twentieth century” UNESCO site buildings (Source: elab-
orated by the authors)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1057
the other spaces in the UNESCO site are unused or underused, and therefore require redevel-
opment through the transformation of their original functions. However, any enhancement
action will need to include restoration and will involve economic-ﬁnancial issues. Such an
action will have to be both compatible with the historical and architectonic values of the
assets and include the establishment of new functions, identiﬁed in relation to the potential
demand segments and based on their economic and ﬁnancial feasibility.
The document with which the UNESCO World Heritage Committee (WHC) motivated
the inclusion of the site in the UNESCO World Heritage List (UNESCO WHC, 2018) under-
lined the value of this heritage as testimony of an era and of a modern vision, which is
emblematic of the transition from mechanical to digital production. Nevertheless, the WHC
also highlighted the uncertain future of many buildings, due to their maintenance level and
state of deterioration, and that efforts would be necessary to develop new uses that were at the
same time similar to the original ones (such as telecommunications, production or cultural
activities). The WHC requested “a strategic conservation plan for the property, including the
planned conservation outcomes for each building, strategies for new uses of vacant buildings,
and resources for maintenance”.
Any decision in relation to the enhancement of the site will be difﬁcult. This situation
became evident during the ﬁve years of analysis at the Politecnico di Torino in laboratory
activities on Heritage preservation and enhancement, a didactic and research experience
(Curto et al., 2022a) activated together the Municipality of Ivrea (represented by the Mayor,
City planning Councillor, Coordinator of the UNESCO nomination, Coordinator in charge of
Demographic Services, Communication and Information Systems) and the Superintendence
of Archaeology, Fine Arts and Landscape for the Metropolitan City of Turin (represented
by ofﬁcials who were also involved as professors of the “Heritage preservation” module).
Furthermore, the students that took part in the activities interacted with the local association
of industries (Conﬁndustria Canavese), as well as with some companies in order to acquire
speciﬁc data that would be useful to correctly set the economic-ﬁnancial analyses and verify
the feasibility and proﬁtability of their projects. A great deal of knowledge was acquired
about the site, its value and its enhancement complexity. Some data, which were acquired and
structured in a GIS, were used during the candidacy process, while all the other unstructured
and inhomogeneous pieces of knowledge ran the risk of vanishing. However, the organisers
of the laboratory activities thought that the knowledge should be systematised and made
accessibletotheactorsinvolvedintheenhancementprocess,andabovealltotheMunicipality.
3.1 A pilot study to organise and communicate dispersed knowledge
A DIKEDOC application was developed at the Politecnico di Torino, in an interdisciplinary
research context, at the end of ﬁve years of laboratory activities and analyses on the UNESCO
site. Researchers from different disciplines were involved (economic evaluation, multicrite-
ria decision aiding, public policy analysis, architectural restoration) for two main reasons.
The relationships between the concepts of preservation, conservation, reuse and economic-
ﬁnancial sustainability are complicated and therefore require a multidisciplinary approach.
Moreover, the rich documentation acquired and produced during the laboratory activities
could only be proposed to stakeholders in the area if organised and validated from the dif-
ferent technical points of view, which needed to be made explicit.
The DIKEDOC application involved the interdisciplinary team that used the dispersed
knowledge which had been acquired and created in the laboratory to build and share a
description of the situation and its complexity. Knowledge organisation, visualisation and
123

1058
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
discussion steps were integrated with other steps in which any topic of discussion in the
interdisciplinary team became a formal model to test the included knowledge, reduce possible
misunderstandings and describe how possible actions and decisions could be evaluated and
compared by means of analytical methods.
Some logical tools were used in the ﬁrst steps to clarify the nature of speciﬁc difﬁculties, to
identify the main uncertainties that were making any decision complex or impossible and to
use the acquired knowledge in order to generate possible answers to some central questions.
The internal logic and understandability of the results was tested by individuals who had not
been involved in the laboratory activities.
Different MC models were then developed in relation to the central questions and associ-
ated problems, and MC methods were applied to the models to test the quality and usability
of the organised knowledge, and to generate examples that could be explained and discussed
in a participative context.
Some of the steps and results of the DIKEDOC application conducted at the technical
level were presented to the Municipality, the key actor in the site enhancement, to verify the
reliability of the organised knowledge and discuss and test its signiﬁcance in consideration
of the involvement, in a participative context, of some potential actors’ in a process of
site enhancement. The presentation only included the essential steps and results, in order
to facilitate an easy transmission of the logic and potentiality of the methodology. Some
knowledge organisation results, as they were presented to the Municipality of Ivrea, are
described in the next section.
4 A DIKEDOC application at a technical level
A PSM, the Strategic Choice Approach (SCA), was used in the ﬁrst iterations of the DIKE-
DOC application, which only involved the interdisciplinary team, in order to share the
dispersed knowledge of the main problems and uncertainties that were making any deci-
sion complex (some of the procedural iterations are synthetically described in Curto et al.,
2022b). SCA was proposed (Friend, 1989; Friend & Hickling, 1987) as a method for complex
and unstructured decision problems, and it is normally used to structure problems charac-
terised by a high level of uncertainty with several interconnected decisions, to explicitly
manage and reduce complexity, control uncertainties, exclude alternatives that are not feasi-
ble for technical or political reasons, and elaborate and compare compatible solutions. The
SCA methodology, with the support of its STRAD software tool, has been applied in various
situations (see, for instance, Montibeller & Franco, 2011; Han & Laiô, 2011; Norese et al.,
2015a, 2015b; Rolando, 2015; Georgiou et al., 2019; Paucar-Caceres et al., 2020).
After some iterative applications of SCA, to organise the acquired knowledge and reduce
complexity and uncertainty, the situation was considered complex and rich in interconnected
aspects and decision needs, and therefore other simpler tools were used to synthesize and
describe the results and verify the internal consistency of this technical description of the
problem situation. The results were the identiﬁcation of the central questions, interconnected
with all the other questions, and of the issues that could be dealt with, at a technical level, by
means of some components of SCA that could easily produce communicable results.
The knowledge organised at the technical level and “made communicable” is here pro-
posed, together with the tools thatwere used, and some SCA results are presented in Sects.3.2,
3.3 and 3.4. These results were then used as inputs for MC models and method applications,
details of which are presented in the fourth section.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1059
4.1 Structure of the stakeholders and the main problem issues
A large number of public and private stakeholders could or should be involved, at differ-
ent levels and with different relationships and possible roles, in the site enhancement and
management process. These ﬁgures are continuously evolving, and a distinction into ﬁve
typologies facilitated a general overview of the stakeholders’ structure (Fig. 2), where both
the private and public owners of the assets that have to be redeveloped and enhanced play
important ﬁnancial roles.
Not all the stakeholders are interested in the overall enhancement problem, but their points
of view, in relation to some important aspects, had to be considered. Some their needs, goals
and strategies were identiﬁed. Particular attention was paid to the role of the Municipality of
Ivrea, which should coordinate the different stakeholders and control the enhancement and
redevelopment process of the whole site.
The Politecnico di Torino, as one of the technical actors in the decision process that led to
the inclusion of the site in the World Heritage List (WHL), identiﬁed a series of complexities
and uncertainties that could have made any new decision on the site enhancement difﬁcult and
risky. These difﬁculties were above all related to the restoration issues and ﬁnancial problem
of funding the site enhancement, but also to how the requests and recommendations of the
UNESCO World Heritage Committee (UNESCO WHC, 2018) could be accomplished and
how the Outstanding Universal Values ﬁxed at the time of inscription in the WHL could be
conveyed (ICOMOS, 2011). The complexity and uncertainties associated with enhancement
of the site generated speciﬁc research questions which were dealt with in Master theses and
during a Ph.D. course; these detailed analyses produced a new perception of the situation.
Several questions that had arisen from the laboratory activities and detailed analyses were
dealt with and discussed in the ﬁrst phase of the DIKEDOC application and then synthesised
in a “rich picture” diagram, which included the needs, expectations and concerns of the main
actors (Checkland, 2001) and was used to interconnect questions (Fig. 3).
Some of these questions are related to the nature of tourism and its requirements and they
have direct consequences on the kind of services that the future visitor centre and the city
of Ivrea should provide to attract tourists and people in general and thus revitalize the urban
Fig. 2 Structure of the stakeholders (Source: elaborated by the authors)
123

1060
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
Fig. 3 A “rich picture” diagram of the main questions (Source: elaborated by the authors)
area. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a heavy impact on the touristic role of this site, which
had already been considered a great challenge because of the economic fragility of this area
before this health crisis erupted. Other doubts are related to the lack of availability of public
and/or private funds, which should be associated with strategic interventions to generate
both proﬁtability for the private investors and public beneﬁts. Moreover, some questions are
related to norms, information and activities that should be compatible with the historic and
cultural value of the assets, in agreement with the owners.
The diagram in Fig. 3 was analysed and the two central questions, which should always be
considered when dealing with any other question, were synthesised as “What public policies
could attract tourism and transfer Olivetti’s values?”. The other questions were associated
with four kinds of issue: the actors’ roles, and economic, technical and design issues (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4 The evolution of the “rich picture” diagram: from questions to issues (Source: elaborated by the authors)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1061
Some issues outlined in the ﬁgure are associated with the possible roles of some actors
(the Municipality of Ivrea, the owners of the assets, citizens and representatives of Olivetti’s
legacy) in a transparent and inclusive decision process, which will be able to point out and
solve both political and technical issues, the latter being related, for example, to building
constraints, as well as to connections and public services that will need to be implemented in
and around the site. The stakeholders’ structure in Fig. 2 underlines how complex the context
is.
The economic issues that limit the enhancement process of the site were highlighted, with
particular reference to the critical condition of the economic context, which is characterised
by limited public resources, and balanced by the presence of private individuals who are
willing to invest in the redevelopment of some buildings, but probably concerned about the
overall amount of the necessary investments and the current state of the real-estate market,
which is very weak at present (Barreca et al., 2022).
Issues linked to technical aspects were studied during the laboratory activities, in relation
to the elaborated projects. Soma data on the physical characteristics of the built environment,
as well as data concerning the territorial, socio-economic and cultural context, had been
easily acquired and structured in a GIS (Barreca et al., 2017). The GIS was continuously
updated, and it can now be used as a component of a knowledge base (Barreca et al., 2020),
which should include studies on the restoration of buildings for speciﬁc reuse, in relation to
public policies and actions for the enhancement of the whole UNESCO site.
The Design issues were chosen to be analysed in depth in the pilot study, to consider some
possible activities and policies that the Municipality of Ivrea could implement, starting from
the questions: WHERE is it possible to intervene on the site? and What are the FUNCTIONS,
consistent with the covered or open spaces, that should be activated, in relation to the needs
of the socio-economic context and to enhance the whole site?
Some components of SCA, above all the Designing and Comparing operation modes, were
onlyusedwhentheywereessentialtoreducecomplexityanduncertaintyandtoproduceeasily
communicable results.
4.2 Generation of alternative options and their compatibility analysis
The Analysis of Interconnected Decision Areas technique, which is a Strategic Choice
Approach (SCA) tool, was used to analyse the two Design issues that were dealt with in
the WHERE and FUNCTIONS decision areas. A set of options was deﬁned for each deci-
sion area and their compatibility was explored.
Three classes of buildings, with similar characteristics in relation to the space distribution
and constraints about some speciﬁc reuses, were recognised as possible options for the ﬁrst
decision area. A fourth class, pertaining to all the green areas and open-air spaces that could
be used to enhance the urban system and to generate positive impacts for both private and
public stakeholders, was identiﬁed.
Three of the second decision area options were associated with three kinds of function
(Business, Social and Culture, and Leisure) and the “validity” of each combination of function
and class of assets was analysed, in terms of risks and potentialities, in the Compatibility
analysis of the SCA Designing mode (see the Compatible table of the STRAD SW tool in
Fig. 5a).
Seven combinations of functions and asset classes were considered compatible, and their
consistency was analysed in relation to the present situation in the site, where the business
function has already been implemented in the buildings with huge, highly ﬂexible spaces
123

1062
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
Fig. 5 Compatibility analyses (where X means incompatibility; a blank square means compatibility; ? means
uncertainty that requires investigation or an expert’s judgement) (Source: elaborated by the authors by means
of the STRAD SW tool)
(Hhﬂex), and to the possibility of implementing the cultural function in a combination of
huge ﬂexible spaces (Hﬂex) and open spaces.
A new decision area was then analysed, and a set of options was associated with the
main issue: “What public policies could attract tourism and transfer Olivetti’s values?”. Five
compatible combinations of assets and functions were analysed in relation to three policy
options that the Municipality could implement, together with three combinations of these
options (Fig. 5b).
The Compatibility analysis in Fig. 5b produced some useful indications about the com-
patibility of cultural and leisure activities and the proposed policies, but also underlined the
difﬁculty of an analysis of the possible policies in a technical context. The compatibility
between some policies and functions was sometimes uncertain and this result suggested the
activation of another SCA tool, the Comparing mode, that was used to further analyse the
identiﬁed possible policies, as described in Sect. 3.3.
4.3 Analysis of the possible policies
Three possible public policies were identiﬁed by the technical team to improve the attrac-
tiveness of the UNESCO site and to increase the number of visitors. One of these policies
is Maximising the enjoyment of the site through events, which could be organised in open
spaces or huge buildings in a sustainable way, while taking into account the necessary post-
COVID19 measures. Another is Mainly working on the communication of Olivetti’s legacy
values, which are not only architectonical and/or historical values, but also a combination of
the cultural and political concepts of “a human-based industrial site” and “innovation sus-
tainability”. Another policy concentrates on the Re-activation of the whole site, which implies
project integration in a systemic vision of the UNESCO site. More complicated policies may
include two of these individual visions and policy aims.
The Comparing mode of SCA has the aim of stimulating decision makers to identify
certain aspects and use them to distinguish and select the alternatives, or at least eliminate
the least interesting. Such aspects are used as conceptual tools that facilitate the expressions
of points of view, in terms of comparative judgements. Therefore, these aspects have been
deﬁned as Comparison Areas (CAs).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1063
Table 1 Comparison areas
INVESTMENTS
Capacity to attract public and private investments
TIMESPAN
Time necessary to achieve some of the ﬁrst expected results after a policy
activation
VISIBILITY
Visibility that a policy could foster
MANAG_SUST
Sustainable management of the policy implementation process and its results
COSTS
Necessary costs to activate a policy
COVID19/TOU
Sustainable tourism support according to the current post-COVID19
measures
TOUR_ATTRA
Capacity to attract both tourists and visitors
IV_CONSIST
Consistent integration of the site components and between the site and the
architectonic, historical and morphological values of the context, as an
Intangible Value (IV) of Olivetti’s vision
IV_SOC_INT
A fruition that would facilitate social integration, with spaces and activities
that would generate opportunities for underprivileged families, as an
interpretation of the Community Idea of integration between spaces and
daily life activities (IV)
IV_DES_CUL
Integration of spaces of a different nature as a possible interpretation of the
intangible “design culture” value, which mediates between beauty and
functionality
The identiﬁcation of CAs, in DIKEDOC and speciﬁcally in this case, is an activity that is
solicited as a result of some difﬁculties that a compatibility analysis may have encountered
and underlined. The use of CAs to express comparative judgements from a technical point
of view facilitates the deﬁnition of “abstract” elements that are not clearly delineated at a
technical level without any explicit political indication.
In this case, the potentialities and limitations of any individual policy or combination of
possible policies were analysed to establish the potential effectiveness and associated risks,
above all in relation to the current post-COVID19 measures, and the consistency of such
policies with Olivetti’s vision. The analysis of the latter aspect was not easy, but it generated
a better deﬁnition of the policies and, in general, of the possible enhancement actions. The
CAs identiﬁed and analysed by the interdisciplinary team are indicated in Table 1. The Option
Assessment windows of the STRAD SW tool allowed us to visualise whether the comparative
judgements could distinguish the compared options, i.e. individual and combined policies
(see Fig. 6).
The policies are sometimes clearly grouped (e.g. in two parts, as in MANAG_SUST or in
COST, or four, as in IV_CONSIST or in VISIBILITY), but are often not clearly distinguished,
suchasinIV_DES_CUL.TheMaximisingtheevents (max_events)policyisalwaystheworst,
or one of the worst, while CA TIMESPAN indicates this policy as the best. On the other hand,
the Mainly working on the communication of Olivetti’s legacy values (communic) policy is
always the best or the second best, while CA INVESTMENTS indicates this policy as the
worst.
A policy that combines Maximising the events of the site and Mainly working on the com-
munication of Olivetti’s legacy values (maxev + com) is interesting in terms of VISIBILITY
and TOURIST ATTRACTION, but this combined message may generate confusion for the
end-users. Anybody who receives communication on events pertaining to music, dance or
sport, should combine this communication with that on the intangible values of Olivetti’s
123

1064
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
Fig. 6 Option Assessment windows (Source: elaborated by the authors by means of the STRAD SW tool)
legacy. The Re-activation of the whole site is combined more easily with Mainly working on
the communication of the legacy values than with Maximising the events. The combination
of Re-activation of the whole site and Mainly working on the communication of the legacy
values is almost always the best option, but is only in the second position for Visibility, Costs
and Touristic attraction, and not so interesting in terms of Timespan.
These CAs underlined that a combination of different policies and speciﬁc enhancement
plans could generate interesting results. A combination of the three individual policies should
be able to include projects of a different nature and satisfy the different actors’ expectations.
However, the associated projects should be coordinated through a systematic and overall
vision of the situation of the site, and communication should be activated early on and with
a great deal of care.
4.4 From organised knowledge to MC modelling
The compatibility analyses in Fig. 5 suggested a need to further explore the possible cultural
and leisure activities that could be included in the UNESCO site, by distinguishing them
in at least three groups (activities that can attract a multitude of people for music, dance or
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1065
sport events, or a large number of people, for exhibitions, theatre, ﬁlms or to have access
to documents, or a handful of people for sports and recreation) and by analysing their
compatibility with a set of buildings and open-air spaces in the UNESCO site. Fifty-three
combinations resulted to be compatible, some spaces resulted to be ﬂexible and could be
associated with functions of a different nature, while others could only be associated with
one or few functions. The resulting ﬁfty-three compatible combinations were used as input
for an MC model and a method application, which veriﬁed the potential of using the available
knowledge to assign possible actions (combinations of spaces and activities) to ordered risk
categories, in relation to aspects included in the CAs (Curto et al., 2022b).
Furthermore, some conclusions of the public policy analysis suggested another analysis,
in relation to some possible enhancement projects. Two projects were recent proposals, while
three were partially studied during the laboratory activities (Coscia & Curto, 2017; Curto
et al., 2018). The projects, and the associated cultural or leisure activities, were logically
associated with open spaces that had resulted to be compatible with the activities in the pilot
study. A sixth project was also included in the set as a combination of a recent proposal and
any of the buildings that had resulted to be compatible with this proposal in the pilot study.
The projects were considered possible enhancement actions that needed to be evaluated by
an MC model, while an MC method was used to compare and rank the actions, from the
most to the least urgent action for the enhancement of the whole site. An MC model was
therefore created, and the six projects were evaluated in terms of organisational and economic
feasibility, and in relation to the aims of attracting tourism and transferring Olivetti’s values,
concepts that had already been analysed as comparing areas.
The model, which is presented in the next section, was created from a technical point of
view and was presented to the Municipality, the main actor of the enhancement process, as
an example of how projects, plans or strategies could be evaluated.
5 Multicriteria modelling and applications of an ELECTRE method
An MC model includes a set of possible actions and a family of coherent criteria. Parameters
are introduced into a model to express the preference system of the decision maker(s) (Roy,
1996). If a model is generated to describe how the available knowledge is used to evaluate
actions and to test the quality, completeness and usability of the knowledge, such parameters
have to be introduced from a technical point of view, in a simulative way that has to be
documented and logically explained.
The logical structure of an evaluation model includes (a few) main aspects (or model
dimensions) and their analytical formalisation in criteria pertaining to the different related
dimensions (Norese, 2016). The structure and size of a model should be simple and minimal
to facilitate the model presentation and discussion, although the model considers all the
issues, which in this case are outlined in Fig. 4.
An MC model with three dimensions and six criteria (Fig. 7) was used to describe how the
six possible projects could be evaluated in relation to criteria that could be associated with
different scales and qualitative or quantitative evaluations (Figueira et al., 2005; Roy, 1990).
The ﬁrst dimension is associated with certain organisational risks, which cannot be too
high, and are dealt with in the MC model by means of two criteria. The second dimension
is the Consistency with Olivetti’s legacy and includes two criteria, one for the intangible
values and the other in relation to a conclusion from the Compatibility and the Comparing
analyses: the enhancement of the site implies its whole re-activation and an overall view and
123

1066
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
Fig. 7 Structure of the model (Source: elaborated by the authors)
communication of the heritage system. Therefore, the centrality of the ﬁrst projects may be
essential. The third dimension is Economic-ﬁnancial feasibility, which has to be considered
to evaluate the required investments and the potential attraction and funding from private and
public players (two criteria).
Theproposedmodelstructurefacilitatedthedescriptionofanessentialconcept,therelative
importance of the criteria, which involves translating a system of values into a set of criteria
and in deﬁning their weights.
The values assigned to such parameters have a subjective nature and can only be grasped
through communicating with the decision maker(s) in a DA process (Roy & Mousseau, 1996).
When the description of a technical point of view is proposed in a DIKEDOC application,
these parameters can only be introduced as an example, and are only oriented to balance the
structure of the model. The model dimensions represent strategic aspects of the problem.
Therefore, a single strategic aspect cannot be much more important than the others or much
less important. They may have the same importance or even have a different (but not so
different) level of importance, which indicates a possible scenario or a technical point of view.
The relative importance of the criteria can be considered a distribution of the importance of
a strategic aspect over the associated criteria. This technical approach to the deﬁnition of
the relative importance of the criteria can be proposed to stakeholders participating in a
discussion and used to describe other approaches for decision contexts, and scenario analysis
logics.
The six criteria were associated with scales, whose meanings are described hereafter,
together with the criteria. In four of the six criteria, the evaluation states of the ordinal scales
result from documented combinations of values (see tables in the following sub-sections).
5.1 Organisational dimension
The Organisational dimension is dealt with in the MC model by means of two criteria. The
ﬁrst is Organisational complexity, which is related to the number and nature of the Involved
actors and to the Transformation level of buildings and open-air spaces that is required
to implement any enhancement project. The evaluations of the Organisational complexity
criterion are the result of a combination of the two factors and their values. The Involved actors
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1067
Table 2 Ordinal scale of the
Organisational complexity
criterion
Transformation level
Low
Medium
High
Involved actors
Only PA
1
2
–
Private actors
2
3
5
PA and private actors
3
4
6
Table 3 Ordinal scale of the
Consensus criterion
Timespan
< 1
1–2
> 2
Consistency with expectations
High
5
4
3
Medium
3
2
1
factor is related to the difﬁculties that can be generated from a multiplicity of different actors.
In relation to the site re-activation, three situations can be distinguished: reduced complexity,
when only the Public Administration (PA) is involved; a more complex situation, when some
Private actors are involved; and the worst situation, which involves both PA and Private actors.
The Transformation level factor is related to the nature of the project and can be Low (when
the building is not used and the open-air spaces are unimportant, or when all the current uses
are conﬁrmed) or Medium (when a part of the building is used or the open-air spaces should
be reorganised in order to return to their original use or to improve the effectiveness of the
project) or High (when most of the building is occupied and used, and the current uses have
to be changed). A logical combination of the involvements of the different actors with the
need for changes generates six ordered evaluation states of organisational complexity, which
are described in Table 2.
The second criterion is the Consensus that is easily acquired or maintained if the Con-
sistency with the citizens’ expectations and the Timespan that is required to clearly manifest
the nature of the enhancement project are considered acceptable and the citizens are able
to perceive its beneﬁts. The evaluations are the result of the combination of two factors.
The Consistency with the citizens’ expectations can be High, if services for the citizens are
included, or only Medium. A good perception of the nature of the project depends on the
quality and rapidity of communication, but a perception that something starts and can produce
beneﬁts depends on the complexity of the action and therefore on the Timespan necessary to
make any action evident. Three time intervals may be considered: less than one year (< 1),
between one and two years (1–2) and more than 2 years (> 2). A logical combination of the
two factors and their values generates ﬁve ordered evaluation states of Consensus, which are
described in Table 3.
5.2 Consistency with Olivetti’s legacy
The potential of any enhancement project to transfer tangible and intangible values of the
site to the end-users, in order to improve the attractiveness of the UNESCO site, can be
dealt with considering two criteria. The built heritage is outstanding, as all the buildings are
important for both historical and architectural reasons (tangible values). However, there is a
123

1068
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
Table 4 Ordinal scale of the
Transmission of intangible values
criterion
Social integration in an
overall re-activated site
CT
PT
LT
Innovation sustainability
High
4
3
2
Medium
3
2
1
place inside the former factory that has recently been chosen to become the Visitor centre
and Info point. The distance between any location and this point may have an impact on the
enhancement of the site. The evaluations of the Distance criterion are not quantitative: the
distance from the “heart” of the site could critically reduce the perception of the site as a
whole (C—more than 500 m) or may endanger the development of the enhancement of the
site (D—100–500 m) or is unessential (U—less than 100 m from the Info point).
The intangible values can be transferred if the original Community idea of Adriano
Olivetti is updated in an overall re-activated site, which allows and supports Social inte-
gration activities, while Innovation sustainability is updated in enhancement projects that
involve mediation between beauty and functionality. The evaluations of the Transmission of
intangible values criterion are the result of the combination of the two factors and their val-
ues, which generates four ordered states, as described in Table 4. A complete re-activation of
the site that facilitates social integration between the end-users is associated with a Complete
Transmission of the intangible value (CT). If the re-activation of the site is only partial, or
social integration is not facilitated, there is only a Partial Transmission (PT) and the transmis-
sion is Limited if the re-activation of the site is partial and social integration is not facilitated
(LT). The Innovation sustainability of an intervention is High if the interaction between
beauty and functionality is made evident and enhanced through the project, and it is Medium
when there is not a clear evidence of this interaction.
5.3 Economic-financial feasibility
The Economic-ﬁnancial feasibility dimension includes two important criteria, which are
aimed at determining the concrete possibility of economically implementing a redevelopment
project. The ﬁrst is the total cost of the Investment, which represents the amount of money
necessary to restore and redevelop the internal and external spaces of the buildings and
reﬂects the extension of the actions as well as the design complexity related to the newly
identiﬁed functions. The evaluations are quantitatively based on the estimated amount of
money necessary to restore the buildings and their surroundings and to upgrade, integrate or
change functions inside and/or outside.
The second criterion is Potential funding eligibility, whose evaluations are based on certain
assumptions, according to the nature of the enhancement projects. Three of the six actions are
related to private projects (a1, a2 and a3), two are related to Public Administration projects
(a5 and a6) and the last one is a private project with public participation (a4).
The current economic crisis and the vulnerable socio-economic context in which the site
is located (decreasing number of inhabitants, weak real-estate market) do not foster high
proﬁtability and increase the investment risk level, thereby reducing the possible role of
private enterprises.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1069
Table 5 Ordinal scale of the Potential Funding Eligibility (PFE) criterion
For private projects:
attractiveness (IRR)
Very good (≥
15%)
Good (< 15%, ≥
11%)
Weak (< 11%, ≥
7%)
Low (< 7%)
For public projects:
chance of funding
L.77/2006
Very high
High
Medium
Low
PFE ordinal scale
4
3
2
1
In a general scenario of very limited or absent public resources, at least at a local level,
the most important source of funding for the public projects implemented at UNESCO sites
is the State, and above all Italian Law No. 77/2006 (Special measures for the protection and
the exploitation of Italian UNESCO sites).
Therefore, Potential funding eligibility (PFE) is an important criterion, but the different
nature of the analysed projects makes the elaboration of the criterion difﬁcult.
In the case of private projects, the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is considered as a proxy
of the attraction of real-estate investors and four intervals of IRR values can be associated
with four levels of Attractiveness (Table 5). In the case of public projects, the availability of
state resources and the chance of obtaining funding can instead be hypothesised on the basis
of the technical rules (above all 2b on the involvement and participation of the end-users,
and 3a on the optimal cost – beneﬁt rate) provided by Italian Law 77/2006, which provides
ﬁnancial support for the enhancement, communication and exploitation of projects. Chance
of funding is Very high when both evaluations are very high in relation to the 2b and 3a
rules. It is only High when one of the two evaluations is very high and the other is sufﬁcient,
while it is Medium when both are only sufﬁcient and Low when one of them is low. The PFE
criterion scale is associated to four ordered evaluation states, which are described in Table 5.
5.4 Evaluation of the projects and results of the ELECTRE II method
The evaluations of the actions, in relation to the six criteria, are included in Table 6, together
with the states of the adopted scales and their preference direction, that is, from the worst to
the best. Table 6 facilitated a ﬁrst reading, which underlined how ﬁve of the six actions were
not efﬁcient because they were dominated by at least one other action (a5). The only efﬁcient,
or Pareto optimal, action, a5, could be indicated as the most urgent intervention to start the
re-activation of the site, while the relative positions of the other possible interventions were
not known, and a ranking of the different actions could be required. An outranking method
of the ELECTRE family (Figueira et al., 2005) was chosen to compare and rank the actions.
The number of projects that had to be compared was limited. They represented almost
homogenous logical proposals, without detailed data, whose evaluations were associated with
“good” ordinal scales, and with few clearly distinguished and completely documented eval-
uation states. Only one cardinal scale, where the net preference was always present between
couples of evaluations, was used. Therefore, the model only included true criteria. The appli-
cation of ELECTRE II (Roy & Bertier, 1973) was considered possible and appropriate in
this case.
This was the ﬁrst ELECTRE method that was designed speciﬁcally to deal with ranking
problems. It is now only used in rare situations (to rank actions when no uncertainty is
123

1070
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
Table 6 Structural elements of the MC model
Criteria
[Scale and reference direction]
Organisational
complexity
g1
[6–1]
Consensus
g2
[1–5]
Distance
g3
[C,D,U]
Intangible v. transfer
g4
[1–4]
Investment
g5
Mln e [ −]
Funding eligibility
g6
[1–4]
Relative importance (or weights)
Projects (A)
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.15
0.18
0.22
a1 OCC_Food & Sport
5
4
D
3
12
1
a2 DPC_Music
3
4
C
1
6
3
a3 SSC_Multifunctional
3
4
U
3
4
2
a4 CHP_Archive
3
1
D
2
8
2
a5 OpenairMuseum
1
5
U
4
2
4
a6 IndoorOpenairMuseum
2
5
U
4
3
3
Discordance sets
[6–1]
[1–5]
–
[1–4]
[12–3, 12–2]
[1–4]
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1071
associated with the evaluations), but it is an interesting option when the method is only used
to describe the role of an MC method in a decision situation, because the application of the
method can be described in detail, without the aid of an SW tool, and can be used to explain
the logic of any outranking method. Very few parameters have to be deﬁned, and the passage
to other ELECTRE methods and their parameters can be postponed until they are required
during a DA intervention.
The weights that distinguish the criteria, in terms of relative importance, were the result of
a (documented) technical choice of the different levels of importance of the model dimensions
(0.35 for Organisational dimension, 0.25 for Consistency with Olivetti’s legacy and 0.40 for
Economic-ﬁnancial feasibility) and the consequent distribution of this importance on the
related criteria, as shown in Fig. 7 and Table 6.
The discordance sets were the other non-mandatory parameters. They included couples
of values logically in discordance, in relation to criteria where a very bad evaluation of an
“interesting” action on a criterion could generate a risky decision whenever another action
presented a very good evaluation of the same criterion, In this case, discordance sets were
proposed for ﬁve criteria but not for the Distance criterion, because the logical distance
between the three evaluation states was not so high and a logical discordance did not result
to be present.
The ELECTRE II method (see Appendix 1) includes two phases. In the ﬁrst phase, prefer-
ences between couples of actions are modelled by means of the binary outranking relation S
which, in this ELECTRE method, means the application of two tests, that is, the concordance
test and the non-discordance test. Outranking relation S can be represented by an outranking
graph and the second phase activates two iterative procedures on the graph, a descending
procedure, which is oriented towards identifying, at each iteration, "the actions that are not
outranked”, and an ascending procedure, which is oriented towards identifying “the actions
that do not outrank any other action”.
The ELECTRE II application (see Appendix 2) produced the same sequence of classes,
in the ascending and descending procedures, from the most urgent action to the least urgent,
that is {a5}, {a6}, {a3}, {a2}, {a4} and {a1}. The only efﬁcient, or Pareto optimal action, a5,
resulted to be the priority action, while the order of the other projects suggested a possible
activation sequence, which could be obtained by means of the implementation of an integrated
set of different but coherent policies.
6 The pilot study results
The study was conducted on behalf of the Municipality of Ivrea, even though a large number
of public and private stakeholders were involved in the past and could also be involved in a
future decision process. The aim of the interdisciplinary team was to describe how knowledge
about the site enhancement problem could be synthesised from the main public actor’s point
of view, but also to underline the need to consider the different goals and expectations of the
other actors, at least as criteria for new models.
What had been a confused list of questions became a structured identiﬁcation of issues,
which in turn facilitated the formulation of the problem that the strategic planning phase of
the enhancement process could or should study and deal with.
The Compatibility analyses were applied in relation to some different decision problems,
reducedthecomplexityoftheproblemandfacilitatedtheassignmentoftheseveralcompatible
actions to risk categories and the elaboration and comparison of some possible actions, i.e.
123

1072
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
enhancement projects aimed at restoring and redeveloping buildings and open-air spaces by
installing suitable new functions that would be able to attract public and private investments
and re-activate the whole site.
The conceptual use of the Comparing Areas fostered a detailed analysis of some of the
complicated concepts, mainly the intangible values, and the translation of concepts into
formal expressions of values, that is, criteria. Furthermore, it also facilitated the deﬁnition of
the main policies the Municipality could adopt to enhance the UNESCO site.
In a DIKEDOC application, MC models transparently synthesise the knowledge that has
beenacquired,integratedandorganised,allowpossibledecisionstobeanalysed,andelements
of knowledge to be redeﬁned and improved.
The formal modelling of some criteria underlined the need for new knowledge, which had
not been generated during the laboratory activities, and was inferred from press reviews or
from events and seminars that took place during the pilot study. This knowledge was debated,
linked to the previously integrated knowledge and used by the interdisciplinary team. The
evaluation of the projects was supported through the use of a dynamic GIS, developed during
the laboratory activities and updated in the pilot study, and which could be used to assist the
Municipality of Ivrea and the stakeholders in developing compatible strategies, policies and
actions for the enhancement of the whole site.
MC outranking methods were used to describe how the available knowledge can be used
to deal with some problems in a decision context, which results can be produced, and which
elements of a preference system should be constructed in the decision aid process (Norese,
2009). The ELECTRE applications produced results that were considered examples of pos-
sible decision activities (to exclude risky actions or clarify the possible roles of some speciﬁc
decisions in the enhancement process).
The interdisciplinary team considered the results of the pilot study, at the technical level,
as an interesting proposal and a starting point to foster the activation of the second phase, at
a participative level, to test the DIKEDOC methodology.
The procedural logic of the study and some results were to have been presented in a
round-table meeting with some potential actors in the UNESCO site enhancement process.
The meeting was organised and planned for April 2020, but it was not conducted because the
COVID-19 emergency created urgent new problems and interrupted the organisation of any
event involving direct participation. New contacts were activated in Autumn, and in January
2021 some procedural steps and preliminary results were presented during a meeting with
the Mayor of the Municipality of Ivrea and the Coordinator of the UNESCO site, who had
also been the Coordinator of the UNESCO Nomination process.
The pilot study was proposed as a logical and analytical “description” of the Munici-
pality’s space of action, in relation to different policies and enhancement projects. Some
tools, together with their applications in the pilot study, and some preliminary results were
illustrated to point out the potentiality of the methodology, in relation to the complexity of
the enhancement process and to the crisis that the COVID-19 emergency has generated in
the tourism sector, especially for the role that any Municipality could play in relation to
the measures to implement the Next Generation EU program in Italy. The interdisciplinary
team proposed two workshops, the ﬁrst with the Coordinator of the UNESCO site, some
potential actors from the territory and the owners of the private assets, in order to present the
methodology and discuss its preliminary results; the second with the Mayor of Ivrea and the
council members, plus other public organisations included by the Municipality, in order to
test the reaction of the parties, in relation to the technical proposal.
The logic of the methodology resulted clear and the results convincing. The participants
appreciated both the models and the methods. The Coordinator of the UNESCO site proposed
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1073
using MC models and methods to ex post validate decisions, to facilitate the monitoring
requested by UNESCO and to contribute to the Heritage Impact assessment (HIA) procedure
and the deﬁnition of the Strategic conservation plan (SCP). The Municipality proposed the
HIA and the SCP documents for the analysis of the interdisciplinary team and the team asked
to be put in contact with the team involved in the HIA and SCP procedures.
The documents arrived after some weeks, but they only included some ideas about the
deﬁnition of bureaucratic procedures. A subsequent series of contacts with the Municipality
clariﬁed the situation. The proposal of two workshops was not taken into consideration and
any relationship between the analysts and the team involved in the HIA and SCP or any other
organisations of the territory was discouraged. It was also underlined that the role of the
Public Administration in the enhancement of the UNESCO site had been and would remain
minimal or even absent, in relation to the public spaces, while private organisations were and
would be active in proposing and activating projects.
Any contact between the Politecnico di Torino and the Administration was interrupted in
March 2021, one year before the next administrative election, when the Municipality will
have to answer the question “How was the enhancement of the UNESCO site planned and
implemented?”.
7 Conclusions
DIKEDOC is a methodology that integrates logical and analytical tools to be used ﬁrst at a
technical level, with knowledge sources of any nature, and then in a participative context in
relation to different situations (from a committee to a table of experts, from a workshop to
a round-table meeting or a virtual space, and so on). Its versatility was veriﬁed in the pilot
study and, above all, during several preparatory MCDA interventions in innovative situations
where the activation of a decision process was considered a risk, with experts or stakeholders,
and in technical and political committees, with scientiﬁc and/or technical knowledge sources
and potential decision makers.
DIKEDOC can be proposed at a technical level to provide a shared context for people, who
maybeexperts,skilledpractitionersand/ormoreingeneral,sourcesofknowledge,toorganise
dispersed knowledge in a way that generates understanding and insights, and which can be
communicated, at a participative level, to enable dialogue with people who are stakeholders
in a decision problem where a decision system is latent or not yet activated. At a participative
level, the aim of DIKEDOC is to create an opportunity to interact, share personal points
of view and experiences, explore spaces of action, where the tools facilitate understanding,
criticism and inclusion of proposals and changes, and to create new knowledge. DIKEDOC
stimulates learning at both of these levels, i.e. the construction of understanding and the
emerging of a community of interpretation (Brown & Duguid, 1991), and collaborative
processes based on a constructive vision of decision aiding. However, DIKEDOC is more
effective than efﬁcient, because signiﬁcant results can be acquired but, in general, time and
effort necessary to conduct such methodology are not minimal.
The lessons learned and the results achieved from the pilot study have underlined that
DIKEDOC can be proposed to an interdisciplinary team of knowledge sources who agree to
interact and share their expertise, experience or understanding of data, facts and histories. The
pilot study was organised to communicate knowledge and ways of using such knowledge
in the complex social context within which the UNESCO site has been perceived as an
opportunity, if its enhancement takes place.
123

1074
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
The application of DIKEDOC at a participative level can be proposed to stakeholders who
are willing to participate in discussion groups or workshops that should only be considered as
preparatory events, where conﬂictual visions may be expressed, either directly or indirectly,
without the activation of the “ﬁghting arena” factor. When DIKEDOC is applied in formal
committees, its main aim is that of reducing the conﬂictual atmosphere and frequent misun-
derstandings, and of facilitating the passage towards a collaborative attitude (see Norese &
Toso, 2004; Norese, 2006).
Logical and analytical tools can be used as procedural references that reduce ambiguities
and inappropriate behaviour, and the software tools used to apply decision aid methods allow
the participants to visualise problems and model structures and to understand procedures and
results. However, the participation in and generation of an interpretation community, which
discusses and proposes legitimate expressions of knowledge and possible actions, must be
legitimated. This legitimation was initially agreed upon in the pilot study but then made
impossible.
The DIKEDOC methodology is currently being applied in relation to a new case, that
is, the reuse of a large area, built in 1935, in the centre of Turin and which has till recently
been used as a hospital. Other possible applications could be implemented in relation to
the activation of the National Recovery and Resilience Plan—called “Recovery Plan”. The
Recovery Plan represents a great opportunity for Public Administrations, which have to ade-
quately identify, select and estimate potential enhancement/redevelopment projects, as well
as to properly describe and communicate them in order to be funded. Therefore, DIKEDOC
could support Public Administrations in these difﬁcult tasks. However, legitimation should
always be discussed at the start of any intervention and constructed during its activation.
Funding Open access funding provided by Politecnico di Torino within the CRUI-CARE Agreement. The
authors did not receive support from any organization for the submitted work.
Availability of data and material The data used in the model are transparent; other data and materials are not
available.
Code availability Not applicable.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no relevant ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interests to disclose.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1075
Appendix 1
ELECTRE II
The ELECTRE II method is an outranking method that can be used to deal with the problem
of ranking a set of actions from the best option to the worst (Figueira et al., 2005) in the
classiﬁcation problem statement. Like the other ELECTRE methods, ELECTRE II includes
two phases: construction of an outranking relation, S, whose meaning is at least as good
as, followed by a procedure that applies a decision rule that is consistent with the speciﬁc
decision problem and is used to elaborate recommendations from the results obtained in the
ﬁrst phase. The ELECTRE II method is applied to an MC model whose components are: A,
a complete set of actions ai ∈A; a family J of consistent criteria gj ∈J, which associates, to
each ai ∈A, its evaluation, gj(ai) ∈E, in relation to a speciﬁc criterion gj and its scale E, and
inter-criterion parameters.
First phase of ELECTRE II
The outranking relation S is a binary relation that is used to model preferences between
couples of actions. Considering two actions, a and a’, four situations may occur: aSa’ and not
a’Sa, i.e., aPa’ (a is strictly preferred to a’); a’Sa and not aSa’, i.e., a’Pa (a’ is strictly preferred
to a); aSa’ and a’Sa, i.e., aIa’ (a is indifferent to a’); not aSa’ and not a’Sa, i.e., aRa’ (a is
incomparable to a’). If one of the P or I situations is veriﬁed, there is outranking. If neither P
nor I are veriﬁed, there is incomparabily, R, a preference relation that is useful to account for
situations in which the decision maker is not able to compare two actions. The ELECTRE II
method can only be applied if each criterion is a true-criterion, for which there is strict, or net,
preference for each difference between evaluations and indifference when the evaluations are
the same. The outranking relation is based on the concordance–discordance principle, which
involves declaring that an action is at least as good as another if a “majority” of the criteria
supports this assertion (concordance condition) and if the opposition of the other criteria
does not generate “too strong” reasons (non-discordance condition). An outranking relation
is constructed with the aim of comparing, in a comprehensive way, each pair of actions (a,a’),
and the concordance–discordance principle is implemented in ELECTRE II by means of two
tests that verify concordance and non-discordance conditions.
Concordance test
An action a can outrank an action a’, aSa’, if a sufﬁcient majority of criteria are in favour of
this assertion. The concordance condition can be deﬁned as follows: the concordance index
C(aSa’) has to be at least equal to a concordance level c, and C(aSa’) has to be at least equal
to C(a’Sa), in order to consider only conditions of preference and not of indifference. In order
to make this deﬁnition operational, the criteria are partitioned into J + , which includes the
criteria in favour of the ﬁrst element of the couple (a, a’), J  (when the evaluations of a and
a’ are equal) and J-, the criteria in favour of the second element of the couple (a, a’). The
weights pj of the criteria included in J+, J= and J−are synthesized in P+, P= and P−.
P+
a, a′


j∈J+ pj
P
a, a′


j∈J pj
123

1076
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
P−
a, a′


j∈J−pj
These weights are used in the concordance test:
C

a, a′
 P +

a, a′
+ P 

a, a′
/ Pj ≥c (level of concordance)
P +

a, a′
≥P−
a, a′
Non discordance (or veto) test
When the concordance condition holds, none of the criteria in the minority should oppose
the assertion aSa’ too much. In order to make this deﬁnition operational, a set of discordance
Dj* is created to include couples of values (e, e’) that are considered too discordant (e is
“too much” worse than e’) in relation to the J* criteria, which can activate the discordance
test (the test can be activated in relation to all the criteria, but also in relation to just some of
them). If (a, a’) is a couple of actions and their evaluations are
gj∗(a)  e and gj∗

a′
 e′
for at least one of the J* criteria, a does not outrank a’, even though the concordance test for
the couple (a, a’) has been passed.
Second phase of ELECTRE II
The outranking relation S, which is constructed in the ﬁrst phase, can be represented by
an outranking graph, where the actions are the nodes and the oriented arcs indicate the
presence of an outranking relation between two nodes. The second phase activates two
iterative procedures on the graph to produce two preorders (i.e. orders that accept an element
in joint position with others in some classes). The ﬁrst (descending) procedure is oriented
toward identifying, at each iteration, a sub-set of actions (Di) that follow this rule: "the best
actions are not outranked”. The second (ascending) procedure is oriented toward identifying
actions that follow this different rule: “the worst actions do not outrank any other action”.
If the graph does not include circuits, at least one action is consistent with the procedure
rule at each iteration. When only one action is consistent with the rule, it is assigned to a class
(C±) and eliminated from the graph. When more than one action is identiﬁed by the rule, a
weak outranking relation is applied, by means of a weak concordance level, cw, to the sub
graph that only includes the actions of Di. The same rule is then applied to the sub graph.
The two procedures produce the same result or results that are marginally or substantially
different. At the end of the second phase, the intersection of two marginally different preorders
produces a ﬁnal partial graph (some remarks on the analysis of these graphs and on the cases
of different results have been proposed in Norese et al., 2016).
Appendix 2
The ELECTRE II application
The ELECTRE II method (see the Appendix 1) included two phases, and in the ﬁrst phase,
preferences between couples of actions were modelled by means of the binary outranking
relation S that, in this ELECTRE method, means the application of two tests, the concordance
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1077
and the non-discordance tests. The application of the ﬁrst phase of ELECTRE II produced
the results synthesised in Table 7: partition of the criteria family into J+, J= and J−, levels
of concordance P+ + P=, when P+ is at least equal to P–, and the presence of discordance
as a result of the Non-Discordance (ND) test. They were then transferred in the outranking
graph in Fig. 8, where each arc represented one of the outranking relations modelled in the
ﬁrst phase, in relation to the strong concordance level cS  0.75.
In the second phase, the descending (P(A)+) and ascending (P(A)−) procedures were
applied to the outranking graph of Fig. 8, which does not include circuits.
Table 7 First phase with the concordance and non discordance tests
(a,a’)
J+
J=
J–
P+ ≥P–
P+ + P=
ND test
S
a1 a2
3,4
2
1, 5, 6
No
a1 a3
/
2, 4
1, 3, 5, 6
No
a1 a4
2, 4
3
1, 5, 6
No
a1 a5
/
/
1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6
No
Yes
a1 a6
/
/
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
No
Yes
a2 a1
1, 5, 6
2
3, 4
Yes
0,75
S
a2 a3
6
1,2
3, 4, 5
No
a2 a4
2, 5, 6
1
3, 4
Yes
0,75
S
a2 a5
/
/
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
No
Yes
a2 a6
/
/
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
No
Yes
a3 a1
1,3,5,6
2, 4
/
Yes
1
S
a3 a2
3, 4, 5
1,2
6
Yes
0,78
S
a3 a4
2, 3, 4, 5
1, 6
/
Yes
1
S
a3 a5
/
3
1, 2, 4, 5, 6
No
a3 a6
/
3
1, 2, 4, 5, 6
No
a4 a1
5, 6
1, 3
2, 4
Yes
0,70
a4 a2
3, 4
1
2, 5, 6
No
a4 a3
/
1, 6
2, 3, 4, 5
No
a4 a5
/
/
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
No
Yes
a4 a6
/
/
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
No
Yes
a5 a1
1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6
/
/
Yes
1
S
a5 a2
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
/
/
Yes
1
S
a5 a3
1, 2, 4, 5, 6
3
/
Yes
1
S
a5 a4
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
/
/
Yes
1
S
a5 a6
1, 5, 6
2, 3, 4
/
Yes
1
S
a6 a1
1, 2, 3, 4, 5,6
/
/
Yes
1
S
a6 a2
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
/
/
Yes
1
S
a6 a3
1, 2, 4, 5, 6
3
/
Yes
1
S
a6 a4
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
/
/
Yes
1
S
a6 a5
/
2, 3, 4
1, 5, 6
No
123

1078
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
Fig. 8 Outranking graph ( Source:
elaborated by the authors)
The descending procedure to create a classiﬁcation from the best to the worst (P(A) +)
The actions that are not outranked (Di) are identiﬁed and analysed in order to be assigned to
class Ci+ and eliminated from the graph at each iteration i.
Iteration 1: A1  A
D1  {a5} and C1+  {a5}
Iteration 2: A2  A1\C1+  {a1, a2, a3, a4, a6}
D2  {a6} C2+  {a6}
Iteration 3: A3  A2\C2+  {a1, a2, a3, a4}
D3  {a3} C3+  {a3}
Iteration 4: A4  A3\C3+  { a1, a2, a4}
D14  {a2} C4+  {a2}
Iteration 5: A5  A4\C4+  {a1, a4}
D5  {a1, a4}
D5 includes the two actions that are not outranked. The weak outranking relation is activated
in order to distinguish between the actions. It adopts the weak concordance level cW  2/3
in the concordance test, in relation to the sub-graph, which only includes the actions of D5.
The weak outranking relation can distinguish between the actions: a4 is the only action that
is not outranked, and only this action is therefore assigned to class C5+ of the descending
pre-order.
a1
a4
C5+  {a4}
Iteration 6: A6  A5\C5+  {a1}
C6+  {a1}
Iteration 7: A7  A6\C6+  ´Ø →|A7| 0 STOP
P(A)+ (sequence of the classes from the best to the worst)  {a5},{a6},{a3},{a2},{a4},{a1}
The ascending procedure to create a classiﬁcation from the worst to the best (P(A)–)
The actions that cannot outrank any other action (Di) are identiﬁed and analysed in order to
be assigned to class Ci−and eliminated from the graph at each iteration i.
a1
a4
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1079
Iteration 1: A1  A D1  {a1, a4}
C1–− {a1}
Iteration 2: A2  A1\C1− {a2, a3, a4, a5, a6}
D2  {a4} and C2− {a4}
Iteration 3: A3  A2\C2− {a2, a3, a5, a6}
D3  {a2} and C3− {a2}
Iteration 4: A4  A3\C3− {a3, a5, a6}
D4  {a3} and C4− {a3}
Iteration 5: A5  A4\C4− {a5, a6}
D5  {a6} and C5− {a6}
Iteration 6: A6  A5\C5− { a5}
D6  {a5} and C6− {a5}
Iteration 7: A7  A6\C6− ´Ø →|A8| 0 STOP
P(A)−(sequence of the classes from the worst to the best)  {a1},{a4},{a2},{a3},{a6},{a5}
Results The ascending and descending procedures produced the same sequence of classes,
from the most urgent action to the least urgent, that is {a5 OpenairMuseum}, {a6 IndoorOpe-
nairMuseum}, {a3 SSC_Multifunctional}, {a2 DPC_Music}, {a4 CHP_Archive} and {a1
OCC_Food&Sport}.
References
Abi-Zeid, I., & Tremblay, J. (2016). Value-based argumentation for policy decision analysis-Methodology and
an exploratory case study of a hydroelectric project in Québec. Annals of Operations Research, 236(1),
233–253. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-014-1774-4
Balestra, G., Norese, M. F., & Knaﬂitz, M. (2001). Model structuring to assess the progression of muscular
dystrophy. In A. Colorni, M. Parruccini, & B. Roy (Eds.), A-MCD-A—Aide Multicritère à la Décision
(Multiple Criteria Decision Aiding) (pp. 31–46). European Commission Joint Research Centre.
Bana e Costa, C. A., Ensslin, L., Correa, E. C., & Vansnick, J.-C. (1999). Decision support systems in action:
Integrated application in a multicriteria decision aid process. European Journal of Operational Research,
113(2), 315–335. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(98)00219-7
Barreca, A., Curto, R., & Rolando, D. (2017). An innovative methodological and operational approach to
developing Management Plans for UNESCO World Heritage Sites: A Geographic Information System for
“Ivrea, industrial city of the 20th century.” Aestimum, 71, 177–213. https://doi.org/10.13128/Aestimum-
22727
Barreca, A., Curto, R., & Rolando, D. (2020). A dynamic GIS for the sustainable economic development of the
Ivrea UNESCO site: potentialities and constraints of a knowledge exchange process. In 15th International
Forum on Knowledge Asset Dynamics (IFKAD 2020), (pp.1217–1238). Matera 9–11 September 2020.
Barreca, A., Curto, R., Malavasi, G. & Rolando, D. (2022). Energy retroﬁtting for the Modern Heritage
enhancement in weak real estate markets: the Olivetti housing stock in Ivrea, Submitted for publication
on Sustainability.
Belton, V., Ackermann, F., & Shepherd, I. (1997). Integrated support from problem structuring through to
alternativeevaluationusingCOPEandVISA.JournalofMulti-CriteriaDecisionAnalysis,6(3),115–130.
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-1360(199705)6:3%3C115::AID-MCDA140%3E3.0.CO;2-I
Belton, V., & Stewart, T. J. (2010). Problem structuring and multiple criteria decision analysis. In: M. Ehrgott,
J. R. Figueira, & S. Greco (Eds.), Trends in Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis, International Series in
Operations Research and Management Science 142 (pp 209–239). Heidelberg: Springer. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-1-4419-5904-1_8
Bouyssou, D., Marchant, T., Pirlot, M., Tsoukias, A., & Vincke, Ph. (2006). Evaluation and Decision Models
with Multiple Criteria. Stepping Stones for the Analyst. Springer Science & Business Media.
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (1991). Organisational learning and communities of practice: Toward a uniﬁed
view of working, learning and innovation. Organisation Science, 2(1), 40–57. https://doi.org/10.1287/
orsc.2.1.40
123

1080
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (2001). Knowledge and organization: A social-practice perspective. Organization
Science., 12(2), 198–213. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.12.2.198.10116
Carlile, P. (2004). Transferring, translating and transforming: An integrative framework for managing knowl-
edge across boundaries. Organization Science, 15(5), 555–568. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1040.0094
Cavallo, A., & Norese, M. F. (2001). Slope instability and erosion: Hazard evaluation through the integration
of GIS and Multicriteria Analysis. Informatica, 12(1), 25–44. https://doi.org/10.3233/INF-2001-12102
Checkland, P. (2001). Soft system methodology. In J. Rosenhead & J. Mingers (Eds.), Rational Analysis for
a Problematic Word Revisited (pp. 61–89). Wiley.
Cook, S. D. N., & Brown, J. S. (1999). Bridging epistemologies: The generative dance between organizational
knowledge and organizational knowing. Organization Science, 10(4), 381–400. https://doi.org/10.1287/
orsc.10.4.381
Coscia, C., & Curto, R. (2017). Valorising in the absence of public resources and weak markets: The case of
“Ivrea, the 20th-century industrial city.” In S. Stanghellini, P. Morano, M. Bottero, & A. Oppio (Eds.),
Appraisal: Theory to Practice-Results of SIEV 2015 (pp. 79–99). Springer.
Curto, R., Barreca, A., & Rolando, D. (2018). Restoration, Reuse and Energy retroﬁt for the enhancement
of 20th Century Heritage: a learning experience on the Ivrea Site Inscribed on the UNESCO World
Heritage List. Valori e valutazioni, 21, 41–58. Retrieved February 28, 2022, from https://siev.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/02/21_05_CURTO-ET-AL_eng.pdf
Curto, R., Barreca, A., Coscia, C., Ferrando, D., Fregonara, E., & Rolando, D. (2022). The active role of
students, teachers, and stakeholders in managing economic and cultural value, urban and built heritage.
The Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-based Learning. https://doi.org/10.14434/ijpbl.v15i1.29626
Curto, R., Norese, M.F., & Rolando, D. (2022b). A multi-criteria decision aid perspective that guides an
incremental development of knowledge and fosters relationships and decisions. Submitted for publication
on EURO Journal on Decision processes.
Daniell, K. A., Morton, A., & Ríos Insua, D. (2016). Policy analysis and policy analytics. Annals of Operations
Research, 236(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-015-1902-9
De Marchi, G., Lucertini, G., & Tsoukiàs, A. (2016). From evidence based policy making to policy analytics.
Annals of Operations Research, 236(1), 15–38. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-014-1578-6
Déri, R., Landry, M., & Banville, C. (1993). Revisiting the issue of model validation in OR: An epistemo-
logical view. European Journal of Operational Research, 66(2), 168–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-
2217(93)90311-A
Ehrgott, M., Figueira, J. R., & Greco, S. (2010). Trends in Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis. Springer.
Ferreira, F., Santos, S., & Rodrigues, P. (2011). Adding value to bank branch performance evaluation using
cognitive maps and MCDA: A case study. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 62(7), 1320–1333.
https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.2010.111
Figueira, J. R., Greco, S., & Ehrgott, M. (2004). Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: State Of The Art Surveys.
Springer.
Figueira, J., Mousseau, V., & Roy, B. (2005). ELECTRE methods. In J. Figueira, S. Greco, & M. Ehrgott
(Eds.), Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: State of the Art Surveys (pp. 133–162). Springer.
Friend, J. (1989). The strategic choice approach. In J. Rosenhead (Ed.), Rational Analysis for a Problematic
World: Problem Structuring Methods for Complexity, Uncertainty and Conﬂict (pp. 121–158). Wiley.
Friend, J., & Hickling, A. (1987). Planning Under Pressure: The Strategic Choice Approach. Pergamon Press.
Genard, J.-L., & Pirlot, M. (2002). Multi-criteria decision-aid in a philosophical perspective. In D. Boyssou,
E. Jacquet-Lagrèze, P. Perny, R. Slowinski, D. Vanderpooten, & Ph. Vincke (Eds.), Aiding Decisions
with Multiple Criteria: Essays in Honour of Bernard Roy (pp. 89–117). Kluwer Academic.
Georgiou, I., Heck, J., & Mrvar, A. (2019). The analysis of interconnected decision areas: A computational
approach to ﬁnding all feasible solutions. Group Decision and Negotiation, 28(3), 543–563. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10726-018-9607-5
Han, H., & Laiô, S.-K. (2011). Decision network: A planning tool for making multiple, linked decisions.
Environment and Planning b: Planning & Design, 38(1), 115–128. https://doi.org/10.1068/b35153
Hermans, L. M., & Thissen, W. A. H. (2009). Actor analysis methods and their use for public policy analysts.
European Journal of Operational Research, 196(2), 808–818. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2008.03.040
Keys, P. (2007). Developing a design science for the use of problem structuring methods. System Practice and
Action Research, 20(4), 333–349. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11213-007-9066-4
Kogut, B., & Zander, U. (1996). What ﬁrms do? Coordination, identity, and learning. Organisation Science,
7(5), 502–518. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.7.5.502
Kolfschoten, G., French, S., & Brazier, F. (2014). A discussion of the cognitive load in collaborative problem-
solving: The decision-making phase. EURO Journal on Decision Processes, 2(3–4), 257–280. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s40070-014-0034-9
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
1081
Kotiadis, K., & Mingers, J. (2006). Combining PSMs with hard OR methods:The philosophical and practi-
cal challenges. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 57(7), 856–867. https://doi.org/10.1057/
palgrave.jors.2602147
ICOMOS.(2011).GuidanceonHeritageImpactAssessmentsforCulturalWorldHeritageProperties.Retrieved
June 02, 2021, from https://www.iccrom.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2018-07/icomos_guidance_on_heritage_
impact_assessments_for_cultural_world_heritage_properties.pdf
Majchrzak, A., Cooper, L. P., & Neece, O. E. (2004). Knowledge reuse for innovation. Management Science,
50(2), 174–188. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1030.0116
Marttunen, M., Lienert, J., & Belton, V. (2017). Structuring problems for multi-criteria decision analysis
in practice: A literature review of method combinations. European Journal of Operational Research,
263(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.04.041
Meinard, Y., & Tsoukias, A. (2018). On the rationality of decision aiding processes. European Journal of
Operational Research, 273(3), 1074–1084. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.09.009
Mingers, J., & Brocklesby, J. (1997). Multimethodology: For mixing towards a framework methodologies.
Omega, 25(5), 489–509. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-0483(97)00018-2
Mingers, J., & Rosenhead, J. (2004). Problem structuring methods in action. European Journal of Operational
Research, 152(3), 530–554. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(03)00056-0
Mintzberg, H., Raisinghani, D., & Theoret, A. (1976). The structure of the unstructured decision process.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 21, 246–276.
Montibeller, G., Belton, V., Ackermann, F., & Ensslin, L. (2008). Reasoning maps for decision aid: An
integrated approach for problem-structuring and multi-criteria evaluation. Journal of the Operational
Research Society, 59(5), 575–589. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jors.2602347
Montibeller, G., & Franco, L. A. (2011). Raising the bar: Strategic multi-criteria decision analysis. Journal of
the Operational Research Society, 62(5), 855–867. https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.2009.178
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese Companies Create the
Dynamics of Innovation. Oxford University Press.
Norese, M. F. (2006). ELECTRE III as a support for participatory decision-making on the localisation of waste-
treatment plants. Land Use Policy, 23(1), 76–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2004.08.009
Norese, M. F. (2009). A multi-criteria decision aiding system to support monitoring in a public administration.
International Journal of Decision Support System Technology, 1(4), 59–71. https://doi.org/10.4018/jdsst.
2009062604
Norese, M. F. (2016). A model-based process to improve robustness in Multi Criteria Decision Aiding inter-
ventions. Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, 23(5–6), 183–196. https://doi.org/10.1002/mcda.
1597
Norese, M. F. (2020a). Proﬁling analysts and actors in interaction: How behavioural aspects can positively
affect the decision aid process. EURO Journal on Decision Processes, 8(3), 125–150. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s40070-020-00113-w
Norese, M. F. (2020b). SISTI: a multicriteria approach to structure complex decision problems. In S. Ben
Amor, A. Teixeira de Almeida, J. L. de Miranda, & E. Aktas (Eds), Advanced Studies in Multi-Criteria
Decision Making (pp. 57–80). Taylor & Francis.
Norese, M. F., Montagna, F. & Vinardi, F. M. (2004). Multicriteria modelling and rational use of waste.
In R. Meredith, G. Shanks, D. Arnott, & S. Carlsson (Eds.), Decision support in an Uncertain and
Complex World (Proceedings of the 2004 IFIP International Conference on Decision Support Systems)
(pp. 598–607). Monash University, Prato.
Norese, M. F., Montagna, F., & Riva, S. (2008). A multicriteria approach to support the design of complex
systems. Foundations of Computing and Decision Sciences, 33(1), 53–70.
Norese, M. F., & Toso, F. (2004). Group decision and distributed technical support. International Transactions
in Operational Research, 11(4), 395–417. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-3995.2004.00466.x
Norese, M. F., & Carbone, V. (2014). An application of ELECTRE Tri to support innovation. Journal of
Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, 21(1–2), 77–93. https://doi.org/10.1002/mcda.1508
Norese, M. F., Galliano, R., & Rolando, D. (2015a). A methodology to support a concerted approach when the
context is non-collaborative. International Journal of Decision Support Systems, 1(4), 412–437. https://
doi.org/10.1504/IJDSS.2015.074545
Norese, M. F., Novello, C., & Salassa, F. (2015b). An integrated system to acquire knowledge and support
decisions in complex innovation design processes. Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic
Commerce, 25(2), 194–212. https://doi.org/10.1080/10919392.2015.1033949
Norese, M.F., Mustafa, A., & Scarelli, A. (2016). New frontiers for MCDA: from several indicators to struc-
tured models and decision aid processes. Newsletter of the European Working Group “Multiple Criteria
Decision Aiding”, 3 (34), Fall 2016, 1–8.
123

1082
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 325:1049–1082
Nutt, P. C. (1993). The identiﬁcation of solution ideas during organizational decision making. Management
Science, 39(9), 1071–1085. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.39.9.1071
Olivetti, A. (1945). L’ordine politico di comunità, Nuove Edizioni, Ivrea (new edn., 2014, Edizioni di Comunità
Olivettiana, Ivrea).
Ormerod, R. J. (2014). Critical rationalism in practice: Strategies to manage subjectivity in OR investigations.
European Journal of Operational Research, 235(3), 784–797. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2013.12.018
Ostanello, A. (1997). Complexity issues and new trands in Multiple Criteria Decision Aid. In J. Clìmaco (Ed.),
Multicriteria Analysis (pp. 8–14). Springer.
Paucar-Caceres, A., Ribeiro dos Santos, P., Wright, G., & Belderrain, M. C. N. (2020). Soft situational strategic
planning (SSSP): A method and case study of its application in a Brazilian municipality. Journal of the
Operational Research Society, 71(3), 363–380. https://doi.org/10.1080/01605682.2019.1568840
Rolando, D. (2015). Multicriteria decision problem structuring: The Strategic Choice Approach in the context
of public projects in Italy. International Journal of Multicriteria Decision Making, 5(1–2), 4–38. https://
doi.org/10.1504/IJMCDM.2015.067942
Rosenhead, J. (Ed.). (1989). Rational Analysis for a Problematic World: Problem Structuring Methods for
Complexity, Uncertainty and Conﬂict. Wiley.
Rosenhead, J., & Mingers, J. (Eds.). (2001). Rational Analysis for a Problematic Word Revisited. Wiley.
Roy, B. (1990). The outranking approach and the foundations of ELECTRE methods. In C. A. Bana e Costa
(Ed.), Readings in Multiple Criteria Decision Aid (pp. 155–184). Springer.
Roy, B. (1993). Decision science or decision-aid science? European Journal of Operational Research, 66(2),
184–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(93)90312-B
Roy, B. (1996). Multicriteria Methodology for Decision Aiding. Kluwer.
Roy, B. (2010). Two conceptions of decision aiding. International Journal of Multicriteria Decision Making,
1(1), 74–79. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJMCDM.2010.033687
Roy, B., & Bertier, P. (1973). La methode ELECTRE II - une application au media-planning. In M. Ross (Ed.),
OR ’72 (pp. 291–302). North-Holland.
Roy, B., & Mousseau, V. (1996). A theoretical framework for analysing the notion of relative importance of
criteria. Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, 5(2), 145–159. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-
1360(199606)5:2%3C145::AID-MCDA99%3E3.0.CO;2-5
Roy, B., & Słowinski, R. (2013). Questions guiding the choice of a multicriteria decision aiding method.
EURO Journal on Decision Processes, 1(1–2), 69–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40070-013-0004-7
Roy, B., & Vanderpooten, D. (1996). The European school of MCDA: Emergence, basic features and current
works. Journal of Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, 5(1), 22–38. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-
1360(199603)5:1%3C22::AID-MCDA93%3E3.0.CO;2-F
Spender, J. C. (1996). Making knowledge the basis of a dynamic theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management
Journal, 17(S2), 45–62. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250171103
Stewart, T. J., Joubert, A., & Janssen, R. (2010). MCDA framework for ﬁshing rights allocation in South
Africa. Group Decision and Negotiation, 19(3), 247–265. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10726-009-9159-9
Tsoukiàs, A. (2007). On the concept of decision aiding process: An operational perspective. Annals of Oper-
ations Research, 154(1), 3–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-007-0187-z
Tsoukiàs, A., Montibeller, G., Lucertini, G., & Belton, V. (2013). Policy analytics: An agenda for research
and practice. EURO Journal on Decision Processes, 1(1–2), 115–134. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40070-
013-0008-3
UNESCO WHC (World Heritage Committee). (2018). Decision adopted during the 42nd session of the World
Heritage Committee. Retrieved June 02, 2021, from http://whc.unesco.org/en/decisions/7143
White, L. (2009). Understanding problem structuring methods interventions. European Journal of Operational
Research, 199(3), 823–833. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2009.01.066
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123