TITLE: Digital Innovation, Data Analytics, and Supply Chain Resiliency: A Bibliometric-based Systematic Literature Review
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04765-6
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
1 3
Accepted: 3 May 2022 / Published online: 19 May 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Digital Innovation, Data Analytics, and Supply Chain 
Resiliency: A Bibliometric-based Systematic Literature 
Review
Anas Iftikhar1 · Imran Ali2
 · Ahmad Arslan3 · Shlomo Tarba4
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04765-6
Abstract
In recent times, the literature has seen considerable growth in research at the intersection 
of digital innovation, data analytics, and supply chain resilience. While the number of 
studies on the topic has been burgeoning, due to the absence of a comprehensive literature 
review, it remains unclear what aspects of the subject have already been investigated and 
what are the avenues for impactful future research. Integrating bibliometric analysis with 
a systematic review approach, this paper offers the review of 262 articles at the nexus of 
innovative technologies, data analytics, and supply chain resiliency. The analysis uncovers 
the critical research clusters, the evolution of research over time, knowledge trajectories 
and methodological development in the area. Our thorough analysis enriches contempo­
rary knowledge on the subject by consolidating the dispersed literature on the significance 
of innovative technologies, data analytics and supply chain resilience thereby recognizing 
major research clusters or domains and fruitful paths for future research. The review also 
helps improve practitioners’ awareness of the recent research on the topic by recapping 
key findings of a large amount of literature in one place.
Keywords  Digital innovation · Data analytics · Digital technology · Supply chain 
resilience · Bibliometrics
1  Introduction
The innovative technologies of the 21st century, also called Industry 4.0 technologies, have 
now emerged as a new frontier to collect, and analyse real-time data and take more innova­
tive decisions for sustained competitive advantage. Industry 4.0 or innovative technologies 
include the Internet of Things (IoT), blockchain technology, big data analytics, and arti­
ficial intelligence (Xu et al., 2018; Strozzi et al., 2017; Ali & Aboelmaged, 2022). These 
innovative technologies are integrated within a firm’s business environment where their 
operational processes, machines, and products constantly share data (Ivanov et al., 2019; Ali 
et al., 2021). Data analytics allow the firms to continuously identify the areas of improve­

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
ment and thereby revolutionize their operations (Hoberg & Alicke, 2016). For instance, 
IoT connected devices collect and transmit data on supply and demand, inventory level, 
production planning and operational hiccups (Birkel & Hartmann, 2020; Kadadevaramth 
et al., 2020). Blockchain is capable to create visibility and transparency across the supply 
chain through the digitally distributed ledger, smart contracts, and multi-layered protection 
against financial threats (Cui et al., 2019; Lohmer et al., 2020). Big data analytics is found 
to be useful in enhancing data processing capacity and thereby responding to disruptive 
events (Dubey et al., 2019; Akter et al., 2020). The constantly collected data is evaluated to 
introduce the right products, improve product and service offerings, and share information 
throughout the network for performance optimization (Akter et al., 2020b). Also, valuable 
insights are gleaned from the data to compare the magnitude of the current disruptive event 
with the past events and devise a new strategy for quicker recovery. As such, technological 
innovation and data analytics has become an emerging topic from the perspective of supply 
chain resilience (SCRE).
The concept of SCRE mainly refers to preparing for, resisting and bouncing back to a 
more favorable equilibrium position in response to disruptions (Hendry et al., 2019). Gen­
erally, the extant literature suggests three phases—readiness, response and recovery—of 
supply chain resilience (Kamalahmadi & Parast, 2016; Ali & Golgeci, 2019). The readi­
ness phase refers to the proactive deployment of resources to avoid possible disruptions 
(Kamalahmadi & Parast, 2016). The response phase comes into play when an incident 
materializes and thereby resists disruption to reduce the magnitude of losses. Whilst the 
recovery phase, which often follows the first two phases, refers to quickly recovering back 
from disruption and gaining a normal or even better than pre-disruptive stage (Ali et al., 
2021). The recent global pandemic (COVID-19) and the complexity of global supply chains 
highlighted the use of innovative technologies to anticipate market changes and reduce the 
adverse impact (Xu et al., 2020). Consequently, we have observed the mounting research on 
the application of innovative technologies in managing disruptions and resilience in recent 
years (Hosseini & Ivanov, 2020; Ralston & Blackhurst, 2020; Zouari et al., 2021; Belhadi et 
al., 2021). Given that SCRE research is still nascent and evolving (Ali and Golgeci, 2019; 
Zouari et al., 2021), it is indispensable to map the emerging literature at the intersection of 
digital innovation, data analytics, and SCRE.
Prior studies offer some insightful literature reviews; however, their focus remains on 
SCRE alone. For instance, Ali et al., (2017) analysed the essential elements and manage­
rial practices at different phases of supply chain resilience; Ali & Gölgeci (2019) identi­
fied numerous drivers, barriers, theories, moderators and mediators to build supply chain 
resilience through literature review and co-occurrence analysis; Xu et al., (2020) presented 
the development path in the area of supply chain disruptions through bibliometric analysis; 
Iftikhar et al., (2021) conducted a quantitative meta-analytic review on the antecedents and 
outcomes of supply chain resilience and firm performance. Further, the extant literature 
discusses literature reviews at the intersection of, for example, big data, and artificial intel­
ligence in the maritime industry (Munim et al., 2020), big data and dynamic SC capabilities 
(Rialti et al., 2019; Mishra et al., 2018), big data and sustainable SC under big data (Zhang 
et al., 2020). As such, the existing literature reviews missed the opportunity to offer insights 
into the nexus of innovative technologies, data analytics, and SCRE. The disruptive occur­
rences, for instance, the Suez Canal blockage and natural disasters due to climate change 
(Ali and Golgeci, 2021) could cause failure in the manufacturing of numerous products 
826

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
used in everyday production, and delays in cargo shipments that rippled across the network 
(Iftikhar et al., 2022). The advancement in innovative technologies enables SC operations to 
continue by mitigating the disruptive impacts of the uncertain environment (i.e., pandemic) 
(Zhang et al., 2020). Researchers have argued that by utilizing the innovative technologies 
enabled data analytics, firms would be able to confront the complexity and dynamism in 
the external environment (Arslan et al., 2021), and hence improve resilience and robustness 
(Iftikhar et al., 2022; Ali & Govindan, 2021). Further, the resilience concept is multidisci­
plinary that necessitates a multifaceted approach (Iftikhar et al., 2021), the extant literature 
lacks reviewing the potential of innovative technologies enabled data analytics to build 
resilience across the supply networks. Therefore, a systematic literature review is indispens­
able in consolidating a scattered knowledge base and identifying current research trends and 
opportunities for impactful future research on an emerging topic.
In the extant literature, four main types of literature review approaches have been pro­
posed (Paul & Criado, 2020). The first is referred to as a domain-based review, which allows 
literature review via computational methods, resulting in unique trends and themes in a 
particular field (Rialp et al., 2019; Paul & Criado, 2020). The second kind of review is clas­
sified as a theory-based review—analyzing the role of a particular theory in a specific area 
of interest or field (Rindfleisch & Heide, 1997; Colquitt & Zapata-Phelan, 2007). The third 
type includes the method-based review, which synthesizes the research studies based on a 
particular methodology – either quantitative or qualitative (Ding et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2019). 
The fourth commonly used approach is the meta-analytic reviews, which help quantitatively 
synthesize the existing empirical studies mainly through correlations of the underlying con­
structs (Ataseven & Nair, 2017; Iftikhar et al., 2021).
Despite the growing popularity of bibliometric analysis and systematic literature, there 
is an ongoing debate on the benefits of these two approaches. The proponent of bibliometric 
review underlines its ability to automatically generate research themes that have less bias 
compared to manually generated themes with systematic literature review (van Eck & Walt­
man 2010; Ali et al., 2021; Golgeci et al., 2022). Conversely, the partisans of systematic 
literature review argue that bibliometric studies are more focused on counting articles, the 
number of clusters, and contributing authors, thereby missing the opportunity to map the 
current state of the art and knowledge trajectories (Wong, 2021). Without indulging in the 
current debate, this study undertakes a more holistic perspective by combining the benefits 
of both bibliometric analysis and a systematic literature review. In doing so, we aim to 
offer a more reliable and biased free analysis that quantitatively generates the key research 
clusters or themes (bibliometric analysis) and thereby reviews the current state-of-the-art 
and the valuable avenues for future research in each cluster (systematic literature review). 
Formulation of the research question is indispensable to conducting a literature review in a 
more structured and logical order (Ali and Aboelmaged, 2021). As such, we derive the fol­
lowing three research questions for our review:
1. What are the key clusters of research and recent development in each cluster at the 
nexus of innovative technologies, data analytics and SCRE?
2. How has research on the topic evolved?
3. What is the methodological development/classification of the field?
4. What are the opportunities for more impactful research at the intersection of innovative 
technologies and SCRE?
827

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
The remaining paper is structured as follows. The second section discusses the literature 
review methodology of this study. The third section presents the findings of the bibliomet­
rics analysis, along with the evolution of the research topic, knowledge trajectories, and 
classification of research methods. The fourth section outlines the discussion and future 
research directions. The paper is concluded with the study’s limitation in the fifth section.
2  Review methodology
Consistent with the research objectives, this study combines bibliometric analysis with a 
systematic literature review. First, with the aid of visual tools (i.e., VOSviewer software), 
bibliometric analysis is employed to generate key research clusters based on the keyword’s 
association strength. While bibliometric analysis produces research clusters quantitatively 
and objectively, it is unable to describe the recent development or gap in each cluster. To 
overcome this shortcoming, we integrated bibliometric analysis with a systematic review 
approach where the articles related to each cluster were carefully reviewed by the authors of 
this study. Such a combination of two approaches thus helped our review to not only retrieve 
key research clusters in an objective and biased free manner but also discuss the recent 
research trajectories and opportunities for further research in each cluster. The past litera­
ture reviews show that the combination of these techniques provides more reliable findings 
(e.g., Ali and Golgeci, 2019). To follow the systematic review guidelines, we established 
the eligibility criteria (inclusion and exclusion criteria) for the present study (see Table 1). 
The data was collected from Scopus, which is a large source of scholarly publications in 
the field of business and management. To retrieve the maximum number of related articles, 
a comprehensive set of keywords with Boolean connectors was developed. In the extant 
Criteria
Description
Exclusion
A
Any article which is not categorized as a peer 
review article (editorial, or industry report).
B
Any article which is not written in the English 
language.
C
Any article not written at the intersection of Indus­
try 4.0 technologies and supply chain resilience/
disruptions.
D
Any article without full text.
Inclusion
A
Any article which is peer-reviewed and is formally 
accepted for publication (forthcoming, ahead of 
print, or in press variants).
B
Any article belonging to any research method (em­
pirical, case study, modelling, analytical, review).
C
Industry 4.0 enabled technology has to be a core 
concept of the article.
D
Articles must have discussed the concept of supply 
chain disruptions, resilience, or robustness along 
with Industry 4.0 enabled technology.
Table 1  Exclusion and Inclu­
sion criteria
Adapted from Ghobakhloo et 
al. (2020)
 
828

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
literature, we couldn’t find a universal definition or agreement on what constitutes Industry 
4.0. Different scholars suggested various technologies that can be categorized as Industry 
4.0. As such, the keywords developed are motivated by some widely cited past studies on 
Industry 4.0 technologies (Xu et al., 2018; Strozzi et al., 2017; Tang & Veelenturf, 2019; 
Ivanov et al., 2019; Witkowski, 2017).
Our set of keywords included: “Supply Chain”, “Resilien*”, “Robust*”, “Disruption*” 
along with “innovative technologies*”, “Predictive analytics”, “Big Data”, “Industry 4.0”, 
“Big Data Analytics”, “blockchain”, “internet of things”, “IoT”, “Additive Manufacturing”, 
“3D Printing”, “RFID”, “Cloud computing”, “cyber-physical system*”, Sensors, “smart 
factory”, “advanced robotics”, “artificial intelligence”, “drones”, “Supply chain analytics”, 
“digital technologies*”, “digitization”, “digitalization”.
The initial search was conducted on 4th January 2021, which produced 589 articles in 
the English language within the subject areas of engineering, business management, science 
technology, operations research, operations management, transportation, and computer sci­
ence. The research articles were searched starting from the year 2003, as the first publication 
on the SCRE topic appeared (Rice & Caniato, 2003). After retrieving the data, the first two 
authors of this study reviewed the dataset and found 262 relevant articles by looking at the 
titles, abstracts, and keywords. Given the nascency of the topic and to gain a comprehensive 
insight, we did not exclude conference papers, reviews, and book chapters. Overall, 327 
were removed after evaluating the dataset according to the exclusion criteria mentioned in 
Table 1.
After all inclusions and exclusions, we found a sample of 262 articles published between 
2008 and 2021. The articles were exported to VOSviewer software for the bibliometric 
analysis. We used the “co-occurrence” function of the VOSviewer to generate key clusters 
of frequently occurring keywords. These clusters are generated based on the association 
strength of the keywords (Ali et al. 2021). Further, these clusters place the same character­
istics of articles together. We have used the following equation to calculate the association 
strength:
 
ASij = Cij
wiwj 
(1)
Where, cij denotes “the number of co-occurrences of items i and j and where wi and wj 
denote either the total number of occurrences of items i and j or the total number of co-
occurrences of these items. It can be shown that the similarity between items i and j calcu­
lated using (1) is proportional to the ratio between, on the one hand, the observed number 
of co-occurrences of i and j and, on the other hand, the expected number of co-occurrences 
of i and j under the assumption that co-occurrences of i and j are statistically independent” 
(van Eck & Waltman 2010, 531).
The software helps in searching the frequently co-occurring keywords from the avail­
able data set extracted from SCOPUS and places them into different colors of clusters as 
per similar keywords. Based on similar keywords, each cluster represents closely related 
themes (Ali & Gölgeci, 2019). Also, the set of studies in these clusters pertains to a similar 
line of argument or themes.
829

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
Overall, the “co-occurrence” produced 4 different clusters (see Fig. 1) of research at the 
nexus of innovative technologies, data analytics and SCRE. The subsequent section dis­
cusses the major findings under each cluster.
3  Findings of bibliometric analysis and systemic review
3.1  Cluster 1: IoT and SCRE
Cluster 1 is the blue color cluster. The main keywords in this cluster include internet of 
things, SCRE, IoT, coordination mechanism, traceability, RFID, etc. Looking at the lit­
erature associated with these keywords, we classified this cluster as ‘IoT and SCRE’. The 
following section maps the key literature around cluster 1.
Exploring the nexus between IoT and SCRE, Al-Talib et al., (2020) and Cui (2015) 
argued that IoT technologies collect and transmit data to enhance visibility, flexibility, and 
collaboration, which are key precursors of the supply chain resiliency (Hohenstein et al., 
2015). To protect the supply chains from highly impactful disruptions, Nah and Siau (2020) 
identified that the data collected through IoT technologies could be utilized to predict the 
sudden spikes in the demand and adapt and respond to the rapid market changes timely. This 
means that the implementation of IoT enabled innovative technologies will place firms in a 
much better position to anticipate disruptions, prepare themselves beforehand, reduce dis­
ruptive impact and assure uninterrupted supplies. Ivanov et al., (2019), Chen et al., (2020), 
and Park et al., (2020) further added that IoT supported cyber-physical systems could be 
Fig. 1  Clusters retrieved through VOSviewer analysis of 262 articles
 
830

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
integrated into the supply chain risk related data analytics, which is useful to navigate crises 
and help the firms in adapting to sudden changes (Kozyrkov, 2020). These authors also 
examined supply chain data analytics systems, concluding that big data analytics will be 
the primary source of competitive advantage in the future. This argument has also been 
supported by Gajek et al., (2020), Gelenbe et al., (2020), and Martin (2020) in that IoT 
will have a substantial influence on the competitiveness of the manufacturing sectors and, 
as a result, organisations should establish effective gateways for digital innovation. Going 
further, Birkel & Hartmann (2020) confound how the application of IoT in manufactur­
ing companies can enhance transparency and risk knowledge to improve resilience perfor­
mance. Similarly, Kadadevaramth et al., (2020) mentioned that IoT enables data analytics 
and resilience by providing access to real-time data through information sharing, collabora­
tion, and pre-programmed responses. Hence, in today’s hypercompetitive and disruptive 
environment adoption of these highly sophisticated innovative technologies has become 
inevitable (Cui et al., 2019).
In increasingly complex SCs, with more stakeholders involved, IoT helps in design­
ing intelligent and resilient SCs by creating real-time information sharing, visibility, and 
stronger collaboration among the business partners (Ali et al., 2021; Rejeb et al., 2020). 
Additionally, IoT also facilitates SCs in enhancing information transparency by strengthen­
ing the integration of information systems which then improves the firm’s data process­
ing capabilities (Cui et al., 2019; Al-Talib et al., 2020). The beneficial effects of IoT are 
achieved through its key approaches, for instance, radio frequency identification (RFID), 
track and trace systems, wireless sensors, and coordination mechanisms, among others Yan 
et al., 2020; Burmester et al., 2017; Bemthuis et al., 2019). These elements are considered 
essential antecedents to improving the resiliency in SCs (Dubey et al., 2019; Ali & Golgeci, 
2019).
The sample studies of this cluster also discuss the application of IoT in different sectors 
to make SCs more resilient. For example, food supply chains are an integral part of every 
economy therefore to avoid supply disruptions, evaluation of risks beforehand and assure 
continuity of operations, Ali et al., (2019) suggested adopting IoT enabled technologies to 
monitor product history and origin tracking. Hence, this helps in improving the visibility 
and risk transparency in the SCs (Birkel & Hartmann, 2020). Whereas, adopting IoT in 
Fig. 2  Industry 4.0 technologies 
and SCRE
 
831

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
the retail SCs offer more benefits in terms of creating flexibility, visibility, adaptation, and 
reduced operational risks (Gao et al., 2020). Figure 2 shows the connection of IoT with dif­
ferent SCRE enablers. Similarly, IoT-enabled technology might be used in other industrial 
sectors, for instance, pharmaceuticals and construction, to develop internal capacities to 
predict and mitigate supply chain interruptions (Rejeb et al., 2020).
In a nutshell, the current research depicts that IoT-enabled technological innovation 
supports data analytics and thereby capability to early detect disruptive behaviours which 
results in sooner preventive measures to assure business continuity and resiliency. Further, 
innovative technologies also protect supply chains against market dynamism and uncertain­
ties. However, the application of innovative technologies is not without challenges. That 
is, IoT is an integrated system, and therefore to provide the privacy and security of supply 
networks during information exchange business enterprises also need to develop cyberse­
curity measures.
3.2  Cluster 2: Blockchain, Industry 4.0, big data analytics, and resilience
Cluster 2 represents red and green clusters that are more interconnected and constitute 
closely associated keywords. As such, we treated these clusters together while labelling 
the key themes. The most frequently co-occurring keywords in these two clusters include 
industry 4.0, big data analytics, data mining, blockchain, resilience, forecasting, decision-
making process, among others. Looking at the studies behind these keywords, we classified 
red and green clusters as ‘blockchain, Industry 4.0, and SCRE’. The three major streams of 
literature that have emerged in these clusters include, blockchain, Industry 4.0, and big data 
analytics and their relationships with SCRE.
The first stream of research examines blockchain-enabled data sharing and the result­
ing SCRE. For instance, Lohmer et al., (2020) stressed the use of blockchain technology 
strengthens the resilience of the supply chains and substantially reduces disruption propaga­
tion by developing a transparent, visible, and automated data exchange mechanism. Like­
wise, Babich & Hilary (2020), Mylrea & Gourisetti (2018), and Queiroz et al., (2020) added 
that blockchain technology enhances visibility, validation, transparency, secure transac­
tions, traceability, and cyber-security which then improves the resiliency in the network.
Prior research also highlighted that blockchain technology provides the immutability, 
auditability, and provenance that secures and traces data hence providing visibility beyond 
the tier 1 supply networks (Kamble et al., 2020; Shahzad et al., 2020; Lin & Zhang, 2020). 
Further, within the supply network, trading partners extensively interact with each other 
and intersect business functions across the national boundaries; thus, prone to vulnerabili­
ties. Accordingly, Min (2019) argued that since blockchain technology is a digitally distrib­
uted ledger and possesses a network verification process, it is capable to enhance SCRE in 
times of uncertainty through data sharing, asset tracking, automating order fulfilment, and 
cybersecurity. That is, blockchain possesses the capability to transform the traditional risk 
management process, mainly focused on mitigation of risk, to blockchain-enabled resil­
ience management by having a proactive nature, uncovering invisible and hidden risks, 
and providing multi-layered protection. Besides the operational disruptions, the literature 
has also discussed the significance of blockchain during the current pandemic (Lohmer et 
al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Bhaskar et al., 2020). During the COVID-19 induced lockdown, 
many businesses observed disruptions such as sudden spikes in demand causing shortages 
832

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
in life-saving drugs, personal and protective equipment, ventilators, etc. (Ali et al., 2022). 
This has exposed how fragile the current supply network systems requiring to reimagin­
ing the structural design. In this vein, Bhaskar et al., (2020) suggested that lean intensive 
approaches alone would not be useful during the pandemic. Therefore, to mitigate the ripple 
effects during high impactful disruptive events and ensure a continuous supply, they pro­
posed an integrated framework along with blockchain technology to improve governance, 
reduce inefficiencies and smoothen supply chain processes among the public healthcare 
institutions. Transparency attained through blockchain technology would play a significant 
role in rebuilding the disrupted supply networks, as it would allow trading partners, regula­
tors, and consumers to verify information (Hewett et al., 2020). Through a synchronized 
process, blockchain technology ensures the transparency of reliable and secure data using 
a set of predetermined criteria. Further, the application of blockchain technology to miti­
gate the disruptions and improve resiliency is also studied in different industry settings, for 
example, agriculture (Kamble et al., 2020; Bodkhe et al., 2020); food and beverage (Ali et 
al., 2021; Emmanouilidis and Bakalis, 2020); and healthcare (Jayaraman et al., 2018; Bell 
et al., 2018).
The second stream of research in these two clusters focuses on Industry 4.0 enabled 
data analytics and SCRE. From this perspective, Katsaliaki & Mustafee (2019) discussed 
the impact of Industry 4.0 supported data exchange in creating resiliency against ripple 
effects. They identified that Industry 4.0 with customized configuration creates higher mar­
ket flexibility and shorter lead times at the cost of mass production, thereby resulting in 
higher responsiveness. Likewise, Fragapane et al., (2020) note that Industry 4.0 enables data 
exchange to create adaptive systems, which is a significant ability to maintain the supply 
chain amidst disruption. Ralston & Blackhurst (2020) espoused that Industry 4.0 enhances 
the firm’s adaptation and reconfiguration capabilities, which contributes to enhanced resil­
ience by improving performance throughout the whole SC and assisting organisations in 
dealing with unanticipated circumstances. Besides, the beneficial effects of Industry 4.0, 
data analytics and SCRE, researchers (e.g., Kaur & Singh 2020; Sharma et al., 2020) have 
also studied the resilient supplier evaluation and selection methodology in Industry 4.0 
environment to identify technologically capable suppliers under different disaster scenarios. 
Additionally, Ramirez-Pena et al. (2020) argued that Industry 4.0 technologies coupled with 
lean and resilient paradigms create visibility and connectivity for shipbuilding SCs. Like­
wise, Ivanov (2017) and Dolgui et al., (2018) explored that an extensive SC structure pos­
sesses high complexities and uncertainties, and as such, adoption of Industry 4.0 along with 
cyber-physical systems will facilitate predicting the performance of manufacturing plants 
and supply chains. Thus, it will help in devising recovery strategies for the negative event 
in advance. Industry 4.0 supported data integration between supply chain partners, helps 
in improving the material delivery reliability and reduces the information distortions (Ali 
et al., 2021), hence improving the supply chain continuity. For example, information inter­
change via Industry 4.0 enabled data analytics allows enterprises to greatly enhance demand 
prediction accuracy, lowering the impact of any supply-demand discrepancy and therefore 
preventing supply chain operational interruptions. Its application is adopted in multiple 
industries to reduce disruptions and improve supply chain resilience, such as agriculture, 
automobile, pharmaceuticals, shipbuilding Kumar et al., 2010; Ralston & Blackhurst, 2020; 
Kaur & Singh, 2020; Sharma et al., 2020; Jirsak, 2018; Ramirez-Pena et al., 2020; Chand­
riah and Raghavendra, 2019).
833

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
The third stream of research offers insights on big data analytics (BDA) and SCRE. 
BDA refers to an integration of structured and non-structured data from multiple sources in 
the supply network (suppliers, manufacturing plants, warehouses, customers, etc.) to reach 
processable information for efficient decision making (Raut et al., 2021). From the SCRE 
perspective, BDA is discussed in anticipating disruption occurrences, reaction planning, 
and real-time controlling (Dubey et al., 2019; Singh & Singh, 2019; Mandal, 2019), for 
example, explored the extent to which a firm’s existing technological infrastructure capa­
bilities and big data analytics add value in responding to disruptive events. Similarly, Dubey 
et al., (2019) studied the big data analytics capability to enhance information processing 
capacity, control ripple effects, and thereby improve resilience. Whereas other empirical 
studies have highlighted the role of big data analytics on the LARG (lean, agile, resilient, 
and green) paradigm (Raut et al., 2021); different big data analytics related capabilities on 
multiple resilient dimensions (Mandal, 2019); and big data analytics capability on multiple 
hospital supply chain integration dimensions to respond COVID-19 related crises (Yu et al., 
2021). Still, others explored how big data could be utilized in disaster-prone areas to assure 
resiliency (Papadopoulos et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2016).
In summary, the structural design of supply networks has massively expanded over time, 
thereby increasing the uncertainty and probability of disruption propagation. In this sce­
nario, the firm’s decision-making ability if powered by innovative technologies (Industry 
4.0, blockchain, and big data analytics) may pave the way for managing disruptions risks 
and controlling the ripple effects in the network. These innovative technologies with their 
fast-paced ability enable firms to adjust their manufacturing or service structure by promptly 
responding to new changes in the environment. Since these technologies have real-time vis­
ibility capability, therefore, firms are inclined towards adopting them due to the adaptability 
and reconfiguration capability to deal with unexpected events. Figure 2 also shows the con­
nection of Industry 4.0 enabled BDA and blockchain technologies with the antecedents of 
SCRE.
3.3  Cluster 3: 3-D printing, artificial intelligence, and SCRE
The most frequently co-occurring keywords in the yellow cluster include 3D-printing, arti­
ficial intelligence, COVID-19, and supply chain disruption, among others. Referring to the 
literature related to these terms, we classified yellow clusters into two main themes: (1) 
3D-printing (additive manufacturing) and SCRE, and (2) artificial intelligence and SCRE.
The first stream of research sheds light on the nexus of additive manufacturing (AM) and 
SCRE. A few of the key approaches of AM discussed in the extant literature are rapid proto­
typing, rapid manufacturing, rapid tooling, and mass customization, among others (Van der 
Elst et al., 2020;Verboeket & Krikke 2019). Researchers highlighted that adopting additive 
manufacturing (AM) enables firms to bring the production near to the demand hence mak­
ing it more responsive and adaptable to sudden market changes than traditional manufactur­
ing systems (Ivanov et al., 2019; Verboeket & Krikke, 2019). Particularly, the authors have 
stressed the use of 3D printing by the manufacturing companies in responding COVID-19 
pandemic crisis to assure uninterrupted medical supplies (Longhitano et al., 2021; Salmi et 
al., 2020). This study looked at how AM ensured continuous supply by producing locally 
and on-demand to deal with the disruptions created by COVID-19, such as shortages in 
medical supply and services. Several resilient practices have been recognized using AM 
834

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
(Naghshineh & Carvalho, 2020), for instance: the role of flexibility, robustness, and resil­
ience in adopting AM technology (Chiu & Lin, 2016); how AM improves SC readiness and 
responsiveness in a disaster-prone area (Meisel et al., 2016); and AM’s role in reducing 
structural SC complexity (Ivanov, 2018). These authors analyzed AM characteristics and 
find out that it leads to increased flexibility, shorter lead times, financial strength, higher 
responsiveness, and efficient control of maintenance, repair, and operating supplies (MROs)
The second stream of manuscripts is on the relationship between artificial intelligence 
(AI) and SCRE. Some of the approaches which are used in AI are genetic algorithms, swarm 
optimization, artificial bee colony, agent-based systems, fuzzy logic and programming, 
among others (Kumar et al., 2010; Frayret, 2011; Baryannis et al., 2019; Pramanik et al., 
2020). In this vein, Baryannis et al., (2019) and Rajesh (2020) examined the application of 
AI in quantifying the resilient strategies for identifying, assessing, mitigating and monitor­
ing the disruptive events in the supply networks. To increase the resiliency in agri-food 
supply chains, Zavala-Alcívar et al., (2020) analyzed the application of AI techniques in the 
supplier selection and evaluation process. Whereas Kumar et al., (2010) adopted AI-related 
approaches to minimize supply chain costs associated with different types of disruptions. 
Further, to anticipate the disruptive events Baryannis et al., (2019) proposed an AI-based 
framework that will be useful in the decision making to shield against disruptions. Simi­
larly, Reyes et al., (2020) adopted AI-related computational techniques to investigate their 
applicability in identifying supply network disruptions. AI approaches have also been used 
to predict cargo theft and secure the infrastructure, particularly in the railways’ transport 
case (Lorenc et al., 2020). Researchers have also evaluated inventory and sourcing strate­
gies to manage supply uncertainties through the AI approaches (Pramanik et al., 2020); and 
explored the potential of AI techniques for supplier selection to assess their responsiveness 
against disruptive events (Zhao & Yu, 2011). Lastly, Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., (2020) 
mentioned that AI-driven computational techniques provide reliable and updated forecasts 
in real-time, thus creating end-to-end visibility and coping uncertainty.
Overall, the literature on additive manufacturing and artificial intelligence for SCRE is 
emerging and nascent. In the first stream, there is a surge of articles on the use of additive 
manufacturing for high impactful disruptions like the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the 
second stream focuses on the identification of disruptive impacts and suggestions for busi­
ness continuity. It is also expected that these sophisticated technologies will help in reduc­
ing the structural complexity and uncertainties in SCs, by using fewer components and 
materials in the product design stage. Also, these technologies would reduce the impact of 
geopolitical risks by producing materials locally.
In a nutshell, the review of extant literature shows the connections between Industry 4.0 
technologies and key antecedents of SCRE (see Fig. 2). Building upon the literature, it can 
be expected that the adoption of various technologies (blockchain, big data analytics, IoT, 
additive manufacturing and AI) would support supply chain resilience through improve­
ment in visibility, traceability, collaboration, flexibility, reconfiguration, and transparency.
3.4  Evolution of research on the topic
This section presents the distribution of studies from 2008 to 2021 to track the progression 
of research on this under-studied topic. Figure 3 shows that the topic of innovative technol­
ogy, data analytics and SCRE has been evolving since 2008, albeit with an inconsistent 
835

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
pattern of growth. From 2008 to 2013, development in this subject area was somewhat 
sluggish and erratic.
We can see an uneven trend of growth from 2014 to 2017. Whereas, from 2017 and 
onwards, there is a significant growth in the number of studies which have exponentially 
grown till the 2020-year end. The highest number of studies (100) were observed in 2020. 
This demonstrates the topic’s high recognition and popularity among the operations and 
supply chain management research community. Because the search for articles was con­
ducted on 04 January 2021, we only found 7 items with a sharp decline in the trend line.
3.5  Knowledge trajectories
To observe the trajectories of knowledge over the past two, keywords clusters were cre­
ated for two different periods i.e., 2008–2017 and 2018–2021 (see Fig. 4). The unequal 
distribution of years between the two periods is attributed to the uneven development of the 
research topic. That is, while the literature on the intersection of innovative technologies 
and SCRE began to develop in 2008, a visible change was noticed from 2018.
We have noticed a significant shift in the knowledge flow between the two time periods 
shown in Fig. 4. From 2008 to 2017, popular keywords were radio frequency identification, 
RFID, internet of things, big data, cloud computing, resilience, supply chains, risk manage­
ment, risk assessment, artificial intelligence, and decision support systems.
Whereas, Industry 4.0, blockchains, additive manufacturing, 3-D printing, cyber-phys­
ical system, digital twin, and covid-19 are among the new themes, from 2018 to 2021. 
The remaining keywords, on the other hand, are comparable, but their node size, which 
represents several studies, is significantly bigger than in the previous period (2008–2017). 
Internet of things, big data analytics, blockchains, risk management, and SCRE are a few 
examples. The additional keywords and larger node sizes represent the emergence of inno­
vative technologies and SCRE. This information could assist the early career researchers 
and prospective researchers to understand the dynamics of recent research while choosing 
a new research project.
3.6  Classification of research methods
The sampled studies (262) in our review present different methodological perspectives (see 
Fig. 5). These include: 105 (40%) studies consist of conceptual/literature reviews (e.g., 
Ivanov & Dolgui 2019; Min, 2019; Verboeket & Krikke, 2019; Hosseini & Ivanov, 2020); 
Fig. 3  Evolution of research 
on innovative technologies and 
SCRE
 
836

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
94 (36%) studies are simulation/modelling/analytical (e.g., Kumar et al., 2010; Ivanov et 
al., 2013;Bottani et al., 2019; Lohmer et al., 2020): 39 (15%) articles comprise of empiri­
cal qualitative (e.g., Kask & Öberg 2019;Ralston & Blackhurst 2020); and 9% (24) studies 
constitute empirical quantitative (e.g., Papadopoulos et al., 2017; Wamba & Queiroz, 2020; 
Dubey et al., 2020).
Clearly, a major portion of the literature (76%) is based on conceptual frameworks plus 
simulation and analytical papers, most of which lack real-world data. Whereas only 24% 
of the studies adopted empirical methodologies, both qualitative and quantitative. There are 
fewer studies in quantitative empirical papers (survey-based research) than in qualitative 
empirical papers, indicating a substantial difference.
Fig. 5  Classification of research methods
 
Fig. 4  Knowledge trajectories between two main periods (2008–2017 and 2018–2021)
 
837

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
4  Discussion and future research avenues
The review of the literature shows a significant increase in the literature on innovative 
technologies, data analytics and SCRE. The descriptive evaluation of 262 eligible articles 
in this systematic literature review highlighted that the growth rate of research publica­
tions on innovative technologies, data analytics, and supply chain disruption and resilience 
has exponentially grown. We found that IoT facilitates the design of intelligent and robust 
SCs by enabling real-time information exchange, and improved cooperation among busi­
ness partners in the network. Also, the data acquired through IoT technology could be used 
in forecasting abrupt spikes in demand, preparing and responding to the sudden changes 
timely, hence protecting supply chains from extremely disruptive shocks. Furthermore, ris­
ing worldwide demand has prompted businesses to diversify their product offerings and 
expand into new markets. Hence, leads towards extended supply chains, which cause unpre­
dictability and dynamism in the external environment (Azadegan et al., 2013). In this situ­
ation, the firm’s decision-making abilities, influenced by innovative technologies (Industry 
4.0, blockchain, and big data analytics), may pave the way for managing and controlling 
disruption risks and ripple effects in the network. Our bibliometric review also highlighted 
that using AM allows businesses to shift production closer to demand, making them more 
responsive and flexible to market changes than traditional manufacturing processes. It was 
also noted that businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic adopted 3D printing, producing 
face masks and shields, to ensure meet consumer demand. This review further highlights the 
AI-related approaches, i.e., agent-based systems, swarm optimization, artificial bee colony, 
etc., used by the researchers to understand the complex behaviour of supply network struc­
tures towards resilience and robustness (Giannoccaro & Iftikhar, 2020).
Based on this study we explored the significance of SCRE antecedents with the innova­
tive technologies enabled data analytics. We found that the usage of innovative technolo­
gies by researchers has evolved within the supply chain disruption and resilience domain 
from RFID to blockchain and cyber-physical systems. Following the development in this 
area, different industries in manufacturing and service have been investigated separately to 
develop resilience measures (Belhadi et al., 2021; Mubarik et al., 2021). Nonetheless, we 
recognized that there is a substantial gap in performing empirical research on issues sur­
rounding the nexus of innovative technologies and supply chain disruptions and resilience. 
During the review of the literature, plenty of opportunities for future research emerged on 
the confluence of innovative technologies, data analytics and SCRE. We have highlighted 
some of them with specific themes in the below section. Table 2 summarizes the research 
themes along with the future research questions.
4.1  Complexity, innovative technologies, and resilience
The extant literature identified different forms of SC complexities that could have both det­
rimental and beneficial effects on a firm’s business value and resilience (Bode & Wagner, 
2015; Chowdhury et al., 2019). However, the following important questions remain unan­
swered: (1) how do different innovative technologies (big data analytics, blockchain, IoT, 
artificial intelligence, etc.) interact with multiple forms of complexities (static, dynamic, 
upstream, internal, and downstream) to leverage SCRE? (2) How does data analytics inter­
838

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
act with different dimensions of SC complexities, and how simultaneously it can improve 
traceability and transparency in the supply network?
While blockchain has received a great deal of attention in the literature (Wang et al., 
2020; Kurpjuweit et al., 2019; Min 2019; Lohmer et al., 2020), little is known about the 
role of network orchestrators that blockchain-enabled data exchange could display in highly 
complex supply chains.
4.2  Blockchain-enabled data analytics and SCRE
In contemporary SCs, procurement frauds are amid the significant menaces and vulner­
abilities that disrupt the financial flows among the network partners. However, blockchain-
based data analytics and transactions assure transparency and fraud reduction (Wang et al., 
2019; Guerar et al., 2020). IBM blockchain platform, for example, developed distributed 
digital ledger in which transaction data is shared among the network and constantly rec­
onciled hence it’s hard to alter the information by the stakeholders. Barclay – the second-
largest bank in the UK - has been successfully using blockchain in its banking system. Other 
examples include Unilever and Walmart, which are using IBM blockchain in procurement 
thus reducing risks of, tampering, counterfeiting and fraud. We suggest researching this 
new phenomenon to bring vital insights into how blockchain technologies facilitate finan­
cial communication across the network through analyses of data on business transactions, 
thereby reducing frauds and counterfeiting.
The dynamics of understudied innovative technologies are different, as revealed dur­
ing the literature review (Ivanov et al., 2019; Ivanov and Dolgui, 2020; Baryannis et al., 
2019). However, we do not know the synergistic effects of these innovative technologies 
(e.g., blockchain in AI environment, big data analytics, and cyber-physical systems) on 
data analytics capabilities and SCRE. This topic could be studied by considering different 
contextual variables, such as competition intensity, technological complexity, or bargaining 
power. Further, what other resources, tangible, or intangible, would be required by the firms 
to achieve the beneficial effect of resiliency, an area that warrants further research.
The analysis of the literature depicts that past research predominantly focuses on block­
chain’s adoption challenges in the traditional manufacturing industries (Wamba & Queiroz, 
2020; Queiroz & Wamba, 2019; Moktadir et al., 2019), leaving the gap for research on 
other important contexts. Particularly, while the importance of food supply chains has been 
increasingly recognised during the COVID-19 outbreak, there is a lack of broad empirical 
evidence if and how blockchain technology can be effectively used to deal with the pan­
demic and ensure a smooth supply of food. As such, we suggest large-scale research on the 
application of blockchain in the agri-food supply chains specifically on SMEs in emerging 
and developing economies. The adoption of these innovative technologies would secure the 
financial flow of SMEs, leverage their productivity, and assure business continuity, transpar­
ency, and visibility through ‘disintermediation’ (Wang et al., 2019).
4.3  SC mapping through innovative technologies enabled data analytics
SC mapping is considered one of the significant sources to assure supply resiliency and 
business continuity in complex supply networks (Gardner & Cooper, 2003). It provides the 
firm with a holistic visualization of its entire supply network (Swift et al., 2019). Owing to 
839

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
the significant disruptions caused by the global pandemic (COVID-19), Choi et al., (2020), 
and Mubarik et al., (2021) stress SC mapping, which could enable to a better understanding 
of the network structure in which a firm operates (Giannoccaro & Iftikhar, 2020). Given 
this, a fruitful future research avenue is to investigate the role of innovative technologies 
enabled data analytics in SC mapping to enable resilience.
4.4  Innovative technologies, data analytics and cyber-resilience
A compelling body of literature identifies the vulnerabilities among the traditional SC flows 
(Ali and Golgeci, 2019; Ivanov 2017; Xu et al., 2020). Similarly, digital SCs are not risk-
free and possess significant threats, impacting different industrial sectors (Büyüközkan & 
Göçer, 2018). To achieve cyber resilience, firms need to adopt a holistic approach (Boyes, 
2015). Therefore, it is of utmost importance for future researchers to explore how the dark 
sides of innovative technologies could be minimized, what enabling factors to assure cyber 
resiliency firms need to develop, how digital platforms will be kept secured particularly in 
the critical infrastructures and maritime sectors in the wake of disruptions. This will further 
build confidence among the customers and suppliers to adopt technology driven SC solu­
tions. Future researchers could also identify the critical managerial skills required to make 
data analytics-based decisions and manage the cyber resilience operations, grounded in dif­
ferent theoretical frameworks, such as technology acceptance model (TAM), technology 
organization environment (TOE) framework, or unified theory of acceptance and use of 
technology (UTAUT) (Jeyaraj & Dwivedi, 2020; Tao et al., 2020).
4.5  Innovative technologies, relational governance, and resilience
The presence of trust is considered a significant organizational capability to leverage resil­
ience in a disruptive environment (Ali and Golgeci, 2019). However, it also has its limita­
tions, such as it is expensive, time-consuming, and difficult to manage under high structural 
complexity (Capaldo & Giannoccaro, 2015; Galvin et al., 2021). While adopting innova­
tive technologies and deciding based on data analytics, firms are not obliged to trust their 
partners as they used to, it is integrated into these blockchain platforms (Wang et al., 2019). 
Therefore, an interesting avenue for future research could be to investigate the degree to 
which reliance on partners via trust mechanisms would be effective in disruptive environ­
ments under the wave of innovative technologies to improve resilience in the network. It 
would be insightful to explore whether adopting innovative technologies would lessen the 
need for developing interorganizational relationships or protect SC partners against adopt­
ing any opportunistic behavior. The extant literature suggests that relational capabilities 
reduce uncertainty and risk and enhance resilience, however, the extent to which relational 
attributes/capabilities be effective under digital transformation while mitigating SC disrup­
tions, is an area not well understood.
4.6  Innovative technologies and reshoring
Owing to the severe disruptions caused by the COVID-19, a significant discussion emerged 
around bringing manufacturing closer to the demand and making SCs shorter (Choi et al., 
2020). As such, future researchers could empirically explore how innovative technologies 
840

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
supported by data analytics would affect the firm’s location decisions or/and how they will 
enable viable reshoring to further heighten the responsiveness to market dynamics and 
Research theme
Future Research Questions
Supply chain com­
plexities, innova­
tive technologies & 
resilience.
Q1. How do different innovative technologies 
(big data analytics, blockchain, IoT, artificial 
intelligence, etc.) interact with multiple forms 
of complexities (static, dynamic, upstream, 
internal, and downstream) to leverage SCRE?
Q2. How does data analytics interact with 
different dimensions of SC complexities, and 
how simultaneously it will impact the trace­
ability in the supply network?
Q3. What is the role of blockchain-enabled 
data exchange in network orchestration for 
highly complex supply chains (i.e., automo­
tive sector, fashion industry, etc.), and at the 
same time how it would improve transpar­
ency beyond 1st tier suppliers?
Blockchain-enabled 
data analytics and 
SCRE
Q1. What is the role of blockchain-based data 
analytics to protect financial flows among 
the network partners to assure resiliency in 
global value chains?
Q2. What are the synergistic effects of 
innovative technologies on data analytics 
capabilities and SCRE?
Q3. How blockchain technology can be effec­
tively used to deal with the highly uncertain 
environment and ensure resiliency in agri-
food supply chains in certain contexts (i.e., 
SMEs, emerging & developing economies).
Supply chain map­
ping and innovative 
technologies
Q1. What is the role of innovative technolo­
gies enabled data analytics in SC mapping to 
enable resilience?
Innovative technolo­
gies, data analytics 
and cyber resiliency
Q1. What enabling factors to assure cyber 
resiliency firms need to develop, how digital 
platforms will be kept secured particularly 
in the critical infrastructures and maritime 
sectors?
Q2. What critical managerial skills are re­
quired to make data analytics-based decisions 
and manage the cyber resilience operations, 
grounded in different theoretical frameworks?
Innovative technolo­
gies and relational 
governance
Q1. How effective it would be for firms in 
supply chains while adopting innovative tech­
nologies to operate in a trustless marketplace 
under a disruptive environment?
Innovative technolo­
gies and reshoring
Q1. How innovative technologies enabled 
data analytics would affect the firm’s location 
decisions or/and how they will enable viable 
reshoring to further heighten the responsive­
ness to market dynamics and uncertainty?
Innovative technolo­
gies and SC disrup­
tion management
Q1. What is the role of different innovative 
technologies at different SC disruption man­
agement phases to improve post-disruption 
supply chain recovery?
Table 2  Research themes and 
future research questions
 
841

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
uncertainty. Further, the impact of different industrial sectors could be explored, such as the 
textile industry, the high-tech sector, consumer goods, electronics and electrical, and other 
manufacturing industries.
4.7  Innovative Technologies and SC disruption management
Our review of literature depicts those different types of disruption risks that have been com­
prehensively categorized (Craighead et al., 2007; Giannoccaro & Iftikhar, 2020) along with 
different SC disruption management phases and strategies (Macdonald & Corsi, 2013). In 
doing so, most of the prior literature explored how SC disruptions management strategies 
reduce the vulnerabilities and mitigate the disruptive impact.
However, the role of different innovative technologies in different SC disruption man­
agement phases, disruption detection, reaction, recovery, and learning to improve post-dis­
ruption supply chain recovery, is an area that warrants further investigation.
5  Conclusions
Unprecedented disruptive incidents have increasingly attracted academics’ interest in 
innovative technologies, data analytics and SCRE. This study aimed to review the exist­
ing literature at the nexus of innovative technologies, data analytics and SCRE. We found 
that innovative technologies (big data analytics, IoT, Industry 4.0, additive manufacturing, 
blockchain, artificial intelligence, etc.) supported data analytics can play a significant role 
in anticipating disruptive events, reducing their impacts and assuring business continuity. 
Despite considerable contributions, many past studies are still conceptual and lack empiri­
cal corroboration. In particular, there is a severe shortage of mixed methods research, which 
is considered important to support the rigor and clarity of the underlying relationships. We 
have recognized several promising opportunities for more impactful future research on this 
interesting yet underexplored topic of research.
Aside from the interesting findings, this study has several limitations, just like any other 
literature review. Despite using a broad set of search keywords on innovative technolo­
gies and SCRE to collect as many publications as possible, it’s possible that a few of the 
articles were overlooked unintentionally. However, our considerably large sample size (262 
articles) assures that the findings are a fair reflection of the research conducted around the 
topic. We identified four research clusters by employing bibliometric analysis; however, 
future researchers might use other methods, such as homogeneity analysis using alternating 
least squares (HOMALS) to cross-check our findings. Future researchers may also improve 
the content analysis by adopting the multiple correspondence analysis (MCA) approach. 
Finally, we provide significant insights on the SCRE research and advance knowledge from 
the standpoint of digital innovation and data analytics; our research agenda has the potential 
to spark further discussion around this topic.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, 
842

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the 
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is 
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory 
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Akter, S., Motamarri, S., Hani, U., Shams, R., Fernando, M., Babu, M. M., & Shen, K. N. (2020). a. Building 
dynamic service analytics capabilities for the digital marketplace. Journal of Business Research, 118, 
177–188
Akter, S., Gunasekaran, A., Wamba, S. F., Babu, M. M., & Hani, U. (2020). b. Reshaping competitive advan­
tages with analytics capabilities in service systems. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 159, 
120180
Al-Talib, M., Melhem, W. Y., Anosike, A. I., Reyes, J. A. G., & Nadeem, S. P. (2020). Achieving resilience in 
the supply chain by applying IoT technology. Procedia CIRP, 91, 752–757
Ali, I., Arslan, A., Chowdhury, M., Khan, Z., & Tarba, S. Y. (2022). Reimagining global food value chains 
through effective resilience to COVID-19 shocks and similar future events: A dynamic capability per­
spective. Journal of Business Research, 141, 1–12
Ali, I., Arslan, A., Khan, Z., & Tarba, S. Y. (2021). The Role of Industry 4.0 Technologies in Mitigating 
Supply Chain Disruption: Empirical Evidence From the Australian Food Processing Industry. IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3088518
Ali, A., Mahfouz, A., & Arisha, A. (2017). “Analysing supply chain resilience: integrating the constructs 
in a concept mapping framework via a systematic literature review”. Supply Chain Management, 22 
No(1), 16–39
Ali, I., & Gölgeci, I. (2019). Where is supply chain resilience research heading? A systematic and co-occur­
rence analysis. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 49(8), 793–
815. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-02-2019-0038
Ali, I., & Gölgeci, I. (2021). Managing climate risks through social capital in agrifood supply chains. Supply 
Chain Management: An International Journal, 26(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-03-2020-0124
Ali, I., Golgeci, I., & Arslan, A. (2021). Achieving resilience through knowledge management practices and 
risk management culture in agri-food supply chains. Supply Chain Management: An International Jour­
nal, ahead-of-print(ahead-of-print). https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-02-2021-0059
Ali, I., & Govindan, K. (2021). Extenuating operational risks through digital transformation of agri-food 
supply chains (pp. 1–13). Production Planning & Control
Ali, S. M., Moktadir, M. A., Kabir, G., Chakma, J., Rumi, M. J. U., & Islam, M. T. (2019). Framework for 
evaluating risks in food supply chain: Implications in food wastage reduction. Journal of cleaner pro­
duction, 228, 786–800
Ali, I., & Aboelmaged, M. G. S. (2022). Implementation of supply chain 4.0 in the food and beverage indus­
try: perceived drivers and barriers. International Journal of Productivity and Performance Manage­
ment, 71(4), 1426–1443
Ali, I., Sultan, P., & Aboelmaged, M. (2021). A bibliometric analysis of academic misconduct research in 
higher education: Current status and future research opportunities. Accountability in Research, 28(6), 
372–393. https://doi.org/10.1080/08989621.2020.1836620
Arslan, A., Cooper, C., Khan, Z., Golgeci, I., & Ali, I. (2021). Artificial intelligence and human workers inter­
action at team level: a conceptual assessment of the challenges and potential HRM strategies. Interna­
tional Journal of Manpower, ahead-of-print(ahead-of-print). https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-01-2021-0052
Ataseven, C., & Nair, A. (2017). Assessment of supply chain integration and performance relationships: 
A meta-analytic investigation of the literature. International journal of production economics, 185, 
252–265
Ateş, M. A., Suurmond, R., Luzzini, D., & Krause, D. (2021). Order from Chaos: A Meta-analysis of Supply 
Chain Complexity and Firm Performance.Journal of Supply Chain Management, e12264
Azadegan, A., Patel, P. C., Zangoueinezhad, A., & Linderman, K. (2013). The effect of environmental com­
plexity and environmental dynamism on lean practices. Journal of operations management, 31(4), 
193–212
Babich, V., & Hilary, G. (2020). OM Forum—Distributed ledgers and operations: What operations man­
agement researchers should know about blockchain technology. Manufacturing & Service Operations 
Management, 22(2), 223–240
843

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
Baryannis, G., Validi, S., Dani, S., & Antoniou, G. (2019). Supply chain risk management and artificial intel­
ligence: state of the art and future research directions. International Journal of Production Research, 
57(7), 2179–2202
Belhadi, A., Kamble, S., Jabbour, C. J. C., Gunasekaran, A., Ndubisi, N. O., & Venkatesh, M. (2021). Manu­
facturing and service supply chain resilience to the COVID-19 outbreak: Lessons learned from the 
automobile and airline industries. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 163, 120447
Belhadi, A., Mani, V., Kamble, S. S., Khan, S. A. R., & Verma, S. (2021). Artificial intelligence-driven 
innovation for enhancing supply chain resilience and performance under the effect of supply chain 
dynamism: an empirical investigation (pp. 1–26). Annals of Operations Research
Bell, L., Buchanan, W. J., Cameron, J., & Lo, O. (2018). Applications of blockchain within healthcare. 
Blockchain in healthcare today
Bemthuis, R. (2019, October). Business logic for resilient supply chain logistics. 2019 IEEE 23rd Interna­
tional Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Workshop (EDOCW) (pp. 190–195). IEEE
Burmester, M., Munilla, J., Ortiz, A., & Caballero-Gil, P. (2017). An RFID-based smart structure for the 
supply chain: Resilient scanning proofs and ownership transfer with positive secrecy capacity channels. 
Sensors, 17(7), 1562
Bhaskar, S., Tan, J., Bogers, M. L., Minssen, T., Badaruddin, H., Israeli-Korn, S., & Chesbrough, H. (2020). 
At the Epicenter of COVID-19–the Tragic Failure of the Global Supply Chain for Medical Supplies. 
Frontiers in public health, 8, 821
Bodkhe, U., Tanwar, S., Bhattacharya, P., & Kumar, N. (2020). Blockchain for precision irrigation: Opportu­
nities and challenges. Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies. e4059
Birkel, H. S., & Hartmann, E. (2020). “Internet of Things – the future of managing supply chain risks”. Sup­
ply Chain Management, 25 No(5), 535–548
Bode, C., & Wagner, S. M. (2015). Structural drivers of upstream supply chain complexity and the frequency 
of supply chain disruptions. Journal of Operations Management, 36, 215–228
Bottani, E., Murino, T., Schiavo, M., & Akkerman, R. (2019). Resilient food supply chain design: Modelling 
framework and metaheuristic solution approach. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 135, 177–198
Boyes, H. (2015). Cybersecurity and cyber-resilient supply chains. Technology Innovation Management 
Review, 5(4), 28
Büyüközkan, G., & Göçer, F. (2018). Digital supply chain: literature review and a proposed framework for 
future research. Computers in Industry, 97, 157–177
Capaldo, A., & Giannoccaro, I. (2015). How does trust affect performance in the supply chain? The moderat­
ing role of interdependence. International journal of production Economics, 166, 36–49
Chandriah, K. K., & Raghavendra, N. V. (2019, April). Architectural Framework for Industry 4.0 Compliance 
Supply Chain System for Automotive Industry. In Computer Science On-line Conference (pp. 107–
116). Springer, Cham
Chen, L., Dui, H., & Zhang, C. (2020). A resilience measure for supply chain systems considering the inter­
ruption with the cyber-physical systems. Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 199, 106869
Chiu, M. C., & Lin, Y. H. (2016). “Simulation-based method considering design for additive manufacturing 
and supply chain: An empirical study of lamp industry”. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 116 
No(2), 322–348
Choi, T. Y., Rogers, D., & Vakil, B. (2020). Coronavirus is a wake-up call for supply chain management. 
Harvard Business Review, 27, 364–398
Chowdhury, M. M. H., Quaddus, M., & Agarwal, R. (2019). “Supply chain resilience for performance: role of 
relational practices and network complexities”. Supply Chain Management, 24 No(5), 659–676
Colquitt, J. A., & Zapata-Phelan, C. P. (2007). Trends in theory building and theory testing: A five-decade 
study of the Academy of Management Journal. Academy of management journal, 50(6), 1281–1303
Craighead, C. W., Blackhurst, J., Rungtusanatham, M. J., & Handfield, R. B. (2007). The severity of supply 
chain disruptions: design characteristics and mitigation capabilities. Decision sciences, 38(1), 131–156
Cui, P., Dixon, J., Guin, U., & Dimase, D. (2019). A blockchain-based framework for supply chain prov­
enance. IEEE Access, 7, 157113–157125
Cui, Y. (2015). Improving supply chain resilience with employment of IOT. In International Conference on 
Multidisciplinary Social Networks Research (pp. 404–414). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
Ding, L., Lam, H. K., Cheng, T. C. E., & Zhou, H. (2018). A review of short-term event studies in operations 
and supply chain management. International Journal of Production Economics, 200, 329–342
Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2018). Ripple effect in the supply chain: an analysis and recent litera­
ture. International Journal of Production Research, 56(1–2), 414–430
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Bryde, D. J., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Papadopoulos, T. (2020). Blockchain technol­
ogy for enhancing swift-trust, collaboration and resilience within a humanitarian supply chain setting. 
International Journal of Production Research, 58(11), 3381–3398
844

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Wamba, F., Roubaud, S., D., & Foropon, C. (2019). Empirical 
investigation of data analytics capability and organizational flexibility as complements to supply chain 
resilience.International Journal of Production Research,1–19
Emmanouilidis, C., & Bakalis, S. (2020, August). Digital Technology enablers for resilient and customer 
driven food value chains. In IFIP International Conference on Advances in Production Management 
Systems (pp. 649–657). Springer, Cham
Fragapane, G., Ivanov, D., Peron, M., Sgarbossa, F., & Strandhagen, J. O. (2020). Increasing flexibility and 
productivity in Industry 4.0 production networks with autonomous mobile robots and smart intralogis­
tics (pp. 1–19). Annals of operations research
Frayret, J. M. (2011). Multi-Agent System applications in the forest products industry. Journal of Science & 
Technology for Forest Products and Processes, 1(2), 15–29
Gao, Q., Guo, S., Liu, X., Manogaran, G., Chilamkurti, N., & Kadry, S. (2020). Simulation analysis of sup­
ply chain risk management system based on IoT information platform. Enterprise Information Systems, 
14(9–10), 1354–1378
Gajek, S., Lees, M., & Jansen, C. (2020). IIoT and cyber-resilience (pp. 1–11). AI & SOCIETY
Galvin, P., Tywoniak, S., & Sutherland, J. (2021). Collaboration and opportunism in megaproject alliance 
contracts: The interplay between governance, trust and culture. International Journal of Project Man­
agement, 39(4), 394–405
Gardner, J. T., & Cooper, M. C. (2003). Strategic supply chain mapping approaches. Journal of business 
logistics, 24(2), 37–64
Gelenbe, E., Fröhlich, P., Nowak, M., Papadopoulos, S., Protogerou, A., Drosou, A., & Tzovaras, D. (2020). 
IoT Network Attack Detection and Mitigation. In 2020 9th Mediterranean Conference on Embedded 
Computing (MECO) (pp. 1–6). IEEE
Giannoccaro, I., & Iftikhar, A. (2020). Mitigating ripple effect in supply networks: the effect of trust and 
topology on resilience.International Journal of Production Research,1–18
Gölgeci, I., Ali, I., Ritala, P., & Arslan, A. (2022). A bibliometric review of service ecosystems research: cur­
rent status and future directions. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 37(4), 841–858
Guerar, M., Merlo, A., Migliardi, M., Palmieri, F., & Verderame, L. (2020). A fraud-resilient blockchain-based 
solution for invoice financing. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 67(4), 1086–1098
Hendry, L. C., Stevenson, M., MacBryde, J., Ball, P., Sayed, M., & Liu, L. (2019). Local food supply chain 
resilience to constitutional change: the Brexit effect. International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, 39 No(3), 429–453
Hewett, N., Søgaard, J. S., & Mølbjerg, R. W. (2020). This Is How Blockchain Can Be Used In Supply 
Chains To Shape A Post-COVID-19 Economic Recovery
Hoberg, K., & Alicke, K. (2016). The customer experience. Supply Chain Management Review, 9(10), 28–37
Hohenstein, N. O., Feisel, E., Hartmann, E., & Giunipero, L. (2015). Research on the phenomenon of supply 
chain resilience. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 45(1/2), 90
Hosseini, S., & Ivanov, D. (2020). Bayesian networks for supply chain risk, resilience and ripple effect analy­
sis: A literature review. Expert systems with applications, 161, 113649
Iftikhar, A., Purvis, L., & Giannoccaro, I. (2021). A meta-analytical review of antecedents and outcomes of 
firm resilience. Journal of Business Research, 135, 408–425
Iftikhar, A., Purvis, L., Giannoccaro, I., & Wang, Y. (2022). The impact of supply chain complexities on 
supply chain resilience: the mediating effect of big data analytics (pp. 1–21). Production Planning & 
Control
Ivanov, D. (2017). Revealing Interfaces of Supply Chain Resilience and Sustainability: A Simulation Study. 
International Journal of Production Research, 56(10), 3507–3523
Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2019). Low-Certainty-Need (LCN) supply chains: a new perspective in managing 
disruption risks and resilience. International Journal of Production Research, 57(15–16), 5119–5136
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2013). Multi-disciplinary analysis of interfaces “supply chain 
event management–RFID–Control theory”. International Journal of Integrated Supply Management, 
8(1/2/3), 52–66
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2019). The impact of digital technology and Industry 4.0 on the ripple 
effect and supply chain risk analytics. International Journal of Production Research, 57(3), 829–846
Jayaraman, R., AlHammadi, F., & Simsekler, M. C. E. (2018). Managing product recalls in healthcare supply 
chain. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management 
(IEEM) (pp. 293–297). IEEE
Jeyaraj, A., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2020). Meta-analysis in information systems research: Review and recom­
mendations. International Journal of Information Management, 55, 102226
Ji, J., Plakoyiannaki, E., Dimitratos, P., & Chen, S. (2019). “The qualitative case research in international 
entrepreneurship: a state of the art and analysis”. International Marketing Review, 36 No(1), 164–187
845

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
Kadadevaramth, R. S., Sharath, D., Ravishankar, B., & Mohan Kumar, P. (2020). A Review and devel­
opment of research framework on Technological Adoption of Blockchain and IoT in Supply Chain 
Network Optimization. 2020 International Conference on Mainstreaming Block Chain Implementation 
(ICOMBI) (pp. 1–8). IEEE
Kamalahmadi, M., & Mellat-Parast, M. (2016). Developing a resilient supply chain through supplier flexibil­
ity and reliability assessment. International Journal of Production Research, 54(1), 302–321
Kamble, S. S., Gunasekaran, A., & Sharma, R. (2020). Modeling the blockchain enabled traceability in agri­
culture supply chain. International Journal of Information Management, 52, 101967
Kask, J., & Öberg, C. (2019). “Why “majors” surge in the post-disruptive recording industry”. European 
Journal of Marketing, 53 No(3), 442–462
Kaur, H., & Singh, S. P. (2020). Disaster resilient proactive and reactive procurement models for humanitar­
ian supply chain (pp. 1–14). Production Planning & Control
Kozyrkov, C. (2020). To Recognize Risks Earlier, Invest in Analytics. HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW, 
98(6), 53–55
Kumar, S. K., Tiwari, M. K., & Babiceanu, R. F. (2010). Minimisation of supply chain cost with embed­
ded risk using computational intelligence approaches. International Journal of Production Research, 
48(13), 3717–3739
Lee, Y., Watanabe, K., & Li, W. S. (2016). Enhancing regional digital preparedness on natural hazards to 
safeguard business resilience in the Asia-Pacific. In International Conference on Information Technol­
ogy in Disaster Risk Reduction (pp. 170–182). Springer, Cham
Li, C. Z., Chen, Z., Xue, F., Kong, X. T., Xiao, B., Lai, X., & Zhao, Y. (2021). A blockchain-and IoT-based 
smart product-service system for the sustainability of prefabricated housing construction. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 286, 125391
Lin, C., & Zhang, Z. W. (2020). A Two-Tier Blockchain Architecture for the Digital Transformation of Mul­
tilateralism. In 2020 IEEE 91st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2020-Spring) (pp. 1–5). IEEE
Lohmer, J., Bugert, N., & Lasch, R. (2020). Analysis of resilience strategies and ripple effect in blockchain-
coordinated supply chains: An agent-based simulation study. International journal of production eco­
nomics, 228, 107882
Lorenc, A., Kuźnar, M., Lerher, T., & Szkoda, M. (2020). Predicting the Probability of Cargo Theft for Indi­
vidual Cases in Railway Transport. Tehnički vjesnik, 27(3), 773–780
Mandal, S. (2019). “The influence of big data analytics management capabilities on supply chain prepared­
ness, alertness and agility: An empirical investigation”. Information Technology & People, 32 No(2), 
297–318
Macdonald, J. R., & Corsi, T. M. (2013). Supply chain disruption management: Severe events, recovery, and 
performance. Journal of Business Logistics, 34(4), 270–288
Martin, R. A. (2020). Visibility & Control: Addressing Supply Chain Challenges to Trustworthy Software-
Enabled Things. In 2020 IEEE Systems Security Symposium (SSS) (pp. 1–4). IEEE
Meisel, N. A., Williams, C. B., Ellis, K. P., & Taylor, D. (2016). “Decision support for additive manufacturing 
deployment in remote or austere environments”. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 
27 No(7), 898–914
Mishra, D., Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., & Childe, S. J. (2018). Big Data and supply chain manage­
ment: a review and bibliometric analysis. Annals of Operations Research, 270(1), 313–336
Moktadir, M. A., Ali, S. M., Paul, S. K., & Shukla, N. (2019). Barriers to big data analytics in manufacturing 
supply chains: A case study from Bangladesh. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 128, 1063–1075
Mubarik, M. S., Naghavi, N., Mubarik, M., Kusi-Sarpong, S., Khan, S. A., Zaman, S. I., & Kazmi, S. H. A. 
(2021). Resilience and cleaner production in industry 4.0: Role of supply chain mapping and visibility. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 292, 126058
Min, H. (2019). Blockchain technology for enhancing supply chain resilience. Business Horizons, 62(1), 
35–45
Munim, Z. H., Dushenko, M., Jimenez, V. J., Shakil, M. H., & Imset, M. (2020). Big data and artificial intel­
ligence in the maritime industry: a bibliometric review and future research directions. Maritime Policy 
& Management, 47(5), 577–597
Naghshineh, B., & Carvalho, H. (2020). The Impact of Additive Manufacturing on Supply Chain Resilience. 
In Doctoral Conference on Computing, Electrical and Industrial Systems (pp. 214–221). Springer, Cham
Nah, F. F. H., & Siau, K. (2020, July). COVID-19 pandemic–role of technology in transforming business to 
the new normal. In International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (pp. 585–600). Springer, 
Cham
Papadopoulos, T., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Altay, N., Childe, S. J., & Fosso-Wamba, S. (2017). The role 
of Big Data in explaining disaster resilience in supply chains for sustainability. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 142, 1108–1118
846

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
Park, K. T., Son, Y. H., & Noh, S. D. (2020). The architectural framework of a cyber physical logistics system 
for digital-twin-based supply chain control.International Journal of Production Research,1–22
Paul, J., & Criado, A. R. (2020). The art of writing literature review: What do we know and what do we need 
to know? International Business Review, 29(4), 101717
Pramanik, D., Mondal, S. C., & Haldar, A. (2020). “Resilient supplier selection to mitigate uncertainty: soft-
computing approach”. Journal of Modelling in Management, 15 No(4), 1339–1361
Queiroz, M. M., & Wamba, S. F. (2019). Blockchain adoption challenges in supply chain: An empirical 
investigation of the main drivers in India and the USA. International Journal of Information Manage­
ment, 46, 70–82
Queiroz, M. M., Telles, R., & Bonilla, S. H. (2020). “Blockchain and supply chain management integration: 
a systematic review of the literature”. Supply Chain Management, 25 No(2), 241–254
Rajesh, R. (2020). A grey-layered ANP based decision support model for analyzing strategies of resilience in 
electronic supply chains. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 87, 103338
Ralston, P., & Blackhurst, J. (2020). Industry 4.0 and resilience in the supply chain: a driver of capability 
enhancement or capability loss? International Journal of Production Research, 58(16), 5006–5019
Ramirez-Peña, M., Sotano, A. J. S., Pérez-Fernandez, V., Abad, F. J., & Batista, M. (2020). Achieving a sus­
tainable shipbuilding supply chain under I4. 0 perspective. Journal of Cleaner Production, 244, 118789
Raut, R. D., Mangla, S. K., Narwane, V. S., Dora, M., & Liu, M. (2021). Big Data Analytics as a mediator in 
Lean, Agile, Resilient, and Green (LARG) practices effects on sustainable supply chains. Transporta­
tion Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 145, 102170
Rejeb, A., Simske, S., Rejeb, K., Treiblmaier, H., & Zailani, S. (2020). Internet of Things research in supply 
chain management and logistics: A bibliometric analysis. Internet of Things, 12, 100318
Reyes, P. M., Visich, J. K., & Jaska, P. (2020). Managing the dynamics of new technologies in the global 
supply chain. IEEE Engineering Management Review, 48(1), 156–162
Rialp, A., Merigó, J. M., Cancino, C. A., & Urbano, D. (2019). Twenty-five years (1992–2016) of the Interna­
tional Business Review: A bibliometric overview. International Business Review, 28(6), 101587
Rialti, R., Marzi, G., Ciappei, C., & Busso, D. (2019). “Big data and dynamic capabilities: a bibliometric 
analysis and systematic literature review”,Management Decision, 57 No. 8,2052–2068
Rice, J. B., & Caniato, F. (2003). Building a secure and resilient supply network. Supply Chain Management 
Review, 7 No(5), 22–24
Rindfleisch, A., & Heide, J. B. (1997). Transaction cost analysis: Past, present, and future applications. Jour­
nal of marketing, 61(4), 30–54
Rodríguez-Espíndola, O., Chowdhury, S., Beltagui, A., & Albores, P. (2020). The potential of emergent dis­
ruptive technologies for humanitarian supply chains: the integration of blockchain, Artificial Intelli­
gence and 3D printing. International Journal of Production Research, 58(15), 4610–4630
Salmi, M., Akmal, J. S., Pei, E., Wolff, J., Jaribion, A., & Khajavi, S. H. (2020). 3D printing in COVID-19: 
productivity estimation of the most promising open source solutions in emergency situations. Applied 
Sciences, 10(11), 4004
Shahzad, A., Zhang, K., & Gherbi, A. (2020). Intuitive development to examine collaborative iot supply 
chain system underlying privacy and security levels and perspective powering through proactive block­
chain. Sensors, 20(13), 3760
Sharma, R., Shishodia, A., Kamble, S., Gunasekaran, A., & Belhadi, A. (2020). Agriculture supply chain 
risks and COVID-19: mitigation strategies and implications for the practitioners.International Journal 
of Logistics Research and Applications,1–27
Singh, N. P., & Singh, S. (2019). Building supply chain risk resilience: Role of big data analytics in supply 
chain disruption mitigation. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 26 No(7), 2318–2342
Strozzi, F., Colicchia, C., Creazza, A., & Noè, C. (2017). Literature review on the ‘Smart Factory’concept 
using bibliometric tools. International Journal of Production Research, 55(22), 6572–6591
Swift, C., Guide Jr, V. D. R., & Muthulingam, S. (2019). Does supply chain visibility affect operating per­
formance? Evidence from conflict minerals disclosures. Journal of Operations Management, 65(5), 
406–429
Tang, C. S., & Veelenturf, L. P. (2019). The strategic role of logistics in the industry 4.0 era. Transportation 
Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 129, 1–11
Tao, D., Wang, T., Wang, T., Zhang, T., Zhang, X., & Qu, X. (2020). A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
user acceptance of consumer-oriented health information technologies. Computers in Human Behavior, 
104, 106147
Van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2010). Software survey: VOSviewer, a computer program for bibliometric 
mapping. Scientometrics, 84(2), 523–538
Van der Elst, L. A., Gokce Kurtoglu, M., Leffel, T., Zheng, M., & Gumennik, A. (2020). Rapid fabrication 
of sterile medical nasopharyngeal swabs by stereolithography for widespread testing in a pandemic. 
Advanced engineering materials, 22(11), 2000759
847

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 333:825–848
1 3
Verboeket, V., & Krikke, H. (2019). The disruptive impact of additive manufacturing on supply chains: A 
literature study, conceptual framework and research agenda. Computers in Industry, 111, 91–107
Wamba, S. F., & Queiroz, M. M. (2020). Industry 4.0 and the supply chain digitalisation: a blockchain diffu­
sion perspective (pp. 1–18). Production Planning & Control
Wang, Y., Chen, C. H., & Zghari-Sales, A. (2020). Designing a blockchain enabled supply chain.International 
Journal of Production Research,1–26
Wang, Y., Singgih, M., Wang, J., & Rit, M. (2019). Making sense of blockchain technology: How will it 
transform supply chains? International Journal of Production Economics, 211, 221–236
Witkowski, K. (2017). Internet of things, big data, industry 4.0–innovative solutions in logistics and supply 
chains management. Procedia engineering, 182, 763–769
Wong, C. Y. (2021). “Editorial”. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 
51 No(3), 205–211
Xu, L. D., Xu, E. L., & Li, L. (2018). Industry 4.0: state of the art and future trends. International Journal of 
Production Research, 56(8), 2941–2962
Xu, S., Zhang, X., Feng, L., & Yang, W. (2020). Disruption risks in supply chain management: a liter­
ature review based on bibliometric analysis. International Journal of Production Research, 58(11), 
3508–3526
Yan, B., Chen, X., Yuan, Q., & Zhou, X. (2020). Sustainability in fresh agricultural product supply chain 
based on radio frequency identification under an emergency. Central European Journal of Operations 
Research, 28(4), 1343–1361
Yu, W., Zhao, G., Liu, Q., & Song, Y. (2021). Role of big data analytics capability in developing integrated 
hospital supply chains and operational flexibility: An organizational information processing theory per­
spective. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 163, 120417
Zavala-Alcívar, A., Verdecho, M. J., & Alfaro-Saíz, J. J. (2020). A conceptual framework to manage resil­
ience and increase sustainability in the supply chain. Sustainability, 12(16), 6300
Zhang, X., Yu, Y., & Zhang, N. (2020). “Sustainable supply chain management under big data: a bibliometric 
analysis”. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 34 No(1), 427–445
Zhao, K., & Yu, X. (2011). A case based reasoning approach on supplier selection in petroleum enterprises. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 38(6), 6839–6847
Zouari, D., Ruel, S., & Viale, L. (2021). “Does digitalising the supply chain contribute to its resilience?“. 
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 51 No(2), 149–180
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Anas  Iftikhar1 · Imran  Ali2 · Ahmad  Arslan3 · Shlomo  Tarba4
 
 Imran Ali
i.ali@cqu.edu.au
Anas Iftikhar
a.iftikhar@lancaster.ac.uk
Ahmad Arslan
ahmad.arslan@oulu.fi
Shlomo Tarba
s.tarba@bham.ac.uk
1 
International Lecturer in Logistics & Supply Chain Management, Lancaster University 
Management School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom
2 
Lecturer in Operations and Innovation Management, School of Business & Law, Central 
Queensland University, Rockhampton, Australia
3 
Oulu Business School, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
4 
Birmingham Business School, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
848