TITLE: Is blockchain a cure for peer-to-peer lending?
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05108-1
---

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05108-1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Is blockchain a cure for peer-to-peer lending?
Wangcheng Yan1
· Wenjun Zhou2
Accepted: 21 November 2022 / Published online: 8 December 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
The blockchain, a decentralized ledger system, has been considered a revolutionary technol-
ogy to transform businesses, including the ﬁnancial markets. As peer-to-peer (P2P) lending
is also known for decentralization in the sense that individuals borrow from and lend to
each other directly, bypassing traditional banks, we explore the possibility and beneﬁts of
blockchains in P2P lending. We ﬁrst provide an economic analysis of existing P2P lend-
ing problems, including herding and platform-borrower collusion, with and without the
blockchain mechanism. We note that, compared with the existing markets, blockchain-backed
P2P lending is highly effective in privacy preservation and borrower quality distinction. Since
the role of intermediaries is eliminated in the blockchain world, the chance of platform-
borrower collusion is also minimized. Moreover, we show that borrowers and lenders can
expect additional surplus when the origination fee in traditional P2P lending is replaced with
a smaller tokenization cost and when borrowers present a more accurate ﬁnancial incentive
in a smart contract. With the smart contract, borrowers are allowed to propose optimal inter-
est rates based on their creditworthiness and capacity of repayment while detailed personal
information is not required. Additionally, we demonstrate that small investors’ surplus can
be further enhanced due to the elimination of herding.
Keywords Permissioned blockchains · Smart contract · Economic model
1 Introduction
Peer-to-peer (P2P) lending raises funds from individual lenders, or investors, to ﬁnance small
personal loans requested by borrowers via an Internet-based platform (Wei and Lin, 2016).
In recent years, P2P lending has seen substantial growth both in domestic and international
markets. According to Statista, the global P2P lending market increased its value from 1.2
B Wangcheng Yan
wyan3@tongji.edu.cn
Wenjun Zhou
wzhou4@utk.edu
1
Advanced Institute of Business, Tongji University, Zhangwu Road No. 1, Room 2108, Tongji SEM,
Shanghai 200092, China
2
Department of Business Analytics and Statistics, The University of Tennessee Knoxville, 916 Volunteer
Blvd., SMC 247, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
123

694
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
billion USD in 2012 to 64 billion USD in 2015 and is expected to have a market worth 1,000
billion USD in 2025.1 In the UK alone, the P2P lending in consumer markets has increased
from US$0.79 billion in 2014 to US$2.5 billion in 2017, according to the International
Monetary Fund (Bazarbash and Beaton, 2020). The growth of P2P lending as an alternative
ﬁnancing and investing market is attributable to its efﬁcient funding process without involving
ofﬁcial ﬁnancial institutions (more details about the funding process will be provided in
Sect. 3). One essential beneﬁt of P2P lending is the ﬁnancial surplus reducing borrowers’
cost and increasing lenders’ return compared with traditional ﬁnancial services. According to
Investopedia, borrowers and lenders in P2P lending receive a 7% margin on average compared
with traditional banking services.2 Additional beneﬁts of P2P lending include faster funding
process for borrowers and more diverse investment options for lenders.
The P2P lending business model, however, still sees underlying challenges. One of the
biggest challenges is the high risk for investors due to moral hazards and adverse selection.
Speciﬁcally, the default rate at Prosper.com, a leading P2P lending platform in the United
States, was reported to be 2.6% for A-grade loans and 11.5% for D-grade loans as of May
2017,3 in contrast to only 1.84% for consumer loans at commercial banks, according to
the Federal Reserve Bank.4 Similarly in China, approximately 250 P2P lenders default in
merely two months in 2018.5 The prevalence of risk in this market makes it essential for
lenders to distinguish high- and low- quality loans, while these same lenders suffer from
renown information asymmetry. Though not perfect, P2P lending has a great potential in the
personal loans market. Therefore, we are interested in developing insights to overcome its
drawbacks and fully utilize its beneﬁts.
The blockchain, a decentralized, automatic ledger technique, has gained much attention in
recent years, partly due to the spike in Bitcoin prices. The Bitcoins are a cryptocurrency based
on the blockchain technology (Koutmos, 2019). Its unit price raised from $15 in May 2013 to
a historical high of $67,139 in October 2021. According to Google Trends (see Fig. 1b), the
search term “blockchain” raised much interest in 2016, whereas the term “personal loan” has
been of constant interest. While cryptocurrencies like Bitcoins are important applications
of the blockchain technology, the latter is not limited to cryptocurrencies and may have
further implications for the ﬁnancial market (e.g., personal loans). Since P2P lending is
conceptually decentralized (although is practically still centralized via an online platform),
we were interested in learning whether the blockchain could help bring more vitality to P2P
lending since its decentralized nature well ﬁts the goal of P2P lending.
There are also literature studying the Blockchain’s potential economic beneﬁts, such as
reduced transaction veriﬁcation cost, lowered networking cost (Catalini and Gans, 2020;
Trautman, 2016). Some researchers further theoretically model market players’ behavior
and analyze potential beneﬁts of applying the blockchain technology in a particular ﬁnancial
market. For instance, Cong and He (2019) studied the product selling and buying market and
found that the permissioned blockchain could increase customer surplus and social welfare
while public blockchain may disrupt.6 Malinova and Park (2017) considered a P2P asset-
liquidity trading market involving two large institutions and multiple small investors and
1 https://www.statista.com/statistics/325902/global-p2p-lending/. Visited on 11/01/2021.
2 https://www.investopedia.com/articles/ﬁnancial-theory/08/peer-to-peer-lending.asp.Visitedon11/01/2021.
3 http://www.investmentzen.com/peer-to-peer-lending-for-investors/prosper. Visited on 11/01/2021.
4 Seaon
2
in
2017.
See
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/chargeoff/delallsa.htm.
Visited
on
11/01/2021.
5 https://www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Publications/PP/2019/PPEA2019024.ashx. Visited on 05/07/2021.
6 Details about blockchain types can be found in Sect. 2.1.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
695
Fig. 1 Trends about P2P lending and blockchain. a The P2P lending market evaluation and forecast from
Statista; b the search interest (normalized to max 100) of two topics over past ﬁve years from Google Trends
Worldwide Web Search
123

696
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
demonstrated that the blockchain might be undesirable for ﬁnancing. Even though the work
by Malinova and Park (2017) was done in the context of P2P trading, it may not ﬁt the P2P
lending market since all liquidity requesters in their model settings have available valuable
assets, while borrowers—liquidity requesters in P2P lending—do not commit assets before
submitting loan requests. Thus, we further explore potential beneﬁts of blockchain based on
speciﬁc features of P2P lending.
In this study, we explore a theoretical model to explain the behavior of borrowers and
lenders in the traditional world and the blockchain world. In P2P lending, a borrower sub-
mits a loan request, and an investor (or lender) can choose whether and how much to invest in
the loan.7 For borrowers, the signiﬁcant concerns are personal privacy, charged origination
fee, and paid interest. When it comes to lenders, we consider knowledge and investment het-
erogeneity among investors while simply such difference in two levels—small investors and
large investors. A small investor may not well identify a loan’s quality due to lack of ﬁnan-
cial knowledge and analytical capacity, and thus, choose to follow others’ investment, which
is renown as herding. Compared with small investors, large investors usually own richer
ﬁnancial knowledge and validate loan quality (i.e., reward-to-variability ratio) more accu-
rately. However, they are still faced with the estimation uncertainty since there is information
asymmetry in this market. Thus, there could be different effects of applying the blockchain
technology on the two types of lenders.
Our work contributes to understandings of possible impacts of blockchains in P2P lend-
ing. First, by considering the loan quality estimation bias, we exploit an economic model to
explain herding and fraud, and identify potential victim small investors in traditional P2P
lending (see Sects. 3.1 and 3.2). Next, we theoretically analyze potential beneﬁts of the
smart contract based blockchain in P2P lending and show how the blockchain world may be
superior to the conventional one. In the blockchain world, we ﬁrst extend the decentralized
consensus model from Cong and He (2019) to explain the requirement of honest majority
in a blockchain (see Sect. 4.1). Then we explore the feasibility of eliminating intermediaries
while motivating borrowers to maintain trustworthiness with a smart contract (see Sect. 4.2).
In the permissioned blockchain, a borrower will automatically select an optimal interest rate
himself based on the market competitiveness and his risk. The beneﬁts of the blockchain
technology are as follows. Most importantly, the blockchain technology eliminates interme-
diaries and reduces the intermediate transaction fee. As a result, borrowers will increase their
interest rates but pay less ultimately, and lenders can expect more return from borrowers’
paid interest (see Proposition 2). From borrowers’ perspective, another direct beneﬁt is the
privacy protection and efﬁcient distinction between high and low-quality loans (see Propo-
sition 1). From lenders’ perspective, they could increase surplus even if borrowers do not
increase the interest rate. For small investors, the blockchain technology can prevent herding
since no receiver’s ID information is publicly released. Thus, they could avoid biased loan
quality estimation and increase surplus in a Bertrand competition (see Proposition 3). For
both small and large investors, they would estimate the loan quality with less variation since
the blockchain technology could provide a direct ﬁnancial incentive of borrowers. As a result,
they could expect a higher expected return (see Proposition 4). In sum, the blockchain tech-
nology offers economic and social beneﬁts to borrowers, small investors, and large investors
simultaneously. To the best of our knowledge, this is a pioneer work modeling and analyzing
the blockchain technology in the context of P2P lending to tackle its disadvantages.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 3, we describe and model two
signiﬁcant problems in traditional P2P lending platforms. Then we conduct a literature review
7 In this paper, we use lender and investor interchangeably.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
697
in Sect. 2 with a primer on the blockchain and smart contract in Sect. 2.1 as well as their
applications focusing on the ﬁnancial market in Sect. 2.2. Next, we apply the blockchain
technology to overcome the problems in the traditional world that are stated in Sect. 3, and
analyze the behavior of borrowers and lenders and beneﬁts to them in Sect. 4. In Sect. 5 we
perform a numerical study to illustrate the beneﬁts of blockchain. In Sect. 6, we conclude
the paper with discussions of limitations of this study and future research directions.
2 Literature review
In this section, we ﬁrst provide an overview of blockchains and smart contracts, and then
review research works about their economic beneﬁts.
2.1 Blockchains and smart contracts
The history of blockchain can be dated back to 1991 when Stuart Haber and W. Scott Stor-
netta described a cryptographically secured chain of blocks (Haber and Stornetta, 1990). In
2008, Nakamoto (2008) ofﬁcially proposed Bitcoin (BTC)—a blockchain-based, decentral-
ized cryptocurrency. In the blockchain system, the ledger book consists of multiple blocks
and is publicly available. In each block, all transaction information within a certain period
(e.g., approximately 10 min in Bitcoin) including sender, receiver, and the transaction amount
is recorded. Further, each block is linked to a previous block so that everyone can validate
the trustworthiness of the block by tracking historical transactions. All miners8 (i.e., record
keepers) can verify transactions with a negligible veriﬁcation cost and are required to prove
their mining power. The ﬁrst miner who veriﬁes the transaction and proves the mining power
can receive a certain amount of reward from a small transaction fee charged to the sender.
This system will work as long as no one controls at least 51% of the mining power.
It should be noted that a blockchain can be classiﬁed into different types based on various
criteria. A blockchain can be public or private based on user authentication (who are you).
It can also be permissionless or permissioned based on user authorization (what can you
do). Typically, permissionless blockchains such as Bitcoin are public, whereas permissioned
blockchains such as Ripple are private. Each blockchain type has its own pros and cons.
For instance, a permissionless blockchain has almost no requirement for participation but
is difﬁcult to control if it is attacked, while a permissioned blockchain is easy to manage
but requires entrants to meet a preset standard. In P2P lending, it is important to control
borrowers’ quality via additional information since they overdraft the future. The credit
score requirement is one type of quality indicators in existing platforms, for instance, the
minimum score in SoFi and Marcus are 680 and 660, respectively.9 Since a permissioned
blockchain only accepts qualiﬁed users, it better satisﬁes the requirements of P2P lending.
Later in 2013, Vitalik Buterin introduced an improved platform named Ethereum (its
corresponding cryptocurrency can also be called Ethereum) (Buterin, 2016). Compared with
Bitcoin’s primary purpose of supporting a decentralized currency, Ethereum was created
mainly to help build and run distributed applications. Based on these applications, Ethereum
further promotes P2P contracts. Due to the ﬂexibility of building applications on the Ethereum
8 Like those who extract ore from the earth, miners search for the reward in the blockchain. Take Bitcoin as
an example. Different from physical mining, mining in the blockchain is to solve a computational expensive
problem and add the solution along with transactions into the block.
9 https://www.nerdwallet.com/blog/loans/personal-loans-good-credit/. Visited on 11/01/2021.
123

698
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
platforms, many cryptocurrencies are developed upon it to improve the blockchain system.
Since many investors and developers believe the future success of the appealing decentralized
feature, cryptocurrencies have gained great success in the past ﬁve years. However, the
underlying technique—blockchain—is not limited to cryptocurrencies, and could beneﬁt a
wider range of industries. For example, the smart contract, ﬁrst proposed by Nick Szabo
(Szabo, 1994), can be integrated into the Ethereum platform. A smart contract is a computer
recognized protocol to automatically execute transactions and exchanges with predeﬁned
rules without involving a third party. In Buterin et al. (2014), Vitalik Buterin described the
smart contract system and its algorithmic implementations in detail.
Blockchain technology development revolves around several issues. The ﬁrst issue is to
design mechanisms of trustworthy decentralized consensus. The most widely used ones are
Proof-of-Work (PoW) (Nakamoto, 2008) and Proof-of-Stake (PoS) (Bentov et al., 2016).
A miner (i.e., record keeper) can add transactions to a block by proving the computational
power in the PoW blockchain or the involved stake in the PoS blockchain (more information
about decentralized consensus mechanisms can be found in “Appendix A”). The second issue
is privacy preservation. In many blockchain systems such as Bitcoin, all the users’ transaction
history and wallet balance are publicly known. This would be a problem for all borrowers and
especially for large institutions. Business opponents of these large institutions may analyze
their transaction behavior to identify business strategies that these institutions did not intend
to disclose. Further, it may be undesirable that all you business relationship can be mined
in these blockchain networks. To protect users’ privacy, transaction senders’ and recipients’
key ownership is unidentiﬁable in newer blockchain systems, like Monero (Courtois, 2016).
A more detailed overview of the blockchain’s privacy preservation mechanism can be found
in “Appendix B”.
2.2 Economic benefits
The economic beneﬁt of blockchain technology mainly derives from its decentralization
nature. A direct outcome is the possibility of anonymizing transaction values and par-
ties, which is critical for large traders in the ﬁnancial market (Malinova and Park, 2017).
Blockchain technology can also reduce veriﬁcation cost and networking cost compared with
the traditional world (Catalini and Gans, 2020). Further, The blockchain may beneﬁt ﬁnancial
services in different periods of trading, including pre-trade, trade, post-trade, and custody &
security servicing (Peters and Panayi, 2016; Trautman, 2016). For instance, the blockchain
does not need central clearing for real-time cash transactions after trading occurs. Despite the
potential beneﬁts discussed above, some researchers show a dialectical attitude towards this
emerging technique from different perspectives. For instance, Cai and Zhu (2016) admitted
that the blockchain technology could prevent object information fraud (e.g., loan application)
but did not function well in subjective information fraud (e.g., malicious rating). Further, there
is a lack of a regulatory and legal framework to prevent potential attacks on the blockchain
(Hileman and Rauchs, 2017). The authors also argued that the blockchain technology needed
to solve the security and scalability issues to improve its performance. The requirement of
external monitoring to the blockchain is further supported by the potential Bitcoin price
manipulation found in (Grifﬁn and Shams, 2020). In their work, empirical evidence was
found that the purchases of Tether, a digital currency pegged to USD, occurred precisely
during the Bitcoin price drop and quickly moved up the price. To address these challenges of
applying the blockchain technology, Mendling et al. (2017) pointed out seven future research
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
699
directions, such as the execution and monitoring system, the implementation of a redesigned
blockchain-based process, and the impact of new business models.
There is a small number of recent works that explore the economic nature of the blockchain
in different ﬁnancial markets using mathematical modeling. For instance, Cong and He (2019)
compared the blockchain world (both permissioned and permissionless) with the traditional
world in the context of product trading with heterogeneous quality. They found that the
permissioned blockchain could improve customer surplus and social welfare due to increased
competition, while consumer surplus might be lowered in a public blockchain. To the best
of our understanding, P2P lending is different from the context of product selling in the
above work since borrowers overdraw future incomes while product sellers offer products
with equivalent current values. In other words, product sellers obtain the liquidity after
consumers receive products, while borrowers obtain the liquidity before lenders receive any
product (i.e., principal and interest) in P2P lending. Another work from Malinova and Park
(2017) investigated the market design comparing the intermediated and blockchain-based
P2P trading, such as buying and selling a valuable asset for liquidity. They found that P2P
trading did not require blockchain technology. By comparing the public blockchain with
multiple IDs and the private blockchain with non-transparent single ID, they also found that
the public blockchain has higher aggregated welfare but may lead to lower payoffs for large
investors. Different from their framework, we include the investors’ loan quality estimation
uncertainty in our model settings. The loan quality estimation uncertainty, including bias
and variance, can be used to explain P2P practice problems, such as herding and fraud. We
further explore the blockchain technology as a solution to these problems.
Smart contract—a powerful digital tool to facilitate contracts—also attracts much atten-
tion due to the popularity of blockchain. As described in Szabo (1994), digital cash protocol
can maintain paper cash characteristics such as unforgeability, conﬁdentiality, and divisi-
bility while performing online payment. Together with the blockchain technology, a smart
contract can also promote sharing of services and properties in the Internet of Things domain
(Christidis and Devetsikiotis, 2016). For instance, Slock.it10 is conducting research on smart
electronic locks that can be opened with tokens remotely, whereas LO3 Energy11 is devel-
oping a platform to enable consumer P2P transactions on excessive energy in the blockchain
automatically via a smart contract. Cong and He (2019) used the smart contract as a quality
controller during the product selling process (i.e., money will not be transferred to the seller’
account until the buyer receives a product with satisfactory quality) in the blockchain world.
Overall, the blockchain technology is an emerging and evolutionary technology that could
reform the world economy. Currently, there is still a lack of relevant literature with mathe-
matical and economic analysis on blockchain’s applications in P2P lending. Our work is an
attempt to employ the blockchain technology to facilitate P2P lending and explores potential
beneﬁts of blockchain to different market players.
3 Peer-to-peer lending: the traditional world
P2P lending is typically supported by an Internet-based platform for executing transactions.
In Prosper.com, a borrower submit his personal information such as name, date of birth,
income when requesting a loan. The platform will review the borrower’s credit report and
10 https://blog.slock.it/slock-it-fully-integrates-with-blockchains-llc-d5a2553eedb6. Visited on 11/01/2021.
11 https://lo3energy.com/. Visited on 11/01/2021.
123

700
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
provide an offer with a preset interest rate (based on the creditworthiness level).12 Once
the borrower accepts the offered loan, the platform will list it on the website (see Fig. 2a)
and allow multiple lenders to invest into it. As we can see, for each loan, the website lists
the critical investment information such as borrower rate, monthly interest, and historical
return, as well as the borrower’s credit proﬁle, such as FICO score, bankcard utilization, and
debt/income ratio (see Fig. 2b). These loans may have different quality, and thus, are rated
from A to E by the platform with grade A being the highest rating. By comparing grade A loan
with grade E loan (Fig. 2b vs. c), we can see that higher grade loans typically have smaller
risk with lower return, and such information can be used by lenders to determine whether
and how much to invest in these loans. If the loan is successfully funded, the loan will be
leased to the borrower with an origination fee charged by the platform (e.g., approximately
5% in Prosper.com). Next, the borrower needs to make monthly repayment to lenders. If
the borrower cannot repay the loan, the platform would notify the credit report agency and
contact a collection agency.
In general, P2P lending platforms provide borrowers with a lower interest rate and lenders
with a higher return compared with those offered by well-established ﬁnancial institutions,
such as major banks in the US. However, possessing less investment proﬁciency and infor-
mation retrieval ability (compared to professional investors), lenders are still faced with high
investment risks.
In the following subsections, we use a simple economic model to explain how herding
and fabrication occurs in P2P lending. With this economic model, we provide a foundation
of the loan quality estimation and use the estimation bias to further investigate drawbacks of
the traditional world and beneﬁts by applying the blockchain technology. In particular, we
will discuss several long-lasting challenges of P2P lending. Suppose an investor j decides
to invest w j to a loan with quality (i.e., the payoff for one unit of investment) hi. The lender
can validate the loan quality with a cost λ j. We will use subscript {l, b} to represent lenders
and borrowers, respectively. Our model reveals that in most cases, the victims from the
herding and fabrication are small investors. In the following, we describe the challenges in
P2P lending and our model settings in details.
3.1 Irrational herding
The P2P lending, essentially a credit marketplace, suffers from the problems of information
asymmetry and adverse selection (Lin et al., 2013). In the P2P lending market, borrowers have
much more information about the loan quality than lenders, especially small investors. In P2P
lending platforms (e.g., Prosper), one common phenomenon resulted from the information
asymmetry is herding (Herzenstein et al., 2011), where investors often observe and follow
others’ investment and participate in loans that are close to be successfully funded.13 Possible
explanations to this irrational behavior are lack of resources (e.g., time) or expertise (e.g.,
ﬁnancial knowledge) and opportunity cost (e.g., selecting an excellent but less popular listing
while it does not get funded ﬁnally.) Such irrational investment decision can hurt lenders’
surplus due to the inability of effective diversiﬁcation, high system risk from the mono
investment portfolio, and insufﬁcient money resource allocation (Wang and Greiner, 2010).
12 Prosper changed the origination process on December 19, 2010. Before that date, the loan interest rate
was determined using a bidding process. Interested readers may refer to Wei and Lin (2016) and Butler et al.
(2016) for details of the bidding mechanism.
13 The initial P2P lending platform was based on interest rate bidding to leverage market efﬁciency. The
bidding system would result in more herding (Wei and Lin, 2016).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
701
Fig. 2 A screenshot of loan listing in Prosper.com
123

702
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
The herding also exists in the emerging cryptocurrency market, and generates signiﬁcant
impact that can be either positive or negative depending on the market (King and Koutmos,
2021).
Here we use an economic model to explain herding and its impact. An investor has two
choices: The ﬁrst choice is to devote effort to validate all loans’ quality and choose the best
one (h(1)). Such effort would lead to a validation cost λ j. The second choice is using some
simple information, such as credit score and friends’ recommendation, to estimate a loan i’s
quality hi. Then the utility from the ﬁrst choice is E[U 1
l ] = h(1)w j −λ j, whereas the utility
from the second choice is E[U 2
l ] = hiw j. Thus, compared with the ﬁrst choice, the utility
gain in the second choice is,
E[ΔUl] = E[U 2
l ] −E[U 1
l ] = −ciw j + λ j,
(1)
where ci = h(1) −hi is the unit loss without validation for loan i.
From Eq. (1) we can obtain that the investor j should carry out the validation process
(choice one) if w j > w = λ j
ci . However, the investor j may overestimate the quality of a
“popular” loan i due to the herding effect in the second choice. In this case, the estimation
of loan i’s quality becomes hi + d jG(ηi), where d j is the belief that others make good
choices, ηi is the percentage of funded for loan i, G(·) is a function linking probability of
successful loan and percentage of funded. It is obvious that G(·) is an increasing function
with 0 ≤G(0) < G(1) ≤1. Then the estimation of the utility difference between the two
choices becomes,
E[ΔU ′
l ] = −(ci −d jG(ηi))w j + λ j.
(2)
Solving Eq. (2), we can obtain that the threshold w increases to w′ =
λ j
ci−d j . That is, the
investor j should validate all loans’ quality (choice one) for the optimal utility gain but
may proceed to use some simple information only (choice two) due to the herding when her
investment is,
λ j
ci
< w j <
λ j
ci −d j
.
(3)
Further, for such an investor j, she will invest in a loan i in the second choice if and only if
ηi > η = G−1
 ci
d j
−
λ j
d jw j

.
(4)
Note that Eq. (3) represents the majority of lenders, whose investment amount is at a
moderately small level. For these lenders, their real utility gain in the second choice E[ΔUl]
is negative while the estimated utility gain E[ΔU ′
l ] is positive. In sum, the herding will lead
to more investors’ investment without thorough loan quality validation. As a result, it may
harm lenders’ surplus and ﬁnally lower the market efﬁciency.
3.2 Investment risk due to borrower default and borrower-platform collusion
The primary risk lenders face in P2P lending platforms are from malicious borrowers. It is
not rare that borrowers default on loans due to lack of repayment capacity and sometimes
intentional fraud (Jiang et al., 2018). Further, even if the platform requests a third party to
collect the debt, lenders rather than the platform are responsible for the entire cost occurred
in the debt collection process. The frequent occurrence of such phenomenon may come from
the insufﬁcient ﬁnancial incentive for borrowers to obey the rule.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
703
Another source of investment is from the platform itself. It is possible that the platform
colludes with borrowers to attract lenders’ investment. It is difﬁcult for lenders to distinguish
whether a loan is fabricated or not due to information asymmetry. A famous example is
the Ezubao incident that occurred between 2014 and 2016 (Gough, 2016), resulting in $7.6
billion dollars stolen from victim investors. The platform attracted follow-up investment by
a high delusive return with fabricated projects. Similar problems happened in the United
States, such as the Lending Club scandal discovered in April 2016 that involved fraud and
nondisclosure (Rudegair, 2016).
Here we use an economic model to explain the mechanism of such investment risk from
the borrower and platform collusion. Consider the case where collusion happens—the loan
has extremely low quality (hi < 0). If an investor j can obtain an unbiased estimation of hi,
she will not invest into it due to the expected negative payoff. However, since the loan may
be packaged and promoted due to collusion between the borrower and platform, the investor
j would over-estimate hi as,
ˆhi = hi + ai j + ϵi j,
(5)
where ϵi j is a random term with mean zero and ai j is the fabrication level with ai j = gi(w j).
Moreover, gi(·) is a decreasing function with respect to w j, that is, large investors are less
likely to become victims due to their richer ﬁnancial knowledge. Here we use the functional
form gi(w j) = ai
w j . Then the investor j’s estimation of expected payoff would be,
E[ ˆU ′
l ] = ai + hiw j −λ j.
(6)
Solving E[ ˆU ′
l ] = 0 we can obtain that w =
ai−λ j
−hi . When w j > w, lender j will
not invest due to estimated negative payoff. However, for those lenders with w j < w
(i.e., small investors), they would invest and receive a negative payoff ultimately. Note that
limai→+∞w = +∞, which indicates all the lenders may become victims if the fabrication
level is sufﬁciently high (e.g., the platform fraud in Ezubao).
3.3 Information disclosure and privacy leakage in public listings
Further, from the borrowers’ perspective, their privacy cannot be guaranteed since they submit
theirpersonalinformationtoathirdparty.EvenatrustedthirdpartysuchasEquifaxmaysuffer
from the data breach (Mathews, 2017). Moreover, high-quality borrowers cannot distinguish
themselves from low-quality borrowers by providing more ﬁnancial incentive since all the
borrowers’ creditworthiness are determined by their credit proﬁles. The platform may set up
a high interest rate for a borrower if his credit proﬁle is not good enough, though the borrower
could repay the loan timely.
Since the blockchain technology could generate decentralized consensus without interme-
diaries and protect market players’ personal information, it is deemed to be a good solution
to overcome the above-mentioned drawbacks of traditional P2P lending platforms.
4 Peer-to-peer lending in the blockchain world
In this section, we explore the viability of a P2P lending system supported by the
blockchain technology. Figure 3 contrasts the P2P lending process in the traditional world
and the blockchain world. In the traditional world, the borrowers submit loan applications
(i.e., listings) by disclosing personal information. Investors assess the quality of listings and
123

704
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
Fig. 3 A framework comparing the blockchain world with the traditional world
allocate small amounts of funds on listings they prefer. Once a listing receives enough fund,
it automatically becomes a loan. When the borrowers pay back the loans with interest, the
investors receive returns of investments. When the borrowers fail to pay back the loans (e.g.,
default),theinvestorscannotrecovertheinvestmentamountandbearsaloss.Intheblockchain
world,14 a borrower ﬁrst needs to obtain tokens from a trusted third party with his real-world
asset collateral (e.g., auto vehicle). It would not have any impact on the asset unless they can-
not repay the loan. Then the borrower could submit a loan request with the token commitment
rather than the personal information. An investor will review his commitment and determines
the investment with his proposed interest rate and risk. Finally, the collateral will be returned
(forfeited) if the repayment is successful (failed). In the blockchain world, borrowers under-
take the risk of failed repayment, which is different signiﬁcantly from the traditional world
where lenders take the majority of the risk. Thus, borrowers have more incentive to submit
a trustful loan and make repayment timely in the blockchain world. Further, since lenders
have involved investment, we could apply the PoS and Delegated Proof-of-Stake (DPoS, a
variation of PoS) mechanisms to guarantee the decentralized consensus on the transaction
veriﬁcation and blockchain maintenance.15
In the following, we will discuss how blockchain and smart contract can beneﬁt borrowers
and lenders compared with the traditional world. First, the blockchain world helps protect
personal information, attract high-quality borrowers, and increases users’ surplus by elimi-
nating the role of intermediaries (i.e., P2P lending platforms). Second, the multiple ID setting
in the blockchain world can prohibit herding among small investors and increase lenders’
surplus. Third, by delivering a direct ﬁnancial incentive, large investors increase their payoffs
as the estimation of loan quality has less uncertainty.
14 Our primary focus is a permissioned blockchain, since a public blockchain is hard to control and may
disrupt (Cong and He, 2019).
15 DPoS is one of the widely used consensus mechanisms that builds upon users’ stakes and works efﬁciently.
More details about decentralized consensus mechanisms can be found in “Appendix A”.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
705
4.1 An extended framework of decentralized consensus
Cong and He (2019) developed a model of decentralized consensus and demonstrated that
record keepers will always choose to report the true state of a transaction, even when the
number of record keepers goes to inﬁnity. However, their model is based on the assumption
that the majority of miners are honest. In this subsection, we modify the miner’s utility
function to explain this rule.
Suppose there is a transaction w to be veriﬁed. w = 1 if the transaction happens and
0 otherwise. In the network, there are K record keepers to validate the transaction and
broadcast their validation result y = {y1, . . . , yk, . . . , yK } with yk ∈{0, 1}. The consensus
of the transaction z(y) = 1 with probability 1
K

k yk and 0 otherwise. The record keeper
k needs to consider the following beneﬁt: First, creating a deviated consensus (z(y) ̸= w)
could bring him/her a beneﬁt bk (e.g. recording a non-existing transaction); Second, he/she
could receive a reward rk (e.g., a certain amount of cryptocurrency) if the report is accepted
by the whole network (yk =z(y)); Third, he/she has a willingness hk to be honest (yk = w),
or equivalently, a reputation cost (−hk) if misreporting (yk ̸= w). Thus, each risk-neural
record keeper k needs to maximize the following utility function:
max
yk∈{0,1}U(yk; y) = bk1z(y)̸=w + rk1yk=z(y) + hk1yk=w,
(7)
Note that in (7) the risk-neutral record keeper will receive cryptocurrency rk if and only if
his reported transaction aligns with the consensus (the second term on the RHS). That is, no
matter whether the record keeper is honest or not, to receive cryptocurrency, the only thing
is to be consistent with the majority.
Further, we consider the case where all the record keepers submit their reports simul-
taneously (e.g., ignoring the network speed difference). In this case, each one has a prior
probability p = Pr(yk = w) to report the true record. The prior p can be understood as the
percentage of the honest record keepers among all. Without losing generality, we discuss the
situation when w = 0.16 We can obtain the utility of reporting the truth and misreporting as
follows,
E[Uyk=0] = bk
K −1
K
(1 −p) + rk

1 −K −1
K
(1 −p)

+ hk,
(8)
E[Uyk=1] = (bk + rk)
 K −1
K
(1 −p) + 1
K

.
(9)
Thus, the record keeper k will report the truth (yk = w) if and only if
E[ΔU] = E[Uyk=0] −E[Uyk=1] = rk
K −1
K
(2p −1) −bk
K + hk > 0.
(10)
Note that limK→∞E[ΔU] = rk(2p −1) + hk, a sufﬁcient condition to guarantee the
decentralized consensus is that p > 1
2 and there are sufﬁciently many record keepers (K >
K =
bk−hk
(2p−1)rk+hk + 1). In blockchain, when the token price increases (e.g. see the Ethereum
price trend), the reward rk becomes larger, and consequently, the minimum number of record
keepers required (K) is reduced. When the reward rk is low, a small increase in the reward
may lead to a signiﬁcant reduction in the required number of record keepers, whereas the
impact diminishes when the reward becomes large. In the rest of this paper, we focus on the
case where perfect consensus is reached, that is, most stakeholders are honest.
16 It is not difﬁcult to verify the conclusions when w = 1 with the same procedure.
123

706
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
4.2 Permissioned blockchain to protect privacy and prevent fraud
In this subsection, we consider and show how a permissioned blockchain can help resolve
the privacy and safety issues in the traditional world. To enter the blockchain, a borrower i
needs to commit a collateral in the smart contract. What a borrower needs to do regarding
collateral commitment is signing an agreement such that in the absence of timely repay, the
collateral will be forfeited to pay the principal.
Compared with the traditional world, the penalty process for failed repayment is brought
forward to the beginning of a loan request. The trusted third party does not need to bear the
ﬁnancial risk since they do not lend out any cash and the liquidity is still with investors, which
is dramatically different from a traditional loan. Suppose a borrower needs one unit liquidity
and offers an interest rate Ri, the commitment would be ℜi = {1 + Ri, ξi}(ξi ≥0) with Ri
and ξi being money charged upon successful and failed repayment. Note that Ri and ξi are
time-discounted values. The commitment ξi can be accomplished by an valuable collateral
in a trusted third party. After collateral, borrowers receive a certain amount of tokens, which
can be used as the commitment ξi in the smart contract.
With this smart contract setting, borrowers can enter the blockchain with more ﬁnan-
cial incentive and privacy preservation. First, they are not required to submit any personal
information to the P2P lending network. Their loans will be evaluated based on their com-
mitments. The higher the commit (both successful one Ri and failed one ξi), the more chance
the loan becomes funded. Second, borrowers’ quality will be reﬂected on their commitment
upon failed repayment (ξi). On one hand, a high-quality borrower can propose a high ξi to
convince lenders his creditworthiness. On the other hand, a low-quality borrower can still
attract more lenders with a high commitment ξi. However, the borrower may receive a great
loss since he is lack of repayment capacity and the asset value ξi will be forfeited by the
trusted third party upon failed repayment. Thus, a borrower will propose a commitment ξi
based on his capacity of repayment to minimize the potential loss. In sum, with smart con-
tract borrowers propose interest rates based on their credit worthiness, and we summarize
the corresponding beneﬁtsas follows,
Proposition 1 With smart contracts, high-quality borrowers tend to propose a lower interest
rate, Ri, and a higher commitment upon failed repayment, ξi, than low-quality borrowers
do.
Since borrowers’ personal information is not submitted, a natural problem is how to
determine their creditworthiness. We further model how borrower i will choose his interest
rate Ri given his creditworthiness and market competitiveness. Considering the case where
borrower i’s maximum acceptable interest rate is xi (the interest rate from banks minus the
processing fee charged by the platform). Given an interest rate Ri, the probability of his loan
being funded is f (Ri), where f (Ri) is increasing in Ri with f (R) = 0, where R is the
minimum interest rate lenders will accept. The probability of being funded, f (Ri), is lower
if β is large (high market competitiveness) or ξi is low (high risk of borrower i). Then a
risk-neural borrower i’s problem is,
max
Ri
Ub = f (Ri)(xi −Ri).
(11)
Here we use the functional form f (Ri) = (Ri −R)β/ξi . Taking derivative with respect to
Ri, we can obtain the optimal interest rate proposed by the borrower i is,
R∗
i =
β
ξi + β xi +
ξi
ξi + β R.
(12)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
707
It is easy to verify that R < Ri < xi and Ri increases as the market competitiveness
β increases and decreases as ξi increases. For a borrower i with high risk, he may propose
a commitment close to zero if he fails to complete the repayment (ξi →0). In this case,
the optimal choice for borrower i is to propose the highest interest rate (Ri →xi). For
those borrowers with low risk, they could offer a high commitment upon failed repayment to
increase their chances of being funded while reducing the paid interest. The results in (12)
has several practical implications. In particular, exogenous factors may affect the borrowers’
optimal interest rate through parameters such as xi and R. For instance, with an expansionary
monetary policy the interest rate xi will be reduced, and thus, the optimal interest rate R∗
i
will be lower, whereas political conﬂicts may raise the overall risk of market players, and
thus, the minimum interest rate R may be higher, leading to an increased R∗.
Further, in the traditional world, the platform needs to charge a considerable origination fee
to maintain the ledger and its team. However, in the blockchain world, the cost would occur
during the tokenization with a trusted third party. Here we make the following assumption,
Assumption 1 The fees (tokenization fee plus transaction fee) in the blockchain world is
smaller than the origination fee in the traditional world.
Take a car as an example asset. Such tokenization is different from the auto loan since the
trusted third party is not required to release any cash but only need to verify the car ownership
with the CarFax report. Since the blockchain technology eliminates intermediaries with smart
contract, it saves an enormous amount of human resource fee. A proportion of the saved
origination fee could be distributed to the trusted third party as a participation incentive.
Under Assumption 1, the maximum acceptable interest rate for borrower i becomes larger
in the blockchain world (Δxi = xblockchain
i
−xtraditional
i
> 0). Based on Eq. (12), the
interest rate proposed by borrowers will increase in the blockchain world. From lenders’
perspective, they gain more return from an increased interest rate proposed by borrowers
(ΔRi =
β
ξi+β Δxi). From borrowers’ perspective, their paid fee, which equals to the interest
rate plus the origination fee, decreases by an amount (
ξi
ξi+β Δxi). Further, since borrowers
pay more interest, more lenders will be attracted and the probability of getting funded is
increased. In sum, we have the following proposition,
Proposition 2 The blockchain approach can save borrowers’ ultimate payment by
ξi
ξi+β Δxi
after eliminating origination fee and increase lenders’ expected return by
β
ξi+β Δxi from
higher interest rates proposed by borrowers.
Proposition 2 mainly comes from the signiﬁcant advantage of the blockchain technology
to eliminate intermediaries. The saved transaction cost would beneﬁt borrowers and lenders
simultaneously. It should also be noted that the higher the market competitiveness (β), the
more beneﬁt lenders can gain. Further, given the market competitiveness (β), a borrower
with a higher commitment (ξi) would save more debt cost compared with those with less
commitment.
After borrowers enter the blockchain, they may not want to commit their valuable asset
every time. Further, they may request a lower interest rate given their excellent performance
of repayment. To address this concern, we can apply a DPoS mechanism to select witnesses.
Top borrowers selected as witnesses need to maintain the blockchain and can gain reputation
score if they perform well. Since witnesses could be replaced with low-quality performance,
they are incentivized to keep correct records. Then they can use these tokens to serve as the
commitment. Further, witnesses can be changed by the stakeholders (i.e., lenders) if they do
123

708
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
not perform a high-quality service securing the network. As the blockchain grows, it is more
and more competitive for a borrower to become a witness and he has ﬁnancial incentive to
deliver an excellent service (i.e., make repayment timely and secure the blockchain).
4.3 Multiple public IDs to prevent herding for small investors
One approach to eliminate the effect of “herding instinct” is to make ηi unobservable while
completingloanfundingprocessgivencertainconditions(i.e.,ηi > ηthreshold).Itisinfeasible
for P2P platforms in the traditional world to hide the “% Funded” since lenders need to make
sure that their investments are not attacked by fraud, such as malicious use by the platform.
There are several approaches in the blockchain to make ηi unobservable while lenders’
every investment is on track. One approach is using the stealth address and ring signature
adopted by Monero.17 All outsiders can only observe the occurrence of the transaction but
have no idea about the sender’s and receipt’s information. Another approach is based on the
multiple-public-ID setting. For each user in the platform, he/she will be assigned multiple
private and public IDs using the hash function. The number of public IDs of user k is
determined by the number of units of liquidity requested/invested. For instance, if a borrower
requires a loan $1,000 and one unit be $25, the number of public IDs assigned to him will
be 40. In this setting, all outsiders can only observe the transactions among these public IDs
but cannot link them to their corresponding users.
Further, borrowers are guaranteed to receive their requested loan with the smart contract.
All the invested liquidity (in the form of cryptocurrency such as Ethereum) will be stored in
a smart contract. Any borrower can enter his password (master private key) to see if his loan
satisﬁesthereleasingconditions.Oncetheconditionsaremet,thecryptocurrencywilltransfer
from the smart contract to the borrower’s account, and this process will be broadcasted to
the whole network. Otherwise, the money will be returned to lenders’ accounts.
By prevent herding using blockchain, small investors can estimate the loan quality (hi)
without the belief that others make good choices (d j). Thus, they can obtain a quality esti-
mation with less bias. From the perspective of lenders’ surplus, we have the following
proposition,
Proposition 3 The blockchain increases the lenders’ surplus if the lenders’ preference dis-
tribution over loans with different quality is sufﬁciently right skewed.
Proposition 3 reveals the importance of avoiding herding in the P2P lending. It is beneﬁcial
for the market to keep away from the excessive demand for “popular” loans that may have low
quality since herding could lower the market efﬁciency, not to mention the possibility that
malicious market players (even the platform) may manipulate popular loans. By strategically
hiding the funding status of each loan, lenders can invest more rationally with their ﬁnancial
analysis of each borrower’s commitment.
4.4 Additional benefit for both large and small investors
In this subsection, we explore the beneﬁt in the blockchain world due to a stronger ﬁnancial
incentive from a borrower. After eliminating herding and fabrication, an investor j’s unbiased
estimation of loan i’s quality can be expressed as,
ˆhi = hi + ϵi j,
(13)
17 More details about blockchain’s privacy protection techniques can be found in “Appendix B”.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
709
where ϵi j is an error term with mean zero. Following existing operations research literature
(e.g., Terwiesch and Xu, 2008, Ales et al., 2017), we assume that ϵi can be approximated using
a Gumbel distribution with mean zero and scale parameter μ due to the ﬂexibility of Gumbel
distribution. In fact, the Gumbel distribution is typically used to model the distribution of
random variable for maximum, and leads to a closed form expression. The larger the scale
parameter μ, the higher the variance of estimation uncertainty.
As discussed in Sect. 4.2, the permissioned blockchain provides a different incentive for
borrowers to repay the loan timely. In the traditional world, the incentive is guaranteed using
the personal credit proﬁle. However, the incentive is ﬁnancial in the blockchain world. Here
we make the following assumption regarding the estimated loan quality,
Assumption 2 With a ﬁnancial incentive, investors can estimate the loan quality more accu-
rately. That is, the loan quality estimation error has a smaller variance in the blockchain world
compared with the traditional world. Mathematically, μblockchain < μtraditional.
Assumption 2 reveals a critical difference between the traditional world and the blockchain
world. In the traditional world, borrowers are not required to provide any monetary commit-
ment upon failed repayment. Such requirement corresponds to ξi = 0 in the smart contract (or
a small ξi for those who value their credit proﬁles). Thus, the difﬁculty of identifying borrow-
ers’ quality is massive from investors’ perspective. On the contrast, high-quality borrowers
in the blockchain world can reveal their quality with a high commitment ξi as discussed in
Sect. 4.2. Since the incentive in the blockchain world is more directly related to the personal
risk, it is reasonable to generate a reduced quality estimation variation.
After validating n different loans, the large investor j will pick up the one with the highest
estimated quality, that is,
U j = hiw j, i = arg max
k {hk + ϵkj, k = 1, 2, . . . , n}.
(14)
According to the discrete choice model, the expected utility of the investor j is,
E[U j] = w j
n

j=1
{hi Pi},
(15)
where Pi = 1
Z exp{hi/μ} and Z = n
i=1 exp{hi/μ}. Comparing the expected utility in the
traditional world and the blockchain world, we obtain the following proposition,
Proposition 4 Forlargeinvestors, E[U blockchain
j
] > E[U traditional
j
]giventhatμblockchain <
μtraditional.
Proposition 4 indicates that the less uncertainty when estimating the loan quality, the
higher utility an investor can expect to gain. Intuition is that if an investor can estimate the
loan quality perfectly, she will pick up the best loan for sure. Thus, lenders’ choices will
be wiser in the blockchain world as a result of a better distinction between high- and low-
quality borrowers compared with the traditional world.
5 Numerical study
We perform a numerical study to illustrate the beneﬁts of blockchain. We start by looking at
the potential beneﬁt of eliminating herding. The parameters are set as follows. Assume that
123

710
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
Fig. 4 The expected utility, E[U], as a function of investment, w: a traditional; b blockchain. The dashed line
represents the possible utility without herding
there is a loan with a quality of h = 1.39 and a funding percentage 24.56%. An investor would
like to invest w on this loan. He is endowed a level of trust in others’ choices, d, which is lower
in the blockchain world due to reduced herding. Here we assume that dtraditional = 1 in the
traditional world, and dblockchain = 0.3 in the blockchain world. His cost of validating the
loan quality is λ = 0.5. Figure 4 shows his expected utility, E[U], for different investment
amount, w. For each ﬁgure, the solid and dashed line represents the investor’s actual and
optimal choice, respectively. The shadow part, then, measures the sub-optimality of the
choice. As we can see, the investor makes an optimal choice in regions (I) and (III) but a
sub-optimal choice in region (II). Comparing Fig. 4b with a, we can see that the area of (II)
is reduced, and thus, promotes this investor’s optimality of investment.
Then we check how will the market players make decisions, i.e., the optimal interest rate
in the contract, in the blockchain world, and what the potential beneﬁts can be. Assume that
in the market there are two borrowers with high and low quality. Their maximum acceptable
interest rate is x1 = 0.1 and x2 = 0.15, respectively. There is also an investor with a
reservation rate R = 0.03. Here we show two results of interest. First, we compare their
optimal interest rate with a ﬁxed identical failed commitment ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.12. Figure 5a
shows how the optimal rate R∗
i , changes when the market competitiveness, β, increases.
As we can see, with blockchain a borrower with a higher quality will propose a larger
interest rate, and this rate increases with the market competitiveness. Second, we examine
the relationship between the optimal interest rate and the failed commitment under given
market competitiveness. Figure 5b shows the indifference curve for the two investors when
the marketcompetitiveness β = 0.2. For any given Ri, the low-quality borrower needs to offer
a higher ξi than the high-quality borrower, and vice versa. Therefore, the blockchain market
is sufﬁcient in the sense that borrowers need to offer rates based on their creditworthiness.
Next, we examine the potential beneﬁts of using blockchain for both sides of the market
with a reduced origination fee, which is assumed Δx = 3% in this numerical study. Figure 6
presents the gain from this reduced fee for both borrowers and lenders, given that the market
competitiveness β = 0.2. As we can see, the reduced fee is distributed between the borrower
and lender. The borrower’s (lender’s) gain increases (decreases) with the commitment upon
failed repayment, because a higher commitment indicates a lowered interest rate, and thus,
the corresponding lender’s gain. The gains of the two sides become equivalent if and only if
the commitment upon failed repayment equals the market competitiveness.
Finally, we show the potential beneﬁts of lenders in addition to that from reduced trans-
action cost. Assume that there are ten loans in the market with their quality sampled from a
uniform distribution. A lender wants to invest one dollar into the market, and his expected
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
711
Fig. 5 Borrowers’ optimal strategies: a the optimal proposed interest rate, R∗
i , as a function of the market
competitiveness, β; b the frontier of the optimal proposed interest rate, R∗
i , and the commitment on failed
repayment, ξi
Fig. 6 The borrower’s and
lender’s gain as a function of
commitment upon failed
repayment, ξ, given a reduced
origination fee
Borrower
Lender
0.01
0.02
0.1
0.2
0.3
Gain
Fig. 7 The expected payoff of a
lender, E[U], as a function of the
market volatility, μ
1.2
1.6
2.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
E[U]
payoff is shown in Fig. 7. As we can see, the expected payoff decreases with the market
volatility. Since blockchain can lower the market volatility by making the transaction more
transparent, we can expect an increased payoff for lenders.
6 Conclusion and discussion
In this paper, we explore how the smart contract based blockchain technology could advance
market efﬁciency and improve surplus for borrowers and lenders simultaneously in P2P
lending. Liquidity requesters in general contract based business activities, such as product
selling and trading, deliver products on or before receiving funds. However, borrowers who
need funds but do not have enough liquidity obtain investors’ trustiness via their commitment
of future repayment, that is, they overdraft the future. With a smart contract involving a
123

712
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
trusted third party, borrowers can reach an agreement on the collateral, which is executed
automatically when the repayment fails. In this case, borrowers can obtain lenders’ trust more
easily by providing a high commitment upon failure. Thus, high- and low-quality borrowers
can be well distinguished with their risk (i.e., the capacity for making timely repayment).
Further, by eliminating intermediaries and requesting borrowers’ ﬁnancial incentives, the
blockchain world can provide economic surpluses to borrowers and lenders. The surplus
comes from reduced transaction fee (i.e., no origination fee), eliminated herding risk, and
reduced uncertainty in loan quality estimation. Borrowers could also avoid potential personal
information leak. Our theoretical analysis informs how the intrinsic features of the blockchain
technology make it superior to the conventional method.
Our proposed model and its results also have some policy implications. First, the regulatory
should force the execution of the smart contract. In our model, it is critical that the collateral
amount is sufﬁciently high to incentivize the borrowers to propose interest rates based upon
their private creditworthiness. Second, the occurrence of the dishonest majority should be
prevented from the regulatory perspective. The regulatory may implement a monitoring
system to detect possible dishonest majority occurrence. A possible approach is to set up an
external channel for investors to report misbehavior. Finally, the regulatory should maintain
the price level of the tokens, that is, the market volatility should be lowered, so that the
blockchain system is stable.
There are several limitations to this work. First, the blockchain technology generally
requires a vast network of users to guarantee the decentralized consensus. Thus, it is necessary
to develop a mechanism to attract sufﬁciently many investors in P2P lending, as shown in
Sect. 4.1. Further, a critical requirement for maintaining trustworthiness in blockchains is
the “honest majority”, that is, more than 50% of users in the chain need to be honest. This
requirement may not be satisﬁed, and thus, leading to 51% attacks. Several possible solutions
are available from existing research. For instance, the weight of each user in this chain is
determined by their reputation instead of mining power or investment amount (Han et al.,
2019). Our model speciﬁed in (7) also provides a possible solution to the “honest majority”
problem: By providing sufﬁcient willingness, e.g., connecting to the real world credit proﬁle,
the “honest majority” can then be guaranteed because everyone would believe that others
report the truth to maximize their utility. Second, though the permissioned blockchain could
deliver stronger incentive from borrowers, it sets up a higher entry barrier compared with the
permissionless blockchain. It would be interesting to investigate the potential permissionless
blockchain beneﬁt-disruption trade-off to further explore the feasibility of the permissionless
blockchain in P2P lending. Finally, blockchain applications are often faced with scalability
issues. In this study, we have not investigated how the blockchain network size may affect
economic outcomes.
As an emerging technology, blockchains pose many future research directions. From the
theoretical perspective, the economic impact of imperfect consensus should be integrated
into the blockchain design to assure a low risk. Next, it would be interesting to analyze the
borrowers and lenders’ behavior when they could autonomously choose to disclose personal
information. Further, it would be beneﬁcial to investigate if some mechanisms, such as new
user promotions, could be integrated into the blockchain world to attract more investors.
Finally, as there are different types of blockchain mechanisms, a more viable way to apply
this technology in P2P may be available with a comprehensive effort. From the empirical
perspective, there is still a lack of real-world data to test the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the
blockchain technology. Overall, it requires coadjutant effort from multiple discipline experts
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
713
(i.e., computer scientists, economists, and mathematicians) to implement the blockchain and
smart contract technology and analyze its effectiveness and efﬁciency.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
A Major decentralized consensus mechanisms
In the blockchain world, each miner (i.e., record keeper) can announce their transaction
veriﬁcation results (i.e., whether the transaction occurs or not and is the transaction amount
correct). The veriﬁcation process is easy to implement, and thus, the associated cost is often
negligible. Here we describe three popular approaches to prevent fraudulent reports.
Proof-of-Work and Proof-of-Stake PoW requires miners to demonstrate their computa-
tional power, whereas PoS requires them to prove their stake. PoW blockchain is widely
used in cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin (BTC), Ethereum (ETH), Litecoin (LTC), Bitcoin
Cash (BCH), and Monero (XMR). Compared with PoW, PoS can save much computational
resource (i.e., electricity) and keep more stable cryptocurrency price, which determines min-
ers’ involved stake value. Example PoS cryptocurrecies include Cardano (ADA), Nxt (NXT),
and Peercoin (PPC). In both mechanisms, to attack the blockchain, attackers need to control
at least 51% of computational power or stake. Though it is difﬁcult to achieve, the 51%
attack did happen several times, for instance, in two ETH based blockchains—Krypton and
Shift—in August 2016, and in a Bitcoin fork - Bitcoin Gold (BTG) in June 2018.
DelegatedProof-of-StakeRecently,DPoSwascreatedtoincreasethespeedofblockcreation
and the scalability of the blockchain. In DPoS, users vote for witness and their voting power
is proportional to their stakes. Top witnesses (typically top 101) have the right to validation
transactions, create blocks, and receive a certain amount of reward. Note that the witnesses
are not required to have large involved stakes. Moreover, all witnesses are faced with the risk
of being replaced if they behave maliciously. Thus, they are motived to keep their reputation
amongthevoters.Atthesametime,delegatesarealsovotedtosupervisetheworkofwitnesses
and can propose any changes except transaction validation and block creation. For instance,
they can recommend to change the reward amount to witnesses. Example cryptocurrencies
include EOS.IO (EOS), Bitshares (BTS), and Steem (STEEM).
B Blockchain technology to support privacy
In the blockchain world, an essential approach to protecting the user privacy is the asymmetric
cryptography technique (Antonopoulos, 2014). Each user may have multiple pairs of keys:
public keys are visible to all the users in the network, whereas private keys are only known
to the owner. By using the hash function (Rogaway and Shrimpton, 2004), public keys can
be obtained easily with private keys, but not vice versa. Further, users are not required to
disclose any identiﬁable information or the ownership of public keys. Thus, the crowd in
123

714
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
the network can only observe transactions among these public keys but cannot identify their
owners.
Based on the basic concepts of public and private keys, several approaches are created
to support users’ privacy. For instance, Monero uses two techniques, namely stealth address
and ring signature, to protect recipients’ and senders’ information, such as their public keys
(Courtois, 2016). In Monero, each user has a spend key and a view key. Each time a transaction
occurs, a stealth address for the transaction output is generated via a hashing function involv-
ing the receiver’s public view key and public spend key. The other users in the blockchain can
only observe the stealth address but cannot link it to any other address. Further, the receiver
can still allocate and spend the received cryptocurrency using his private spend key and view
key. With the “stealth address” method, receipts’ privacy is protected. Next, the “ring sig-
nature” method can protect senders’ privacy. It creates a signature for a transaction using a
combination of the sender’s public address and a group of past transaction output. It is com-
putationally impossible for any outsider to identify which one is the genuine address. Further,
miners can still verify the transaction (e.g., preventing double-spending) with a key image
(Wong and Memon, 2001). In addition to the above two techniques, “zk-Snarks” (Bitansky et
al., 2012), a variation of zero-knowledge proof, is adopted by a cryptocurrency named Zcash
(ZEC). The zero-knowledge proof is a method of proving valid transaction without revealing
the sender, receiver, and transaction amount (Goldwasser et al., 1989). Consequently, the
problem “front-running” (Malinova and Park, 2017) no longer exists.
C Derivations and proofs
Proof of Proposition 3 Suppose each small investor plans to make one unit investment and
there are multiple loans with heterogeneous quality hi. Following Cong and He (2019), an
investor j’s surplus in a Bertrand competition is  j ∝E[h(2)]. In the traditional world,
lenders may be promoted to invest in “popular” loans due to herding. That is, the lenders’
preference distribution over different loans is skewed. It shifts the demand curve for these
“popular” loans. In this case, the “popular” loans count more weight in determining the
lenders’ surplus. If these “popular” loans have relatively low quality, it is possible that the
second-order statistic are lowered.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 4 Denote yi = exp{hi/μtraditional} and α = μtraditional/μblockchain. It
is easy to see that yi increases as hi increases and α > 1. To prove that E[U blockchain
j
] >
E[U traditional
j
], we only need to prove that,

i hi yα
i

j yα
j
>

i hi yi

j y j
.
(16)
It is equivalent to prove that,

i

j
hi yα
i y j >

i

j
hi yi yα
j .
(17)
The above inequality is true since we have
L H S −RH S =

i

j
hi yi y j(yα−1
i
−yα−1
j
)
=

i> j
hi yi y j(yα−1
i
−yα−1
j
) +

i< j
hi yi y j(yα−1
i
−yα−1
j
)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
715
=

i> j
yi y j(hi −h j)(yα−1
i
−yα−1
j
) > 0.
⊓⊔
References
Ales, L., Cho, S. H., & Körpeo˘glu, E. (2017). Optimal award scheme in innovation tournaments. Operations
Research, 65(3), 693–702.
Antonopoulos, A. M. (2014). Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking digital cryptocurrencies. Sebastopol: O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
Bazarbash, M., Beaton, K., et al. (2020). Filling the gap: Digital credit and ﬁnancial inclusion. International
Monetary Fund Working Papers, 20(150), 1–30.
Bentov, I., Gabizon, A., & Mizrahi, A. (2016). Cryptocurrencies without proof of work. In International
conference on ﬁnancial cryptography and data security (pp. 142–157). Springer.
Bitansky, N., Canetti, R., Chiesa, A., & Tromer, E. (2012). From extractable collision resistance to succinct non-
interactive arguments of knowledge, and back again. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical
computer science conference (pp. 326–349). ACM.
Buterin, V. (2016). Ethereum: Platform review; opportunities and challenges for private and consortium
blockchains.
Buterin, V., et al. (2014). A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application platform. White
Paper, 3(37).
Butler, A. W., Cornaggia, J., & Gurun, U. G. (2016). Do local capital market conditions affect consumers’
borrowing decisions? Management Science, 63(12), 4175–4187.
Cai, Y., & Zhu, D. (2016). Fraud detections for online businesses: A perspective from blockchain technology.
Financial Innovation, 2(1), 20.
Catalini, C., & Gans, J. S. (2020). Some simple economics of the blockchain. Communications of the ACM,
63(7), 80–90.
Christidis, K., & Devetsikiotis, M. (2016). Blockchains and smart contracts for the internet of things. IEEE
Access, 4, 2292–2303.
Cong, L. W., & He, Z. (2019). Blockchain disruption and smart contracts. The Review of Financial Studies,
32(5), 1754–1797.
Courtois, N. T. (2016). Stealth address, ring signatures, Monero. London: University College London.
Goldwasser, S., Micali, S., & Rackoff, C. (1989). The knowledge complexity of interactive proof systems.
SIAM Journal on Computing, 18(1), 186–208.
Gough, N. (2016). Online lender Ezubao took $7.6 billion in Ponzi scheme, china says. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/02/business/dealbook/ezubao-china-fraud.html.
Grifﬁn, J. M., & Shams, A. (2020). Is bitcoin really untethered? The Journal of Finance, 75(4), 1913–1964.
Haber, S., & Stornetta, W. S. (1990). How to time-stamp a digital document. In Conference on the theory and
application of cryptography (pp. 437–455). Springer.
Han, R., Sui, Z., Yu, J., Liu, J., & Chen, S. (2019). Fact and ﬁction: Challenging the honest majority assumption
of permissionless blockchains. Technical report, Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2019/752.
Herzenstein, M., Dholakia, U., & Andrews, R. (2011). Strategic herding behavior in peer-to-peer loan auctions.
Journal of Interactive Marketing, 25(1), 27–36.
Hileman, G., & Rauchs, M. (2017). 2017 global blockchain benchmarking study. https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3040224.
Jiang, C., Wang, Z., Wang, R., & Ding, Y. (2018). Loan default prediction by combining soft information
extracted from descriptive text in online peer-to-peer lending. Annals of Operations Research, 266(1–2),
511–529.
King,T.,&Koutmos,D.(2021).Herdingandfeedbacktradingincryptocurrencymarkets.AnnalsofOperations
Research, 300(1), 79–96.
Koutmos, D. (2019). Market risk and bitcoin returns. Annals of Operations Research, 294, 453–477.
Lin, M., Prabhala, N. R., & Viswanathan, S. (2013). Judging borrowers by the company they keep: Friendship
networks and information asymmetry in online peer-to-peer lending. Management Science, 59(1), 17–35.
Malinova, K., & Park, A. (2017). Market design with blockchain technology. https://ssrn.com/
abstract=2785626.
Mathews, L. (2017). Equifax data breach impacts 143 million Americans. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/
sites/leemathews/2017/09/07/equifax-data-breach-impacts-143-million-americans.
123

716
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 321:693–716
Mendling, J, Weber, I., van der Aalst, W. M. P., vom Brocke, J., Cabanillas, C., Daniel, F., Debois, S., Ciccio,
C. D., Dumas, M., Dustdar, S., Gal, A., García-Bañuelos, L., Governatori, G., Hull, R., Rosa, M. L.,
Leopold, H., Leymann, F., Recker, J., Reichert, M., Reijers, H. A., Rinderle-Ma, S., Rogge-Solti, A.,
Rosemann, M., Schulte, S., Singh, M. P., Slaats, T., Staples, M., Weber, B., Weidlich, M., Weske, M.,
Xu, X., & Zhu, L. (2017). Blockchains for business process management—challenges and opportunities.
Computing Research Repository (CoRR). arXiv:1704.03610.
Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Business Review 21260.
Peters, G. W., & Panayi, E. (2016). Understanding modern banking ledgers through blockchain technologies:
Future of transaction processing and smart contracts on the internet of money. In Banking Beyond Banks
and Money (pp. 239–278). Springer.
Rogaway, P., & Shrimpton, T. (2004). Cryptographic hash-function basics: Deﬁnitions, implications, and
separationsforpreimageresistance,second-preimageresistance,andcollisionresistance.InInternational
workshop on fast software encryption (pp. 371–388). Springer.
Rudegair, P. (2016). Lendingclub ceo ﬁred over faulty loans. The Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/
articles/lendingclub-ceo-resigns-over-sales-review-1462795070.
Szabo, N. (1994). Smart contracts. Unpublished manuscript.
Terwiesch, C., & Xu, Y. (2008). Innovation contests, open innovation, and multiagent problem solving. Man-
agement Science, 54(9), 1529–1543.
Trautman, L. J. (2016). Is disruptive blockchain technology the future of ﬁnancial services?https://ssrn.com/
abstract=2786186.
Wang, H., Greiner, M. E. (2010). Herding in multi-winner auctions. In International conference on information
systems (ICIS) (p. 235).
Wei, Z., & Lin, M. (2016). Market mechanisms in online peer-to-peer lending. Management Science, 63(12),
4236–4257.
Wong, P. W., & Memon, N. (2001). Secret and public key image watermarking schemes for image authenti-
cation and ownership veriﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 10(10), 1593–1601.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123