TITLE: A planetary boundaries perspective on the sustainability: resilience relationship in the Kenyan tea supply chain
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04096-y
---

Vol.:(0123456789)
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04096-y
1 3
S.I. : DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT OF HUMANITARIAN SUPPLY 
CHAINS
A planetary boundaries perspective on the sustainability: 
resilience relationship in the Kenyan tea supply chain
George Mutugu Mwangi1 · Stella Despoudi2 · Oscar Rodriguez Espindola2 · 
Konstantina Spanaki3 · Thanos Papadopoulos4 
Accepted: 28 April 2021 / Published online: 18 May 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
The purpose of this paper is to examine whether agricultural supply chains (ASC) can 
be simultaneously sustainable and resilient to ecological disruptions, using the Planetary 
Boundaries theory. The nine different Planetary Boundaries i.e. climatic change, biodi-
versity loss, biogeochemical, ocean acidification, land use, freshwater availability, strato-
sphere ozone depletion, atmospheric aerosols and chemical pollution are examined in rela-
tion to ASC sustainability and resilience. Kenya’s tea upstream supply chain sustainability 
and resilience from the ecological point of view is questioned. This study adopts a multi-
case study analysis approach of nine producer organisations from Kenya’s tea supply chain. 
The data from the in-depth semi-structured interviews and a focus group discussion are 
analysed using thematic analysis. The Kenyan tea supply chain producers are not aware 
of all the nine planetary boundaries, although these impact on their resilience practices. 
They are engaged in pursuing both sustainability and resilience practices. They implement 
mainly environmental practices in relation to sustainability, while only a few of them are 
implementing resilience practices. The sustainability and resilience concepts were found to 
be interrelated, but resilience does not improve at the same pace as sustainability. It is sug-
gested that the relationship between sustainability and resilience is non-linear. Limitations 
and future research avenues are also provided.
Keywords  Planetary boundaries · Resilience · Sustainability · Agriculture · Producers
1  Introduction
The last few decades have seen increased interconnectedness among suppliers and man-
ufacturers resulting in both high supply chain complexity and dependency among firms 
(Blackhurst et al., 2005; Christopher & Holweg, 2011). Even though this has resulted in 
increased efficiency, it has also left organizations exposed to supply chain interruptions 
 * Thanos Papadopoulos 
 
a.papadopoulos@kent.ac.uk
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

662
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
because the current turbulence and uncertainty in global markets renders traditional risk 
approaches to risk management impotent (Pettit et al., 2013). The effect can be undesirable 
losses to the organization (Ponomarov & Holcomb, 2009). At the same time, stakeholders 
are increasingly demanding that organizations conduct their business operations socially 
and in an environmental and ethical manner (Carter & Easton, 2011). Integrating sustain-
ability measures into business operations has gained strategic importance (Fahimnia & 
Jabbarzadeh, 2016). Hence, organizations need to adopt proactive measures to enhance the 
resilience of the supply chain whilst ensuring sustainability of their operations (Ponomarov 
& Holcomb, 2009).
While both sustainability and resilience have been discussed in the broader Supply 
Chain Management (SCM) tenets, their interrelationship in the Agricultural Supply Chain 
(ASC) has received little attention (Leat & Revoredo-Giha, 2013; Michel-Villarreal et al., 
2019). This neglect is unfortunate because the expected world population growth combined 
with socio ecological factors adds even more pressure to ASCs (Despoudi, 2021; Spanaki 
et al., 2021; Stone et al., 2015a). Even though organizations have embarked on implement-
ing various sustainability practices there is limited knowledge about the broader effects of 
sustainability practices employed in organizations on the supply chain ability to endure dis-
ruptions (Fahimnia & Jabbarzadeh, 2016). Pre-existing research on the ASC focuses either 
on sustainability or resilience practices (Bajželj et al., 2020; Colwill et al., 2016; Despoudi, 
2020; Manning & Soon, 2016; Soussana, 2014; Stone & Rahimifard, 2018). However, 
there is no clarity about their possible interrelationship in the ASC (Ambler-Edwards et al., 
2009; Fahimnia & Jabbarzadeh, 2016).
Current conceptualizations of the relationship between resilience and sustainability 
are inconclusive as they focus on either the focal firm or the overreaching industry and 
the broader global context tends to be ignored (Whiteman et al., 2012). Micro-level resil-
ience involves the direct engagement between buyers and suppliers to mitigate disruptions, 
whereas macro-level resilience focuses on the collaboration of different stakeholders in the 
industry including corporations, governments or trade associations (Azadegan & Dooley, 
2021). Both levels can deliver valuable insights. However, the current climatic crisis 
requires a broader systems perspective, which integrates micro, meso and macro level fac-
tors such as the planetary boundaries (Huang & Farboudi Jahromi, 2021; Prentice et al., 
2021). Prentice et al. (2021) and Azadegan and Dooley (2021) argue that it is important 
to consider the meso level, which is about promoting collaboration between firms from 
different supply networks. Micro-level resilience struggles in instances when major dis-
ruptions affect both supply and demand, whereas the macro-level is more focused on 
medium to long term response and can have a stable nature that can complicate collabora-
tion (Azadegan & Dooley, 2021). Hence, the meso level can be useful to connect the micro 
and macro levels and enable a better response to sustainability and resilience challenges 
(Sievers-Glotzbach & Tschersich, 2019). Although several research has focused on the 
micro-level, more analysis is needed at the meso and macro levels connecting the three as 
all three of them operate under the same system and limits i.e. planetary boundaries (Shaw 
et al., 2018). Indeed, the link between sustainability and resilience needs to consider local 
interactions, responsive structures inclusive of different supply networks, global collabora-
tion with industry and governmental stakeholders, and the overall planetary system and its 
respective limits (Azadegan & Dooley, 2021; Goworek et al., 2018; Matthews et al., 2014)
Kenya’s Tea Supply Chain (KTSC) is facing vulnerabilities from climatic change that 
threaten tea productivity, while at the same time reduce the amount of land available for 
tea production (Hadyniak, 2014). Kenya is based in a region that is expected to be sig-
nificantly affected by climatic change according to the United Nation’s (UN) assessment 

663
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
on climate change (Hadyniak, 2014). Previous studies addressing climatic change and 
current interventions in the tea industry in Kenya (Cracknell, 2015; Kabubo-Mariara 
& Karanja, 2007; Ochieng et al., 2016) made recommendations for adaptation without 
reflecting on the way these adaptability recommendations affect both the resilience and 
sustainability of the industry. For instance, Cracknell (2015), proposes that the indus-
try could adapt better by replacing the current bushes with drought and frost resistant 
clones. However, such an approach would not necessarily increase resilience, as other 
factors could impact growth and thereby compromise the financial sustainability of the 
industry as tea takes about 5–7  years to mature (Chang & Brattlof, 2015). Thus, the 
study of sustainability and resilience of KTSC from an ecological point of view is war-
ranted. This research explores the sustainability—resilience relationship in the ASC 
context in the face of projected disruptions using the lens of the planetary boundaries 
theory (PBT), which draws upon the natural sciences to incorporate micro, meso and 
macro level factors (Rockström et al., 2009; Whiteman et al., 2012). The study is using 
the KTSC as case study to address the problematic experienced in the country and pro-
vide insights informing theory and practice. Specifically, this paper aims to examine 
whether the KTSC can simultaneously be sustainable and resilient under the PBP using 
semi-structured interviews and a focus group with practitioners. Thematic analysis was 
undertaken to identify the main themes and develop theoretical and managerial implica-
tions. To fulfil the overall aim of this research, the research questions are as follows:
• RQ1: what are the current levels of planetary boundaries as well as sustainability 
and resilience levels in the Kenyan Tea Supply Chain from the producers’ perspec-
tive?
• RQ1: what is the relationship between sustainability and resilience under the planetary 
boundaries’ theory in the Kenyan Tea Supply Chain from the producers’ perspective?
As a result of human activities, we have already surpassed the climatic change, biodi-
versity loss and biogeochemical safe zones (Matthews et al., 2016). This is particularly 
problematic for agricultural supply chains (ASCs), because these are based on resource-
intensive activities. Considering that PBT acknowledges the interconnectedness of dif-
ferent issues and the impossibility to address one of them without influencing the others 
(Whiteman et al., 2012), it is essential to identify the planetary boundaries encountered 
in ASCs to develop holistic policies able to make impactful improvements considering 
the relationship between them. Hence, the first step of this research involves ascertaining 
the current awareness levels of the KTSC producers about the nine planetary boundaries, 
which is encapsulated on RQ1.
Having more understanding about those boundaries, it is possible to delve into the rela-
tionship between sustainability and resilience. The lack of consensus on the literature about 
their relationship (Marchese et al., 2018) endangers implementing policy and guidelines 
that could inadvertently have negative effects in either one of those dimensions or risking 
having less impactful results. Therefore, their link needs to be addressed through deeper 
investigation examining their interaction to inform research and practice. This research 
tackles that need as part of RQ2. The relationship of sustainability and resilience practices 
is examined through an analysis of current practices and the effect of them on both dimen-
sions to provide more clarity in the context of the KTSC from the producers’ perspective. 
Having determined the latter relationship, relationship between sustainability and resil-
ience will be explored in relation to the factors that will emerge from the PBT.

664
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
Therefore, the contribution of this research to the current body of knowledge is three-
fold. It analyses practices promoting sustainability and resilience from Kenya’s tea 
upstream supply chain using the lens of PBT, an approach never undertaken before. It 
investigates the link between sustainability and resilience which is currently underexplored 
and without a clear consensus (Ambler-Edwards et al., 2009; Fahimnia & Jabbarzadeh, 
2016). Finally, this research accounts for micro, meso and macro factors affecting sustain-
ability and resilience to disruptions in the ASC. These contributions can be used to inform 
tea supply chains in similar countries and to inform similar studies in different countries to 
develop analytical generalisations (Tsang, 2014).
This paper is organized in six sections. Section  1 presents the literature review and 
the theoretical background of this research. Section 3 outlines the research methodology 
employed in this study, while Sect. 4 presents the findings of this research. Finally, Sect. 5 
is the discussion and Sect.  6 the conclusions with the research implications and future 
research directions.
2  Literature review and theoretical background
This section reviews research on resilience and sustainability in the supply chain and in 
ASC. It provides an overview of the different definitions and practices in supply chain sus-
tainability and sustainability in AGS, the concept of supply chain resilience and ASC resil-
ience, and the relationship between sustainability, resilience and ASC is presented. Addi-
tionally, the theorical lens of this study which is the PBP theory is explained along with an 
overview of Kenya’s tea supply chain.
2.1  Supply chain sustainability and agricultural supply chain sustainability
Even though the term sustainability has gained increased prominence, there is neither con-
sensus on its definition nor how to operationalize (De Silva & Forbes, 2016). However, the 
World Commission on Environmental and Development defines sustainability as “meet-
ing the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs” (Commission on Environment, 1987, p. 8). Sustainability has been 
described as a moral value question that should address the preservation of the abilities of 
future generations (Matthews et al., 2016), but current business practices have failed to live 
up to this billing as they still focus on win–win outcomes that tend to favour the financial 
objective of the firms (Golicic & Smith, 2013). Dubey and Gunasekaran (2016) argue that 
sustainable supply chain design needs to be agile, adaptable and aligned.
Sustainability has been considered as one of the main capabilities of organisations, 
which further creates a competitive advantage to the firm (Shibin et al., 2020). To ben-
efit from the advantages of sustainability, organizations have to acknowledge their social 
and environmental impacts at each stage of production (Koplin, 2005) as companies have 
recently come under pressure from both regulators and consumers for a lack of sustainabil-
ity compliance (Seuring & Müller, 2008). In the ASC context sustainability is defined as 
food is produced, processed and traded in ways that: contributes positively to local econo-
mies, protects diversity of plants and animals and natural resources, helps to manage cli-
matic change, and provides social benefits to consumers (Sustain, 2015).
SustainAbility (2011) defines ASC sustainability as having a reliable, resilient and 
transparent supply chain, which produces food within ecological limits, empowers food 

665
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
producers, and ensures accessible and nutritious food for all. In the HM UK government 
report the ‘Food 2030’ (2010), it is stated that sustainable food is food that is produced, 
processed and distributed to feed a growing global population in ways which use global 
natural resources sustainably, enable the continuing provision of the benefits and services, 
ensure a healthy natural environment provides, promote high standards of animal and wel-
fare, protect food safety, and make significant contribution to rural communities. There-
fore, current projections of population growth to 9 billion people by the year 2050 (Kast-
ner et al., 2012) combined with climate change and the increasing number of disruptions 
on supply chains, make it essential to ensure sustainable supply chains are implemented 
to deliver food to regions under different conditions, especially in the face of disruptions 
(Schiffling et  al., 2020; Soussana, 2014). Despite the increased attention and academic 
research focused on sustainability (Seuring & Müller, 2008), there still critical issues that 
need to be addressed to enable business leaders achieve sustainability both at the strategic 
and tactical level (Pagell & Wu, 2009).
Existing academic work has focused on investigating social, economic and environmen-
tal factors individually ignoring an integrated approach (Gold et al., 2010). For instance, 
the study by Hutchins and Sutherland (2008) examined both social and environmental fac-
tors while Dewangga et al. (2008) examined social and environmental factors respectively. 
Additionally, most researchers have focused on developing sustainability measurement 
models that assess the sustainability of a system (Collins et al., 2010). For instance, Pull-
man et al. (2010) note that although researchers are free to test different practices, some 
practices are only industry specific and different practices have been identified by differ-
ent researchers. The current research embraces the concept of all-round approach of sus-
tainability (Despoudi, 2020; Elkington, 1998), which suggests ASC sustainability is about 
having the resources and the capabilities in the supply chain to create sustainable food 
consistently for now and for the future by balancing all three sustainability elements (i.e. 
environmental, social, and economic).
Environmental sustainability seeks to encourage practices that preserve the environmen-
tal resources of future generations addressing the efficient use of energy, reducing green-
house gasses emissions, water management, waste management and lessen any ecologi-
cal effects (Alhaddi, 2015; Goel, 2010). According to Despoudi (2020), environmentally 
sustainable ASC companies promote the responsible consumption of resources, managing 
their carbon footprints and openly informing the public about their performance. As regu-
lations tighten, a common trend has seen less sustainable companies relocate or outsource 
their production function to other countries that have relaxed environmental restrictions 
(Alhaddi, 2015). For example, the past decade has seen a lot of ASC businesses moving 
their manufacturing to the far east and environmental compliance has been one of the rea-
sons why they moved.
Social sustainability seeks to address fair labour and human practices that provide value 
and are beneficial to the community and may include, safeguarding against child labour, 
discrimination, fair compensation and promoting health and safety practices for its workers 
(Elkington, 1998). Large corporations in the ASC have been blamed for their social sus-
tainability practices as they take advantage of small-scale producers by giving them unfair 
prices (Despoudi et al., 2020). ASC companies should benefit the community in which 
they operate as they consume their resources, and this may affect the livelihoods of the 
local population. Economic sustainability is related to the capabilities of the organisation 
to survive and progress in a way that will still supports the livelihoods of future generation, 
therefore giving emphasis to the long term financial strength (Alhaddi, 2015). Different 
indicators are taken into account which may include revenue growth, share price, supply 

666
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
chain costs and profitability while at the same time keeping social and environmental fac-
tors in control (Delai & Takahashi, 2011). The ASC from the producers’ perspective is fac-
ing economic sustainability issues (Papaioannou et al., 2020).
2.2  Supply chain resilience and agricultural supply chain resilience
The concept of resilience was first introduced by Christopher and Peck (2004), when the 
world was recovering from the foot-and-mouth outbreak in the UK and the 9/11 bomb in 
America, both of which caused huge disruptions to global supply chains. Since then, there 
has been a steady growth in the amount of research in the field (Jüttner & Maklan, 2011; 
Kim et al., 2015). Nevertheless, Ponomarov and Holcomb (2009) noted that the idea is still 
in its exploratory stage. The concept of resilience has evolved through time (Behl & Dutta, 
2019a, b). Christopher and Peck (2004) describe resilience as the “capacity of a supply 
chain to cope with the consequences of vulnerabilities and to get back to its original state 
or an even more desirable state once it is disrupted” Christopher and Peck (2004, p. 2). 
Later on, Ponomarov and Holcomb (2009) on the other hand, described it as an adaptive 
capability to prepare for unexpected eventualities respond and recover while at the same 
time maintaining a continuation of operations at a desirable level. Implicit in its definition 
is the ability to be adaptable and to absorb shocks that may engulf it (Folke, 2006).
While most definitions on resilience tend to favour a return to the original operating 
capacity or state of equilibrium, in a field as complex as food systems where social, eco-
nomic, environmental and political issues define the space, it’s almost impossible to have 
this equilibrium (Stone & Rahimifard, 2018). Thus, considering that supply chain must 
incorporate the resilience concept to deal with the challenges posed by any disruptions 
(Queiroz et al., 2020), research on ASC resilience has been seen to support an adapta-
ble system that is able to maintain “function” and adapt in the face of disruptions focus 
on maintaining an unbroken flow of safe and fitting food to consumers (Tendall et  al., 
2015). ASC resilience is of crucial importance because food, nutritional outcomes, liveli-
hoods, and many other essential life-supporting services (Barrett et al., 2001). This was 
evident during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in which ASCs failed to adapt 
and there were food shortages with many people not having access to food (Galanakis, 
2020). According to Vroegindewey and Hodbod (2018) ASC resilience is about having the 
capacity to continue operations and services in the face of supply and demand disturbances 
through preparation, response, recovery and adaptation to changes.
A supply chain that possesses resilience capabilities is better able to withstand the 
unpredictability that modern supply chains must contend with because of the embedded 
adaptability and responsiveness (Kwak et al., 2018). At the same time, it can help achieve 
a competitive advantage by being able to recover faster than competitors from disruptions 
(Leat & Revoredo-Giha, 2013). The potential of resilience to support competitive advan-
tage in organisations is essential, as industries are becoming more global and SMEs are 
becoming an important part of international value chains (Gunasekaran et al., 2011). Using 
the resource-based theory lens, Kwak et al. (2018) employ factor analysis and structural 
equation modelling in a sample of 174 South Korean manufacturers to explore the link 
between supply chain innovation, robustness an resilience, and competitive advantage. 
Their findings highlight the role of innovation to develop resilience and robustness, which 
in turn have a significant effect on the level of competitive advantage of the company.

667
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
Results from Abeysekara et al. (2019) agree with the importance of resilience to achieve 
competitive advantage. The study undertakes a dynamic capability perspective to investi-
gate the way organisational assets and resources can support achieving high levels of per-
formance and competitive advantage. The article introduces risk management, re-engineer-
ing, agility, and collaboration as dimensions of supply chain resilience. Partial least squares 
structural equation modelling is used to analyse 89 responses from Sri Lankan apparel 
manufacturers. Their results show the influence of agility and collaboration on competi-
tive advantage. Hence, organisations need to consider the potential of resilience to sup-
port competitive advantage in the organisation. The importance of resilience is also high-
lighted in the study of Altay et al. (2018) who found that resilience can affect supply chain 
performance.
The current business practices employed by supply chain managers in the pursuit of 
lower costs and creation of value for their shareholders greatly undermine the resilience 
capabilities of their supply chains. For instance, a lack of safety stock held in the ASC 
as well as a lack of back up capacity greatly reduces the abilities of a firm to retain its 
operational structure in the face of disruption (Pettit et al., 2010). Therefore, to be able to 
continuously deliver safe and fit food for consumption despite disruptions, ASCs should be 
able to adapt to prevailing situations by adopting suitable capabilities (Smith et al., 2016). 
This study adopts the three main themes of disruption as identified by Ponomarov and Hol-
comb (2009), and an additional stage suggested by Stone and Rahimifard (2018) to form 
the basis for grouping the core capabilities needed by a resilient ASC system. These are 
readiness, responsiveness and recovery, and adaptive strategy. This phases have also been 
referred to as resist, recover and adapt (Fahimnia & Jabbarzadeh, 2016; Leat & Revoredo-
Giha, 2013). Figure 1 presents the different capabilities needed for ASC resilience.
Also described as the resistance stage (Fahimnia & Jabbarzadeh, 2016; Leat & 
Revoredo-Giha, 2013), it focuses on how an organization anticipates either by preparing 
for the disruption or avoiding the disruption. These elements help to identify and moni-
tor changes in the environment as well as those elements that need to be built early to be 
utilised in other stages (Stone & Rahimifard, 2018). The readiness phase is about redun-
dancy. Redundancy is the strategic use of built up extra capacity and stocks of agricultural 
products that can be used in a moment of emergency to provide cover before the systems 
restores for example, exponential demand could be catered for using spare stocks (Chris-
topher & Peck, 2004). Holding spare capacity has however been criticized as an expen-
sive way of doing business especially as business leaders try to reduce non-value adding 
Fig. 1   Capabilities for ASC resilience. Source: authors

668
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
activities in the supply chain (Pettit et al., 2013). In ASCs the food shelf life of particular 
products at times works against this particular capabilities usefulness (Stone et al., 2015b). 
The readiness phase also involves building flexibility as a core component. Flexibility is 
the ability of a supply chain to respond to changing business environment and customer 
requests (Lam & Bai, 2016). Flexibility can be used to enhance resilience in the ASC in 
several ways. For example; postponement, flexible transport systems, flexible labour 
arrangements, flexible order fulfilment (Christopher & Holweg, 2011; Pettit et al., 2013). 
Although flexibility helps ASCs to respond rapidly and recover, this can be enhanced by 
the existence of spare capacity or alternatives (redundancy) such as spare suppliers (Sheffi 
& Rice, 2005).
The response stage is also described as the recovery stage (Fahimnia & Jabbarzadeh, 
2016; Leat & Revoredo-Giha, 2013). Response concerns pre-planned elements that mit-
igate impact of a disruption and at the same time help the system to remain functional 
(Stone & Rahimifard, 2018). The first response capability is visibility. Visibility concerns 
being able to see through structures and processes from one end of the supply chain to the 
other (Dubey et al., 2020). This will usually involve information being shared across the 
ASC by partners to enable the right knowledge to be utilised (Jüttner et al., 2003). There-
fore, with proper information and knowing what is happening in the environment, organi-
zations are thus able to respond better.
The second response capability is collaboration, which represents the glue that holds 
organizational relationships together when facing disruptions (Faisal et al., 2006). Collabo-
ration is the building of partnerships to achieve mutual goals and further reducing uncer-
tainty by distributing risk among partners (Despoudi et al., 2018; Pettit et al., 2010). In the 
ASC key collaborations need to be built among producers and their buyers to ensure food 
products sustainability (Despoudi et al., 2020). The adaptability stage involves the way in 
which the system is able to grow out of the disruption (Hohenstein et al., 2015). Adaptabil-
ity could be defined as the capability of a system to adjust operations in response to certain 
eventualities by using different technology, reducing the lead time and learning from the 
experience (Dubey et al., 2018; Rasouli, 2019). In ASCs, this can be achieved by building 
flexibility into both the sourcing or the order fulfilment (Stone et al., 2015b). In sourcing, 
this could be achieved by having numerous sourcing options such as suppliers from differ-
ent countries. Although this could limit the kind of relationships the organization is able to 
build, flexibility in order fulfilment could be achieved by having different distribution chan-
nels available to the organization (Manning & Soon, 2016).
2.3  The sustainability and resilience relationship
Food security is essential for the welfare of populations and countries (Soussana, 2014). 
ASCs compared with other supply chains have traditionally experienced a higher level of 
uncertainty stemming from the short shelf life of food, long production throughput times, 
variability in quality and susceptibility to deterioration as raw materials move down the 
supply chain (Christopher & Holweg, 2011; Stone et  al., 2015a). This situation is cur-
rently being aggravated by the unprecedented amount of dependency among partners fur-
ther increasing the vulnerability on supply chains (Sheffi & Rice, 2005). ASCs are under 
increasing stress due to the increased amount of extreme weather conditions and geological 
activity attributed to climate change (Hodges et al., 2010). This climate related events are 
expected to reduce the amount of favourable land to farm and have a negative effect on 
food production and distribution (Suweis et al., 2015).

669
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
Findings from the Agriculture, Food Security and Climate Change forum outline the 
research priorities for sustainable ASCs (Vermeulen et al., 2010). These include the impor-
tance of strengthening European agriculture to reduce the increasing pressure of food pro-
duction in other regions, reduce the environmental impact of agriculture, and build resil-
ience to climate change in agricultural supply chains (Soussana, 2014). Sustainability has 
been a very popular topic, but resilience is emerging as a new crucial area in agri-food 
which is related to sustainability (Barbosa, 2021). In fact, a stocktaking exercise in 24 
countries from 1990 to 2015 with participation of FAO, EU, WFP and the International 
Fund for Agricultural dimension found that agriculture must support environmental sus-
tainability to make more resilient systems (Kennedy et al., 2020). Hence, achieving those 
aims require ASCs to consider the integration of sustainability, and resilience, especially 
in urgent and chaotic settings caused by disruptions (Queiroz et al., 2020; Venkatesh et al., 
2019). That is the reason recent studies have shown the intersection between sustainability 
and resilience (Dolgui et al., 2020).
Understanding and finding ways to evaluate sustainability and resilience are key in 
ASCs for the society as a whole (Michel-Villarreal et al., 2019), because rather than just 
adapting, food supply chains have to create the conditions to deliver products under vari-
ous circumstances (Schiffling et al., 2020). It allows to balance human requirements with 
necessary ecosystem functions for the survival of agricultural resources (Vroegindewey & 
Hodbod, 2018). Derissen et al. (2011) note that several studies on resilience and sustain-
ability in supply chain management have considered each concept separately. Yet the influ-
ence between the two concepts on each other is too much to warrant ignoring one or the 
other. Fahimnia and Jabbarzadeh (2016) state that it is unrealistic to investigate one and fail 
to query how they affect each other. Both resilience and sustainability represent complex 
yet very important universal issues.
Although in social sciences the concepts of sustainability and resilience have been used 
interchangeably (Lamine, 2015), each one of them is valuable on its own right and they are 
essential elements in robust agricultural supply chains. Considering social, financial and 
environmental aspects, sustainability creates the capacity to survive. Companies nowadays, 
however, need to couple that concept with the capability to reinvent themselves when fac-
ing extreme challenges to thrive and move forward (Edgeman & Wu, 2016), which is the 
reason why the concept of resilience appeared more recently (Lamine, 2015). The imple-
mentation of both concepts, however, needs to be cautiously assessed because an inad-
equate understanding of their similarities and variances can result to underperformance 
(Marchese et al., 2018).
There are different views about how the sustainability and resilience concepts inter-
act. An assessment on the literature by Marchese et al. (2018) came up with three broad 
perspectives on how these concepts interact with each other. However, this study suggests 
that there are four different perspectives about the sustainability—resilience relationship 
(Table  1). The first perspective suggests that resilience is an element of sustainability 
(Stone & Rahimifard, 2018), meaning that “increasing the resilience of a system makes 
that system more sustainable, but increasing the sustainability of a system does not neces-
sarily make it more resilient” (Marchese et al., 2018, p. 1276). Sustainability in this case 
provides the systems objectives while resilience capabilities are merely there to achieve 
these objectives (Anderies et al., 2013). Papadopoulos et al. (2017) undertake an analy-
sis of unstructured big data gathered online and structured data from 205 responses from 
managers involved in the Nepal earthquake in 2015 to investigate the role of big data for 
sustainability. They argue that using unstructured big data analysis can be used to develop 
frameworks for supply chain resilience and promote sustainability.

670
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
In their systematic literature review about food system outcomes, Stefanovic et al. 
(2020) highlight that the aim food supply resilience is to ensure food security even 
in situations following disturbances and shocks, which is the reason why resilience is 
a desired aspect of sustainable food supply chains. Michel-Villarreal et al. (2019) men-
tions that resilience can be seen as an enabler of sustainability because it allows systems 
to adapt to new ways of managing agricultural and natural systems (King, 2008). Leng-
nick (2015) presents an analysis looking at vulnerability and resilience of food systems 
to investigate the sustainability of the U.S. food supply chain. Their analysis of the lit-
erature show that food systems relying on external or distant resources and specialized 
marketing, production and supply chains are more vulnerable to climate change, which 
affects their sustainability. Therefore, all of them conclude that increasing the resilience 
of the system is crucial to optimize sustainability (Higgins et al., 2010).
The second perspective addresses sustainability as an element of resilience which 
means that “increasing the sustainability of a system makes that system more resilient, 
but increasing the resilience of a system does not necessarily make that system more 
sustainable” (Marchese et  al., 2018, p. 1276). The purpose of resilience in this case 
is to uphold a certain objective such as profit during and after a disruption, and with 
increased sustainability the functionality of the system becomes more resilient to inter-
ruptions (Bansal & DesJardine, 2014). For instance, by adopting sustainable practices 
(social, economic and environmental) an organization would be able to remain profit-
able during a period of disruptions. Dubey et al. (2019a, b) provide an analysis of ante-
cedents of resilient supply chains with information from 250 manufacturing companies 
through the lens of the resource-based view and the relational view. Their framework 
identifies cooperation and trust as promoters of sustainable commitment and perfor-
mance, which can promote resilience in the supply chain. Their result confirm that coop-
eration, trust and also visibility have a significant influence on supply chain resilience. 
Chowdhury et al. (2021) undertook a systematic literature review to explore the impact 
of that major disruption on the supply chain. The analysis of 74 papers unveiled that 
sustainability and resilience took a prominent role in supply chain studies accounting 
for the effects of the pandemic. The authors highlight the gap of looking at the impact of 
sustainable practices on resilience.
There is also evidence that investment in either sustainability or resilience is not nec-
essarily associated with an increase on the other. The third research perspective views 
resilience and sustainability as different elements each with separate objectives (Michel-
Villarreal et al., 2019). That means neither of the two components contribute towards the 
advancement of the other (Marchese et al., 2018) with policies potentially affecting one, 
both or none of them (Derissen et al., 2011; Lew et al., 2016). King (2008) contrast engi-
neering resilience, ecological resilience and adaptive capacity resilience with alternative 
Table 1   The different perspectives about the relationship between sustainability and resilience. Source: 
authors
Perspective 1
Perspective 2
Resilience as element of sustainability
Sustainability as element of resilience
Increased sustainability no impact on resilience
Increased resilience, no impact on sustainability
Perspective 3
Perspective 4
Sustainability and resilience are not related
Sustainability and resilience are interrelated concepts

671
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
agri-ecological systems. The findings suggest that resilience can be essential to design 
these alternative systems.
The fourth perspective argues that the sustainability—resilience concepts are interre-
lated and in need of one another. Higgins et al. (2010) argue that both concepts are related 
and investigate the potential of operational research methodologies to enhance them. The 
authors focus on the value of agent-based modelling, dynamical systems modelling and 
network analysis to develop insights into ASCs. Hoy (2015) categorized sustainability as 
part of agroecosystem health and describes the Agroecosystems Management Program at 
the Ohio State University which uses an approach of promoting self-organizing social net-
work behaviour and entrepreneurship through the development of online tools to generate 
diversity. Their experience shows the potential of managing diversity in agroecosystems 
and encouraging innovation as valuable steps towards agroecosystem health and resilience. 
Vieira et al. (2018) mention that urban food systems need to be sustainable in their prac-
tices and resilient to manage disruptions. They present a systematic literature review com-
bining both concepts and highlight the importance of healthy food, connectivity between 
urban and rural areas, existence of a strong local food economy and food production, 
reduced food waste, and active participation of all actors in decision-making regarding 
UFS as relevant principles for sustainable and resilient systems.
Das (2019) argue that sustainable food supply chains need to include resilience criteria 
to cope with disturbances. They propose a deterministic optimization model aiming to max-
imize realization of food production and maximize profit. They highlight the importance of 
supply chain approaches such as green and lean to increase resilience and social responsi-
bility. Zhu and Krikke (2020) study the impact of disruptions, specifically the COVID-19 
contingency, on supply chain demand. The authors introduce a systems dynamics simula-
tion model to show that the development of sustainable and resilient ASCs restricting the 
information sharing that causes endogenous demand and utilize a loosely coupled strategy 
for decision-making to reduce the negative influence of endogenous demand. Mohammed 
et  al. (2021) coins the term “gresilient” to combine green and resilient practices. They 
integrate both with traditional practices for supplier selection. The weights of the crite-
ria are obtained through AHP and the suppliers are evaluated using TOPSIS. Once both 
tools are employed, the results are used in a multi—objective resource allocation model. 
Ivanov (2020) argues that supply chains should be viable across three perspectives: agility, 
sustainability and resilience. They mention that viability involves the interaction of sustain-
ability and resilience for coping with negative disturbances and recovering from short-term 
and long-term shocks involving societal and economic transformations. Cristiano (2021) 
uses the case of northern Italy to discuss the way that a horticultural collaborative produc-
tion system can serve as basis to improve socio-economic sustainability and resilience in a 
region.
Although there is evidence that sustainability practices can promote resilience, 
Sarkis (2020) mentions that there are sustainability concerns about measures to build 
resilience. For instance, there has been significant discussion about the value of local 
supply to increase sustainability in areas affected by disruptions (Matopoulos et  al., 
2014). Schmitt et al. (2017) use information from 14 local and global suppliers to com-
pare the results between groups looking at environmental, economic, social, health and 
ethical indicators. The outranking analysis employed shows that although local sup-
pliers perform better in general, the result depends on factors beyond the distance of 
suppliers. Local and intermediate suppliers are strong in health and socio-economic 
aspects such as resilience, whereas global food suppliers outperform local and inter-
mediate suppliers in affordability and climate change mitigation. On the other hand, 

672
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
sustainability has been associated with alignment of objectives and information shar-
ing (Despoudi et  al., 2018). However, Vilalta-Perdomo and Hingley (2018) provide 
an alternative view looking at food-micro producers more as a community rather than 
links in a chain using information from six in-depth interviews, an online survey, 
and telephone surveys. They highlight that collaboration does not necessarily require 
shared aims and support the use of collective action for individual improvements. 
Their results show that collective action can be important to build resilience in food-
micro producers.
Additionally, Vroegindewey and Hodbod (2018) look at resilience from the per-
spective of socio-ecological systems. They highlight the importance of redundancies, 
managing connectivity between components, manage variables and feedback, flexibil-
ity, and connectivity as principles required for resilience building. Stone and Rahimi-
fard (2018) agree with that view and outline flexibility, risk awareness, redundancy, 
early warning systems and security as core intra-organizational factors for resilience, 
whereas collaboration, flexibility, agility, visibility, adaptability, and redundancy were 
recognized as intra-supply chain factors. Nevertheless, redundancy can create a con-
flict between sustainability and resilience (Bajželj et al., 2020; Sarkis, 2020). Bajželj 
et al. (2020) focused on that trade-off by analyzing the effect of waste reduction strate-
gies on different aspects of resilience. They analyzed literature to mapped reinforcing 
or opposing relationships between promoting sustainability and reducing food waste. 
Their findings suggest that redundancy can potentially enhance short-term resilience 
(e.g. over-production and over-purchasing), but with the risk of having no real impact 
in resilience if there are no ways to mitigate spoilage and have significant negative 
impact in sustainability of the system.
Sarkis (2020) in his analysis of supply chain management after COVID-19 mentions 
that building redundancy capacity and capabilities can lead to wasted resources and 
energy. Pavlov et al. (2019) looking at seaport operations identify that suboptimal net-
work redundancy can affect the environment negatively, whereas insufficient redundan-
cies can lead to high vulnerability. Hence, potential conflict of efficiency and resilience 
can be affecting the link between sustainability and resilience (Dolgui et  al., 2020). 
Although the relationship between sustainability and resilience is yet to ascertained, 
Ambler-Edwards et  al. (2009) observed that despite possible conflicts, future food 
systems will have to combine the two. Additionally, a study by Colwill et al. (2016) 
recommends that the long term ASC sustainability will only be achieved by coupling 
it with resilience. Indeed, the relationship between both concepts can be crucial (Jab-
barzadeh et al., 2018), especially if there is a trade-off between them that needs to be 
addressed (Pavlov et  al., 2019). At the strategic level, the contribution of Fahimnia 
et al. (2018) provide insights about the relationship between greenness and robustness. 
Their use of an environmental performance scoring approach and a robustness meas-
ure showed the way there can be instances in which sustainability and robustness can 
have a positive relationship or be in conflict. This trade-off has been addressed in the 
supply network design area by Jabbarzadeh et al. (2018). They introduce a stochastic 
bi-objective optimisation model to support outsourcing decisions and the selection of 
resilient strategies. The model aims to minimise cost and maximise sustainability in 
disruptions. The system is solved using a combination of MATLAB and GAMS for a 
case study of the plastic pipe industry.
But although there exists a lot of interest in the two concepts, what this means in the 
upstream stage of the ASC is still not understood (Leat & Revoredo-Giha, 2013).

673
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
2.4  The Kenyan tea supply chain
The aforementioned issues are expected to disproportionately affect global economies, 
especially developing economies in African countries that are heavily dependent on agri-
culture. The significance of such trends will be high in Kenya where agriculture contributes 
an estimated 26% of the gross domestic product (GDP) and more than 80% employment 
of the total population (KNBS, 2018). The country’s agricultural sector is highly depend-
ent on rain for cultivation of major food crops such as maize as well as foreign exchange 
earners like tea and coffee (Ochieng et al. 2016). Hence, climatic variability and change 
resulting in reduced and irregular rainfall leave the country exposed to loss of agricultural 
production and increased food insecurity (Ochieng et al., 2016). For instance, unfavour-
able weather conditions in the year 2017 substantially stifled production of key crops and 
caused drought that triggered a national emergency (Schmidt et al., 2017). Additionally, 
impacting the GDP growth rate from 5.9% in the year 2016 to 4.9% in 2017 (KNBS, 2018).
Kenya is the third largest producer of tea in the world and the biggest seller of black tea 
(Tea & Centre, 2012) with an export value estimated at USD 1.33 billion in the year 2013 
(Chang & Brattlof, 2015). The sector is dominated by small scale producers (own about 
4–8 ha of land, not entirely dedicated to tea production) accounting for more than 60% of 
the production as compared to estates that account for less than 40% of produce (Ange-
lucci et al. 2013). Small scale producers through the support of the government own their 
own production facilities that process and market tea giving them a considerable advan-
tage as compared to other tea producing countries (Angelucci et al., 2013). Nonetheless, 
despite the importance of the commodity to the country several challenges face the sec-
tor ranging from poor infrastructure, high production costs, declining global tea prices, 
insufficient research, low levels of value addition and climatic change (Hadyniak, 2014). 
Hence, the sustainability and resilience of KTSC requires further study to support regional 
development.
2.5  Theoretical lens: the planetary boundaries perspective (PBP)
“The planet’s environment has been unusually stable for the past 10,000 years…” (Rock-
ström et al., 2009, p. 472). However, trends are changing and there is evidence that the sys-
tem is losing its stability “now, largely because of a rapidly growing reliance on fossil fuels 
and industrialized forms of agriculture, human activities have reached a level that could 
damage the systems that keep earth in the desirable Holocene state” (Rockström et al., 
2009, p. 472). Despite awareness of the deteriorating state of the ecosystem, researchers 
have yet to link business operations to the global ecological processes (Whiteman et al., 
2012), with existing theories warranting a paradigm shift to address the already dilapidated 
ecological sphere (Matthews et al., 2016).
The planetary boundaries approach is a social-ecological system that recognizes that 
one issue alone (e.g., climate change) cannot be managed individually without influencing 
the other planetary perspectives as they are determined by a set of inter connected social 
and environmental processes (Whiteman et al., 2012). Rockström et al. (2009) introduced a 
set of nine boundaries to quantify the safe limits that the earth can safely live in and outside 
of which the earth cannot function normally. These boundaries include; climate change, 
biodiversity loss, biogeochemical, ocean acidification, land use, freshwater availability, 
stratosphere ozone depletion, atmospheric aerosols and chemical pollution.

674
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
We have already crossed beyond the safe zone for three boundaries, namely climate 
change, biodiversity loss and biogeochemical; while the others are under immense pressure 
from ongoing depleting ecological practices (Matthews et al., 2016). The resilience and 
sustainability of a system to natural disasters could be assessed through the assessment of 
the crossover of the nine planetary boundaries (Haffar, 2018). Hence, when assessing the 
sustainability and resilience of a system to natural disasters the planetary boundaries need 
to be considered. The KTSC is highly affected by natural disasters which are predicted 
to increase in the coming years (Reliefweb, 2021). At the same time, the current concep-
tualizations on the two phenomenon’s—resilience and sustainability—are inconclusive as 
they tend to consider, the focal firm or the industry, ignoring the global context (Whiteman 
et al., 2012). However, the planetary boundaries constraints on human development require 
a broader approach to be followed by organisations that integrates the macro ecological 
factors and their levels on a particular geographical area. Therefore, this research utilises 
the PBT to assess the sustainability—resilience relationship under the context of natural 
disasters in a particular geographical area i.e. KTSC. The PBP approach is used to assimi-
late the global operating environment, and thus inform on our understanding on how sus-
tainability practices may affect resilience and vice versa in times of disruptions emanating 
from global operating environment factors. Therefore, the research gap that this research 
aims fill is the exploration of the relationship between sustainably and resilience practices 
and whether these can co-exist in the ASC from the PBT perspective. Based on the above 
the objectives of this research are:
1. Identify the current levels of planetary boundaries as well as sustainability and resilience 
levels in the Kenyan tea supply chain from the producers’ perspective.
2. Explore the relationship between sustainability and resilience under the planetary bound-
aries’ theory in the Kenyan tea supply chain from the producers’ perspective.
3  Methods
3.1  Research design and sample
The exploratory nature of this research and absence of research regarding the sustainabil-
ity—resilience relationship in ASCs using the PBT calls for a multi-case study approach. 
This approach is appropriate as it enables an in-depth investigation of the phenomenon 
under study (Voss et al., 2016). The aim of this research is to develop theory about the rela-
tionship between sustainability and resilience in ASCs using the PBT by elaborating on the 
existing literature regarding sustainability and resilience in supply chains and ASCs, that 
is, ‘theory elaboration’ (Ketokivi and Choi, 2014). To this purpose, nine case studies of 
producer organisations have been included. One way that validity is ensured in this study is 
through the robust design of the interview questions (Table 7 in Appendix).
The case study approach was used to provide a qualitative basis and a deep understand-
ing of the phenomena under investigation by examining the meanings that participants 
assign to them in a particular context (Orlikowski & Baroudi, 1991). The study herein 
cannot be separated from its original contextual environment (i.e. KTSC) and therefore 
used a cross-case analysis technique to identify relationships and compare them through 
interviews of multiple stakeholders (Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 2014) of different Kenyan tea 
supply chains. Also, another reason for applying the cross-case study approach is due to 

675
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
the research design, which allows concepts to emerge from the data but also allows the 
researchers to provide rival explanations from multiple stakeholder views (Yin, 2014). 
Miles and Huberman (1994) and Yin (2009a, b) use case studies as a preferred strat-
egy when how or why questions are being posed, when the investigator has little control 
over events, and when the focus is on a contemporary phenomenon within some real-life 
context.
The data from the case study interviews were analyzed through the various phases of 
thematic analysis (Boyatzis, 1998; Braun & Clarke, 2006) and themes were generated 
based on the literature review (PBT elements, resilience practices, and sustainability prac-
tices), leading to an initial coding scheme (Table 7 in Appendix). Further thematic analysis 
was carried out to indicate the sub-themes and divide them into sub-groupings. Sample 
size is a difficult aspect to define for qualitative research, as it relies on the type of qualita-
tive design (Creswell, 2013). For case study research, Creswell (2018) suggests to gather 
information from four to five cases to have rich data for analysis. However, Yin (2009a, b) 
argues that traditional criteria for deciding the size of sample in case study research are not 
applicable. Hence, this research is following the suggestion from Charmaz (2014) about 
the value of continue sampling until reaching saturation (i.e. when the information con-
verges). Using that approach, this research has collected data from nine producer organiza-
tions for analysis. Nine in-depth interviews were conducted in total. The number of cases 
exceeds the threshold from Creswell (2018) and reaching saturation allowed us to gather 
enough information to provide meaningful results.
The tea producers have been identified initially through personal contacts and these 
were then used to create a further pool of respondents. The initial choice of informants 
provided a preliminary understanding of their awareness regarding PBT aspects, and their 
practices regarding resilience and sustainability. We endeavored to conduct interviews with 
producers likely to represent a diverse range of views regarding sustainability and resil-
ience hence we included producers from different geographical regions in Kenya i.e. Kig-
oro, Kigumo, Mundoro, Kifere, Kanyoni, Gachege, Kiangynu, and Gahtanji.
3.2  Data collection and analysis
There were two stages of data collection. First, to be able to understand resilience and sus-
tainability practices in the Kenyan tea industry, in-depth semi-structured face-to-face inter-
views were conducted. Semi-structured interviews can be referred to as an approach that 
involves the interviewer preparing some predetermined set of questions but giving freedom 
to the respondent to add insights on issues that the interviewer did not consider in advance 
(Saunders et al., 2016). An interview protocol was developed based on the objectives of 
this study and it was used to keep the questions consistent across the different interviewees. 
The duration of the interviews varied from 40 to 45 min and the respondents agreed to be 
audio recorded. Informed consent forms and confidentiality agreements were given to each 
interviewee prior to interview. During the interview process the respondents were encour-
aged to elaborate on their answers and on anything that they considered to be relevant to 
this topic to explore in-depth any other issues. To validate the findings the interviewer also 
used observation as a data collection method necessarily to support his understanding of 
the different practices and to confirm that practices that had been mentioned by participants 
were being implemented on the ground.

676
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
Secondly, interviewees were invited to a focus group discussion. This discussion ena-
bled the validation and triangulation of the findings. This research avoided bias by the tri-
angulation of sources as the research used historical data to provide the background of 
each case before and after the interviews, observations of the processes and actions of the 
participants relevant to the objectives of this study and also the interviews with the par-
ticipants. Interviews were conducted on several participants in different time frames and 
in varying locations. Credibility was further increased by selecting participants from the 
KTSC who had substantial experience in the industry and represented a valid picture of the 
research matter (Creswell, 2003). By informing the participants that the research informa-
tion was strictly confidential and would only be used for this research project the researcher 
ensured that the participants were free to engage in a free way that enabled the researcher 
gain better insights.
Thematic analysis evidence has shown that the general trend is to begin with coding 
which then allows for themes to be generated (Miles & Huberman, 1994). Thematic analy-
sis with coding was used to identify themes reflecting the interview guide. Two researchers 
coded each interview through NVivo Qualitative Data Analysis Software. After the end of 
each interview it was immediately transcribed to identify the need for further interviews 
and the transcripts were sent to the interviewees for checking. The results were reported 
under the main categories i.e. planetary boundaries, sustainability practices, and resilience 
practices.
To ensure transferability (equivalent to external validity), we followed Lincoln and 
Guba (1985) and provided sufficient information about the context of Kenyan supply chain 
where the research was conducted so that “anyone else interested in transferability has a 
base of information appropriate to the judgement” (pp. 124–125). To ensure credibility 
(equivalent to internal validity), we followed Lincoln and Guba (1985) and used interview 
data in parallel with observation, peer debriefing, and audit trails. Finally, we followed Lin-
coln and Guba (1985) and therefore the following strategies to ensure ruling out rival inter-
pretations of data: (i) prolonged engagement with the organisation, understanding the cul-
ture and building trust with the participants (ii) persistent observations (iii) triangulation.
The results were presented in the focus group discussion for validation purposes.
4  Findings
This section presents the findings of the primary data collected in order to understand the 
producers awareness of the existence of the PBT elements, to understand the resilience and 
sustainability practices employed with the aim to explore the relationship between sustain-
ability and resilience in context of the KTSC guided by the PBT approach.
4.1  Participants profiles
To preserve the anonymity of the participants, Table  2 presents a summary of this 
study’s participants based on the region and their experience in years. The table also 
indicates the participant’s codes, (denoted between P1 and P9). The number of years’ 
experience in the KTSC was thought to be an important metric as individuals with more 
experience would be able to compare experiences especially concerning climate change 
which is an ongoing occurrence. Validation of the data was achieved by triangulating 

677
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
the data collection across different regions—which were chosen because tea in these 
areas was the main economic activity.
4.2  Findings on planetary boundaries
The interviewed producers were asked about their awareness regarding the different 
planetary boundaries as presented in Table 7 in the Appendix. Most of the interviewees 
were aware about seven out of the nine planetary boundaries; they were not aware about 
novel entities and in stratospheric ozone depletion. Table 3 below summarizes the find-
ings of the Planetary boundaries’ awareness per participant.
All interviewed producers were found to be aware of climatic change as they expe-
rience it highly. The impact of climatic change is mainly visible to them through the 
extreme weather conditions such as extreme rain, drought, and hail. Some of the inter-
viewed producers stated that:
‟…for the last 3 years we have experienced extreme heat and drought and due to 
these it is really affecting tea production negatively.” (P1)
Table 2   Participants details
Participants code
Experience in years
Region
P1
16
Kigoro
P2
33
Kigumo
P3
17
Mundoro
P4
33.5
Oleng
P5
20
Kaifere
P6
20
Kanyoni
P7
40
Gachege
P8
8
Kiangunu
P9
34
Gathanji
Table 3   Summary of findings about the planetary boundaries per participant
Par-
ticipants 
code
Planetary boundaries awareness
Climatic 
change
Atmospheric 
aerosol loading
Land sys-
tem change
Biochemi-
cal flows
Biosphere 
integrity
Fresh water 
availability
Ocean acid
P1
×
×
P2
×
×
P3
×
×
×
P4
×
P5
×
×
×
P6
×
×
×
P7
×
×
P8
×
×
×
×
×
×
P9
×
×
×
×
×

678
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
‟…a lot of rain makes the roots of the tea leaves freeze especially when the 
weather is misty. Also recently there were hail stones and because previously the 
weather was very sunny, the hail stones really affected the tea plantations.” (P3)
‟…the weather lately has been unpredictable not like in the earlier years, the 
atmosphere has really changed when we are expecting the rains it gets extreme hot 
and when we are expecting the sunny season it starts raining.” (P4)
Especially the hail and extremely cold weather seem to impact them significantly as 
it destroyed completely their produce. Extremely hot weather may impact negatively 
their production. Some of the interviewed producers mentioned that:
‟…When it is extremely hot we experience low production leading us to produce 
less kilograms, which can drop even to approximately 40%.” (P5)
In terms of the atmospheric aerosol loading, stratospheric ozone depletion, and novel 
entities only one of the interviewed producers was found to be aware of air pollution. 
Producer P5 mentioned that he is taking actions to reduce his emissions by measuring 
the ­CO2 emissions of his business. All the interviewed producers were found to use fer-
tilizers which are ozone depleting substances and could possibly be considered as novel 
entities. However, none of them was aware of their negative implications on the envi-
ronment. This is probably because they are given the fertilizers by their buyers as and 
they apply them directly to their produce without understanding what they are using. 
Since producers were not aware about the stratospheric ozone depletion and the novel 
entities planetary boundaries there are not included in Table 3.
Six out of the nine interviewed producers were aware of the land system change as it 
affects them as they frequently have landslides. One of the interviewed producers stated:
‟…this year we have had a lot of rains from March, April and May, because of the 
topography of this area being very hilly, we experienced a lot of landslides and 
some of our farmers lost their tea arising from the landslides. They wake up on 
morning and find that the farm is not there it has gone to the neighbors together 
with the tea. That is one area that has really been a problem.” (P7)
In response to the land system change they are adopting different measures to ensure 
high yields on their current land holdings in order to increase land productivity and 
improve environmental conditions such as training, dividing of their land holdings, and 
planting trees. Some of the interviewed producers mentioned:
‟…despite the fact that agricultural land has been decreasing what we have expe-
rienced is just farmers’ sub dividing their lands.” (P6)
‟…we have embarked so much on rehabilitating our rivers, riverbeds and planting 
of trees and that kind of programs. In fact, on Monday ­16th, we are having a tree 
planting day.” (P8)
Only four out of the nine interviewed producers were aware of the biochemical flows 
planetary boundary which is related to nitrogen and phosphorus losses. These producers 
were found to be aware of the impact of their farming actions on the planet as rivers are 
impacted as well as the quality of their production. One the producers stated:
‟…there is a lot of heavy soil erosion such that rivers have turned almost yellow 
because of the soil. Thirdly, due to the excessive rains the crop has been affected 
negatively because when there is too much water in the soil this reverses the gains 

679
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
that we have had. Additionally, the fertilizers that we do buy we have not seen the 
results because the soils are washed out too much by the rains.” (P8)
In terms of changes in biosphere integrity which is about awareness of biodiversity 
implications on their farming business only a few producers were aware of it. This is evi-
dent to them as their yields are decreasing, and new infections and other plant types appear 
and damage their production. This has further implications as tea producers may choose 
to invest in other types of crops that are more profitable and future tea production may be 
impacted. Some of the interviewed producers stated:
‟…As a result of soil erosion, tea plants are no longer producing especially during 
the dry season. With dry season we have lost crops, sometimes even bushes have 
dried up, we have also lost our young seedlings.” (P9)
‟…we opt uprooting the tea plantations when they dry up due infections and plant 
other types of cash crops.” (P3)
Only two out of the nine interviewed producers were aware of the freshwater availability 
due to negative implications on their produce as current water resources seem not to be suf-
ficient for them. A few of the interviewees mentioned:
‟…during extreme hot weathers, we face a lot of challenges since we can’t water the 
plantations because the water is rationed, and the water might not be sufficient to 
everyone. We therefore depend on purely rain fed agriculture. So, if we don’t receive 
adequate rainfall, production goes down.” (P2)
‟…on water management, us farmers in this area we don’t water our tea farms since 
there is no sufficient water supply. If tea farming had better returns, we would risk to 
get water from somewhere else at a cost, but now we don’t get much from tea farm-
ing therefore we can’t afford to incur others costs lest we work at a loss.” (P4)
There were a few of them that they are implementing water management systems and 
they hold certifications such as the Certification of the Rain Forest Alliance in their efforts 
to save water and use it more efficiently. Only one of the interviewed producers was found 
to be aware of the ocean acidification issue. This is probably because it does not seem to 
affect them directly as their landholdings are on highlands. One of the interviewed produc-
ers stated:
‟…on ocean acidification, that’s a non-issue to us because our farms are in the high-
lands and also when we apply fertilizer we do so when there is minimal rain and by 
the time the rains come, the plant has already utilized the fertilizer.” (P8)
4.3  Supply chain sustainability findings
This section presents the findings of the three sustainability elements in terms of the differ-
ent practices that the interviewed producers employ. Most of the interviewees were found 
to be engaged in at least two sustainability practices (Table 4).
Eight out of the nine interviewees implement environmental sustainability practices. 
These practices are related to the use of water meters, energy saving equipment and other 
alternative energy methods, as well as waste management. A few of them have acquired the 
Rain Forest Alliance certification for water preservation purposes. One of the producers 
claimed:

680
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
‟…the Certification of the Rain Forest Alliance is one of the key criteria in water 
management. That is why we are having a lot of programs together with other 
stakeholders like Water Resources Management Authority. We are going back to 
our rivers; we are having policies and active participations in protecting our riv-
ers.” (P8)
Producers are receiving training about waste and water management and they were 
found to have recycling schemes for plastic recycling. Any food waste is used as manure 
in their produce. Some of the interviewed producers stated:
‟…people inspecting on waste management make sure the pits have been dug in 
certain specifications and that they are big enough to hold quite a number of these 
polythene. (P2)
‟…yes, we have been taught on garbages, things like plastic paper bags are sup-
posed to be collected and recycled and not burnt or buried.” (P3)
They are also investing in alternative sources of energy to firewood as they found out 
that it is not sustainable due to the tree cutting that it requires and the greenhouse gas 
emissions that are generated. The use of firewood generates further ­CO2 emissions when 
the trees are burnt in the boiler. None of the interviewed producers were found to cur-
rently have any practices about reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Although there were no visible alternative sources on display at the time, two pro-
ducers mentioned that they were considering the use of solar systems to replace their 
current energy sources. But these plans were at an initial stage as electricity and fire-
wood were the main source of energy. Although the purchase of land to plant more trees 
for firewood while they were considering an alternative source of fuel seemed counter-
productive and the solution to that is to plant more trees for environmental conservation. 
One of the interviewed producers mentioned:
‟…we are also researching to know what else we can do or what else we can use 
as a source of energy, since firewood is our main source of energy that’s what we 
use here for generating steam. I know it has an effect on the climate since the more 
we cut trees the more we are affecting the rainfall and also emitting a lot of green-
house gases. We are encouraged to plant trees, and we are buying farms to plant 
our own trees for firewood that will act as a source of energy.” (P6)
Table 4   Summary of findings 
about sustainability practices per 
participant
Participants code
Sustainability practices
Environmental
Social
Economic
P1
×
×
P2
×
×
P3
×
P4
×
×
P5
×
×
P6
×
×
×
P7
×
×
×
P8
×
×
×
P9
×
×
×

681
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
Six out of the nine producers were found to be engaged in social sustainability practices. 
These practices are focussed on child labour prohibition and on promoting non-gender and 
non-racial discrimination. An interesting observation was that only women seemed to be 
working as tea pickers in the farms as men do not like to work on that.
‟…there is no discrimination when employing farm workers, though most of our work-
ers are women compared to men. Regarding employing children to work on the farms, 
we have been educated by KTDA not to employ any child since that is child labour and 
it’s against the law.” (P4)
Producers also receive training about waste management, and environmental protection 
from their buyers. One of them state:
‟… we receive training from our buyers on how to handle the waste in farms, water and 
all the waste that is generated in the farm. We separate the wastes then they collect them 
from their farms.” (P6)
Six out of the nine producers claimed to be economically sustainable at the moment, but 
they are not sure if this will continue in the future. Although the Kenyan tea industry pays the 
most to producers among competing countries, all producers felt that they were not being paid 
enough to sustain their business and they are considering of investing in other types of pro-
duce that are more profitable. One of the producers stated:
‟…as a tea farmer, since we are not getting sufficient money from tea farming, some are 
opting planting avocado trees and macadamia since the farms are small which have a 
better income and also there is manpower involved like you don’t have to employ work-
ers unlike tea farming. When these avocado and macadamia are ready for harvest, the 
buyers come to harvest for themselves unlike tea whereby we farmers pluck ourselves.” 
(P4)
Pay on the farms was based on a piecemeal basis that paid the worker on output and 
depending on how much tea one was able to pick then there was a standard price per kilo. The 
standard rate per kilo of raw tea leaves seemed to have been a factor of market economics as 
they all did not know how it was agreed upon and was more instinctive rather than planned. 
One producer mentioned:
‟…around this area we pay our workers 10 shilling per kilogram. Though at times we 
are straining because, at the factory we are paid 15 shillings per kg then I pay my worker 
10 shilling per kilogram, the remainder is 5 shillings then you less the fertilizer, less 
manpower to take care of the farm. Most of us are forced to rely on bonuses only.” (P5)
Therefore, in terms of the sustainability practices the majority of the interviewed produc-
ers were found to implement environmental sustainability practices, while almost half of them 
have in place social economic sustainability practices (6 social and 6 economic). Four of the 
interviewees were found to have adopted practices related to all the three sustainability ele-
ments (i.e. environmental, social, and economic).
4.4  Supply chain resilience findings
This section presents the findings based on the three aspects of ASC resilience as identified 
in the literature review i.e. readiness, response and adaptability. Table 5 presents a sum-
mary of the findings about resilience practices per participant.

682
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
Regarding the readiness aspect of resilience, four out of the nine interviewees were 
found to implement readiness practices in case of a disruption due planetary boundaries 
implications. Most of them they keep extra stock, postponement activities, and conduct 
risk assessments. Some of the interviewed producers mentioned:
‟…we keep extra produce in our warehouses in case there is a disruption. To 
achieve that we collaborate with buyers in order to store even more products.” 
(P8)
‟…we do risk assessment and then we have a list of all the risks that are likely to 
happen then put the mitigation factors which we put in place just in case that risk 
happens.” (P6)
In terms of response, only three out of the nine respondents found to have response 
practices in case of a disruption. These practices are about information sharing, devel-
opment of collaborative capabilities with key buyers, and training about responding to 
unexpected situations.
‟…yes, we have never shut down, we are able to deal with the challenges as they 
come. We share information with our collaborators to understand how to deal bet-
ter with it.” (P8)
‟…through the collaborative activities with our buyers we are taught about how to 
best response in different kinds of unexpected situations.” (P2)
Most of the interviewees i.e. seven out of the nine stated that they implement adapt-
ability practices. This indicates that most of them wait until the disruptions happens and 
then they try to adapt to the changing circumstances such as adapting to changing weather 
conditions and plant more tea trees instead of investing in building readiness and response 
capabilities. This could be considered as a more passive approach to resilience.
‟…we don’t do much, when the tea leaves are destroyed by for example the hail 
stones, we just prune them and wait for the tea leaves to shoot again. There is 
nothing we can do since it’s a natural calamity.” (P4)
‟…I think I am well prepared for climate change, though not 100% but we have 
mitigation issues that are there in place, like what I said we encourage all the 
producers to plant a lot of trees. By this we reduce the rate at which the climate is 
going to affect us.” (P6)
Table 5   Summary of findings 
about ASC resilience aspects per 
participant Participants Code
Resilience practices
Readiness
Response
Adaptability
P1
×
P2
×
P3
×
P4
×
P5
×
P6
×
×
P7
×
P8
×
×
×
P9
×
×
×

683
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
Hence, it was found that the majority of the interviewed producers invest in the devel-
opment of adaptability capacities, then to readiness capabilities and only a few of them to 
response capabilities.
4.5  Supply chain sustainability and resilience findings
For the purposes of this analysis the sustainability and resilience practices of the inter-
viewed producers were ranked as: (a) low implementation (L: only one sustainability or 
resilience practice in place), (b) average implementation (A: two sustainability or resilience 
practices in place), and (c) high implementation (H: all three sustainability or resilience 
practices are in place). A similar categorization was followed to rank the PBT awareness 
findings and this is: (a) low awareness of PBT (L: aware of only one to two planetary 
boundaries), (b) average awareness of PBT (A: aware of three to four planetary bounda-
ries), and (c) (b) high awareness of PBT (H: aware of more than four planetary bounda-
ries). Table 6 presents a summary of this study’s findings and the respective rankings. The 
rankings for the awareness of Planetary boundaries are presented as PR, for the resilience 
practices as RR, and for the sustainability practices as SR.
Overall, the interviewed producers were found to implement more sustainability prac-
tices than resilience practices. Therefore, being sustainable does not mean that they will be 
resilient at the same time. Four of them were ranked as having high implementation of sus-
tainability practices, four average, and one low. Six out of the nine interviewees ranked low 
in terms of their resilience practices implementation as they were found to implement only 
one of the three resilience aspects, one of them average, and two of them as high.
Regarding the relationship between sustainability and resilience, most of the producers 
who ranked high or average on sustainability practices implementation, they have aver-
age or low rankings for resilience practices implementation. In particular these are: P1, 
P2, P4, P5, P6, and P7. In these cases, it seems that the interviewed producers implement 
sustainability practices, but this affects their implementation of resilience practices. How-
ever, sustainability is increasing faster than resilience. This may suggest the existence on 
Table 6   Summary of this study’s findings about the relationship between sustainability and resilience under 
the PBT
PC
Planetary boundaries awareness
Resilience practices
Sustainability prac-
tices
CC
AL
LC
BF
BI
FW
OA
PR
RD
RS
AD
RR
EN
SO
EC
SR
P1
×
×
L
×
L
×
×
A
P2
×
×
L
×
L
×
×
A
P3
×
×
×
A
×
L
×
L
P4
×
L
×
L
×
×
A
P5
×
×
×
A
×
L
×
×
A
P6
×
×
×
A
×
×
A
×
×
×
H
P7
×
×
L
×
L
×
×
×
H
P8
×
×
×
×
×
×
H
×
×
×
H
×
×
×
H
P9
×
×
×
×
×
H
×
×
×
H
×
×
×
H

684
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
a non-linear relationship among sustainability and resilience. Regarding the PBT it was 
found that when there is low or average awareness of the PBT constraints the resilience 
practices implementation is low or average as well (P1, P2, P4, P6, P7). However, sustain-
ability practices implementation does not seem to be affected by the producers’ awareness 
of the PBT factors. This suggests that PBT factors awareness is related to increased resil-
ience but does not seem to affect sustainability practices implementation. Therefore, the 
PBT factors awareness was found to impact resilience practices implementation.
5  Discussion
The findings identified that ecological conditions were posing a real challenge to produc-
ers. Tea growing areas had started to experience climatic conditions that had not been 
experienced before, for instance hailstones had started to appear just five years ago as indi-
cated by the findings. This is evidence of loss of stability by the ecosystem which is in line 
with Rockström et al. (2009) theory on the safe operating spaces. The analysis pointed out 
that the main issue affecting tea production was climatic change as producers are highly 
impacted by that. Most of the Kenyan tea producers were found to be aware of the fol-
lowing planetary boundaries: climatic change, land system change, biochemical flows, and 
biosphere integrity. Only one producer was found to be aware of the atmospheric aero-
sol loading boundary although the extensive use of pesticides on their produce affects this 
boundary. Awareness about the ocean acidification boundary was mentioned by only one 
producer. Interestingly, the novel entities and the stratospheric ozone depletion boundaries 
were not familiar to producers. This may be because they collect the chemicals and the 
pesticides that they use from their buyers, hence they are unaware of the products that are 
using and their negative implications on the environment. Therefore, regarding the aware-
ness of the PBT this research adds to the existing literature of Rockström et al. (2009) 
and Whiteman et al. (2012), that these boundaries exist in the ASC and although certain 
boundaries might have been already crossed the KTSC producers were aware of only a few 
of them. Therefore, increasing awareness activities at all the levels of the ASC is important.
Regarding the sustainability practices implementation this research this study found that 
some producers participate in programs to manage waste, water and utilise energy in an 
efficient way. However, greenhouse gas emission was not being addressed and there was lit-
tle investment on alternative clean energy sources. At the producer level, waste, water, and 
energy were all being managed but greenhouse gas emissions and alternative energy were 
not being practiced. The study exhibited environmental sustainability conformity which is 
in line with Elkington (1998) and Despoudi (2020), but the lack of greenhouse gas emis-
sion management and limited investment on alternative energy sources went against the 
literatures recommendations. Social sustainability requires that organisations engage in fair 
labour practices and safeguard human rights (Elkington, 1998). This study found evidence 
of social sustainability practices in the KTSC at the producers’ level. Producers portrayed 
evidence in the engagement of social issues such as safeguarding against discrimination 
and fair compensation. Therefore, although there were issues that were in line with Elking-
ton (1998) recommendations of social sustainability practices, some other issues especially 
at the producer level were less sustainable in relation to the literature.

685
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
Economic sustainability advocates for profit, cost management, share price growth and 
revenue growth (Elkington, 1998). Producers felt that they were not making enough money 
from tea as compared to alternative types of crops. At the same time, they indicated that 
their costs had substantially gone up, and they were not making enough money from tea 
to keep up. Therefore, although there was indication about current economic sustainability 
in terms of the future is seems quite unsustainable. Overall, almost half of the interviewed 
producers were found to have high or average implementation of sustainability practices 
with all of them having environmental practices in place.
This study adopted the stages of disruptions to identify the right capabilities at each 
stage as suggested by Stone and Rahimifard (2018) that had been developed by Ponomarov 
and Holcomb (2009) and Hohenstein et al. (2015). In terms of the readiness capability, this 
study found that some producers had built redundancy and flexibility capabilities in their 
operations which is in line with the research of Christopher and Peck (2004). Flexibility 
was also evident in the KTSC as producers developed strategic partnerships with their buy-
ers which is in line with the examined literature (Christopher & Peck, 2004; Ponomarov & 
Holcomb, 2009). The findings of this study suggested that collaboration is well practiced 
by producers and there was evidence of existing links of communication and information 
sharing between producers and their buyers and how this had been used in times of dis-
ruptions. This adds to the existing research of Dubey et al. (2020) and Faisal et al. (2006) 
about the response capabilities of visibility through information sharing and collabora-
tion by replicating this finding in the KTSC context. Most of the producers were found to 
implement adaptability practices through flexible sourcing and this confirms the findings 
of Stone et al. (2015a; b). Overall, producers failed to show strong implementation resil-
ience practices to quantify them as being very resilient as per the resilience literature as 
they exhibited mainly adaptability practices which could be considered as a more passive 
approach to resilience.
5.1  Research implications
The findings of this study indicated that sustainability and resilience are interrelated con-
cepts. This in line with the fourth perspective about the sustainability resilience relation-
ship as suggested by the authors of this study in Table 1 and the studies of Higgins et al. 
(2010) and Mohammed et al. (2021). However, the findings of this study suggest that the 
sustainability—resilience relationship is non-linear. As although the concepts were found 
to be related, they do not seem to increase at the same pace. This adds to the existing litera-
ture of Marchese et al. (2018) and Colwill et al. (2016) that there is a fourth perspective of 
the latter relationship but it is not linear in the KTSC context. They are related concepts but 
the way the one increases does not impact the other in the same way. However, the type of 
non-linear relationship should be further examined by future research.
Regarding the PBT it was found that when there is low or average awareness of the PBT 
constraints the resilience practices implementation is low or average as well (P1, P2, P4, 
P6, P7). However, sustainability practices implementation does not seem to be affected by 
the producers’ awareness of the PBT factors. This suggests that PBT factors awareness is 
related to increased resilience but does not seem to affect in the same way sustainability 
practices implementation. Therefore, the PBT does not affect in the same way sustainabil-
ity and resilience. The findings of this study suggested that there is a relationship between 
resilience practices and PBT factors awareness, however there is no relationship between 

686
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
sustainability practices implementation and PBT awareness. This adds to the research of 
Haffar (2018) who claimed that there is a relationship of PBT with both sustainability and 
resilience, by suggesting that in the KTSC context this is not the case. Therefore, to under-
stand the latter relationship specific contextual factors need to be studied. Hence, the prop-
ositions resulting from this study are:
P1: The relationship between sustainability, and resilience is non-linear.
P2: When the awareness about the PBT constraints is high, resilience will be higher 
and when awareness is low, and resilience will be low.
5.2  Managerial implications
This study presents some useful insights for managers and other ASC entities. Firstly, hav-
ing evaluated the current status of the tea industry in Kenya, this research could encourage 
ASC managers and other ASC entities to critically evaluate their sustainability and resil-
ience approaches in the face of vulnerabilities – PBP in this case. Secondly, this research 
illustrated how producers within the same supply chain may employ diverse resilience and 
sustainability practices and indicated the practices that are mostly used. Hence, ASC man-
agers and producers could learn from each other and synergies could be enabled to build 
sustainable and resilience ASCs in the face of disruptions.
5.3  Generalisability of results
The purpose of case study research is to gain deeper understanding about processes, 
the context and the perception from stakeholders (Benbasat et al., 1987) and it cannot 
be reduced to a series of generalisations (Saunders et al., 2009). Indeed, case study 
analysis is not intending to generalise from limited samples to the entire popula-
tion (Yin, 2009a, b), but to provide thorough understanding complex environments 
such as the relationship between sustainability and resilience using PTB. Hence, case 
studies do not allow statistical generalisability (Yin, 2009a, b). However, they allow 
us to create theoretical premises to make assertions about similar situations to the 
one studied (Wikfeldt, 1993). In fact, the concept of analytical generalisation arises 
(Gomm et al., 2009; Yin, 2009a, b), which involves considering several case studies 
with similar characteristics and results as basis to develop theory. This concept has 
also been described as theoretical generalisation (Tsang, 2014). As a result, the theo-
retical insights from this research can be used to inform tea supply chains in similar 
countries and to be used as basis for the development of similar studies in different 
countries to develop theoretical generalisations.

687
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
6  Conclusions, limitations and future research
The aim this study was to evaluate whether a supply chain could simultaneously toler-
ate economic growth, balance social and environmental impacts and still be resilient 
to disruptions by examining the relationship of resilience and sustainability in the 
KTSC under the PBT. Therefore, this study sought to understand the current prac-
tices in the industry by interviewing nine producers who were dependent on tea for 
their livelihoods. Through thematic analysis of the primary data from the interviews, 
insights were generated about the current PBT awareness levels, current resilience 
and sustainability practices, and the relationship between sustainability under the 
PBT in the KTSC. The findings suggest that KTSC producers are aware of most of the 
planetary boundaries and they are engaged in sustainability and resilience practices. 
Although sustainability and resilience were found to be interrelated concepts, they are 
not increasing in the same pace. Hence a non-linear relationship was detected. Further 
research is needed to ascertain the type of non-linear relationship between sustain-
ability and resilience.
Also, the PBT awareness factors were found to be linked to resilience practices and not 
to sustainability ones. This research used interviews from a specific population of inter-
est i.e. KTSC producers. Future studies should use other forms of data collection methods 
such as questionnaires to get more generalisable results and collect data from other ASC 
entities i.e. processors, retailers, and other types of ASCs and explore further the awareness 
of the PBT factors. This research adopted a case study approach which was focused on the 
Kenyan tea producers only and hence the generalisability of the results is limited to this 
specific context. Future research should replicate the findings of this study to other ASCs 
in other countries. Due to the study’s objective to explore the phenomenon’s key practices 
and explore the potential relationship between sustainability and resilience, this study has 
not laid down a detailed framework on how organizations could be able to achieve a bal-
ance of resilience and sustainability. Thus, further research is needed to develop a com-
prehensive framework of how sustainability and resilience could be balanced and used by 
organisations.
Appendix
See Appendix Table 7.

688
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
Table 7   Summary of concepts, abbreviations, definitions, and sources.
Concept
Abbreviation
Definition
Source
Climatic change
CC
the extent to which the organization is aware of the implications of climatic change 
e.g. emissions, energy imbalance
Based on Rockström et al. (2009)
Atmospheric aerosol loading
AL
the extent to which the organization is aware of the atmospheric aerosol boundary/
issue (i.e. air pollution)
Based on Rockström et al. (2009)
Stratospheric ozone depletion
SD
the extent to which the organization is aware of their impact on Stratospheric ozone 
Depletion
Based on Rockström et al. (2009)
Land system change
LC
the extent to which the organization is aware of the global land cover converted to 
cropland
Based on Rockström et al. (2009)
Biochemical flows
BF
the extent to which the organization is aware of their impact on the biochemical 
flows’ boundary related to its control and losses of nitrogen, phosphorus, and other 
biochemical flows
Based on Rockström et al. (2009)
Change in biosphere integrity
BI
the extent to which the organisation is aware of the implications of biodiversity on 
their business as i.e. functional well as their impact on biodiversity loss
Based on Rockström et al. (2009)
Novel entities
NV
the extent to which the organisation uses novel entities e.g. chemicals, new types of 
engineering materials/organisms
Based on Rockström et al. (2009)
Fresh water availability
FW
the extent to which the organisation uses freshwater in a sustainable way
Based on Rockström et al. (2009)
Ocean acidification
OA
the extent to which the organisation is aware of the ocean acidification boundary/issue
Based on Rockström et al. (2009)
Readiness
RD
the extent to which an organization anticipates or prepares for a potential disruption
Based on Stone and Rahimifard (2018)
Response
RS
the extent to which an organization has pre-planned elements that mitigate the impact 
of a disruption and help it to remain functional
Based on Stone and Rahimifard (2018)
Adaptability
AD
the extent to which an organization has the capability to adjust is operations in 
response to a disruption
Based on Hohenstein et al. (2015)
Resilience ranking
RR
overall ranking based on RD, RS and AD
N/A
Environmental sustainability
EN
the extent to which an organization engages in environmentally friendly practices
Elkington (1998)
Social sustainability
SO
the extent to which an organization engages in social practices
Elkington (1998)
Economic sustainability
EC
the extent to which an organization is economically performing well
Elkington (1998)
Sustainability ranking
SR
overall ranking based on EN, SO and EC
N/A

689
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Abeysekara, N., Wang, H., & Kuruppuarachchi, D. (2019). Effect of supply-chain resilience on firm perfor-
mance and competitive advantage. Business Process Management Journal, 25, 1673–1695
Alhaddi, H. (2015). Triple bottom line and sustainability: A literature review. Business and Management 
Studies. https://​doi.​org/​10.​11114/​bms.​v1i2.​752
Altay, N., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., & Childe, S. J. (2018). Agility and resilience as antecedents of sup-
ply chain performance under moderating effects of organizational culture within the humanitarian 
setting: A dynamic capability view. Production Planning & Control, 29(14), 1158–1174
Ambler-Edwards, S. et al. (2009). Food futures: rethinking UK strategy a chatham house report. http://​orca.​
cf.​ac.​uk/​20465/1/​r0109​foodf​utures.​pdf
Anderies, J. M., Folke, C., Walker, B., & Ostrom, E. (2013). Aligning key concepts for global change pol-
icy: Robustness, resilience, and sustainability. Ecology and Society. the Resilience Alliance, 18(2), 
art8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5751/​ES-​05178-​180208
Angelucci, F., Balié, J., Gourichon, H., Mas Aparisi, A., & Witwer, M. (2013). Monitoring and analysing 
food and agricultural policies in Africa.
Azadegan, A., & Dooley, K. (2021). A typology of supply network resilience strategies: Complex collabora-
tions in a complex world. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 57, 17–26
Bajželj, B., Quested, T. E., Röös, E., & Swannell, R. P. J. (2020). The role of reducing food waste for resil-
ient food systems. Ecosystem Services, 45, 101140
Bansal, P., & DesJardine, M. (2014). Business sustainability: It is about time. Strategic Organization, 12(1), 
70–78
Barbosa, M. W. (2021). Uncovering research streams on agri-food supply chain management: A bibliomet-
ric study. Global Food Security, 28, 100517
Barrett, C. B., Barbier, E. B., & Reardon, T. (2001). Agroindustrialization, globalization, and interna-
tional development: The environmental implications. Environment and Development Economics, 6, 
419–433
Behl, A., & Dutta, P. (2019a). Humanitarian supply chain management: A thematic literature review and 
future directions of research. Annals of Operations Research, 283, 1001–1044
Behl, A., & Dutta, P. (2019). Social and financial aid for disaster relief operations using CSR and crowd-
funding: Moderating effect of information quality. Benchmarking: An International Journal.
Benbasat, I., Goldstein, D. K., & Mead, M. (1987). The case research strategy in studies of information sys-
tems. MIS Quarterly, 11, 369–386
Blackhurst, J., Craighead, C. W., Elkins, D., & Handfield, R. B. (2005). An empirically derived agenda 
of critical research issues for managing supply-chain disruptions. International Journal of Produc-
tion Research, 43(19), 4067–4081
Boyatzis, R. E. (1998). Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code development. 
Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychol-
ogy, 3(2), 77–101
Carter, C. R., & Easton, P. L. (2011). Sustainable supply chain management: Evolution and future direc-
tions. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 41(1), 46–62
Chang, K., & Brattlof, M. (2015). Contribution of tea production and exports to food security, rural 
development and smallholder welfare in selected producing countries. Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations - Rome, Italy.
Christopher, M., & Holweg, M. (2011). Supply Chain 2.0: Managing supply chains in the era of turbu-
lence. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 41(1), 63–82
Christopher, M., & Peck, H. (2004). Building the resilient supply chain. International Journal of Logis-
tics Management, 15(2), 1–13

690
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
Collins, E., Roper, J., & Lawrence, S. (2010). Sustainability practices: Trends in New Zealand busi-
nesses. Business Strategy and the Environment, 19(8), 479–494
Colwill, J., Despoudi, S., & Bhamra, R. (2016). A review of resilience within the UK food manufactur-
ing sector. In Y.M. Goh & K. Case (Eds.), Advances in transdisciplinary engineering (Vol. 3, pp. 
451–456). https://​doi.​org/​10.​3233/​978-1-​61499-​668-2-​451
Commission on Environment. (1987). Report of the world commission on environment and develop-
ment: Our common future towards sustainable development 2. Part II. Common challenges popu-
lation and human resources 4. http://​www.​un-​docum​ents.​net/​our-​common-​future.​pdf
Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing grounded theory. (2nd ed.). SAGE.
Chowdhury, P., Paul, S. K., Kaisar, S., & Moktadir, M. A. (2021). COVID-19 pandemic related supply 
chain studies: A systematic review. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation 
Review, 148, 102271
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among five approaches. (3rd 
ed.). SAGE.
Creswell, J. W. (2018). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative & mixed methods approaches, inter-
national student edition. (5th ed.). SAGE.
Cristiano, S. (2021). Organic vegetables from community-supported agriculture in Italy: Emergy assess-
ment and potential for sustainable, just, and resilient urban-rural local food production. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 292, 126015
Cracknell, R. (2015). Extension officer training manual: Climate change adaptation. https://​www.​organ​
ic-​agric​ulture.​net
Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research design Qualitative quantitative and mixed methods approaches. SAGE.
Das, K. (2019). Integrating lean, green, and resilience criteria in a sustainable food supply chain plan-
ning model. International Journal of Mathematical, Engineering and Management Sciences, 4, 
259–275
De Silva, T. A., & Forbes, S. L. (2016). Sustainability in the New Zealand horticulture industry. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 112(4), 2381–2391
Delai, I., & Takahashi, S. (2011). Sustainability measurement system: A reference model proposal. 
Social Responsibility Journal, 7(3), 438–471
Derissen, S., Quaas, M. F., & Baumgärtner, S. (2011). The relationship between resilience and sustain-
ability of ecological-economic systems. Ecological Economics, Elsevier, 70(6), 1121–1128
Despoudi, S. (2020). Green food supply chain. In C. Galanakis (Ed.) Food industry and the environment 
(pp. 35–61). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​B978-0-​12-​816449-​5.​00002-3
Despoudi, S. (2021). Challenges in reducing food losses at producers’ level: The case of Greek agricul-
tural supply chain producers. Industrial Marketing Management, 93, 520–532. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​indma​rman.​2020.​09.​022
Despoudi, S., Papaioannou, G., & Dani, S. (2020). Producers responding to environmental turbulence in 
the greek agricultural supply chain: Does buyer type matter? Production Planning and Control. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09537​287.​2020.​17961​38
Despoudi, S., Papaioannou, G., Saridakis, G., & Dani, S. (2018). Does collaboration pay in agricultural 
supply chain? An empirical approach. International Journal of Production Research, 56, 4396–4417
Dewangga, A., Goldsmith, S., & Pegram, N. (2008). Social responsibility guideline and sustainable devel-
opment: Integrating a common goal of a sustainable society. (Master’s thesis). Retrieved from World-
Cat Dissertations (OCLC: 747412684).
Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2020). Reconfigurable supply chain: The X-network. International 
Journal of Production Research, 58, 4138–4163
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Papadopoulos, T., Luo, Z., & Roubaudl, D. (2020). Upstream 
supply chain visibility and complexity effect on focal company’s sustainable performance: Indian 
manufacturers’ perspective. Annals of Operations Research, 290, 343–367
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Papadopoulos, T., Blome, C., & Luo, Z. (2019). Antecedents 
of resilient supply chains: An empirical study. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 66, 
8–19
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Roubaud, D., Wamba, S. F., Giannakis, M., & Foropon, C. 
(2019). Big data analytics and organizational culture as complements to swift trust and collaborative 
performance in the humanitarian supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 210, 
120–136
Dubey, R., Altay, N., Gunasekaran, A., Blome, C., Papadopoulos, T., & Childe, S. J. (2018). Supply chain 
agility, adaptability and alignment empirical evidence from the Indian auto components industry. 
International Journal of Operations and Production Management, 38, 129–148

691
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
Dubey, R., & Gunasekaran, A. (2016). The sustainable humanitarian supply chain design: Agility, adapt-
ability and alignment. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 19(1), 62–82
Edgeman, R., & Wu, Z. (2016). Supply chain criticality in sustainable and resilient enterprises. Journal of 
Modelling in Management, 11, 869–888
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management Review, 
14(4), 532–550
Elkington, J. (1998). Cannibals with folks: The triple bottom line of 21st century business. New Society 
Publishers.
Faisal, M. N., Banwet, D. K., & Shankar, R. (2006). Mapping supply chains on risk and customer sensitivity 
dimensions. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 106(5–6), 878–895.
Fahimnia, B., & Jabbarzadeh, A. (2016). Marrying supply chain sustainability and resilience: A match made 
in heaven. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 91, 306–324
Fahimnia, B., Jabbarzadeh, A., & Sarkis, J. (2018). Greening versus resilience: A supply chain design per-
spective. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 119, 129–148
Folke, C. (2006). Resilience: The emergence of a perspective for social-ecological systems analyses. Global 
Environmental Change, 16(3), 253–267
Galanakis, C. M. (2020). The food systems in the era of the coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic Crisis. 
Foods, 9, 523.
Goel, P. (2010). Triple bottom line reporting: An analytical approach for corporate sustainability. Journal of 
Finance, Accounting and Management, 1(1), 27–42
Gold, S., Seuring, S., & Beske, P. (2010). Sustainable supply chain management and inter-organizational 
resources: A literature review. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management, 
17(4), 230–245
Golicic, S. L., & Smith, C. D. (2013). A meta-analysis of environmentally sustainable supply chain manage-
ment practices and firm performance. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 49(2), 78–95
Gomm, R., Hammersley, M., & Foster, P. (2009). Case study method. SAGE.
Goworek, H., Land, C., Burt, G., Zundel, M., Saren, M., Parker, M., & Lambe, B. (2018). Scaling sustain-
ability: Regulation and resilience in managerial responses to climate change. British Journal of Man-
agement, 29, 209–219
Gunasekaran, A., Rai, B. K., & Griffin, M. (2011). Resilience and competitiveness of small and medium 
size enterprises: An empirical research. International Journal of Production Research, 49, 5489–5509
Hadyniak, B. (2014). Adaptation and mitigation in the Kenyan tea industry country report. https://​www.​
unido.​org/​sites/​defau​lt/​files/​2017-​03/​Kenya-​count​ry-​report-​DIGIT​AL-​FINAL-​20170​302-​OnePa​ge_0.​
pdf
Haffar, M. (2018). Target-setting for ecological resilience: Are companies setting environmental sustainabil-
ity targets in line with planetary thresholds? Business, Strategy and Environment, 27(7), 1079–1092
Higgins, A. J., Miller, C. J., Archer, A. A., Ton, T., Fletcher, C. S., & Mcallister, R. R. J. (2010). Challenges 
of operations research practice in agricultural value chains. Journal of the Operational Research Soci-
ety, 61, 964–973
HM Government. (2010). Food 2030. http://​archi​ve.​defra.​gov.​uk/​foodf​arm/​food/​pdf/​food2​030st​rategy.​pdf
Hodges, R., Buzby, J. C., & Benett, B. (2010). Postharvest losses and waste in developed and less developed 
countries: Opportunities to improve resource use. Journal of Agricultural Science, 149(S1), 37–45
Hohenstein, N.-O., Feisel, E., Hartmann, E., & Giunipero, L. (2015). Research on the phenomenon of sup-
ply chain resilience: A systematic review and paths for further investigation. International Journal of 
Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 45(1/2), 90–117
Hoy, C. W. (2015). Agroecosystem health, agroecosystem resilience, and food security. Journal of Envi-
ronmental Studies and Sciences, 5, 623–635
Huang, A., & Farboudi Jahromi, M. (2021). Resilience building in service firms during and post 
COVID-19. The Service Industries Journal, 41, 138–167
 Hutchins, M. J., & Sutherland, J. W. (2008). An exploration of measures of social sustainability and their 
application to supply chain decisions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 16(15), 1688–1698.
Ivanov, D. (2020). Viable supply chain model: Integrating agility, resilience and sustainability per-
spectives—Lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Annals of Operations 
Research. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10479-​020-​03640-6
Jabbarzadeh, A., Fahimnia, B., & Sabouhi, F. (2018). Resilient and sustainable supply chain design: Sustain-
ability analysis under disruption risks. International Journal of Production Research, 56, 5945–5968
Jüttner, U., & Maklan, S. (2011). Supply chain resilience in the global financial crisis: An empirical study. 
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 16, 246–259.
Jüttner, U., Peck, H., & Christopher, M. (2003). Supply chain risk management: Outlining an agenda 
for future research. International Journal of Logistics: Research and Applications, 6(4), 197–210

692
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
Kabubo-Mariara, J., & Karanja, F. K. (2007). The economic impact of climate change on Kenyan crop 
agriculture : A ricardian approach. The World Bank (Policy Research Working Papers). https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1596/​1813-​9450-​4334
Kastner, T., Rivas, M.J.I., Koch, W., & Nonhebel, S. (2012). Global changes in diets and the conse-
quences for land requirements for food. In B.L. Turner (Ed.) Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America (Vol. 109, No. 18, pp. 6868–72). National Academy of 
Sciences. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​11170​54109
Kennedy, E., Jafari, A., Stamoulis, K. G., & Callens, K. (2020). The first Programmefood and nutri-
tion security, impact, resilience, sustainability and transformation: Review and future directions. 
Global Food Security, 26, 100422
Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). (2018). Economic survey 2018. Available at: http://​dc.​
sourc​eafri​ca.​net/​docum​ents/​118278-​Kenya-​Natio​nal-​Bureau-​of-​Stati​stics-​Econo​mic.​html. 
Accessed 11 May 2021.
Ketokivi, M., & Choi, T. (2014). Renaissance of case research as a scientific method. Journal of Operations 
Management, 32(5), 232–240.
Kim, Y., Chen, Y. S., & Linderman, K. (2015). Supply network disruption and resilience: A network struc-
tural perspective. Journal of Operations Management, 33–34, 43–59.
King, C. A. (2008). Community resilience and contemporary agri-ecological systems: Reconnecting 
people and food, and people with people. Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 25, 111–124
Koplin, J. (2005). Integrating environmental and social standards into supply management-An action 
research project. In H. Kotzab, S. Seuring, M. Müller, & G. Reiner (Eds.), Research methodolo-
gies in supply chain management. (pp. 381–396). Physica-Verlag HD.
Kwak, D.-W., Seo, Y.-J., & Mason, R. (2018). Investigating the relationship between supply chain inno-
vation, risk management capabilities and competitive advantage in global supply chains. Interna-
tional Journal of Operations & Production Management, 38, 2–21
Lam, J. S. L., & Bai, X. (2016). A quality function deployment approach to improve maritime supply chain 
resilience. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 92, 16–27.
Lamine, C. (2015). Sustainability and resilience in agrifood systems: Reconnecting agriculture, food and 
the environment. Sociologia Ruralis, 55, 41–61
Leat, P., & Revoredo-Giha, C. (2013). Risk and resilience in agri-food supply chains: The case of the 
ASDA PorkLink supply chain in Scotland. Supply Chain Management, 18(2), 219–231
Lengnick, L. (2015). The vulnerability of the US food system to climate change. Journal of Environmen-
tal Studies and Sciences, 5, 348–361
Lew, A. A., Ng, P. T., Ni, C.-C., & Wu, T.-C. (2016). ‘Community sustainability and resilience: Simi-
larities, differences and indicators. Tourism Geographies, 18(1), 18–27
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Sage.
Manning, L., & Soon, J. M. (2016). Building strategic resilience in the food supply chain. British Food 
Journal, 118(6), 1477–1493
Marchese, D., Reynolds, E., Bates, M. E., Morgan, H., Clark, S. S., & Linkov, I. (2018). Resilience and 
sustainability: Similarities and differences in environmental management applications. Science of 
the Total Environment, 613–614, 1275–1283
Matopoulos, A., Kovacs, G., & Hayes, O. (2014). Local resources and procurement practices in humani-
tarian supply chains: An empirical examination of large-scale house reconstruction projects. Deci-
sion Sciences, 45, 621–646
Matthews, L., Power, D., Touboulic, A., & Marques, L. (2016). Building bridges: Toward alternative theory 
of sustainable supply chain management. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 52(1), 72–72
Matthews, E. C., Sattler, M., & Friedland, C. J. (2014). A critical analysis of hazard resilience meas-
ures within sustainability assessment frameworks. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 49, 
59–69
Michel-Villarreal, R., Vilalta-Perdomo, E., Hingley, M., & Canavari, M. (2019). Evaluating economic 
resilience for sustainable agri-food systems: The case of Mexico. Strategic Change, 28(4), 
279–288.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook. (2nd 
ed.). Sage.
Mohammed, A., Harris, I., Soroka, A., Naim, M., Ramjaun, T., & Yazdani, M. (2021). Gresilient sup-
plier assessment and order allocation planning. Annals of Operations Research, 296, 335–362.
MAFAP Synthesis Report. (2013). MAFAP Synthesis Report Series, FAO, Rome.
Ochieng, J., Kirimi, L., & Mathenge, M. (2016). Effects of climate variability and change on agricultural 
production: The case of small scale farmers in Kenya. NJAS—Wageningen Journal of Life Sci-
ences, 77, 71–78

693
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
Orlikowski, W. J., & Baroudi, J. J. (1991). Studying information technology in organizations: Research 
approaches and assumptions. Information Systems Research, 2, 1–28
Papadopoulos, T., Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Altay, N., Childe, S. J., & Fosso-Wamba, S. (2017). The 
role of Big Data in explaining disaster resilience in supply chains for sustainability. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 142, 1108–1118
Papaioannou, G., Mohammed, A., Despoudi, S., Saridakis, G., & Papadopoulos, T. (2020). The role of 
adverse economic environment and human capital on collaboration within agri-food supply chains. 
International Journal of Information Management, 52, 102077. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijinf​omgt.​
2020.​102077
Pavlov, A., Ivanov, D., Pavlov, D., & Slinko, A. (2019). Optimization of network redundancy and contin-
gency planning in sustainable and resilient supply chain resource management under conditions of 
structural dynamics. Annals of Operations Research. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10479-​019-​03182-6
Pagell, M., & Wu, Z. (2009). Building a more complete theory of sustainable supply chain management 
using case studies of 10 exemplars. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 45(2), 37–56
Pettit, T. J., Croxton, K. L., & Fiksel, J. (2013). Ensuring supply chain resilience: Development and 
implementation of an assessment tool. Journal of Business Logistics, 34(1), 46–76
Pettit, T. J., Fiksel, J., & Croxton, K. L. (2010). Ensuring supply chain resilience: Development of a con-
ceptual framework. Journal of Business Logistics, 31(1), 1–21
Ponomarov, S. Y., & Holcomb, M. C. (2009). Understanding the concept of supply chain resilience. The 
International Journal of Logistics Management, 20(1), 124–143
Prentice, C., Altinay, L., & Woodside, A. G. (2021). Transformative service research and COVID-19. 
The Service Industries Journal, 41, 1–8
Pullman, M. E., Maloni, M. J., & Dillard, J. (2010). Sustainability practices in food supply chains: How 
is wine different? Journal of Wine Research, 21(1), 35–56
Queiroz, M. M., Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Fosso Wamba, S. (2020). Impacts of epidemic outbreaks on 
supply chains: mapping a research agenda amid the COVID-19 pandemic through a structured lit-
erature review. Annals of Operations Research. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10479-​020-​03685-7
Reliefweb, 2021, Kenya Drought 2014–2020, https://​www.​gfdrr.​org/​en/​region/​kenya.
Rasouli, M. R. (2019). Intelligent process-aware information systems to support agility in disaster relief 
operations: A survey of emerging approaches. International Journal of Production Research, 
57(6), 1857–1872
Rockström, J. et al. (2009) Planetary boundaries: Exploring the safe operating space for humanity rec-
ommended citation. http://​pdxsc​holar.​libra​ry.​pdx.​edu/​iss_​pub. http://​www.​ecolo​gyand​socie​ty.​org/​
vol14/​iss2/​art32/
Sarkis, J. (2020). Supply chain sustainability: Learning from the COVID-19 pandemic. International 
Journal of Operations & Production Management, 41, 63–73
Schmidt, W. et al. (2017) Climate and development knowledge network and world weather attribution 
initiative raising risk awareness. https://​cdkn.​org/​wp-​conte​nt/​uploa​ds/​2017/​06/​The-​droug​ht-​in-​
Kenya-​2016-​2017.​pdf
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2009). Research methods for business students. (5th ed.). FT 
Prentice Hall.
Schiffling, S., Hannibal, C., Tickle, M., & Fan, Y. (2020). The implications of complexity for humanitar-
ian logistics: A complex adaptive systems perspective. Annals of Operations Research. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s10479-​020-​03658-w
Sievers-Glotzbach, S., & Tschersich, J. (2019). Overcoming the process-structure divide in conceptions of 
social-ecological transformation: Assessing the transformative character and impact of change pro-
cesses. Ecological Economics, 164, 106361
Shaw, D., Cumbers, A., McMaster, R., & Crossan, J. (2018). Scaling up community action for tackling cli-
mate change. British Journal of Management, 29, 266–278
Schmitt, E., Galli, F., Menozzi, D., Maye, D., Touzard, J. M., Marescotti, A., Six, J., & Brunori, G. (2017). 
Comparing the sustainability of local and global food products in Europe. Journal of Cleaner Produc-
tion, 165, 346–359
Seuring, S., & Müller, M. (2008). From a literature review to a conceptual framework for sustainable supply 
chain management. Journal of Cleaner Production, 16(15), 1699–1710
Sheffi, Y., & Rice, J. B., Jr. (2005). A supply chain view of the resilient enterprise. MIT Sloan Management 
Review, 47(1), 41–48
Shibin, K. T., Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Hazen, B., Roubauds, D., Gupta, S., & Foropon, C. (2020). 
Examining sustainable supply chain management of SMEs using resource based view and institu-
tional theory. Annals of Operations Research, 290, 301–326

694
 
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695
1 3
Spanaki, K., Sivarajah, U., Fakhimi, M., et al. (2021). Disruptive technologies in agricultural operations: A 
systematic review of AI-driven AgriTech research. Annals of Operations Research. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​s10479-​020-​03922-z
Smith, K., Lawrence, G., MacMahon, A., Muller, J., & Brady, M. (2016). The resilience of long and short 
food chains: a case study of flooding in Queensland, Australia. Agriculture and Human Values, 33(1), 
45–60
Soussana, J. F. (2014). Research priorities for sustainable agri-food systems and life cycle assessment. Jour-
nal of Cleaner Production, 73, 19–23
Stefanovic, L., Freytag-Leyer, B., & Kahl, J. (2020). Food system outcomes: An overview and the contri-
bution to food systems transformation. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, 4. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
3389/​fsufs.​2020.​546167 
Stone, J., & Rahimifard, S. (2018). Resilience in agri-food supply chains: A critical analysis of the literature 
and synthesis of a novel framework. Supply Chain Management: an International Journal, 23(3), 
207–238
Stone, J., Rahimifard, S., & Woolley, E. (2015a). An overview of resilience factors in food supply chains. 
https://​dspace.​lboro.​ac.​uk/​2134/​19826
Stone, J., Rahimifard, S., & Woolley, E. (2015b). An overview of resilience factors in food supply chains. 
In 11th Biennial conference of the European society for ecological economics, leeds, 30th June–3rd 
July (pp. 1–24).
Sustain. (2015). Sustainable food. http://​www.​susta​inweb.​org/​publi​catio​ns/​the_​susta​in_​guide_​to_​good_​
food/
SustainAbility. (2011). Appetite for change. http://​www.​susta​inabi​lity.​com/​libra​ry/​appet​ite-​for-​chang​e#.​
Tzzj5​Vy15WU
Suweis, S., Carr, J. A., Maritan, A., Rinaldo, A., & D’Odorico, P. (2015). Resilience and reactivity of global 
food security. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(22), 6902–6907.
Tea, D., & Centre, T. (2012). Tea sector (October) (pp. 1–7).
Tendall, D. M., Joerim, J., Kopainsky, B., Edwards, P., Shrek, A., Le, Q. B., Kruelti, P., Grant, M., & Six, J. 
(2015). Food system resilience: Defining the concept. Global Food Security, 6, 17–23
Tsang, E. W. K. (2014). Generalizing from research findings: The merits of case studies. International Jour-
nal of Management Reviews, 16, 369–383
Venkatesh, V. G., Zhang, A., Deakins, E., Luthra, S., & Mangla, S. (2019). A fuzzy AHP-TOPSIS approach 
to supply partner selection in continuous aid humanitarian supply chains. Annals of Operations 
Research, 283, 1517–1550
Vermeulen et al. (2010). Agriculture, food security and climate change: Outlook for knowledge, tools and 
action. https://​ccafs.​cgiar.​org/​sites/​defau​lt/​files/​pdf/​Hague_​Confe​rence_​Agric​ulture_​Food_​Secur​ity_​
and_​Clima​te_​Change_​backg​round_​paper.​pdf
Vieira, L. C., Serrao-Neumann, S., Howes, M., & Mackey, B. (2018). Unpacking components of sustainable 
and resilient urban food systems. Journal of Cleaner Production, 200, 318–330
Vilalta-Perdomo, E., & Hingley, M. (2018). Beyond links and chains in food supply: a Community OR per-
spective. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 69, 580–588.
Voss, C., Johnson, M., & Godsell, J. (2016). Case Research. In C. Karlsson (Ed.), Research methods for 
operations management (pp. 165–197). New York: Routledge.
Vroegindewey, R., & Hodbod, J. (2018). Resilience of agricultural value chains in developing country con-
texts: A framework and assessment approach. Sustainability, 10, 916–916
Wikfeldt, E. (1993). Generalising from Case Studies. Master’s thesis. Halmstad University Department of 
Business, Halmstad.
Whiteman, G., Walker, B., & Perego, P. (2012). Planetary boundaries: Ecological foundations for corporate 
sustainability. 
https://​corpo​rate-​susta​inabi​lity.​org/​wp-​conte​nt/​uploa​ds/​arcs-​2012-​Perego-​White​man-​
Walker.​pdf
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods, essential guide to qualitative methods in 
organizational research. Sage.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods. (4th ed.). Sage.
Yin, R. K. (2014). Case study research design and methods (5th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Zhu, Q., & Krikke, H. (2020). Managing a sustainable and resilient Perishable food supply chain (PFSC) 
after an outbreak. Sustainability (switzerland), 12, 5004
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.

695
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:661–695 
1 3
Authors and Affiliations
George Mutugu Mwangi1 · Stella Despoudi2 · Oscar Rodriguez Espindola2 · 
Konstantina Spanaki3 · Thanos Papadopoulos4 
 
George Mutugu Mwangi 
 
mutugu.mwangi@outlook.com
 
Stella Despoudi 
 
s.despoudi@aston.ac.uk
 
Oscar Rodriguez Espindola 
 
o.rodriguez-espindola@aston.ac.uk
 
Konstantina Spanaki 
 
k.spanaki@lboro.ac.uk
1 
Lotus Consulting, Nairobi, Kenya
2 
Aston Business School, Aston University, Birmingham, UK
3 
Loughborough School of Business and Economics, Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK
4 
Kent Business School, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK