TITLE: Optimal dynamic climate adaptation pathways: a case study of New York City
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05886-w
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05886-w
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Optimal dynamic climate adaptation pathways: a case study
of New York City
Chi Truong1
· Matteo Malavasi2
· Han Li3 · Stefan Trück1
·
Pavel V. Shevchenko1
Received: 3 January 2023 / Accepted: 5 February 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Assessing climate risk and its potential impacts on our cities and economies is of fundamen-
tal importance. Extreme weather events, such as hurricanes, ﬂoods, and storm surges can
lead to catastrophic damages. We propose a ﬂexible approach based on real options analysis
and extreme value theory, which enables the selection of optimal adaptation pathways for a
portfolio of climate adaptation projects. We model the severity of extreme sea level events
using the block maxima approach from extreme value theory, and then develop a real options
framework, factoring in climate change, sea level rise uncertainty, and the growth in asset
exposure. We then apply the proposed framework to a real-world problem, considering sea
level data as well as different adaptation investment options for New York City. Our research
can assist governments and policy makers in taking informed decisions about optimal adap-
tation pathways and more speciﬁcally about reducing ﬂood and storm surge risk in a dynamic
settings.
Keywords Climate change · Real option analysis · Flood risk · Sea level rise · Adaptation
B Chi Truong
chi.truong@mq.edu.au
B Stefan Trück
stefan.trueck@mq.edu.au
Matteo Malavasi
m.malavasi@unsw.edu.au
Han Li
han.li@unimelb.edu.au
Pavel V. Shevchenko
pavel.shevchenko@mq.edu.au
1
Department of Actuarial Studies and Business Analytics, Macquarie Business School, Macquarie
University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
2
School of Risk and Actuarial Studies, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
3
Department of Economics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
123

Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
Catastrophes such as hurricanes, ﬂoods, and storm surges have caused signiﬁcant damages
in coastal regions. In the presence of population growth and increasing value of physical
assets in coastal areas, the frequency and severity of losses from catastrophic events can be
expected to increase further with the impact of climate change (Pörtner et al., 2022). For
example, in 2005 in the US, Hurricane Katrina claimed more than 1800 lives and caused a
total damage of $108 billion (Wang et al., 2015), while the total costs of recent hurricanes
Harvey and Irma also exceeded $100 billion. These catastrophes have increased the debt
under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in the US to nearly $20 billion and have
raised serious concerns about the sustainability of the program (Musulin, 2017). Optimal
planning for adaptation to these emerging risks is therefore paramount for coastal regions
(see, for example, Song & Du, 2019; Al Qundus et al., 2022). It is particularly important
for those regions with considerable wealth and concentration of exposure such as New York
City (NYC), New Orleans, and South Florida.
Climate adaptation projects for reducing ﬂood and storm surge risk in coastal areas include
hard protection measures and soft measures. Hard protection measures such as dikes or sea
walls aim to protect the region up to the designed ﬂood height. Soft measures include building
codes that require buildings to be elevated to a certain height, dry ﬂood-prooﬁng measures that
seal the buildings to prevent water from entering into the buildings, and wet ﬂood-prooﬁng
measures that move valuable assets to a higher level. Soft measures also include land use
policies that convert the most vulnerable housing areas to park land. Among these measures,
decision makers are often asked to choose from several alternative and/or complementary
projects. Under these premises, ﬂexible evaluation tools should be applied to provide useful
insights to decision makers.
The value of ﬂexibility in decision making under climate change uncertainty has been
recognized in so-called ’adaptation pathways’ studies (see, Fazey et al., 2016; Buurman &
Babovic, 2016; Werners et al., 2021; Cradock-Henry et al., 2020). Adaptation pathways pro-
vide insights into the sequencing of actions over time, aiming to construct ﬂexible strategies
that can then be adapted as new information is revealed, or when the underlying conditions
have changed (see, e.g., Haasnoot et al., 2013; Ranger et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2019). To
deal with uncertainty about the future, the possibility to spread, expand, or even abandon an
investment over time should be considered (Dobes, 2010; Haasnoot et al., 2013; Nicholls
et al., 2014). Adaptation pathways have been successfully applied to complex problems in
a wide range of ﬁelds, including biodiversity, natural resource management, and coastal
development (see, among others, Downing, 2012; Haasnoot et al., 2012, 2013; Wise et al.,
2014; Fazey et al., 2016). Despite its great success, the adaptation pathways framework has
typically been applied in a qualitative way only, where the selected adaptation actions can
be strongly subjective.
In contrast to a more qualitative adaptation pathways approach, real option analysis is a
quantitative tool that can be used to determine the value of ﬂexibility under climate change
uncertainty. Real option analysis is a popular approach to climate adaptation studies, and has
been implemented in various settings (see, Brandao & Dyer, 2005; Dobes, 2010; Woodward
et al., 2011, 2014; Wreford et al., 2020; Park et al., 2014; Chan et al., 2016; Oh et al., 2018;
Park et al., 2014; Kim & Kim, 2018; Regan et al., 2017; Schiel et al., 2019; Ginbo et al.,
2021; Gersonius et al., 2011; Muñoz et al., 2011; Chesney et al., 2017; Mac Cawley et al.,
2020; Truong & Trück, 2016; Truong et al., 2017). However, to the best of our knowledge,
123

Annals of Operations Research
there has not been a study yet that uses real option theory to determine optimal adaptation
pathways.
In this paper, we bridge the gap between qualitative and quantitative adaptation pathways
by proposing a framework based on real option analysis, which enables the identiﬁcation
of optimal adaptation pathways in an objective manner. Our modeling framework allows to
determine whether to invest in low cost adaptation measures ﬁrst and preserve investment
ﬂexibility or to commit to more effective but also more costly adaptation measures ﬁrst. As
illustrated in our numerical application, the answer to this research question is not always
straightforwards, and it is important to conduct a quantitative examination of the adaptation
problem. Our model is built upon and substantially extend previous ﬂood studies by adding
real options analysis, especially the analysis with respect to investment sequences. Firstly, fol-
lowing Menéndez and Woodworth (2010), Lobeto et al. (2018), Salas et al. (2018) we model
extreme sea level events, using the block maxima approach from extreme value theory. The
block maxima approach is a popular modelling tool to overcome data scarcity often present
when estimating catastrophic risk. Secondly, following Aerts et al. (2014), we adopt the esti-
mation of a ﬂood loss curve in order to translate extreme water levels into monetary losses.
Then, similar to Gersonius et al. (2011, 2013) we factor in both the impact and uncertainty
of climate change by allowing the mean sea level to follow an arithmetic Brownian motion.
Finally, we develop a real option framework to evaluate optimal investment sequences, when
several adaptation projects are considered. Therefore, the proposed framework allows us to
provide optimal pathways for climate adaptation projects, taking into account catastrophic
risk and climate change uncertainty.
In applying the model to a case study of NYC, we ﬁnd that some soft adaptation measures
may be preferable to invest immediately when considered separately from other possible
measures. However, when all measures are considered together to develop adaptation path-
ways, it may be optimal to invest in hard measures ﬁrst. Therefore, one of the key ﬁndings of
our study is the importance of considering adaptation pathways to determine the best adap-
tation strategies for coastal cities. Our study extends the literature on real option analysis
applied to climate change problems and in particular to ﬂood risk mitigation and adaptation
projects (see, for example, Gersonius et al., 2011, 2013; Woodward et al., 2011, 2014; Kim
et al., 2017, 2019; Brown et al., 2018; Kim & Kim, 2018; Dittrich et al., 2019; Wreford
et al., 2020). We also make important contributions to the literature by extending the case
study presented in Aerts et al. (2014), and linking it to the stream of literature on adaptation
pathways (see, among others, Downing, 2012; Haasnoot etal., 2012; 2013; Wise et al., 2014;
Fazey et al., 2016). Moreover, we extend the discussion on the application of extreme value
theory to ﬂood risk modeling and hydrology problems (Menéndez & Woodworth, 2010; Salas
& Obeysekera, 2014; Lobeto et al., 2018; Hieronymus & Kalén, 2020; Muis et al., 2018).
To the best of our knowledge, our study is one of the ﬁrst to propose a quantitative
analysis of climate adaptation pathways based on real option analysis and extreme value
theory. Typically, studies on adaptation pathways (Downing, 2012; Haasnoot et al., 2012,
2013; Wise et al., 2014; Fazey et al., 2016) are more likely to follow a qualitative approach
as it comes to modeling ﬂexibility, possibly making the selected pathway and sequence of
projects more subjective. In comparison to these applications, in our case study we analyse
adaptation pathways based on an underlying quantitative framework, to overcome the gap
between adaptation pathways, optimal timing and the quantitative analysis for adaptation
projects.
Thus, unlike most of the existing literature, the proposed methodology allows us to study
optimal adaptation pathways comprising both soft and hard adaptation measures. Putting
more emphasis on uncertainty and ﬂexibility than existing studies, the application of our
123

Annals of Operations Research
adaptation framework also allows us to factor in uncertainty about climate change impacts or
growth in the value of the exposure. These features clearly distinguish the work conducted
in this study from previous literature on adaptation to climate change impacts.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sect.2 presents the modelling frame-
work, Sect.3 describes the NYC case study set up, Sect.4 shows the empirical results, and
Sect.5 concludes.
2 Methodology
This section illustrates the proposed methodology that allows to combine the modeling of
losses from ﬂooding with real options analysis for the optimal sequencing of adaptation
projects. The proposed framework has three main components: (1) modeling extreme sea
water levels, (2) modeling losses from ﬂood risk, and (3) conducting real option analysis for
investment sequencing. The ﬁrst component provides for each future time period a distribu-
tion of extreme water mark level—the highest level to which the sea water level rises in a
particular year. The second component relates the high water mark level to ﬂood damage via
a loss curve. This model calculates the losses without ﬂood mitigation as well as with ﬂood
mitigation measures in place at a given time. Finally, the third component uses the reduction
in ﬂood losses from a mitigation measure to calculate the value of implementing that mea-
sure. This approach allows us to determine the optimal time to implement a single project,
or the sequencing of multiple projects when several ﬂood mitigation investment options are
available.
2.1 Sea water level modeling
Typically, extreme water levels can be modelled using the block maxima approach from
extreme value theory. Let X1, . . . , Xn be independent and identically distributed random
variables deﬁned on a common probability space (, F, P), with cumulative distribution
function F. These can be hourly water levels observed over a time period such as a month
or a year. Let St be the highest level recorded over the period t, i.e. St = max (X1, . . . , Xn).
According to the Fisher-Tippett-Gnedenko Theorem, the maximum water level distribution
converges to the generalized extreme value (GEV) distribution, under some regularity con-
ditions on the cumulative distribution function F (Fisher & Tippett, 1928):
H(St; m, s, ξ) = exp

−

1 + ξ
 St −m
s
−1/ξ
,
1 + ξ
 St −m
s

> 0,
(1)
where m, s, ξ are called the location, scale and shape parameters. When there are N periods
for which observations of the sea level are available, and S1, . . . , SN are the block maxima
in these periods, the log-likelihood function is given as:
l (m, s, ξ, S1, . . . , SN) = log
 N
 
i
h(Si; m, s, ξ)I1+ ξ(Si −m)
σ
>0

,
where h(Si; m, s, ξ) is the density function of the GEV deﬁned in Eq. (1), and Ix>0 is the
indicator function being equalto 1 if x > 0, and zero otherwise. We deﬁne the high water mark
level Mt as the sum of mean sea-level W(t), the tide Tide(t) and the block maximum surge
St. Since St follows a GEV distribution H(St; m, s, ξ), conditional on W(t) and Tide(t) at
123

Annals of Operations Research
time t, the high water mark Mt also follows a GEV H(Mt; α(t), s, ξ) with the same scale and
shape parameters as St, while the location parameter is given by α(t) = W(t)+Tide(t)+m.
2.2 Flood loss modeling
Flood loss curves represent damage to buildings and infrastructures due to inundations, and
are regarded as essential components of ﬂood risk assessments (see, for example, Pretten-
thaler et al., 2010; Merz et al., 2004). Nonetheless, the relationship between high sea levels
and the consequent destruction that such sea levels can cause is complex and requires careful
considerations (Hallegatte et al., 2011). Firstly, ﬂoodwater loss can be divided into two com-
ponents: direct and indirect. Direct losses are caused by contact with ﬂoodwater, for example
damage to buildings, building contents, and infrastructures. Indirect losses are usually con-
sidered as a consequence of contact with ﬂoodwater, for example business interruption, or
the impact of severe ﬂood events on the regional and national economy (see, Prettenthaler
et al., 2010; Büchele etal., 2006; Parkeret al., 2007). Secondly, the estimation of a ﬂood loss
curve L(M) requires a measurement of the monetary damages due to ﬂood events, which
often relies on complex hydrological models (see, Prettenthaler etal., 2010; Hallegatte et al.,
2011; Aertset et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2015; Han et al., 2020). In the case study, we therefore
adopt the loss curve estimated by Aerts et al. (2014) and assume that it is available to the
decision-maker.
Given a loss curve L(M), we can estimate future ﬂood losses once we have made some
assumptions about the growth of the loss exposure through time. When the loss exposure
grows at a rate γ , a water level Mt will cause a loss eγ t L(Mt). Adaptation projects help
reduce ﬂood losses and the value they provide over a future period t is likely to be higher
than the expected reduced ﬂood losses since reduced ﬂood risk leads to more stable wealth for
affected residents. In cases that all properties and infrastructure in the area are fully insured,
the beneﬁt provided by adaptation projects in a period t is the reduction in insurance premium
for that period. When the mean sea-level is α, the insurance premium for a full loss coverage
in period t can be obtained as
π(u, t, α; L) = (1 + δ)eγ t
 ∞
u
L(M)d H(M),
(2)
where δ is the premium loading and u is the ﬂood threshold such that when the water level
is lower than u, no damage is caused.1
The impact of adaptation projects on ﬂood losses can also be analyzed in this frame-
work. In the following we consider two competing adaptation measures: ﬂood-prooﬁng of
buildings and the construction of a barrier and dike system. Flood-prooﬁng is a soft climate
adaptation measure, as it is usually less invasive and often limited only to building-speciﬁc
improvements. Common examples of ﬂood-prooﬁng are the installation of water shields on
windows, reinforcements to external walls, and the usage of speciﬁc sealants to reduce the
impact of water through walls.
Flood-prooﬁng can help to reduce damages by a proportion κ as long as the water level is
lower than a certain height, e.g., u +k. Figure1 shows the impact of ﬂood-prooﬁng measures
on the loss curve L(M). Adopting ﬂood-prooﬁng measures, only affects the loss curve for
sea level between u and u + k by rotating downwards the curve of the proportion κ. By
alleviating the impact of smaller ﬂoods, ﬂood-prooﬁng measures reduce the ﬂood losses by
1 See the appendix for more details.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 This ﬁgure shows an example for the density of the GEV distribution (top), and the impact of ﬂood-
prooﬁng measures on the loss curve (bottom). Flood prooﬁng measures reduce the impact of sea levels between
u and u + k, by rotating the loss curve of the proportion κ
the following amount:
R(k, t, α; L) = κ[π(u, t, α; L) −π(u + k, t, α; L)].
(3)
The construction of a dike and a barrier aims to protect an entire area from the sea level
rise up to a given height. It is considered to be a hard climate adaptation measure, and it
requires major investment by the decision maker. Building a dike or seawall that raises the
ﬂood threshold from u to u + k will help avoid damages from ﬂoods with levels up to u + k.
The impact is similar to that of ﬂood-prooﬁng where κ = 1. The dike helps to reduce the
ﬂood loss at time t from π(u, t, α; L) to π(u + k, t, α; L), and so the beneﬁt ﬂow of this
adaptation measure is
R(k, t, α; L) = π(u, t, α; L) −π(u + k, t, α; L).
(4)
The ﬂood loss curve in Aerts et al. (2014) can be used to translate the level of the ﬂood
into monetary losses. Nevertheless, Aerts et al. (2014) only provides discrete estimates for
the ﬂood loss curve. Therefore, to approximate the true relationship between monetary losses
and ﬂoodwater level, we employ a polynomial curve. In empirical applications, polynomial
curves can be used to describe the relationship between extreme water levels and monetary
losses from ﬂooding. Often a quadratic loss function L(M) is used and we also follow this
approach in our study (see, for example Merz etal., 2004, 2010; Seifertet al., 2010; Kreibich
et al., 2010; Gerl et al., 2016),
L(M) = aM2 + bM + c = Xβ,
(5)
123

Annals of Operations Research
where X = [ M2 M 1 ] and β = [ a b c ]
′.2 Under this speciﬁcation the implicit ﬂood
threshold, i.e. the sea level corresponding to a loss of zero can be found as u∗such that
a(u∗)2 + bu∗+ c = 0. We consider u∗as the ﬂood threshold in the absence of any ﬂood
mitigation measure. With the quadratic loss curve, the expected damage from ﬂooding at
a general ﬂood threshold x, D(x, α; β) =
 ∞
x
L(M)d H(M), can be determined in closed
forms. In the case of the GEV with the cumulative distribution function as in Eq. (1), the
expected damage function D(x, α; β) has the following form (El Sherpieny et al., 2013;
Embrechts et al., 2013):
D(x, α; β) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
D1(x, α; β)
if ξ > 0 and x > α −s
ξ
D2(x, α; β)
if ξ > 0 and x ≤α −s
ξ
0
if ξ < 0 and x > α −s
ξ
D1(x, α; β)
if ξ < 0 and x ≤α −s
ξ
(6)
where D1(x, α; β) and D2(x, α; β) are given by:
D1(x, α; β) = a( s
ξ )
2

1 −2ξ,

1 + ξ
 x −α
s
−1/ξ
+ 2 s
ξ (aα −a s
ξ + b/2)

1 −ξ,

1 + ξ
 x −α
s
−1/ξ
+

a

α −s
ξ
2
+ b

α −s
ξ

+ c

[1 −H(x)],
(7)
D2(x, α; β) = a

α −s
ξ
2
+ sa
ξ
 s
ξ (1 −2ξ) −2( s
ξ −α)(1 −ξ)

+ bα + sb
ξ [(1 −ξ) −1] + c.
(8)
2.3 Real option model
Recall that Mt follows a GEV distribution H(Mt; α(t), s(t), ξ), where α(t) = W(t) +
Tide(t) + m. Tide presents seasonality effects that can be challenging to deal with in invest-
ment analysis. We simplify the investment model by adopting the deseasonalization approach
often used in the real option literature, see e.g. Abadie and Chamorro (2008), Boomsma et
al. (2012), Ernstsen and Boomsma (2018) and in ﬂood risk adaptation, see e.g. Aerts et al.
(2013), Aerts et al. (2014), Wang et al. (2015), Hallegatte et al. (2011).
Climate change uncertainty is typically modeled via a Brownian motion (see, for example
Gersonius et al., 2011, 2013; Kim et al., 2019). Here we assume that the mean sea level W(t)
follows the following arithmetic Brownian motion process3:
dW(t) = μdt + σd B(t),
(9)
where B(t) is a standard Brownian motion, μ is the expected change in the mean sea-level
and σ represents the uncertainty in the estimates of sea-level changes. Representing the mean
sea level evolution as an additive process of random shocks closely resembles the long term
2 See the appendix for more details.
3 More complex formulations for the mean sea level process can be adopted, such as, e.g., the introduction
of a feedback loop, which is left for future research.
123

Annals of Operations Research
trend behavior of extreme sea level events, as often found in applications of extreme value
theory on extreme sea level events (Menéndez & Woodworth, 2010; Lobeto et al., 2018;
Salas et al., 2018). Then, the location parameter α(t) also follows an arithmetic Brownian
motion
dα(t) = μdt + σd B(t),
(10)
and the location parameter for the high water mark at time T is α(T ) ∼N(α0 + μT , σ 2T ).
The simple relation between the location parameter αt and the mean water level provides a
way to estimate the time varying location parameter αt by observing the mean water level.
We estimate the mean water level by the average hourly water level for each year, and use
the annual mean water level to estimate the stochastic process in Eq. (9).
Inordertoevaluateaclimateadaptationproject,weneedariskneutralprobabilitymeasure,
which can be obtained using the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). According to the
CAPM, the expected return μX on an asset X that has a return standard deviation σX is given
by:
μX = r + φρxmσX,
(11)
where r is the risk free rate, ρxm is the correlation between the asset return and market return,
φ = rm−r
σm
is the market price of risk and rm and σm are the expected value and standard
deviation of the market return (see, e.g., Sharpe, 1964; Lintner, 1964; Mossin, 1966). Under
the risk neutral measure, the rate of return of asset X is then r or μX −φρxmσX.
Using similar lines of argument, we can then deﬁne the risk neutral process for the location
parameter α(t) as:
dα(t) = (μ −θ)dt + σd B∗(t),
(12)
where θ = φσρwm and ρwm is the correlation between the changes in the mean sea level
and the market return, and d B∗(t) = d B(t) + φρxmσdt is a Brownian motion under the risk
neutral measure P∗. Using the risk neutral measure, the project value can then be calculated
as
V (α) =
 ∞
t
e−(r−γ )(u−t)E∗[R(k, α(u))|α(t) = α] du,
(13)
and the value of the option to invest, (α), can be shown to follow the differential equation,
see, e.g., Dixit and Pindyck (1994):
1
2σ 2αα + (μ −θ)α −r = 0.
(14)
where α and αα are the ﬁrst and second derivative of , respectively. Furthermore, at the
option exercise threshold α∗, the value matching and smooth pasting conditions need to be
satisﬁed, providing two boundary conditions:
(α∗) = V (α∗) −I,
(15)
α(α∗) = Vα(α∗),
(16)
where I is the investment cost of the project.
When several adaptation projects can be invested, investment sequencing can be important.
We deﬁne the optimal investment sequence as the one that gives the highest investment value.
For an example of two mutually non-exclusive investment projects, Project 1 and Project 2,
two investment sequences are possible: (i) Project 1 is invested ﬁrst, and then Project 2 is
123

Annals of Operations Research
invested some time after and (ii) Project 2 is invested ﬁrst and then Project 1 is invested.
It is necessary to compute the investment value for each sequence and identify the optimal
sequence that gives the highest value. The same procedure applies when more than two
projects are considered.
To evaluate the investment value of one investment sequence, for example, the ﬁrst
sequence in the above example, suppose the investment costs of the two projects are I1
and I2. In addition, suppose R1(k1, t, α; L1) is the beneﬁt ﬂow that is obtained when Project
1 is invested. The beneﬁt ﬂow R1(k1, t, α; L1) is the same as in the case of a single investment
only. In contrast, the beneﬁt ﬂow R12(k2, t, α; L2) obtained when we further invest in Project
2, after Project 1 has been invested, is the marginal beneﬁt obtained due to the additional
protection offered by Project 2. For example if we invest in ﬂood-prooﬁng measures ﬁrst,
and in the construction of the dike at a later stage, the beneﬁt ﬂows can be written as:
R1(k1, t, α; L) = eγ tκ(1 + δ) (D(u, α; β) −D(u + k1, α; β))
= κ (π(u, t, α; L) −π(u + k1, t, α; L))
and
R12(k2, t, α; L) = eγ t(1 + δ) (D(u + k1, α; β) −D(u + k1 + k2, α; β))
= π(u + k1, t, α; L) −π(u + k1 + k2, t, α; L).
Similarly, if the dike and barrier project is adopted ﬁrst, and the ﬂood-prooﬁng measures are
applied afterwards, the beneﬁt ﬂows can be written as:
R2(k2, t, α; L) = eγ t(1 + δ) (D(u, α; β) −D(u + k2, α; β))
= π(u, t, α; L) −π(u + k2, t, α; L)
and
R21(k1, t, α; L) = eγ tκ(1 + δ) (D(u + k2, α; β) −D(u + k2 + k1, α; β))
= κ (π(u + k2, t, α; L) −π(u + k2 + k1, t, α; L)) .
Then, to determine the optimal time τ1 to invest in Project 1, and the optimal time τ2 to
invest in Project 2 thereafter, the following investment problem needs to be considered:
1 (α(t)) + 12 (α(t)) = max
τ1,τ2 E∗
t
 ∞
τ1
e−rs R1(k1, t, α(s); L1)ds −e−rτ1 I1
(17)
+
 ∞
τ2
e−rs R12(k2, t, α(s); L2)ds −e−rτ2 I2|α(t)

.
Hereby, 1(α(t)) is the value of the option to invest in Project 1 and 12(α(t)) is the value of
the option to invest in Project 2, after Project 1 has already been invested. Similarly, if Project
2 is invested ﬁrst, then 2(α(t)) + 21(α(t)) is obtained. In considering which project to
be invested ﬁrst, the decision maker needs to select a sequence that maximizes the option to
invest, s(α(t)), i.e.
s(αt) = max{1(α(t)) + 12(α(t)), 2(α(t)) + 21(α(t))}.
(18)
To ﬁnd the project values, optimal investment boundaries, and option values for the prob-
lem, we use the binomiallattice to solve for the projectvalue, the optimalinvestmentboundary
and the option value, since it is simple to ﬁnd the investment boundary with this method.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Observed annual mean and annual maximum sea levels at the battery in lower Manhattan, NYC
3 Case study
In this section, we present a case study to demonstrate the application of our proposed
methodology to assess optimal adaptation pathways. Consider a decision maker, willing to
invest into climate adaptation, aiming to protect NYC from the risks of sea level rise and
extreme ﬂooding. The decision maker is tasked to evaluate the opportunity to invest into one
or more admissible climate adaptation projects. The set of admissible projects is composed
of: (i) a barrier and dike project and (ii) a ﬂood prooﬁng project. Note that the framework
presented in the previous section can be easily extended to analyse an investment in a portfolio
of projects composed of more than two alternatives.
The barrier project is referred to as project S2c in Aerts et al. (2014), which aims to reduce
the length of the coastline of the NYC area as much as possible. It involves the construction
of two storm surge barriers. One barrier will connect Sandy Hook in New Jersey and the tip
of the Rockaways in Queens, New York and the other barrier will close the East River. The
investment cost is estimated to range from $11 billion to $15 billion and the maintenance
cost is $118 million per year. We use a mid-range value of the investment cost, which is $13
billion. The project raises the ﬂood threshold by 1000mm for houses and infrastructure.
The ﬂood-prooﬁng project is a measure that helps to keep the options open. Building codes
can be further enhanced in the future or storm surge barriers can be developed. It involves
wet ﬂood-prooﬁng of existing buildings in the one-in-100 year ﬂood area. We consider the
most cost effective measure found by Aerts et al. (2014), which involves wet-prooﬁng 2 feet
(610mm) of buildings with 30% effectiveness. The cost of this measure is $246 million.
3.1 Sea level data
Data for the empirical studies in this project are collected from the archives of the University
of Hawaii Sea Level Centre (http://uhslc.soest.hawaii.edu). The sea level time series is com-
posed of hourly observations of sea level taken at the gauge station located at 40.7◦North
74.015◦West, and contains hourly observation of the sea level from 6 February 1920 until 31
December 2019. This time series has been used in many previous studies, see e.g. Menéndez
and Woodworth (2010). We use the most recent 4 years to estimate the tide using the UTide
package by Codiga (2011).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Information on estimated and assumed parameter values
Parameters
Values
Location parameter (α0)
1642
Scale parameter (s)
131
Shape parameter (ξ)
0.27
Current ﬂood threshold (u)
2506mm
Quadratic coefﬁcient of damage curve (a)
0
Linear coefﬁcient of damage curve (b)
0.0393
Mean sea level rise per year (μ)
6mm
Standard deviation of sea level rise per year (σ)
25mm
Risk free rate (r)
4%
Growth rate of loss exposure (γ )
1%
Market risk premium (θ)
0.15
Flood-prooﬁng (Project 1)
Investment cost (I1)
$246 million
Flood mitigation (k1)
610mm
Effectiveness (κ)
30%
Dike construction (Project 2)
Investment cost (I2)
$15.95 billion
Flood mitigation (k2)
1000mm
Figure2 shows the annual mean (black line) and annual maximum (blue line) sea level at
the NYC gauge station between February 1920 and December 2019. We observe that both the
annual mean and annual maximum exhibit an increasing trend, while the annual maximum
exhibits a much higher volatility than the annual mean.
3.2 Adaptation projects
We examine the optimal investment strategies for two projects for NYC based on Aerts et al.
(2014): (a) a barrier project that uses barriers and dikes to protect the region and (b) a wet
ﬂood-prooﬁng project that adjusts the interior and material of buildings in the one-in-100
year ﬂood area (i.e. the area in which the probability of having a ﬂood in any single year is
at least 0.01) to limit ﬂood damage.
We start by estimating ﬂood risk in the area based on the surge height at the Battery
in lower Manhattan, NYC. We obtain the surge height by excluding the tide and the mean
sea level from the hourly water level. We then obtain the annual maximum of storm surge
height for each year to estimate the GEV distribution. The average tide and the mean sea
level are then added back to the estimated location parameter to obtain the distribution of
the high water mark. The estimated parameters of the high water mark distribution are:
α = 1642, s = 131, ξ = 0.27. We assume a 1.31% growth in loss exposure for the area in
this study, based on GDP and population growth in the region (see, Weinkle et al. (2018),
for details). In addition, we assume a real risk-free rate of 4% based on the study by Newell
and Pizer (2003), who estimate the real risk-free rate using 10-year treasury bond yields
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Damage curve for the studied area in New York City
observed since 1800.4 We use an estimate of the market risk premium θ of 0.15, based on
the correlation between the annual change in the mean sea level and the rate of return on the
stock market index (S&P 500) (corr = 0.0283), the market price of risk φ = 0.1382, and the
historical standard deviation of 38.48. A safety loading of δ = 3% is assumed, following the
estimation results reported by Shao et al. (2015) based on CAT bond prices. We use results
from climate change studies to calibrate the mean sea level rise process. We follow Aerts
et al. (2014) to assume a mean sea level rise of 6mm per year for the area and use σ =
25mm to summarise the uncertainty in sea level change estimates, based on data provided
by Johansson et al. (2014). The ratio of the standard deviation and the mean of the sea level
rise is quite high, which indicates signiﬁcant uncertainty related to the estimate of future sea
level changes.
We adopt the damage curve estimated by Aerts et al. (2014) (Fig.3). Without adaptation,
ﬂood loss occurs whenever the sea level exceeds 2.506ms. This ﬂood threshold occurs at the
extreme right tail of the distribution where 1 −H(u) = 0.023. Using the estimated damage
curve and the high water mark distribution, the expected annual damage without adaptation
is $498M, which is slightly lower than the expected annual damage of $508M estimated by
Aerts et al. (2014). The discrepancy between the two estimates is likely due to the difference
in the approach to high water mark estimation: Aerts et al. (2014) use a model-based approach
that estimates the high water mark distribution based on simulated storm surge events, while
we use historical data.
The ﬂood-prooﬁng project will reduce ﬂood damages to buildings, leaving ﬂood losses
to business interruption, infrastructure and vehicles unchanged. Aerts et al. (2014) consider
ﬂood-prooﬁng for buildings in the one-in-100-year ﬂood area, leaving buildings in other
areas unchanged. To recognize the impact of this measure in our model, we scale down the
total damage curve in Fig.3 such that the annual beneﬁt of ﬂood-prooﬁng under no growth
in the exposure and no climate change is the same as that estimated by Aerts et al. (2014).
Figure4 shows the damage curves for the two projects. The barrier and dike project helps
to prevent water from coming into the city and provides a large risk reduction. In contrast, the
ﬂood-prooﬁng project focuses on only protecting buildings and leaving business interruptions
and damages to infrastructure unchanged. These two projects may provide a good example of
4 This is also the discount rate used by Aerts et al. (2014).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig.4 Damage curves estimated for the case of no adaptation, adaptation with barriers and dikes and adaptation
with ﬂood-prooﬁng buildings
supplementary projects in the dynamic dimension. It appears that the barrier project is costly
and optimal to invest only when climate change is sufﬁciently serious. The ﬂood-prooﬁng
project has a low investment cost and may be worthwhile to invest in the absence of the
barrier project. Actual investment timing, however, will depend on the beneﬁt of each project
relative to the cost.
4 Empirical results
In this section, we present the empirical results for the application of our proposed framework
to the illustrated case study of optimal adaptation pathways for reducing the risk from sea
level rise and extreme ﬂooding for NYC. Firstly, we study the optimal adaptation pathways for
the two ﬂood risk mitigation measures in a baseline scenario. Then, we perform a sensitivity
analysistoassesstherobustnessofournumericalresultswithrespecttosealevelrise,discount
rate, and sea level rise uncertainty.
4.1 Baseline scenario
Table 2 provides the results for two alternative pathways: invest in the ﬂood-prooﬁng measure
ﬁrst and in the barrier and dike measure later (upper panel); (ii) invest in the barrier and dike
measure ﬁrst and consider the ﬂood-prooﬁng measure later (bottom panel). We provide the
net present value (NPV) and the value of the option for both individual projects, as well as the
total value. Looking at the upper panel, it can be seen that ﬂood-prooﬁng returns a positive
NPV, with its value being equal to the total value with optionality, i.e. considering the optimal
timing of the project through real option analysis. This implies that both a decision rule based
on NPV and real option analysis would suggest that the ﬂood-prooﬁng project is invested
right away.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Investment analysis for investment sequences using NPV rule and real option methods
Flood-prooﬁng then barrier and dike
Flood-prooﬁng
Barrier and dike
Total
NPV
0.78
7.63
8.42
Total value with optionality
0.78
9.60
10.38
Difference
0.00
1.97
1.97
Barrier and dike then ﬂood-prooﬁng
Barrier and dike
Flood-prooﬁng
Total
NPV
9.15
−0.73
8.42
Total value with optionality
10.69
0.00
10.69
Difference
1.54
0.73
2.27
Bold indicates projects and investment sequences reaching the highest values
We report (in billion USD) the NPV, the total value with optionality and the difference of the two values
For the barrier and dike project, the NPV is positive, but lower than the total value with
optimal timing of the project. Thus, while investing right away in the dike and barrier project
would provide a positive return, it is actually more beneﬁcial to defer the investment into the
future and to wait for the uncertainty about climate change to unfold. This result illustrates the
beneﬁts of applying real option analysis in comparison to choosing a simple NPV approach.
In terms of dynamic pathways, investing ﬁrst in the ﬂood-prooﬁng and then into the barrier
and dike project, either right away or in the future, provide a positive total value. The bottom
panel presents the dynamic pathways for investing in the dike and barrier project ﬁrst, and
then into the ﬂood-prooﬁng measures. Similar to the previous case, the barrier and dike
project exhibits a positive NPV but lower than the total value with optionality, indicating that
even when the barrier and dike project is invested ﬁrst, based on our conducted real option
analysis, the decision to invest should be deferred into the future. Interestingly, when the
ﬂood-prooﬁng project is invested after the barrier and dike, it yields a negative NPV and still
a zero beneﬁt with optionality, i.e. when real option analysis is applied. This indicates that
under the baseline scenario the barrier and dike project seems to be sufﬁcient to defend NYC
from sea level rise and makes additional ﬂood-prooﬁng measures redundant.
Overall, the results for our baseline scenario suggest that it is not optimal to invest right
away. The highest project value (USD 10.69 billion) can be achieved by waiting initially and
then investing in the barrier and dike project some time in the future. Our results also suggest
that once the barrier and dike project has been invested, there is no additional beneﬁt of
investing into the ﬂood-prooﬁng project at a later stage. Interestingly, an alternative pathway,
providing a slightly lower beneﬁt (USD 10.38 billion) is to invest into the ﬂood-prooﬁng
project immediately and then into the barrier and dike project at a later stage.
Figure 5 shows the exercise boundaries for the conducted real options analysis in terms
of water levels for the ﬁrst dynamic pathway analysed in Table 2, i.e. investment into ﬂood-
prooﬁng ﬁrst and then into the barrier and dike project. The exercise boundaries in Fig.5
conﬁrm our numerical results. When ﬂood-prooﬁng is invested ﬁrst, the water level required
to initiate the adoption of the mitigation measures is close to zero, suggesting that the adoption
happens right away. The barrier and dike project is then invested at a signiﬁcantly higher
water level of approximately 1.8ms. Note that we do not provide a ﬁgure for the second
dynamic pathway, since once the barrier and dike project has been invested (optimal at an
approximate water level of 1.4ms), there is no need to invest into the ﬂood-prooﬁng project
anymore, i.e. the water level required for additional investment would go to inﬁnity.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Exercise boundaries (water levels) for the dynamic pathway of investing into the ﬂood-prooﬁng project
ﬁrst and into the barrier and dike project second
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
In this subsection, we present a sensitivity analysis to examine the impact of some of the
variables on our results. First, we investigate how robust the results of our numerical analysis
are with respect to the discount rate. Table 3 shows the total investment value for the optimal
adaptation pathways under different discount rate regimes. The upper panel shows the results
for the case where the ﬂood-prooﬁng measures are adopted ﬁrst, and then the barrier and
dike project is invested, while the bottom panel shows the opposite investment sequence,
with the barrier and dike project being invested ﬁrst, and the ﬂood-prooﬁng measures are
adopted subsequently. Note that for each scenario, we indicate the project value of the optimal
adaptation pathway in bold.
As expected, climate adaption project values depend signiﬁcantly on the discount rate,
with values of the invested projects decreasing as the discount rate increases. Nevertheless,
the strategy to invest in the dike and barrier project ﬁrst, remains optimal under all discount
rates considered, with the exception of r = 6%, where the recommendation is to invest ﬁrst
into the ﬂood prooﬁng project. Note, however, that for r = 6%, the two adaptation pathways
are approximately equivalent in terms of project value.
Table 4 shows the sensitivity analysis with respect to different scenarios for mean sea level
rise, ranging from μ = 0 mm up to μ = 12 mm per year. As the sea level rise increases, so
does the project value for both the individual projects and also for both adaptation pathways
considered. Interestingly, the pathways selected as optimal in the previous section, (ﬂood-
prooﬁng ﬁrst, barrier and dike then) is optimal for higher levels of sea level rise (μ ≥6),
while for lower levels of sea level rise, investing in the ﬂood-prooﬁng measures ﬁrst, and then
waiting for the climate change uncertainty to unfold and ﬁnally invest into the barrier and
dike project, returns a higher project value. This important result illustrates that adaptation
pathways, i.e. the optimal sequencing of projects, may well be affected by key variables such
as the assumed magnitude of sea level rise through time.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 3 Investment sequences under different discount rate scenarios
r = 2%
r = 3%
r = 4%
r = 5%
r = 6%
Flood-prooﬁng then barrier and dike
NPV
327.99
53.99
8.42
−3.17
−7.27
Total value with optionality
327.99
53.99
10.38
2.71
0.85
Difference
0.00
0.00
1.97
5.87
8.11
Barrier and dike then ﬂood-prooﬁng
NPV
327.99
53.99
8.42
−3.17
−7.27
Total value with optionality
338.45
55.84
10.69
2.73
0.84
Difference
10.47
1.85
2.27
5.90
8.11
We report (in billion USD) the NPV, the total value with optionality and the difference between the two values.
For each scenario the project value of the optimal adaptation pathway is indicated in bold letters
Table 4 Investment sequences under different scenarios for mean sea level rise
μ = 0
μ = 3
μ = 6
μ = 9
μ = 12
Flood-prooﬁng then barrier and dike
NPV
−7.89
−3.50
8.42
29.76
55.48
Total value with optionality
0.20
1.95
10.38
29.77
55.48
Difference
8.09
5.44
1.97
0.02
0.00
Barrier and dike then ﬂood-prooﬁng
NPV
−7.89
−3.50
8.42
29.76
55.49
Total value with optionality
0.15
1.92
10.69
31.02
57.52
Difference
8.04
5.41
2.27
1.26
2.04
We report (in billion USD) the NPV, the total value with optionality and the difference between the two values.
For each scenario the project value of the optimal adaptation pathway is indicated in bold letters
Finally, Table 5 shows the results of the conducted sensitivity analysis for different scenar-
ios of sea level rise uncertainty. As it can be seen from the table, for both dynamic pathways
the project value increases as σ increases. Moreover, in every considered scenario, the deci-
sion to invest in the barrier and dike ﬁrst, and ﬂood-prooﬁng measures afterwards, provides
the highest project beneﬁt.
4.3 Discussion
The numerical results of the previous sections demonstrate the potential of our approach,
which combines real option analysis and extreme value theory, to assist decision makers in
determining optimal climate adaptation pathways. When evaluated separately, both of the
considered adaptation policies provide a positive return on investment, suggesting that both
policies provide enough beneﬁt to be implemented by decision makers. As both policies can
provide beneﬁts to the city of New York, some jeopardy can arise on which policy should be
implemented, whether a portfolio of strategies might be the better option, or if a sequence of
investments should be considered. Table 2 analyzes the optimal investment sequence in the
baseline scenario. The results suggest that there is a quantiﬁable difference in the beneﬁts
produced by the two competing sequences (ﬂood-prooﬁng and then barrier and dike vs barrier
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 5 Investment sequences under different levels of sea level rise uncertainty
σ = 7
σ = 15
σ = 25
σ = 30
σ = 45
Flood-prooﬁng then barrier and dike
NPV
4.00
5.39
8.42
10.40
17.71
Total value with optionality
6.27
7.57
10.38
12.22
19.05
Difference
2.27
2.18
1.97
1.82
1.35
Barrier dike then ﬂood-prooﬁng
NPV
4.00
5.39
8.42
10.40
17.71
Total value with optionality
6.42
7.77
10.69
12.59
19.68
Difference
2.42
2.38
2.27
2.19
1.97
We report (in billion USD) the NPV, the total value with optionality and the difference between the two values.
For each scenario the project value of the optimal adaptation pathway is indicated in bold letters
and dike and then ﬂood-prooﬁng), and therefore the order in which the adaptation measures
are implemented matters. Moreover, it is not optimal to invest right away, but to wait initially
and then invest in the barrier and dike project that provides a more substantial protection.
Our results also suggest that under our baseline scenario once the barrier and dike project
has been invested, there is no additional beneﬁt of investing into the ﬂood-prooﬁng project
at a later stage. An alternative pathway, providing a slightly lower beneﬁt is to invest into the
ﬂood-prooﬁng project immediately and then into the barrier and dike project at a later stage.
This aspect was somewhat overlooked in Aerts et al. (2014) where ﬂood-prooﬁng measures
and barrier and dike were considered jointly as a hybrid strategy rather than as a sequence.
Nonetheless, we have obtained similar results on the optimal investment timing, indicating
that deferring the investment for more invasive projects, such as the barrier and dike, might
turn out to be more beneﬁcial than investing in it right away.
Sensitivity analysis in Tables 3, 4, and 5 illustrates that the obtained results for our method-
ology are dependent on the chosen parameter values for key input variables. It can be seen
from the tables that the project values are more sensitive to interest rate and sea level rise than
to sea level rise uncertainty. In particular, during a low interest rate regime, it is more beneﬁ-
cial to invest ﬁrst in the more invasive and expensive project and then into the less expensive
soft measures. In scenarios with high interest rates (higher than 6%), investing in the soft
measures ﬁrst is preferred, indicating that when the opportunity cost is high, decision makers
might prefer soft measures over hard measures in the short run. However, high interest rates
should be used with caution when evaluating climate adaptation policies with a very long
time horizon, since future monetary beneﬁts can be undervalued too harshly (see, Aerts et
al., 2014). Similar considerations can be made with respect to the sensitivity analysis in sea
level rise. While our ﬁndings for the optimal adaptation pathway remain unchanged for most
scenarios, for very low levels of sea level rise, the order of investment into the projects for an
optimal adaptation pathway may be changed. In optimistic scenarios with no climate change
impact (μ = 0) and low climate change impact (μ = 3), the optimal investment strategy is
to adopt soft measures ﬁrst and then implement hard measures. However, with expectations
of more substantial sea level rise, the hard measures appear to be necessary.
123

Annals of Operations Research
5 Conclusions
Flood risk and, more generally, the risk of natural hazards as a result of climatic change can
have catastrophic consequences for our cities, infrastructure and societies. Thus, reducing
the impact of climate change can be considered as one of the key challenges of our time faced
by decision and policy makers. The concept of adaptation pathways has proven to be a valu-
able tool in taking decisions on climate adaptation policies, in developing ﬂexible strategies
capable to adapt to new information or to changes in the underlying conditions. Nevertheless,
so far adaptation pathways are rarely implemented based on an underlying thorough quan-
titative analysis, possibly making the selected pathway and sequence of projects strongly
subjective. In this study we propose a methodology based on extreme value theory and real
option analysis to bridge the gap between adaptation pathways, optimal timing and the quan-
titative analysis for adaptation projects. Our methodology is ﬂexible enough to study optimal
adaptation pathways comprising both soft and hard adaptation measures. The approach also
allows to factor in growth in the value of the exposure and uncertainty about the impacts of
climate change.
We illustrate our methodology with a case study, aiming to identify the combination of
soft measures, such as ﬂood-prooﬁng, and hard infrastructure, such as the construction of a
barrier and dike to best protect the area of NYC.
We also performed a sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness of our results with respect
to key variables such as the discount rate, the mean level of sea level rise, and uncertainty
about sea level rise.
Our proposed methodology based on real option analysis for optimal climate adaptation
policiescanbeveryhelpfulfordecisionandpolicymakerstaskedwiththeselectionofoptimal
investment sequences. From a policy implication perspective, our methodology can assist
decision makers in selecting the optimal investment sequence and the timing for the chosen
combination of climate adaptation technologies. Our results suggest that, depending on the
current sea level and the characteristics of the competing adaptation projects, decision makers
may choose to defer investment in hard measures and disruptive adaptation projects such as
the construction of a barrier and dike system, and wait for climate uncertainty to unfold.
However, only for a few of the scenarios considered, the adoption of soft measures seems
to provide an overall adequate level of protection from sea level rise in our case study. Our
study provides an important modeling framework to determine whether to invest in low cost
adaptation measures ﬁrst and preserve investment ﬂexibility or to commit to more effective
but also more costly adaptation measures ﬁrst. As illustrated in our numerical application,
the answer is not straightforwards, emphasizing the need for a quantitative examination of
the solution.
The real option framework presented in this manuscript can be easily extended to allow
for more than just two climate adaptation projects, and can be applied to other locations
than NYC. Nevertheless, a few notes of caution need to be mentioned. Firstly, real option
analysis requires the estimation of several key parameters, such as the expected rate of sea
level rise and the impact of climate indices, which may require relatively long time series.
While signiﬁcant effort has been made to collect and collate data on sea levels, high quality
data may be lacking in other areas or less developed countries. Secondly, our methodology
is based on extreme value theory and relies on data on extreme weather events, which are
often scarce. While the block maxima approach is a valid and widely accepted method to deal
with such data, it is important for researchers and policy makers to consider this limitation.
Thirdly, our approach requires reliable estimates of the ﬂood loss curve, which are usually
123

Annals of Operations Research
obtained from comprehensive and complex studies. In addition, real option analysis could
be quite computationally intensive for more complex portfolios of adaptation projects.
It should be noted that in our proposed methodology, the transmission of climate uncer-
tainty is achieved via the mean sea level. However, future studies may consider extending
the model to a two-factor approach where climate uncertainty affects both the mean sea level
and storm surge volatility.
Appendix
Appendix A. Insurance premium calculation
The insurance premium calculation exercise is carried out with the intent to assign a mone-
tary value to the beneﬁt derived from investing into climate adaptation policy. Nevertheless,
considering a city council willing to insure the entirety of a city or district might be imprac-
tical. The introduction of a top cover limit, where losses due to ﬂoods are insured only up
to a pre-speciﬁed amount, might provide a more accurate representation of the real world
insurance perspective. In this case, one could replace Eq.2 with the premium of a insurance
policy with a top cover limit. For instance, one could consider a decision maker willing to
insure losses due to ﬂoodwater damage, for one year, up to a pre-speciﬁed amount l. The
corresponding insurance premium would then be:
π(u, u∗, t, α; L) = (1 + δ)eγ t
 ∞
u
L(M)d H(M) −
 ∞
m
L(M)d H(M)

,
= π(u, t, α; L) −π(m, t, α; L),
where L(m) = l.
Appendix B. Flood loss curve
The quadratic form of the loss curve in Eq.5 is not necessary for our methodology, and
alternative parameterizations of the ﬂood loss curve may be considered as well. One only
needs to assure that the integral in Eq.2 is well deﬁned. For example consider the following
simple function:
L(M) =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
0,
if M < u∗
L1, if u∗≤M < M1
L2, if M1 ≤M < M2
L3, if M ≥M2
,
where the monetary losses corresponding to ﬂoodwater levels are discretized into 4 categories
0, L1, L2, L3 and with 3 distinct levels for each damage u∗, M1, M2.
Acknowledgements This research was supported by the Society of Actuaries (SOA), under project “Flood
risk management and adaptation under sea-level rise uncertainty”, by the Australian Government through the
Australian Research Council (project number FT200100148), and Data 61 CSIRO Australia, under project
“Optimal decision making for risk mitigation of natural hazards using a real options approach”. We would like
to acknowledge valuable discussions with the SOA project oversight group (Rob Montgomery, Josh Rekula,
Remi Villeneuve, Matthew Self, Tamara Wilt, Cindy Bruyere, Priya Rohatgi, Sam Gutterman, Bronwyn
Claire), CSIRO research partners Simon Dunstall and Mahesh Prakash, and Babson College Professor Michael
Goldstein.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of interest.
Human and animals rights This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals
performed by any of the authors.
Informed consent: This research was supported by funding through the Society of Actuaries (project “Flood
risk management and adaptation under sea-level rise uncertainty”) and Data 61 CSIRO Australia (project
“Optimal decision making for risk mitigation of natural hazards using real options approach”).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abadie, L. M., & Chamorro, J. M. (2008). European CO2 prices and carbon capture investments. Energy
Economics, 30(6), 2992–3015.
Aerts, J. C., Botzen, W. W., Emanuel, K., Lin, N., De Moel, H., & Michel-Kerjan, E. O. (2014). Evaluating
ﬂood resilience strategies for coastal megacities. Science, 344(6183), 473–475.
Aerts, J. C., Lin, N., Botzen, W., Emanuel, K., & de Moel, H. (2013). Low-probability ﬂood risk modeling
for New York City. Risk Analysis, 33(5), 772–788.
Al Qundus, J., Dabbour, K., Gupta, S., Meissonier, R., & Paschke, A. (2022). Wireless sensor network for
AI-based ﬂood disaster detection. Annals of Operations Research, 319, 697–719.
Boomsma, T. K., Meade, N., & Fleten, S.-E. (2012). Renewable energy investments under different support
schemes: A real options approach. European Journal of Operational Research, 220(1), 225–237.
Brandao, L. E., & Dyer, J. S. (2005). Decision analysis and real options: A discrete time approach to real
option valuation. Annals of Operations Research, 135(1), 21–39.
Brown, J. M., Morrissey, K., Knight, P., Prime, T. D., Almeida, L. P., Masselink, G., Bird, C. O., Dodds, D.,
& Plater, A. J. (2018). A coastal vulnerability assessment for planning climate resilient infrastructure.
Ocean & Coastal Management, 163, 101–112.
Büchele, B., Kreibich, H., Kron, A., Thieken, A., Ihringer, J., Oberle, P., Merz, B., & Nestmann, F. (2006).
Flood-risk mapping: Contributions towards an enhanced assessment of extreme events and associated
risks. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 6(4), 485–503.
Buurman, J., & Babovic, V. (2016). Adaptation pathways and real options analysis: An approach to deep
uncertainty in climate change adaptation policies. Policy and Society, 35(2), 137–150.
Chan, R., Durango-Cohen, P. L., & Schofer, J. L. (2016). Dynamic learning process for selecting storm
protection investments. Transportation Research Record, 2599(1), 1–8.
Chesney, M., Lasserre, P., & Troja, B. (2017). Mitigating global warming: A real options approach. Annals of
Operations Research, 255(1), 465–506.
Codiga, D. L. (2011) Uniﬁed tidal analysis and prediction using the UTide Matlab functions.
Cradock-Henry, N. A., Blackett, P., Hall, M., Johnstone, P., Teixeira, E., & Wreford, A. (2020). Climate
adaptation pathways for agriculture: Insights from a participatory process. Environmental Science &
Policy, 107, 66–79.
Dittrich, R., Butler, A., Ball, T., Wreford, A., & Moran, D. (2019). Making real options analysis more accessible
for climate change adaptation. An application to afforestation as a ﬂood management measure in the
Scottish Borders. Journal of Environmental Management, 245, 338–347.
Dixit, A. K., & Pindyck, R. S. (1994). Investment under uncertainty. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Dobes, L. (2010). Notes on applying ‘real options’ to climate change adaptation measures, with examples from
Vietnam. Crawford School Research Paper, Crawford School of Economics and Government–Centre for
Climate Economics & Policy (CCEP) Working Paper 7.
Downing, T. E. (2012). Views of the frontiers in climate change adaptation economics. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 3(2), 161–170.
El Sherpieny, E., Assar, S., & Amer, N. (2013). Parameters estimation of generalized extreme value distribution
under progressive type II censored. Asian Journal of Applied Sciences, 2(2), 68–72.
Embrechts, P., Klüppelberg, C., & Mikosch, T. (2013). Modelling extremal events: For insurance and ﬁnance
(Vol. 33). Berlin: Springer.
Ernstsen, R. R., & Boomsma, T. K. (2018). Valuation of power plants. European Journal of Operational
Research, 266(3), 1153–1174.
Fazey, I., Wise, R. M., Lyon, C., Câmpeanu, C., Moug, P., & Davies, T. E. (2016). Past and future adaptation
pathways. Climate and Development, 8(1), 26–44.
Fisher, R. A., & Tippett, L. H. C. (1928). Limiting forms of the frequency distribution of the largest or smallest
member of a sample. In: Mathematical proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society (Vol. 24,
pp. 180–190). Cambridge University Press.
Gerl, T., Kreibich, H., Franco, G., Marechal, D., & Schröter, K. (2016). A review of ﬂood loss models as basis
for harmonization and benchmarking. PLoS ONE, 11(7), 1–22.
Gersonius, B., Ashley, R., Pathirana, A., & Zevenbergen, C. (2013). Climate change uncertainty: Building
ﬂexibility into water and ﬂood risk infrastructure. Climatic Change, 116(2), 411–423.
Gersonius, B., Morselt, T., Van Nieuwenhuijzen, L., Ashley, R., & Zevenbergen, C. (2011). How the failure
to account for ﬂexibility in the economic analysis of ﬂood risk and coastal management strategies can
result in maladaptive decisions. Journal of Waterway, Port, Coastal, and Ocean Engineering, 138(5),
386–393.
Ginbo, T., Di Corato, L., & Hoffmann, R. (2021). Investing in climate change adaptation and mitigation: A
methodological review of real-options studies. Ambio, 50(1), 229–241.
Haasnoot, M., Kwakkel, J. H., Walker, W. E., & Ter Maat, J. (2013). Dynamic adaptive policy pathways: A
method for crafting robust decisions for a deeply uncertain world. Global Environmental Change, 23(2),
485–498.
Haasnoot, M., Middelkoop, H., Offermans, A., Van Beek, E., & Van Deursen, W. P. (2012). Exploring pathways
for sustainable water management in river deltas in a changing environment. Climatic Change, 115(3),
795–819.
Hallegatte, S., Ranger, N., Mestre, O., Dumas, P., Corfee-Morlot, J., Herweijer, C., & Wood, R. M. (2011).
Assessing climate change impacts, sea level rise and storm surge risk in port cities: A case study on
Copenhagen. Climatic Change, 104(1), 113–137.
Han, Y., Ash, K., Mao, L., & Peng, Z.-R. (2020). An agent-based model for community ﬂood adaptation under
uncertain sea-level rise. Climatic Change, 162(4), 2257–2276.
Hieronymus, M., & Kalén, O. (2020). Sea-level rise projections for Sweden based on the new IPCC special
report: The ocean and cryosphere in a changing climate. Ambio, 49(10), 1587–1600.
Johansson, M. M., Pellikka, H., Kahma, K. K., & Ruosteenoja, K. (2014). Global sea level rise scenarios
adapted to the Finnish coast. Journal of Marine Systems, 129, 35–46.
Kim, K., Ha, S., & Kim, H. (2017). Using real options for urban infrastructure adaptation under climate change.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 143, 40–50.
Kim, K., & Kim, J.-S. (2018). Economic assessment of ﬂood control facilities under climate uncertainty: A
case of Nakdong River, South Korea. Sustainability, 10(2), 308.
Kim, M.-J., Nicholls, R. J., Preston, J. M., & de Almeida, G. A. (2019). An assessment of the optimum
timing of coastal ﬂood adaptation given sea-level rise using real options analysis. Journal of Flood Risk
Management, 12(S2), 12494.
Kreibich, H., Seifert, I., Merz, B., & Thieken, A. H. (2010). Development of FLEMOcs-a new model for the
estimation of ﬂood losses in the commercial sector. Hydrological Sciences Journal-Journal des Sciences
Hydrologiques, 55(8), 1302–1314.
Lintner, J. (1964). Optimal dividends and corporate growth under uncertainty. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 78(1), 49–95.
Lobeto, H., Menendez, M., & Losada, I. (2018). Toward a methodology for estimating coastal extreme sea
levels from satellite altimetry. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 123(11), 8284–8298.
Mac Cawley, A., Cubillos, M., & Pascual, R. (2020). A real options approach for joint overhaul and replacement
strategies with mean reverting prices. Annals of Operations Research, 286(1), 303–324.
Menéndez, M., & Woodworth, P. L. (2010) Changes in extreme high water levels based on a quasi-global
tide-gauge data set. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 115(C10), 1–15.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Merz, B., Kreibich, H., Schwarze, R., & Thieken, A. (2010). Assessment of economic ﬂood damage. Natural
Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 10(8), 1697–1724.
Merz, B., Kreibich, H., Thieken, A., & Schmidtke, R. (2004). Estimation uncertainty of direct monetary ﬂood
damage to buildings. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 4(1), 153–163.
Mossin, J. (1966). Equilibrium in a capital asset market. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society,
34(4), 768–783.
Muis, S., Haigh, I. D., Guimarães Nobre, G., Aerts, J. C., & Ward, P. J. (2018). Inﬂuence of el niño-southern
oscillation on global coastal ﬂooding. Earth’s Future, 6(9), 1311–1322.
Muñoz, J. I., Contreras, J., Caamaño, J., & Correia, P. (2011). A decision-making tool for project investments
based on real options: The case of wind power generation. Annals of Operations Research, 186(1),
465–490.
Musulin, R. (2017). The reality of ﬂood insurance repayment. Casualty Quarterly, 1(3), 1–3.
Newell, R. G., & Pizer, W. A. (2003). Discounting the distant future: How much do uncertain rates increase
valuations? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 46(1), 52–71.
Nicholls, R. J., Hanson, S. E., Lowe, J. A., Warrick, R. A., Lu, X., & Long, A. J. (2014). Sea-level scenarios
for evaluating coastal impacts. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(1), 129–150.
Oh, S., Kim, K., & Kim, H. (2018). Investment decision for coastal urban development projects considering
the impact of climate change: Case study of the Great Garuda Project in Indonesia. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 178, 507–514.
Parker, D. J., Tunstall, S. M., & McCarthy, S. (2007). New insights into the beneﬁts of ﬂood warnings: Results
from a household survey in England and Wales. Environmental Hazards, 7(3), 193–210.
Park, T., Kim, C., & Kim, H. (2014). Valuation of drainage infrastructure improvement under climate change
using real options. Water Resources Management, 28(2), 445–457.
Pörtner, H.-O., Roberts, D.C., Adams, H., Adler, C., Aldunce, P., Ali, E., Begum, R.A., Betts, R., Kerr, R.B.,
Biesbroek, R., et al. (2022). Climate change 2022: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. IPCC Sixth
Assessment Report.
Prettenthaler, F., Amrusch, P., & Habsburg-Lothringen, C. (2010). Estimation of an absolute ﬂood damage
curve based on an Austrian case study under a dam breach scenario. Natural Hazards and Earth System
Sciences, 10(4), 881–894.
Ranger, N., Reeder, T., & Lowe, J. (2013). Addressing ‘deep’ uncertainty over long-term climate in major
infrastructure projects: Four innovations of the Thames Estuary 2100 Project. EURO Journal on Decision
Processes, 1(3–4), 233–262.
Regan, C. M., Connor, J. D., Segaran, R. R., Meyer, W. S., Bryan, B. A., & Ostendorf, B. (2017). Climate
change and the economics of biomass energy feedstocks in semi-arid agricultural landscapes: A spatially
explicit real options analysis. Journal of Environmental Management, 192, 171–183.
Salas, J. D., & Obeysekera, J. (2014). Revisiting the concepts of return period and risk for nonstationary
hydrologic extreme events. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, 19(3), 554–568.
Salas, J., Obeysekera, J., & Vogel, R. (2018). Techniques for assessing water infrastructure for nonstationary
extreme events: A review. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 63(3), 325–352.
Schiel, C., Glöser-Chahoud, S., & Schultmann, F. (2019). A real option application for emission control
measures. Journal of Business Economics, 89(3), 291–325.
Seifert, I., Kreibich, H., Merz, B., & Thieken, A. H. (2010). Application and validation of FLEMOcs-a ﬂood-
loss estimation model for the commercial sector. Hydrological Sciences Journal-Journal des Sciences
Hydrologiques, 55(8), 1315–1324.
Shao, J., Pantelous, A., & Papaioannou, A. D. (2015). Catastrophe risk bonds with applications to earthquakes.
European Actuarial Journal, 5(1), 113–138.
Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk. The Journal
of Finance, 19(3), 425–442.
Song, M., & Du, Q. (2019). Analysis and exploration of damage-reduction measures for ﬂood disasters in
China. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 795–810.
Truong, C., & Trück, S. (2016). It’s not now or never: Implications of investment timing and risk aversion
on climate adaptation to extreme events. European Journal of Operational Research. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ejor.2016.01.044
Truong, C., Trück, S., & Mathew, S. (2017). Managing risks from climate impacted hazards-the value of
investment ﬂexibility under uncertainty. European Journal of Operational Research, 269, 132–145.
Wang, C.-H., Khoo, Y. B., & Wang, X. (2015). Adaptation beneﬁts and costs of raising coastal buildings under
storm-tide inundation in South East Queensland, Australia. Climatic Change, 132(4), 545–558.
Weinkle, J., Landsea, C., Collins, D., Musulin, R., Crompton, R. P., Klotzbach, P. J., & Pielke, R. (2018).
Normalized hurricane damage in the continental United States 1900–2017. Nature Sustainability, 1(12),
808–813.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Werners, S. E., Wise, R. M., Butler, J. R., Totin, E., & Vincent, K. (2021). Adaptation pathways: A review of
approaches and a learning framework. Environmental Science & Policy, 116, 266–275.
Wise, R. M., Fazey, I., Smith, M. S., Park, S. E., Eakin, H., Van Garderen, E. A., & Campbell, B. (2014).
Reconceptualising adaptation to climate change as part of pathways of change and response. Global
Environmental Change, 28, 325–336.
Woodward, M., Gouldby, B., Kapelan, Z., Khu, S.-T., & Townend, I. (2011). Real options in ﬂood risk
management decision making. Journal of Flood Risk Management, 4(4), 339–349.
Woodward, M., Kapelan, Z., & Gouldby, B. (2014). Adaptive ﬂood risk management under climate change
uncertainty using real options and optimization. Risk Analysis, 34(1), 75–92.
Wreford, A., Dittrich, R., & van der Pol, T. D. (2020). The added value of real options analysis for climate
change adaptation. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 11(3), 642.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123