TITLE: The abatement game in a dynamic oligopoly: social welfare versus profits
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05674-y
---

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05674-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The abatement game in a dynamic oligopoly: social welfare
versus proﬁts
Domenico Buccella1 · Luciano Fanti2 · Luca Gori3
· Mauro Sodini4,5
Received: 31 January 2023 / Accepted: 19 October 2023 / Published online: 16 November 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
This article considers an N-ﬁrm oligopoly with abating and non-abating ﬁrms and analyses
a dynamic setting in which the environmental regulator sets the tax rate to incentivise ﬁrms
to undertake emission-reduction actions according to different hypotheses (ﬁxed rule and
optimal rule). The behaviour of the public authority sharply affects the ﬁrm’s (individual)
incentive to move towards the abatement activity over time. This changes the number of
(non)abating ﬁrms on the market and the corresponding social welfare outcomes. The article
eventually shows that the environmental policy may cause oscillations resulting in a coexis-
tence of the two types of ﬁrms in the long term and pinpoints the welfare outcomes emerging
in the model.
Keywords Abatement · Oligopoly · Nash equilibrium · Environmental regulator · Dynamics
JEL Classiﬁcation C62 · D43 · L13 · O31
B Luca Gori
luca.gori@unipi.it ; dr.luca.gori@gmail.com
Domenico Buccella
buccella@kozminski.edu.pl
Luciano Fanti
luciano.fanti@unipi.it
Mauro Sodini
mauro.sodini@unina.it
1
Department of Economics, Kozminski University, Jagiello´nska Street, 57/59, 03301 Warsaw,
Poland
2
Department of Economics and Management, University of Pisa, Via Cosimo Ridolﬁ, 10, 56124
Pisa, PI, Italy
3
Department of Law, University of Pisa, Via Collegio Ricci, 10, 56126 Pisa, PI, Italy
4
Department of Law, University of Naples ‘Federico II’, Via Mezzocannone 16, 80134 Naples, NA,
Italy
5
Department of Finance, Faculty of Economics, Technical University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech
Republic
123

1038
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1 Introduction
Climate change is a pressing worldwide phenomenon (see, e.g., The Economist, 2019, for
critical issues) predominantly stemming from greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, which result
from the process of combustion of fossil fuels for manufacturing and services production.
According to the latest available data, World’s GHG emissions have increased by 53% in the
period 1990–2019, with 60% of GHG emissions produced by ten countries, and China and
the US responsible for 36% of them (Climatewatchdata.org 2022).
The worldwide worry about climate change has induced several countries to implement
environmental policies in highly polluting industries. The EU is a leading political institution
in the process of “de-carbonization” focusing on cutting GHG emissions (mainly CO and
CO2) from industrial activities. The main environmental policy instrument the EU uses to
incentivise de-carbonization is the Emission Trading System (EU ETS), which started in
2005 and is still in place. It works on the “cap and trade” principle: the European institutions
ﬁx a cap on the total amount of some GHGs that installations the system covers can emit.
Over time, the cap decreases: thus, total emissions fall. Within the cap (de facto, a quota),
installations trade certiﬁcates which represent emissions allowances. Given their limited
number, those certiﬁcates have value. After each year, to cover entirely its emissions, an
installation must concede enough allowances, otherwise, ﬁnes are imposed. If an installation
cuts emissions, the unused allowances can be either saved for future needs or sold to other
installations that are short of them. This system guarantees ﬂexibility because emissions are
cut where it is more efﬁcient, and carbon price incentivises investment in “green” (abatement)
technologies (European Commission, 2022).
Recently, the US has also implemented actions to reduce emissions and ﬁght climate
change. However, the US attitude towards environmental policies has been oscillating. In
2008, under President Barack Obama, the US administration started preparing the Presi-
dential Climate Action Plan (in 2013) to reduce GHG (mainly carbon dioxide) emissions,
showing concerns about global warming and moving the administration closer to European
counterparts and Japan. The directives in this plan represented a sharp reversal of the Bush
administration, which became more open to climate-change issues quite late (The New York
Times, 2009, 2013). However, during the subsequent administration, President Trump weak-
ened or wiped out more than 125 rules and policies aimed at protecting the environment; as
a consequence of looser environmental policies and controls, ﬁrms decreased their engage-
ment in environmental activities (The New York Times, 2017; The Washington Post, 2020).
Indeed, data show that, except for the years of the COVID-19 pandemic, emissions during
the Trump administration have been increasing (E.P.A., 2023). With the Biden administra-
tion, environmental regulations are likely to be re-introduced (The New York Times, 2021).
Moreover, after decades of unsuccessful congressional actions, on August 7th 2022, the US
Senate passed the Inﬂation Reduction Act. Once law, this act will provide $369bn in terms
of subsidies and tax credits over a decade on renewable energy and electric vehicles, hydro-
gen hubs, carbon capture and storage, and more, representing the largest package of climate
spending in the US history (The Economist, 2022). Another example is the case of Australia.
In fact, due to a change of government in 2014, a carbon pricing policy introduced in 2012 was
repealed (Ernest and Young, 2021). As a consequence, the level of emissions has increased in
the subsequent three years after a ﬁve-year decreasing trend (World Bank, 2023). Therefore,
ﬁrms’ adoption of environmental actions can change/adapt over time in response to different
attitudes of the society, and thus indirectly of governments, toward environmental policies.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1039
Given the major importance of these facts, there is a growing trend to acknowledge the
effects of pollution abatement in the economic literature (regardless of the existence of ad hoc
laws or regulations requiring these reductions), and the study of the policy-oriented ﬁrm’s
incentive to reduce emissions in the market activities dates back at least to some decades
ago (e.g., Carlsson, 2000; Oates & Strassmann, 1984; Carraro & Siniscalco, 1993; Conrad &
Wang, 1993; Katsoulacos & Xepapadeas, 1996; Requate, 2005a; Simpson, 1995; Ulph, 1996;
van der Ploeg & de Zeeuw, 1992), though the pressure towards an ecological transition (on
the supply side) can result from various external stakeholders (e.g., consumers or community
groups). The environmental theoretical literature developed in strategic competitive markets
has mainly focused on static models with widespread aims and objectives (e.g., Buccella et
al., 2021, 2022, 2023; Lambertini et al., 2017; Lee and Park, 2021; Ouchida & Goto, 2016;
Poyago-Theotoky & Yong, 2019; Xu et al., 2022).
The climate issue calls for the attention of individuals, governments and international
organisations; an investigation of this subject is timely and critical, amongst other things,
to address its relevant dynamic concerns affecting the lifetime of individuals worldwide
(Jørgensen et al., 2010; Requate, 2005b). Unfortunately, the literature dealing with policy
issues (e.g., environmental taxation and other instruments), especially those that incentivise
market-based instruments for the adoption of abatement technologies, in dynamic oligopolies
(or in models that study the non-linear dynamics of ﬁrms in strategic markets) is rather scant,
with some exceptions, e.g., Benchekroun and Chaudhuri (2011), who consider the dynamic
effects of a Markovian tax on emissions in a polluting oligopoly industry, showing that it can
favour cartelization, which can negatively affect social welfare. More recently, with other
aims and modelling frameworks, Elsadany and Awad (2019) studied a mixed duopoly with
public and private ﬁrms and environmental taxes considering stability issues and applying
methods for chaos control, whereas van der Meijden et al. (2022) and Yanase and Kamei
(2022) respectively concentrate on an oligopoly-fringe model with non-renewable resources
to assess the dynamic effects of imperfect competition in markets for fossil fuel on welfare,
climate damages and the Green Paradox, and the effects of government permits in a two-
country differential game that account for transboundary pollution control with a continuum
of polluting oligopolistic industries. In addition, some works have focused (e.g., Antoci et
al., 2021) on the effects of public policies to prevent offshoring phenomena by ﬁrms towards
countries with less stringent environmental legislation.
The present research departs from the recent contribution by Buccella et al. (2021) framed
in a static duopolistic setting, in which the authors pinpoint the existence of a trade-off on the
ﬁrm side whether to abate pollution through an end-of-pipe technology1 when the environ-
mental regulator sets the tax rate to maximise social welfare (with the aim of incentivising
emission-reduction actions). The main economic mechanism of Buccella et al. (2021) works
as follows. On one hand, installing and using an end-of-pipe technology forces ﬁrms to incur
green R&D investment costs and then proﬁts reduce through this channel. On the other hand,
the abatement activity allows abating ﬁrms to save on the environmental tax burden computed
on emissions, which is higher for non-abating than for abating ﬁrms. The strategic decision
1 End-of-pipe technologies (implemented as a last stage of a process before a stream is disposed of/delivered)
are a common assumption in the environmental economics literature and represent an example of cleaning
technology not directly linked to output like “the number of the ﬁlters in a reﬁnery’s pipe for CO2 reduction
or ‘scrubbers’ to remove SO2 from a fuel gas coal-ﬁred electric plant” (Asproudis and Gil-Moltó, 2015, p.
169). Moreover, Frondel et al. (2007) have empirically shown that, in OECD countries, regulatory measures
and the stringency of environmental policies (on which this work focuses) are more important for end-of-pipe
technologies, while clean production processes tend to be favoured by cost savings, general management
systems and speciﬁc environmental management tools motives.
123

1040
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
of each proﬁt-maximising ﬁrm in this environment passes through simple, but non-trivial,
effects that modify the individual incentive to use either dirty technology or green technology.
When the beneﬁts allowed by a reduced tax burden on emissions are lower (resp. overcome)
the costs to incur R&D green investments, ﬁrms get higher proﬁts by choosing not to abate
(resp. to abate). To sum up, abating ﬁrms sustain R&D green investment costs, but save
on the environmental tax burden; non-abating ﬁrms do not sustain R&D green investment
costs, but the environmental tax burden is higher than under abatement. The convenience
towards or against pollution abatement is studied by applying a game-theoretic approach
in non-cooperative (static) quantity-setting and price-setting duopolies and depends on the
extent of public awareness towards a clean environment and the efﬁciency of the R&D green
technology. The endogenous market outcomes range from a Pareto efﬁcient sub-game perfect
Nash equilibrium (SPNE), in which ﬁrms do not abate, to a Pareto efﬁcient SPNE, in which
ﬁrms abate, passing through an anti-green prisoner’s dilemma and coordination game with
an indeterminate outcome in pure strategies.
The present article extends (Buccella et al., 2021) in a twofold direction: (1) it considers an
N-ﬁrm oligopoly with dirty (D) and green (G) ﬁrms, and (2) it passes to a dynamic setting in
which the environmental regulator sets the tax rate to incentivise ﬁrms to undertake emission-
reduction actions according to different hypotheses (ﬁxed rule and optimal rule) by relaxing
the assumption that the number of ﬁrms belonging to every group is given over time. From a
dynamic point of view, this article is closer in spirit to Benchekroun and Chaudhuri (2011)
and aims to ﬁll a gap in the existing literature on the nonlinear dynamics of oligopolies
by considering different ways to set the environmental tax rate dynamically and how the
regulator can indeed modify the individual incentives of ﬁrms whether to abate over time.
The article pinpoints several static and dynamic results emerging in an oligopoly in which
the regulator acts as an additional player (other than the N oligopolistic ﬁrms) by choosing
the tax rate either with a ﬁxed rule or an optimal (welfare-maximising) rule. Choosing an
optimal rule for environmental taxation generates incentives that, depending on the main
parameters of the problem (the efﬁciency of the R&D cleaning technology and the societal
awareness towards a clean environment) allow proﬁt-maximising ﬁrms to deviate to play an
environmentally friendly strategy (by installing an end-of-pipe cleaning technology) instead
of maintaining dirty technology. The number of ﬁrms prevailing in the long term can also be
characterised by persistent oscillations.
The rest of the article proceeds as follows. Section2 presents the static (one-shot) mod-
elling oligopoly by considering the demand side and the production side of the economy,
speciﬁcally showing the technological characteristics of the abating and non-abating ﬁrms
and the behaviour of the (welfare-maximising) environmental regulator. It also studies the
Nash equilibrium emerging in this setting. Section3 moves to the dynamic analysis by con-
sidering two different hypotheses about the behaviour of the regulator and presents the main
analytical results and simulation exercises. Section4 outlines the conclusions.
2 The model
Consider an oligopolistic industry in which N ﬁrms (N > 0 is constant) compete on quanti-
ties. The production process leads to the emission of pollution (Ulph, 1996). To simplify the
discussion, we assume that one unit of output produced by the generic ﬁrm i corresponds to
one unit of pollution, i.e., the production activity takes place through a polluting technology,
where i = {1, . . . , N} is the ﬁrm index. The generic ﬁrm i produces qi units of polluting
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1041
output. In addition, ﬁrms choose whether to abate pollution by using an end-of-pipe tech-
nology, which allows them to abate ki < qi units of pollutant. The number of abating ﬁrms
is denoted by G (green), whereas the number of non-abating ﬁrms is denoted by D (dirty),
and N = D + G. The index d = {1, . . . , D} denotes the generic dirty D-ﬁrm and the index
g = {1, . . . , G} denotes the generic green G-ﬁrm. Thus, if the generic ﬁrm i chooses not to
abate, it emits an amount of pollutant equal to qi. Differently, if the generic ﬁrm i chooses
to abate, it emits an amount of pollutant equal to ei = qi −ki (Buccella et al., 2021; Ulph,
1996).
The environmental regulator (government) aims at levying an emissions tax τ ∈[0, 1)
per each unit of polluting output to incentivise ﬁrms undertaking emissions-reduction actions
to maximise social welfare. Consequently, the tax base under no abatement is qi and the
corresponding tax revenue is τqi, whereas the tax base under abatement becomes qi −ki
(i.e., the remaining pollution), and the corresponding tax revenue is τ(qi −kt).
The aggregate environmental damage from industrial production is captured by the expres-
sion:
E D = x
2
 N

i=1
ei
2
,
(1)
where E D is a convex function of total pollution (van der Ploeg and de Zeeuw, 1992; Ulph,
1996) and x > 0 is the burden that the environmental regulator attaches to the environmental
damage, representing the awareness of the overall society towards the environment and thus
against the damage from industrial production (computed as aggregate emission squared).
An increase in x implies, ceteris paribus, an increase in the extent of the relative weight of
the environmental damage as measured by the overall society.
On the demand side, we assume that goods are homogeneous and the inverse market
demand for the product of every ﬁrm (which is the result of the maximisation of a quadratic
utility function of consumers with identical preferences) is given by:
p = 1 −
N

i=1
qi = 1 −
D

d=1
qd −
G

g=1
qg,
(2)
where p is the market price.
Proﬁts of the generic ﬁrm i are given by the following expression:
i = pqi −τei −C(ki) −Fi,
(3)
in which we have assumed zero marginal costs, Fi ≥0 is the ﬁxed cost2 to install the abating
technology, C(ki) = z
2k2
i represents the cost of the effort to abate pollution, which depends
only on ki (end-of-pipe), and z > 0 is a parameter weighting abatement efﬁciency thus scaling
up/down the abatement effort total costs. It represents an exogenous index of technological
progress, measuring for example the appearance of a new technology weighting the degree
at which the available abatement can be implemented. A reduction in z can be interpreted as
a technological advance.
The proﬁt equation of the generic non-abating D-type ﬁrm is:
d =
⎛
⎝1 −qd −

h̸=d
qh −
G

g=1
qg
⎞
⎠qd −τqd,
(4)
2 This assumption follows the pioneering article by Katz and Shapiro (1985), who consider ﬁxed cost of
compatibility in network industries. We extend their assumption to a market with abating ﬁrms.
123

1042
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
where C(kd) = 0, Fd = 0 and

h̸=d
qh is the sum of the quantities produced by all dirty ﬁrms
other than ﬁrm d.
Differently, the proﬁt equation of the generic abating G-type ﬁrm is:
g =
⎛
⎝1 −qg −

r̸=g
qr −
D

d=1
qd
⎞
⎠qg −τ(qg −kg) −z
2k2
g −Fg,
(5)
where

r̸=g
qr is the sum of the quantities produced by all green ﬁrms other than ﬁrm g.
The mechanism trading-off the beneﬁts and costs of pollution abatement is clear from
the expressions in (4) and (5 ). In fact, on one hand, the abatement activity forces a ﬁrm to
incur abatement (variable and ﬁxed) costs to install the abatement technology. This effort
tends to reduce the proﬁts of each abating ﬁrm. On the other hand, abating pollution allows
each abating ﬁrm to save on the side of the environmental tax costs from taxation and then
pay a smaller amount of environmental taxes than each non-abating ﬁrm. This effect tends
to increase the proﬁts of each abating ﬁrm. Studying the convenience for each selﬁsh ﬁrm to
install an abatement technology depends on the relative weight of the marginal beneﬁts of
pollution abatement compared to the corresponding marginal costs. This is the main aim of
the present article, which tackles this issue in a dynamic oligopoly framework.
The optimality conditions for each proﬁt-maximising ﬁrm allow us to compute the expres-
sions for the output reaction functions of the generic dirty (d) ﬁrm and the generic green (g)
ﬁrm. These functions are respectively given by:
qd =
1 −τ − 
h̸=d
qh −
G 
g=1
qg
2
,
(6)
and
qg =
1 −τ − 
r̸=g
qr −
D
 
d=1
qd
2
.
(7)
In addition, the generic g-ﬁrm also chooses the abatement effort to satisfy the following
condition:
kg = τ
z .
(8)
By taking into account the expressions (6) and (7) and considering the homogeneity of both
groups of green and dirty ﬁrms (i.e., the symmetric equilibrium condition, which implies that
all the ﬁrms belonging to one group are identical), we obtain the quantity produced by each
type of ﬁrm given the behaviour of the rivals belonging to the other type, that is:
qd = 1 −qgG −τ
1 + D
,
(9)
and
qg = 1 −qd D −τ
1 + G
.
(10)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1043
From (9) and (10) it is possible to compute the equilibrium quantities at the Nash equi-
librium, whose coordinates are given by:
(q∗
d, q∗
g) =

q∗, q∗
,
(11)
where
q∗= 1 −τ
1 + N .
(12)
The expression in (11) implies that D-ﬁrm and G-ﬁrm produce the same amount in equilib-
rium. This is because of the properties of the abating end-of-pipe technology, which does not
directly affect the production process.
The equilibrium consumer surplus, CS∗, is deﬁned as follows:
CS∗= (q∗N)2
2
,
(13)
whereas the corresponding equilibrium aggregate environmental damage, E D∗, and the total
tax revenue, T R∗, are respectively given by:
E D∗= x
2 (q∗N −k∗G)2,
(14)
where k∗= kg and
T R∗= τ

q∗N −k∗G

.
(15)
The producer surplus corresponding to the Nash equilibrium, PS∗, is:
PS∗= ∗
d D + ∗
gG,
(16)
where
∗
d =
 1 −τ
1 + N
2
,
(17)
and
∗
g = 2(1 −τ)2z + (τ 2 −2zF)(1 + N)2
2z(1 + N)2
,
(18)
where F := Fg to simplify the notation. Therefore, the equilibrium social welfare function
W ∗is described by the following index:
W ∗= PS∗+ CS∗+ T R∗−E D∗.
(19)
Equation (19) represents a multi-objective function including heterogeneous components
with conﬂicting goals and objectives. The environmental regulator maximises the expression
in (19) by choosing the extent of the environmental tax rate, τ. From the ﬁrst order conditions,
one gets:
∂W ∗
∂τ
= 0 ⇔τ = τ FOC =
Nz[(G(1 + N) + Nz)x −z]
(x + 1)N 2z2 + (1 + N)(2Nx + N + 1)Gz + G2x(1 + N)2 .
(20)
From simple calculations we can verify that τ FOC < 1 but τ FOC can in general be negative.
For τ FOC ∈[0, 1) the following expression must be veriﬁed:
x ≥
z
G(1 + N) + Nz .
(21)
123

1044
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
The condition in (21) implies that the public awareness should be high enough to guarantee
that the society is willing to collect resources to be used as a public transfer to incentivise
ﬁrms to undertake emission-reduction actions through ad hoc environmental taxation.
The correct expression of the optimal tax rate is then given by:
τ o(G) = max

0, τ FOC
.
(22)
Let us now focus on how taxation is affected by G, i.e., the number of green ﬁrms. In
particular, let us consider the case of a constant value of N, i.e., the total number of ﬁrms.
Therefore, a change in G leads to a change in the relative number of green and dirty ﬁrms.
The results are summarised in Proposition 1 (see also Fig.1 for a geometrical illustration of
the result of the proposition).
Proposition 1 Let us consider x1, x2,x,x as deﬁned in the proof. Then, the following results
hold.
(I) Let z < √1 + N then x < x < x1 < x2. Furthermore
(a) if x > x2 then τ o is a decreasing and positive function ∀G ∈[0, N];
(b) if x ∈(x1, x2) then τ o is positive and inverted U-shaped;
(c) if x ∈(x, x1)thenthereexists 
G suchthatτ o = 0 ∀G ∈

0, 
G

andτ o > 0 ∀G ∈


G, N

.
When τ o > 0, τ o is inverted U-shaped;
(d) if x ∈(x,x, ) then τ o is a non-decreasing function ∀G ∈[0, N] and there exists 
G
such that τ o = 0 ∀G ∈

0, 
G

and τ o > 0 ∀G ∈


G, N

; e) if x < x then τ o = 0
∀G ∈[0, N].
(II) Let z > √1 + N then x < x1 < x < x2. Furthermore
(a) if x > x2 then τ o is a decreasing and positive function ∀G ∈[0, N];
(b) if x ∈(x, x2) then τ o is positive and inverted U-shaped;
(c) if x ∈(x1,x) then τ o is positive and strictly increasing;
(d) if x ∈(x, x1) then τ o is a non-decreasing function ∀G ∈[0, N] and there exists 
G such
that τ o = 0 ∀G ∈

0, 
G

and τ o > 0 ∀G ∈


G, N

;
(e) if x < x then τ o = 0 ∀G ∈[0, N].
Proof To understand the behaviour of the optimal tax rate, we consider the function τ(G) =
τ FOC. We have that
τ(0) =
Nx −1
N(1 + x)
Therefore, τ(0) > 0 if and only if x > x1 ≡1/N where x1 < 1.
In addition,
τ(N) =
[N 2x + (z + 1)Nx −z]z
N 3x + [(1 + 2x)z + 2x]N 2 + [(x + 1)z2 + 2(x + 1)z + x]N + z ,
so that τ(N) > 0 if and only if x > x ≡
z
N(1+z+N) where x ∈[0, 1
N ).
From the derivative of (20) we have that
sgn{τ ′(G)} = sgn

AG2 + BG + C

,
(23)
where A=−[x(N + 1)]2<0, B = [2(1 + N)(1 −Nx)xz] andC = z2[1+N(1+x)−x2N 2].
We note that B > 0 ⇔x < x1 and C > 0 ⇔x < x2 ≡1+
√
5+4N
2N
.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1045
Let M(G) be the second-degree polynomial that appears inside the brackets on the right-
hand side of (23). Then, its discriminant is equal to
M = 4[2 + (1 −x)N](N + 1)2x2z2.
(24)
Then, τ is a monotonic decreasing function of G if x > x3 ≡1 + 2/N.
We also note that x < x1 < x2 < x3.
Instead, if x < x3 the polynomial M(G) shows (a) two negative roots if B < 0 and C < 0
(that is, if x > x2); (b) two roots of opposite sign if B < 0 and C > 0 (that is, if x ∈(x1, x2))
or if B > 0 and C < 0 (that is, if x < x1). Other combinations of the signs of B and C are
not possible.
In case (a), the expression in (20) is a monotonic decreasing function in the interval [0, G].
In case (b), the graph of the function in (20) shows an inverted U-shaped behaviour in the
interval [0, +∞) with a maximum point at
G M = 1 −Nx + z√N(1 −x) + 2
(N + 1)x
.
We note that G M < N if and only if x < x, where
x ≡z 2N + z + 2 +

4N 3 + (8z + 16)N 2 + (4z2 + 20z + 20)N + 5z2 + 12z + 8
2N(N + z + 1)2
.
A direct comparison shows that x < x, and x < x1 ⇔z < √N + 1. The proof follows by
the comparison of the different results obtained.
⊓⊔
Proposition 1 shows, amongst other things, that the optimal tax rate can be a decreasing
function of the number of green ﬁrms (G). In fact, although the environmental damage is an
increasing function of the number of dirty and green ﬁrms (and this implies a greater need
for taxation), the output of the individual ﬁrm decreases with G (and this implies a lower
need for taxation). Therefore, the environmental impact of the production of each ﬁrm and
the aggregate environmental damage decrease with G. Consequently, there is less need to
levy an ad-hoc tax to incentivise ﬁrms to abate pollution. Finally, we note that regardless of
its trend over time, taxation remains positive for any G if x is sufﬁciently large (x > 1/N).
3 The dynamic setting
In the static analysis made so far we assumed that the number of the ﬁrms belonging to the
two groups (D and G) is given and constant over time. This assumption, however, is too
strong in a dynamic setting, as ﬁrms may want to change their strategy and play the one
that guarantees the highest proﬁt over time, in turn, moving from D to G (or viceversa). In
this regard, an innovation of the present article compared to the existing related literature,
especially (Buccella et al., 2021), which has mostly been developed in a static setting, is to
move towards a dynamic framework considering various assumptions about the behaviour of
the environmental regulator, which can signiﬁcantly affect the proﬁts of the ﬁrms belonging
to both the D-group and G-group, and then it can modify the individual incentive whether
to abate over time.
More formally, we assume – irrespective of the strategy adopted in the past – that a given
percentage (0 < δ < 1) of ﬁrms can, in every period, change the status and switch towards
producing, at time t + 1, by means of the technology allowed to get the highest proﬁts in
123

1046
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
Fig. 1 Panel A: N = 10, z = 0.2. Panel B: N = 10, z = 5.2. Outline of the results of Proposition 1
the current period (time t), where t ∈N is the time index. Indeed, we are assuming that a
given percentage of equipment used for the production process loses its functionality (natural
obsolescence, breakdown, etc.) and therefore needs to be changed. When ﬁrms must do new
investments, they can decide whether to install green or dirty technology.
If both technologies (D and G) yield the same proﬁts, ﬁrms that are allowed to change
their status will half (δN/2) choose to be green and half (δN/2) choose to be dirty. Once
they have decided on their strategies, ﬁrms coordinate themselves on the Nash equilibrium
deﬁned in (11). We note that regardless of the choices of the ﬁrms to be dirty or green they
continue to produce the same level of output in accordance with the end-of-pipe technology
leading the G-ﬁrm to abate non-strategically, as is clear from the expression in (8).
We now introduce the index describing the incentive to change the status time by time,
i.e. the proﬁt differential between G and D. This index is given by the following expression:
 := g −d = τ 2 −2zF
2z
.
(25)
The dynamic analysis that will be studied in the subsequent sections will consider two
hypotheses about the behaviour of the environmental regulator to set the tax rate τ over time:
1) ﬁxed environmental tax rate, and 2) optimal environmental tax rate.
3.1 Fixed environmental tax rate
This section deals with a ﬁrst, simple, exercise, and considers that the level of taxation decided
by the public authority is constant over time, i.e., τt = τ for any t. By using this assumption
together with the expression in (25) the dynamics of the system will be monotonic and
convergent towards the equilibrium in which all ﬁrms choose to abate (resp. not to abate) if:
τ > τT H
(resp. < τT H),
(26)
where τT H := √2zF.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1047
Fig. 2 Time series of G for N = 100, δ = 0.05, x = 4; z = 0.4; F = 0.1. The threshold value of
environmental tax rate is τT H ≃0.2828. The values of the environmental tax rate are τ = 0.3 (above τT H )
and τ = 0.25 (below τT H )
The dynamic system in this case is given by:
Gt+1 = (1 −δ)Gt + δ
⎧
⎨
⎩
N
if τ > τT H
N
2
if τ = τT H
0
if τ < τT H
.
(27)
Figure 2 shows the time evolution of the number of green ﬁrms existing in the market
depending on the value of the tax rate above or below the threshold τT H. Regarding the
threshold, we note that it depends positively on the ﬁxed cost. Thus, when the ﬁxed costs to
install a cleaning technology are relatively high a ﬁrm is incentivised to become green in the
long term only whether the tax rate is high enough (see Antoci et al., 2021 on the problem
of the possibility of offshoring in the presence of overly burdensome regulation of ﬁrms in a
context of perfect competition).
If the environmental tax rate is ﬁxed over time, results are quite simple: in the long
term, only one type of ﬁrm remains in the market. There exists a boundary—represented
by τT H— that separates the possible evolution of the adopted technologies (green or dirty).
This result seems to contrast with the observation of actual markets in which ﬁrms that adopt
different technologies coexist (Konar and Cohen, 2000). In the next section, we will see how
considering a more articulated action of the public authority can sharply change the dynamic
results of the model.
3.2 Optimal environmental tax rate
Like the static analysis, in this section we will assume that government acts to maximise social
welfare. In a dynamic context in which the relative number of ﬁrms (i.e., the percentage of
ﬁrms of type G and of type D) is not constant, this objective is not straightforward. Indeed,
from the expression in (20) the optimal tax rate depends on the existing number of ﬁrms.
123

1048
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
As it would be difﬁcult to consider an environment in which the regulator has this type of
information updated time by time, we will assume that at time t it will choose an optimal tax
rate based on the number of G-ﬁrm and D-ﬁrm that existed in the past (i.e., at time t −1),
which is therefore assumed to be known (i.e., there is an information lag of one period). In
other words, in this section we will study the dynamics of a game with N +1 players in which
D + G (proﬁt maximising) ﬁrms coordinate themselves on the Nash equilibrium given the
level of the environmental taxation, whereas the regulator (the additional player) pursues the
goal of social welfare maximisation.
This type of strategic interaction, in which players have different objectives or they are
heterogeneous, has not been much explored in the literature on the dynamics of oligopolies.
Over the course of the years, this literature has mainly focused on the study of the hetero-
geneity in the strategies adopted by ﬁrms, which were all basically proﬁt-oriented (Lamantia
and Radi, 2018; Zeppini, 2015), in contexts of bounded rationality and/or limited knowledge
of the market (e.g., Bischi et al., 2015).
Before moving on through the details of the dynamic analysis, we note that the green tech-
nology used in the paper (end-of-pipe) is standard in the static industrial organisation (IO)
literature, at least since Ulph (1996) and Asproudis and Gil-Moltó (2015). This implies that
there is no multiplicative relationship between production and abatement in the expression of
proﬁts (because the effectiveness of green technology in reducing the environmental damage
from industrial production occurs at the end of the production process). Consequently, in
the static model, there is no relationship between q and k in the optimum and the equilib-
rium values of production and abatement depend only on the environmental tax rate. Unlike
this scenario, considering an environmental technology that follows the R&D models à la
d’Aspremont and Jacquemin (1988, 1990) would lead to a more articulated relationship,
in which the optimal choices of one ﬁrm on quantity would also depend on the abatement
choices of other ﬁrms, and abatement decisions would be deﬁned strategically.
In a dynamic setting, the expression deﬁning the proﬁt differential in (25), by assuming a
strictly positive value of the tax rate, modiﬁes to become
t = 1
2
A4G4
t + A3G3
t + A2G2
t + A1Gt + A0

((Gt + z)N + Gt)2 + ((N + 1)2Gt + N 2z)z
2 ,
(28)
where
A4 = −2Fx2(N + 1)4 < 0,
(29)
A3 = −4Fxz(2Nx + N + 1)(N + 1)3 < 0,
(30)
A2 = −12(N + 1)2z

Fz −1
12

N 2x2 +

N + 2
3

N Fzx + 1
6 Fz (N + 1)2

,
(31)
A1 = −8N 2z2(N + 1)

Fz −1
4

Nx2 + 1
2

Fz(3N + 1) + 1
2

x + Fz
2 (N + 1)

,(32)
and
A0 = −2N 2z3

Fz −1
2

N 2x2 + (2F Nz + 1)Nx + N 2Fz −1
2

.
(33)
Given the positivity of the denominator in (28) we can concentrate on the sign of the
expression
P(Gt) = A4G4
t + A3G3
t + A2G2
t + A1Gt + A0.
(34)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1049
We note that when the optimal tax rate is zero the difference between G- and D-ﬁrms
is irrelevant as no ﬁrm is incentivised to invest in cleaning technologies and all the ﬁrms
become dirty (this is clearly shown by the expression in (8)).
Then, we have that
Gt+1 = H(Gt) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
I := (1 −δ)Gt + δN
if P(Gt) > 0 and τ FOC(Gt) > 0
L := (1 −δ)Gt + δ N
2
if P(Gt) = 0 and τ FOC(Gt) > 0,
Z := (1 −δ)Gt
if P(Gt) < 0 or τ FOC(Gt) < 0
(35)
where H : [0, N] →[0, N].3
We observe that no ﬁxed point G ∈(0, N) can exist (unless when P(G) = 0 for G = N/2
and τ FOC(N/2) > 0 that happens with zero probability), whereas if the ﬁxed point G = 0
exists it is locally asymptotically stable, and the same applies to ﬁxed point G = N. In fact,
we have H′(0) = H′(N) = 1 −δ. In this regard, the following results hold.
Proposition 2 Let us consider the map deﬁned in (35). If a) x <
1
N or if b) x >
1
N and
z >
1
2F then the ﬁxed point G = 0 exists and it is locally asymptotically stable. If x > 1
N
and z <
1
2F the ﬁxed point G = 0 does not exist.
Proof We have that
P(0)=1(x)=−2z3(Fz−1/2)N 4x2−4(FzN +1/2)z3N 3x−2z3(N 2Fz−1/2)N 2, (36)
and
τ opt(0) =
Nx −1
N(x + 1).
(37)
Let us consider the case x < 1/N. From (37) if follows from the deﬁnition of map (35) that
the ﬁxed point 0 exists. Let us consider the case x > 1/N. By evaluating the elements of
the polynomial 1 and knowing that discriminant of 1 is positive, the polynomial always
admits two real roots x1 = 1+2zF N−(N+1)√2Fz
N(1−2Fz)
and x2 = 1+2zF N+(N+1)√2Fz
N(1−2Fz)
. For z >
1
2F ,
x1 and x2 are negative and P(0) takes a negative value for any x > 1/N. If z <
1
2F we have
that x1 < 0 < x2 and it is easily veriﬁed that x2 < 1/N. So again P(0) > 0 ∀x > 1/N.
Combining the results, the thesis follows.
⊓⊔
Proposition 3 Let us consider the map deﬁned in (35). If a) x
z <
1
N2+Nz+N or if b)
x
z >
1
N2+Nz+N and F > z
2

N2x+x(z+1)N−z
X
2
then the ﬁxed point G = N does not exist. If
x
z >
1
N2+Nz+N and F < z
2

N2x+x(z+1)N−z
X
2
then the ﬁxed point G = N exists and it is
locally asymptotically stable.
Proof Let X = x N 3 + ((2x + 1)z + 2x)N 2 + ((x + 1)z2 + (2x + 2)z + x)N + z. We have
that
P(N) = 2(F) = −2N 2X2F + zN 2 
(N 2 + Nz + N)x −z
2 ,
and
τ opt(N) = z (N 2 + Nz + N)x −z
X
.
By evaluating the sign of τ opt(N) and 2(F) we get the result.
⊓⊔
3 In what follows we will focus on I and Z not playing L any relevant role. On this point, see Avrutin et al.
(2019).
123

1050
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
There are three parameters useful to disentangle the results, F, x and z: F is the ﬁxed cost
to install the cleaning technology for each G-ﬁrm, x is the awareness of the overall society
towards a clean environment, in turn, measuring the weight the society attaches to against the
damage from industrial production, and z measures the efﬁciency of the cleaning technology.
Intuitively, G = 0 is a possible outcome of the model when the weight given by society to
having a clean environment is too low, or society has a high relative focus on environmental
quality but either the efﬁciency of the available technology is low or the ﬁxed cost to activate
it is too high

z >
1
2F

. Conversely, G = N is a possible outcome of the model when the ratio
x/z is sufﬁciently large and simultaneously the ﬁxed cost to install the cleaning technology
is sufﬁciently low.
In the present model, as the solutions of a fourth-degree polynomial are involved in the
deﬁnition of the switching points, their analytical expression, although feasible, is rather
cumbersome. However, a result on the occurrence of switches is given by the following
proposition that greatly simpliﬁes the subsequent analysis:
Proposition 4 Map (35) has at most two switches. All switches are induced by changes in
the sign of (34).
Proof We ﬁrst note that the proﬁt differential is described by a fourth degree polynomial.
From the signs of the coefﬁcients Ai, i = 0..4 it follows that this polynomial has at most three
positive roots. For F = 0 the polynomial reduces to a second degree polynomial deﬁning a
non-negative convex function that becomes zero at G = 
G := z(1−Nx)
x(N+1) . For this value, we
also have that τ FOC = 0. We recall that for τ < 0 the map is Gt+1 = (1 −δ)Gt.
Let us denote by P(G, F) the polynomial (34) in which we explicit the dependence of
this polynomial on F. We note that ∂P(G,F)
∂F
< 0 so that in the intervals where P is negative
an increase in the value of F maintains P negative. In addition, ∂2 P(G,F)
∂G∂F
< 0, ∂3 P(G,F)
∂2G∂F
< 0
so that in the intervals where P is decreasing (resp. concave) with respect to G an increase
in the value of F maintains P decreasing (resp. concave) with respect to G. For any value
of F > 0 we have that lim
G→∞P(G, F) = −∞. From the fact that P(G, F) is C∞, we have
the existence of a threshold value F such that for ∀F ∈(0, F) the polynomial admits two
relative maxima G1
M and G2
M with G1
M < G2
M and one relative minimum Gm. Since for
F > 0 it turns out that a) P(
G, F) < 0 and b) there exists an interval


G −ε, 
G

with
ε > 0 for which ∂P(G,F)
∂G
< 0 ∀G ∈


G −ε, 
G

, an interval (0, F) ⊂(0, F) exists such
that ∀F ∈(0, F) the polynomial has four roots Gi, i = 0 . . . 3, ordered, without loss of
generality, in ascending order with G0 < G1 < 
G. Let us consider two cases depending on
the value of Nx.
Case 1. If Nx < 1, ∀F ∈(0, F) we have that G0 < 0 and G0 < G1 < 
G < G2 < G3,
with P negative in the interval (
G, G2). Thus, in the interval [0, min(G2, N)) the map is
given by Gt+1 = (1 −δ)Gt from which it follows that ∀F ∈(0, F) at most two switches
for the map can exist. Given the properties of P described so far, the maximum number of
switches is still two even considering F varying in the interval (0, +∞). In fact, starting
from F ∈(0, F) as F increases the roots G2 and G3 can go outside the interval [0, N] or
they can disappear whereas the roots G0 and G1 as long as they exist will be always smaller
than 
G and therefore not relevant for the deﬁnition of the dynamics.
Case 2. If Nx > 1, ∀F ∈(0, F) we have that G0 < G1 < 
G < 0 and 
G < G2 < G3, with
(a) P negative in the interval [0, G2) if G2 > 0 or (b) P positive in the interval [0, G3) if
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1051
G2 < 0. Then, also in this case, ∀F ∈(0, F) at most two switches for the map can exist.
Starting from F ∈(0, F), as F increases, G0 and G1 continue to be negative, as long as
they exist, and thus they are not relevant for the deﬁnition of the dynamics. Therefore, the
maximum number of switches is still two. Concerning which inequality induces the switch
between the pieces of the map, taking into account the non-negativity constraint on τ, we
can conclude that for x > 1/N the inequality τ FOC(G) > 0 is always veriﬁed and therefore
any switches of the map are only determined by changes of signs of P(G) in the interval
[0, N]. When x < 1/N we have that at the point 
G, where τ FOC changes sign from negative
to positive P(
G) < 0 and therefore no change at 
G occurs.
⊓⊔
Despite the switches induced by changes in the sign of (34), the non-negativity of τ FOC
cannot be excluded from the deﬁnition of the map. This is because if x < 1/N there are cases
in which there exists an interval in the set 0 < G < 
G in which P(G) > 0 and τ FOC < 0.
Indeed, without the positivity condition of τ FOC, in that interval there would be the incentive
to pollute (with no economic sense) this would let “green” ﬁrms (i.e., the ﬁrms that instal
the cleaning technology) be super-polluting (as the amount of abatement becomes negative
when τ FOC < 0) while increasing at the same time their proﬁts.
We remark that even if the sign changes of τ FOC are not part of the deﬁnition of the
switches, the values of G at which these switches occur (determined by the roots of P)
involve all the parameters of the model except for δ. In fact, δ only contributes to deﬁning the
slope of the map, which is given by 1 −δ for both I and Z. In this regard, we note that much
of the contributions in the literature focus on models in which the switches are usually set
exogenously and the properties of the map are studied as the parameters deﬁning the pieces
of the map. See for example the works generated by the pioneering contributions of Sushko
et al. (2003) and Tramontana et al. (2010) on business cycles and inﬂationary dynamics,
respectively. An exception is given by the work of Sushko et al. (2005), which elaborates
on some properties of an economic growth model in which parameters enter simultaneously
into the deﬁnition of the pieces of the map and the deﬁnition of the switching point.
Considering the results of Proposition 3 we can infer that (1) when the two ﬁxed points
are attractive (see Propositions 2 and 3), the dynamics are deﬁned by a two-branch map and
trajectories converge to 0 or N if the initial condition respectively lies to the left or right of
the switching point (see, for instance, Fig. 8, Panel A), (2) if there are two switches then 0 is
an attractor, and the map is described by Z, ﬁrst and third branches, and by I, second branch
(see, for instance, Fig.9, Panel A), (3) if at least one of the ﬁxed points is not attractive,
regardless of whether the map consists of two or three branches, there is still a set of initial
conditions for which the dynamics are (at least temporarily) oscillatory, (4) when there are
persistent oscillations only two branches of the map are involved to describe the oscillatory
dynamics of the model, I before and Z after the discontinuity point (see, for instance, Fig.7,
Panel A and Fig. 9, Panel A). We note however that the existence of a third branch is also
possible.
Despite the possibility of persistent oscillations, from a mathematical point of view the
model is characterised by regular dynamics as the slope of both branches, given by 1 −δ, is
positive and smaller than 1. When a cycle of period k exists its stability is determined by the
eigenvalue
λ := (1 −δ)k < 1.
Then, all the existing cycles are locally stable. When a stable cycle does not exist the dynamics
are quasi-periodic with trajectories dense on an interval. We pinpoint that in our model we
cannot observe chaotic regimes as there is no sensitivity to initial conditions, i.e., trajectories
123

1052
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
generated by two different neighbouring initial conditions will remain close to each other
at every iterate. Also, it is not possible to have an attractive Cantor set. This is because it
needs the existence of inﬁnitely many coexisting unstable cycles, which cannot occur in this
regime of stable dynamics.
We will now consider the various scenarios, given N, by letting the other parameters vary
and then study the properties of the map. To simplify the exposition of the results we will
deﬁne the map to be of type I (resp. Z) if the dynamics are characterised only by branch I
(resp. Z) on the domain [0, N]. Instead, we deﬁne the map to be of type I-Z (resp. Z-I) if there
is only one switching point on the interval [0, N] such that the dynamics are characterised
by I (resp. Z) before the switching point, and by Z (resp. I) after the switching point. On
similar ground, we will deﬁne the map to be of type Z-I-Z if there are two switching points
ˆG1 and ˆG2 on the interval [0, N] and the dynamics are characterised by I on the intervals
[0, ˆG1) and ( ˆG2, N] and by Z on the interval ( ˆG1, ˆG2).
Figure 3 classiﬁes the possible conﬁgurations of the map in the parameter space (x, z)
for different values of the ﬁxed cost F. The meaning of the colours in the various panels is
detailed in the caption. Starting from the (polar) condition F = 0 (Panel A), so that ﬁrms
incur no additional cost to switch from dirty to green technology, we note that depending on
the value of x and z the convergence of the industry to a state in which all ﬁrms are green is
not guaranteed. In particular, given any level of z, if the society’s awareness towards a clean
environment is relatively low (i.e., very low values of x) then all ﬁrms in the long term may
remain dirty (white region). The result is reversed if x is sufﬁciently high (green region). It is
interesting to note that it is also possible to observe (for an intermediate range of values of x)
a situation in which the initial conditions (i.e., the relative number of G- and D-ﬁrms) may
lead to opposite results (blue region), i.e., a low (resp. high) initial number of green ﬁrms lead
the oligopolistic industry to coordinate on an equilibrium in which all ﬁrms do not invest
(resp. invest) in abatement. If the ﬁxed costs to install a cleaning technology are low but
positive (Panel B) two possible new scenarios for low values of z (very efﬁcient abatement
technology) appear depending on the value of x: the grey area when x is relatively low and
the red area when x is relatively high. In these cases, the conﬁguration of the oligopolistic
industry can generate a situation in which both types of ﬁrms coexist in the long term. In
addition, as discussed so far, the evolutionary mechanism considered does not allow for
the emergence of a stationary equilibrium within the interval [0, N]. This coexistence of
strategies in this scenario allows us to observe the emergence of persistent switching from
one technology to another accompanied by changes in the taxation policies. A higher value
of ﬁxed costs (Panel C) changes the relative size of the parameter regions observed in Panel
B favouring the emergence of scenarios in which ﬁrms choosing dirty technology survive
in the long term. A further increase in ﬁxed costs (Panel D) makes the emergence of ﬁrms
adopting a cleaning technology more difﬁcult in the long term.
To analyze the dynamics generated by the map in more detail (especially when the dynam-
ics are not converging to any ﬁxed point) we consider the following parameter set N = 20,
F = 0.0009 and δ = 0.4. Figure4, Panel A shows a two-dimensional bifurcation diagram
in the (x, z) parameter plane. The coloured bar next to the ﬁgure identiﬁes which periodicity
the colours in the diagram are associated with. We recall that x is the burden that the envi-
ronmental regulator attaches to the environmental damage, or the awareness of the overall
society towards the environment and thus against the damage from industrial production,
whereas z weights abatement efﬁciency. The yellow-coloured regions denote a parameter
space in which there exists a locally stable ﬁxed point (G = 0 in the region with small values
of x, and G = N in the region with large values of x). An interesting feature of the analysis
of piecewise linear maps is that several elements of the two-dimensional bifurcation diagram
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1053
Fig. 3 Different conﬁgurations of the map in the 2D parameter space (x, z) for different values of the ﬁxed
cost F (N = 10). Panel A: F = 0. Panel B: F = 0.000036. Panel C: F = 0.0009. Panel D: F = 0.09. In
the white region the map is of type Z. In the green region the map is of type I. In the blue region the map is
of type I −Z. In the red region the map is of type Z −I. In the grey region the map is of type Z −I −Z.
(Color ﬁgure online)
can be determined analytically. To this purpose, several papers (e.g., Tramontana et al., 2010,
2014) describe the border collision bifurcation (BCB) curves related to the cycles of the ﬁrst
degree of complexity. We recall that these curves deﬁne the birth/death of a k-cycle (for any
integer k > 1) formed by 1 point deﬁned by one regime and k −1 points deﬁned by the
other regime (see Avrutin et al., 2019 for a survey on the results for this kind of maps). This
procedure can be only partially adapted to the present paper as it needs the explicit expression
of the switching points to characterise the BCB curves. As this route is not feasible, in this
123

1054
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
paper we consider the expressions of the points deﬁning a cycle of a given periodicity k4 with
1 point deﬁned by one regime and k −1 points deﬁned by the other regime. Then, we impose
that such a cycle has an element at the switching point, i.e., it is a root of the polynomial
(34). This expression allows the BCB curves to be determined in the plane (x, z), at least in
implicit form. To clarify this procedure, we consider a four-period cycle consisting of one
point deﬁned by regime Z and three points deﬁned by regime I (see the red region in Fig.4,
Panel A). For such a cycle to exist its coordinates must be as follows:
 −N(1 −δ)(δ2 −3δ + 3)
δ3 −4δ2 + 6δ −4
, N(δ3 −4δ2 + 5δ −3)
δ3 −4δ2 + 6δ −4
, N(δ3 −3δ2 + 4δ −3)
δ3 −4δ2 + 6δ −4
, −N(δ2 −3δ + 3)
δ3 −4δ2 + 6δ −4

.
To deﬁne a BCB curve, one of its elements (either the maximum element or its pre-image)
must solve the equation P(G) = 0. Proceeding similarly, we obtain the BCB curves shown
in Fig.4, Panel B. The “dense” black part in the upper right corner of the picture in Fig.4,
Panel B is due to BCB curves that are very close to each other.
In addition to the regions characterised by cycles of complexity equal to 1, there exist
other (an inﬁnite number, indeed) regions in which there are cycles of higher complexity,
that is, cycles in which more elements are deﬁned by both pieces of the map. Speciﬁcally, a
number, the rotation number, can be associated with each region to classify all the periods
and cycles with the same period. In this notation, a periodic orbit of period k is characterised
by the period and the number of points in the two branches (denoted by I and Z respectively)
separated by the discontinuity point. A cycle has a rotation number p
k if a k-cycle has p
points on the I side and the others k −p on the Z side. Then, between any pair of periodicity
regions associated with the rotation numbers p1
k1 and p2
k2 there exists a periodicity region
associated with the rotation number p1
k1 ⊕p2
k2 =
p1+p2
k1+k2 (where ⊕stands for the so-called
Farey composition rule, or summation rule, see for example in Avrutin et al., 2019). For
example, Fig.4, Panel C depicts a bifurcation diagram for x (with z = 0.5) showing how
an increase in x causes an increase in the periodicity of the cycles of the ﬁrst degree of
complexity. An enlargement view of such a bifurcation diagram (Fig.4, Panel D) shows that
a region with rotation number 2
13 exists between two regions characterised by cycles of the
ﬁrst-degree of complexity of period 6 and a cycle of the ﬁrst-degree complexity of period 7.
We remark that these regions are very thin and then they cannot easily be identiﬁed by the
two-dimensional bifurcation diagram reported in Fig.4, Panel A.
The dynamic events in the scenarios analysed in Figs. 3 and 4 are exempliﬁed in Figs.
5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 to pinpoint some additional economic features of the model. In particular,
Fig.5 shows (Panel A) a typical trajectory corresponding to the dynamic outcomes about the
times series of the number of ﬁrms prevailing in the long term in the white scenario (in which
all ﬁrms have the incentive to become dirty). The corresponding Panel B and Panel C refer
to the time series of the environmental tax rate and social welfare. After an initial increase,
the tax rate marks the start of a reduction approaching zero in the long term. The shape of
the time series of social welfare shows – despite the disappearance of green technology in
the long run –, that the trajectory is “rational” at the societal level, due to the low awareness
towards a clean environment and the corresponding importance of economic goals coming
from the industrial production of the oligopolistic market, social welfare increases. Figure6
details the green scenario, in which the parameters describe outcomes at all different than
those observed in the white scenario. The corresponding Panels A–C show, respectively, a
typical trajectory of the time series of the number of G-ﬁrms prevailing in the long term, and
the corresponding environmental tax rate and social welfare outcomes. In this case, all the
ﬁrms have the incentive to become green over time and the initial high tax rate chosen by the
4 The expression of such points does not depend on x nor z.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1055
Fig. 4 Bifurcation diagram in the (x, z)-parameter plane for N = 10, F = 0.0009 and δ = 0.4 (Panel A).
Bifurcation curves of ﬁrst-degree of complexity for some cycles, which are obtained following the procedure
described in the main text (Panel B). Bifurcation diagram for x showing the Farey composition rule. Parameter
set: N = 10, F = 0.0009, δ = 0.4 and z = 0.5. (Panel C). Enlargement view of Panel C (Panel D)
regulator is gradually lowered as far as there are improvements in the environmental quality,
i.e., a cleaner society, by the societal goal. The red scenario is described in Fig.7 (Panels
A–C) and is characterised by an interesting coexistence of D- and G-ﬁrms whose number
oscillates between these two different technologies with regular oscillations, after an initial
reduction (resp. increase) in the tax rate (resp. social welfare). In the blue scenario (Fig.8,
Panels A–C) history matters and there exist two long-term equilibria depending on initial
conditions. If the number of G-ﬁrms is initially small (resp. large) then the ﬁrms using green
technology disappear (resp. prevail) in the long term. From a societal perspective, it would
be better to lie in a trajectory in which all the ﬁrms become green, but this is not guaranteed
and depends on the level of taxation used (a higher level of taxation leads to higher social
welfare). If the tax rate is lower, there are no incentives to invest in clean R&D and ﬁrms
will be back to using dirty technology and the society will be worse off. Society will then
be better off by keeping the level of taxation high even in the long term allowing ﬁrms to
become green. Finally, the grey scenario is more articulated (Fig.9, Panels A–C): there exists
a multiplicity of attracting steady states but the state in which all the ﬁrms become of the
G type leads to a higher social welfare although with oscillations. We also note that even in
123

1056
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
Fig. 5 Time series of the number of G-ﬁrms (Panel A: initial condition G = 8), the optimal environmental
tax rate (Panel B) and the corresponding social welfare (Panel C). The white scenario (all ﬁrms become dirty
in the long term). Parameters: N = 10, δ = 0.4, x = 0.02, z = 0.279297 and F = 0.0009. (Color ﬁgure
online)
the presence of a unique (internal) attractor, the related trajectories may not necessarily be
associated with higher welfare than when all ﬁrms are green.
Going further into the analysis of social welfare, Fig. 10, Panels A–C show, in the (x, z)
plane, the change in welfare associated with the state where no ﬁrms are green (Panel A),
all ﬁrms are green (Panel B) and the number of green ﬁrms is deﬁned by a trajectory with
an initial value of G close to but less than N (Panel C). In this last case, a trajectory will
converge to (1) N if N is attractive, (2) an internal attractor if this exists, and (3) 0 if 0 is
the only attractor of the system. To evaluate social welfare in this case we considered the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1057
Fig. 6 Time series of the number of G-ﬁrms (Panel A: initial condition G = 1), the optimal environmental
tax rate (Panel B) and the corresponding social welfare (Panel C). The green scenario (all ﬁrms become green
in the long term). Parameters: N = 10, δ = 0.4, x = 0.35, z = 0.9 and F = 0.0009. (Color ﬁgure online)
average social welfare after a sufﬁciently long transient, which coincides with the welfare
associated with 0 or N if these states are attractive or with the average welfare deﬁned over
the k points forming the (attractive) k-period cycle. In addition, Fig.10, Panel D compares
the levels of welfare in 0 and N and those corresponding to the internal attractor when it
exists, highlighting the existence/attractiveness of states 0 and N. The dark green region (resp.
light green) illustrates the set of parameters (x, z) in which steady-state N welfare dominates
steady-state 0 when N is attractive and 0 does not exist (resp. exists). The red region illustrates
the parameter area where trajectories generated by a sufﬁciently large initial condition are
captured by the internal attractor. However, society would be better off in state N (which is
123

1058
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
Fig. 7 Time series of the number of G-ﬁrms (Panel A: initial condition G = 1), the optimal environmental
tax rate (Panel B) and the corresponding social welfare (Panel C). The red scenario (coexistence of dirty and
green ﬁrms in the long term; there are oscillations). Parameters: N = 10, δ = 0.4, x = 0.25, z = 0.1 and
F = 0.0009. (Color ﬁgure online)
not a ﬁxed point of the system in this case). Again for this parameter conﬁguration, 0 is a
ﬁxed point that attracts sufﬁciently low initial conditions of G and the related social welfare
is less than the welfare associated with the internal attractor. Differently, in the light pink
(resp. light blue) region, the system has only one (the internal) attractor, and the related social
welfare is less (resp. greater) than the welfare associated with state N (resp. with states 0 and
N). The orange region identiﬁes the set of parameters such that the welfare corresponding
to the internal attractor is greater than the welfare corresponding to N, which does not exist
in this case, and the welfare corresponding to 0, which is an attractor of the system in this
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1059
Fig. 8 Time series of the number of G-ﬁrms (Panel A: initial condition G = 3), the optimal environmental tax
rate (Panel B) and the corresponding social welfare (Panel C). The blue scenario (history matters). Parameters:
N = 10, δ = 0.4, x = 0.13, z = 0.998 and F = 0.0009. (Color ﬁgure online)
case. The grey region is such that 0 is the only attractor of the system, but society would be
better off in N. Finally, the magenta region represents the area where 0 is the only attractor
of the system and social welfare associated with it is greater than that associated with N.
Interestingly, the red and light pink regions represent a “dynamic trap”. This is because
evolutionary dynamics make dirty ﬁrms persist in the economy and society even though from
a welfare perspective society would be better off if ﬁrms were all green.
A question now arises: considering a parameter set belonging to these regions, does a
value of τ exist (in the model with a ﬁxed environmental tax rate) allowing the economy
to converge to G = N and society to be better off? An answer to that question is provided
123

1060
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
Fig. 9 Time series of the number of G-ﬁrms (Panel A), the optimal environmental tax rate (Panel B) and
the corresponding social welfare (Panel C). The grey scenario (coexistence of dirty and green ﬁrms and
oscillations). Parameters: N = 10, δ = 0.4, x = 0.1, z = 0.9 and F = 0.0009. (Color ﬁgure online)
by Fig.10, Panel E, which shows that a tax rate slightly higher than τT H = √2zF (this is
given by the blue region in the ﬁgure, which is a subset of the union of the red and light pink
regions in Panel D) can make the system converge to the N state.
The analysis made so far allows us to have some policy considerations. For instance,
increasingthelevelofcommitmentoftheregulator/governmenttoapproachanenvironmental
policy goal with a ﬁxed tax rate may let society be better off than under a (bounded rational)
regulator/government whose decisions are driven by short-term economic/environmental
outcomes.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1061
Fig.10 Socialwelfare.Socialwelfarecorrespondingtothestates0 and N (PanelsAand B,respectively).Long-
term average social welfare related to a generic trajectory generated by a sufﬁciently large initial condition of
G (Panel C). Social welfare comparison (Panel D). Social welfare under optimizing policies versus ﬁxed rule
(Panel E)
4 Conclusions
This article tackles the issue of pollution abatement by considering a game-theoretic approach
framed in a standard static context in which ﬁrms choose whether to be environment-oriented
((Buccella et al., 2021)) through an ad-hoc cleaning effort. In the former case, ﬁrms use an
end-of-pipe technology for pollution abatement coming from the industrial production of
goods and services. In the latter case, the pollution from industrial production is not abated.
The recent article by Buccella et al. (2021) belongs to the static IO literature. The strate-
gic competition is based on Cournot rivalry in which two ﬁrms (duopoly) non-cooperatively
choose whether to abate (through an end-of-pipe technology) in the ﬁrst decision-making
stage, knowing that the regulator (government) levies an ad-hoc tax rate to incentivise
emission-reduction actions by maximising social welfare. In this setting, a wide spectrum of
SPNE of the abatement decision game can emerge—ranging from dirty to green production—
depending on the relative size of the societal awareness towards a clean environment (i.e.,
against the damage generated by industrial production) and the index measuring the rela-
tive cost of abatement (i.e., the exogenous index of technological progress weighting the
efﬁciency of the cleaning technology).
Compared to Buccella et al. (2021), the present article presents two main differences: (1)
it considers an N-ﬁrm oligopoly instead of a two-ﬁrm duopoly, and (2) it moves from a static
context to a dynamic scenario pinpointing the different long-term market conﬁgurations
123

1062
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
emerging depending on the behaviour of the regulator. The regulator, which is welfare-
oriented, can set the environmental tax rate according to a ﬁxed rule over time or an optimal
rule by maximising social welfare dynamically. The article focuses on the role of the public
authority in shaping the individual (ﬁrm’s) incentive to be green or dirty. Of course, this
choice sharply affects the social welfare outcomes prevailing in equilibrium compared to
the basic static framework studied by Buccella et al. (2021). The policy implications are
deep and depend on the main parameters of the problem. The article highlights the active
role of the regulator as a player choosing alongside ﬁrms with a social welfare goal instead
of being proﬁt-maximising. If the tax rate is chosen by the government/regulator according
to a ﬁxed rule over time, the number of G-ﬁrms (or D-ﬁrms) does not change in the long
term. This means that the economy will end up with all ﬁrms being dirty or green. Unlike
this, the government/regulator can sharply affect the kind of ﬁrms and the level of emissions
from industrial production if the tax rate is determined by maximising the social welfare
dynamically. In the former case (ﬁxed tax rate), the dynamics deﬁned by public intervention
are simple as the behaviour of the regulator establishes a path within the industry that leads to
the disappearance of one of the two types of ﬁrms, depending on the extent of taxation. In the
latter case (optimal tax rate), government intervention can make industrial dynamics more
complex with possible greater volatility of the type of ﬁrms even in the long term (persistence
of the two types of ﬁrms in the market).
Turning on the example of the US history and its policy approach towards environmental
protection, our model is capable of capturing the long-term oscillations in the number of
ﬁrms adopting green or dirty technologies. These oscillations are determined, given the ﬁxed
cost of abatement, by the size of the optimal environmental tax rate, which, in turn, depends
on public awareness towards a clean environment. The parameter measuring this awareness,
therefore, allows us to capture in a broad sense the political nature of the different approaches
and recipes adopted by the US government over time (through differences in the size of the
tax rate). In this sense, therefore, changing the way society evaluates environmental quality
is responsible for (and then can explain) the oscillations in the number of green and dirty
ﬁrms that can be observed in the market, implying the coexistence of both types of ﬁrms in
the long term. This result cannot be obtained in the benchmark static duopoly of Buccella et
al. (2021).
The model analysed in the present article is based on a set of simplifying and precise
assumptions that call for signiﬁcant extensions.
First, given their relevance in contemporary economics, it would be extremely worth
considering the case of managerial ﬁrms in which ownership and control are separated, and
then analysing, in the presence of government intervention (1) how and who would take
abatement decisions; and (2) which incentive scheme should be proposed to managers, in the
light of the increasing appearance of retribution contracts linked to “green” performances
(see, inter alias, Buccella et al., 2022, 2023; Park & Lee, 2023; Poyago-Theotoky & Yong,
2019; Xu & Lee, 2023).
Second, this paper examines just the emission taxes as a tool to incentivise abatement
activities. However, “green” subsidies to reduce the cost of cleaning technology investments
and policy mixes are alternative tools that can be used to nudge ﬁrms into cutting emissions.
Third, this work simply assumes that society indirectly shows its level of awareness
around a clean environment, represented by the weight the regulator/government uses to
internalise the evaluation of the environmental damage. However, as widely observed, con-
sumers can directly show their environmental concern by being willing to pay higher prices
(a premium) for “green labelled” products (“green consumerism”, see e.g. Giallonardo and
Mulino, 2023). Moreover, in the last decades, ﬁrms worldwide have voluntarily adopted envi-
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1063
ronmental actions, as several consulting ﬁrms report (see e.g. KPMG, 2020, 2022), mainly
in response to increasing environmental sensitivity. It would be interesting to analyse how
the environmental concerns of the different social groups (consumers, ﬁrms) can affect the
government/regulator’s attitude towards the environmental policy. All these subjects are left
to future research.
Acknowledgements Theauthorsacknowledgetwoanonymousreviewersofthejournalforvaluablecomments
on an earlier draft of the manuscript. The authors are also indebted to participants of the (1) 13th PODE
conference held at the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy (May 2023), (2) 13th NED
conference held at the University of Agder, Kristiansand, Norway (June 2023), and (3) 2nd DISEI-Workshop
on Heterogeneity, Evolution and Networks in Economics held at the University of Florence, Italy (September
2023). Luca Gori acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the University of Pisa under the “PRA – Progetti
di Ricerca di Ateneo” (Institutional Research Grants) – Project No. PRA_2020_64 “Infectious diseases,
health and development: economic and legal effects”. Mauro Sodini acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the
Czech Science Foundation (GACR) under project 23-06282S, and an SGS research project 729 of VŠBTUO
(SP2023/19). The usual disclaimer applies.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università di Pisa within the CRUI-CARE Agreement.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Antoci, A., Borghesi, S., Iannucci, G., & Sodini, M. (2021). Should I stay or should I go? Carbon leakage and
ETS in an evolutionary model. Energy Economics, 103, 105561.
Asproudis, E., & Gil-Moltó, M. J. (2015). Green trade unions: Structure, wages and environmental technology.
Environmental and Resource Economics, 60, 165–189.
Avrutin, V., Gardini, L., Sushko, I., & Tramontana, F. (2019). Continuous and discontinuous piecewise-smooth
one-dimensional maps: Invariant sets and bifurcation structures. World scientiﬁc series on nonlinear
science series A. (Vol. 95). Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Benchekroun, H., & Chaudhuri, A. R. (2011). Environmental policy and stable collusion: the case of adynamic
polluting oligopoly. Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control, 35, 479–490.
Bischi, G. I., Lamantia, F., & Radi, D. (2015). An evolutionary Cournot model with limited market knowledge.
Journal Economic Behavior & Organization, 116, 219–238.
Buccella, D., Fanti, L., & Gori, L. (2021). To abate, or not to abate? A strategic approach on green production
in Cournot and Bertrand duopolies. Energy Economics, 96, 105164.
Buccella, D., Fanti, L., & Gori, L. (2022). “Green” managerial delegation theory. Environment and Develop-
ment Economics, 27, 223–249.
Buccella, D., Fanti, L., & Gori, L. (2023). Environmental delegation versus sales delegation: A game-theoretic
analysis. Environment and Development Economics, 28, 469–485.
Carlsson, F. (2000). Environmental taxation and strategic commitment in duopoly models. Environmental and
Resource Economics 15, 243-256.
Carraro, C., & Siniscalco, D. (1993). Strategies for the international protection of the environment. Journal of
Public Economics, 52, 309–328.
123

1064
Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
Climatewatchdata.org (2022). Historical GHG emissions. retrieved Aug 23, 2022, from https://www.
climatewatchdata.org/ghg-emissions?chartType=percentage&end_year=2019&start_year=1990
Conrad, K., & Wang, J. (1993). The effect of emission taxes and abatement subsidies on market structure.
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 11, 499–518.
d’Aspremont, C., & Jacquemin, A. (1988). Cooperative and noncooperative R&D in duopoly with spillovers.
American Economic Review, 78, 1133–1137.
d’Aspremont, C., & Jacquemin, A. (1990). Cooperative and noncooperative R&D in duopoly with spillovers:
Erratum. American Economic Review, 80, 641–642.
Elsadany, A. A., & Awad, A. M. (2019). Dynamics and chaos control of a duopolistic Bertrand competitions
under environmental taxes. Annals of Operations Research, 274, 211–240.
E.P.A. (United Stated Environmental Protection Agency), (2023). Inventory of US Greenhouse gas emissions
and sinks. Retrieved from, https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/inventory-us-greenhouse-gas-emissions-
and-sinks
Ernest & Young, (2021). How businesses need to navigate environmental incentives and penalties. Retrieved
from, https://www.ey.com/en_gl/tax/how-businesses-need-to-navigate-environmental-incentives-and-
penalties
European Commission, (2022). EU Emission trading system (EU ETS). Retrieved Aug 23, 2022, from https://
ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/eu-emissions-trading-system-eu-ets_en#a-cap-and-trade-system
Frondel, M., Horbach, J., & Rennings, K. (2007). End-of-pipe or cleaner production? An empirical comparison
of environmental innovation decisions across OECD countries. Business Strategy and the Environment,
16, 571–584.
Giallonardo, L., & Mulino, M. (2023). Green consumerism and ﬁrms’ environmental behaviour under monop-
olistic competition: A two-sector model. Italian Economic Journal. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40797-023-
00223-9
Jørgensen, S., Martín-Herrán, G., & Zaccour, G. (2010). Dynamic games in the economics and management
of pollution. Environmental Modeling & Assessment, 15, 433–467.
Katsoulacos, Y., & Xepapadeas, A. (1996). Emission taxes and market structure. In C. Carraro, Y. Katsoulacos
& A. Xepapadeas (Eds.), Environmental policy and market structure. Economics, energy and environ-
ment, (Vol 4, pp. 3-22). Dordrecht: Springer.
Katz, M. L., & Shapiro, C. (1985). Network externalities, competition, and compatibility. American Economic
Review, 75, 424–440.
Konar, S., & Cohen, M. A. (2000). Why do ﬁrms pollute (and reduce) toxic emissions? Retrieved from, SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=922491
KPMG (2020). The time has come. KPMG survey of sustainability reporting 2020. Retrieved from, https://
assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/xx/pdf/2020/11/the-time-has-come.pdf
KPMG
(2022).
Big
shift,
small
steps.
The
KPMG
survey
of
sustainability
reporting
2022.
Retrieved
from,
https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/se/pdf/komm/2022/Global-Survey-of-
Sustainability-Reporting-2022.pdf
Lamantia, F., & Radi, D. (2018). Evolutionary technology adoption in an oligopoly market with forward-
looking ﬁrms. Chaos, 28, 055904.
Lambertini, L., Poyago-Theotoky, J., & Tampieri, A. (2017). Cournot competition and “green” innovation:
An inverted-U relationship. Energy Economics, 68, 116–123.
Lee,S.-H.,&Park,C.-H.(2021).Environmentalregulationsinprivateandmixedduopolies:Taxesonemissions
versus green R&D subsidies. Economic Systems, 45, 100852.
Oates, W. E., & Strassmann, D. L. (1984). Efﬂuent fees and market structure. Journal of Public Economics,
24, 29–46.
Ouchida, Y., & Goto, D. (2016). Cournot duopoly and environmental R&D under regulator’s precommitment
to an emissions tax. Applied Economics Letters, 23, 324–331.
Park, C. H., & Lee, S. H. (2023). Emission taxation, green R&D, and managerial delegation contracts with
environmental and sales incentives. Managerial and Decision Economics, 44, 2366–2377.
Poyago-Theotoky, J., & Yong, S. K. (2019). Managerial delegation contracts, “green” R&D and emissions
taxation. B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics, 19, 20170128.
Requate, T. (2005a). Environmental policy under imperfect competition: A survey. Christian-Albrechts-
Universität Kiel, Economics Working Paper No. 2005-12.
Requate, T. (2005b). Dynamic incentives by environmental policy instruments: A survey. Ecological Eco-
nomics, 54, 175–195.
Simpson, R. D. (1995). Optimal pollution taxation in a Cournot duopoly. Environmental and Resource Eco-
nomics 6, 359–369.
Sushko, I., Agliari, A., & Gardini, L. (2005). Bistability and border-collision bifurcations for a family of
unimodal piecewise smooth maps. Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems B, 5, 881–897.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2024) 337:1037–1065
1065
Sushko, I., Puu, T., & Gardini, L. (2003). The Hicksian ﬂoor-roof model for two regions linked by interregional
trade. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 18, 593–612.
The Economist. (2019). The climate issue. September 21st – 27th, 2019.
The Economist, (2022). Joe Biden’s signature legislation passes the Senate, at last. Aug 9, 2022.
Tramontana, F., Gardini, L., & Ferri, P. (2010). The dynamics of the NAIRU model with two switching regimes.
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34, 681–695.
Tramontana, F., Westerhoff, F., & Gardini, L. (2014). One-dimensional maps with two discontinuity points
and three linear branches: Mathematical lessons for understanding the dynamics of ﬁnancial markets.
Decisions in Economics and Finance, 37, 27–51.
The New York Times, (2009). Obama putting quick stamp on environmental policy. Retrieved from, https://
www.nytimes.com/2009/01/26/world/americas/26iht-calif.4.19691318.html
The New York Times, (2013). Obama outlines ambitious plan to cut greenhouse gases. Retrieved from, https://
www.nytimes.com/2013/06/26/us/politics/obama-plan-to-cut-greenhouse-gases.html
The New York Times, (2017). Under Trump, the E.P.A has slowed actions against polluters, and put limits on
enforcement ofﬁcers. Retrieved from, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/10/us/politics/pollution-epa-
regulations.html
The New York Times, (2021). Restoring environmental rules rolled back by Trump could take years. Retrieved
from, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/22/climate/biden-environment.html
The Washington Post, (2020). Trump rolled back more than 125 environmental safeguards. Here’s how.
Retrieved from, https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2020/climate-environment/trump-climate-
environment-protections/
Ulph, A. (1996). Environmental policy and international trade when governments and producers act strategi-
cally. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 30, 265–281.
van der Meijden, G., Withagen, C., & Benchekroun, H. (2022). An oligopoly-fringe model with HARA
preferences. Dynamic Games and Applications, 12, 954–976.
van der Ploeg, F., & de Zeeuw, A. J. (1992). International aspects of pollution control. Environmental and
Resource Economics, 2, 117–139.
World Bank, (2023). CO2 emissions (kt): Australia. Retrieved from, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.
ATM.CO2E.KT?locations=AU
Xu, L., Chen, Y., & Lee, S.-H. (2022). Emission tax and strategic environmental corporate social responsibility
in a Cournot–Bertrand comparison. Energy Economics, 107, 105846.
Xu, L., & Lee, S. H. (2023). Cournot–Bertrand comparisons under double managerial delegation contracts
with sales and environmental incentives. Managerial and Decision Economics, 44, 3409–3421.
Yanase, A., & Kamei, K. (2022). Dynamic game of international pollution control with general oligopolistic
equilibrium: Neary meets Dockner and Long. Dynamic Games and Applications, 12, 751–783.
Zeppini, P. (2015). A discrete choice model of transitions to sustainable technologies. Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, 112, 187–203.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123