TITLE: Digital manufacturing and supply chain: creating benefits through operations research and artificial intelligence
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06450-2
---

EDITORIAL
Published online: 3 January 2025
© The Author(s) 2024
 
 Erwin Pesch
erwin.pesch@uni-siegen.de
Weiwei Chen
wchen@business.rutgers.edu
Tsan-Ming Choi
T.M.Choi@liverpool.ac.uk
Alexandre Dolgui
alexandre.dolgui@imt-atlantique.fr
Dmitry Ivanov
divanov@hwr-berlin.de
1 
Department of Supply Chain Management, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, USA
2 
Centre for Supply Chain Research, Management School, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool L69 7ZH, UK
3 
IMT Atlantique, LS2N-CNRS, Nantes, France
4 
Supply Chain and Operations Management, Berlin School of Economics and Law, Berlin, 
Germany
5 
Faculty III, University of Siegen, Siegen, Germany
Digital manufacturing and supply chain: creating benefits 
through operations research and artificial intelligence
Weiwei Chen1 · Tsan-Ming Choi2 · Alexandre Dolgui3 · Dmitry Ivanov4 · Erwin Pesch5
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:569–574
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06450-2
With Industry 4.0, a transition from automated and intelligent to digital has been coined. 
This transition covers both network and plant levels. At the plant level, digital manufactur­
ing is based on the collaboration of machines, machines with products, and humans with 
machines. From the application perspective, these features have materialized through addi­
tive manufacturing, robotics, digital twins, virtual and augmented reality, and collabora­
tion tools in creating products and services. At the network level, the digital supply chain 
has been created utilizing Blockchain, the Internet of Things, e-commerce platforms, and 
collaborative supplier portals to achieve seamless end-to-end visibility. From the solution 
methodology perspective, innovative approaches have been developed combining interdis­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:569–574
ciplinary methods from operations research (OR), machine learning (ML), and artificial 
intelligence (AI).
The special issue “Digital Manufacturing and Supply Chain: Creating Benefits Through 
Operations Research and Artificial Intelligence” is targeted towards, but not restricted to the 
10th IFAC Conference MIM 2022 that took place on June 22–24, 2022, in Nantes (France) 
and attracted 767 participants from 59 countries: https://hub.imt-atlantique.fr/mim2022/.
The special issue features papers demonstrating how Automation Technology (Additive 
Manufacturing, Drones, AGVs), Collaboration Technology (Digital Platforms), Identifi­
cation and Communication Technology (Blockchain, Sensors, Smart Products), and Data 
Processing Technology (Big Data Analytics) can generate benefits for manufacturing and 
supply chains.
This special issue of ANOR reports on recent developments, building upon methods and 
applications of OR and analytics to digital, resilient, and sustainable manufacturing and sup­
ply chains 4.0. It contains 17 papers which are detailed below.
Reza Lotfi, Mohsen Rajabzadeh, Abolfazl Zamani, and Mohammad Sadra Rajabi pro­
pose in their paper “Viable supply chain with vendor-managed inventory approach by con­
sidering blockchain, risk and robustness” a case study-based model to compare issues in 
and excluding Blockchain Technology (BCT) using Mixed-Integer Linear Programming 
and GAMS-Bonmin in the Pharmacy Industry. The results indicate a 0.61% greater cost 
function of the core problem without using BCT compared to the identical problem with the 
usage of BCT. The authors state that decreasing the resiliency coefficient and increasing the 
conservative coefficient will increase the cost function. In addition, the analysis examines 
an increasing confidence level that results in a reduction of the cost function. As the authors 
conclude, an expansion in the scale of the problem leads to a longer problem-solving time 
(Lotfi et al., 2022).
Bin Shen, Jianing Zhang, Ming Cheng, Shu Guo, and Renlong He explore in their paper 
“Supply chain integration in mass customization” the influence of waiting time and self-
design entertainment from the acquisition of mass customization (MC) products on supply 
chain integration. The study uses a supply chain containing one manufacturer, one retailer, 
and one customizer. Standardized products are produced and sold by the manufacturer 
through the retailer. The customizer is able to choose to sell their products between a manu­
facturer–customizer integration or retailer–customizer integration. Firstly, the authors iden­
tify that a win-win-win outcome is created for all supply chain participants whenever the 
waiting time for MC is within an average range and a high customer satisfaction rate with 
the product quality in manufacturer-customizer integration. Secondly, they state a different 
outcome for retailer-customizer integration in case the manufacturer is not engaging in the 
integration. The authors conclude the competition mitigation effect can compensate for a 
low level of self-design entertainment in the supply chain integration and the achievability 
of a win-win-win effect for every supply chain member in the manufacturer-customizer 
integration is unchanged with endogenized self-design entertainment (Shen et al., 2023).
Jing Peng, Jianghua Zhang, and Tengfei Nie investigate in their paper “Social influence 
and channel competition in the live-streaming market” the effect on stakeholders in the live-
streaming market by making use of a one-to-two channel in which two diverse influencers 
compete for sales of a popular producer. By implementing a multiunit bilateral bargaining 
framework, the authors focus on determining an equilibrium with rational expectations by 
analyzing parallel negotiations with the influencers and the fabricator. The authors conclude 
1 3
570

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:569–574
that, since the Matthew effect is observed, the manufacturer should focus on using the most 
successful influencer and that live streaming increases consumer surplus (Peng et al., 2023).
Ping Xie, Ruixia Shi, and Di Xu identify the optimal live stream plan for retailers 
that provide complimentary rides between the retailer’s store brand and a manufacturer’s 
national brand using a game-theoretic framework in their paper “Retailer service strategy 
on livestreaming platforms considering free riding behavior”. In case there are limited 
resources on the live streaming channel, the retailer should either not promote products 
with low demand or offer the service to a national brand themselves. If not, assign it to the 
manufacturer. Correspondingly, in case there are unlimited assets, promoting both brands 
may not be mandatory if the store brand has a high demand (Xie et al., 2023).
Nail Tahirov, Najmaddin Akhundov, Simon Emde, and Christoph H. Glock propose in 
their paper “Configuration of last-mile distribution networks for an encroaching manufac­
turer” an integrated optimization model aimed at examining various distribution approaches 
for a manufacturer retailing both standard and customized products to diverse customer sec­
tions with changing preferences. By resolving a location-routing problem, a wide-ranging 
evaluation of the effects on the total logistics costs and customer approachability is gener­
ated. The authors conclude that for serving a variety of customer divisions while reducing 
handling costs at the same time, an omnichannel distribution system is a viable method 
(Tahirov et al., 2024).
In their paper “Contracting under information superiority in a supply chain of subscrip­
tion-based apps: a comparative analysis”, Tal Avinadav and Priel Levy use a game-theoretic 
approach to analyze a supply chain of subscription-based apps that contain a platform and 
a designer. Two scenarios concerning the platform’s data status for each static fee and com­
mission rate are evaluated. The study concludes that it is beneficial for the platform to 
make fixed-fee contracts which result in higher quality and price of the subscription. Lastly, 
estimated revenues of the platform and designer are higher with bigger demand volatility 
(Avinadav & Levy, 2023).
Kuo-Ching Ying, Pourya Pourhejazy, and Po-Jui Fu explore production planning of a 
three-stage distributed manufacturing system including the production of subcomponents, 
assembling components in Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) factories as well as 
fabricating products at the product manufacturer’s facility. In their paper “N-list-enhanced 
heuristic for distributed three-stage assembly permutation flow shop scheduling” using Dis­
tributed Three Stage Assembly Permutation Flowshop Scheduling Problems (DTrSAPFSP) 
models, the authors argue that a significantly better algorithm performance can be created 
by using an N-list-enhanced Constructive Heuristic algorithm (Ying et al., 2023).
Longfei He, Xiao Zhang, Baofeng Huo, and Yang Zhang analyze the influence of cross-
network externality as well as supply risk of the two-sided market on the Acceptance Deci­
sions of Pricing and Blockchain by volume distribution platforms in their paper “Platform 
pricing and blockchain adoption for capacity sharing with cross-network externality and 
supply risk”. By using the mean-variance model and blockchain technology, the authors 
state that platforms prefer using blockchain technology whenever fixed costs for implemen­
tation are lower than the expected profit, adding more value to the blockchain technology. 
To conclude, the authors provide a theoretical foundation for pricing policies of platforms 
and managerial insights for utilizing blockchain technology (He et al., 2024).
Feng Liu, Mingjie Fang, Shufeng Xiao, and Yangyan Shi explore the effect of the digital 
revolution on the bullwhip effect at the firm level and the relationship to customer concen­
1 3
571

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:569–574
tration using the organizational processing theory in their paper “Mitigating bullwhip effect 
in supply chains by engaging in digital transformation: the moderating role of customer 
concentration”. Hierarchical linear modeling with 2,159 Chinese manufacturing firms from 
2016 to 2020 is used for hypothesis testing. The authors conclude that a severe mitigation 
of the bullwhip effect in firms when using digital transformation and a less diffuse customer 
base (Liu et al., 2024).
Samira Ebrahimi, Mohammad Fathian, and Seyyed-Mahdi Hosseini-Motlagh analyze 
in their paper “Dynamic effects of parallel selling channels on the electronic marketplace 
reputation and performance” the dynamic effect of the parallel selling channels on the cost-
effectiveness and standing of the electronic marketplace. Using a dynamic game theory 
approach, price markdown and delivery lead time decisions are computed. Price discounts 
and delivery time choices can be contemplated as simultaneous dynamic results for enhanc­
ing market share. Furthermore, commission fees can influence the service level and time 
leads to improving the marketplace reputation over time. To conclude, the authors state 
that the performance of retailers and the market increases significantly with coordination 
contracts (Ebrahimi et al., 2024).
In the paper “A queueing-inventory system with a repeated-orbit policy during the ser­
vice”, Gabi Hanukov investigates a service system where customers are not required to be 
present during the processing of their order. Using the matrix geometric method, analysis of 
the queueing-inventory-repeated-orbit (QIRO) is executed in case customers need to leave 
again before their service is completed. For optimal sendoff time calculation, a maximiza­
tion of the customer’s anticipated efficacy is considered. Correspondingly, the author states 
for an increased demand and maximization of the profit an optimal finished service storage 
capacity and investment in preservation technologies are required (Hanukov, 2023).
Seyed Amin Seyfi, İhsan Yanıkoğlu, and Görkem Yılmaz analyze a combined lot siz­
ing and workforce scheduling issue under demand insecurity using a multi-stage stochastic 
manufacture planning method as a case study at Vestel in their paper “Multi-stage scenario-
based stochastic programming for managing lot sizing and workforce scheduling at Vestel”. 
For modeling uncertainty in demand, scenario trees are used, and a multi-stage scenario-
based stochastic linear program is established to enhance the total efficacy of production 
planning and to regulate production quantities accordingly. To conclude, the authors state 
that almost ideal solutions in feasible computation times are generated through a meta­
heuristic for large-sized cases, and a noteworthy enhancement in costs as well as CPU time 
performance for benchmark methods is observed (Seyfi et al., 2023).
Xue Yan, Ting Wang, and Xuefei Shi explore the usage of the combinatorial auction in 
technician obligation and subcontracting amenity procurement using software enterprises 
for reducing the overall expenses for software development in their paper “Optimal schedul­
ing on unrelated parallel machines with combinatorial auction”. The authors propose using 
an unrelated parallel machine scheduling problem incorporating combinatorial auction 
(UPMSCA) to investigate whether to plan works on parallel machines or select the offer 
with the lowest rate. An arc-flow model and a set-partitioning formulation with column-
based constraints are suggested to resolve the issue. The algorithm’s performance is vali­
dated by outcomes from widespread computational tests on 100 series of randomly created 
examples (Yan et al., 2024).
Na Liu and Shuyun Ren analyze production disruption risks by investigating the effects 
on the consumer, supply chain agents, and society in their paper “Production disruption in 
1 3
572

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:569–574
supply chain systems: impacts on consumers, supply chain agents and the society”. A vari­
ety of parameters are used to explore the influence on the ideal decisions of selling price and 
the revenue of supply chain agents as well as the profit alteration. The authors highlight that 
wholesale price is irrelevant for unbiased supply chain agents but becomes important for 
risk-seeking supply chain agents (Liu & Ren, 2024).
Amina Antit, Amel Jaoua, Safa Bhar Layeb, and Chefi Triki propose a new mechanism 
for handling the range of common customers for a logistics company in their paper “Pre-
auction optimization for the selection of shared customers in the last-mile delivery”. The 
novel approach uses the auction as an instrument to handle the assortment of common cli­
ents through the coalition pool which outsources entirely nonprofit shared customers to 
other cooperating carriers. Firstly, to explain the deterministic form of the issue, a mixed 
integer linear programming model is used. Secondly, a simulation-based optimization 
model is established to efficiently resolve the stochastic form of the issue and is aimed at 
solving a case study of a parcel delivery company. To conclude, the authors state that the 
study discovered an increase of 22.65% in revenues for the delivery company using an auc­
tion approach for handling the common customers (Antit et al., 2023).
Wenping Liu, Bangyi Li, Guoqing Zhang, Zhe Wang, and Yongbo Cheng suggest in their 
paper “Quality disclosure pattern options for competing refurbishers: blockchain vs online 
platform”, a duopoly model to analyze the execution circumstances of various quality dis­
closure designs for refurbishers and equilibrium disclosure patterns in the rival market using 
game theory. Online retailer sales or direct blockchain adoption are measured as quality 
patterns with competing refurbishers with heterogeneous levels of quality. The authors con­
clude that the counterparty’s pattern is crucial for the refurbishers’ will for diverse disclo­
sure patterns and the product quality gap affects the high-grade refurbisher (Liu et al., 2023).
Huini Zhou, Guo Li, Yong Tan, and Xu Guan propose an approach for dynamic invest­
ment tactics of online advertising for multi-oligopoly businesses by contemplating the spill­
over effect of online promotion in their paper “Dynamic investment in online advertising of 
multi-oligopoly competitive enterprises with spillover effect”. For examination, the authors 
use the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman function to identify the Nash equilibrium solutions of the 
online promotion quantity and revenues accomplished in symmetrical, semisymmetric, and 
asymmetric events for analyzing market share and spreading the model to n-dimensional 
space. Firstly, to conclude, the authors state that investment in fixed-location online market­
ing is inversely proportional to the spillover effect although pay-per-click is directly propor­
tional. Additionally, leading companies are touched by the spillover effect in semisymmetric 
and asymmetric events. Secondly, the total investment in online advertising is contrary to 
external restriction aspects, and negative revenue in the case of more than three companies 
in the market (Zhou et al., 2023).
We thank Editor-in-Chief Endre Boros for supporting this important special issue. We 
also want to thank all authors and reviewers for their kind contribution. Enjoy reading!
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
1 3
573

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:569–574
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Antit, A., Jaoua, A., Layeb, S. B., & Triki, C. (2023). Pre-auction optimization for the selection of shared 
customers in the last-mile delivery. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​
2​3​-​0​5​7​1​1​-​w​
Avinadav, T., & Levy, P. (2023). Contracting under information superiority in a supply chain of subscription-
based apps: a comparative analysis. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​
2​3​-​0​5​5​6​5​-​2​
Ebrahimi, S., Fathian, M., & Hosseini-Motlagh, S. M. (2024). Dynamic effects of parallel selling channels 
on the electronic marketplace reputation and performance. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​4​-​0​5​8​3​8​-​4​
Hanukov, G. (2023). A queueing-inventory system with a repeated-orbit policy during the service. Annals of 
Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05648-0
He, L., Zhang, X., Huo, B., & Zhang, Y. (2024). Platform pricing and blockchain adoption for capacity shar­
ing with cross-network externality and supply risk. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​4​-​0​5​8​5​0​-​8​
Liu, F., Fang, M., Xiao, S., & Shi, Y. (2024). Mitigating bullwhip effect in supply chains by engaging in 
digital transformation: the moderating role of customer concentration. Annals of Operations Research. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05908-7
Liu, N., & Ren, S. (2024). Production disruption in supply chain systems: impacts on consumers, supply chain 
agents and the society. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05782-9
Liu, W., Li, B., Zhang, G., Wang, Z., & Cheng, Y. (2023). Quality disclosure pattern options for competing 
refurbishers: blockchain vs online platform. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​
1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​3​-​0​5​6​2​2​-​w​
Lotfi, R., Rajabzadeh, M., Zamani, A., & Rajabi, M. S. (2022). Viable supply chain with vendor-managed 
inventory approach by considering blockchain, risk and robustness. Annals of Operations Research. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05119-y
Peng, J., Zhang, J., & Nie, T. (2023). Social influence and channel competition in the live-streaming market. 
Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05548-3
Seyfi, S. A., Yanıkoğlu, İ., & Yılmaz, G. (2023). Multi-stage scenario-based stochastic programming for 
managing lot sizing and workforce scheduling at Vestel. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​3​-​0​5​7​4​1​-​4​
Shen, B., Zhang, J., Cheng, M., Guo, S., & He, R. (2023). Supply chain integration in mass customization. 
Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05202-y
Tahirov, N., Akhundov, N., Emde, S., & Glock, C. H. (2024). Configuration of last-mile distribution networks 
for an encroaching manufacturer. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​
4​-​0​6​0​3​1​-​3​
Xie, P., Shi, R., & Xu, D. (2023). Retailer service strategy on livestreaming platforms considering free riding 
behavior. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05201-z
Yan, X., Wang, T., & Shi, X. (2024). Optimal scheduling on unrelated parallel machines with combinatorial 
auction. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06283-z
Ying, K. C., Pourhejazy, P., & Fu, P. J. (2023). N-list-enhanced heuristic for distributed three-stage assembly 
permutation flow shop scheduling. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​
3​-​0​5​4​5​6​-​6​
Zhou, H., Li, G., Tan, Y., & Guan, X. (2023). Dynamic investment in online advertising of multi-oligopoly 
competitive enterprises with spillover effect. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​
1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​3​-​0​5​5​7​8​-​x​
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
574