TITLE: Energy in the backseat? Investigating decarbonization dialogue in supply chain tweets during and after COVID-19
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05806-4
---

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05806-4
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Energy in the backseat? Investigating decarbonization
dialogue in supply chain tweets during and after COVID-19
Umer Shahzad1
· Tuhin Sengupta2
· Amar Rao3
· Gagan Deep Sharma4,5,6
Received: 29 November 2022 / Accepted: 19 December 2023 / Published online: 25 January 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
While we move into the seventh year of the signing of Paris agreement, research scholars
and supply chain ﬁrms have paid a lot of emphasis on environmental sustainability with
the aim of achieving net zero targets by 2050. However, the global pandemic has somewhat
disturbed the focus from environment to resilience due to severe economic implications of
COVID-19. In this paper, we contribute to the very scant discussion on Twitter Analytics
by analysing supply chain tweets with COVID-19 at the backdrop. Our approach involves
analysing how decarbonization related discussions have evolved by capturing the tweets
across three timelines: pre pandemic, pandemic and post pandemic. By integrating descriptive
analytics, content analytics and machine learning algorithm in topic modelling, we extract
textual intelligence related to emissions and pollution from leading ﬁrms involving supply
chain management. We ﬁnd that although decarbonization related discussions are at bare
minimum in terms of the proportion of discussions within the supply chain context, the overall
emotion of tweets indicate fear across all three timelines. Moreover, it was surprising to note
that although pollution levels came down due to low economic activity during pandemic, we
found more discussions during COVID in comparison to pre-COVID times. Pollution and
waste caused by plastics, fuel consumption, reduction in greenhouse gas emission are some of
B Gagan Deep Sharma
angrishgagan@gmail.com
Umer Shahzad
Shehzad-umer@hotmail.com
Tuhin Sengupta
tuhin.sengupta@iimranchi.ac.in
Amar Rao
amarydvrao@gmail.com
1
Brandenburg University of Technology, Chair of Energy Economics, Cottbus, Germany
2
Department of Operations Management, Indian Institute of Management Ranchi, 5th Floor,
Suchana Bhawan, Meur’s Road, Audrey House Campus, Jharkhand 834004, India
3
BML Munjal University, 67th KM Stone, NH-8, Gurugram, Haryana 122413, India
4
Széchenyi István University of Gy˝or, Gy˝or, Hungary
5
University School of Management Studies, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, New
Delhi, India
6
Lebanese American University, Beirut, Lebanon
123

582
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
the key topics that emerged during pandemic times. Our paper makes a modest contribution
on the role of social media analytics within supply chain context around COVID-19.
Keywords Supply chain · Pollution · Fuel consumption · Twitter · Machine learning ·
Sustainability
1 Introduction
Decarbonization is a term which commonly refers to the reduction of carbon dioxide output
to the atmosphere (Deloitte, 2021). In other words, decarbonization is a process through
which carbon emissions are reduced by deploying low carbon sources in the entire supply
chain. According to a recent report from KPMG, organizations (mainly Fortune 500 compa-
nies) have already outlined decarbonization strategies at the backdrop of net-zero imperative
(KPMG, 2021). The net-zero imperative is motivated by the 2015 Paris Agreement with the
intention to pursue carbon neutrality by 2050 (Meinshausen et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022). One
critical strategy should focus on the strategic foresight in terms of resolving competing imper-
atives towards decarbonization. For instance, while business leaders are promoting net-zero
activities, ﬁrms are still struggling to recover from post pandemic phase, create a long-term
vision for the rapidly growing technological space which includes automation, disruptive
technology including AI, in addition to increasing competitive markets much attributed to
change in focus towards consumer centric responsive supply chains (Example: Amazon
Online Marketplace) which are more digitally aware in order to serve customers. This points
us to the importance of aligning business strategy towards clean energy sources, rewarding
senior executives for environmental performance and reporting tangible progress in emission
reduction initiatives. These initiatives will apply across different stages in the supply chain
which includes sourcing strategies, manufacturing processes, distribution networks includ-
ing logistics, transportation and warehousing. Hence, a process driven mechanism to reliably
report such initiatives not only improve overall credibility but also increases regulatory agility
in western markets where regulations involving emissions are strict. For instance, the Climate
Mobilizing Act enacted by New York City in 2019 to cap carbon emissions may result in
billions of dollars in ﬁnes for the real estate sector if they fail to decarbonize (KPMG, 2021).
A recent paper ﬁnds four common barriers to supply chain decarbonization: lack of aware-
ness, resistant mindset, major upfront investment cost, and lack of expertise (Zhang et al.,
2022). Hence, the next set of strategies to counter these mentioned barriers must include cli-
mate focused partnerships. Partnerships not only enhance innovation in supply chains (Xie
et al., 2022) but also could lead to cost sharing contracts in different greening initiatives (Dai
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020). It has been documented that innovation does improve the envi-
ronmental quality (Appiah et al., 2023). Also, cost sharing contracts would not only reduce
the problem of large investments borne by a single ﬁrm but also enhance the expertise level
as multiple stakeholders would come together to address the problem. For instance, Hotel
Hilton in Bali, Indonesia was recognized for their effort in eliminating more than 460,000
single use water bottles and realized 40% cost savings by partnering with a local Bali based
ﬁrm (KPMG, 2021). With regard to the resistant mindset and lack of awareness issue, ﬁrms
need to build trust among different stakeholders and deploy technology such as machine
learning (Feng et al., 2022), blockchain (Karim et al., 2023; Kouhizadeh & Sarkis, 2018) to
drive actionable insights across the entire value chain. In short, establishing credibility is the
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
583
ﬁrst step towards building trust followed by veriﬁable data instead of greenwashing (Delmas
& Burbano, 2011) to impress across stakeholders.
While the argument on the importance of decarbonization is well documented in both
academic and grey literature, there has been a growing concern on how ﬁrms will evolve
post COVID-19 pointing us towards the conﬂicting imperative towards achieving net-zero
level. It is well observed that as businesses have started recovering and economic activities
have increased, unsustainable consumption practices have increased pollution levels during
the recovery phase (Dutheil et al., 2021) which will eventually impact resources affecting a
very large proportion of the global population especially in emerging markets. According to a
recent report in Ernst and Young, on how European Union could revive both economically and
environmentally post pandemic, a three-pronged approach, which includes ﬁnancial stimuli
towards resilient economy, ﬁscal incentives to mitigate climate change and focus on circular
economy, could positively transition Europe towards their emission reduction goals (Ernst &
Young, 2022). However, due to its recency effect, we have very little information both in the
academic literature and grey literature on how ﬁrms are evolving in line with their net-zero
goals while recovering economically post pandemic. While, we always argued in favour of
triple bottom line approach, the current pandemic has shown how difﬁcult it is to focus on
all three dimensions of sustainability. While economic recovery is something ﬁrms cannot
ignore, it has to be seen how environmental concerns and their strategies evolved throughout
this phase. The overarching objective of this study is to understand how discussions have
evolved concerning pollution in supply chains from pre-COVID to post-COVID phase since
focusing on pollution is counter intuitive to the immediate objective of economic recovery
during post-COVID at the ﬁrm level. While a qualitative approach would have been suitable,
as ﬁrms’ responses towards resilience and environment evolve, we believe that such an
approach would restrict us in capturing a wide variety of discussions across industrial sectors.
We, therefore, decided to collect data from Twitter due to three important reasons. First, at
a generic level, social media analytics have proved to be instrumental during the global
pandemic in varying applications such as government crisis management (Chon & Kim,
2022), mitigating the negative effects of COVID-19 (Zhang et al., 2020), understanding the
emotions of stakeholders impacted by the pandemic (Tinguely et al., 2020). Second, Twitter
has shown its ability to highlight supply chain issues (Schmidt et al., 2020). Third, Twitter
allows us to collect a large data set which could capture the issues concerning pollution
at the ﬁrm level from a temporal perspective. This provides us with speciﬁc advantages in
understanding how priorities or strategies (in the form of discussions/tweets) have evolved
from pre pandemic to post pandemic concerning pollution. We present our research gaps as
follows:
RQ 1 What are the emerging discussions on decarbonization in supply chains in pre pandemic
times? How has the discussion evolved during and recovery phase of COVID-19.
Before the COVID-19 pandemic, discussions on decarbonization in supply chains were
already gaining traction, as businesses and governments recognized the environmental impact
of global trade and production. Consumers were becoming more conscious of the environ-
mental impact of the products they purchased. As a result, there were discussions about the
need for greater transparency and traceability in supply chains, allowing consumers to make
informed choices and encouraging companies to adopt sustainable practices. Businesses were
recognizing the importance of engaging their suppliers in decarbonization efforts. Collab-
orating with suppliers to improve their environmental performance could lead to a ripple
effect throughout the supply chain, reducing emissions and promoting sustainability. The
123

584
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
circular economy concept, which focuses on reducing waste and maximizing resource uti-
lization, was becoming a prominent topic in supply chain discussions. However, it needs to
be seen whether Twitter data continue to provide such valuable discussion during and after
the pandemic.
Our methodological approach involves various steps. First, we collect tweets based on a
certain search criterion. Then, we cleaned the data and present the descriptive statistics. We
apply three different techniques to answer our research questions: topic modelling, emotion
analysis and sentiment analysis by naïve bayes algorithm, a supervised machine learning tech-
nique. COVID-induced sentiment has been argued to inﬂuence intraday volatility spillovers
between energy and exchange traded funds (Naeem et al., 2023). Our ﬁndings reveal that
decarbonization efforts in the post pandemic recovery phase was absent and there was no dis-
cussion on any linkages potential strategies towards reducing pollution in the long run. This is
concerning for leading supply chain ﬁrms and environmentalists on the use and engagement
of social media platforms towards highlighting the importance of decarbonization activities
at various stages within the supply chain. Further, we did not ﬁnd any focused involvement
of stakeholder engagement initiatives towards decarbonization as pointed out by one of the
papers in the literature. Our papers make a modest attempt to point out how the global pan-
demic may have diverted attention from decarbonization to resilience thereby risking net
zero targets of nations across the globe with far reaching implications to sustainability.
The remainder of the section is as follows: Sect. 2 presents the review of related literature
ranging from supply chain, pollution, twitter and COVID-19. The research gap is derived
by carefully reviewing the above-mentioned literature streams. The third section presents
the methodology and the data description. Here, in addition to providing the theoretical
understanding of different methods that we have adopted in the paper, we also explain the
data collection process from Twitter, followed by descriptive analysis of the data. Section 4
presents the results and ﬁndings of the topic modelling, sentiment analysis and emotions
across different timelines from pre-covid to post covid. We conclude the paper in the ﬁnal
section by highlighting the core ﬁndings, implications to theory and practice followed by
limitation and future scope of our work.
2 Literature review and theoretical framework
The review of literature is divided into four streams. First, we base our argument by discussing
how the theory on social media analytics have evolved into different methods and business
function applications. Second, we discuss the current studies in the interface of supply chain
and pollution as this remains our core focus. Then, we further capture the discussions on
supply chains in twitter since our sample involves tweets. Second, we explain the related
literature on environmental pollution in the context of the pandemic since our focus also
entails COVID-19. We draw our research gap by triangulating the information synthesized
from these streams of literature.
2.1 Theoretical framework
The underlying theoretical discussion is based on the application areas of social media ana-
lytics (Rathore et al., 2017). Social media analytics is currently used in various businesses
to capture insights which could aid performance and productivity issues in various domains.
The theory speciﬁcally points out how user-oriented interaction processes such as discussion
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
585
and debates in social media platforms such as Twitters have evolved over the last decade
(Kaplan & Haenlien, 2010). Such user-oriented content is critical as both direct and indi-
rect stakeholders of businesses often engage in issues that warrants opinions from different
users. With regard to methods, domains and objectives, Rathore et al. (2017) points out
how different data mining objective such as classiﬁcation, clustering, association rule dis-
covery, regressions have been applied in different industry such as public administration,
consumer discretionary, education, healthcare among others. A careful examination of the
business function would suggest emergency management, operations, accounting and mar-
keting, stakeholder engagement as the prominent areas of business function applications. As
users generated content is evolving at a faster pace, text analytics, visualization and network
analytics have been used extensively in such business domains. With speciﬁc reference to
industry wise analysis, the authors ﬁnd sentiment analysis, topic modelling as one of the
most commonly used techniques to develop business insights. We base our understanding
and way forward in social media analytics and apply to supply chain issues which is currently
an emerging domain in developing insights into key issues. In this paper, we explore pollution
as a critical focal point keeping in mind net zero targets. However, with the global pandemic
disturbing the net zero focus, we wish to explore how supply chain discussions revolving
around pollution has evolved across the pandemic timelines.
2.2 Supply chain, pollution and twitter
Studies related to supply chain and pollution are focused into three broad areas, namely,
regulatory and policy measures leading to pollution reduction, role of technology and stake-
holderstowardspollutionmitigationandimpactofstrategicresponsesandconsumerpressure.
Ouardighi et al. (2016), through a game theoretic approach, determine how the role of double
marginalization towards the trade-off between pollution emissions and abatement activities
in a vertical supply chain. On similar lines, Wang et al. (2022), using a Stackelberg model,
analyse a two-period supply chain where manufacturer participates in a cap-and-trade scheme
with an uncertain emission permit price, while the retailer faces a price sensitive demand. The
author ﬁnds that the abatement level increases with the permit price and decreases with uncer-
tainty. It also highlights that when the toxicity of the pollutants is low, the impact of emission
trading on social welfare may be stronger thus highlighting the role of such abatement strate-
gies towards social welfare. Sim and Kim (2021) analyse a scenario where manufacturer is
polluting the environment through production activities and therefore determine abatement
efforts while the government imposes emission penalties. The authors ﬁnd that imposing a
fraction of penalties on the retailer might reduce manufacturer emissions. Chung et al. (2013)
highlights the importance of ﬁrms’ decisions on supply chain networks. In response to one
ﬁrms’ decision in price change and to environmental taxes, the manufacturer may strategi-
cally change many decisions ranging from shipment patterns, inventory management, the
decision of paying environmental taxes versus recycling decisions etc. Then, there are spe-
ciﬁc technology deployment studies concerning pollution in supply chains. For instance, Niu
et al. (2021) ﬁnds that environmental sustainability within a supply chain improves when
supply chain adopts blockchain technology and supply chain uncertainty is small. Kraines
(2002) developed an integrated system trade-off model to assess cost and pollution associated
with transportation in the coke making supply chain in China. The author ﬁnds that transfer
of low pollution truck technology results in high pollution reduction thus highlighting the
importance of truck transportation in coke making industry.
123

586
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Studies related to twitter data and supply chain are scant and diverse in terms of its focus.
Chae et al. (2015) was one of ﬁrst few papers that analysed supply chains from different per-
spective. The authors touched upon issues ranging from information sharing, need for hiring
professionals, stakeholder communication, risks, corporate social responsibility including
environmental standards and disruptions in supply chains. Responses in twitter concerning
supply chains are critical to a wider audience. Schmidt et al. (2020) conﬁrmed this hypoth-
esis by exploring the twitter response to supply chain glitches on stock market returns. This
conﬁrms the relevance of social media platforms such as Twitter and its ability to elevate
the overall importance of supply chain related problems. Shifting our discussion on supply
chain challenges, Sharma et al. (2020), by relying on twitter data from NASDAQ 100 ﬁrms,
found that ﬁrms are facing challenges in terms of deploying technology, the issue of match-
ing supply with demand and most importantly the strategic need to makes supply chains
more resilient (Janjua et al., 2021). Interestingly, in line with our context, the authors also
highlight that ﬁrms are experiencing challenges in implementing sustainability within their
supply chains. A previous study seems to be complementing the issue raised on the pretext
of sustainability (Mishra & Singh, 2018). Here, the authors, developed waste minimizing
strategies by recommending a framework for execution process by using an example for beef
supply chains. Although the tweets involved large data sets concerning beef products, we
may argue that such strategies could be developed for other product types depending on the
severity of its impact on environment.
2.3 Environmental pollution & COVID-19
The literature on environmental pollution and COVID-19 is fast evolving. However, our
intention is to highlight those studies which show how pollution levels have changed during
or post COVID-19. Yang et al. (2021) shows that COVID-19 improved PM 2.5, PM 10,
NO2, and CO levels but did not reduce SO2 and O3 levels. Further, surface water, coastal
water and groundwater became more cleaner as a result of COVID-19. The authors attribute
travel restrictions as the main reason for carbon emission reduction. This is similar to Razzaq
et al. (2020) except for the fact that in the latter, the author found that in high polluted areas,
the intensity of COVID-19 was more in states within USA. In the case of Egypt, Mostafa
et al. (2021) found that NO2, CO and GHG emissions decreased while ozone level increased.
However, the author warns that post lifting of lockdown, such beneﬁcial impacts may fade
away unless stricter environmental laws are adopted and implemented. Other studies also
show similar results in different contexts thus highlighting the impact of COVID-19 and
pollution (Kephart et al., 2021; Keshtkar et al., 2022; Marwah & Agrawala, 2022). Hence, it
is fairly evident that pollution levels came down due to the global pandemic. It is therefore,
interesting to understand the association post covid and the underlying reasons if pollution
levels remain reduced. This leads to our motivation of understanding how supply chains must
change or changing towards reducing their carbon footprint. We argue our research gaps in
the next section by summarizing the learnings from the literature.
3 Research gaps
We wish to present couple of observations from the review of related literature above. First,
although studies concerning supply chain and pollution is evolving, we found very little evi-
dence on how supply chains are tackling pollution apart from some game theoretic models
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
587
explaining a theoretical model under different regulatory conditions. Second, studies con-
cerning pollution levels post covid is currently absent in the literature. Although, it is evident
that pollution levels will rise, however how organizations, ﬁrms or supply chains would act
or react in the recovery stage of pandemic specially when economic activities will pick up is
currently missing in the literature. Third, although it is well established that twitter responses
are critical in supply chain issues, there is very little knowhow how those responses are
towards pollution abatement and mitigation strategies especially when the world is recover-
ing from the pandemic. We do know that twitter responses have highlighted the problem of
environmental sustainability in supply chains. However, the severity of the issue and broad
discussion themes on environmental sustainability is currently missing when it comes to
understanding how social media is responding in the supply chain context. The objective
of our paper is a modest attempt to understand and compare how twitter responses have
emerged from pre-covid to post-covid times in the supply chain context thus shedding light
on how environmental sustainability can be achieved across different supply chain stages.
The outcome of our work would also lay foundation on the discussion on how organiza-
tions should move towards stricter pollution-controlled activities within their ﬁrms while
maintaining economic recovery from the global pandemic.
4 Data and methodology
4.1 Collection of data from Twitter
The objective of this research is to conduct an exploratory analysis on a curated set of
tweets emanating from the ofﬁcial Twitter accounts of organizations involved in supply chain
management. The analysis incorporates techniques such as frequency analysis, sentiment
analysis, graph theory, and topic modeling. The overall methodology is delineated into three
discrete stages: data acquisition, data preprocessing, and data analysis, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
The initial phase involves collecting tweets from organizations listed in the Forbes 2000
and Gartner’s Top 50 supply chain companies. Utilizing Twitter’s streaming APIs, we
achieved low-latency access to a global dataset that includes tweet text along with asso-
ciated metadata, such as posting time and geographical coordinates (when geolocation is
enabled). Speciﬁcally, we employed Twitter’s Standard Search API v1.1 to conduct sim-
ple queries against the indices of recent or popular tweets. This functionality approximates,
albeit not identically, the search feature available in Twitter’s mobile and web interfaces.
Data collection spans three distinct timelines: pre-COVID (January 2019 to January 2020),
during COVID (February 2020 to December 2021), and post-COVID (January 2022 to June
2022). The selected time periods for data collection—pre-COVID (January 2019 to January
2020), during COVID (February 2020 to December 2021), and post-COVID (January 2022
to June 2022)—are strategically chosen to offer a comprehensive understanding of the evolu-
tion of discourse on decarbonization within supply chains. The pre-COVID phase serves as
a baseline, representing industry discussion and sentiment prior to the global pandemic. The
during-COVID phase captures the immediate and lingering effects of the pandemic, a period
when supply chain resilience became a predominant focus, potentially overshadowing sus-
tainability goals. The post-COVID phase seeks to understand whether the discussion returns
to decarbonization as ﬁrms transition to recovery and potentially prepare for a more sustain-
able future. These timeframes are not only relevant for capturing shifts in industry priorities
123

588
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Fig. 1 Flowchart of the dataset preparation and analysis
and public sentiment but are also critical for providing actionable insights for policymakers
and supply chain ﬁrms.
Upon retrieval, tweets were ﬁltered based on speciﬁc keywords such as “emission,” “emis-
sions,” and “pollution.”
The rationale for this selective approach is multifold. First, these terms are directly asso-
ciated with the core subject of decarbonization, making them apt indicators for gauging
discourse in this context. Second, they are commonly used terminology in both layman and
scientiﬁc discussions surrounding environmental sustainability, thereby maximizing the like-
lihood of capturing a wide range of conversations and viewpoints. Third, these terms intersect
with critical aspects of supply chain operations, such as transportation and manufacturing
processes, that are signiﬁcant contributors to carbon emissions and pollution. By focusing
on these keywords, the study aims to extract meaningful and relevant data that can illumi-
nate how supply chain companies are publicly discussing, or perhaps notably not discussing,
crucial issues related to decarbonization.
A subset of the dataset, comprising 2,215,405 tweets, is elucidated in Table 3. Prior to any
analytical procedures, it is imperative to cleanse the dataset to eliminate noise and enhance
interpretability. Given that tweets often contain informal language, URLs, and emojis, a
"sanitized" version of the text was generated. This entailed the removal of hashtags, user
mentions, URLs, media, and symbols. To maintain purity of the data, retweets indicated by
“RT” and other extraneous symbols were also expunged. The remaining textual content was
converted to lowercase, and tweets not in English were translated using the TextBlob Python
module. In the analytical phase, sentiment analysis was executed on the cleansed dataset.
For this purpose, we employed the TextBlob package, which bases its sentiment analysis on
a predeﬁned lexicon. The package provides two metrics: polarity, ranging from -1.0 to 1.0,
and subjectivity, with a score between 0.0 and 1.0. Each tweet was assigned two sentiment
scores: one reliant solely on the textual content and another incorporating both text and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
589
emojis. Emojis were identiﬁed using a comprehensive Unicode list and were translated to
their ofﬁcial or commonly recognized names for accurate sentiment interpretation.
4.2 Descriptive analysis
Twitter data contain a great deal of information, such as tweets and metadata (e.g., user
information). The descriptive analysis focuses on descriptive data, such as the count of
tweets, likes, and retweets, the distribution of tweet types, and the number of hashtags.
The distinction is in the number of metrics. While a modest number of metrics (such as
sample size, response rate, and respondent proﬁle) are utilized for survey data, the richer
nature of Twitter data enables intelligence extraction by utilizing a huge number of metrics
on tweets, users, hashtags, and URLs, etc.
4.3 Content analysis
The nature of social media data is “unstructured” because it consists mostly of text. Therefore,
it is vital to utilize content analytics (CA), which refers to a wide range of natural language
processing (NLP) and text mining techniques, in order to extract intelligence from Web 2.0
(Chau & Xu, 2012). The text of a tweet is made of a short list of words, hashtags, URLs,
and other information. Intelligence gathering, therefore, requires careful consideration of
text cleansing and processing (e.g., “Hector, a Delivery Operations Manager, is determined
to drive environmental change at Amazon. Heâe™s proud to be part of the team working
to make zero-emission delivery a reality. See Hectorâe™s story: https://t.co/DSdhgdcXsb
https://t.co/go4FUgxWJ8”) contains not just text, but urls, trademark signs, hashtags, etc.).
Therefore, specialized text mining techniques, such as sentiment analysis, are necessary to
extract such opinions. Algorithms for text mining and machine learning are crucial compo-
nents of CA. Text mining turns unstructured texts (or documents) into formatted data (or
documents) using techniques such as tokenization, n-grams, stemming, and the removal of
stop words (extraneous words) (c.f.,Weiss et al., 2010). Using machine learning algorithms
such as clustering and association analysis, these modiﬁed texts can be utilized for text sum-
marization, keyword analysis, word frequency analysis, and text clustering. Despite the fact
that the presence of CA in supply chain research (Georgi et al., 2010; Seuring & Gold, 2012;
Vallet-Bellmunt et al., 2011), the approach has been manual or semi-manual, relying heavily
on human interpretations. Due to the huge data nature of Twitter data, CA in TA depends on
text-processing techniques and algorithms.
In CA, word analysis is the beginning point. It comprises frequency analysis of terms, doc-
ument summary, and grouping. In information retrieval, term frequency (TF) is commonly
employed. The combination of TF and n-gram enables the identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant terms
within documents. Overall, our studies aid in identifying debate themes and reveal distinct
Twitter usage based on emissions related tweets by supply chain’s organizations.These high-
lighted topics are valuable for document-level analysis (e.g., clustering) using unsupervised
machine learning methods.
Term Frequency (TF): The term frequency is a measure of how frequently a term occurs
in a document. It is calculated as follows:
T F(t, d)  (Number of times term t appears in document d)/
(T otal number of terms in document d)
123

590
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
where:
t is a term
d is a document
N-grams: N-grams are sequences of n words from a text. For example, the bigram "supply
chain"isanexampleofa2-g.N-gramsareusedtoidentifysigniﬁcanttermswithindocuments.
TF-IDF: TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency) is a weighting scheme
used to identify the importance of a term in a document. It is calculated as follows:
T F −I DF(t, d)  T F(t, d) ∗log(N/DF(t))
where
N is the total number of documents in the corpus.
DF(t) is the number of documents in the corpus that contain the term t.
Cosine Similarity: Cosine similarity is a measure of similarity between two vectors, typ-
ically used to compare the similarity between two documents. It is calculated as follows:
cosine_similarity(d1, d2)  (d1.d2)/(||d1||∗||d2||)
where
d1 and d2 are two document vectors.
. represents the dot product of the two vectors
||d1||and||d2||arethelengthsof thevectors
Overall, the use of frequency analysis of terms, including TF, n-grams, TF-IDF, and cosine
similarity, can help to identify signiﬁcant terms within documents and aid in the identiﬁcation
of themes and patterns within social media data.
4.3.1 Topic modelling
Theentitiesthatmakeupthetopicmodellingnotionare“words,”“documents,”and“corpora.”
As the basic unit of discrete data in a document, “word” is deﬁned as vocabulary items that are
indexed for each unique word in the document. “Document” is an arrangement of N words.
A corpus is a collection of M documents, and its plural form, corpora, is corpora. While
“subject” refers to the spread of a set vocabulary. Simply said, each document in the corpus
has its own proportion of topics mentioned based on the terms it includes. Topic modelling
is a prevalent technique for identifying hidden patterns or topics within a big corpus of text
data. Particularly effective for discovering and analysing the underlying subjects inside social
media data, such as tweets about supply chain ﬁrms and their emissions. Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) is a generative probabilistic model that represents a document as a mixture
of themes, where each topic is a probability distribution over a set of words. To do topic
modeling, we ﬁrst tokenized the tweets, removed stop words and other noise, and converted
the text to lower case. The LDA model was constructed using the Gensim Python module. The
model was trained on the whole corpus of tweets pertaining to emissions and supply chain
ﬁrms, and we tested with various numbers of subjects to determine the ideal conﬁguration.
After training the LDA model, we extracted the most representative terms for each topic
and labelled them based on their content. Then, we manually evaluated and analysed the
labelled topics to determine the data’s signiﬁcant themes and patterns. This strategy allowed
us to obtain a deeper grasp of the Twitter debate surrounding emissions and supply chain
ﬁrms and to select the most pertinent and signiﬁcant subjects for our research. Overall, topic
modelling proved to be a potent and effective technique for discovering hidden patterns and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
591
topics within the enormous corpus of social media data that we collected, and it provided
useful insights into the Twitter discourse around supply chain ﬁrms and their emissions.
4.3.2 Sentiment analysis using Naïve Bayes
Since Sentiment Analysis (SA) is a trending issue in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing
(NLP), there are numerous methods to determine the state of sentiment (positive or nega-
tive feeling) inside a text, paragraph, or the entire document. Sentiment Analysis follows a
speciﬁc approach that begins with the collection and identiﬁcation of data. Later, the nec-
essary features will be extracted in preparation for the following stage, which is sentiment
categorization. Ultimately, decision-making will occur at the phase of sentiment polarity
and subjectivity. Sentiment analysis typically employs machine learning and lexicon-based
methodologies (Medhat et al., 2014) to investigate the emotion contained within a docu-
ment. According to Textblob documentation (Loria, 2020), Textblob uses the Nave Bayes
(NB) classiﬁcation model (refer to Fig. 2). The NB classiﬁer was trained on NLTK (Natural
Language ToolKit) to determine the sentiment of aggregated tweets.
Figure 2 shows the hierarchy of Naive Bayes in sentiment analysis within the broader ﬁeld
of machine learning. Sentiment analysis involves the use of computational tools and tech-
niques to automatically classify text into different categories of sentiment, such as positive,
negative, or neutral. One of the subcategories within sentiment analysis is lexicon-based algo-
rithms, which use pre-deﬁned dictionaries of words and their associated sentiment scores to
classify text. Another subcategory is supervised learning, which involves training a machine
learning model on labeled data to classify new, unlabeled data. Unsupervised learning, on the
other hand, involves clustering or grouping data without any prior knowledge or labels. Prob-
abilistic classiﬁers are a common approach used in sentiment analysis and machine learning
more broadly. Naive Bayes is a type of probabilistic classiﬁer that assumes independence
between the features of the data. In the context of sentiment analysis, the features are the
words in the text, and Naive Bayes calculates the probability of a given text belonging to a
particular sentiment category based on the frequency of the words in that text. The hierarchy
in Fig. 2 suggests that Naive Bayes is one of the methods used within the broader category
of probabilistic classiﬁers for sentiment analysis.
NB is a probabilistic technique that uses Bayes’ theorem to determine sentiment distri-
bution over the data. However, NB reduces all text to a bag of words, which disregards the
placements of the words entirely.
P

label
f eatures

 P(label) ∗P( f eatures/label)
P( f eatures)
where P(label) represents the prior probability of a label, P(features/label) represents the
prior probability of a given feature set being classed as a label, and P(features) represents
Fig. 2 Naïve Bayes Hierarchy (Source: Manguri et al., 2020)
123

592
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
the prior probability of a given feature set happening. We chose this approach because it is
a well-established and widely used method for sentiment analysis (Alahmary & Al-Dossari,
2023; AminiMotlagh et al., 2022; Astuti et al., 2023), and it has been successfully applied
to similar datasets in previous research. Furthermore, we wanted to ensure the efﬁciency
and speed of the sentiment analysis process, given the large volume of tweets we collected.
Overall, the Naïve Bayes algorithm was a suitable choice for our research objectives, and
its use allowed us to efﬁciently and accurately analyze the sentiment of the tweets related to
emissions and supply chain companies.
4.3.3 Emotions in text
To analyse the emotions based on text in cleaned tweets, we resorted to a new package known
as text2emotions API to extract the emotions in the tweets.1 Since text2emotion is a new
technique, the extracted emotions were manually cross validated. In addition, we used the
VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner) lexicon, a sentiment analysis
tool, to determine the sentiments expressed in tweets and cross-validated the outputs of
text2emotion and VADER. The text2emotion with VADER’s output. The text2emotion API
generated several scores as follows

st, e f oreache ∈E

where E is a set of basic emotions which can be represented as:
E  {setof basicemotions}  {angry, f ear, happy, sad, surprise}
The emotion score for each set of emotion in set E is derived from the equation as follow:
Score_happyx, d  Happinessexpressedinalltweetspc, dc, pocf ortweet Xondayd


t∈Tx, dehappySt, e
where pc  pre-covid tweets.
dc  during covid tweets.
poc  post-covid tweets.
In a similar way, we calculated scores for anger, sad, surprise, and fear. The purpose of
analysing emotions in text is to gain a deeper understanding of the sentiment and attitudes
expressed in the tweets related to emissions and supply chain companies. By using both
the text2emotion API and VADER lexicon, we were able to cross-validate the emotions
extracted from the tweets and ensure the accuracy of our results. The emotion analysis
provides a complementary perspective to the sentiment analysis conducted using the Naïve
Bayes algorithm, allowing us to gain a more nuanced understanding of the emotional tone of
the tweets. Overall, the emotion analysis technique adds value to our research by providing
insights into the emotions expressed by users towards emissions and supply chain companies,
which can be useful for companies and policymakers in addressing issues related to emissions
and sustainability.
1 https://pypi.org/project/text2emotion/#description.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
593
5 Analysis and ﬁndings
5.1 Preliminary analysis
In this section, we present our ﬁndings. Table 1 shows the collection of tweets pre, during and
post-COVID. The timeline for pre-COVID is from Jan 2019-Jan 2020 giving us 1,284,897
tweets, for during the COVID period, from Feb 2020-Dec 2021 giving us 815,367 tweets
and post-COVID timeline is Jan 2022-June 2022 providing us with 115,141 tweets.
The total sample size is 2,215,678 tweets. In the next step, we ﬁltered out the tweets by
using keywords; “Emission”, “Emissions”, and “Pollution”. Now our sample size reduced
to 3122 tweets out of our initial sample of 2,215,678 tweets. Table 2 shows the breakup of
focussed tweets pre, during and post-COVID.
In Table 3, we presented the preliminary analysis of replies, retweets, likes and quotes
on tweets for three phases of COVID. Twitter offers users a number of interaction functions
in the current platform version (2021) so they can engage with tweets on their own. The
four primary forms of engagement functionalities—like, retweet, quote tweet, and reply.
These interaction strategies have various inputs and results. While quoting and commenting
are considerably more informational and conversational because they allow users to convey
unique ideas and content, liking and retweeting are relatively basic and easy engagement
behaviours because they both lack additional original content. Regarding output, aside from
liking, the other three forms of engagement behaviours (i.e., retweets, quote tweets, and
replies) might result in new tweets that are tallied toward a user’s overall number of tweets
posted (Fang et al., 2022).
In pre and during COVID timelines, the statistics related to replies, retweets, liked and
quotes are similar, for e.g., Std. Dev of replies in pre-COVID is 24.90, and Std. Dev of replies
during COVID is 28.36. The mean of retweets is 87.53, 90.24 and 34.41 for replies on tweets
for pre, during and post-COVID respectively.
Table 1 Collection of data
Period
Timeline
Total Tweets
Pre-COVID
Jan’2019–Jan’2020
1,284,897 tweets
COVID
Feb’2020–Dec’2021
815,367 tweets
Post COVID
Jan’2022–June’2022
115,141 tweets
*Total Companies: -73
Table 2 Focussed tweets
Pre-COVID
COVID
Post COVID
Emission
797
683
73
Emissions
683
567
44
Pollution
186
71
18
Total
1666
1321
135
123

594
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Table 3 Preliminary analysis
Count of tweets
Mean
Std. Dev
Min
Max
Pre-COVID- Jan-2019–Jan-2020
Replies on Tweets
1666
6.48
24.90
0
504
Retweet on Tweets
1666
23.93
87.53
0
1560
Likes on Tweets
1666
240.71
1184.72
0
17,305
Quote on Tweets
1666
2.73
11.27
0
260
COVID- Feb-2020–Dec-2021
Replies on Tweets
1321
10.83
28.36
0
504
Retweet on Tweets
1321
32.88
90.24
0
1320
Likes on Tweets
1321
334.75
1264.75
0
17,288
Quote on Tweets
1321
3.75
10.22
0
114
Post-COVID- Jan-2022–June-2022
Replies on Tweets
135
13.33
23.07
0
159
Retweet on Tweets
135
22.17
34.41
0
145
Likes on Tweets
135
163.95
281.02
0
1061
Quote on Tweets
135
3.60
9.41
0
77
5.2 Content analysis
Figures 3, 4 and 5 shows the textual analysis of tweets for pre-, during and post-COVID
tweets respectively. Figure 3 delineates the frequency distribution of pivotal phrases in tweets
collected from the pre-COVID-19 timeline. Displayed on the x-axis are the speciﬁc terms
under analysis, while the y-axis illustrates their corresponding frequency within the corpus.
Intriguingly, the term ’emissions’ stands out with a frequency exceeding 1,400 instances,
highlighting its centrality in supply chain discussions related to decarbonization. The term
’CO,’ cited around 600 times, suggests a focus on carbon monoxide or carbon-related topics.
The prominence of ’consumption’ and ’fuel,’ with frequencies of approximately 550 and
430 respectively, possibly indicates concerns related to energy usage and its environmental
implications. Lastly, the term ’greenhouse’ occurs less frequently, with around 200 mentions,
signaling that it might not be as primary a focus in pre-COVID discussions within supply
chain contexts. The distribution of these terms’ sheds light on what aspects of decarboniza-
tion were most discussed before the onset of the pandemic, thereby serving as a baseline
for comparison with subsequent periods. Figure 4 provides a detailed analysis of phrase
frequency for tweets during the COVID-19 timeline. While the general pattern is congruent
with that observed in Fig. 3, there are some noteworthy deviations. For instance, the term
"consumption" ascends to 5th place in frequency rankings, up from its 6th place standing in
the pre-COVID-19 data. This shift could be indicative of growing awareness or concern about
sustainable consumption practices during the pandemic. Interestingly, the term "greenhouse"
declines in prominence, moving to the second-to-last position with approximately 180 men-
tions. This reduced frequency may suggest that greenhouse-related topics received lesser
attention during the pandemic. Moreover, the term "carbon" gains traction, registering 300
mentions, a trend that could reﬂect increased focus on carbon management strategies amid
the crisis.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
595
Fig. 3 Phrases pre-COVID Tweets
Fig. 4 Phrases COVID Tweets
123

596
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Fig. 5 Phrases post-COVID Tweets
Figures 6, 7 and 8 displays the word-cloud for the tweets for all the three phases of
COVID-19.
Using a corpus of tweet tokens, dominating keywords can reveal the most popular subjects
mentioned by users. A graphic representation of the frequency of an n-count of terms is called
a word cloud. In contrast, smaller words are linked to a lower frequency. Bolder and bigger
terms in a word cloud reﬂect keywords that are used more frequently by users. In these word
-cloud, the more a speciﬁc word appears in a tweet, the bigger and bolder it appears in the
word-cloud. During the phase of COVID, and post-COVID, the emission word is dominant
followed by CO (carbon dioxide). In pre and during COVID timelines, the fuel consumption
word also dominating the landscape of tweets. In pre-COVID and during COVID’s word
cloud, the dominant keywords are energy consumption, plastic pollution, gas emissions,
zero emissions, air pollution, natural gas, whereas as post-COVID word cloud, help, global,
electric, greenhouse gas, carbon emissions are the dominant keywords. In Figs. 9, 10, and 11,
we presented the polarity analysis of tweets for three phases. In all three phases, the positive
sentiment dominating the negative sentiments.
In Fig. 6, the words "emission" and "consumption" are the most prominent words in the
word cloud, indicating that these are the most common topics discussed by the supply chain
companies in their pre-COVID-19 tweets. The words "zero emission" and "energy consump-
tion" are also included in the word cloud, suggesting that supply chain companies were
already discussing and promoting zero-emission technologies and practices even before the
COVID-19 pandemic. Finally, the words "climate change" and "combined" further empha-
size the environmental concerns and efforts being discussed by these companies even prior to
the pandemic. Overall, the word cloud for pre-COVID-19 tweets indicates that supply chain
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
597
Fig. 6 Word cloud pre-COVID tweets
Fig. 7 Word cloud COVID tweets
123

598
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Fig. 8 Word cloud post-COVID tweets
Fig. 9 Polarity of pre-COVID tweets
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
599
Fig. 10 Polarity of COVID-19 tweets
Fig. 11 Polarity of post-COVID tweets
123

600
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
companies were already aware of the need for emission reduction and energy efﬁciency in
their operations.
Figure 7 represents a word cloud generated from the tweets collected during the COVID-
19 timeline, which were ﬁltered on the basis of keywords mentioned in methodology. The
word cloud provides a visual representation of the most frequently occurring words in the
tweets, with the size of each word indicating its relative frequency in the dataset. As we can
see, the word cloud includes a variety of keywords related to emissions and sustainability,
such as emission, sustainable, carbon neutral, global, and carbon market. This suggests that
supply chain companies were actively discussing and promoting sustainable practices during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, the presence of words such as km and fuel suggest
that companies were also discussing the reduction of fuel consumption and emissions through
the use of more sustainable transportation methods. Overall, this word cloud provides insight
into the topics that were most commonly discussed on Twitter by supply chain companies
during the COVID-19 pandemic related to emissions, sustainability, and reducing carbon
footprint.
Figure 8 presents the word cloud generated for the post-COVID-19 tweets collected from
supply chain companies, after ﬁltering them based on the presence of keywords "emission",
"emissions", and "pollution". A word cloud is a visualization tool that displays the most
frequently used words in a text corpus, with the size of each word indicating its frequency
of occurrence. In this word cloud, we can observe that the most prominent words are "con-
sumption", "electric", "emission", "greenhouse", "carbon", "gas", "co", and "global". These
words are indicative of the topics and themes that were most commonly discussed in the post-
COVID-19 tweets related to emissions and pollution by the supply chain companies. The
presence of words like "consumption" and "electric" suggests that there is an increasing focus
on reducing emissions through the adoption of electric vehicles and other forms of sustain-
able transportation. The words "emission", "greenhouse", "carbon", and "gas" indicate that
the companies are actively discussing ways to reduce their carbon footprint and greenhouse
gas emissions. Furthermore, the appearance of the word "global" in the word cloud indicates
that supply chain companies are acknowledging the global impact of their operations and
are taking steps to mitigate their environmental impact. Overall, this word cloud provides an
insight into the topics and themes being discussed by supply chain companies in relation to
emissions and pollution in the post-COVID-19 era.
The word cloud for pre-COVID tweets shows prominent words such as "emission,"
"consumption," and "climate change," indicating the companies’ concern for environmental
sustainability before the pandemic. The word cloud for COVID tweets highlights words such
as "sustainable," "carbon–neutral," and "reduce," which suggests the companies’ focus on
reducing emissions during the pandemic, likely driven by societal and economic pressures.
Finally, the word cloud for post-COVID tweets shows a shift towards "electric" and "zero
emission," indicating the companies’ focus on transitioning to more sustainable and cleaner
energy sources. Overall, these word clouds reveal the changing priorities of supply chain
companies over time, reﬂecting their response to environmental and social pressures.
Figure 9 shows polarity analysis of pre-COVID tweets related to emissions and supply
chain companies. The ﬁgure shows that there were 1500 tweets with a positive polarity and
150 tweets with a negative polarity. Polarity analysis is a common method used in sentiment
analysis to determine the overall positive or negative sentiment of a given text. In this case,
the polarity analysis indicates that the majority of pre-COVID tweets related to emissions
and supply chain companies were positive in sentiment, with only a small minority being
negative. This information can be useful in understanding the general sentiment and attitudes
of users towards emissions and supply chain companies before the COVID-19 pandemic.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
601
Fig. 12 Pre-COVID emotion analysis of tweets
Furthermore, the results of the polarity analysis may also suggest that pre-COVID users
were generally supportive of efforts related to emissions reduction and sustainability within
the supply chain industry. The relatively low number of negative tweets may also indicate
that there was less public scrutiny or negative attention given to supply chain companies
regarding their emissions practices prior to the pandemic.
We also plotted the results of emotion analysis of tweets for all three phases by using
a text2Emotion package in python. It processes any textual material, detects the emotion it
contains, and outputs the results as a dictionary in form of ﬁve basic emotion categories such
as Angry, Surprise, Sad, Happy and Fear. Figures 12, 13 and 14 shows the ﬁve emotions
related to the tweets. In all three phases, fear is the dominant emotion followed by happy.
Based on the analysis presented in Fig. 12, it appears that the majority of tweets related
to emissions and supply chain companies before the COVID-19 pandemic were categorized
as "fear" with approximately 800 tweets falling into this category. "Happy" was the second
most frequent emotion with approximately 400 tweets, followed by "surprise" with around
200 tweets. "Sad" and "angry" were the least common emotions, each with around 100
tweets. These results can provide insight into the general emotional tone of tweets related
to emissions and supply chain companies before the COVID-19 pandemic. Nonetheless, the
results suggest that fear and happiness were the predominant emotions expressed in tweets
related to emissions and supply chain companies before the COVID-19 pandemic.
Similarly, Fig. 13 shows emotion analysis of tweets during the COVID-19 pandemic
related to emissions and supply chain companies. The majority of tweets categorized under
this analysis were classiﬁed as "fear," with approximately 520 tweets falling under this
category. "Happy" was the second most frequent emotion expressed in tweets, with around
340 tweets, followed by "surprise" with approximately 180 tweets. "Sad" and "angry" were
the least common emotions, each with approximately 140 tweets. These results suggest that,
during the COVID-19 pandemic, fear continued to be the predominant emotion expressed in
123

602
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Fig. 13 COVID emotion analysis of tweets
Fig. 14 Post COVID emotion analysis of tweets
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
603
tweets related to emissions and supply chain companies. However, it is interesting to note
that the number of tweets expressing "happy" emotions decreased signiﬁcantly compared
to the pre-COVID-19 period. Overall, this analysis highlights the potential impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the emotional tone of tweets related to emissions and supply chain
companies.
Based on the analysis presented in Fig. 14, it appears that the emotional tone of tweets
related to emissions and supply chain companies has shifted after the COVID-19 pandemic.
The results indicate that "fear" remains the most common emotion, but with a signiﬁcantly
lower count of only 36 tweets. "Happy" is the second most frequent emotion with 25 tweets,
followed by "surprise" with around 20 tweets. "Angry" and "sad" were the least common
emotions, each with around 21 and 15 tweets, respectively. These results suggest that the
emotional tone of tweets related to emissions and supply chain companies has shifted to a
more positive direction after the COVID-19 pandemic, with a lower emphasis on negative
emotions such as fear and anger.
In Figs. 15, 16, and 17, we plotted the subjectivity and polarity scores through a scatter
plot for all the phases. The classiﬁcation of sentences as subjective judgments or objective
facts is subjectivity analysis. Therefore, using subjectivity analysis, we separate subjective
statements from objective sentences for a set of messages in a dataset. Our dataset has
been subjectivity-analysed using Python TextBlob for Natural Language Processing (NLP).
Python TextBlob, a well-known NLP programme that is free to use, can be employed to do out
text subjectivity analysis. The textblob library, which employs a built-in model to determine
the subjectivity value, was used to calculate the subjectivity of each tweet. The range of
Fig. 15 Scatter plot of subjectivity and polarity pre-COVID
123

604
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Fig. 16 Scatter plot of subjectivity and polarity COVID
subjectivity values are shown in Table 1. An objective text is indicated by a number close to
0, whereas a highly subjective text is indicated by a value close to 1. After determining if a
statement is opinionated or not through subjectivity analysis, we analyse the text for polarity
to determine whether it communicates a positive or negative opinion. The goal of polarity
analysis is to ascertain the text writer’s emotional stance toward the subject being discussed.
As Twitter becomes more and more popular as a communication tool, interest in using its data
to gauge public sentiment toward a subject or well-known ﬁgures has also increased. We can
get that knowledge by quantifying the sentiment of text using polarity analysis. Thus, the text
can be categorised as either negative, positive, or neutral. There are numerous technologies
available for brief text sentiment analysis. In all the phases of COVID, we can observe a
positive liner relationship between subjectivity and polarity of the tweets.
Tables 4, 5 and 6 show the ten most prevalent topics in our sample dataset for all the three
phases. We also plotted the frequency of these topics by count for all three phases in Figs. 18,
19 and 20. Topic modelling is an unsupervised classiﬁcation of documents, akin to clustering
of numerical data. We used Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) technique. It maximises the
likelihood that a word belongs to a given topic. It is predicated on the idea that a corpus of
text can be represented by a distribution of topics, with each subject being characterised by a
distribution of words. The probability of each word’s appearance in a document is then used
to assign it to a topic, creating a topic mixture for the content. This method has been used to
analyse online support group posts to ﬁnd cogent issues in social science contexts. In Table 4,
which show the topics for pre-COVID phases, the top topics with keywords are emissions,
carbon, progress at place 0, the topic 2 comprises of words such as emissions, gas, carbon,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
605
Fig. 17 Scatter plot of subjectivity and polarity post-COVID
Table 4 Topic modelling pre-COVID tweets
Pre-COVID Focused Tweets
Topic S.No
Topic
0
Emissions zero carbon net committed nestl progress ll
1
Emissions gas carbon reducing greenhouse zero new co
2
Emissions gas reduces ups learn natural net carbon
3
km combined bmw consumption fuel emissions co xdrive
4
km combined co emissions kwh consumption fuel energy
5
Emissions today pollution work air sustainability year ﬁnd
6
Emissions learn reducing goals metric work tons recently
7
Emissions reduce use co greenhouse environmental plastics sustainability
8
Plastic emission pollution free help waste option problem
9
Waste plastic pollution tackling hi priority urgent working
123

606
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Table 5 COVID topic modelling
COVID Focused Tweets
Topic S.No
Topic
0
Emissions reduce carbon greenhouse help gas
impact co
1
Emissions zero carbon net climate global change
read
2
km combined emissions co consumption fuel
bmw coup
3
3 emissions carbon emission zero gas
greenhouse new fuel
4
Emissions zero learn net hybrid reduce co change
5
km wltp combined consumption emissions co
weighted fuel
6
Emissions zero net learn gas greenhouse climate
carbon
7
km emissions combined consumption pollution
plastic co kwh
8
Emissions zero electric climate remission rail
trucks goal
9
Emissions carbon reduce amp energy fuel gas
reducing
Table 6 Post-COVID topic
modelling
Post- COVID Focused Tweets
Topic S.No
Topic
0
Ups newsletter emissions subscribe learn largest
purchase recently
1
Emissions gas zero natural net learn reduce climate
2
km combined bmw consumption emissions co fuel
xdrive
3
Emissions co km kombiniert mercedes vehicles
electric benz
4
Emissions reduce gas new renewable greenhouse
free ground
5
Emissions ghg rail reduces freight carbon zero
million
6
Emissions co learn carbon zero reduction read
chain
7
Emissions carbon learn reducing sustainable amp
committed reduce
8
Emissions carbon help new zero co address energy
9
Plastic pollution tackling urgent waste priority hi
packaging
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
607
Fig. 18 Pre-COVID topics frequency
Fig. 19 COVID topic frequency
123

608
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Fig. 20 Post-COVID topic frequency
reducing, greenhouse topped with count of more than 100 tweets during pre-COVID in July
2019. The frequency of rest of the topics varied from frequency of 40 to 20.
During COVID phase, topic 2 dominates with a frequency of 40 tweets at the start of
October 2020 followed by 30 tweets at the end of October 2020. From Jan 2021 to April
2021, topic 1 with keywords like emissions, subscriber, learn, largest started to gain traction
with a frequency of 24 tweets in Jan 2021 and reaches to 28 tweets during April 2021.
Table 6 show the post-COVID topic modelling with topic 2 dominating till the end of
our sample period with keywords such as combined, consumption, fuel, emissions followed
topic 1 with keywords such as newsletter, emission, subscribe, purchase etc.
6 Discussion and conclusion
This study makes a modest attempt to understand key discussions concerning decarboniza-
tion in supply chain through the lens of twitter data. By sourcing tweets from ﬁrms carefully
selected Forbes 2000 companies and Gartner Top 50 supply chain companies, we carried out
a step-by-step procedure to address our research questions with COVID-19 as the background
context since reducing pollution seems to be secondary towards resilience in the recovery
phase of the pandemic. With more than 22,00,000 tweets spanning more than three years, we
carried out our preliminary analysis to understand how decarbonization is discussed during
pandemic times. Surprisingly, although predictable, tweets concerning pollution and related
keywords such as emissions was considerably low in proportion compared to the master list of
tweets that we gathered. A careful reﬂection of the proportion points out that decarbonization
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
609
related discussions accounted for roughly 0.13% during pre-pandemic, 0.16% during pan-
demic and 0.11% post pandemic. This is counter-intuitive as common understanding suggest
that pollution levels decreased during pandemic times. Although the proportion is too low to
make an impact, it is unfortunate and therefore signiﬁcant for ﬁrms to focus more towards
emissions and pollution if nations as a whole wish to aim for carbon neutrality by 2050.
Moving ahead, we carried out our content analysis across each timeline. One of encouraging
signs of decarbonization is that while we analysed phrases across timelines, we found that the
count of words such as “consumption” and “fuel” has gone up in terms of ranking from pre-
covid to post covid times. Since our reﬁned sample only contains tweets involving pollution
and emissions, discussion on consumption and fuel certainly gives us a positive indication
towards sustainable consumption and the need for cleaner fuels across supply chains. Even
if we refer to the word cloud, we ﬁnd emphasis on greenhouse gas emissions, fuel consump-
tion, net zero, climate change among others. However, since the proportion regarding supply
chain issues and emissions are very low, overall importance of such keywords remains ques-
tionable at the ﬁrm level. Further, with twitter being so proactive on important discussions
and announcement, top supply chain ﬁrms should be more vocal towards participating in
discussions concerning decarbonization or at least treat such social media platforms as a
mode of advertisement towards their efforts towards environmental sustainability. Moving
towards emotion analysis, the inclination towards “fear” emotion raises important questions
concerning decarbonization or otherwise especially during pre-covid times. For instance, if
the emotion on tweets concerning emissions and pollution is more towards fear across time-
lines, then the question arises on the reasons why such leading supply chain players are not
participating in pollution mitigating strategies in social media platforms such as Twitter. We
believe that just reporting such initiatives in sustainability reports will neither inﬂuence other
actors within the supply chain nor help tweet emotions to move from “fear” to other positive
emotions such as “happy” or “surprise”. The topic modelling results identiﬁed important
topics leading to decarbonization efforts. For instance, plastic pollution mitigation efforts,
use of renewable energy use in supply chains, greenhouse gas emissions in freight transport
etc. are all critical issues concerning greening in supply chains.
7 Research implications
We posit certain key implications to research concerning twitter, supply chain and decar-
bonization. We extend the discussion of Chae (2015) concerning supply chain issues and
twitter data and explain how there is a need to focus on speciﬁc environmental challenges
within supply chains in addition to discussing environmental standards. Unfortunately, while
Chae (2015) emphasis the need for stakeholder engagement and communication, our anal-
ysis did not ﬁnd any focused involvement of stakeholder engagement initiatives towards
decarbonization. Our results, however, point out that emission related discussion remains
a fear emotion across pandemic timelines and therefore the impact of pandemic does not
alter the importance of emission concerns within supply chain. This points out the relevance
of Sharma et al. (2020) involving twitter data on the deployment of technology in not only
improving supply chain resilience but also to reduce use of fuels that are causing harm to
the decarbonization efforts. Further, linking to the discussion on environmental pollution and
COVID-19 (Marwah & Agrawala, 2022; Keshtkar et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2021), we neither
found evidence of decarbonization efforts in the post pandemic recovery phase nor found any
123

610
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
linkages on the discussion on pollution towards potential strategies towards reducing pollu-
tion in the long run. This may be because of two reasons: First, due to surge of economic
activity in the recovery stage, ﬁrms felt the need to discuss the challenges of the recovery
phase rather than focus on the increase in pollution levels due to increase in business activities.
Second, ﬁrms were more focused towards making supply chain more resilient in the wake of
similar pandemic in near future. However, this remains a concern for leading supply chain
ﬁrms and environmentalists on the use and engagement of social media platforms towards
highlighting the importance of decarbonization activities at various stages within the supply
chain.
7.1 Managerial and policy implications
The managerial implications for supply chain decarbonization are numerous and varied, as
the process of reducing a company’s carbon footprint can involve changes across multiple
areas of the organization. Some of the key managerial implications include: Commitment
from top management: The commitment of senior management is critical to achieving sup-
ply chain decarbonization goals. Managers must be willing to invest resources, set targets,
and make decisions that prioritize sustainability. Collaboration with suppliers: Supply chain
decarbonization is often a collaborative effort involving multiple parties, including sup-
pliers. Managers need to work with their suppliers to encourage sustainable practices and
identify areas where emissions can be reduced. Integration of sustainability into procurement
processes: Managers should consider sustainability factors when making procurement deci-
sions, including selecting suppliers with strong environmental performance and considering
the environmental impact of materials and products. Data collection and analysis: Effective
supply chain decarbonization requires accurate and reliable data on emissions and other envi-
ronmental impacts. Managers need to establish systems for collecting and analysing this data
to inform decision-making and track progress towards sustainability goals. Communication
and transparency: Managers should communicate their supply chain decarbonization efforts
to stakeholders, including customers, investors, and employees. This communication can
build support for sustainability initiatives and demonstrate the company’s commitment to
reducing its environmental impact. Overall, the managerial implications of supply chain
decarbonization require a holistic approach to sustainability, with a focus on collabora-
tion, data analysis, and effective communication. By taking these steps, managers can make
progress towards reducing their company’s carbon footprint while maintaining operational
efﬁciency and meeting customer needs.
Overall, the future of decarbonization policies will likely involve a comprehensive and
integrated approach that addresses various sectors of the economy and considers social, eco-
nomic, and environmental factors. As the urgency of addressing climate change continues to
grow, governments and stakeholders will need to work collaboratively to ensure a sustainable
and low-carbon future. The commitment of political leaders and governments to prioritize
decarbonization will have a signiﬁcant impact on the pace and effectiveness of policy imple-
mentation. Public awareness and support for decarbonization will inﬂuence policy decisions.
Governments may focus on educating the public about the beneﬁts of sustainable living and
encouraging behavioural changes that reduce carbon footprints. Policies promoting circu-
lar economy principles, which emphasize reducing, reusing, and recycling resources, can
contribute to lower carbon emissions. Climate change is a global issue, and international col-
laboration is crucial. Agreements like the Paris Agreement provide a framework for countries
to work together to limit global warming. Continued efforts to strengthen and implement such
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
611
agreements will be important. Continued investment in research and innovation is essential
to discover new technologies and strategies for decarbonization.
7.2 Limitations and future scope
Our paper has several limitations which allows other researchers for further extension. First,
since it was a tweets-based study, our results do not reﬂect the potential factors behind the out-
come. For instance, individual companies have different approaches to emission mitigation
and respective carbonization issues may be unique to a certain ﬁrm or industry. The tweets in
our sample do not effectively reﬂect what are those factors or steps towards decarbonization
within the industry or ﬁrm. Future research could speciﬁcally conduct sector speciﬁc work
on decarbonization and ascertain how carbon emissions was better managed while ﬁrms
recovered from the global pandemic. Second, unlike interview-based transcripts, tweets did
not provide sufﬁcient content on the critical issues leading to decarbonization. As a result,
content analysis by coding broad themes was not possible in this work. Based on sector
speciﬁc sentiments, broad themes could be generated about the issues concerning decar-
bonization by conducting interviews of top management professionals across geographies
within a speciﬁc sector. This could complement our earlier recommendation for future work.
The discussion is expected to bring in competing aspects of technology, cost, innovation,
emissions in the backdrop towards the need for more resilient supply chains. Third, certain
observation and results remain unclear. For instance, what could be the reasons fear emotions
remained dominant across timelines especially pre-covid times. Since, our sample reﬂects
emissions and pollution, it has to be further studies whether supply chains, irrespective of the
global pandemic, are sceptical towards their decarbonization efforts and whether different
stakeholders believe such efforts are in the right direction or not.
Funding Open access funding provided by Széchenyi István University (SZE).
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Alahmary, R., & Al-Dossari, H. (2023). A semiautomatic annotation approach for sentiment analysis. Journal
of Information Science, 49(2), 398–410. https://doi.org/10.1177/01655515211006594
AminiMotlagh, M., Shahhoseini, H., & Fatehi, N. (2022). A reliable sentiment analysis for classiﬁcation of
tweets in social networks. Social Network Analysis and Mining, 13(1), 7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13278-
022-00998-2
Appiah, M., Li, M., Naeem, M. A., & Karim, S. (2023). Greening the globe: Uncovering the impact of envi-
ronmental policy, renewable energy, and innovation on ecological footprint. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 192, 122561.
Astuti, I. F., Widagdo, P. P., Tanro, M. L. R., Cahyadi, D., & Suntara, A. A. (2023). Sentiment analysis on land
and forest ﬁre management in Twitter using Naïve Bayes method. AIP Conference Proceedings. https://
doi.org/10.1063/5.0110588
123

612
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
Chae, B. K. (2015). Insights from hashtag# supply chain and Twitter Analytics: Considering Twitter and
Twitter data for supply chain practice and research. International Journal of Production Economics, 165,
247–259.
Chau, M., & Xu, J. (2012). Business intelligence in blogs: Understanding consumer interactions and commu-
nities. MIS Quarterly, 36(4), 1189–1216. https://doi.org/10.2307/41703504
Chon, M. G., & Kim, S. (2022). Dealing with the COVID-19 crisis: Theoretical application of social media
analytics in government crisis management. Public Relations Review, 48(3), 102201.
Chung, S. H., Weaver, R. D., & Friesz, T. L. (2013). Strategic response to pollution taxes in supply chain
networks: Dynamic, spatial, and organizational dimensions. European Journal of Operational Research,
231(2), 314–327.
Dai, R., Zhang, J., & Tang, W. (2017). Cartelization or Cost-sharing? Comparison of cooperation modes in a
green supply chain. Journal of Cleaner Production, 156, 159–173.
Delmas, M. A., & Burbano, V. C. (2011). The drivers of greenwashing. California Management Review, 54(1),
64–87.
Deloitte (2021). What is decarbonisation? The importance of decarbonisation explained. Accessed on August
30, 2022. Retrieved from https://www2.deloitte.com/nl/nl/pages/energy-resources-industrials/articles/
what-is-decarbonisation.html
Dutheil, F., Baker, J. S., & Navel, V. (2021). Air pollution in post-COVID-19 world: The ﬁnal countdown of
modern civilization? Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 28(33), 46079–46081.
El Ouardighi, F., Sim, J. E., & Kim, B. (2016). Pollution accumulation and abatement policy in a supply chain.
European Journal of Operational Research, 248(3), 982–996.
Ernst, & Young (2022). How Europe’s post-COVID-19 economy and environment can both prosper. Accessed
on August 30, 2022. Retrieved from https://www.ey.com/en_gl/eu-institutions/how-europe-s-post-covid-
19-economy-and-environment-can-both-prosper
Feng, Y., Lai, K. H., & Zhu, Q. (2022). Green supply chain innovation: Emergence, adoption, and challenges.
International Journal of Production Economics, 248, 108497.
Georgi, C., Darkow, I. L., & Kotzab, H. (2010). The intellectual foundation of the journal of business logistics
and its evolution between 1978 and 2007. Journal of Business Logistics, 31(2), 63–109. https://doi.org/
10.1002/j.2158-1592.2010.tb00143.x
Janjua, N. K., Nawaz, F., & Prior, D. D. (2021). A fuzzy supply chain risk assessment approach using real-time
disruption event data from Twitter. Enterprise Information Systems, 17, 1959652.
Kaplan, A. M., & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of Social
Media. Business Horizons, 53(1), 59–68.
Karim, S., Naeem, M. A., Tiwari, A. K., & Ashraf, S. (2023). Examining the avenues of sustainability in
resources and digital blockchains backed currencies: evidence from energy metals and cryptocurren-
cies. Annals of Operations Research, 1–18.
Kephart, J. L., Avila-Palencia, I., Bilal, U., Gouveia, N., Caiaffa, W. T., & Diez Roux, A. V. (2021). COVID-19,
ambient air pollution, and environmental health inequities in Latin American cities. Journal of Urban
Health, 98(3), 428–432.
Keshtkar, M., Heidari, H., Moazzeni, N., & Azadi, H. (2022). Analysis of changes in air pollution quality and
impact of COVID-19 on environmental health in Iran: Application of interpolation models and spatial
autocorrelation. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 29(25), 38505–38526.
Kouhizadeh, M., & Sarkis, J. (2018). Blockchain practices, potentials, and perspectives in greening supply
chains. Sustainability, 10(10), 3652.
KPMG (2021). The decarbonisation journey: Five pillars to achieving net zero. Accessed on August 30, 2022.
Retrieved from https://home.kpmg/ua/en/home/insights/2021/09/ﬁve-pillars-of-net-zero.html
Kraines, S. (2002). Pollution and cost in the coke-making supply chain in Shanxi province, China: Applying
an integrated system model to siting and transportation trade-offs. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 6(3–4),
161–184.
Loria, S. (2020). TextBlob: Simpliﬁed text processing. Machine Learning Research, 3, 993–1022.
Manguri, K. H., Ramadhan, R. N., & Amin, P. R. M. (2020). Twitter sentiment analysis on worldwide COVID-
19 outbreaks. Kurdistan Journal of Applied Research. https://doi.org/10.24017/covid.8
Marwah, M., & Agrawala, P. K. (2022). COVID-19 lockdown and environmental pollution: An Indian multi-
state investigation. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 194(2), 1–15.
Medhat, W., Hassan, A., & Korashy, H. (2014). Sentiment analysis algorithms and applications: A survey. Ain
Shams Engineering Journal, 5(4), 1093–1113.
Meinshausen, M., Lewis, J., McGlade, C., Gütschow, J., Nicholls, Z., Burdon, R., & Hackmann, B. (2022).
Realization of Paris Agreement pledges may limit warming just below 2° C. Nature, 604(7905), 304–309.
Mishra, N., & Singh, A. (2018). Use of twitter data for waste minimisation in beef supply chain. Annals of
Operations Research, 270(1), 337–359.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 359:581–613
613
Mostafa, M. K., Gamal, G., & Waﬁq, A. (2021). The impact of COVID 19 on air pollution levels and other
environmental indicators-A case study of Egypt. Journal of Environmental Management, 277, 111496.
Naeem, M. A., Karim, S., Yarovaya, L., & Lucey, B. M. (2023). COVID-induced sentiment and the intraday
volatility spillovers between energy and other ETFs. Energy Economics, 122, 106677.
Niu, B., Shen, Z., & Xie, F. (2021). The value of blockchain and agricultural supply chain parties’ participation
confronting random bacteria pollution. Journal of Cleaner Production, 319, 128579.
Rathore, A. K., Kar, A. K., & Ilavarasan, P. V. (2017). Social media analytics: Literature review and directions
for future research. Decision Analysis, 14(4), 229–249.
Razzaq, A., Sharif, A., Aziz, N., Irfan, M., & Jermsittiparsert, K. (2020). Asymmetric link between envi-
ronmental pollution and COVID-19 in the top ten affected states of US: A novel estimations from
quantile-on-quantile approach. Environmental Research, 191, 110189.
Schmidt, C. G., Wuttke, D. A., Ball, G. P., & Heese, H. S. (2020). Does social media elevate supply chain
importance? An empirical examination of supply chain glitches, Twitter reactions, and stock market
returns. Journal of Operations Management, 66(6), 646–669.
Seuring, S., & Gold, S. (2012). Conducting content-analysis based literature reviews in supply chain manage-
ment. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 17(5), 544–555. https://doi.org/10.1108/13
598541211258609
Sharma, A., Adhikary, A., & Borah, S. B. (2020). Covid-19′ s impact on supply chain decisions: Strategic
insights from NASDAQ 100 ﬁrms using Twitter data. Journal of Business Research, 117, 443–449.
Sim, J., & Kim, B. (2021). Regulatory versus consumer pressure and retailer responsibility for upstream
pollution in a supply chain. Omega, 101, 102250.
Tinguely, P., Shrestha, Y. R., & Von Krogh, G. (2020). How does your labor force react to COVID-19?
Employing social media analytics for preemptive decision making. California Management Review.
Vallet-Bellmunt, T., Martínez-Fernández, M. T., & Capó-Vicedo, J. (2011). Supply chain management: A mul-
tidisciplinary content analysis of vertical relations between companies, 1997–2006. Industrial Marketing
Management, 40(8), 1347–1367. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2011.03.002
Wang, G., Ding, P., Chen, H., & Mu, J. (2020). Green fresh product cost sharing contracts considering
freshness-keeping effort. Soft Computing, 24(4), 2671–2691.
Wang, X., Sethi, S. P., & Chang, S. (2022). Pollution abatement using cap-and-trade in a dynamic supply
chain and its coordination. Transportation Research Part e: Logistics and Transportation Review, 158,
102592.
Weiss, S. M., Indurkhya, N., Zhang, T., & Damerau, F. (2010). Text mining: predictive methods for analyzing
unstructured information. Springer Science & Business Media.
Wu, X., Tian, Z., & Guo, J. (2022). A review of the theoretical research and practical progress of carbon
neutrality. Sustainable Operations and Computers, 3, 54–66.
Xie, Y., Zhao, Y., Chen, Y., & Allen, C. (2022). Green construction supply chain management: Integrating
governmental intervention and public–private partnerships through ecological modernisation. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 331, 129986.
Yang, M., Chen, L., Msigwa, G., Tang, K. H. D., & Yap, P. S. (2021). Implications of COVID-19 on global
environmental pollution and carbon emissions with strategies for sustainability in the COVID-19 era.
Science of the Total Environment, 809, 151657.
Zhang, A., Alvi, M. F., Gong, Y., & Wang, J. X. (2022). Overcoming barriers to supply chain decarbonization:
Case studies of ﬁrst movers. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 186, 106536.
Zhang, D., Zhou, L., & Lim, J. (2020). From networking to mitigation: The role of social media and analytics
in combating the COVID-19 pandemic. Information Systems Management, 37(4), 318–326.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123