TITLE: ManufacturerŌĆÖs optimal distribution strategy in the platform supply chain: Bundling or add-on?
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05842-8
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05842-8
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
ManufacturerŌĆÖs optimal distribution strategy in the platform
supply chain: Bundling or add-on?
Junbin Wang1,2 ┬Ę Shanshan Wang3 ┬Ę Yangyan Shi4,5
┬Ę V. G. Venkatesh6,7 ┬Ę
Sanjoy Kumar Paul8
Received: 5 July 2023 / Accepted: 13 January 2024
┬® The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
This study delves into the realm of distribution strategies employed in retail markets,
particularly focusing on the widely utilized bundle-and-add-on strategy. Three distinct
distribution strategies are examined: bundled-by-the-base-manufacturer (BBBM), bundled-
by-the-platform, and the add-on approach within a platform supply chain context. Through
comprehensive analysis, this paper investigates the optimal distribution strategy for manu-
facturers. Signi’¼ücantly, our research reveals that in cases where only bundling is feasible,
base manufacturers can reap bene’¼üts from a self-bundling strategy when both the platformŌĆÖs
commission rate and the marginal cost of the bundled product are low. Additionally, the plat-
form stands to gain from this approach when the commission rate is low, and the marginal
cost of the bundled product is either moderate or very high. Notably, winŌĆōwin scenarios can
emerge for both manufacturers and platforms through speci’¼üc bundling or platform bundling
strategies under speci’¼üc conditions. Furthermore, the study demonstrates that the price of
bundles under the add-on strategy will be lower, attracting more consumers, especially when
the commission rate is low. Intriguingly, when the marginal cost of the base product is low, the
add-on strategy consistently emerges as the optimal choice; as costs escalate, BBBM might
be optimal, especially when the commission rate is low, showcasing a nuanced understanding
of the interplay between costs and strategic choices in distribution. The major contribution
B Yangyan Shi
ys102@hotmail.com
1
School of Business, Changshu Institute of Technology, Changshu 215500, Jiangsu, China
2
School of Management, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
3
School of Management, Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai 201620, China
4
Macquarie Business School, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
5
Centre for Transport, Logistics and Global Supply Chain Management, Chongqing Jiaot Tong
University, Chongqing, China
6
EM Normandie Business School, METIS Lab, Paris, France
7
Corvinus Institute of Advanced Studies (CIAS), Corvinus University of Budapest, Budapest,
Hungary
8
UTS Business School, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
123

Annals of Operations Research
of this paper lies in its nuanced analysis of these strategies and their implications for both
manufacturers and platforms in the retail landscape.
Keywords Supply chain management ┬Ę Platform operations ┬Ę Bundling strategy ┬Ę Add-on
strategy ┬Ę Game theory
1 Introduction
Unlike bundling, where two or more individual goods are sold in a single package, add-on
sales separate the base product from the add-on product. Firms can impose price discrimi-
nation on consumers because different consumers value the base product from the add-on
product differently. Taking AppleŌĆÖs earphones (i.e., iPod) as an example, some consumers
who prefer the quality or brand of iPods will buy the earphones even if they do not buy
AppleŌĆÖs mobile phones. This phenomenon is also common in the hotel industry. For exam-
ple, some hotels have begun to sell their rooms and breakfast services separately. In this way,
the hotel can attract more consumers who want to enjoy breakfast. Thus, ’¼ürms face a dilemma
when they must give up extra pro’¼üts from selling add-on products in a bundle. In the retail
market, some ’¼ürms adopt bundling, while others adopt add-on sales. For example, car dealers
offer additional extended warranty programs to customers who buy new cars. The hotel sells
rooms and charges additional services (Yin et al., 2021). In the example above, consumers
can buy basic products and add-ons separately depending on the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs sales policy. When
the ’¼ürm adopts an add-on strategy, the ’¼ürm can impose price discrimination on consumers.
However, the ’¼ürm also needs to face the potential risk that consumers may value the base
product more than that of the add-on, and thus these consumers may refuse to purchase the
add-on. Moreover, when the ’¼ürm adopts a bundle strategy, that is, consumers have to buy the
base product and the add-on together, it is intuitive that both the add-on manufacturer and the
base manufacturer can pro’¼üt from such a strategy. However, the ’¼ürms cannot impose price
discrimination on consumers to earn a higher pro’¼üt. Thus, it is critical for ’¼ürms to choose an
optimal pricing strategy for the base product and its add-on.
Another phenomenon worth paying attention to is the increasing participation of e-
commerce platforms in bundling. For example, e-commerce platforms such as JD.com sell
home appliances but also offer insurance and sell smartphones, protective cases, membranes,
and even communication network services. However, some e-commerce platforms explicitly
oppose bundling. For example, Kuaishou, an emerging Chinese social e-commerce platform,
recently banned ŌĆ£bundlingŌĆØ and announced the termination of third-party sellers who violated
rules.1 This clearly illustrates that different participants (platforms, base manufacturers, and
add-on manufacturers) have different incentives for bundling or add-on strategies under the
platform supply chain model. Speci’¼ücally, when the bundle is provided by the platform, the
base manufacturer and add-on manufacturer need to wholesale the products to the platform
’¼ürst, and then the platform sets the price for bundles. In this case, the bundle suffers a triple
markup, and the double marginalization problem becomes more signi’¼ücant. However, when
the base manufacturer provides the bundle, that is, the add-on manufacturer wholesales its
product to the base manufacturer at ’¼ürst, and then the base manufacturer makes the pricing
decision on the bundle. In this case, the bundle only suffers from double markup, but the
base manufacturer transfers the commission to the bundleŌĆÖs price. Thus, the commission rate
charged by the platform plays a critical role in the decision of bundle strategy.
1 Available at http://news.sohu.com/a/534710257_329832 (in Chinese, accessed 18 May, 2022).
123

Annals of Operations Research
The above motivation urges us to study a ’¼ürmŌĆÖs bundling or add-on strategy in the platform
supply chain context. The online shopping market has experienced incredible growth in
recent years, for example, from 108 million online shoppers in 2009 to 782.41 million in
2020 (Marketing China, 2022). The record growth of e-commerce platforms has become
even more signi’¼ücant in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is estimated that ’¼ürms can
increase sales by 20 percent by selling Chinese e-commerce platforms (Marketing China,
2022). Therefore, it is critical to investigate how ’¼ürms make product operational decisions
on e-commerce platforms. The platform-operating model has two key features associated
with bundled or add-on sales. First, bundling can be performed by different entities, either
by the base product manufacturer or platform. For example, JD.com sells mobile phones
and accessories (such as protective cases) in its self-run stores. By contrast, mobile phone
manufacturers (such as Apple) sell mobile phone accessories in their third-party stores.
However, the manufacturer uses a bundle or sells on the platform separately, and they have to
pay the platform a percentage of the commission. Our study captures these two key features
by considering a speci’¼üc structural and pricing approach to contribute to the literature on
bundling and platform supply chains.
Based on the above discussion, in the platform supply chain considering bundling and
add-on selling respectively, the platform can adopt the following strategies: when bundling
is considered, (1) the manufacturer will implement bundling, and sell the two products at the
bundling price, and the platform will charge the commission according to the proportion of
sales (ŌĆ£Case MŌĆØ); (2) The platform itself implements bundling, that is, the platform provides
bundling product and sets the bundling price (ŌĆ£Case EŌĆØ); When bundling is not considered
(i.e., add-on selling), (3) the manufacturers of the two products sell their products directly
through the platform respectively, consumers buy one or two products at a price set by the two
manufacturers respectively, and the platform charges commission according to the percentage
of sales (ŌĆ£Case AŌĆØ). The following issues may arise in this case: (i) Who is better to undertake
a bundling strategy between the platform and the manufacturer? (ii) How do the platform
and manufacturer decide on sales models and pricing strategies when considering add-on
strategy? and (iii) what is the strategic impact of bundling or add-on strategy on the platform,
manufacturer, and supply chain?
To solve these problems, we developed a game-theoretical model consisting of two manu-
facturers selling base products and add-on products through a common platform respectively.
As a benchmark, we ’¼ürst analyze the bundling model of a ’¼ürmŌĆÖs decision-making, and then
investigate how ’¼ürms make decisions under the add-on strategy. Finally, we analyze two
extensions of correlated valuations to check the robustness of our main model.
Accordingly, the main contributions of this research are given as follows:
ŌĆó This study challenges previous ’¼ündings by revealing that the platformŌĆÖs commission rate
signi’¼ücantly in’¼éuences optimal pricing strategies in a platform supply chain, emphasizing
the need to consider platform fees in pricing decisions.
ŌĆó This study explores how different entities within the supply chain are affected by bundling
strategies, offering valuable insights into pricing decisions and pro’¼üts for supply chain
participants, a factor often overlooked in prior studies.
ŌĆó Contrary to earlier beliefs, the study ’¼ünds that the add-on pricing strategy is optimal only
when the base productŌĆÖs cost is low. This nuanced understanding guides base manufacturers
in choosing suitable strategies for selling base products and add-ons in a platform supply
chain context.
123

Annals of Operations Research
ŌĆó This study not only contributes theoretical insights but also provides actionable recommen-
dations, helping businesses make informed decisions about their pricing and distribution
strategies in platform supply chains.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews literature relevant
to our study. Section 3 proposes the game-theoretical model and presents some assumptions.
Section 4 considers three possible distribution strategies and derives equilibrium outcomes.
Section 5 explores the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal distribution strategy. Section 6 presents some numerical
experiments to reveal the impact of relevant factors on the pro’¼ütability of all ’¼ürms under
different distribution strategies. Section 7 presents extensions to verify the robustness of our
basic model. Section 8 presents the conclusions and future research directions of this study.
2 Literature review
This study aims to explore the base manufacturerŌĆÖs optimal product distribution strategy in a
platform supply chain. Thus, our work is related to three streams of literature: (i) the selling
mode in the platform supply chain, (ii) the bundling strategy, and (iii) the add-on strategy.
This section reviews related studies and describes the research gaps.
2.1 Selling mode in the platform supply chain
The tremendous growth of e-commerce enforces the development of platform supply chains,
and thus, an increasing number of scholars are paying attention to the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs choice of
platform selling mode. Hagiu and Wright (2015) found that ’¼ürms prefer the reselling model
when market activities lead to spillover effects between products and network effects lead
to negative results. Liu et al. (2020) studied the platformŌĆÖs optimal selling mode when data-
driven marketing (DDM) is considered. The results show that as DDM ef’¼üciency increases,
the platform is more likely to choose the reselling model. Niu et al. (2021) investigated
the interactions between ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ strategies for introducing Internet-based installments and
the platformŌĆÖs selling mode in a competing market environment. They found that when
incremental demand is moderate, the platform prefers to provide services, while the supplier
will refuse to provide such services. Wang et al. (2021) investigated a platform retailerŌĆÖs
optimal selling strategy when consumer returns are considered. The results show that when
the sales ef’¼üciency of the channels is different or close enough, the platform is more inclined
to adopt the reselling strategy than the agency strategy. Xu and Choi (2021) analyzed the
in’¼éuence of the selling mode on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ strategy of adopting blockchain technology when
cap-and-trade regulations are considered. They showed that the platform in the agency mode
is always better off from blockchain technology, whereas the platform in the reselling mode
might be worse off from such technology. Li et al. (2021) revealed that the manufacturer will
be more willing to choose the agency mode after the platform introduces a private brand.
Tian et al. (2018) and Shi et al. (2021) analyzed the platformŌĆÖs choice of selling mode facing
upstream or downstream competition, they showed that the platformŌĆÖs choice depends on
the commission rate and competition between two suppliers. In the closed-loop supply chain
context, Ma and Hu (2022) found that only when the commission rate is very low or high,
the supply chain members can reach a stable platform sales partnership. In the context of the
platform supply chain, Zhang et al. (2022) found that the selection of a sales model is highly
dependent on the inherent attributes of the product, and both the commission rate and slotting
fee are also important moderators. In contrast to the above studies, this study focuses on the
123

Annals of Operations Research
’¼ürmŌĆÖs choice of selling mode in the platform supply chain, which has rarely been studied in
previous literature.
2.2 Bundling strategy
In this subsection, we focus on literature related to the bundling strategy. Some studies explore
’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal product-bundling strategies in the monopoly market. Giri et al. (2013) studied
the impact of the bundling strategy on supply chain operations when reservation prices follow
discrete and uniform continuous distributions. They found that the retailer can be better off
when the manufacturer adopts a pure bundling strategy and the productŌĆÖs cost is low. Banciu
and ├śdegaard (2016) investigated the optimal bundling strategy with dependent valuations
of the bundle components, they found that the seller can bene’¼üt from bundles when the
productŌĆÖs marginal cost is relatively low. In a multi-echelon supply chain context, Eghbali-
Zarch et al. (2019) found that bundling a basic good with a premium can bene’¼üt from the
bundlingstrategywhenthemarketsize,productcost,andamountofrequiredrawmaterialsare
small. Banciu et al. (2010) explored a sellerŌĆÖs bundling strategy with vertically differentiated
products and limited resources. The results showed that the optimal strategy is affected by
the resourcesŌĆÖ absolute and relative availabilities and the productŌĆÖs quality. Honhon and Pan
(2017) examined a ’¼ürm offering vertically differentiated products and analyze its optimal
pricing decisions under different bundling strategies. Their results showed that adopting a
bundling strategy can improve pro’¼üts by increasing sales.
Moreover, some scholars focus on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ bundling strategies in the duopoly market. Lin
et al. (2020) focus on two competing e-commerce platforms and study their optimal pricing
and product-bundling strategies. The result shows that the mixed product-bundling strat-
egy is the equilibrium. Jena and Ghadge (2020) studied the interactions between product
bundling and advertising strategies in a competitive environment with different power struc-
tures. They ’¼ünd that the supply chain can obtain the highest pro’¼üt from the manufacturerŌĆÖs
bundling strategy, which signi’¼ücantly impacts advertising efforts. Chen et al. (2019, 2020)
study how product interrelatedness affects ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ choice of bundling strategies. They ’¼ünd
that the manufacturer bene’¼üts from a partially mixed bundling strategy when the products
are substitutable with relatively high substitutability. They also found that the manufacturer
prefers a pure bundling strategy when the products are complementary. Giri et al. (2017)
found that adopting the bundling strategy is always optimal in a supply chain consisting
of two suppliers that produce two complementary products. In contrast to previous studies
that consider the in’¼éuencing mechanism of the bundling strategy on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts, our study
is more concerned with who is more appropriate to provide the bundling strategy, that is,
BBBM or BBP. Meanwhile, when the base manufacturer adopts different bundling strategies,
the supply chain members adjust their pricing decisions, accordingly in’¼éuencing ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ prof-
its. However, the literature rarely examined the bundling strategy with different undertakers
on all participantsŌĆÖ pricing decisions and pro’¼üts.
2.3 Add-on strategy
As this study aims to reveal the differences between bundling and add-on strategies, we
also review studies on the add-on strategy. Yin et al. (2021) investigated two product selling
strategies, add-on, and bundling, and further explored the retailerŌĆÖs optimal strategy. Their
results showed that when ’¼ürms are integrated, the retailer prefers the add-on strategy if the
base product cost is low and the add-on cost is high, and the retailer prefers the add-on strategy
123

Annals of Operations Research
if ’¼ürms are independent. Shulman and Geng (2013) explored ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ add-on pricing decisions
when products are vertically differentiated and partial consumers are unaware of the initial
purchase add-on fees. They found that, when quality asymmetry exists only in the underlying
goods and consumers are bounded rationally, a high-quality ’¼ürm will be worse off under the
add-on strategy, while a low-quality ’¼ürm will be better off under such a strategy. Geng and
Shulman (2015) investigated the impact of cost-saving and heterogeneous consumer price
sensitivity on a ’¼ürmŌĆÖs add-on pricing decision. Their results showed that when consumers
are heterogeneous in price sensitivity, the positive effect of the add-on strategy caused by
cost savings may diminish. Thus, the ’¼ürm will suffer from the add-on strategy. Geng et al.
(2018) investigated the interactions between add-on pricing and an online platformŌĆÖs choice of
selling mode. The results showed that the ’¼ürm prefers the bundling strategy under the reseller
mode and the separate selling strategy under the agency mode. Lin (2017) considered ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ
add-on strategies with vertically differentiated products in different industries. The results
indicated that a high-quality ’¼ürm is more likely to sell the add-on as an alternative choice, but
a low-quality ’¼ürm prefers to sell the add-on to all consumers when the add-onŌĆÖs cost-to-value
ratio is very low. Song and Li (2018) studied a ’¼ürmŌĆÖs dynamic pricing decision for basic
services when the add-on is sold separately. They found that the unbundling value increases
the consumerŌĆÖs degree of dependence on the subscription price of the basic service and the
add-on service.
Moreover, our study is similar to Yin et al. (2021) and Geng et al. (2018). However, there
are some differences between our study and the above literature. First, Yin et al. (2021)
studied the retailerŌĆÖs optimal pricing strategy in different scenarios that differ by whether the
add-on manufacturer or base manufacturer is independent of the retailer or not. However,
we focus on the manufacturerŌĆÖs optimal pricing strategy: bundling or add-on. Second, if the
base manufacturer can bene’¼üt from the bundling strategy, we further explore which bundling
strategyŌĆöBBP or BBBMŌĆöwill be the optimal one, which was not considered in Yin et al.ŌĆÖs
(2021) study. Third, although our research uses the same demand of models as Yin et al.
(2021), the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üt functions in our study are different. Yin et al. (2021) studied the
retailerŌĆÖs optimal pricing strategy in a traditional supply chain, but we explored the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs
strategies in a platform supply chain. Thus, the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs pricing decision and optimal selling
strategy are in’¼éuenced by the features of the platform, such as the commission rate charged
by the platform, which has not been studied in the literature. Fourth, in contrast to Geng et al.
(2018), our study focuses on the base manufacturerŌĆÖs optimal pricing strategy in a platform
supply chain. However, Geng et al. (2018) investigated the interactions between the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs
pricing strategy (i.e., bundling or add-on pricing), and also the distribution contract between
the platform and ’¼ürm (i.e., wholesale or agency). Further, we examine the impacts of different
undertakers of the bundling strategy on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼ütability.
Given the research gap in Table 1, the main novelty of this study is examining the in’¼éuence
of different bundling strategy undertakers on pricing decisions and pro’¼üts for supply chain
participants, and also analyzing the optimal selling strategy of base manufacturers when
considering both add-on and base product distribution separately.
3 Problem statement
In this section, we propose a game-theoretical model and introduce our assumptions. Table
2 lists the main de’¼ünitions and notations used for reference. All proofs are provided in the
ŌĆ£AppendixŌĆØ.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Summarizes the most relevant research in the literature and compares the topic, research focus, and
goal of the case study
References
Topic
Research focus
Goal
Hagiu and Wright (2015)
Platform Selling
Mode
Factors in’¼éuencing
choice
Examined factors
affecting ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ choice
of platform selling
mode
Liu et al. (2020)
Platform Selling
Mode
Data-driven marketing
impact
Analyzed the impact of
data-driven marketing
ef’¼üciency on the
platformŌĆÖs optimal
selling mode
Niu et al. (2021)
Platform Selling
Mode
Interactions with ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ
strategies
Investigated interactions
between ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ
strategies and the
platformŌĆÖs selling mode
in a competitive market
environment
Wang et al. (2021)
Platform Selling
Mode
Consumer returns
impact
Explored platform
retailerŌĆÖs optimal
selling strategy
considering consumer
returns
Xu and Choi (2021)
Platform Selling
Mode
In’¼éuence on adopting
blockchain
Analyzed in’¼éuence of
selling mode on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ
adoption of blockchain
technology under
cap-and-trade
regulations
Li et al. (2021)
Platform Selling
Mode
Impact of private brand
introduction
Explored manufacturerŌĆÖs
choice of agency mode
after platform
introduced a private
brand
Tian et al. (2018), Shi
et al. (2021)
Platform Selling
Mode
Competition impact
Analyzed platformŌĆÖs
choice of selling mode
facing upstream or
downstream
competition
Ma and Hu (2022)
Platform Selling
Mode
Stable platform sales
partnership
Studied stable platform
sales partnership in a
closed-loop supply
chain context
Zhang et al. (2022)
Platform Selling
Mode
Product attributes and
sales model
Explored selection of
sales model in the
platform supply chain
based on product
attributes, commission
rate, and slotting fee
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 (continued)
References
Topic
Research focus
Goal
Girju et al. (2013)
Bundling Strategy
Impact on supply chain
operations
Examined the impact of
bundling strategy on
supply chain operations
in the presence of
discrete and uniform
continuous reservation
prices
Banciu and ├śdegaard
(2016)
Bundling Strategy
Optimal bundling with
dependent valuations
Investigated optimal
bundling strategy with
dependent valuations of
bundle components
Eghbali-Zarch et al.
(2019)
Bundling Strategy
Multi-echelon supply
chain context
Explored bundling
strategy in
multi-echelon supply
chain considering
market size, product
cost, and required raw
materials
Banciu et al. (2010)
Bundling Strategy
Vertically differentiated
products
Explored sellerŌĆÖs
bundling strategy with
vertically differentiated
products and limited
resources
Honhon and Pan (2017)
Bundling Strategy
Optimal pricing
decisions
Examined optimal
pricing decisions under
different bundling
strategies with
vertically differentiated
products
Lin et al. (2020)
Bundling Strategy
Optimal pricing and
product-bundling
strategies
Studied optimal pricing
and product-bundling
strategies in a duopoly
market with two
competing e-commerce
platforms
Jena and Ghadge (2020)
Bundling Strategy
Interactions with
advertising
Studied interactions
between product
bundling and
advertising strategies in
a competitive
environment with
different power
structures
3.1 Firms
We consider a two-tier platform supply chain that includes a base manufacturer (M1) who
produces the base product, an add-on manufacturer (M2) who produces the add-on, and an
e-commerce platform (E). For example, manufacturers sell home appliances on e-commerce
platforms such as JD.com, while third-party providers serve protection plans. Note that the
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 (continued)
References
Topic
Research focus
Goal
Chen et al. (2019, 2020)
Bundling Strategy
Product interrelatedness
impact
Explored bundling
strategies in the context
of product
interrelatedness and
their effects on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ
choices
Giri et al. (2013)
Bundling Strategy
Complementary
products in the supply
chain
Studied bundling strategy
in supply chain with
two suppliers producing
complementary
products
Yin et al. (2021)
Add-on Strategy
Comparison with
bundling strategy
Investigated add-on and
bundling strategies;
compared retailerŌĆÖs
optimal strategy under
different scenarios
Shulman and Geng (2013)
Add-on Strategy
Quality asymmetry and
rationality
Explored add-on pricing
decisions with
vertically differentiated
products when quality
asymmetry and
bounded rationality
exist
Geng and Shulman (2015)
Add-on Strategy
Consumer price
sensitivity
Investigated add-on
pricing decisions
considering cost-saving
and heterogeneous
consumer price
sensitivity
Geng et al. (2018)
Add-on Strategy
Interactions with
platformŌĆÖs mode
Studied interactions
between add-on pricing
and online platformŌĆÖs
selling mode; compared
bundling and add-on
strategies
add-on only becomes valuable if the consumer buys the base product (e.g., home appliance
dealers sell extended warranty programs to consumers who have bought new home appli-
ances). The base manufacturer can choose between two product sales modes, that is, bundling
and add-on selling. Furthermore, when the bundling mode is chosen, the base manufacturer
can choose to bundle by itself or dictate the platform to bundle. This assumption is plausible
because the base manufacturer, such as Apple, Samsung, Nike, and Adidas, generally has
more power to decide which selling mode to use.
Based on the above analysis, we consider three cases, as shown in Fig. 1. In Case E,
both products are BBP which sells the bundled product in its own marketplace. In Case
M, both products are bundled by either of the manufacturer. Without loss of generality and
consistency with common situations, we consider only the case with both products BBBM.
After bundling, the base manufacturer sells the bundled product to consumers through the
platform, while the platform charges a commission rate on the base manufacturer. In Case A,
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 Summary of notations
Type
Notation
Description
Indices
y
y  M, E, A represent the bundle by the
manufacturer strategy, the bundled by the
platform strategy, the add-on strategy
i
Products, i  1, 2, represent the base
product, the add-on
Decision variables
pi
The retail price of product i
pb
The retail price of the bundle product
Parameters
vi
The value of product i
ci
The marginal cost of product i
f
The platformŌĆÖs commission rate
ua
The customer utility under the add-on
strategy
ub
The customer utility under the bundling
strategy
da
The product demand in Case A
db
The product demand in Case M or E
ŽĆ y
e
The platformŌĆÖs pro’¼üt in case y
ŽĆ y
mi
The manufacturer iŌĆÖ pro’¼üt in case y
Fig. 1 Supply chain structures
two manufacturers sell their products independently through the platform, and each pays a
commission rate to the platform to gain access rights. Manufacturer M1 produces the product
at a marginal cost c1 Ōłł[0, 1] and manufacturer M2 produces the add-on at marginal cost
c2 Ōłł[0, 1].
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.2 Consumers
Consumers are heterogeneous in their valuations of both products. The total market size was
normalized to 1. We denote a consumerŌĆÖs valuation of product i by vi (i  1, 2), and i  1
signi’¼ües the base product, and i  2 signi’¼ües the add-on. Similar to that in prior literature
(e.g., Prasad et al., 2010; Yin et al., 2021), we assume both v1 and v2 are uniformly and
independently distributed from 0 to 1. When a bundled product is offered (i.e., bundling
strategy) for a consumer with valuation (v1, v2), they can purchase the product and obtains
the utility ub  v1 + v2 ŌłÆpb or leave the market with zero utility, where pb is the bundled
productŌĆÖs price. As the base product and the add-on are offered separately (i.e., add-on
strategy) with retail prices of p1 and p2 respectively, a consumer can obtain either utility
ua  v1 ŌłÆp1 if they purchase the base product only or the utility ua  v1 + v2 ŌłÆp1 ŌłÆp2
if they purchase both products or leave the market with zero utility. The consumer makes
a purchase decision by obtaining the maximum utility from the market-offered product(s).
Note that the customer who consumes an add-on should satisfy two conditions: (i) they have
bought the base product, and (ii) the add-on provides them with positive utility.
Based on the consumerŌĆÖs decisions, we can derive the demand for a product(s) between
bundling and add-on strategies. When the bundling strategy is offered and the price pb is set,
the demand for bundle db can be derived by ub Ōēź0 as db  1
2

2ŌłÆp2
b

if pb Ōēż1 and db  1
2
(2 ŌłÆpb)2 otherwise (Fig. 2 illustrates this). When the add-on strategy is offered, consumers
can buy the base product and add-on in the platformŌĆÖs marketplace. A consumer will buy the
base product ’¼ürst if they can obtain utility of ua  v1 ŌłÆp1 > 0. Subsequently, the consumer
considers whether to buy the add-on. A consumer will buy if she ’¼ünds that the add-on gives
them an additional non-negative utility (i.e., v2 ŌłÆp2 > 0). Therefore, we can derive the base
productŌĆÖs demand d1  1 ŌłÆp1 and the add-onŌĆÖs demand d2  (1 ŌłÆp1)(1 ŌłÆp2).
Fig. 2 Demands under bundling strategy
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.3 Firm and consumer decisions
Based on the above discussion, it is intuitive that the possible selection of bundling or add-on
is driven by the base product manufacturerŌĆÖs distribution offering and the platformŌĆÖs rate
structure (i.e., the commission rate f ). In each case, the interaction between manufacturers
and the platform is depicted in Fig. 1. The stages of the game for each case are given as
below:
Stage 1: The product distribution strategy. The base manufacturer decides on the product
distribution strategy, that is, the bundling strategy or add-on strategy.
Stage 2: The bundling strategy. If the manufacturer chooses the bundle-selling strategy, it
must decide by itself or dictate the platform to bundle.
Stage 3: The operational decisions. Firms make pricing decisions in different cases as
follows:
(1) In Case E, the base manufacturer adopts a bundling strategy, and the platform acts as a
reseller to sell both products as a bundle. In this case, manufacturers ’¼ürst simultaneously
set wholesale prices w1 and w2 on the platform, which sets the bundleŌĆÖs price pb for in
turn.
(2) In Case M, that is, the base manufacturer adopts a bundling strategy, and the platform
acts as a marketplace for the manufacturers by charging a commission rate f Ōłł[0, 1].
The add-on manufacturer ’¼ürst sets w2 to the base manufacturer, which, in turn, sets the
retail price pb for the bundle.
(3) In Case A, that is, the base manufacturer adopts an add-on strategy, and the platform
acts as a marketplace for the manufacturers by charging a commission rate f . In this
case, assuming that both manufacturers accept the rate structure, then both set the retail
prices p1 and p2 simultaneously.
Notethatwetreatcommissionrate f asexogenouslydeterminedtofocusonunderstanding
the bundling problem. This assumption is also prevailed in previous studies such as Geng
et al. (2018), Shen et al. (2019), and Zhen and Xu (2021). In reality, the commission rate is
largely predetermined through industrial observations. Since both products generally belong
to the same or similar product categories, we further assume that the platform charges them
the same commission rate f .
4 The di’¼Ćerent selling strategies
Inthissection,we’¼ürstprovidetheoptimalsolutionsforeachcase,andthencompareoutcomes
in these cases to reveal the impact of the bundling strategy on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ decisions and pro’¼üts.
Finally, we explore the base manufacturer or platformŌĆÖs optimal bundling strategy.
4.1 Bundled by the platform strategy (Case E)
We ’¼ürst consider Case E, in which the base manufacturer adopts the bundling strategy of the
platform. In this case, the platform resells both products as a bundle. The platform sells the
bundle in its marketplace and chooses pb to maximize its pro’¼üt.
ŽĆ E
e  (pb ŌłÆw1 ŌłÆw2)db
(1)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Both manufacturers face the platform and make independent decisions. Manufacturer i
sets wi to maximize pro’¼üt:
ŽĆ E
mi  (wi ŌłÆci)db
(2)
We can formulate the pro’¼üt functions of the platform and manufacturers, and solve the
game by backward induction. The ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal decisions under Case E (which we denote
by superscript ŌĆ£EŌĆØ) can be summarized in the lemma as below.
Lemma 1 Under Case E, the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pricing and realized demands are as follows:
wEŌłŚ
i
 (2+3ciŌłÆc3ŌłÆi)
4
, pEŌłŚ
b
 (4+c1+c2)
3
, d EŌłŚ
b
 (2ŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)2
18
; the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pro’¼üts are as
follows: ŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
 (2ŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)3
108
and ŽĆ EŌłŚ
mi  (2ŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)3
72
. See all the proofs in the ŌĆ£AppendixŌĆØ.
From Lemma 1, we observe that the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pricing decisions are mainly affected by the
productŌĆÖs marginal cost. Speci’¼ücally, as the base product (add-on)ŌĆÖs cost increases, the base
(add-on) manufacturer sets a higher wholesale price. However, as the add-on (base product)ŌĆÖs
cost increases, the base (add-on) manufacturer decreases its wholesale price. Moreover, as the
base productŌĆÖs or add-onŌĆÖs cost increases, the platform is more likely to set a higher retail price
for the bundle, and thus product demand will decrease. In addition, as the productŌĆÖs marginal
cost increases, the manufacturersŌĆÖ and platformsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts decrease. This also indicates that
lowering the productŌĆÖs cost is an effective way for manufacturers to earn greater pro’¼üts.
4.2 Bundled by the base manufacturer strategy (Case M)
We now consider Case M, where the base manufacturer adopts a bundling strategy. In this
case, the platform acts as a marketplace for manufacturers by charging commission rates. The
base product manufacturer sells the bundle through the platformŌĆÖs marketplace and chooses
pb to maximize its pro’¼üt.
ŽĆ M
m1  ((1 ŌłÆf )pb ŌłÆw2 ŌłÆc1)db
(3)
The add-on manufacturer acts as a supplier for the base product manufacturers. The add-on
manufacturer chooses w2 to maximize pro’¼üt:
ŽĆ M
m2  (w2 ŌłÆc2)db
(4)
The platform gains pro’¼üt from charging the base product manufacturer by ŽĆ M
e
 f pbdb.
We can formulate the pro’¼üt functions of the platform and manufacturers and solve the game
as above subsection. The ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal decisions in Case M (denoted by superscript ŌĆ£MŌĆØ)
can be summarized in the lemma as below.
Lemma 2 Under Case M, the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pricing and realized demands are as fol-
lows: wMŌłŚ
2

2(1ŌłÆf )ŌłÆc1+2c2
3
, pMŌłŚ
b

2
9

5 + 2(c1+c2)
1ŌłÆf

, d MŌłŚ
b

8[2(1ŌłÆf )ŌłÆ(c1+c2)]2
81(1ŌłÆf )2
; the
’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pro’¼üts are as follows: ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
 16 f [5(1ŌłÆf )+2(c1+c2)][2(1ŌłÆf )ŌłÆ(c1+c2)]2
729(1ŌłÆf )3
, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 
16[2(1ŌłÆf )ŌłÆ(c1+c2)]3
729(1ŌłÆf )2
, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2  8[2(1ŌłÆf )ŌłÆ(c1+c2)]3
243(1ŌłÆf )2
. See all the proofs in the ŌĆ£AppendixŌĆØ.
Lemma 2 provides the equilibrium outcomes when the base manufacturer adopts a
bundling strategy. In this case, ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pricing decisions, product demands, and pro’¼üts are
affected by the productŌĆÖs marginal cost and commission rate. From Lemma 2, we ’¼ünd that
the add-on manufacturer decreases its wholesale price as the commission rate increases.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Meanwhile, as the commission rate increases, the base manufacturer sets a higher prod-
uct price, thus decreasing the demand for bundled products. The results show that a higher
platform commission rate may discourage consumersŌĆÖ willingness to purchase a bundle.
Moreover, it is intuitive that manufacturersŌĆÖ pro’¼üts will decrease as the productŌĆÖs marginal
cost or commission rate increases. However, if the cost is high, the platformŌĆÖs pro’¼üt increases
in the productŌĆÖs marginal cost, and the platform might be better off with high-cost bundles
under the manufacturer bundling strategy.
4.3 Add-on strategy (Case A)
This subsection considers the case where the base manufacturer adopts an add-on strategy.
For analysis, we denote this case by ŌĆ£A.ŌĆØ In this case, the base product and add-on are
sold by the base and add-on manufacturers, respectively. Meanwhile, the platform acts as a
marketplace for both manufacturers, who in turn pay a commission rate f based on revenue.
Recall that the consumer obtains u1  v1 ŌłÆp1 Ōēź0 and u2  v2 ŌłÆp2 < 0 if buying the
base product only, and obtains u1  v1 ŌłÆp1 Ōēź0 and u2  v2 ŌłÆp2 Ōēź0 if buying both
products. Accordingly, the sale of the base good is d1  1 ŌłÆp1 and the add-on is d2 
(1 ŌłÆp1)(1 ŌłÆp2). Both manufacturers face consumers directly in the platform marketplace.
Manufacturer i sets pi to maximize pro’¼üt:
ŽĆ A
mi  [(1 ŌłÆf )pi ŌłÆci]di
(5)
The platform gains pro’¼üt by charging both manufacturers by ŽĆ A
e 
2
i1
f pidi. The ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ
optimal decisions in equilibrium in Case A (denoted by superscript ŌĆ£AŌĆØ) can be summarized
in the lemma as below.
Lemma 3 Under Case A, the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pricing and realized demands are as follows:
pAŌłŚ
1
 1ŌłÆf +c1
2(1ŌłÆf ) , pAŌłŚ
2
 1ŌłÆf +c2
2(1ŌłÆf ) , d AŌłŚ
1
 1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1
2(1ŌłÆf ) , d AŌłŚ
2
 (1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc2)
4(1ŌłÆf )2
; the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal
pro’¼üts are as follows: ŽĆ AŌłŚ
e


3(1ŌłÆf )2+2c1(1ŌłÆf )ŌłÆc2
2

f (1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)
8(1ŌłÆf )3
, ŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1  (1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)2
4(1ŌłÆf ) , and ŽĆ AŌłŚ
m2 
(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc2)2
8(1ŌłÆf )2
.
From the equilibrium outcomes in Lemma 3, we ’¼ünd that when the base product and
add-on are sold separately, as the commission rate and the productŌĆÖs marginal cost increase,
all product prices increase. Thus, the base productŌĆÖs demand decreases as an increase of com-
mission rate. However, for the add-on, its demand will increase as an increase of commission
rate only when the commission rate is high. Lemma 3 also shows that manufacturersŌĆÖ pro’¼üts
will decrease as the marginal cost and commission rate increase.
5 Results
In this analysis, we ’¼ürst discuss the base manufacturerŌĆÖs optimal bundling strategy, that is,
BBI or BBP, in Sect. 5.1. Then, we explore the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal selling strategy, that is, the
bundled or add-on strategy in Sect. 5.2.
123

Annals of Operations Research
5.1 The analysis of the bundling strategy
In this subsection, we ’¼ürst analyze the in’¼éuences of different bundling strategies on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ
pricing as well as market demands, and then analyze ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼ütability performances under
the above bundling strategy. Finally, we explore the optimal bundling strategy.
5.1.1 Prices and demands
By comparing the bundle productŌĆÖs price and demand in cases E and M, we have Proposition
1, which is presented as follows:
Proposition 1
(i)
The bundle product price under the base manufacturer strategy will be lower when the
commission rate is low; otherwise, the bundle product price under the platform strategy
will be lower. Mathematically, pMŌłŚ
b
ŌēżpEŌłŚ
b
if f Ōēż2ŌłÆ(c1+c2)
2+3(c1+c2); otherwise, pEŌłŚ
b
< pMŌłŚ
b
.
(ii) The product demand under BBBM strategy will be lower when the commission rate is
moderate; otherwise, the demand under BBP will be lower. Mathematically, d MŌłŚ
b
< d EŌłŚ
b
if
2ŌłÆ(c1+c2)
2+3(c1+c2) < f < 7(2ŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)
14ŌłÆ3(c1+c2); otherwise, d EŌłŚ
b
Ōēżd MŌłŚ
b
.
AsshowninProposition1(i),whentheplatformchargesalowcommissionrate,thepriceof
bundled products under BBBM strategy will be lower than that under BBP strategy. However,
as an increase of commission rate, the price of the product increases under BBBM strategy.
There are two reasons for base manufacturersŌĆÖ pricing decisions. The most obvious difference
between the two strategies is the pricing power for the bundle. Under BBP strategy, the base
manufacturer and add-on manufacturer ’¼ürst wholesale the base product and add-on to the
platform, and then the platform sets the retail price for the bundle. However, under the BBBM,
the price of bundles is set by the base manufacturer directly, which can effectively avoid the
second markup from the platform. Thus, the manufacturer has the incentive to set product
price lower. However, under BBBM strategy, the manufacturer must bear the platformŌĆÖs
commission rate charge. Thus, when the commission rate is set at a low level, the positive
effect of alleviating the double marginalization dominates. Thus, the base manufacturer sets
a lower price for bundled products. When the commission rate is high, the manufacturer will
cover the loss by increasing the product price.
Moreover, Proposition 1(ii) compares the bundle product demands in cases E and M.
Speci’¼ücally, when the commission rate is suf’¼üciently low or high, the product demand in
Case M will be higher than that in Case E. Otherwise, the product demand in Case E will
be higher. Referring to the result in Proposition 1(i), the base manufacturer in Case M sets
a lower product price if the commission rate is low (i.e., f Ōēż
2ŌłÆ(c1+c2)
2+3(c1+c2)). Thus, there are
more consumers to purchase the bundle owing to the low price. When the commission rate is
moderate, the demand in Case M decreases because of a higher product price. Interestingly,
our results show that when the commission rate is very high, demand in case M is still higher
than that in Case E, even if the manufacturer sets a higher product price. This indicates that
when the platform charges a very high commission rate, there is a demand-increasing effect
and a price-increasing effect if the base manufacturer adopts a bundling strategy.
5.1.2 FirmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts
Then, we develop Propositions 2 and 3 by comparing the pro’¼üts between the base manufac-
turer and platform in cases E and M as follows:
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 The optimal bundling strategy for all participants
Proposition 2 The base manufacturer can bene’¼üt from BBI strategy when both the commis-
sion rate and the bundleŌĆÖs cost are low; otherwise, the manufacturer can bene’¼üt from BBP
strategy. Mathematically, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 > ŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 if f < 47
128 and c <
2
 
8(1ŌłÆf )ŌłÆ3ŌłÜ
3[32(1ŌłÆf )]2
8ŌłÆ3ŌłÜ
3[32(1ŌłÆf )]2
(  C0);
otherwise, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 .
As shown in Proposition 2, the results show that the base manufacturer prefers the BBI
strategy if the commission rate and marginal cost of the bundle are low. See Fig. 3(1) for
an illustration. When the commission rate and the cost are low, the base manufacturer can
obtain a higher pro’¼üt by adopting the BBI strategy owing to the increased product demand.
However, when the commission rate or cost is high enough, the base manufacturer is more
willing to adopt BBP strategy. Compared with Case E, the manufacturer in Case M needs to
shoulder the extra cost of purchasing the add-ons and the commission rate charged by the
platform. Therefore, when the commission rate or cost is high, although the BBBM strategy
might attract more consumers or force the manufacturer to set a higher price, the extra cost
for purchasing the add-ons and the commission rate reduces the base manufacturerŌĆÖs margin
pro’¼üt. Thus, the manufacturer will be worse off when adopting the bundling strategy by itself.
As a result, adopting the BBP strategy is the optimal choice when the commission rate or
marginal cost is high.
Proposition 3 The platform can bene’¼üt from the BBBM strategy when (a) the commission
rate is low, and the bundleŌĆÖs cost is moderate or very high, or (b) the commission rate is
high, and the bundled productŌĆÖs marginal cost is very low or very high. Mathematically,
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
> ŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
if (a) f Ōēż
27
160, C1 < c < C2, and c > C3, (b) f >
27
160, c < C2 and c > C3;
otherwise, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , where c  c1 + c2 and C1 < C2 < C3.
Proposition 3 provides the platformŌĆÖs preference for the bundling strategy. See Fig. 3(2)
for an illustration. Speci’¼ücally, when the platform charges a low commission rate, it prefers
BBBM strategy if the productŌĆÖs marginal cost is moderate. The reason is that in the above
region, the price-increasing effect in Case M dominates the demand-increasing effect in Case
E. Thus, the platform can pro’¼üt from the bundled by the manufacturer strategy. Moreover,
the platform can earn greater pro’¼üt from such a strategy if the bundleŌĆÖs cost is very low while
the commission rate is high enough. This is because, under such conditions, the platform can
obtain a high commission income from Case M, and the demand in Case M will be higher
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 FirmsŌĆÖ pro’¼ütability under
bundling strategy
than in Case E. Consequently, the platform prefers the manufacturerŌĆÖs bundling strategy. In
addition, the results show that when the bundleŌĆÖs cost is very high, owing to the demand-
increasing and price-decreasing effects, the BBBM strategy will be the optimal choice for
the platform.
Propositions 2 and 3 show the in’¼éuences of different bundling strategies on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ prof-
itability. It is worth discussing whether the different bundling strategies always in’¼éuence
the base manufacturer and the platform similarly. We obtain Corollary 1 which is shown as
below.
Corollary 1 The base manufacturer and platform achieve a winŌĆōwin situation in Case E in
the dark blue region in Fig. 4, a winŌĆōwin situation in Case M in the yellow region, and a
win-lose situation in other parameter regions.
Combined with Corollary 1 and Fig. 4, we ’¼ünd that when the commission rate and the
bundleŌĆÖs cost are relatively low (i.e., the winŌĆōwin in Case M region in Fig. 4), the BBBM
strategy will bene’¼üt both the base manufacturer and the platform. Meanwhile, when the
bundleŌĆÖs cost is relatively high (i.e., the win in region E in Fig. 4), the BBP strategy will
bene’¼üt the base manufacturer and platform. Within the above two parameter ranges, the
impacts of the bundling strategy on the base manufacturer and platform are the same, which
means that the bundling strategy can achieve a ŌĆ£winŌĆōwinŌĆØ situation for them. However,
in other regions (i.e., the win-lose regions in Fig. 4), the impact of bundling strategies is
completely different. Speci’¼ücally, when the commission rate and the bundleŌĆÖs cost are very
low, the base manufacturer will bene’¼üt from Case M, but the platform will bene’¼üt from Case
E; when the commission rate and the bundleŌĆÖs cost are moderate, or when the cost is very
high, the base manufacturer will bene’¼üt from Case E, but the platform will bene’¼üt from Case
M. All the above regions will result in a win-lose situation for the base manufacturer and the
platform. In addition, there is no region in which the base manufacturer and platform suffer
from the bundling strategy.
5.1.3 The optimal bundling strategy
We examine the equilibrium bundling strategy, in which a strategic interaction exists between
the platform and the base manufacturer. We aim to solve the problems as follows: Is there
any bundling strategy in equilibrium? It is worth noting that, to be consistent with the prior
123

Annals of Operations Research
studies, we investigated the in’¼éuence of two key factors only, that is, total marginal cost
c1 + c2 and the platformŌĆÖs commission rate f .
Proposition 4 For any given c1 + c2, both platform and base manufacturer prefer the base
manufacturer to bundle (Case M) for a relatively low commission rate, and both platform and
base manufacturer prefer the platform to bundle (Case E) for a relatively high commission
rate, and one party prefers the other to bundle otherwise.
Next, we discuss the insights behind this proposition. The pro’¼üt margin is ’¼üxed for any
given marginal cost. In addition, a relatively low commission rate leads to a relatively low
bene’¼üt for the platform. In this case, the platform must increase its sales volume to increase
its total pro’¼üt. According to Proposition 1, under the above conditions, the price of bun-
dled products in Case M is relatively low, resulting in higher demand. Therefore, both the
platform and base manufacturers bene’¼üt. Similarly, the platform extracts more pro’¼üts from
manufacturers through commission rates for any given marginal cost and a relatively high
commission rate. In this case, it is more favorable for the platform to gain more pro’¼üt through
bundling and pricing by itself (i.e., Case E). In addition, the base manufacturer can bene’¼üt
from this case because commissions are not too high, and the platform is more ef’¼ücient
with bundling. If these two equilibria cannot be achieved, one party expects the other party
to implement the bundling strategy. Predictably, if there are no better outside options, both
sides will choose a suboptimal strategy. In addition, the stronger party will also dictate the
other party to bundle, especially as the rise of the platformŌĆÖs market power may be dominant;
of course, some strong brands will be exceptions, such as Apple and Nike.
5.2 The analysis of optimal strategy: bundling versus add-on
By comparing the prices of the bundle and the demand for the base product under the bundling
and add-on strategies, we have Proposition 5, which is described as follows:
Proposition 5
(i)
The product price under the add-on strategy will be lower than that under the bundle
by the manufacturer/platform strategy under a low commission rate; otherwise, the
product price under the bundle by the manufacturer/platform strategy will be lower.
Mathematically,

pAŌłŚ
1 + pAŌłŚ
2

ŌēżpEŌłŚ
b
if f Ōēż2ŌłÆ(c1+c2)
2+2(c1+c2); otherwise, pEŌłŚ
b
<

pAŌłŚ
1 + pAŌłŚ
2

;

pAŌłŚ
1
+ pAŌłŚ
2

ŌēżpMŌłŚ
b
if f Ōēż2ŌłÆ(c1+c2)
2
; otherwise, pMŌłŚ
b
<

pAŌłŚ
1
+ pAŌłŚ
2

.
(ii) The product demand of the base product under the add-on strategy will be lower
than that under the bundle by the manufacturer/platform strategy under a high com-
mission rate; otherwise, the product demand of the base product under the bundle
by the manufacturer/platform strategy will be lower. Mathematically, d AŌłŚ
1
< d EŌłŚ
b
if
f
> 1 ŌłÆ
9c1
(5ŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)(1+c1+c2); otherwise, d EŌłŚ
b
Ōēżd AŌłŚ
1 ; d AŌłŚ
1
< d MŌłŚ
b
if
f
>

34ŌłÆ17c1+64c2ŌłÆ9

17c2
1+64c2
2

34
; otherwise, d MŌłŚ
b
Ōēżd AŌłŚ
1 .
The result in Proposition 5(i) indicates that when the platform sets a low commission
rate, the sum price of both products under the add-on model is lower than that under the
bundling model; otherwise, the price under the bundling model is lower. The results show
that selling the base product and add-on separately might result in a lower product price
with a low commission rate. For instance, in the app stores of operating systems like AppleŌĆÖs
123

Annals of Operations Research
iOS or GoogleŌĆÖs Android, developers can sell their apps (add-ons) separately from the base
software, allowing users to customize their software experience without the burden of a higher
bundledprice(Kawaguchietal.,2023).Thiscanattractmoreconsumerstopurchaseproducts,
thus increasing in demand, as shown in Proposition 5(ii). Moreover, when the platformŌĆÖs
commission rate is high, manufacturers are incentivized to increase product prices under the
add-on strategy. Thus, the bundleŌĆÖs price in the add-on strategy is higher than that in the
bundling strategy. Consequently, consumers are less willing to purchase a bundle under the
add-on strategy. For example, car manufacturers often provide basic models with the option
to add extra features (add-ons) such as GPS navigation systems, leather seats, or upgraded
sound systems (Zhang et al., 2023).
6 Sensitivity analysis
It is dif’¼ücult to compare the outcomes of the add-on model because of the mathematical
complexity. Thus, in this section, we employ some numerical experiments to analyze the
impacts of relevant parameters on the supply chain and its memberŌĆÖs pro’¼ütability, and further
explore the optimal selling strategies.
6.1 The effect of the marginal cost
In this subsection, we ’¼ürst consider the effect of productsŌĆÖ marginal costs under different
selling strategies. We ’¼üx the commission rate at f  0.2, and the marginal cost of the base
product c1  xc2, where x  0.2, x  0.5, x  0.8, respectively. Further, we vary the
marginal cost of add-ons c2 from 0 to 1 to ensure that all equilibrium outcomes are positive.
Thus, we obtain Figs. 5, 6 and 7.
Figure 5 shows that when the base productŌĆÖs cost is relatively low, the base manufacturer
prefers the add-on strategy, that is, selling the base good and add-on separately. When the
base productŌĆÖs marginal cost is very high, the manufacturer prefers the add-on strategy only
if the add-onŌĆÖs marginal cost is low; otherwise, the manufacturer is more likely to choose the
bundling strategy. This indicates that for a high-cost base product and high-cost add-ons, the
bundling strategy would be the optimal choice for the base manufacturer. Figure 6 shows the
platformŌĆÖs pro’¼üts under different strategies. We ’¼ünd that the platform always becomes worse
off under the BBI strategy. The result indicates that when the platform sets a relatively high
commission rate, i.e., f  0.2, the platform should refuse to provide bundle-selling service
Fig. 5 The effect of c2 on the base manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 The effect of c2 on the platformŌĆÖs pro’¼üt
Fig. 7 The effect of c2 on the supply chain pro’¼ütability
for the base manufacturer. Furthermore, for the platform, the BBBM strategy is the optimal
choice when the marginal cost of add-ons is relatively low, otherwise, the add-on strategy is
optimal.
Figure 7 shows the optimal product strategy from the supply chain perspective. It signi’¼ües
that when the base productŌĆÖs marginal cost is low, the supply chain can bene’¼üt from the bundle
using the base manufacturer strategy. When the cost is high, the supply chain should adopt
the add-on strategy and switch to the BBP strategy, which mainly depends on the add-onsŌĆÖ
marginal cost.
6.2 The effect of the commission rate
Next, we further analyses the effect of the commission rate on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼ütability. We set
the marginal cost of add-ons c2  0.2, and the marginal cost of the base product c1  xc2,
where x  0.2, x  0.5, x  0.8, respectively. Further, we vary the commission rate from 0
to 0.7 to ensure that all equilibrium outcomes are positive. Thus, we obtain Figs. 8, 9 and 10.
As shown in Fig. 8, the base manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt in cases M and A decreases as the
commission rate increases. As the base productŌĆÖs marginal cost increases, the base manufac-
turer prefers the add-on strategy under a low commission rate; otherwise, it is more likely to
choose the bundle using the platform strategy. The reason is that, when the commission rate
is very high, the negative effect of a high commission rate in Case A dominates the positive
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 The impact of f on the base manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt
Fig. 9 The effect of f on the platformŌĆÖs pro’¼üt
Fig. 10 The effect of f on the supply chainŌĆÖs total pro’¼üt
effect of the double marginalization mitigation. Thus, the base manufacturer will forgo the
add-on strategy. Figure 9 shows the effect of the commission rate and indicates that, when
the commission rate is very low, the platform would be better off under the BBI strategy.
However, as the commission rate increases, the platform can bene’¼üt from the add-on strategy,
which is consistent with Fig. 6.
Figure 10 illustrates the effect of the commission rate on the supply chain pro’¼ütability. It
indicates that the total pro’¼üt of the supply chain decreases as the commission rate increases.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Moreover, when the base productŌĆÖs marginal cost is low, the add-on strategy is always the
optimal strategy. As the cost increases, bundling by the base manufacturer might be the
optimal choice under a low commission rate.
7 Extensions
We consider independent valuations of the base and add-on products in the main model. One
may question that customers may value the base product more while value the add-on more
(or less), corresponding to positive (or negative) correlations. In this section, we analyze two
extensions of correlated valuations. All other modeling elements remained the same as those
in the main model. We test these two extensions respectively, since the derivation methods
under positive and negative correlation scenarios are different.
7.1 Positive correlation between base product valuation and add-on valuation
We ’¼ürst consider the positive correlation between base product valuation and add-on valua-
tion. In reality, for example, it stands to reason that consumers who wants to buy an expensive
shampoo (the base product) might also be willing to pay more for conditioner (the add-on).
Using the settings of McCardle et al. (2007) and Yin et al. (2021), we assumed that the value
v1 of the base product is distributed between 0 and 1 uniformly, whereas the value v2 of the
add-on is distributed between l and h uniformly, where 0 Ōēżl < h Ōēż1. Accordingly, product
costs satisfy c1 Ōłł[0, 1] and c2 Ōłł[l, h]. Then, v2  l + (h ŌłÆl)v1 is used to capture the
perfectly positive correlation between both productsŌĆÖ valuations.
Therefore, for the bundled product, its market demand becomes db  1 ŌłÆ
pbŌłÆl
1+hŌłÆl , and the
price of the bundled product pb is betweenl and (1+h). Under the add-on model, given p1, the
base productŌĆÖs market demand is d1  1ŌłÆp1, where the marginal consumer ╦£v1  p1. Hence,
(i) when the marginal consumer buys the add-on, we have v2 ŌłÆp2  l +(h ŌłÆl)p1 ŌłÆp2 Ōēź0,
which leads to p1 Ōēźp2ŌłÆl
hŌłÆl . In this scenario, all consumers who consume the base product
will own the add-on as well, so we have d2  d1. (ii) When the marginal consumer does
not buy the add-on, there exists p1 < p2ŌłÆl
hŌłÆl . In this scenario, consumers will buy the add-on
if they obtain positive utility, that is, v2 ŌłÆp2  l + (h ŌłÆl)v1 ŌłÆp2 Ōēź0, which leads to
the marginal consumer ╦£v1 Ōēźp2ŌłÆl
hŌłÆl and d2  1 ŌłÆp2ŌłÆl
hŌłÆl . Combining scenarios (i) and (ii), we
obtain d2  1 ŌłÆmax
 
p2ŌłÆl
hŌłÆl , p1

.
To examine the impact of the positive correlation between base product valuation and
add-on valuation, we compared ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under the bundling strategy. The results are sum-
marizedinProposition6.AllanalysisandequilibriumresultsarepresentedintheŌĆ£AppendixŌĆØ.
Proposition 6 When there exist perfectly positively correlated product valuations, such that:
(1) For any given c1+c2
1+h , both platform and base manufacturer prefer the platform to bun-
dle (Case E) for a relatively low or high commission rate; mathematically, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
Ōēż
ŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 if
1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
<
c1+c2
1+h
Ōēż
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
or
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
< c1+c2
1+h Ōēż1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
;
(2) Bothplatformandbasemanufacturerneversimultaneouslypreferthebasemanufacturer
to bundle (Case M).
(3) For any given c1+c2
1+h , if the commission rate reaches a relatively high level, a winŌĆōwin-
win situation achieves for the platform and both manufacturers in Case E compared
123

Annals of Operations Research
to Case M; mathematically, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 if
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
< c1+c2
1+h Ōēż5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
.
Proposition 6 echoes a part of the conclusion in Proposition 4. That is, for any given sum
of marginal costs, both the platform and base manufacturers tend to favor platform bundling
(i.e., Case E) when the commission rate reaches a relatively high level. The difference is
that, in this case, there is some variation in marginal cost, which needs to be divided by the
sum of the maximum values of products (i.e., 1 + h). This is because when the value of the
two products is positively correlated, cost-effectiveness can be reconciled by the magnitude
of the product values. In addition, Proposition 6 provides new insights. First, for any given
marginal cost, both platform and base manufacturers tend to prefer platform bundling when
the commission rate is relatively low. Even more extreme, as shown in Proposition 6(2),
both platform and base manufacturers never simultaneously prefer the base manufacturer to
bundle. This is because when there exist perfectly positively correlated product valuations, the
demand pooling effect of bundled products decreases. Thus, platform bundling can double
the marginal effect compared with base manufacturer bundling, which bene’¼üts both the
platform itself and the base manufacturer. Moreover, Proposition 6(3) shows that a winŌĆōwin-
win situation is occurred in Case E when the commission rate reaches a relatively high level.
This is because a high commission rate ensures the platformŌĆÖs earnings, the platform sales
of the bundled product are conducive to expanding demand, and the correlation between the
base product and add-on bene’¼üts both manufacturers under the given conditions.
Proposition 7 When there exist perfectly positively correlated product valuations, the base
manufacturer prefers add-on strategy to bundling strategy if the pair of (c1, c2) satis’¼ües c2 Ōēź
Max
 
1+h+

3
2

2(1+hŌłÆl)
1ŌłÆf
ŌłÆ1

c1ŌłÆ3
2(1ŌłÆf )

2(1+hŌłÆl)
1ŌłÆf
, (1ŌłÆf )(1+h)+

2ŌłÜ1 + h ŌłÆlŌłÆ1

c1ŌłÆ2
(1 ŌłÆf )
ŌłÜ1 + h ŌłÆl

.
Proposition 7 shows that the base manufacturer prefers the add-on strategy to the bundle
strategy when the base productŌĆÖs cost is relatively low and the add-onŌĆÖs cost is relatively high.
Since the productsŌĆÖ valuations are positively correlated, the demand pooling effect of bundled
products decreases. However, the base manufacturerŌĆÖs incentive to adopt the bundling strategy
remains. The relatively low marginal cost of the base product implies a relatively high-pro’¼üt
margin for the base manufacturer. At this time, the relatively high marginal cost of the add-on
means a relatively low-pro’¼üt margin for the add-on manufacturer. In this circumstance, the
adoption of an add-on strategy is conducive to stimulating add-on manufacturers to expand
the market through aggressive pricing, and the effect of price competition is lower than the
enhancement of the market effect and the weakening of the double marginal effect.
7.2 Negative correlation between base product valuation and add-on valuation
In this subsection, we consider that consumers who value the base product more value the add-
on less, that is, there exist negatively correlated product valuations. In reality, for example,
a consumer who has already purchased a luxury brand car (i.e., the base product) may not
be willing to spend time buying decorative accessories (i.e., the add-on). Consistent with the
model in Sect. 7.1, we assume that the value v1 is distributed between 0 and 1 uniformly,
whereas the value v2 is distributed between l and h uniformly, where 0 Ōēżl < h Ōēż1.
Accordingly, product costs satisfy c1 Ōłł[0, 1] and c2 Ōłł[l, h]. Then, v2  h ŌłÆ(h ŌłÆl)v1 is
used to capture the perfectly negative correlation between both productsŌĆÖ valuations.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Therefore, the market demand for the bundled product becomes db  1 ŌłÆ
pbŌłÆh
1+lŌłÆh , and
the price of the bundled product is between h and (1 + l). Under the add-on model, given
p1, the base productŌĆÖs market demand is d1  1 ŌłÆp1, where the marginal consumer is
╦£v1  p1. Hence, (i) when the marginal consumer buys the add-on, we have v2 ŌłÆp2  h ŌłÆ
(h ŌłÆl)p1 ŌłÆp2 Ōēź0, which leads to p1 ŌēżhŌłÆp2
hŌłÆl . In this scenario, all consumers who own
the base product will be not willing to pay for the add-on, so the add-onŌĆÖs market demand is
d2  0. (ii) When the marginal consumer does not buy an add-on, p1 > hŌłÆp2
hŌłÆl holds. In this
scenario, consumers who buy the base product will purchase the add-on if v2 ŌłÆp2  h ŌłÆ
(hŌłÆl)v1ŌłÆp2 Ōēź0, where the marginal consumer is ╦£v1 ŌēżhŌłÆp2
hŌłÆl . Thus, add-on market demand
is d2  hŌłÆp2
hŌłÆl ŌłÆp1. Combining scenarios (i) and (ii), we have d2  max
 
hŌłÆp2
hŌłÆl ŌłÆp1, 0

.
To examine the impact of the negatively correlated valuations, we compare ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts
under the bundling strategy. The results are summarized in Proposition 8. All analysis and
equilibrium results are presented in the ŌĆ£AppendixŌĆØ.
Proposition 8 When there exist perfectly negatively correlated product valuations, such that:
(1) For any given c1+c2
1+l , both platform and base manufacturer prefer the platform to bun-
dle (Case E) for a relatively low or high commission rate; mathematically, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
Ōēż
ŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 if
1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
<
c1+c2
1+l
Ōēż
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
or
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
< c1+c2
1+l
Ōēż1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
;
(2) Bothplatformandbasemanufacturerneversimultaneouslypreferthebasemanufacturer
to bundle (Case M).
(3) For any given c1+c2
1+l , if the commission rate reaches a relatively high level, a winŌĆōwin-
win situation achieves in Case E compared to Case M; mathematically, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
and
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 if (1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
< c1+c2
1+l
Ōēż5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
.
Proposition 8 is similar to Proposition 6. The difference is that, in this case, the ratio of
the sum of the marginal costs to (1 + l) plays an important role. It can be seen that the lower
threshold of the add-on value plays a key role in this case. In the case of a perfectly positive
correlation, the upper threshold of the add-on value plays a key role. In addition, for the case
of negatively correlation, the bundling strategyŌĆÖs demand pooling effect is enhanced, which
is exactly the opposite of the situation in which the valuation of both products is perfectly
positively correlated. Under the combined in’¼éuence of the two opposite effects, Proposition
8 in this case is so close to Proposition 6 that no further explanation is required. Similarly,
the conclusion obtained from Proposition 7 is valid in this case, which also shows that our
conclusion is robust.
8 Managerial insights and practical implications
Regarding the bundling strategy, our ’¼ündings show that, when the commission rate is rel-
atively low, both the platform and base manufacturer can bene’¼üt from the BBBM strategy.
This indicates that when the base manufacturer provides the bundle by itself, the platform
should lower the commission rate so that all participants can earn a greater pro’¼üt. However,
one party expects the other party to implement a bundling strategy at a relatively high com-
mission rate. In the real world, the stronger party will also dictate the other party to bundle,
especially with the rise of the market power of the platform, which may be dominant. Of
course, some strong brands will be exceptions, such as Apple and Nike.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The second ’¼ünding is that, if the platform sets a low commission rate, the sum of the
productsŌĆÖ prices is lower than that of the bundle; otherwise, the bundleŌĆÖs price would be
lower. These results provide pricing guidance for consumers when they tend to purchase
base products and add-ons. In addition, the above ’¼ünding indicates that the platform could
play an important role in the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs pricing decisions and even the consumerŌĆÖs purchase
decisions by adjusting the commission rate. Taking a ride-hailing service like Uber or Lyft
for example, the drivers provide the base service (rides) and can offer additional services or
amenities (add-ons), such as premium car types or in-car entertainment options, for an extra
cost. If the platform sets a low commission rate, drivers might price their additional services
competitively. Customers interested in speci’¼üc add-ons may ’¼ünd it cheaper to select and pay
for these services individually rather than opting for a pre-packaged bundle, especially if they
donŌĆÖt need all the bundled services.
In addition, by analyzing the impacts of relative factors (i.e., the commission rate and
product cost) on the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ and supply chainŌĆÖs pro’¼üts under different selling strategies, we
’¼ünd that not only the platformŌĆÖs commission rate but also the product cost can have a sig-
ni’¼ücant in’¼éuence on the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ decisions. For example, as the productŌĆÖs marginal cost (or
commission rate) increases, the base manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt decreases, whereas the platformŌĆÖs
pro’¼üt increases in the commission rate. These observations show that the base manufacturer
can increase pro’¼üts by reducing the productŌĆÖs cost, whereas the platform can bene’¼üt from a
higher commission rate. In the e-commerce industry, platforms like Amazon charge varying
commission rates to third-party sellers. When sellers analyze the impact of these commission
rates and their product costs, they may ’¼ünd that adjusting their product costs through bunding
or add-on to affect their pro’¼ütability.
9 Conclusions and outlook
In business practices, bundling or add-on strategies are widely used for selling base products
and add-on products, such as mobile phones and earphones, cars and their post-sale services,
and hotel accommodations and additional services. Under the bundling strategy, the add-on
product can be sold with the base product, while the ’¼ürm must give up the additional pro’¼üts
created by the add-ons. Under the add-on strategy, the ’¼ürm could impose price discrimination
on consumers, although some consumers may not purchase add-ons. Thus, ’¼ürms should
weigh the advantages and disadvantages of the aforementioned strategies when selling these
products. Moreover, e-commerce growth has forced more platforms to engage in bundled
sales, which may affect the manufacturerŌĆÖs distribution strategy. Motivated by these results,
weproposeagame-theoreticalmodeltoexplorebundlingoradd-onstrategyŌĆÖsimplementation
in the context of a platform supply chain and obtain some results.
The results of this research and managerial insights are as follows:
ŌĆó The base manufacturer can bene’¼üt from the BBI strategy only when both the commission
rate and the bundleŌĆÖs cost are at a low level, which results from increasing product demand.
Meanwhile, the platform is better off under such a strategy when the commission rate is
low while the bundleŌĆÖs cost is moderate or very high, or the commission rate is high and
the bundleŌĆÖs cost is very low or very high. These results also indicate that under certain
conditions, the base manufacturer and platform can agree on the bundling strategy and
achieve a winŌĆōwin outcome.
ŌĆó Our study analyzes the impact of the add-on and bundling strategies on ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pricing
decisions. The results show that, when the commission rate stays at a low level, the bundled
123

Annals of Operations Research
productŌĆÖs price under the BBP strategy is higher than that under the BBBM strategy,
thus leading to higher product demand. However, both the price and demand for bundled
product under the BBBM strategy will be higher than those under the BBP strategy if the
commission rate stays suf’¼üciently high level. Moreover, we ’¼ünd that, compared with the
bundling strategy, the bundleŌĆÖs price under the add-on strategy will be lower if the platform
charges a low commission rate, thus attracting more consumers to purchase the bundles.
ŌĆó We explore the impacts of the relevant factors, that is, the commission rate and marginal
cost of the base product and add-on, on the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ and supply chainŌĆÖs pro’¼üts under the above
strategies. The observations show that as the productŌĆÖs marginal cost (or commission rate)
increases, the base manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt decreases while the platformŌĆÖs pro’¼üt increases as
the commission rate increases. Moreover, by maximizing the supply chainŌĆÖs total pro’¼üt,
we ’¼ünd that the add-on strategy is always optimal when the base productŌĆÖs marginal cost
is low. When the cost increases, bundling by the base manufacturer might be the optimal
choice if the commission rate is low.
Although we obtained the above ’¼ündings, our study has some limitations, which can be
studied in future research. First, we assume that the base manufacturer is more powerful in
the platform supply chain, whereas some powerful platforms exist in the real world. Thus,
exploring a manufacturerŌĆÖs selling strategy in a platform-led supply chain is also interest-
ing. Second, our study focuses on a supply chain with a monopoly platform. Investigating a
competitive environment with multiple platforms will be interesting. In addition, our study
assumes that the platform charges the same commission rate to all manufacturers. There-
fore, our study can extend to the case where the platform sets different commission rates
for manufacturers. Finally, with the emergence of various emerging technologies, such as
Internet-ofThings (Goli et al., 2023b) and blockchain (Lot’¼üet al., 2022b, 2023), and new
algorithms (Goli et al., 2023a; Lot’¼üet al., 2022a), the impact of these new technologies can
be considered in models, and more complex models can be solved with these more advanced
algorithms.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
articleŌĆÖs Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the articleŌĆÖs Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1
In Case E, we can formulate the platformŌĆÖs and manufacturersŌĆÖ pro’¼üt functions and solve the
game by backward induction. In the second stage of the game, given a wholesale price wi,
the platformŌĆÖs problem is as follows:
max
pb ŽĆ E
e  (pb ŌłÆw1 ŌłÆw2)db
(6)
123

Annals of Operations Research
where db is given in Sect. 3.2. Speci’¼ücally, we consider the following two scenarios: (1) When
pb Ōēż1, the platformŌĆÖs pro’¼üt is ŽĆ E
e  (pbŌłÆw1ŌłÆw2) 1
2

2ŌłÆp2
b

. By setting dŽĆ E
e
dpb  0, we have
pb  pb1 ŌēĪ1
3

w1+w2ŌłÆ

6 + (w1 + w2)2
or pb  pb2 ŌēĪ1
3

w1+w2+

6 + (w1 + w2)2
.
Note that pb1 < 0 and pb2 > 0, and thus dŽĆ E
e
dpb > 0 if pb Ōēżmin{pb2, 1}, while dŽĆ E
e
dpb < 0
otherwise. Since pb2 Ōēż1, and thus w1 + w2 Ōēż1
2. Thus, we can obtain the platformŌĆÖs local
optimal solution, which is as follows: pŌłŚ
b(w1, w2)  1
3

w1 + w2 +

6 + (w1 + w2)2
if
w1 + w2 Ōēż1
2, and pŌłŚ
b(w1, w2)  1 otherwise. (2) When 1 < pb Ōēż2, the platformŌĆÖs pro’¼üt is
ŽĆ E
e  (pb ŌłÆw1 ŌłÆw2) 1
2(2 ŌłÆpb)2. By setting dŽĆ E
e
dpb  0, we have pb  pb1ŌĆ▓ ŌēĪ2(1+w1+w2)
3
or pb  pb2ŌĆ▓ ŌēĪ2. Note that 1 < pb1ŌĆ▓ < pb2ŌĆ▓ if w1 + w2 > 1
2, and pb1ŌĆ▓ Ōēż1 < pb2ŌĆ▓ if
w1 + w2 Ōēż1
2, and thus dŽĆ E
e
dpb < 0 if pb > max{pb1ŌĆ▓, 1}, while dŽĆ E
e
dpb > 0 otherwise. Since
pb2ŌĆ▓ Ōēż1, and thus w1 + w2 Ōēż1
2. Thus, we can obtain the platformŌĆÖs local optimal solution,
which is as follows: pŌłŚ
b(w1, w2) 
2(1+w1+w2)
3
if w1 + w2 >
1
2, and pŌłŚ
b(w1, w2)  1
otherwise.
By comparing the above two scenarios, we can obtain the platformŌĆÖs global optimal
solution, which is as follows: pŌłŚ
b(w1, w2)  1
3

w1 +w2 +

6 + (w1 + w2)2
if w1 +w2 Ōēż1
2,
and pŌłŚ
b(w1, w2)  2(1+w1+w2)
3
otherwise. By substituting the optimal price of bundle price
into the demand function in case E, we have dŌłŚ
b(w1, w2)  1
9

6 ŌłÆ(w1 + w2)

w1 + w2 +

6 + (w1 + w2)2
if w1 + w2 Ōēż1
2 and dŌłŚ
b(w1, w2)  2
9(w1 + w2 ŌłÆ2)2 otherwise.
In the ’¼ürst stage of the game, the manufacturers set wi to maximize its pro’¼üt simultane-
ously:
max
wi ŽĆ E
mi  (wi ŌłÆci)db, i  1, 2
(7)
Inserting dŌłŚ
b(w1, w2), we have
ŽĆ E
mi 

1
9(wi ŌłÆci)

6 ŌłÆ(w1 + w2)

w1 + w2 +

6 + (w1 + w2)2
, w1 + w2 Ōēż1
2
2
9(wi ŌłÆci)(w1 + w2 ŌłÆ2)2,
otherwise
(8)
Next, we consider the following two scenarios: (1) When w1 + w2 Ōēż
1
2, the manu-
facturer iŌĆÖs pro’¼üt is ŽĆ E
mi  1
9(wi ŌłÆci)

6ŌłÆ(w1+w2)

w1+w2+

6 + (w1 + w2)2
. We have
dŽĆ E
mi
dwi
 1
9
ŌÄĪ
ŌÄóŌÄŻ6 ŌłÆ(w1 + w2)

w1 + w2 +

6 + (w1 + w2)2

ŌłÆ
(wi ŌłÆci)

w1 + w2 +

6 + (w1 + w2)22

6 + (w1 + w2)2
ŌÄż
ŌÄźŌÄ”
> 1
9(6 ŌłÆ1.5 ŌłÆ3.6(wi ŌłÆci)) > 0
,
which implies that manufacturer miŌĆÖs pro’¼üt increases in its wholesale price wi, so we need
to consider the scenario with w1 + w2 > 1
2 solely. (2) When w1 + w2 > 1
2, the manufacturer
iŌĆÖs pro’¼üt is ŽĆ E
mi  2
9(wi ŌłÆci)(w1 + w2 ŌłÆ2)2. Since the second-order condition d2ŽĆ E
mi
dw2
i
 ŌłÆ4
9
(4 + ci ŌłÆwi ŌłÆ2wi ŌłÆ2w3ŌłÆi) < 0 is satis’¼üed, we can obtain that the manufacturer iŌĆÖs
pro’¼üt function is concave in wi. By jointly solving dŽĆ E
m1
dw1  dŽĆ E
m2
dw2  0, we have wŌłŚ
1  1
4
(2 + 3c1 ŌłÆc2) and wŌłŚ
2  1
4(2 ŌłÆc1 + 3c2). Inserting the expressions of wŌłŚ
1 and wŌłŚ
2, we
123

Annals of Operations Research
then get the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal decisions, product demands, and ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under Case E as
summarized in Lemma 1.
Ō¢Ī
Proof of Lemma 2
In Case M, we can formulate the platformŌĆÖs and manufacturersŌĆÖ pro’¼üt functions and solve
the game by backward induction. In the second stage of the game, given a wholesale price
w2 by the add-on manufacturer, the base good manufacturerŌĆÖs problem is as follows:
max
pb ŽĆ M
m1  ((1 ŌłÆf )pb ŌłÆw2 ŌłÆc1)db
(9)
where db is given in Sect. 3.2. Speci’¼ücally, we consider the following two scenarios: (1)
When pb Ōēż1, the base manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt is ŽĆ M
m1  ((1 ŌłÆf )pb ŌłÆw2 ŌłÆc1) 1
2

2 ŌłÆp2
b

.
By setting dŽĆ M
m1
dpb
 0, we have pb  p(3)
b1 ŌēĪc1+w2ŌłÆŌłÜ
6(1ŌłÆf )2+(c1+w2)2
3(1ŌłÆf )
or pb  p(3)
b2 ŌēĪ
c1+w2+ŌłÜ
6(1ŌłÆf )2+(c1+w2)2
3(1ŌłÆf )
. Note that p(3)
b1 < 0 and p(3)
b2 > 0, and thus dŽĆ M
m1
dpb
> 0 if pb Ōēż
min
 
p(3)
b2 , 1

, while dŽĆ M
m1
dpb
< 0 otherwise. Since p(3)
b2 Ōēż1, and thus w2 Ōēż
1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1.
Thus, we can obtain the base manufacturerŌĆÖs local optimal solution, which is as follows: pŌłŚ
b
(w2)  c1+w2+ŌłÜ
6(1ŌłÆf )2+(c1+w2)2
3(1ŌłÆf )
if w2 Ōēż1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1, and pŌłŚ
b(w2)  1 otherwise. (2) When
1 < pb Ōēż2, the base manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt is ŽĆ M
m1  ((1 ŌłÆf )pb ŌłÆw2 ŌłÆc1) 1
2(2 ŌłÆpb)2.
By setting dŽĆ M
m1
dpb
 0, we have pb  p(4)
b1 ŌēĪ2(1ŌłÆf +c1+w2)
3(1ŌłÆf )
or pb  p(4)
b2 ŌēĪ2. Note that
1 < p(4)
b1 < p(4)
b2 if w2 > 1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1, and p(4)
b1 Ōēż1 < p(4)
b2 if w2 Ōēż1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1. Thus, dŽĆ M
m1
dpb < 0
if pb > max
 
p(4)
b1 , 1

while dŽĆ M
m1
dpb
> 0 otherwise. Since w2 Ōēż1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1 given p(4)
b2 Ōēż1,
hence we can obtain the base manufacturerŌĆÖs local optimal solution, which is as follows: pŌłŚ
b
(w2)  2(1ŌłÆf +c1+w2)
3(1ŌłÆf )
if w2 > 1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1, and pŌłŚ
b(w2)  1 otherwise.
Then, by comparing the two scenarios, we can obtain the base manufacturerŌĆÖs global
optimal solution, which is as follows: pŌłŚ
b(w2)  c1+w2+ŌłÜ
6(1ŌłÆf )2+(c1+w2)2
3(1ŌłÆf )
if w2 Ōēż1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1,
and pŌłŚ
b(w2)  2(1ŌłÆf +c1+w2)
3(1ŌłÆf )
otherwise. By substituting the optimal price of bundle price
into the demand function in case M, we have dŌłŚ
b(w2)  1 ŌłÆ

c1+w2+ŌłÜ
6(1ŌłÆf )2+(c1+w2)22
18(1ŌłÆf )2
if
w2 Ōēż1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1 and dŌłŚ
b(w2)  2(2ŌłÆ2 f ŌłÆc1ŌłÆw2)2
9(1ŌłÆf )2
otherwise.
In the ’¼ürst stage of the game, the add-on manufacturer set w2 to maximize its pro’¼üt as
follows:
max
2
ŽĆ M
m2  (w2 ŌłÆc2)db
(10)
Inserting dŌłŚ
b(w2), we have
ŽĆ M
m2 
ŌÄ¦
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ©
ŌÄ¬ŌÄ¬ŌÄ®
(w2 ŌłÆc2)

1 ŌłÆ

c1+w2+ŌłÜ
6(1ŌłÆf )2+(c1+w2)22
18(1ŌłÆf )2

, w2 Ōēż1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1
(w2 ŌłÆc2) 2(2ŌłÆ2 f ŌłÆc1ŌłÆw2)2
9(1ŌłÆf )2
,
otherwise
(11)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Next, we consider the following two scenarios: (1) When w2 Ōēż1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1, the add-on
manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt is ŽĆ M
m2  (w2 ŌłÆc2)

1 ŌłÆ

c1+w2+ŌłÜ
6(1ŌłÆf )2+(c1+w2)22
18(1ŌłÆf )2

, we have
dŽĆ M
m2
dw2
 1 ŌłÆ

c1 + w2 +

6(1 ŌłÆf )2 + (c1 + w2)2
2
18(1 ŌłÆf )2
ŌłÆ
(w2 ŌłÆc2)

c1 + w2 +

6(1 ŌłÆf )2 + (c1 + w2)2
2
9(1 ŌłÆf )2

6(1 ŌłÆf )2 + (c1 + w2)2
Ōēź1ŌłÆ

c1+w2+

6(1 ŌłÆf )2 + (c1 + w2)2
2
18(1 ŌłÆf )2
ŌłÆ

1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1 ŌłÆc2

c1 + w2 +

6(1 ŌłÆf )2 + (c1 + w2)2
2
9(1 ŌłÆf )2

6(1 ŌłÆf )2 + (c1 + w2)2
> 1 ŌłÆ

c1 + w2 +

6(1 ŌłÆf )2 + (c1 + w2)2
2
18(1 ŌłÆf )2
ŌłÆ

1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1 ŌłÆw2

c1 + w2 +

6(1 ŌłÆf )2 + (c1 + w2)2
2
9(1 ŌłÆf )2

6(1 ŌłÆf )2 + (c1 + w2)2
> 0
on the parameter regions of f Ōłł[0, 1] and c1 + w2 Ōłł

0, 1ŌłÆf
2

, which implies that
manufacturer m2ŌĆÖs pro’¼üt increases in its wholesale price w2, so we only need to consider
the scenario with w2 >
1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1. (2) When w2 >
1ŌłÆf
2
ŌłÆc1, the add-on manufac-
turerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt is ŽĆ M
m2
 (w2 ŌłÆc2) 2(2ŌłÆ2 f ŌłÆc1ŌłÆw2)2
9(1ŌłÆf )2
. Since the second-order condition
d2ŽĆ M
m2
dw2
2
 ŌłÆ4(4ŌłÆ2c1+c2ŌłÆ4 f ŌłÆ3w2)
9(1ŌłÆf )2
< 0 is satis’¼üed, we can obtain the add-on manufacturerŌĆÖs
pro’¼üt function is concave in w2. By solving dŽĆ M
m2
dw2
 0, we have wŌłŚ
2 
2(1ŌłÆf )ŌłÆc1+2c2
3
.
Inserting the expression of wŌłŚ
2, we then get the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal decisions, product demands,
and ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under Case M as summarized in Lemma 2.
Ō¢Ī
Proof of Proposition 1
We ’¼ürst compare the price of bundled products in cases E and M, we have pEŌłŚ
b
ŌēźpMŌłŚ
b
if
f Ōēż2ŌłÆ(c1+c2)
2+3(c1+c2); otherwise, pEŌłŚ
b
< pMŌłŚ
b
. We now compare the demand of bundled products in
cases E and M, we have d EŌłŚ
b
ŌłÆd MŌłŚ
b
 ŌłÆ((2+3(c1+c2)) f ŌłÆ2+c1+c2)((14ŌłÆ3(c1+c2)) f ŌłÆ7(2ŌłÆ(c1+c2)))
162(1ŌłÆf )2
>
0 if
2ŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2
2+3(c1+c2) < f < 7(2ŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)
14ŌłÆ3(c1+c2); otherwise, d EŌłŚ
b
ŌłÆd MŌłŚ
b
Ōēż0. Hence, we have the result in
Proposition 1.
Ō¢Ī
Proof of Proposition 2
In this proposition, we focus on the impact of different bundling strategies on the base
manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt. By comparing the base manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt in cases E and M, we
have ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 > ŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 if 0 < f <
47
128 and 0 < c1 + c2 <
2

8(1ŌłÆf )ŌłÆ3ŌłÜ
3(32(1ŌłÆf ))2
8ŌłÆ3ŌłÜ
3(32(1ŌłÆf ))2
. Hence, we
have the result in Proposition 2.
Ō¢Ī
123

Annals of Operations Research
Proof of Proposition 3
In this proposition, we focus on the impact of different bundling strategies on the platformŌĆÖs
pro’¼üt. For analysis, we denote h(c)  ŌłÆ

12c( ŌłÆ1 + f )2( ŌłÆ27 + 91 f ) + 8( ŌłÆ1 + f )3( ŌłÆ27 +
160 f )+c3
ŌłÆ27ŌłÆ47 f ŌłÆ81 f 2 +27 f 3
ŌłÆ6c2
ŌłÆ27+49 f ŌłÆ49 f 2 +27 f 3
, and c  c1 +c2.
By comparing the platformŌĆÖs pro’¼üts in cases E and M, we have ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌłÆŽĆ EŌłŚ
e

h(c)
2916(1ŌłÆf )3 , and
denote g(c)  hŌĆ▓(c)  ŌłÆ12(ŌłÆ1+ f )2(ŌłÆ27+91 f )ŌłÆ3c2
ŌłÆ27ŌłÆ47 f ŌłÆ81 f 2 +27 f 3
+12c

ŌłÆ27 + 49 f ŌłÆ49 f 2 + 27 f 3
. We have g (c)|c0 Ōēź0 if f Ōēż1
3, g (c)|c0 < 0 if f > 1
3,
and g (c)|c2 > 0. Thus, we can obtain that (1) when f Ōēż1
3, there exist two thresholds C1
and C2, so that g(c) < 0 if C1 < c < C2, otherwise, g(c) Ōēź0; when f > 1
3, there exists
a threshold C2, so that g(c) < 0 if c < C2, otherwise, g(c) Ōēź0. Thus, we can obtain that:
(1) when f Ōēż1
3, with c increases, h(c) will increase at ’¼ürst, and then will decrease, and
’¼ünally will increase; (2) when f > 1
3, with c increases, h(c) will decrease at ’¼ürst and then
will increase.
Moreover, we have h (c)|c0 > 0 if f > 27
160, h (c)|c0 Ōēż0 if f Ōēż27
160, h (c)|cC1 > 0, h
(c)|cC2 < 0, and h (c)|c2 > 0. Thus, we can conclude that: (1) when f Ōēż27
160, there exists
three thresholds C1, C2, and C3, so that h(c) > 0 if C1 < c < C2 and c > C3; otherwise, h
(c) Ōēż0. (2) when f > 27
160, there exists two thresholds C2 and C3, so that h(c) > 0 if c < C2
and c > C3; otherwise, h(c) Ōēż0. Where C1, C2, C3 are solutions of ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌłÆŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
 0. Hence,
we have the result in Proposition 3.
Ō¢Ī
Proof of Lemma 3
In Case A, given a commission rate f , the manufacturersŌĆÖ problems are as follows:
max
p1 ŽĆ A
m1  ((1 ŌłÆf )p1 ŌłÆc1)(1 ŌłÆp1)
(12)
max
p2 ŽĆ A
m2  ((1 ŌłÆf )p2 ŌłÆc2)(1 ŌłÆp1)(1 ŌłÆp2)
(13)
By jointly solving dŽĆ A
m1
dp1
 dŽĆ A
m2
dp2
 0, we have pŌłŚ
1  1ŌłÆf +c1
2(1ŌłÆf ) , pŌłŚ
2  1ŌłÆf +c2
2(1ŌłÆf ) . Inserting
the expression of pŌłŚ
1 and pŌłŚ
2, we then get the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal decisions, product demands, and
’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under Case A as summarized in Lemma 3.
Ō¢Ī
Proof of Proposition 4
Since Ci is not analytically tractable, we resort to numerical analysis to derive the equilibrium
con’¼üguration presented in Fig. 4.
Ō¢Ī
Proof of Proposition 5
Proposition 5 can be derived by using a similar logic in Proposition 1, and thus we omit it. Ō¢Ī
123

Annals of Operations Research
Proof of Proposition 6
In Case E, we can formulate the platformŌĆÖs and manufacturersŌĆÖ pro’¼üt functions and solve the
game by backward induction. In the second stage of the game, given a wholesale price wi,
the platformŌĆÖs problem is as follows:
max
pb ŽĆ E
e  (pb ŌłÆw1 ŌłÆw2)db
(14)
where db  1 ŌłÆ
pbŌłÆl
1+hŌłÆl . By setting dŽĆ E
e
dpb  0, we have pb(w1, w2)  1
2(1 + h + w1 + w2). In
the ’¼ürst stage of the game, the manufacturers set wi to maximize its pro’¼üt simultaneously:
max
wi ŽĆ E
mi  (wi ŌłÆci)db, i  1, 2
(15)
Inserting pb(w1, w2), since the second-order condition d2ŽĆ E
mi
dw2
i
< 0 is satis’¼üed, we can
obtain that the manufacturer iŌĆÖs pro’¼üt function is concave in wi. By jointly solving dŽĆ E
m1
dw1 
dŽĆ E
m2
dw2  0, we have wŌłŚ
1  1
3(1 + h + 2c1 ŌłÆc2) and wŌłŚ
2  1
3(1 + h ŌłÆc1 + 2c2). Inserting the
expressions of wŌłŚ
1 and wŌłŚ
2, we then get the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal decisions, product demands, and
’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under Case E as summarized in Lemma 4.
Lemma 4 Under case E, the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pricing decisions and product demands are as
follows: wEŌłŚ
i
 (1+h+2ciŌłÆc3ŌłÆi)
3
, pEŌłŚ
b
 5(1+h)+c1+c2
6
, d EŌłŚ
b
 1+hŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2
6(1+hŌłÆl) ; the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal
pro’¼üts are as follows: ŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
 (1+hŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)2
36(1+hŌłÆl)
and ŽĆ EŌłŚ
mi  (1+hŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)2
18(1+hŌłÆl) .
In Case M, we can formulate the platformŌĆÖs and manufacturersŌĆÖ pro’¼üt functions and solve
the game by backward induction. In the second stage of the game, given a wholesale price
w2 by the add-on manufacturer, the base good manufacturerŌĆÖs problem is as follows:
max
pb ŽĆ M
m1  ((1 ŌłÆf )pb ŌłÆw2 ŌłÆc1)db
(16)
where db  1 ŌłÆ
pbŌłÆl
1+hŌłÆl . By setting dŽĆ M
m1
dpb
 0, we have pb(w2)  (1ŌłÆf )(1+h)+c1+w2
2(1ŌłÆf )
. In the
’¼ürst stage of the game, the add-on manufacturer set w2 to maximize its pro’¼üt as follows:
max
2
ŽĆ M
m2  (w2 ŌłÆc2)db
(17)
Inserting dŌłŚ
b(w2), since the second-order condition d2ŽĆ M
m2
dw2
2
 ŌłÆ
1
(1ŌłÆf )(1+hŌłÆl) < 0 is satis-
’¼üed, we can obtain the add-on manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt function is concave in w2. By solving
dŽĆ M
m2
dw2  0, we have wŌłŚ
2  (1ŌłÆf )(1+h)ŌłÆc1+c2
2
. Inserting the expression of wŌłŚ
2, we then get the
’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal decisions, product demands, and ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under Case M as summarized
in Lemma 5.
Lemma 5 Under case M, the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pricing decisions and product demands are
as follows: wMŌłŚ
2
 (1ŌłÆf )(1+h)ŌłÆc1+c2
2
, pMŌłŚ
b
 3(1ŌłÆf )(1+h)+c1+c2
4(1ŌłÆf )
, d MŌłŚ
b
 (1ŌłÆf )(1+h)ŌłÆ(c1+c2)
4(1ŌłÆf )(1+hŌłÆl)
;
the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pro’¼üts are as follows: ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e

f ((1ŌłÆf )(1+h)ŌłÆ(c1+c2))(3(1ŌłÆf )(1+h)+(c1+c2))
16(1ŌłÆf )2(1+hŌłÆl)
,
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1  ((1ŌłÆf )(1+h)ŌłÆ(c1+c2))2
16(1ŌłÆf )(1+hŌłÆl)
, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2  ((1ŌłÆf )(1+h)ŌłÆ(c1+c2))2
8(1ŌłÆf )(1+hŌłÆl)
.
In Case A, given a commission rate f , the manufacturersŌĆÖ problems are as follows:
max
p1 ŽĆ A
m1  ((1 ŌłÆf )p1 ŌłÆc1)(1 ŌłÆp1)
(18)
123

Annals of Operations Research
max
p2 ŽĆ A
m2  ((1 ŌłÆf )p2 ŌłÆc2)

1 ŌłÆmax
 p2 ŌłÆl
h ŌłÆl , p1

(19)
By jointly solving dŽĆ A
m1
dp1
 0, we have pŌłŚ
1  1ŌłÆf +c1
2(1ŌłÆf ) . We consider the following two
scenarios: (1) When p2 Ōēżl + (h ŌłÆl)p1 ŌåÆp1 Ōēźp2ŌłÆl
hŌłÆl , we have ŽĆ A
m2  ((1 ŌłÆf )p2 ŌłÆc2)
(1 ŌłÆp1), so pŌłŚ(1)
2
 l + (h ŌłÆl)pŌłŚ
1  (1ŌłÆf )(h+l)+(hŌłÆl)c1
2(1ŌłÆf )
, inserting pŌłŚ(1)
2
we have ŽĆ AŌłŚ(1)
m2

(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)((1ŌłÆf +c1)h+(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)lŌłÆ2c2)
4(1ŌłÆf )
. (2) When p2 Ōēźl + (h ŌłÆl)p1, we have ŽĆ A
m2  ((1 ŌłÆ
f )p2 ŌłÆc2)

1 ŌłÆp2ŌłÆl
hŌłÆl

. By solving dŽĆ A
m2
dp2  0, we have pŌłŚ(2)
2
 1
2

c2
1ŌłÆf + h

, inserting pŌłŚ(2)
2
we have ŽĆ AŌłŚ(2)
m2
 ((1ŌłÆf )hŌłÆc2)2
4(1ŌłÆf )(hŌłÆl) . Since ŽĆ AŌłŚ(2)
m2
ŌłÆŽĆ AŌłŚ(1)
m2
 (c2ŌłÆhc1ŌłÆ(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)l)2
4(1ŌłÆf )(hŌłÆl)
Ōēź0, hence
the scenario (2) dominates scenario (1), so we have pŌłŚ
1  1ŌłÆf +c1
2(1ŌłÆf ) and pŌłŚ
2  1
2

c2
1ŌłÆf + h

in
equilibrium. Inserting the expression of pŌłŚ
1 and pŌłŚ
2, we then get the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal decisions,
product demands, and ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under Case A as summarized in Lemma 6.
Lemma 6 Under case A, the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pricing decisions and product demands are
as follows: pAŌłŚ
1

1ŌłÆf +c1
2(1ŌłÆf ) , pAŌłŚ
2

1
2

c2
1ŌłÆf + h

, d AŌłŚ
1

1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1
2(1ŌłÆf ) , d AŌłŚ
2

(1ŌłÆf )hŌłÆc2
2(1ŌłÆf )(hŌłÆl);
the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pro’¼üts are as follows: ŽĆ AŌłŚ
e

f

(1ŌłÆf )2h(1+h)ŌłÆ(1ŌłÆf +c1)(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)lŌłÆc2
2ŌłÆc2
1h

4(1ŌłÆf )2(hŌłÆl)
,
ŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1  (1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)2
4(1ŌłÆf ) , and ŽĆ AŌłŚ
m2  ((1ŌłÆf )hŌłÆc2)2
4(1ŌłÆf )(hŌłÆl) .
Let c

c1 + c2, we have ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌłÆŽĆ EŌłŚ
e

1
144(1+hŌłÆl)

ŌłÆ

4 +
9 f
(1ŌłÆf )2

c2 +
2(4ŌłÆ13 f )(1+h)
1ŌłÆf
c ŌłÆ(4 ŌłÆ27 f )(1 + h)2
 ŌłÆ
(1+h)2
144(1+hŌłÆl)

c
1+h ŌłÆ(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2


c
1+h ŌłÆ(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2

,onecanobtainthatŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
if (1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
Ōēż
c
1+h Ōēż(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
, and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
otherwise.
Similarily, we have ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌłÆŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 
1
144(1+hŌłÆl)

9
1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ8

c2 ŌłÆ2(1 + h)c + (1 ŌłÆ9 f )
(1+h)2

(1+h)2
144(1+hŌłÆl)

c
1+h ŌłÆ1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f

c
1+h ŌłÆ1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f

, one can obtain that
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 if 1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
Ōēż
c
1+h Ōēż1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
, and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 otherwise.
Similarily, we have ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌłÆŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 
1
72(1+hŌłÆl)

9
1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ4

c2 ŌłÆ10(1 + h)c + (5 ŌłÆ9 f )
(1 + h)2

(1+h)2
72(1+hŌłÆl)

c
1+h ŌłÆ5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f

c
1+h ŌłÆ5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f

, one can obtain that
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 if 5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
Ōēż
c
1+h Ōēż5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
, and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 otherwise.
Given 0
Ōēż
f
Ōēż
1 and 0
Ōēż
c
1+h
Ōēż
1, we have
1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
Ōēż
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
Ōēż5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
Ōēż(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
Ōēż5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
Ōēż
1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
, on can easily obtain that: (1). when 0 Ōēż
c
1+h Ōēż
1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
, such
that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (2). when 1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
<
c
1+h Ōēż
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
, such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (3). when
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
<
c
1+h Ōēż
5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
, such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 ,
and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2
ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (4). when 5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
<
c
1+h Ōēż
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
, such that
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (5). when (1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
<
123

Annals of Operations Research
c
1+h Ōēż
5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
, such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (6).
when 5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
<
c
1+h Ōēż1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
, such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (7). when 1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
<
c
1+h Ōēż1, such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 ,
and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 . Hence, we have the result in Proposition 6.
Ō¢Ī
Proof of Proposition 7
Since ŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 ŌłÆŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1  (1+hŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)2
18(1+hŌłÆl)
ŌłÆ(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)2
4(1ŌłÆf ) , one can obtain that ŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1 if c2 Ōēź1+h +

3
2

2(1+hŌłÆl)
1ŌłÆf
ŌłÆ1

c1 ŌłÆ3
2(1ŌłÆf )

2(1+hŌłÆl)
1ŌłÆf
, and ŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 > ŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1 otherwise. Since ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌłÆŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1 
1
16(1ŌłÆf )

((1ŌłÆf )(1+h)ŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)2
1+hŌłÆl
ŌłÆ4(1 ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)2
, one can obtain that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1 if c2 Ōēź
(1 ŌłÆf )(1 + h) +

2ŌłÜ1 + h ŌłÆl ŌłÆ1

c1 ŌłÆ2(1 ŌłÆf )
ŌłÜ1 + h ŌłÆl, and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 > ŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1 otherwise.
So, we have ŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1 and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1 if c2 ŌēźMax
 
1 + h +

3
2

2(1+hŌłÆl)
1ŌłÆf
ŌłÆ1

c1 ŌłÆ3
2
(1 ŌłÆf )

2(1+hŌłÆl)
1ŌłÆf
, (1 ŌłÆf )(1 + h) +

2ŌłÜ1 + h ŌłÆl ŌłÆ1

c1 ŌłÆ2(1 ŌłÆf )
ŌłÜ1 + h ŌłÆl

. Hence,
we have the result in Proposition 7.
Ō¢Ī
Proof of Proposition 8
In Case E, we can formulate the platformŌĆÖs and manufacturersŌĆÖ pro’¼üt functions and solve the
game by backward induction. In the second stage of the game, given a wholesale price wi,
the platformŌĆÖs problem is as follows:
max
pb ŽĆ E
e  (pb ŌłÆw1 ŌłÆw2)db
(20)
where db  1 ŌłÆpbŌłÆh
1+lŌłÆh . By setting dŽĆ E
e
dpb  0, we have pb(w1, w2)  1
2(1 + l + w1 + w2). In
the ’¼ürst stage of the game, the manufacturers set wi to maximize its pro’¼üt simultaneously:
max
wi ŽĆ E
mi  (wi ŌłÆci)db, i  1, 2
(21)
Inserting pb(w1, w2), since the second-order condition d2ŽĆ E
mi
dw2
i
< 0 is satis’¼üed, we can
obtain that the manufacturer iŌĆÖs pro’¼üt function is concave in wi. By jointly solving dŽĆ E
m1
dw1 
dŽĆ E
m2
dw2  0, we have wŌłŚ
1  1
3(1 + l + 2c1 ŌłÆc2) and wŌłŚ
2  1
3(1 + l ŌłÆc1 + 2c2). Inserting the
expressions of wŌłŚ
1 and wŌłŚ
2, we then get the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal decisions, product demands, and
’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under Case E as summarized in Lemma 7.
Lemma 7 Under case E, the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pricing decisions and product demands are as
follows: wEŌłŚ
i
 (1+l+2ciŌłÆc3ŌłÆi)
3
, pEŌłŚ
b
 5(1+l)+c1+c2
6
, d EŌłŚ
b
 1+lŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2
6(1ŌłÆh+l) ; the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal
pro’¼üts are as follows: ŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
 (1+lŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)2
36(1ŌłÆh+l)
and ŽĆ EŌłŚ
mi  (1+lŌłÆc1ŌłÆc2)2
18(1ŌłÆh+l) .
In Case M, we can formulate the platformŌĆÖs and manufacturersŌĆÖ pro’¼üt functions and solve
the game by backward induction. In the second stage of the game, given a wholesale price
123

Annals of Operations Research
w2 by the add-on manufacturer, the base good manufacturerŌĆÖs problem is as follows:
max
pb ŽĆ M
m1  ((1 ŌłÆf )pb ŌłÆw2 ŌłÆc1)db
(22)
where db  1 ŌłÆpbŌłÆh
1+lŌłÆh . By setting dŽĆ M
m1
dpb  0, we have pb(w2)  (1ŌłÆf )(1+l)+c1+w2
2(1ŌłÆf )
. In the ’¼ürst
stage of the game, the add-on manufacturer set w2 to maximize its pro’¼üt as follows:
max
2
ŽĆ M
m2  (w2 ŌłÆc2)db
(23)
Inserting dŌłŚ
b(w2), since the second-order condition d2ŽĆ M
m2
dw2
2
 ŌłÆ
1
(1ŌłÆf )(1ŌłÆh+l) < 0 is satis-
’¼üed, we can obtain the add-on manufacturerŌĆÖs pro’¼üt function is concave in w2. By solving
dŽĆ M
m2
dw2  0, we have wŌłŚ
2  (1ŌłÆf )(1+l)ŌłÆc1+c2
2
. Inserting the expression of wŌłŚ
2, we then get the
’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal decisions, product demands, and ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under Case M as summarized
in Lemma 8.
Lemma 8 Under case M, the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pricing decisions and product demands are as
follows: wMŌłŚ
2
 (1ŌłÆf )(1+l)ŌłÆc1+c2
2
, pMŌłŚ
b
 3(1ŌłÆf )(1+l)+c1+c2
4(1ŌłÆf )
, d MŌłŚ
b
 (1ŌłÆf )(1+l)ŌłÆ(c1+c2)
4(1ŌłÆf )(1ŌłÆh+l)
; the
’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pro’¼üts are as follows: ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e

f

4(1ŌłÆf )2(1+l)2ŌłÆ(c1+c2+(1ŌłÆf )(1+l))2
16(1ŌłÆf )2(1ŌłÆh+l)
, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 
((1ŌłÆf )(1+l)ŌłÆ(c1+c2))2
16(1ŌłÆf )(1ŌłÆh+l)
, ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2  ((1ŌłÆf )(1+l)ŌłÆ(c1+c2))2
8(1ŌłÆf )(1ŌłÆh+l)
.
In Case A, given a commission rate f , the manufacturersŌĆÖ problems are as follows:
max
p1 ŽĆ A
m1  ((1 ŌłÆf )p1 ŌłÆc1)(1 ŌłÆp1)
(24)
max
p2 ŽĆ A
m2  ((1 ŌłÆf )p2 ŌłÆc2) max
h ŌłÆp2
h ŌłÆl ŌłÆp1, 0

(25)
By jointly solving dŽĆ A
m1
dp1
 0, we have pŌłŚ
1  1ŌłÆf +c1
2(1ŌłÆf ) . We consider the following two
scenarios: (1) When p2 Ōēżh ŌłÆ(h ŌłÆl)p1 ŌåÆp1 ŌēżhŌłÆp2
hŌłÆl , we have ŽĆ AŌłŚ(1)
m2
 0. (2) When
p2 > h ŌłÆ(h ŌłÆl)p1, we have ŽĆ A
m2  ((1ŌłÆf )p2 ŌłÆc2)

hŌłÆp2
hŌłÆl ŌłÆp1

. By solving dŽĆ A
m2
dp2  0, we
have pŌłŚ
2  1
2

c2
1ŌłÆf +h ŌłÆ(h ŌłÆl)pŌłŚ
1

 (1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)h+(1ŌłÆf +c1)l+2c2
4(1ŌłÆf )
, inserting pŌłŚ
1 and pŌłŚ
2 we have
ŽĆ AŌłŚ(2)
m2
 ((1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)h+(1ŌłÆf +c1)lŌłÆ2c2)2
16(1ŌłÆf )(hŌłÆl)
> 0, hence ŽĆ AŌłŚ(2)
m2
> ŽĆ AŌłŚ(1)
m2
; therefore, the scenario
(2) dominates scenario (1), so we have pŌłŚ
1  1ŌłÆf +c1
2(1ŌłÆf ) and pŌłŚ
2  (1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)h+(1ŌłÆf +c1)l+2c2
4(1ŌłÆf )
in
equilibrium. Inserting the expression of pŌłŚ
1 and pŌłŚ
2, we then get the ’¼ürmŌĆÖs optimal decisions,
product demands, and ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ pro’¼üts under Case A as summarized in Lemma 9.
Lemma 9 Under case A, the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pricing decisions and product demands are
as follows: pAŌłŚ
1

1ŌłÆf +c1
2(1ŌłÆf ) , pAŌłŚ
2

(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)h+(1ŌłÆf +c1)l+2c2
4(1ŌłÆf )
, d AŌłŚ
1

1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1
2(1ŌłÆf ) , d AŌłŚ
2

(1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)h+(1ŌłÆf +c1)lŌłÆ2c2
4(1ŌłÆf )(hŌłÆl)
; the ’¼ürmsŌĆÖ optimal pro’¼üts are as follows: ŽĆ AŌłŚ
e

1
16(1ŌłÆf )2(hŌłÆl) f

(1 ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)h(c1(4 ŌłÆh) + (1 ŌłÆf )(4 + h)) ŌłÆ2(1 ŌłÆf + c1)(1 ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)(2 ŌłÆh)l +
(1 ŌłÆf + c1)2l2 ŌłÆ4c2
2

, ŽĆ AŌłŚ
m1  (1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)2
4(1ŌłÆf ) , and ŽĆ AŌłŚ
m2  ((1ŌłÆf ŌłÆc1)h+(1ŌłÆf +c1)lŌłÆ2c2)2
16(1ŌłÆf )(hŌłÆl)
.
Let c  c1+c2, we have ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌłÆŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
 ŌłÆ
1
36(1ŌłÆh+l)

1+
9 f
4(1ŌłÆf )2

c2ŌłÆ(4ŌłÆ13 f )(1+l)
2(1ŌłÆf )
c+ 1
4(4ŌłÆ
27 f )(1+l)2
 ŌłÆ
(1+l)2
36(1ŌłÆh+l)

c
1+l ŌłÆ(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2

c
1+l ŌłÆ(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2

,
123

Annals of Operations Research
one can obtain that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
if (1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
Ōēż
c
1+l Ōēż(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
,
and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e
otherwise.
Similarly, we have ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌłÆŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 
1
144(1ŌłÆh+l)

9
1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ8

c2 ŌłÆ2(1 + l)c + (1 ŌłÆ9 f )
(1 + l)2

(1+l)2
144(1ŌłÆh+l)

c
1+l ŌłÆ1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f

c
1+l ŌłÆ1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f

, one can obtain that
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 if 1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
Ōēż
c
1+l Ōēż1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
, and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 otherwise.
Similarly, we have ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌłÆŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 
1
72(1ŌłÆh+l)

9
1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ4

c2 ŌłÆ10(1 + l)c + (5 ŌłÆ9 f )
(1 + l)2

(1+l)2
72(1ŌłÆh+l)

c
1+l ŌłÆ5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f

c
1+l ŌłÆ5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f

, one can obtain that
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 if 5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
Ōēż
c
1+l Ōēż5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
, and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 otherwise.
Given 0 Ōēżf Ōēż1 and 0 Ōēż
c
1+l Ōēż1, we have 1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
Ōēż(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
Ōēż
5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
Ōēż(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
Ōēż5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
Ōēż1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
, on can eas-
ily obtain that: (1). when 0 Ōēż
c
1+l Ōēż1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
, such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 ,
and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2
ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (2). when 1ŌłÆf ŌłÆ6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
<
c
1+l
Ōēż
(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
, such
that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2
ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (3). when (1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
<
c
1+l Ōēż5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
, such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (4). when
5ŌłÆ(5+6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
<
c
1+l Ōēż(1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
, such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and
ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (5). when (1ŌłÆf )(4ŌłÆf (13+6ŌłÜ5+3 f ))
4+ f +4 f 2
<
c
1+l Ōēż5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
, such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
Ōēż
ŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (6). when 5ŌłÆ(5ŌłÆ6ŌłÜ1ŌłÆf ) f
5+4 f
<
c
1+l Ōēż1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
,
such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 ; (7). when 1ŌłÆf +6 f ŌłÜ2(1ŌłÆf )
1+8 f
<
c
1+l Ōēż1,
such that ŽĆ MŌłŚ
e
ŌēżŽĆ EŌłŚ
e , ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m1 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m1 , and ŽĆ MŌłŚ
m2 ŌēźŽĆ EŌłŚ
m2 . Hence, we have the result in Propo-
sition 8.
Ō¢Ī
References
Banciu, M., Gal-Or, E., & Mirchandani, P. (2010). Bundling strategies when products are vertically differenti-
ated and capacities are limited. Management Science, 56(12), 2207ŌĆō2223. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.
1100.1242
Banciu, M., & ├śdegaard, F. (2016). Optimal product bundling with dependent valuations: The price of inde-
pendence. European Journal of Operational Research, 255(2), 481ŌĆō495. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.
2016.05.022
Chen, T., Yang, F., & Guo, X. (2019). Retailer-driven bundling when valuation discount exists. Journal of the
Operational Research Society, 71(12), 2027ŌĆō2041. https://doi.org/10.1080/01605682.2019.1650620
Chen, T., Yang, F., & Guo, X. (2020). Optimal bundling in a distribution channel in the presence of substi-
tutability and complementarity. International Journal of Production Research, 59(4), 1145ŌĆō1165. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1720930
Eghbali-Zarch, M., Taleizadeh, A. A., & Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R. (2019). Pricing decisions in a multi-
echelon supply chain under a bundling strategy. International Transactions in Operational Research,
26(6), 2096ŌĆō2128. https://doi.org/10.1111/itor.12672
Geng, X., & Shulman, J. D. (2015). How costs and heterogeneous consumer price sensitivity interact with
add-on pricing. Production and Operations Management, 24(12), 1870ŌĆō1882. https://doi.org/10.1111/
poms.12400
Geng, X., Tan, Y., & Wei, L. (2018). How add-on pricing interacts with distribution contracts. Production and
Operations Management, 27(4), 605ŌĆō623. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12831
123

Annals of Operations Research
Giri, R. N., Mondal, S. K., & Maiti, M. (2017). Bundle pricing strategies for two complementary products with
different channel powers. Annals of Operations Research, 287(2), 701ŌĆō725. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1
0479-017-2632-y
Girju, M., Prasad, A., & Ratchford, B. T. (2013). Pure components versus pure bundling in a marketing channel.
Journal of Retailing, 89(4), 423ŌĆō437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretai.2013.06.001
Goli, A., Ala, A., & Mirjalili, S. (2023a). A robust possibilistic programming framework for designing an
organ transplant supply chain under uncertainty. Annals of Operations Research, 328(1), 493ŌĆō530.
Goli, A., Babaee Tirkolaee, E., Golmohammadi, A.-M., Atan, Z., Weber, G.-W., & Ali, S. S. (2023b). A robust
optimization model to design an IoT-based sustainable supply chain network with ’¼éexibility. Central
European Journal of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10100-023-00870-4
Hagiu, A., & Wright, J. (2015). Marketplace or reseller? Management Science, 61(1), 184ŌĆō203. https://doi.
org/10.1287/mnsc.2014.2042
Honhon, D., & Pan, X. A. (2017). Improving pro’¼üts by bundling vertically differentiated products. Production
and Operations Management, 26(8), 1481ŌĆō1497. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12686
Jena, S. K., & Ghadge, A. (2020). Product bundling and advertising strategy for a duopoly supply chain:
A power-balance perspective. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03
861-9
Kawaguchi, K., Kuroda, T., & Sato, S. (2023). Relevant markets and market power of mobile apps. Japan and
the World Economy, 67, 101209.
Li, D., Liu, Y., Hu, J., & Chen, X. (2021). Private-brand introduction and investment effect on online platform-
based supply chains. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tre.2021.102494
Lin, S. (2017). Add-on policies under vertical differentiation: Why do luxury hotels charge for internet while
economy hotels do not? Marketing Science, 36(4), 610ŌĆō625. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2017.1028
Lin, X., Zhou, Y.-W., Xie, W., Zhong, Y., & Cao, B. (2020). Pricing and product-bundling strategies for E-
commerce platforms with competition. European Journal of Operational Research, 283(3), 1026ŌĆō1039.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2019.11.066
Liu, W., Yan, X., Li, X., & Wei, W. (2020). The impacts of market size and data-driven marketing on the sales
mode selection in an Internet platform based supply chain. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2020.101914
Lot’¼ü, R., Kheiri, K., Sadeghi, A., & Babaee Tirkolaee, E. (2022a). An extended robust mathematical model
to project the course of COVID-19 epidemic in Iran. Annals of Operations Research, 1ŌĆō25.
Lot’¼ü, R., Rajabzadeh, M., Zamani, A., & Rajabi, M. S. (2022b). Viable supply chain with vendor-managed
inventory approach by considering blockchain, risk and robustness. Annals of Operations Research,
1ŌĆō20.
Lot’¼ü, R., Hazrati, H., Ali, S. S., Sharifmousavi, S. M., Khanbaba, A., & Amra, M. (2023). Antifragile, sustain-
able and agile healthcare waste chain network design by considering blockchain, resiliency, robustness
and risk. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 1ŌĆō34.
Marketing China. (2022). Ecommerce in China: Guide to Chinese Ecommerce Platforms. Retrieved 19 May,
2022 from https://marketingtochina.com/guide-ecommerce-china/
Ma, D., & Hu, J. (2022). The optimal combination between blockchain and sales format in an internet platform-
based closed-loop supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 254, 108633. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2022.108633
McCardle, K. F., Rajaram, K., & Tang, C. S. (2007). Bundling retail products: Models and analysis. European
Journal of Operational Research, 177(2), 1197ŌĆō1217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2005.11.009
Niu, B., Zeng, F., & Liu, Y. (2021). FirmsŌĆÖ introduction of internet-based installment: Incremental demand
vs. cash opportunity cost. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2021.102277
Prasad, A., Venkatesh, R., & Mahajan, V. (2010). Optimal bundling of technological products with network
externality. Management Science, 56(12), 2224ŌĆō2236. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1100.1259
Shen, Y., Willems, S. P., & Dai, Y. (2019). Channel selection and contracting in the presence of a retail platform.
Production and Operations Management, 28(5), 1173ŌĆō1185. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12977
Shi, D., Wang, M., & Li, X. (2021). Strategic introduction of marketplace platform and its impacts on supply
chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 242, 108300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2021.
108300
Shulman, J. D., & Geng, X. J. (2013). Add-on pricing by asymmetric ’¼ürms. Management Science, 59(4),
899ŌĆō917. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1120.1603
Song, B., & Li, M. Z. F. (2018). Dynamic pricing with service unbundling. Production and Operations
Management, 27(7), 1334ŌĆō1354. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12871
123

Annals of Operations Research
Tian, L., Vakharia, A. J., Tan, Y. R., & Xu, Y. (2018). Marketplace, reseller, or hybrid: strategic analysis of an
emerging E-commerce model. Production and Operations Management, 27(8), 1595ŌĆō1610. https://doi.
org/10.1111/poms.12885
Wang, L., Chen, J., & Song, H. (2021). Marketplace or reseller? Platform strategy in the presence of customer
returns. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.tre.2021.102452
Xu, X., & Choi, T.-M. (2021). Supply chain operations with online platforms under the cap-and-trade
regulation: Impacts of using blockchain technology. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2021.102491
Yin, Q., Huang, K.-L., Kuo, C.-W., & Zhou, S. X. (2021). Add-on pricing in a distribution channel. Production
and Operations Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13502
Zhang, Z., Xu, H., Ke, G. Y., & Chen, K. (2022). Selecting online distribution modes for differentiated products
in a platform supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 244, 108384. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijpe.2021.108384
Zhang,Y.,Huang,M.,Tian,L.,Cai,G.G.,Jin,D.,&Fan,Z.(2023).ManufacturerŌĆÖsproductlinesellingstrategy
and add-on policy in product sharing. European Journal of Operational Research, 308(3), 1332ŌĆō1343.
Zhen, X., & Xu, S. (2021). Who should introduce the third-party platform channel under different pricing
strategies? European Journal of Operational Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2021.06.030
PublisherŌĆÖs Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional af’¼üliations.
123