TITLE: Prediction of bank credit worthiness through credit risk analysis: an explainable machine learning study
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06134-x
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 24 March 2023 / Accepted: 20 June 2024 / Published online: 8 July 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
 
 Victor Chang
v.chang1@aston.ac.uk; victorchang.research@gmail.com
1 
Department of Operations and Information Management, Aston Business School, Aston 
University, Birmingham, UK
2 
School of Computing, Engineering and Digital Technologies, Teesside University, 
Middlesbrough, UK
Prediction of bank credit worthiness through credit risk 
analysis: an explainable machine learning study
Victor Chang1
 · Qianwen Ariel Xu1 · Shola Habib Akinloye2 · Vladlena Benson1 · 
Karl Hall2
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06134-x
Abstract
The control of credit risk is an important topic in the development of supply chain finance. 
Financial service providers should distinguish between low- and high-quality customers 
to predict credit risk accurately. Proper management of credit risk exposure contributes to 
the long-term viability and profitability of banks, systemic stability, and efficient capital 
allocation in the economy. Moreover, it benefits the development of supply chain finance. 
Supply chain finance offers convenient loan transactions that benefit all participants, in­
cluding the buyer, supplier, and bank. However, poor credit risk management in supply 
chain finance may cause losses for finance providers and hamper the development of sup­
ply chain finance. Machine learning algorithms have significantly improved the accuracy 
of credit risk prediction systems in supply chain finance. However, their lack of interpret­
ability or transparency makes decision-makers skeptical. Therefore, this study aims to 
improve AI transparency by ranking the importance of features influencing the decisions 
made by the system. This study identifies two effective algorithms, Random Forest and 
Gradient Boosting models, for credit risk detection. The factors that influenced the deci­
sion of the models to make them transparent are explicitly illustrated. This study also 
contributes to the literature on explainable credit risk detection for supply chain finance 
and provides practical implications for financial institutions to inform decision making.
Keywords  Credit risk analysis · Machine learning · Explainable artificial intelligence · 
Supply chain finance
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
1  Introduction
1.1  Background
Credit risk is one of the most serious dangers that banks seek to mitigate in operations due 
to the nature of their business. In recent years, numerous studies have been done on these 
themes. Hosna et al. (2009) discovered a link between credit risk management and com­
mercial bank profitability in Sweden. Credit risk management is positively associated with 
bank profitability in Nigeria, according to Kolapo, Ayeni, and Oke (2012). Credit risk man­
agement has little impact on commercial bank profitability in Kenya, according to Kithinji 
(2010). Ruziqa (2013) evaluated how traditional Indonesian banks performed in terms of 
credit and liquidity risk. Liquidity risk was shown to be positively related to profitabil­
ity, while credit risk was found to be adversely associated with profitability. These studies 
show that no clear conclusion has been reached, suggesting this is a subject worth further 
investigating.
By correctly managing credit risk exposure, banks contribute to their own long-term via­
bility, profitability, systemic stability and efficient capital allocation in the economy (Psil­
laki, Tsolas, and Margaritis, 2010, p.873). “A few late customers might cost the bank a lot 
of money” (Gestel & Baesems, 2009, p. 24). During the early stages of the Basel Accord, 
the Basel Committee recognized this as a substantial source of risk. Tabari et al. (2013) 
also claim that “bank profitability and capital sufficiency are necessary for the financial 
system’s stability”. In addition, the contribution of credit risk management to the health of 
banks can further benefit the development of supply chain finance. Supply chain finance 
(SCF) is a collection of technologically advanced business and financing processes that 
improve efficiency, reduce costs, or increase revenues for all participants. To be specific, it 
provides convenient loan transactions in which the buyer gets more time to pay, the supplier 
gets paid back faster, and the bank or other funding provider gets interested as the benefit 
(Choi, T. M., 2020; Liang et al., 2021). However, the nature of SCFs also poses unique 
credit risk challenges. Whereas in a traditional credit system, banks extend loans directly to 
individuals or businesses based on their creditworthiness, in SCF, this dynamic relationship 
is intricately intertwined with that between buyers and suppliers. This tripartite structure 
highlights the importance of identifying the credit risk associated with the ultimate borrower 
as well as the supply chain transaction. Poor credit risk management in supply chain finance 
may bring losses to finance providers and, in turn, make the development of supply chain 
finance suffer. Therefore, finance providers, including banks, must distinguish between low 
and high-quality customers to accurately predict credit risk.
Credit risk analysis is a collection of classifiers and the procedures that support them 
that help banks determine creditworthiness to reduce risk in operations research. Credit risk 
analysis is undoubtedly one of the most “conventional” applications of predictive model­
ing, since it predicts whether loans granted to an applicant will result in profit or loss for the 
bank. People, corporations, and other organizations are given credit for a variety of reasons 
(equipment purchases, Purchases of real estate and products for consumption, and so on) 
and through a variety of credit facilities (credit card, loan, delayed payment plan). On the 
other hand, a bank provides finance to a person or a business with the understanding that it 
will be paid back on schedule, with interest calculated according to the risk of default.
1 3
248

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
Several recent studies have been conducted on machine learning-based credit risk analy­
sis. For example, Belhadi et al. (2021) proposed an ensemble method based on the Rota­
tion Forest algorithm and Logit Boosting algorithm to predict the credit risk of Small and 
Medium-sized Enterprises in agriculture 4.0. Targeting SMEs in China, Wang et al. (2022) 
employed resampling methods, under-sampling, over-sampling, synthetic minority overs­
ampling technique, and cost-sensitive learning to several classical machining learning algo­
rithms for predicting the credit risk of SMEs. Mahbobi et al. (2021) applied DNN, SVM, 
KNN, and ANN to the prediction of default payments. More innovative models or applica­
tions will be discussed in the literature review. While these algorithms have made significant 
contributions to the improvement of the accuracy of the credit risk prediction systems that 
can be used in supply chain finance, they lack interpretability or transparency, thus making 
decision-makers skeptical of or even rejecting AI systems (Shin, 2021).
Therefore, this study aims to provide a credit risk detection system with great perfor­
mance using machine learning algorithms. In particular, this study aims to improve AI trans­
parency in data-driven decision-making for supply chain finance by ranking the importance 
of features that influence the decisions made by the system.
1.2  Research aims and objectives
By using a recent and large source of the dataset of bank loan defaults, this research aims 
to perform a credit risk analysis by comparing classification performances among different 
machine learning algorithms and enhance the AI transparency of these classifiers by ranking 
the importance of features that determines the detection results. In pursuit of this aim, our 
objectives are as follows:
 
●
To examine various credit risk analysis approaches and their applications in predicting 
bank credit worthiness.
 
●
Determine the most accurate method for forecasting whether a loan applicant will repay 
the loan in full or default.
 
●
To calculate the likelihood of loan defaults based on the characteristics of loan appli­
cants.
 
●
To develop an AI transparency-enhanced model based on open-source data that predicts 
loan repayment or default.
1.3  Research question and research contributions
We focus on one major research question for the financial service firm that we have worked 
with. “How can machine learning models be leveraged to accurately predict credit risk 
while providing transparent explanations that align with the principles of responsible AI?” 
In this paper, we have demonstrated in-depth theories, steps, algorithmic development, 
simulations and interpretations to show our work can fully validate this research question.
This work significantly adds to the field of responsible and transparent AI in financial 
services in several ways. First, Gradient Boosting is shown to be the best-performing algo­
rithm after a thorough assessment of the most recent machine learning algorithms for credit 
risk prediction. Second, it provides feature important explanations that go beyond model 
1 3
249

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
accuracy and transparently reveal the main factors influencing credit risk. Third, it offers a 
guide on how banks might create credit scoring models that align with ethical AI best prac­
tices, are highly predictive, and are understandable. When combined, these efforts improve 
our knowledge of how to create reliable and responsible AI systems for critical financial 
judgments.
1.4  Paper structure
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Sect. 2 explores important credit worthiness 
related literature. More particularly, it focuses on machine learning (ML) methods for bank 
credit worthiness prediction and explainable AI for credit risk predictions. Section 3 covers 
the methodology conducted in the study, including details of the algorithms employed. Sec­
tion 4 covers the model training process and evaluation. Section 5 provides conclusions and 
recommendations for future research directions in this area.
2  Literature review
This study reviews two main strands of related work. First, the implementation of ML mod­
els is reviewed and their applications in predicting credit worthiness. Second, studies focus­
ing on the importance of transparency and explainability of such models and their associated 
techniques are reviewed. Understanding ML methods well and selecting suitable methods 
for research can be helpful to perform better in analysis and reduce risk in operations.
2.1  Machine learning models for Bank Credit Worthiness Prediction
A genuine, good assessment of bank credit worthiness has been proven to be an effec­
tive management tool. There have been many approaches for predicting credit worthiness. 
Several types of literature have attempted to classify them using statistical methodologies, 
artificial intelligence, data mining, and machine learning techniques. It is a good idea to take 
a glance at how things have evolved in the past before diving into the most cutting-edge 
concepts in this field. There has been a rise in interest in quantitative assessment of financial 
credit risk since Beaver and Altman’s work in the 1960s. In the 1970s, methods such as ordi­
nary least squares regression (Meyer & Pifer, 1970), discriminant analysis (Deakin, 1972), 
and logistic regression (Martin, 1977) were utilized to solve credit worthiness classification 
difficulties. Due to their ability to account for variable correlation, discriminant analysis 
variants surpassed univariate analysis in terms of performance. At this point, Altman had 
achieved a classification accuracy of more than 95% one time before credit worthiness and 
more than 70% three times prior to bankruptcy (Haldeman et al., 1977). By the 1980s, logit 
analysis (Ohlson, 1980), factor analysis (West, 1985), and other credit worthiness prediction 
approaches had been applied to the problem. Altman’s initial Z-score technique was broad­
ened in the 1990s to include private businesses, non-manufacturers, and emerging market 
companies (Altman, 1998). On one hand, this demonstrated that the same machine learning 
approach could be applied across a wide range of industries. However, it also emphasized 
how probability distributions differed amongst markets, challenging extrapolating training 
results outside the market. Using data from the US steel sector to develop an accurate pre­
1 3
250

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
diction model for the European clothing market, for example, would virtually surely result 
in a significant category error.
By the late 2000s, Bayesian approaches were used to combine financial ratios and matu­
rity schedule components (Philosophov et al., 2007). Other than financial ratios, predictors 
in the 2010s included accounting-based metrics, stock prices, company features, industry 
predictions, macroeconomic data, and agents’ perspectives (Altman et al., 2011; Yu et al., 
2011). The restricted expressiveness of financial ratios on the complex system of financial 
distress drove the model’s growing number of parts. Observing “real market aspects” dif­
fers from estimating financial ratios; these hidden components must be identified indirectly. 
Additional elements typically result in a more accurate representation of the company’s true 
health, but they come at a cost. Collecting the data can be time-consuming and costly (if 
not impossible due to confidentiality), making bank credit worthiness prediction a multi-
dimensional classification task. This makes it more difficult to apply machine learning algo­
rithms that must cope with the dimensionality curse efficiently. Most of the publications in 
this series examine datasets with up to 57 criteria (Du Jardin, 2009). In recent years, new 
solutions to these issues have arisen. There are a variety of artificial neural network modifi­
cations provided, including probabilistic neural networks (Sang, 2021) and self-organizing 
maps (Suleiman et al., 2021). Decision trees (Liu et al., 2022), support vector machines 
(Teles et al., 2021), soft computing (Lappas & Yannacopoulos, 2021), genetic algorithms 
(Lappas & Yannacopoulos, 2021; Yu & Cui, 2022), AdaBoost (Machado & Karray, 2022), 
and the Gaussian process are all examples of case-based reasoning successfully employed 
to analyze credit worthiness.
2.2  Explainable artificial intelligence (AI) in credit risk analysis
Machine learning (ML) methods frequently perform predictions better than standard statis­
tical models (Cascarino et al., 2022). Researchers have used this property in many differ­
ent disciplines, particularly when there are a lot of predictors available and the connection 
between the features and the outcomes is non-linear.
However, when these methods are applied in a commercial context, they bring several 
benefits while also revealing some important drawbacks. For example, in regulated financial 
services, every decision must be meaningful, and users need to comprehend the underlying 
reasons for the model’s designation of the customer as a defaulter (Biecek et al., 2021). The 
excessive focus on the performance of predictive models or systems usually comes at the 
cost of a lack of interpretability or explainability, which leads decision-makers to be skepti­
cal of or even reject AI systems (Shin, 2021).
Bussmann et al. (2021) also considered AI models as “black boxes” and believed that 
they are not well-suited for use in regulated financial systems and can present new difficul­
ties for organizations working in the regulated financial services industry and the people 
in charge of them. For example, when evaluating the default risk of a potential borrower, 
individual results often lack interpretability, i.e., it is difficult to relate the predicted prob­
ability of default to the characteristics of the borrower, which poses a challenge for auditing 
and accountability of the estimated probability of default based on expert knowledge or the 
actual characteristics of the borrower. In addition, from a regulatory standpoint, the explain­
ability of credit decisions is a consumer right that regulators should ensure its existence 
1 3
251

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
(Cascarino et al., 2022). Explainable AI (XAI) models, which offer specifics or explanations 
to make AI operations understandable or clear, are required to solve this issue.
XAI allows interested stakeholders to understand the key drivers of model-driven deci­
sions and to understand how AI algorithms decide, predict, and execute the process of their 
operations (Croxson et al., 2019; Rai, 2020). According to the European General Data Pro­
tection Regulation (GDPR), “the existence of automated decision-making should carry out 
meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the significance and the envis­
aged consequences of such processing for the data subject.” Accordingly, under some condi­
tions, the GDPR legislation gives data subjects the right to get relevant information about 
the reasoning behind automated decision-making (Regulation, 2016).
In the existing literature, several XAI methods have been applied to credit risk models 
for operations research, including measuring variable importance (Breiman, 2001; Fisher 
et al., 2018), Accumulated Local Effects (ALE) plot (Apley & Zhu, 2020), Shapley values 
(Shapley, 1953; Štrumbelj & Kononenko, 2014) and LIME (Visani et al., 2020).
To enhance the explainability of credit risk ratings provided by peer-to-peer lending plat­
forms, Ariza-Garzón et al. (2020) and Bussmann et al. (2020) proposed an XAI model 
which builds on a similarity network model applied to the Shapley values of individual 
predictions.
Using a relatively novel XAI approach, Visani et al. (2020) interpreted a credit scoring 
model constructed using a gradient boosting tree and developed an approach to evaluate the 
stability of the resulting interpretation (Roa et al., 2021). In contrast to traditional bureau 
data, measured variable importance and SHAP values were to examine the impact of proxy 
data from an app-based marketplace on credit scoring models.
Kuiper et al. (2021) sought out the perspectives of banks and financial supervisory 
authorities to gain insight into how XAI approaches can be improved in the financial sector 
in the future. They investigated three major areas: credit risk, anti-money laundering and 
consumer credit by employing semi-structured interviews with businesses in the Nether­
lands. Major discrepancies were found in the desired scope of XAI systems between the 
banks and supervisory authorities. The differentiation between the technical aspects of AI 
modeling and explainability requirements should be clarified to overcome this issue.
Demajo et al. (2020) presented a credit scoring model for use in XAI that is highly 
interpretable while also being accurate. They achieved state-of-the-art performance on the 
Lending Club and HELOC datasets by implementing an XGBoost algorithm, augment­
ing it with a 360-degree explanation framework in order to provide local feature-based, 
local instance-based and global explanations. This was supplemented with manual analysis, 
proving that the explainability was consistent and understandable, satisfying hypotheses 
for trustworthiness, detail sufficiency, ease of understanding, effectiveness and correctness. 
One key direction they suggested for advancements in XAI was to combine global and local 
explanations to create decision trees, further increasing explainability.
Misheva et al. (2021) implemented two major model agnostic explainability algorithms 
– LIME and SHAP – to augment ML credit score algorithms employed for analyzing 
US-based peer-to-peer lending platforms. More specifically, LIME was used to enhance 
the explainability of local instances, whereas SHAP was used for both global and local 
instances. Furthermore, the issue of AI adoption in credit risk management was addressed, 
positing that the key to increase the use of AI in this domain is to increase trust by adopting 
XAI methodologies. Therefore, their work showed both LIME and SHAP to demonstrate 
1 3
252

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
consistent explanations correlating to financial theory to develop trust in AI technology in 
the finance sector.
Torrent et al. (2020) utilized a range of ML models for credit risk analysis, namely Logis­
tic Regression, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, CatBoost, and stochastic gradient neural 
networks. The major contribution of this work was by using SHAP to evaluate the perfor­
mance of the ML predictions from both local and global perspectives. Notably, this proved 
that universal approaches should be avoided and that solutions should be tailored to the 
specific environment combination of credit scoring methodologies and financial establish­
ments to understand the relationship between banks and their customers fully. Based on the 
findings of Torrent et al. (2020), it is clear that while SHAP values and other XAI methods 
provide insights into model predictions, they are not without limitations. It is critical to 
understand that the interpretations provided by these methods are strongly influenced by the 
quality and representativeness of the data to which they are applied. Moreover, while XAI 
can shed light on the mechanisms by which predictors influence outcomes, it is important to 
cross-check these interpretations with economics and common sense to ensure that conclu­
sions are consistent with broader financial realities. Therefore, as researchers continue to 
utilise XAI in finance, it is paramount that these interpretations are treated with caution to 
ensure that they are both grounded in data-driven insights and economically sound.
Although there is a growing corpus of research on explainable AI techniques and machine 
learning for credit risk prediction, studies described above still thoroughly assesses various 
modeling approaches and produce feature importance explanations in this particular con­
text. Furthermore, there still needs to be more consensus in the literature regarding the best 
ways to create accountable and transparent AI credit rating systems. By comparing cutting-
edge machine learning models, figuring out what influences model predictions, and provid­
ing a framework that financial institutions can use to create AI systems that stakeholders can 
comprehend and rely on, this study seeks to close these gaps.
In summary, credit risk management is critical to the operation of banking, and related 
domains, such as supply chain finance. To better conduct credit risk analysis, a variety of 
advanced machine learning algorithms have been applied to this area by existing litera­
ture and achieved great performance in terms of accuracy. However, due to the black-box 
nature of AI, the output of ML-based detection systems cannot be easily understandable to 
decision-makers in the financial services industry. Moreover, the research on this domain is 
nascent. Therefore, our study aims to contribute to the literature by improving the explain­
ability of the credit risk models by determining the threshold using the precision-recall AUC 
curve and F-measure and then measuring the feature importance. Providing explainable 
models can indicate which variables contribute more to the default prediction and provide 
meaningful information for the decision-makers in supply chain finance.
3  Methodology
This research aims to perform a bank credit worthiness analysis by comparing classification 
performances among different machine learning algorithms (logistic regression, support 
vector machine, decision tree, multi-layer perception, probabilistic, neural network and so 
on) by using a recent and large source of the dataset for bank loans default.
1 3
253

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
3.1  Machine learning algorithms
3.1.1  Logistic regression
Logistic regression models are efficient because they are fast and easy to train, and their 
results are simple to understand yet relatively accurate. As a result, they are often used in 
classification analyses. The most notable difference between a linear and a logistic function 
is that the latter is dichotomous in nature. After this is considered, the essential assumptions 
for both models are the same, with no limits on the homoscedasticity and normality of the 
variables used in the analysis being applied in either scenario.
3.1.2  Decision tree
Decision trees classify data by recursively dividing the data set into mutually exclusive 
subsets to better explain the variation in the dependent variable under observation (Tickle 
et al., 1998). In order to classify instances (data points), decision trees arrange along the 
tree from the root node to the leaf node at the end of the branches. This leaf node is respon­
sible for categorizing the instance. The decision tree’s branches depict several situations for 
decision-making, as well as the results of those scenarios.
3.1.3  K-Nearest neighbor
The kth and nearest neighbor distance can also be utilized as a density functional metric. 
Therefore, it is a popular outlier detection technique. The smaller the density, the more 
likely the outlier is and the closer the reference point is. The nearest neighbor classifier is 
the closest intuitive neighbor of the form classifier, and it assigns point x to the class of its 
closest neighbor in the function space.
The k-nearest neighbor classifier can be considered as a technique that assigns the k 
nearest neighbors a weight 1
k and assigns a weight of 0 to all other parameters. This can be 
generalized to weighted nearest-neighbor classifiers.
3.1.4  Random forest
The Random Forest algorithm chooses the most relevant splitting point and variable for 
each tree and every node to reduce the errors. The model uses every variable to give pre­
dictions, unlike CART, where the variables not selected do not interfere with the response. 
Therefore, the RF model provides a prediction based on all explanatory variables. This 
model can train with class imbalance due to how the voting process works. Consequently, 
it has the potential to perform well when dealing with credit data, which is often extremely 
unbalanced when compared to the input and response variables (Breiman, 2001).
3.1.5  Naive bayes
The Naive Bayes algorithm is a classification method based on Bayes’ Theorem and assumes 
that predictors are unrelated. In other words, the Naive Bayes classifier assumes that the 
1 3
254

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
existence of one feature in a class has no bearing on the presence of any other feature in the 
same class.
3.1.6  Light gradient boosted machine
To address the limitations of the histogram-based algorithm, which is commonly employed 
in all gradient boosting decision tree frameworks, LGBM employs two methods, exclu­
sive feature bundling and gradient-based one-side sampling. These techniques increase the 
model’s efficiency and use less memory.
3.1.7  Adaptive boosting
Freund and Schapire (1997) developed an adaptive boosting (Adaboost) machine learning 
technique based on reinforcement learning. Adaboost gathers all weak classifiers in one 
location to build a strong classifier. Any machine learning system that performs slightly bet­
ter than random guesses in terms of accuracy is referred to as a weak learner. Weak learners’ 
outputs are linked with a weighted accumulation, which indicates the weighted classifier’s 
results if they are erroneous. As a result of combining the weak classifiers, a superior clas­
sification will be created.
3.1.8  Gradient boosting
Gradient Boosting is an ensemble technique that aims to improve the accuracy of a predic­
tive function by progressively lowering the error term in a predictive function (Friedman, 
2001). Following the development of a base learner, the most common of which is a deci­
sion tree, each of the trees in a series is fitted to the residuals to decrease the error from prior 
trees. Gradient Boosting employs the bagging technique to improve its prediction ability. 
It also has a strong capacity to deal with class imbalances, making it ideal for bank credit 
worthiness modeling.
3.1.9  Linear discriminant analysis
Linear Discriminant Analysis makes predictions by estimating the probability that a new set 
of inputs corresponds to each of the four classes. The class with the best chance of being 
chosen as the output class is identified, with the prediction made.
The Bayes Theorem is used to calculate the model’s probability. In its most basic ver­
sion, Bayes’ Theorem may be used to estimate the likelihood of an output class (k) given an 
input class (x) by considering the probability of each class and the probability of the data 
belonging to each class.
3.1.10  Multilayer perceptron
Multilayer perceptron (MLP) typically refers to any feedforward artificial neural network. 
The MLP in our bank credit worthiness modeling example has three layers: a single neuron 
in the output layer, a hidden layer with any number of hidden neurons, and an input layer 
with all the neurons for the explanatory variables. During training, each connection between 
1 3
255

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
neurons is given a weight, Wi , which determines how well each neuron understands its 
input/explanatory variables and then sends that value to the neurons in the next layer. An 
activation function f (1) is applied to the weighted inputs, together with the bias term b(1)
i to 
compute the output value of the hidden neuron in such a manner that:
 
hi = f (1)(b(1)
i
+
m

j=1
wijxj).
3.2  Performance evaluation metrics
To run these models properly, the data must be categorized into training and testing sets. 
This allows the model to be run on the training data to figure out what parameters to use 
and then compare the results to how the model performs on the test data. It is vital to exam­
ine how accurate the model’s predictions are after it has been built. A range of indicators 
is available for measuring the effectiveness of a model and quantifying the quality of the 
predictions. Some of the measures offered are based on true positive, true negative, false 
positive and false negative classifications, namely accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. 
Additionally, ROC-AUC curves are presented as an alternative way of evaluating the mod­
els’ performance.
3.2.1  Discrimination threshold
Figure 1 shows an example of a discrimination threshold plot, which has five main compo­
nents, including precision, recall, F1 score, queue rate, and discrimination threshold rate. 
The discrimination threshold is a critical value that is used to determine whether the pre­
dicted probability is high enough to label the positive class. Generally, this threshold is 
set at 50% probability. However, it may not be optimal for all scenarios, and adjusting it 
can help fine-tune the classifier to perform optimally. This is achieved by considering key 
metrics such as precision, recall, and F1 score, which can be optimized to achieve a balance 
between minimizing false positives and avoiding missed positive cases. Additionally, the 
queue rate is another crucial metric that describes the percentage of instances that require 
review. It should be optimized in accordance with business requirements, especially when 
the review cost is high. There are several methods to determine the threshold value. In 
this study, the model is executed several times over multiple train/test splits. The metrics 
are then represented as a median curve with a fill area around it. Then, the discrimination 
threshold can be set to maximize the performance of the model on the F1 score. In Fig. 1, 
the threshold is 0.28, corresponding to the queue rate of 0.21, which marks the labels with a 
score in the upper 21 percentiles as positive/risky. Figure 2 shows loan default distribution 
for our analysis.
One reason this paper selects this method is that it allows for the visualization of how 
different discrimination thresholds affect the trade-offs between sensitivity (true positive 
rate) and specificity (true negative rate). By adjusting the discrimination threshold, we can 
optimize the performance of the classifier for the specific requirements. In the context of 
bank loans default classification, for example, the decision-makers may want to optimize 
1 3
256

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
Fig. 2  Bar plot of loan default distribution
 
Fig. 1  Discrimination Threshold Plot
 
1 3
257

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
the model to minimize the number of false positives (good borrowers misclassified as risky) 
or false negatives (risky borrowers misclassified as good), or find the best balance between 
the two measures, as measured by the F1 score. What is also important is that this method 
accounts for the cost of investigation, as measured by the queue rate. This can help decision-
makers of banks to balance the trade-offs between performance and cost, as they can see 
how changes to the discrimination threshold affect both the quality of the predictions and 
the number of potentially risky cases that require further review.
4  Model training and evaluation
4.1  Overview of the data
In order to develop a model for bank credit worthiness analysis through bank loan default 
classification fusing different machine learning algorithms, an investigation of available 
datasets was carried out and a dataset on customer payment default cases in the UK was 
finally selected1. It is the most suitable dataset for our study as it is the most recent dataset 
available and the data sample is relatively large to build a stable model. This dataset con­
tains over 30,000 attributes of bank users who had taken loans across different banks in 
the United Kingdom. These customers were tracked over some periods to observe whether 
they had loan defaults or not. The various features considered in the data are the amount 
borrowed, which is a combination of both the individual customer credit as well as their 
supplementary credit, gender, education level, marital status and age in years. The dataset 
also includes prior payment history, which was compiled from the previous six-monthly 
payment data, amount of bill payments over the same period and the amount of previous 
payments.
Data had to be cleaned and organized in an analytically valuable style before it could be 
analyzed. All categorical variables were translated to numeric equivalents, with a unique 
number given to each category. There were no missing values found. Since not all the data 
sets were scaled evenly, the whole dataset was rescaled using a Z-score standardization; this 
was only required for the logistic regression.
SMOTE, KNN, and Tomek Links are all sampling approaches that may be used to deal 
with unbalanced datasets like the one utilized in this study. Owing to time and technology 
restrictions, a random over-sampling strategy was used for the target variable. The data were 
then randomly divided into a training and a test set using a 75/25% split. The test set was 
used to see how well the models predicted possible bank loan default, while the training set 
was used to make classification predictions.
4.2  Exploratory data analysis
In order to examine the distribution of the target variable, the bar chart presented below 
was computed and it can be observed from the chart that over 22,500 (75%) of the bank 
transactions did not have loan defaults, while well over 7000 out of the 30,000 transactions 
considered resulted in loan defaults.
1 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/praveengovi/credit-risk-classification-dataset.
1 3
258

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
To develop a better understanding of the features provided in the bank loan data used in 
this study, the summary statistics of all the features are computed and presented in Table 1:
Descriptions of the features can be found in Appendix Features description. From the 
total of 30,000 bank account attributes for this research study, the mean amount of the given 
credit (LIMIT_BAL) is £167,484.30, with a standard deviation (SD) of £129,747.70. The 
credit limit ranges from £10,000 to £1,000,000. The clients’ ages (AGE) range from 21 to 
79, with a mean age of around 35 years old, and an SD of 9.21. The table also shows the pay­
ment history of the account owners (PAY_0 to PAY_6), where the average monthly payment 
records from April to September 2005 are given as -0.291, -0.266, -0.221, -0.166, -0.133, 
and − 0.016 for April, May, June, July, August, and September, respectively. The negative 
mean values imply that, on average, the clients paid their previous monthly payments on 
time. However, there were some clients who had payment delays of up to eight months or 
more (maximum values for PAY_0 to PAY_6 are 8).
Furthermore, the table displays the total number of bill statements from April (i.e., BILL_
AMT6) to September (i.e., BILL_AMT1) of 2005. The average amount of bill statements 
for April is 38871.76, SD = 59554.11, May is 40311.4, SD = 60797.16, June is 43262.95, 
SD = 64332.86, July is 47013.15, SD = 69349.39, August is 49179.08, SD = 71173.77, and 
September is 51223.33, SD = 73635.86. The average amount of the bill statements tends to 
increase from month to month, from around 38871.76 in April to 51223.33 in September, 
which suggests that clients may be accumulating debt over time.
Finally, the average amount of the previous payment (pounds) in April is 5215.53, 
SD = 17777.47, May is 4799.39, SD = 15278.31, June is 4826.08, SD = 15666.16, July is 
5225.68, SD = 17606.96, August is 5921.16, SD = 23040.87, and September 2005 is 5663.58, 
SD = 16563.87. The average payment amount tends to decrease from month to month, from 
Table 1  Descriptive statistics of the features
Features
Count
Mean
SD
Min
Max
LIMIT_BAL
30,000
167484.3
129747.7
10,000
1,000,000
AGE
30,000
35.4855
9.217904
21
79
PAY_0
30,000
-0.0167
1.123802
-2
8
PAY_2
30,000
-0.1338
1.197186
-2
8
PAY_3
30,000
-0.1662
1.196868
-2
8
PAY_4
30,000
-0.2207
1.169139
-2
8
PAY_5
30,000
-0.2662
1.133187
-2
8
PAY_6
30,000
-0.2911
1.149988
-2
8
BILL_AMT1
30,000
51223.33
73635.86
-165,580
964,511
BILL_AMT2
30,000
49179.08
71173.77
-69,777
983,931
BILL_AMT3
30,000
47013.15
69349.39
-157,264
1,664,089
BILL_AMT4
30,000
43262.95
64332.86
-170,000
891,586
BILL_AMT5
30,000
40311.4
60797.16
-81,334
927,171
BILL_AMT6
30,000
38871.76
59554.11
-339,603
961,664
PAY_AMT1
30,000
5663.581
16563.28
0
873,552
PAY_AMT2
30,000
5921.164
23040.87
0
1,684,259
PAY_AMT3
30,000
5225.682
17606.96
0
896,040
PAY_AMT4
30,000
4826.077
15666.16
0
621,000
PAY_AMT5
30,000
4799.388
15278.31
0
426,529
PAY_AMT6
30,000
5215.503
17777.47
0
528,666
1 3
259

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
around 5,216 in April to 5,664 in September, which suggests that clients may be struggling 
to keep up with their debt payments.
Based on this analysis, it seems that many customers are carrying a significant amount of 
debt and may be struggling to make their debt payments on time. This could be a cause for 
concern, as it may lead to increased default rates and financial distress for both the clients 
and the banks. If banks do not have enough cash and a high number of customers want to 
withdraw cash, it may lead to possible collapse like what Silicon Valley Bank has experi­
enced. Therefore, understanding the debt and cash flow situations are crucial to financial 
operations research and risk management. By using XAI approach, we can understand in-
depth data analysis better.
4.2.1  Correlation matrix
In order to examine the inter-correlation among the features, a correlation matrix was com­
puted and displayed in the form of a heatmap to indicate how the pairwise relationship 
among the features of the bank account users that obtained loans in the UK. The lighter the 
color of the color block where two features intersect, the stronger the positive correlation 
between these two features. See Fig. 3 for details.
The features can be divided into five types, including the amount of overdraft available 
on the account (LIMIT_BAL), AGE, the user’s repayment status (PAY-related features), 
the monthly bill amount (BILL_AMT-related features), and the monthly repayment amount 
Fig. 3  Correlation matrix of data features
 
1 3
260

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
(PAY_AMT-related features). According to the correlation matrix, the monthly status (PAY-
related features) are moderately correlated with each other, indicating that a customer who 
was late in paying their bills in one month is likely to be late in the following months as well. 
The monthly bill amounts (BILL_AMT-related features) are highly correlated with each 
other, indicating that a customer’s bill amount tends to be consistent across months. Inter­
estingly, the monthly repayments (PAY_AMT-related features) are relatively less correlated 
with each other, which suggests that customers do not always pay their bills in a consistent 
manner across months. Moreover, the correlations with the target variable of this study, 
default, are in the order of PAY-related features, BILL_AMT-related features, AGE, and 
PAY_AMT-related features and LIMIT_BAL. Clients with highly correlated features may 
be more likely to default. The contribution of features to default detection will be further 
explored in measuring feature importance.
4.3  Discussion of model results
The data were subject to the machine learning algorithms described in Sect. 3, and the mod­
el’s performance was assessed using the assessment criteria provided. Finding a consistent 
metric for judging performance may be a complex and subjective procedure, depending on 
the work at hand. In reality, the best assessment model is a profit function that is a function 
of accuracy and recall, both of which must be improved in the future. A tradeoff between 
the TP (profit) and the FP (cost) must be made to calculate the profit, and both variables are 
recorded by the F1 score and precision-recall AUC. On the other hand, F1 score has been 
selected as the metric for evaluating the models in this research. The model with the best F1 
score may be updated and tested further to improve prediction and, as a result, evaluation.
The highest-performing model for each class was chosen using a stratified 5-fold cross-
validation technique. Table 2 compares model performance when the following metrics 
were used to assess their performance.
The Gradient Boost classifier has the best Accuracy score (82.49%), followed by Ran­
dom Forest (82.39%) and Adaboost (82.11%). This indicates that Gradient Boost was the 
most effective algorithm at accurately classifying instances as default or non-default overall. 
Random Forest, AdaBoost, and Gradient Boost, had the highest Precision score of 0.81. In 
the context of credit risk detection, precision measures the accuracy of the model in predict­
ing actual defaults among all cases that were predicted to default. The high precision scores 
of these three algorithms mean that they correctly identify the 81% of cases that are actu­
Table 2  Model evaluation
Algorithm
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Accuracy
AUC
Logistic Regression
0.61
0.78
0.68
0.78
0.50
Decision Tree
0.80
0.81
0.80
0.81
0.66
KNN
0.70
0.75
0.71
0.75
0.54
Random Forest
0.81
0.82
0.80
0.82
0.66
Naïve Bayes
0.74
0.39
0.39
0.39
0.56
LGBM
0.77
0.79
0.78
0.79
0.63
ADABoost
0.81
0.82
0.79
0.82
0.64
Gradient Boost
0.81
0.82
0.80
0.82
0.66
LDA
0.80
0.81
0.78
0.81
0.61
MLP
0.72
0.74
0.73
0.74
0.59
1 3
261

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
ally defaults. Random Forest, Adaboost and Gradient Boost (82%) also returned the joint 
highest recall rate, followed by Decision Tree and LDA (81%). Recall measures the ability 
of the model to correctly identify all cases of default in the dataset. A Recall score of 82% 
means that these three algorithms correctly identified 82% of the actual defaults. Decision 
Tree, Random Forest and Gradient Boosting jointly returned the highest F1 score (80%), 
followed by Adaboost (79%), indicating that they were effective at balancing Precision and 
Recall. All of the models’ Precision-Recall (PR) AUC is higher than 0.5, indicating that 
they performed well in capturing false negatives and positives. This also indicates that there 
are enough features for the models to train correctly. Gradient Boost (0.6605) achieved the 
highest AUC score, followed by Random Forest (0.6587), indicating that they were able to 
correctly classify most of the default and non-default cases in the dataset, regardless of the 
balance between the two categories. By measuring all indicators, Random Forest and Gradi­
ent Boosting were the two most effective algorithms for detecting credit card default risk.
When examining bank credit worthiness, there is the need to determine the proportion of 
accuracy acceptable to the financial institution being considered. False positives will lead to 
the exclusion of clients who would have been profitable otherwise but for whom the models 
mistakenly rated them as providing a high risk to the bank. Consequently, false negatives 
would raise the bank’s risk by classifying customers as non-risky when they were more 
likely to fail, resulting in a financial loss for the bank. Since both situations are undesirable 
for the company, we should establish the best weighting for these two factors to ensure that 
the bank’s expenses are reduced while earnings are increased. The most common method 
for selecting weights is to use hyperparameter optimization to find the most appropriate 
threshold between the two. The AUC curve depicts all possible threshold combinations that 
may be determined between recall and precision.
Given the computational and temporal constraints, hyperparameter optimization for all 
of the models was not practical; as a result, the study concentrated on improving the two 
best-performing models based on the F1 score and the PR AUC score, Random Forest and 
Gradient Boosting. In order to find the optimal parameters, a grid search was performed, and 
model tuning was performed on the two models as a consequence. The results are shown 
in Figs. 4 and 5. For the Gradient Boosting model, the optimal threshold is 0.27, meaning 
that if the predicted probability of the default class is greater than or equal to 0.27, the pre­
dicted class is the default, and otherwise, it is non-default. For the Random Forest model, 
the optimal threshold is 0.25. These two optimal thresholds are chosen to balance the false 
positive rate (good borrowers misclassified as risky) or false negative rate (risky borrow­
ers misclassified as good), which enables Random Forest and Gradient Boosting models to 
achieve high AUC scores and overall good performance, respectively.
While various evaluation metrics measure the performance of machine learning algo­
rithms, feature importance ranking plots are great visualization tools to show decision-mak­
ers in the financial services industry which factors highly indicate a customer’s likelihood 
of high default risk. It also enhances the transparency of AI and makes the output of the 
black-box nature of algorithms more understandable. According to Figs. 4 and 5, one crucial 
observation is that the two models have a similar arrangement and degree of feature impor­
tance across the attributes considered in the models. More specifically, in both instances, the 
attributes contributing most to the likelihood of risk are PAY_0 and PAY_2, which outline 
the repayment status in September and August 2005, respectively. Regarding repayment 
status, the data shows the length of payment delay on these dates. Given that PAY_0 and 
1 3
262

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
Fig. 4  Threshold plot and feature importance ranking for gradient boost classifier
 
1 3
263

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
PAY_2 refer to the most recent dates in the study, the most recent repayment status updates 
contribute the most towards the likelihood of risk. As this is a real case study for an anony­
mous financial service, therefore,
we have named them X1 to X20 for feature importance to meet anonymization and pri­
vacy requirements.
Fig. 5  Threshold plot and feature importance ranking for random forest classifier
 
1 3
264

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
From these results, we can confirm that the Gradient Boosting classifier produced a bet­
ter F1 score after model optimization as compared to the random forest model. This implies 
that the Gradient boost classifier best fits all models when predicting bank credit worthiness.
After determining the best classifier for this study, the importance of each figure deter­
mined by the Gradient boost classifier is then discussed to improve the explainability of this 
algorithm. Overall, the user’s repayment status (features related to PAY) contributed the 
most to predicting default risk, followed by the amount of overdraft available on the account 
(LIMIT_BAL), the monthly repayment amount (features related to PAY_AMT), and then 
the monthly bill amount (features related to BILL_AMT), with gender (SEX) scoring near 
zero and representing almost irrelevant. Regarding the repayment status of each month, the 
importance of the features related to repayment is ranked as PAY_0, PAY_2, PAY_3, and 
PAY_4, PAY_5 and PAY_6, meaning that the closer the monthly repayment status is to the 
prediction time, the more meaningful it is for predicting the user’s default risk, especially 
the repayment data of the last three months is considered the most important of all features 
by both algorithms, where the importance of the last month far exceeds the other features. 
In addition, the Gradient boost classifier considers the user’s monthly repayment amount to 
be more meaningful than the bill amount for predicting the user’s default risk in the next 
month, since most repayment amount features rank higher than the bill amount.
4.4  Discussion: how our findings support credit risk modeling
Our research findings add to and support the body of knowledge already available on trans­
parent credit risk modeling. The Gradient Boosting model’s excellent performance is con­
sistent with earlier studies showing the ensemble learning approaches’ predictive capacity 
in credit scoring scenarios (Abedin et al., 2023; Mushava & Murray, 2024).
Gradient Boosting’s dominance over more conventional techniques like logistic regres­
sion also aligns with the larger body of machine learning literature, which has constantly 
shown the benefits of more adaptable, nonparametric algorithms (Belsti et al., 2023).
However, in addition to analyzing a larger variety of machine learning models, this study 
goes one step further by quantifying the relative significance of certain characteristics in 
influencing model predictions. The feature importance results are externally validated by 
identifying recent repayment history as the most significant predictor of default risk, consis­
tent with domain expertise and economic intuition.
4.5  Limitations of the study
Unforeseen factors altered how the research was conducted, leading to the limitations of 
this study. First, the data used in the study lacked sufficient features to allow for enhanced 
model training, resulting in less accurate results. The number of hidden feature interactions 
would have increased due to the inclusion of more features, allowing the models to learn 
and make more accurate predictions and better measure metrics. Second, data preprocess­
ing and preparation is frequently the most time-consuming portion of any machine learning 
project, and more might have been done to improve performance, especially in the case of 
feature engineering, but a lack of appropriate features slowed the process. Last, an estimate 
of future profits would have been a beneficial addition to this study, but it was outside the 
1 3
265

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
scope of this study. Since this is such an important aspect of any business, the study is con­
strained due to not having investigated it.
5  Conclusions and recommendations
5.1  Conclusions
Credit risk management is critical to the operation of banking, and failing to control the risk 
may bring significant negative effects to other related domains, such as supply chain finance 
and instability to financial operations. To better conduct credit risk analysis, in addition, to 
providing an effective credit risk detection model using machine learning algorithms, this 
study aims to improve AI transparency in data-driven decision-making for supply chain 
finance by ranking the importance of features that determines the detection results and 
reporting price and risk analysis.
The statistics show that determining a limit for assessing binary classification bank credit 
worthiness is challenging. According to the study, predicting bank credit worthiness is dif­
ficult, since deciding who is a high-risk customer is seldom a binary decision but rather a 
continuous system. Furthermore, the unavailability of a balanced dataset complicates calcu­
lations, which is a typical issue with imbalanced datasets, as shown by concentrates (Khan­
dani et al., 2010).
The findings of this research demonstrate that machine learning models present a bet­
ter technique for bank credit worthiness prediction when compared with the traditional 
statistical modeling approach. As observed, the Gradient Boosting classifier is the best fit 
among all models when predicting bank credit worthiness. The Logistic Regression model 
did badly in terms of performance, whereas the Random Forest classifier model came in 
second. The capacity of the model to boost organizational productivity and profitability by 
decreasing the open-door cost of false up-sides and raising revenue by lowering the cost of 
misleading negatives was classified as competent in this research study. The F1-score was 
used to represent the harmonic mean of precision and recall. Regardless, Logistic Regres­
sion scored well on the accuracy measure, which compares the proportion of adequately 
detected defaults to the absolute perception, with over 70% accuracy. Despite this, the accu­
racy measure is inadequate as a proxy for performance since it ignores the cost of misclas­
sification, represented in the number of false positives and negatives, which is why the score 
was left out of the study.
Individual models often outperformed ensemble models, as seen by a range of measures, 
including the concentration of models by Butaru et al. (2016). Overfitting was a concern 
due to the imbalanced nature of the data, and the Gradient Boosting classifier’s resistance 
to overfitting difficulties may have played a factor in why it outperformed the other models. 
The Random Forest model was successfully beaten because of the review’s completion of 
hyper boundary optimization and model change to get a higher limit for precision and recall, 
with the F1-score increasing by 2.7%.
According to the study’s findings, male customers were more likely than female custom­
ers to default, with a 14% and 9% likelihood of defaulting, respectively. Aside from that, 
this study revealed that those aged 18 to 33 were the most likely to default, while those 
aged 54 and older were the least likely. The researchers also observed that inconsistent pay­
1 3
266

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
ment history patterns play an essential role in determining whether a customer will default. 
When dealing with imbalanced datasets, the study revealed that the ensemble models per­
form better at demonstrating bank credit worthiness, similar to credit data sets; neverthe­
less, the models may have done better if the dataset included a larger number of highlights. 
More advanced testing procedures, such as SMOTE, may have contributed even more to the 
uneven data set and performance than traditional statistical modeling techniques.
In addition, this study argues that the joint use of complex models using ML and Explain­
able AI techniques can help understand the determinants of financial risk. Their combination 
helps to identify several characteristics (e.g., thresholds) of the relationship between credit 
risk and its determinants and gives greater weight to determinants that show non-monotonic 
or non-linear relationships with outcomes than logit models.
Aversion to AI systems appears to be especially pervasive in the finance industry, despite 
strong indications that such systems would improve the operations of the supply chain 
finance business. The key to increasing the adoption of such systems lies in gaining the trust 
of those who would benefit the most from implementing them. Ironically, these tend to be 
the people with the most skepticism – and understandably so. It then follows that it is not 
enough for modern AI systems to merely offer an improvement over traditional methods 
– they must be easily explainable. Those looking to employ AI systems, in supply chain 
finance or otherwise, want to be able to understand exactly how they work for them to be 
fully trusted. Indeed, given the complexity of these systems, this is not an easy task, and 
the onus is on the developers of AI systems to demonstrate the level of transparency and 
explainability that is becoming increasingly required.
5.2  Theoretical implications
This study has important theoretical implications for the development of transparent and 
responsible AI systems in the financial sector and beyond. The results demonstrate that it 
is indeed possible to build machine learning models for high-stakes decisions like credit 
underwriting that achieve state-of-the-art accuracy while also providing clear explanations 
of the factors driving model predictions.
The top performance of Gradient Boosting model, coupled with the generation of global 
and local feature importance values, provides a concrete example of how the often-com­
peting objectives of predictive power and interpretability can be balanced. This research 
also outlines a generalizable framework - consisting of techniques like feature importance, 
SHAP values, and visualization of partial dependence plots - that can be applied to build 
explainable AI systems across a range of problem domains.
More broadly, this research makes a theoretical contribution by empirically validating 
the feasibility and value of combining sophisticated machine learning with explanation 
techniques to promote transparency and accountability. It extends the growing body of XAI 
research into the specific context of credit risk modeling, demonstrating how domain-spe­
cific considerations (e.g., the need to provide adverse action notices under fair lending laws) 
make explainability especially critical.
At the same time, the study highlights open theoretical questions around how to define 
and measure key constructs like “transparency”, “explainability”, and “responsibility” 
in the context of AI systems. While feature importance provides one lens of explanatory 
insight, further research is needed to explore other perspectives, such as those focused on 
1 3
267

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
the understandability of explanations to different stakeholder audiences. Ongoing work is 
also needed to develop theoretical frameworks that specify the necessary conditions for AI 
systems across different industries to be considered sufficiently transparent and responsible.
5.3  Practical implications for banks and financial services
The application of SHAP values to pinpoint the primary causes of default risk at the global 
and borrower levels demonstrates how banks can produce justifications that enhance the 
clarity and usefulness of model projections. Essentially, banks ought to combine advanced 
machine learning models with elucidation methods to identify the primary determinants of 
a borrower’s risk score. This is particularly important since it enables banks to give the spe­
cific, model-driven justifications needed to comply with fair lending laws when borrowers 
are denied credit.
More strategically, banks can directly influence how they prioritize different data items 
in their credit risk models by taking into account the precise factors found in this study that 
were most predictive, such as a borrower’s recent repayment history. Although the pre­
cise feature importance might fluctuate among distinct borrower populations and product 
categories, this study offers a broadly applicable proof-of-concept for employing model 
introspection methodologies to enhance data gathering and feature development endeavors.
Finally, this research can provide a guide for banks looking to combine the interpretabil­
ity of explanatory techniques with the power of machine learning to create credit risk mod­
els that are transparent, highly accurate, and consistent with regulatory standards. Banks 
should see explainable AI as a chance to improve the ethical, equitable, and robustness of 
their models rather than as an additional regulatory burden. Banks can cultivate more trust 
from investors, customers, and regulatory bodies through the proactive adoption of the strat­
egies defined in this research.
5.4  Recommendations
As previously stated, despite its limitations, this study provides several recommendations 
for financial operations research:
1. To enable feature engineering, which may improve performance by using a more opti­
mal subset, the analysis should be performed on data with many more characteristics, 
such as monthly transactional information from client accounts.
2. AI provides transparency in deep data analysis and XAI will be utilized more frequently 
in complex data analysis.
3. It is recommended for institutions to analyze data with many more features, such as 
monthly transactional information on customers’ accounts and monthly data. Addition­
ally, considering the rising popularity of technology in the financial industry, alternative 
ways to perform predictive modeling will be useful for any institutions.
4. Future research may examine deep learning models and their performance. However, 
one disadvantage of these models is that they are opaque, making them difficult to 
explain using theoretical frameworks. The blended approach of using XAI and deep 
learning models can be effective.
1 3
268

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
Appendix A: Features description
Features
Description
LIMIT_BAL
Credit limit provided to the client
AGE
Age of the client (in years)
PAY_0 to PAY_6
Repayment status of the client’s previous monthly payments. The measurement 
scale for the repayment status is as follows: -2 = no consumption; -1 = paid in 
full; 0 = use of revolving credit; 1 = payment delay for one month; 2 = payment 
delay for two months; …; 8 = payment delay for eight months or more.
BILL_AMT1 to 
BILL_AMT6
Amount of the client’s bill statement (in NT dollar) for the respective months 
of April to September 2005.
PAY_AMT1 to 
PAY_AMT6
Amount of the client’s previous payment (in NT dollar) for the respective 
months of April to September 2005.
Acknowledgements  This work is partly supported by VC Research (VCR 0000182).
Declarations
Conflict of interest  Authors confirm that there is no conflict of interest with anyone involved.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abedin, M. Z., Guotai, C., Hajek, P., & Zhang, T. (2023). Combining weighted SMOTE with ensemble learn­
ing for the class-imbalanced prediction of small business credit risk. Complex & Intelligent Systems, 
9(4), 3559–3579.
Altman, E. I. (2011). Default Recovery Rates and Lgd in Credit Risk Modelling and Practice.
Altman, E. I., Hartzell, J., & Peck, M. (1998). Emerging market corporate bonds—a scoring system. In 
Emerging Market Capital Flows: Proceedings of a Conference held at the Stern School of Business, 
New York University on May 23–24, 1996 (pp. 391–400). Springer US.
Apley, D. W., & Zhu, J. (2020). Visualizing the effects of predictor variables in black box supervised learning 
models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 82(4), 1059–1086.
Ariza-Garzón, M. J., Arroyo, J., Caparrini, A., & Segovia-Vargas, M. J. (2020). Explainability of a machine 
learning granting scoring model in peer-to-peer lending. Ieee Access, 8, 64873–64890.
Belhadi, A., Kamble, S. S., Mani, V., Benkhati, I., & Touriki, F. E. (2021). An ensemble machine learning 
approach for forecasting credit risk of agricultural SMEs’ investments in agriculture 4.0 through supply 
chain finance (pp. 1–29). Annals of Operations Research.
Belsti, Y., Moran, L., Du, L., Mousa, A., De Silva, K., Enticott, J., & Teede, H. (2023). Comparison of 
machine learning and conventional logistic regression-based prediction models for gestational diabetes 
in an ethnically diverse population; the Monash GDM Machine learning model. International Journal 
of Medical Informatics, 179, 105228.
Biecek, P., Chlebus, M., Gajda, J., Gosiewska, A., Kozak, A., Ogonowski, D., & Wojewnik, P. (2021). 
Enabling machine learning algorithms for credit scoring–explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) 
methods for clear understanding complex predictive models. arXiv Preprint arXiv:210406735.
1 3
269

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
Bis.org (2014). Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. [online] Available at.
Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–32.
Bussmann, N., Giudici, P., Marinelli, D., & Papenbrock, J. (2020). Explainable AI in fintech risk manage­
ment. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 3, 26.
Bussmann, N., Giudici, P., Marinelli, D., & Papenbrock, J. (2021). Explainable machine learning in credit 
risk management. Computational Economics, 57(1), 203–216.
Butaru, F., Chen, Q., Clark, B., Das, S., Lo, A. W., & Siddique, A. (2016). Risk and risk management in the 
credit card industry. Journal of Banking & Finance, 72, 218–239.
Cascarino, G., Moscatelli, M., & Parlapiano, F. (2022). Explainable Artificial Intelligence: interpreting 
default forecasting models based on Machine Learning. Bank of Italy Occasional Paper, (674).
Choi, T. M. (2020). Supply chain financing using blockchain: Impacts on supply chains selling fashionable 
products. Annals of Operations Research, 1–23.
Croxson, K., Bracke, P., & Jung, C. (2019). Explaining why the computer says ‘no’. FCA-Insight, 5, 31.
Deakin, E. (1972). A discriminant analysis of predictors of business failure. Journal of Accounting Research, 
10(1), 167–179.
Demajo, L. M., Vella, V., & Dingli, A. (2020). Explainable ai for interpretable credit scoring. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2012.03749.
Du Jardin, P. (2009). Bankruptcy prediction models: How to choose the most relevant variables? Bankers, 
Markets & Investors, 98, 39–46. Edition. John Wiley & Sons.
Fisher, A., Rudin, C., & Dominici, F. (2018). Model class reliance: Variable importance measures for any 
machine learning model class, from the rashomon perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01489, 68.
Freund, Y., & Schapire, R. (1997). A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an application 
to boosting. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 55(1), 119–139.
Friedman, J. H. (2001). Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine. Annals of Statistics, 
1189–1232.
Gestel, T. V., & Baesens, B. (2009). Credit risk management. [E-book] Available through: Oxford Scholar­
ship Online http://www.oxfordscholarship.com.proxy.ub.umu.se/view/https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:
oso/9780199545117.001.0001/acprof-9780199545117-chapter-1.
Haldeman, R., et al. (1977). Zeta analysis: A new model to identify bankruptcy risk of corporations. Journal 
of Banking and Finance, 1, 29–35.
Hosna, A., Manzura, B., & Juanjuan, S. (2009). Credit risk management and profitability in commercial 
banks in Sweden. rapport nr.: Master Degree Project 2009: 36.
Khandani, A. E., Kim, A. J., & Lo, A. W. (2010). Consumer credit-risk models via machine-learning algo­
rithms. Journal of Banking & Finance, 34(11), 2767–2787.
Kithinji, A. M. (2010). Credit Risk Management and profitability of commercial banks in Kenya. School of 
Business, University of Nairobi.
Kolapo, T. F., et al. (2012). Credit risk and commercial banks’ performance in Nigeria: A panel model 
approach. Australian Journal of Business and Management Research, 2(2), 31–38.
Kuiper, O., Berg, M. V. D., Burgt, J. V. D., & Leijnen, S. (2021, November). Exploring explainable AI in the 
financial sector: perspectives of banks and supervisory authorities. In Benelux Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (pp. 105–119). Springer, Cham.
Lappas, P. Z., & Yannacopoulos, A. N. (2021). A machine learning approach combining expert knowledge 
with genetic algorithms in feature selection for credit risk assessment. Applied Soft Computing, 107, 
107391.
Liang, D., Cao, W., & Wang, M. (2021). Credit rating of sustainable agricultural supply chain finance by 
integrating heterogeneous evaluation information and misclassification risk. Annals of Operations 
Research, 1–31.
Liu, W., Fan, H., & Xia, M. (2022). Credit scoring based on tree-enhanced gradient boosting decision trees. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 189, 116034.
Machado, M. R., & Karray, S. (2022). Assessing credit risk of commercial customers using hybrid machine 
learning algorithms. Expert Systems with Applications, 200, 116889.
Mahbobi, M., Kimiagari, S., & Vasudevan, M. (2021). Credit risk classification: An integrated predictive 
accuracy algorithm using artificial and deep neural networks. Annals of Operations Research, 1–29.
Martin, D. (1977). Early warning of banking failure. Journal of Banking and Finance, 7, 249–276.
Meyer, P., & Pifer, H. (1970). Prediction of bank failures. The Journal of Finance, 25(4), 853–868.
Misheva, B. H., Osterrieder, J., Hirsa, A., Kulkarni, O., & Lin, S. F. (2021). Explainable AI in credit risk 
management. arXiv Preprint arXiv:210300949.
Mushava, J., & Murray, M. (2024). Flexible loss functions for binary classification in gradient-boosted deci­
sion trees: An application to credit scoring. Expert Systems with Applications, 238, 121876.
Ohlson, J. (1980). Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy. Journal of Accounting 
Research, 18(1), 109–131.
1 3
270

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:247–271
Philosophov, L. (2007). Predicting the event and time horizon of bankruptcy using financial ratios and the 
maturity schedule of long-term debt. EFA 2005 Moscow Meetings Paper.
Psillaki, M., et al. (2010). Evaluation of credit risk based on firm performance. European Journal of Opera­
tional Research, 201(3), 873–888.
Rai, A., & Explainable, A. I. (2020). From black box to glass box. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Sci­
ence, 48(1), 137–141.
Regulation, E. U. (2016). 679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protec­
tion of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such 
data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation). Official Journal of the 
European Union L, 119, 1–88.
Roa, L., Correa-Bahnsen, A., Suarez, G., Cortés-Tejada, F., Luque, M. A., & Bravo, C. (2021). Super-app 
behavioral patterns in credit risk models: Financial, statistical and regulatory implications. Expert Sys­
tems with Applications, 169, 114486.
Ruziqa, A. (2013). The impact of credit and liquidity risk on bank financial performance: The case of Indo­
nesian Conventional Bank with total asset above 10 trillion Rupiah. International Journal of Economic 
Policy in Emerging Economies, 6(2), 93–106.
Sang, B. (2021). Application of genetic algorithm and BP neural network in supply chain finance under infor­
mation sharing. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 384, 113170.
Shapley, L. S. (1953). A value for n-person games. Contributions to the Theory of Games, 2(28), 307–317.
Shin, D. (2021). Why does explainability matter in news analytic systems? Proposing explainable analytic 
journalism. Journalism Studies, 22(8), 1047–1065.
Štrumbelj, E., & Kononenko, I. (2014). Explaining prediction models and individual predictions with feature 
contributions. Knowledge and Information Systems, 41(3), 647–665.
Suleiman, S., Ibrahim, A., Usman, D., Yabo, B. I., & Muhammad, H. U. (2021). Improving credit scoring 
classification performance using self Organizing Map-based machine learning techniques. European 
Journal of Advances in Engineering and Technology, 8(10), 28–35.
Tabari, N. A. Y., Ahmadi, M., & Emami, M. (2013). The effect of liquidity risk on the performance of com­
mercial banks. International Research Journal of Applied and Basic Sciences, 4(6), 1624–1631.
Teles, G., Rodrigues, J. J., Rabêlo, R. A., & Kozlov, S. A. (2021). Comparative study of support vector 
machines and random forests machine learning algorithms on credit operation. Software: Practice and 
Experience, 51(12), 2492–2500.
Tickle, A. B., Andrews, R., Golea, M., & Diederich, J. (1998). The truth will come to light: Directions and 
challenges in extracting the knowledge embedded within trained artificial neural networks. IEEE Trans­
actions on Neural Networks, 9(6), 1057–1068.
Torrent, N. L., Visani, G., & Bagli, E. (2020). PSD2 explainable AI model for credit scoring. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2011.10367.
Visani, G., Bagli, E., Chesani, F., Poluzzi, A., & Capuzzo, D. (2020). Statistical stability indices for LIME: 
Obtaining reliable explanations for machine learning models. Journal of the Operational Research 
Society, 1–11.
Wang, L., Jia, F., Chen, L., & Xu, Q. (2022). Forecasting SMEs’ credit risk in supply chain finance with a 
sampling strategy based on machine learning techniques. Annals of Operations Research, 1–33.
West, R. (1985). A factor analytic approach to bank condition. Journal of Banking and Finance, 9, 253–266.
Yu, J., & Cui, H. (2022). Rural Financial Decision Support System Based on Database and Genetic Algo­
rithm. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, 2022.
Yu, L., Yao, X., Wang, S., & Lai, K. K. (2011). Credit risk evaluation using a weighted least squares SVM 
classifier with design of experiment for parameter selection. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(12), 
15392–15399.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
271