TITLE: Location and allocation of primary and backup shelters in transboundary disasters
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06954-5
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 18 September 2024 / Accepted: 10 November 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
 
 Oscar Rodríguez-Espíndola
o.rodriguez-espindola@aston.ac.uk
1 
Aston Business School, Aston University, Birmingham, UK
2 
Depto. de Actuaría, Física y Matemáticas, Universidad de las Américas Puebla, Puebla, 
México
3 
Departamento de Ingeniería Industrial y Mecánica, Universidad de las Américas Puebla, 
Puebla, México
4 
School of Business and Economics, Universidad de las Américas Puebla, Puebla, México
Location and allocation of primary and backup shelters in 
transboundary disasters
Oscar Rodríguez-Espíndola1
 · Pavel Albores1 · Dolores E. Luna3 · Juan A. Díaz2 · 
Sergio Picazo-Vela4
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06954-5
Abstract
There are records of people being unable to find shelter after a disaster or reaching fa­
cilities operating over capacity because of facility failure. Natural hazards do not respect 
geographical or political boundaries and often surpass the capacity of single jurisdictions 
operating with limited resources. Coordination between jurisdictions can become a solu­
tion, but it has been neglected in the literature. This article is the first to investigate the 
use of backup facilities as a strategy facilitated by transboundary coordination. It proposes 
a novel solution incorporating collaboration between multiple jurisdictions to establish a 
shelter location-allocation approach to protect people affected by disasters considering 
facility failure. The article presents a stochastic bi-objective formulation for transbound­
ary coordination, incorporating the responsibility, priorities, and resources of each juris­
diction whilst considering the possibility of facility failure during disaster management. 
The objective of the model is to provide shelter to beneficiaries of all the jurisdictions by 
pooling resources whilst reducing the travel distance and minimizing the maximum cost 
for each jurisdiction. The contribution of the article is to introduce the formulation, assess 
the impact of transboundary coordination, and analyze the value of backup facilities in the 
service provided to people affected by disasters. The model has been applied to a set of 
numerical examples and a real case of volcanic eruptions in Mexico. The results show the 
influence of cross-jurisdictional coordination on the support provided to disaster victims, 
the value of backup facilities, and the capacity of the model designed to provide relevant 
alternatives in humanitarian logistics.
Keywords  Multi-objective optimization · Shelter location-allocation · Cross-
jurisdictional coordination · Backup facilities · Climate action
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
1  Introduction
Over one million people were forced out of their homes after hurricane Katrina affected the 
U.S. in 2005. Although 45 pre-defined shelters were activated, a breach of the seventeenth 
street canal combined with the lack of preparation in the New Orleans Convention Centre 
forced the relocation of evacuees to other safe facilities (Nigg et al., 2006). Similarly, dif­
ferent reports state that facilities designated as public shelters were unavailable following 
the floods in Villahermosa in 2007 (Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., 2018). Recently, there has 
been evidence about the use of inadequate shelters and shortage of facilities after earth­
quakes in Morocco and Turkey (British_Red_Cross, 2023; Save_the_Children, 2023). The 
uncertainty about the nature of the hazard and the possibility of secondary disasters compli­
cate the selection of reliable facilities (Ommi & Janalipour, 2022). That leads to situations 
where people are left without shelters or having to find refuge in shelters exceeding capacity 
(Ozbay et al., 2019), often with the constant risk of having to relocate evacuees multiple 
times (Nigg et al., 2006). That means there is a need to enhance the resilience of disaster 
response plans by incorporating a strategy considering potential facility failure and ensur­
ing people allocated to those facilities can be relocated quickly and efficiently to different 
safe areas.
From 2020 to 2023, EM-DAT (2024) reports that natural hazards displaced more than 
1.6 million people. These evacuees require the availability of safe facilities for protection 
and support. Shelters are often prepared in advance, but emergency services and facilities 
often fail in disaster situations (Albareda-Sambola et al., 2015). That is the reason facility 
reliability is a relevant consideration in disaster management (Hinojosa et al., 2023). The 
uncertainty of natural hazards and their impact on local infrastructure requires having alter­
native strategies to ensure there is enough capacity to shelter affected people. At the same 
time, limited resources from disaster management authorities constrain the availability of 
facilities to act as shelters. Although there are different articles in the literature calling for 
the construction of shelters in optimal locations (Aghaie & Karimi, 2022; Geng et al., 2021), 
that is an unfeasible approach for developing economies, where authorities rely on using 
public facilities as shelters (Liu et al., 2011). The probability of shelter failure has led to 
research on opening extra alternative facilities (Albareda-Sambola et al., 2015; Snyder & 
Daskin, 2005). In this article those alternative facilities are called backup shelters, and these 
are used to reduce the possibility of overcrowded shelters or leaving people without shelter. 
It is worth noting that backup shelters are very taxing on the resources of local authori­
ties. In practice, these authorities have limited resources, including facilities, which hinder 
the implementation of the strategy of backup facilities. Current literature disregards that a 
strategy based on backup shelters might require facilities beyond the resources of single 
authorities, often working under assumptions of unlimited shelter capacity. That unrealistic 
assumption is translated in practice into people without shelter support.
Drafting mutual aid agreements can be an important solution for local authorities from 
different jurisdictions (Henstra, 2010). The collaboration of agencies from different juris­
dictions is warranted because natural hazards often transcend political, functional, and 
temporal boundaries (Ansell et al., 2010; Nurmala et al., 2017; E.-K. Olsson, 2015a). The 
proximity between jurisdictions affected by the same hazard simultaneously can be used 
as an asset to foster the use of backup facilities (Baghersad et al., 2023). Indeed, the alter­
native facilities needed to operationalize the use of backup shelters can be obtained by 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
pooling resources from different jurisdictions through joint operations (Balcik et al., 2010; 
Boin et al., 2014). However, that area remains unexplored in the literature. The limited 
number of models incorporating this dimension is explained by the complexity of con­
sidering the interaction of different actors, resources, and responsibilities. The literature 
often assumes a single decision-maker with control over all of the resources, which con­
tradicts the importance of the organizational and response structure of different countries 
(Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., 2018). Allowing for the interoperability of stakeholders with 
different resources and responsibilities adds an extra layer that is neglected by models look­
ing at shelter management. These formulations need to include financial decisions between 
jurisdictions, facilitate a clear definition of activities, and promote the fair distribution of 
the workload in practice (Mutebi et al., 2022; Schulz & Blecken, 2010). This is an area that 
needs to be developed further to facilitate operations in the field. Tackling these problems 
requires answering two key questions: (i) How can we increase the reliability of shelter 
planning for disaster management? (ii) How can shelter management plans become more 
robust in transboundary settings?
The aim of this research is to integrate cross-jurisdictional collaboration into a sto­
chastic multi-objective formulation for reliable shelter planning using backup shelters, an 
area neglected in the literature but highly relevant in practice. Stochastic programming is 
widely popular to address the complexity of humanitarian logistics because of its capacity 
to incorporate uncertainty regarding the characteristics of the disruption in the literature 
(Gao, 2022; Jamali et al., 2022). Stochastic optimization can be used to analyze potential 
scenarios and balance the resources from different stakeholders to support critical decisions 
in humanitarian logistics (Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., 2023). This research proposes a two-
stage stochastic bi-objective optimization model to support evacuation and shelter location 
decisions incorporating cross-jurisdictional collaboration. The model will provide a shelter 
management policy based on the use of backup shelters enabled by pooling resources from 
different jurisdictions. The formulation is the first of its kind to incorporate the collabora­
tion between different jurisdictions for shelter management considering the reliability of 
facilities and roads. The model balances the resources of multiple participants and develops 
the relocation plan to backup shelters whilst considering the capacity of both primary and 
backup facilities. The purpose is to shed light on the impact of including cross-jurisdictional 
coordination in humanitarian logistics models and the value of backup shelters as a viable 
strategy to ensure people affected by disasters can find safe facilities.
The model is tested using a set of numerical examples and a case study. The article 
extends current literature in three ways: (i) it proposes a novel model for operational collab­
oration in shelter management between stakeholders from different jurisdictions, acknowl­
edging the possibility of the failure of any facility through the use of backup facilities, (ii) 
it evaluates the value of backup shelters to provide support to affected people using a set of 
numerical examples, and (iii) the study provides an analysis about the impact of cross-juris­
dictional coordination on the experience of the people affected by the disaster using real data 
from a case in Puebla, Mexico. Current literature on backup facilities assumes one single 
actor with control of either infinite resources or not constrained by facility capacity. The 
model proposed in this study incorporates cross-jurisdictional coordination as an approach 
to enable and operationalize a shelter management policy based on the use of backup shel­
ters. This feature also extends the literature by including a measure of fairness balancing the 
resources from different stakeholders. The analysis of the numerical examples contributes to 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
the literature by showing the percentage of the population that is likely to be allocated to an 
unreliable facility. The purpose is to show the positive impact that backup facilities can have 
in preventing leaving people without shelters or being forced to go to overcrowded shelters. 
Finally, the analysis of the case study contributes to the discussion about the importance of 
collaboration between authorities from different jurisdictions by providing evidence of the 
impact that collaboration can have on the level of support provided to evacuees.
The article is structured as follows: The next section shows the current state of the art of 
shelter management and cross-jurisdictional coordination in humanitarian logistics to show 
the gap this article fills. Then, we introduce the optimization model, while the next section 
provides the analysis of numerical examples and the case study. Finally, the conclusions are 
presented.
2  Literature review
2.1  Backup shelters
Shelters rendered unavailable because of the impact of disasters can create a domino effect 
leading to people without shelters, people living in shelters exceeding capacity, or people 
having to relocate constantly (British_Red_Cross, 2023; Nigg et al., 2006; Save_the_Chil­
dren, 2023). That is the reason models need to consider facility failure to enhance the resil­
ience of disaster management operations. The vulnerability of infrastructure inside areas 
affected by disruptions has motivated studies looking into the use of backup facilities for 
distribution centers (Mohamadi et al., 2019; Rahmani et al., 2018; Yahyaei & Bozorgi-
Amiri, 2019) and the reliability of transfer paths (Renkli & Duran, 2015; Wang & Xu, 
2023). Shelters also represent key facilities for disaster management, because these are 
spaces used to protect people affected by disasters and to provide them with basic products 
and services (Eriskin & Karatas, 2024). These facilities have a major effect on the perceived 
experience and suffering of evacuees because several of the services received by them are 
provided in shelters. Shelter location involves the selection of suitable safe points to provide 
protection to people affected by disruptions (Kınay et al., 2018). The ample literature on 
shelter location (Esposito Amideo et al., 2019; Kınay et al., 2018) often overlooks shelters 
at the response stage (Kamyabniya et al., 2024) despite of the well-known combination of 
potential road damage with facility disruption that occurs after a hazard hits any area (Bera 
et al., 2023; Esposito Amideo et al., 2019). Most contributions in the literature focus on 
closeness to the population or convenience for relief supply, but more research is needed 
about instances where shelters are subject to failure (Ma et al., 2016).
Among the articles paying attention to potential shelter failure, there is a stream of papers 
focused on building facilities in suitable areas, thereby reducing the possibility of having 
unsuitable facilities. Aghaie and Karimi (2022) propose a two-stage robust location-allo­
cation formulation supported by geographical information systems to minimize the cost 
and time of the operations solved with NSGA-II, whilst Geng et al., (2021) introduce a 
bi-objective location-allocation model maximizing the suitability of the shelter based on 
qualitative factors, and minimizing the number of facilities. However, in many countries 
the policy is to adapt existing facilities as shelters (Liu et al., 2011), which are often vulner­
able to failure. Facilities can be rendered unusable because of external factors as well. For 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
instance, the work of Gangwal et al., (2023) and Wang and Xu (2023) show that road failure 
can lead to isolated shelters regardless of their actual location.
A different stream of research advocates for having alternative facilities to transport peo­
ple in case of shelter failure, i.e. backup shelters. This is an interesting approach because it 
adds flexibility to the operations and helps manage the uncertainty about the actual impact 
of the disruption. There are a few deterministic models in the literature tackling this area. 
Albareda-Sambola et al., (2015) base their analysis on the p-center problem to select pri­
mary and backup facilities for victims. The three-indexed, two-indexed, and covering for­
mulations locate shelters close to the victims in case they reach their closest center, but it 
is closed. The article introduces an assessment of the efficiency of the formulations based 
on small and large-scale instances solved with the Xpress Optimizer. Albareda-Sambola 
et al., (2019) extend that idea by considering different strata of people requiring different 
services. The article proposes formulations with stratum-covering variables, site-covering 
variables and combining both, which are solved using the sample average approximation 
method. Beyond some deterministic approaches, most studies in the literature incorporate 
uncertainty in the situation through the use of two-stage stochastic programming. Hinojosa 
et al., (2023) extend the p-next center problem by incorporating the preferences of the users. 
The article proposes a three-indexed, straight and radius formulations which are solved 
using a tailored heuristic algorithm. The model adopts a hierarchical process where the plan­
ner sets service centers based on the worst-case behavior of the public and the beneficiaries 
select the center based on their preferences. Although this is a promising avenue of research, 
all the models presented disregard the capacity of the facilities. In practice, there are reports 
of shelters operating over capacity and its negative impact on the support provided to people 
affected by the disaster (Kilci et al., 2015; Ozbay et al., 2019), which is a limitation acknowl­
edged by Albareda-Sambola et al., (2015). An et al., (2013) propose a two-stage formulation 
assuming that each facility is subject to independent probabilistic disruptions which are 
represented in a set of scenarios. The objective of the model is to minimize total cost and it 
is solved using CPLEX in GAMS. Their formulation defines the allocation upon the realiza­
tion of the corresponding scenario, which requires the government to notify and direct all 
the evacuees. Babashahi et al., (2020) use stochastic modelling for a bi-objective formula­
tion maximizing network reliability whilst minimizing cost considering facility capacity. 
The study uses reserve hub elements as backup components to prevent failure considering 
failure probabilities calculated based on incoming traffic. The authors propose solving the 
model with Cplex and NSGA-II. Nonetheless, the location and re-location of shelters is still 
a critical gap in need of more research (Kamyabniya et al., 2024). A challenge to pursue 
this approach is resource constraints in the operations, especially because of the lack of 
flexibility about suitable facilities. Enabling collaborative mechanisms to pool resources 
and collaborate across jurisdictions to manage the situation is critical to consider nature of 
disasters affecting multiple areas simultaneously under resource constraints (Rodríguez-
Espíndola, 2022). That is a dimension currently missing in existent models in the literature.
2.2  Coordination across jurisdictions
Disasters are often connected across jurisdictions, with the outcome of one jurisdiction 
affecting the situation in another one (Ansell et al., 2010) and involving conflicting objec­
tives (Rui et al., 2008). Recent studies show that, in many cases, each jurisdiction has their 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
own response policies (Baghersad et al., 2023). Deciding whose resources to use in these 
environments is complex because of the inability to ensure fair allocation of joint opera­
tions, leading to concerns about fair distribution of shared workload and significant ambi­
guity about activities and responsibilities (Mutebi et al., 2022; Schulz & Blecken, 2010). 
The combination of these problems can negatively influence the efficiency and service level 
provided, which is the reason research can facilitate this complex collaboration. Still, the 
review of Kamyabniya et al., (2024) looking at optimization models for disaster response 
operations show that less than 13% of the papers considered the collaboration of relief 
actors, with far less looking into cross-jurisdictional collaboration. That makes developing 
models incorporating the interaction between different stakeholders a gap that needs to be 
filled in the area, especially developing formulations using equity among participants, which 
is only adopted by one article in the category of shelter location (Kamyabniya et al., 2024).
Research discusses the problems associated with formal structures in handling new and 
complex problems (Olsson, 2015a) and underlines the importance of adopting cross-sector 
partnerships in humanitarian logistics (Nurmala et al., 2017). Ansell et al., (2010) argue the 
need for a transboundary authority structure that can be triggered in times of crisis to mini­
mize confusion and bureaucratic infighting. Collaboration between municipalities, countries 
and different services, for instance, can enable more effective operations (Ruktanonchai et 
al., 2020; Zikeloglou et al., 2024). Although it is acknowledged that having customized 
responses at each jurisdiction is useful, the lack of mechanisms enabling cross-jurisdictional 
collaboration can effectively hinder the impact of such plans (Baghersad et al., 2023). That 
is the reason the European Union led the first European Disaster Response Exercise (Hol­
lis, 2020) and some articles have considered the collaboration between different agencies 
using agent-based simulation (Lebcir & Roy, 2023; Valaei Sharif et al., 2023), game theory 
(Coskun et al., 2019; Ergün et al., 2023), and Industry 4.0 technologies (Kumar & Singh, 
2022). For instance, Polese et al., (2024) propose an approach for cross-border multi-risk 
assessment as an answer for single-risk and independent assessments. Nonetheless, this 
area has been less studied in the context of humanitarian logistics activities. Wojtalewicz 
et al., (2014) use the case of the Regional Hub Reception Center (RHRC) led by the Purdue 
Homeland Security Institute involving 17 jurisdictions. The study proposes a discrete-event 
simulation implemented in AnyLogic to test the scenario of a nuclear device detonating in 
the middle of an urban area to efficiently assess the use of facilities to improve coordinated 
responses. Wang et al., (2022) propose a two-stage stochastic model to support the col­
laboration and coordination of a regional healthcare coalition. The model minimizes total 
cost and the maximum expected supply shortage rate over all member hospitals and supply 
types. The study proposes the use of the linear weighting method to obtain the solution. 
The model facilitates collaboration for stock pre-positioning and post-disaster procurement 
and transshipment to serve affected areas. Baghersad et al., (2023) propose a quadratic-
programming model to identify optimal coordination jurisdictions to manage an epidemic 
based on population mobility. The formulation maximizes modularity, and it is solved using 
a heuristic and column-generation algorithm. The approach proposed allows identifying 
interconnected contiguous locations to join them as coordination communities, but it cre­
ates these new jurisdictions rather than supporting the coordination of established political 
jurisdictions. Overall, the literature available fails to facilitate cross-jurisdictional coordina­
tion in instances facing facility failure. The summary of models found in the literature is 
illustrated in Table 1.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1  Comparison of similar models
Article
Problem
Type of modelling
Objective(s)
Multiple 
actors
Reli­
ability of 
facility
Reli­
ability 
road
Capacity
Solution
An et al., (2013)
Facility location, alloca­
tion and evacuation
Two-stage 
stochastic
Minimize cost
✔
Cplex
Albareda-Sambo­
la et al., (2015)
Facility 
location-allocation
Deterministic 
modelling
Minimize maximum cost of allocation
✔
Xpress
Albareda-Sambo­
la et al., (2019)
Facility 
location-allocation
Deterministic 
modelling
Minimize the weighted average of 
the largest distance for each people 
stratum
✔
Sample average 
approximation in 
Xpress
Babashahi 
et al., (2020)
Facility location, alloca­
tion and evacuation
Stochastic 
modelling
Minimize cost
Maximize reliability
✔
✔
E-constraint meth­
od using Cplex and 
NSGA-II
Wang 
et al., (2022)
Facility location, pre-posi­
tioning and procurement
Two-stage 
stochastic
Minimize cost
Minimize maximum expected shortage
✔
✔
Gurobi
Hinojosa 
et al., (2023)
Facility 
location-allocation
Two-stage 
stochastic
Minimize the maximum of the dis­
tances travelled by the users
✔
Heuristic algorithm
Baghersad 
et al., (2023)
Community detection
Deterministic 
modelling
Maximize modularity of communities
✔
Column generation 
algorithm
This study
Facility 
location-allocation
Two-stage 
stochastic
Minimize distance. Minimize maxi­
mum cost per person per jurisdiction
✔
✔
✔
✔
Lexicographic opti­
misation in Cplex
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
2.3  Research gap
The need for research looking at shelter management at the response stage (Kamyabniya 
et al., 2024) is reflected in the limited number of articles considering alternative facili­
ties to manage shelter failure and isolation. In practice, that means experiences of shelters 
operating over capacity or leaving people without shelter. This article argues that shelter 
management needs to incorporate pre-disaster and post-disaster conditions. This task can 
be achieved through the development of models facilitating coordination across different 
jurisdictions that are affected by transboundary disasters. This paper designs and tests a 
novel optimization model to locate and allocate primary and backup shelters enabling the 
coordination and use of resources from different jurisdictions. The bi-objective two-stage 
stochastic formulation proposed in this article has suitable novelties compared with the 
works found in the current literature, such as:
2.3.1  Cross-jurisdictional coordination considering shelter failure
Although there is wide agreement about the need to consider different participants in disas­
ter management and the potential of cascading effects between them (Rodríguez-Espín­
dola, 2023), our review agrees with claims from Nowell et al., (2022) about the limited 
understanding about cooperative management during crises and disasters, which is reflected 
in the fact that current optimization models are ill-equipped to consider the coordination of 
different jurisdictions for shelter management. The limited number of optimization models 
considering the interaction between stakeholders, none of which has been developed con­
sidering shelter failure (Kamyabniya et al., 2024) is noteworthy. This article argues that the 
limitation of neglecting capacity in several optimization models looking at backup shelters 
in the past can be tackled by incorporating the collaboration between different stakeholders. 
This article provides the first formulation combining cross-jurisdictional coordination with 
the possibility of allowing people to go to backup shelters when their primary shelters are 
unavailable.
2.3.2  Reliability in the facility, road and capacity
Facilities can be rendered useless by damage to the facility itself, along with isolation 
caused by damage around the facility. The model proposed in this research accounts for that 
by introducing the possibility of damage to facilities or roads along with limited capacity 
in the remaining facilities. That approach allows having more reliable and realistic plans to 
enhance the evacuation of people affected by disasters.
2.3.3  Use of equity as an objective criterion in cross-jurisdictional coordination
Most of the articles looking at shelter failure aim to minimize cost and distance during 
evacuation activities to define the allocation of people to facilities. Although equity between 
disaster victims has been explored before (Zhu et al., 2019), equity between participants is 
often disregarded in these formulations. This article proposes an objective function mini­
mizing the maximum use of resources from each one of the jurisdictions involved to pro­
mote the collaboration between different stakeholders.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The article is tested in a set of numerical examples and using information from real 
conditions of a volcano eruption in Puebla, Mexico. The case study provides insight into 
the importance of coordination between jurisdictions for evacuation and shelter manage­
ment through the comparison of scenarios with total collaboration, partial collaboration and 
null collaboration. The results can be used to foster the development of more contributions 
incorporating transboundary coordination.
3  Mathematical model
This study develops a two-stage optimization model to guide the selection of primary and 
backup shelters for people affected by disasters considering cross-jurisdictional coordina­
tion. The aim is to find the best combination of the decisions that can lead to a good level of 
service for disaster beneficiaries whilst sharing resources fairly among jurisdictions.
Optimization is commonly used to determine the ‘optimal’ location of facilities because 
it allows investigating the different possibilities and define the most appropriate option 
based on the objective functions (Kınay et al., 2018). It has been selected in prior research 
in the area because it allows balancing the support provided to disaster victims and the 
resources available during disasters (Aghaie & Karimi, 2022; Ergün et al., 2023; Hinojosa 
et al., 2023). Optimization is seen as a good fit for supporting decision-making in humani­
tarian logistics because of its capacity to handle different variables in complex problems 
(Baharmand et al., 2022).
Two-stage stochastic optimization is a popular approach to tackle complex problems 
involving uncertainty (Gao, 2022). In the context of humanitarian logistics, two-stage mod­
els allow tackling some decisions focused on the stage before the occurrence of the disaster, 
and other decisions after the disaster strikes (Jamali et al., 2022). The use of two-stage opti­
mization allows us to incorporate the uncertainty about the impact of the disaster and the 
state of the infrastructure, where the first stage focuses on the primary allocation of facilities 
and the second stage uses information about the impact of the disaster to guide response 
decisions including the allocation to backup facilities considering different scenarios.
3.1  Problem description
Disasters do not respect jurisdictional borders (Lane & Hesselman, 2017). Cross-jurisdic­
tional coordination allows people evacuated in a demand area to travel to the most benefi­
cial facility for them, regardless of the jurisdiction. That maximizes the use of resources 
from different participants whilst enabling people to attend their closest facility. This idea 
is aligned with the findings from Ruktanonchai et al., (2020) after the COVID-19 pan­
demic, which suggest that coordinating different countries geographically connected can 
boost effectiveness. The cooperation of different authorities can add a degree of resilience to 
disaster management plans because it facilitates reaching any of the participants and reduces 
the possibility of any of them being overwhelmed by the conditions of the disaster. How­
ever, this area has not been explored before. The use of backup shelters is acknowledged 
as a valuable policy to manage facility failure, but it is difficult to implement because of 
the capacity of the facilities. That is reflected in articles neglecting capacity constraints in 
these settings (Albareda-Sambola et al., 2015). Transboundary coordination can enable the 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
use of backup shelters because of the possibility of pooling resources (Balcik et al., 2010; 
Boin et al., 2014), but it is met with complications about the responsibilities, priorities and 
resources of different jurisdictions (Nowell et al., 2022). The contribution of the model is 
to facilitate the use of capacitated facilities from different jurisdictions to serve affected 
people whilst considering the agreements about the minimum number of people served per 
jurisdiction, reducing the financial burden for any single jurisdiction and allowing the trans­
ference between jurisdictions in the event of facility or road failure to maximize the service 
provided. This is achieved using two-stage stochastic programming to account for decisions 
before and after the disaster, along with multi objective optimization balancing the service 
provided to the victims with fairness in the use of resources from different jurisdictions.
In the formulation, first stage decisions are focused on facility selection and the flow of 
people from demand areas to primary shelters right before the event. Given the range of 
time for the arrival of people, it is assumed that people will get there by their own means 
before the disaster strikes. That means all eligible vulnerable people proceed to evacuate 
their homes at the stage when evacuation orders are issued, forcing authorities to prepare the 
plan to cater to all the pre-identified people using demographic information and risk maps. 
First stage variables include the allocation to primary shelters and the activation of facilities 
as shelters. Second-stage decisions are based on different scenarios incorporating the uncer­
tainty about the infrastructure and including the allocation of people in unsuitable shelters 
to backup shelter and the number of buses required to transfer people to backup facilities. 
That means the second stage considers scenarios based on the uncertainty of the disaster 
and the impact on infrastructure. Buses are resources provided by authorities and they are 
assumed to have information about their availability in advance. It is important to note 
that the model considers the availability of backup shelters and the connectivity to reach 
them from affected shelters. Given the importance of consider the influence of preparedness 
activities on disaster response (Seraji et al., 2022), this approach provides more realistic 
solutions for decision-makers. The decisions made by the model are reflected in Fig. 1.
The model uses information about the damage to the road network and to the different 
facilities to transfer people to safe facilities. The assumption in the model is that authori­
Fig. 1  Diagram of the situation
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ties will make buses available to take people from unsuitable facilities to backup shelters. 
A set of disaster scenarios is used to guide these decisions to consider uncertainty on the 
magnitude and impact of the disaster. The second stage is focused on the decisions about 
transportation of people, defining the number of people to move to facilities in the same or 
different jurisdictions. The coordination of authorities from different jurisdictions is critical 
to achieve successful operations in transboundary disasters (Ansell et al., 2010). The model 
can allocate people freely across all jurisdictions (full coordination), or it can accommodate 
the possibility to force a minimum percentage of the population from each jurisdiction to 
be served by its jurisdiction at the first stage (partial coordination) to respect pre-defined 
agreements. The latter adds flexibility to the negotiations between stakeholders to facilitate 
agreements.
3.2  Model assumptions
 
●
Mandatory evacuation orders have been issued.
 
●
The number of people evacuating in each jurisdiction is known by authorities.
 
●
The number of buses available for evacuation operations is known in advance by au­
thorities.
 
●
Every eligible person affected must be served.
 
●
People make their way to primary shelters, but they are transferred to backup shelters 
on buses (if needed).
 
●
Shelters can be used as primary and backup simultaneously.
 
●
Only road transportation is available.
 
●
There is uncertainty about the magnitude and the impact of the disaster.
 
●
Different jurisdictions share their resources and accept people from nearby jurisdictions 
in their facilities.
3.3  Notation
The notation of the model is as follows:
Sets
I
Set of demand areas
J
Set of potential shelter locations
L
Set of jurisdictions
Dl
Set of demand areas in jurisdiction l ∈L
Ll
Set of shelters in jurisdiction l ∈L
S
Set of scenarios
Parameters
α
Capacity of the buses
β
Transportation cost per km
Ω
Percentage of population served by their own jurisdiction at stage 1
δ ij
Distance between demand area i ∈I and shelter j ∈J
ejk
Distance between shelter j ∈J and backup shelter k ∈J
π s
Probability of scenario s ∈S
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Sets
γ j
Capacity of shelter j ∈J
µ i
People in demand area i ∈I
σ l
Number of buses available in jurisdiction l ∈L
ξ j
Cost of locating facility j ∈J
ψ ks
Availability of shelter k ∈J in scenario s ∈S
λ jks
Road connectivity between shelter j ∈J and shelter k ∈J in scenario s ∈S
Decision variables
xij
Number of people sent from demand area i ∈I to shelter j ∈J
yjks
Number of people sent from shelter j ∈J to shelter k ∈J in scenario s ∈S
Aj
Use of shelter j ∈J
Rjks
Number of buses traveling from shelter j ∈J to shelter k ∈J in scenario s ∈S
Ck
Spare capacity of shelter k ∈J
M
Maximum operational cost per person among all jurisdictions
The model is as follows:
 
Min z =
∑
i∈I
∑
j∈J
δijxij +
∑
j,k∈J:j̸=k
∑
s∈S
πsejkyjks
(1)
 
Min M
(2)
The objective functions of the optimization problem are critical to ensure the solutions are 
relevant for decision-makers. The discussions in the literature about the best performance 
measures for humanitarian logistics involve efficiency, effectiveness and flexibility measures 
(Beamon & Balcik, 2008). The complexity of humanitarian operations is difficult to encap­
sulate in a single performance measure. That is the reason several articles consider more 
than one objective function to ensure efficiency in the operations (Gutjahr & Nolz, 2016). 
Indeed, there are several arguments in the literature about the importance of incorporating 
multiple objectives to address the complexity of disaster management (Burkart et al., 2017). 
The objectives of the model have been developed considering the context and the problem 
and the perspectives of different jurisdictions. Initially, aligned with the need to give a good 
level of support to people affected (Farahani et al., 2020), the first objective of this research 
(1) is to minimize the distance traveled by people affected to primary and secondary shelters. 
Given the limited resources available during humanitarian operations, the second objective 
function is efficiency based. The minimization of costs is widely used in the field because it 
considers the use of resources at different stages. The flexibility of this measure (Alem et al., 
2016) enables incorporating the fairness between jurisdictions. Neighboring jurisdictions 
are more willing to collaborate when overall costs can be reduced whilst providing support 
to the people affected (Hollis, 2020). To promote that collaboration, the second objective 
function (2) minimizes the maximum cost of the operations per person per jurisdiction to 
balance the burden of the different jurisdictions.
Subject to:
 
M ∑
i∈Dl µi ≥∑
j∈Ll ξjAj +
∑
j∈Llk∈J:j̸=k
∑
s∈S
πsβ ejkRjks
∀l ∈L
(3)
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
∑
i∈I
xij ≤γj Aj
∀j ∈J
(4)
 
∑
j∈J
xij = µi
∀i ∈I
(5)
 
Ck = Akγk −
∑
i∈I
xik
∀k ∈J
(6)
 
∑
i∈I
xij =
∑
k∈J,j̸=k,ψks=1
λjksyjks
∀j ∈J, s ∈S, ψjs = 0
(7)
 
yjks ≤α Rjks
∀j ∈J, s ∈S, ψjs = 0
(8)
 
∑
k∈J,j̸=k
Rjks ≤σl
∀l ∈L, j ∈Ll, s ∈S, ψjs = 0
(9)
 
∑
j∈J
yjk ≤Ckψks
∀k ∈J, s ∈S
(10)
 
∑
i∈Dl
∑
j∈Ll
xij ≥Ω
∑
i∈Dl
µi
∀l ∈L
(11)
 
Aj ∈{0, 1} ; Ck, xij, yjks, Rjks ∈Z+; M, CostMl ≥0
The cost is calculated in expression (3) weighing the cost of opening facilities and transport­
ing people from primary to backup shelters by the number of people originally residing in 
the area. Expression (4) ensures the capacity of the shelters is not exceeded, whereas Eq. (5) 
forces the system to allocate all the people in the affected area. Equation (6) determines the 
spare capacity of the shelters after primary allocation to use the facility for backup. Expres­
sion (7) defines the number of people allocated to a primary shelter that has been damaged 
to transfer them to the backup shelter. Constraint (8) defines the number of buses needed 
whilst Expression (9) ensures the number of buses allocated does not exceed the number of 
available vehicles. Expression (10) ensures people transferred to unaffected backup shelters 
do not exceed their spare capacity and Constraint (11) enforces any agreements to ensure a 
percentage of the population of a jurisdiction is served by the same jurisdiction at the first 
stage. Finally, variables are declared.
3.4  Solution method
There are several approaches to solving multi-objective formulations because these mod­
els do not provide a single solution, but a set of non-dominated solutions (Gutjahr & 
Nolz, 2016; Rodríguez-Espíndola, 2022). Decision-makers have the possibility to look at 
the different non-dominated solutions to select the most appropriate one for them according 
to their preferences and priorities (Lu et al., 2022). Some approaches include linearizing the 
weighted objectives and the use of the epsilon constraint model (Burkart et al., 2017; Wang 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
et al., 2022). This article assumes that authorities have the primary objective of protecting 
people. That means there is a hierarchy between the objectives, which makes a lexico­
graphic approach suitable to solve the model (See Dang et al., 2023). The model is initially 
solved by minimizing objective function (1). Then, the term LEX is introduced to fix the 
value of the total distance obtained using the following equation:
 
LEX = DIS
A new inequality can be defined using the term LEX:
 
LEX ≥∑
i∈I
∑
j∈J
δijxij +
∑
j,k∈J:j̸=k
∑
s∈S
πsejkyjks
(12)
Equation (12) substitutes Eq. (1) in the original formulation and it becomes a constraint. The 
model is then solved by minimizing (2) to obtain a single solution that can be presented to 
the decision-maker.
4  Analysis of results
This section introduces a set of experiments to show the behavior of the model, investigate 
the value of the stochastic approach used and analyze the impact of cross-jurisdictional 
coordination to provide shelter support to people affected by disasters. The study is divided 
into two parts: the first part is based on the use of numerical examples, and the second part 
is conducted based on information from a real case study in Mexico. Numerical experiments 
in the first part serve to analyze the performance of the model, the importance of backup 
shelters and to explore the value of the stochastic solution in instances of different sizes. 
The second part provides evidence about the performance of the model considering real 
conditions to discuss the impact of cross-jurisdictional coordination based on the need of 
using real data sources to enhance the validity of the outcomes of the model (Kamyabniya 
et al., 2024). The case selected for the analysis is an eruption of the Popocatepetl volcano in 
Mexico, which is one of the most challenging scenarios for the country.
4.1  Numerical instances
The model was tested using a set of randomly generated numerical examples. The examples 
represent instances of different magnitudes; low, medium and large. The characteristics of 
the three instances are shown in Table 2. The parameters for each example were generated 
using a random number generator based on the type of variables (e.g. binary, integer).
4.1.1  Results analysis
The information was coded into GAMS 35.2.0 and solved using Cplex with the lexico­
graphic approach explained in the previous section. The model was run on a computer with 
an Intel Core i7 processor and 16 GB of RAM. Each instance was set to have a maximum of 
12 hours for solution time. The model was run allowing total coordination between the dif­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ferent jurisdictions involved in the situation. The process followed was to minimize objec­
tive function (1) first, then fix the objective value, and finally minimize objective function 
(2) subject to the fixed value of (1). A summary of the findings is presented in Table 3. The 
optimality gap is the distance between the objective value of the feasible solution found 
and its optimal value. The first two instances had a gap below 10% within the time limit, 
whereas the gap of around 15% of the large instance is deemed acceptable because of the 
size of the problem. The experiments conducted suggest that longer solution times or heu­
ristic algorithms might be required to close the gap in very large-scale instances.
The number of people crossing boundaries to find safe places at stage one is noteworthy. 
The results show that more than a third of the population evacuated is moving to a shelter in 
a neighboring jurisdiction in all the instances, with more than half of the population doing 
so in the medium and large instances. The number increases with the magnitude of the 
disaster, showing that coordination and collaboration among jurisdictions can be instrumen­
tal to protect affected people, especially for large-scale disasters. This result supports the 
claim that the larger the magnitude of the disaster, the more cross-jurisdictional it becomes 
(Ansell et al., 2010). The percentage is lower at the second stage, but there are still cases of 
people needing a backup shelter that are transferred to one of the neighboring jurisdictions, 
especially in instances of large magnitude. We also need to consider that the percentage of 
people moving across jurisdictions at the second stage does not include people that moved 
between jurisdictions at the first stage and stayed in that new jurisdiction at the second stage, 
so the percentage of people that crossed jurisdictions during both stages is very high in the 
three instances.
Several articles in the literature neglect considering shelter failure and its impact on the 
population. Our results underscore that backup shelters are particularly important for the 
medium and high magnitude instances. In the high magnitude instance, more than one in 
every five people affected requires being transferred to backup shelters at the second stage 
because of damage to the infrastructure. Those medium and large magnitude instances are 
the focus of humanitarian logistics models, showing that facility failure should be an impor­
tant consideration at the response stage in these models. In practice, managers can look at 
Table 2  Characteristics of the numerical examples
Instance
Demand
areas p/jurisdiction
Shelters 
p/jurisdiction
Jurisdictions
Scenarios
Demand
(people)
Low
50
50
3
5
51,310
Medium
75
75
4
15
68,991
Large
100
100
5
30
86,152
Table 3  Summary of the findings
Inst.
Average 
distance p/
person (km)
% of people 
crossing 
jurisdictions
(Stage 1)
Max % of people
across jurisdictions
(Stage 2)
Max % people
transferred
to
backup
Gap 
(%)
Solu­
tion
time
(s)
Low
1.55
35.54
1.39
2.57
0.18
5.10
Medium
2.4
59.84
11.46
13.18
5.6
43,200
Large
3.29
77.86
19.39
21.26
15.85
43,200
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
the percentage of people without available shelters or the number of facilities that need to 
be closed after the disaster to recognize the impact of facility failure in their operations.
Table 4 shows the results about backup shelters. Although the average distance per per­
son is higher than the distances found at the first stage, the trip to backup shelters is done 
by buses from authorities, making the distance acceptable. This table also shows the effect 
of combining cross-jurisdictional coordination with backup shelters, as most of the people 
requiring a backup shelter are travelling to a neighboring jurisdiction in the three cases.
The use of financial resources is a complex issue in humanitarian operations. The oppor­
tunity to deliver effective results whilst carefully managing the expenditure for participants 
can foster collaboration (Hollis, 2020). The model has been designed to find the best com­
bination of resources to allow reducing the burden for all jurisdictions. The rationale is that 
different jurisdictions will be more willing to collaborate if there is a fair distribution of the 
workload and more clarity about the expenditure required. After the minimum travelled dis­
tance for all the beneficiaries is achieved, the model tries to balance the cost by minimizing 
the maximum cost for each one of the jurisdictions involved. This was tested by analyzing 
the cost and number of facilities required per jurisdiction for each one of the instances. The 
results shown in Table 5 suggest that the solution offered by the model is splitting the expen­
diture across the different jurisdictions successfully. In all instances, the difference in the 
expenditure per person between jurisdictions is small and there is a balance in the number 
of shelters activated per 1,000 people.
Overall, these results highlight the importance of backup shelters and cross-jurisdictional 
coordination in disaster settings. Coordination can be valuable to provide more and better 
alternatives to people affected, especially when combined with the strategy of using backup 
Instance
Cost/person/jurisdiction (MXN)
Shelters p/1000 
people
L
R1
62.06
R1
0.31
R2
62.35
R2
0.35
R3
61.21
R3
0.31
M
R1
71.35
R1
0.41
R2
72.17
R2
0.48
R3
71.75
R3
0.41
R4
72.08
R4
0.42
H
R1
73.89
R1
0.45
R2
73.79
R2
0.45
R3
73.82
R3
0.48
R4
74.18
R4
0.45
R5
73.87
R5
0.42
Table 5  Analysis per jurisdiction
 
Instance
Max people 
requiring 
backup shelter
Max 
num­
ber of 
buses
Average 
distance p/
person
Max % of
people attending
shelters across
jurisdictions
Low
1,318
31
10.83
69.27
Medium
9,090
191
8.06
87.00
Large
18,314
386
9.44
91.24
Table 4  Results of backup 
shelters
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
shelters to enhance the robustness of the relief network. The findings also underscore the 
potential of the model proposed to balance the burden for the jurisdictions involved. The 
comparison of the different instances shows that the model maintained a similar level of 
expenses for all the jurisdictions involved, trying to push down the maximum cost per per­
son per jurisdiction following the second objective function.
4.1.2  Value of the stochastic solutions
Stochastic optimization assumes some data can be represented with uncertain parameters, 
which can be used to make a set of decisions before the event (first-stage) and another set 
of decisions after the event (second-stage) (Birge & Louveaux, 2011). The decision to use 
stochastic programming introduces a higher level of complexity in the optimization model 
because it becomes more difficult to solve (Shapiro & Nemirovski, 2005). That increased 
complexity needs to be balanced with the advantage of modelling different risk attitudes, the 
necessity to introduce uncertainty in the situation, and the need for more realistic solutions 
(Chang et al., 2022; Kamyabniya et al., 2024; Nazemi et al., 2021). Although several mod­
els in the literature have stated the value of two-stage stochastic models for disaster relief 
(Kamyabniya et al., 2024; Ozbay et al., 2019), the complexity of stochastic models requires 
addressing problems where the stochastic solution is relevant and it can contribute to get an 
useful solution to the problem. Hence, this article investigates the suitability of two-stage 
stochastic programming for the problem at hand.
The value of the stochastic solution is analyzed using two traditional measures: the 
expected value of perfect information (EVPI) and the value of the stochastic solution (VSS) 
shown in Table 6. EVPI is calculated using the value of the recourse problem (RP) and the 
wait-and-see solution (WS) through the formula: EVPI = zRP – zWS (Mahootchi & Golmo­
hammadi, 2018). VSS is calculated using the expected value problem (EV) and the Expec­
tation of the Expected Value Solution (EEV) through the formula: VSS = zEEV – zRP. Both 
measures are useful to test the benefits of using stochastic models to tackle the problem.
The Table shows positive and significant values for both measures. The analysis of both 
objective functions allowed us to understand more about the behavior of the model. Figure 2 
shows the RP, WS, EV and EEV values for the three instances for the first objective func­
tion. In all instances, the RP values were higher than WS and EV values, and lower than the 
EVV values, as expected, whereas the EV and WS values were nearly the same.
Figure 3 shows the different solutions obtained for the problem for the second objective 
function, with similar behavior, although WS was higher than EV in the third instance. 
Overall, in both functions the values obtained in the RP solution were higher than the values 
Table 6  Value of the stochastic solution
EVPI (zRP – zWS)
VSS (zEEV – zRP) *
Instance
Difference in the
total distance
travelled
(km)
Difference in the Max 
Cost/person
/jurisdiction (MXN)
Difference in the 
total distance 
travelled (km)
Difference in the 
Max Cost/person
/jurisdiction 
(MXN)
Low
791.39
12.01
12,627.55
13.15
Medium
9,769.97
21.17
22,008.32
0.82
High
24,708.94
19.35
24,023.32
9.13
* Relaxed Aj and Ck
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
from the wait-and-see problem ( EV PI ∈R+). The high value of EVPI, particularly in the 
distance travelled, is the result of a significant difference between the RP and WS values, 
which means that the variability in the problem has a significant effect on the distance trav­
elled and the expected cost per person per jurisdiction.
The second part of the analysis looked at the cost of ignoring the uncertainty in decision-
making. Initially, all the EEV problems were unfeasible when we fixed the first-stage deci­
sions from the EV solutions. That means that making decisions based on a unique expected 
value rather than the proposed set of scenarios significantly increases the distance travelled 
and the expected cost per person per jurisdiction. Inadvertently, this result points towards 
a problem already identified in previous events. When the need for backup shelters is 
neglected, the system is vulnerable to shelter shortages and/or the use of resources increases 
Fig. 3  Results of the VSS and EVPI analysis
 
Fig. 2  Results of the VSS and EVPI analysis for objective function (1)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
considerably. From the practical perspective this result makes sense, given that overlooking 
facility failure would complicate having the capacity to provide support to all the beneficia­
ries. An alternative to reach feasible EEV values is relaxing some of the first stage variables. 
After different tests, variables Aj and Ck were unfixed to obtain the values shown in the 
Table. When the availability of shelters and their capacity are unfixed, then the model can 
find solutions to shelter all the people available. The VSS results confirm that neglecting 
uncertainty in the different instances has a significant negative effect on the outcome of the 
operations. Overall, our analysis shows that stochastic modelling is relevant to tackling the 
coordination of multiple jurisdictions for shelter management considering facility failure.
4.2  Case study
4.2.1  Context
Testing the model under real conditions allows us to get more insights about the impact of 
cross-jurisdictional coordination for shelter location and allocation and its practical impli­
cations. The study used information from a case study in México to analyze the research 
questions. The characteristics of the case can be found in Table 7.
The eruption of the Popocatépetl volcano in Mexico is used as a case study because of 
the potential impact on different States of the country. The volcano is located inside a very 
populated region which is very close to Mexico City, with over 165,000 inhabitants living 
within 20 km from the crater. The risk is increased by the presence of critical infrastructure 
in the surrounding area (García et al., 2023). It represents one of the latent hazards in the 
country (medium to high level alert) and it is surrounded by three different States: Estado 
de Mexico (EDOMEX), Puebla and Morelos. Currently, civil protection departments fol­
low their operative plan for management of a disaster caused by the volcano at each one of 
the States (Civil_Protection_Edomex, 2025; Civil_Protection_Morelos, 2019; Civil_Pro­
tection_Puebla, 2025). Although the documents suggest interaction between jurisdictions 
when the emergency is at Federal level (Civil_Protection_Edomex, 2025), current plans 
for evacuation routes favors response within jurisdictions (Civil_Protection_Puebla, 2025). 
There is a need to define mechanisms to facilitate the cooperation between jurisdictions to 
improve the level of service provided to people affected. The combination of latent danger 
of an eruption, a densely populated area and the presence of different jurisdictions makes 
the case relevant to show the application of the model and to draw insights. The purpose of 
this analysis was to look closer into response mechanisms considering the collaboration (or 
lack thereof) between the authorities of these States.
4.2.2  Data collection and gathering
The demand areas and people to evacuate were defined using a radius of 30 km of the 
volcano based on estimations from Mexican authorities. The jurisdictions involved are the 
three States potentially affected. We used the census data (​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​i​n​e​g​i​.​o​r​g​.​m​x​/​p​r​o​
Jurisdiction
Demand areas
Shelters
Demand (people)
EDOMEX
48
60
28,303
PUEBLA
168
141
25,495
MORELOS
107
8
4,998
Table 7  Characteristics of the 
case study
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
g​r​a​m​a​s​/​c​c​p​v​/​2​0​2​0​/) and road networks (​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​g​o​b​.​m​x​/​i​m​t​/​a​c​c​i​o​n​e​s​-​y​-​p​r​o​g​r​a​m​a​s​/​r​e​
d​-​n​a​c​i​o​n​a​l​-​d​e​-​c​a​m​i​n​o​s) from Mexican authorities. The catalogues of facilities with their 
capacities were obtained from to the States of Mexico (​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​c​g​p​r​o​t​e​c​c​i​o​n​c​i​v​i​l​.​e​d​o​m​e​x​.​
g​o​b​.​m​x​/​r​e​f​u​g​i​o​s​_​t​e​m​p​o​r​a​l​e​s), Puebla (​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​p​r​o​t​e​c​c​i​o​n​c​i​v​i​l​.​p​u​e​b​l​a​.​g​o​b​.​m​x​/​r​e​f​u​g​i​o​s​-​t​e​m​p​
o​r​a​l​e​s) and Morelos (​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​o​b​r​a​s​p​u​b​l​i​c​a​s​.​m​o​r​e​l​o​s​.​g​o​b​.​m​x​/​p​d​f​/​r​u​t​a​s​-​d​e​-​e​v​a​c​u​a​c​i​o​n​-​y​-​r​e​f​u​
g​i​o​s​-​t​e​m​p​o​r​a​l​e​s). Shelter costs were estimated using the capacities of the shelters and the 
requirements per person from Mexican authorities (​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​d​o​f​.​g​o​b​.​m​x​/​n​o​t​a​_​d​e​t​a​l​l​e​.​p​
h​p​?​%​2​0​c​o​d​i​g​o​=​5​2​5​7​3​2​2​&​f​e​c​h​a​=​0​3​/​0​7​/​2​0​1​2​#​g​s​c​.​t​a​b​=​0). The maximum number of buses 
was assumed to be 1,250 per jurisdiction.
The digitized information was used to determine demand based on distances to the vol­
cano. The distances were calculated using Transcad© after digitizing the facilities found 
in catalogues from authorities and using the centroids of each one of the AGEBs (Área 
Geoestadística Básica in Spanish – Basic Geostatistical Area). AGEBs are population units 
used in Mexico and defined by the Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (INEGI) 
(similar to neighborhoods). Those distances were used to estimate transportation cost based 
on the consumption of diesel from Serrano-Guevara et al., (2022) and average diesel cost 
in Mexico.
Two dimensions were used to generate scenarios: impact of the disaster and damage to 
the infrastructure. Using 4 levels (low, low-medium, medium-high, high), a total of 24 = 
16 scenarios were generated for the analysis. The probability of scenarios was generated 
assuming probabilities of 0.5 for low impact/damage, 0.25 for low-medium impact/damage, 
0.15 for low-high impact/damage, and 0.1 for high magnitude/damage. The availability of 
facilities was defined using a random number generator [0,1].
4.2.3  Findings
The purpose of this part was to investigate the existence of any benefits of allowing the 
coordination of multiple jurisdictions to shelter people affected by the eruption. The model 
proposed was compared with another two similar models: one not allowing coordination 
(i.e., each State handles the needs of their own population) and another one with partial 
coordination (i.e., people are required to be served in their own jurisdiction at the first stage 
but allowed to go to any jurisdiction if they require a backup shelter). The results are shown 
in Table 8. Very small gaps suggest that the solutions obtained by Cplex using the lexico­
graphic approach proposed are very close to the optimal value in all the instances, with solu­
tion times below four minutes in all cases. Although two-stage models are more complex to 
solve (Shapiro & Nemirovski, 2005), the results are encouraging in the sense that the lexico­
graphic solution approach allows users to get solutions quickly to inform decision-making 
in a real-size instances. Given the importance of uncertainty in the problem and the solution 
Table 8  Comparison of coordination scenarios
Instance
Total 
distance 
travelled 
(km)
Max cost/
person
/jurisdiction 
(MXN)
Max people 
crossing 
jurisdictions 
(stage 1)
Max people 
across
 jurisdictions
(stage 2)
Max 
people 
in 
backup
Gap 
(%)
Time 
(s)
Total coordination
1,298,902
1,828.76
25,957
212
19,729
0.01
204.04
Partial coordination 2,519,125
1,096.03
0
4,796
24,907
0.91
238.6
No coordination
2,547,300
769.18
0
0
19,242
0
180.74
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
time results, the characteristic of the model proposed can be relevant for implementation in 
practice.
The distance travelled by the affected people is significantly reduced by the mobility 
across jurisdictions, cutting the value nearly in half. The reason behind the lower distance 
traveled when cross-jurisdictional coordination is allowed is because different communities 
from the three States are in close proximity, making it easier for them to move to some of 
the adjoining jurisdictions rather than going farther into their State. Our findings support the 
claims from the Geographical Information System analysis of Eom et al., (2022) about the 
potential of cross-jurisdictional coordination to reduce evacuation time, and it extends it by 
showing that the collaboration is essential when there is system failure. Facilitating a coor­
dinated response as opposed to approaches that promote responses within each jurisdiction 
can have a significant effect on the people affected. According to our results, if evacuation 
routes and facility decisions are pre-planned considering a single State, the distance trav­
elled by people will be significantly higher, especially considering the potential uncertainty 
in the area and the disruptions to the infrastructure. That is clearly reflected in over 44% 
of people finding shelter in a different jurisdiction at the first stage when coordination is 
allowed. This is sensible as the model considers the geographical distribution of the people 
affected and the safe areas, rather than limiting the support to political and/or jurisdictional 
boundaries. In that sense, the model is making better use of the combined resources of the 
different jurisdictions whilst considering their individual impact.
In all cases, around one third or more of the population requires transport to backup 
shelters. That result shows that the uncertainty about infrastructure damage and accessibility 
can affect the capacity of providing safe shelters to the affected people (Bera et al., 2023; 
Esposito Amideo et al., 2019). The case also shows that cross-jurisdictional coordination 
can be more impactful at the first stage rather than at the second stage. In the case allowing 
total coordination, once people reach a different jurisdiction they remain in that jurisdiction 
when looking for backup shelters, which is reflected in a little over 1% of people moving 
to a different jurisdiction. In the situation with partial coordination, over 19% of the people 
needing a backup shelter moves to an adjoining jurisdiction. Although travelling a longer 
distance to reach a primary shelter in their own jurisdiction at stage one facilitates reaching 
backup shelters in the same jurisdiction, nearly one in five people still benefit from the pos­
sibility of moving across jurisdictions at that stage.
It is worth noticing that the distance travelled by people affected in situations with partial 
coordination is nearly the same as in situations without any coordination. This finding is 
aligned with the results from the numerical experiments, which also support the idea that 
most people benefit far more from having freedom to move across jurisdictions at the first 
stage rather than at the second stage. An interesting aspect though is that the maximum 
cost per person per jurisdiction is considerably lower when no coordination is permitted, 
as opposed to the expectation that cost would be reduced to all the jurisdictions when total 
coordination is allowed. To investigate that result closer, Table 9 is used to contrast the cost 
per person at each one of the jurisdictions, showing that Morelos becomes a key destination 
when coordination is allowed.
When total coordination is permitted, people from EDOMEX and Puebla go to Morelos, 
increasing the overall cost for that State. The reason is the closeness between some commu­
nities from different States combined with the lexicographic approach. Political boundaries 
can divide communities into different States even though they might be physically closer 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
together. That is the case of several communities from the three States studied, where sev­
eral shelters in Morelos are closer to people from communities at the outskirts of Puebla and 
EDOMEX than other areas in their same State. On the other hand, the formulation proposed 
prioritizes reducing travelled distance. Once the minimum distance is fixed, the model is 
unable to find an answer that can balance the cost of the three States. That is an important 
consequence to have in mind given the importance of reducing the total distance travelled.
The model provides the advantage of looking at the flow of evacuees between the dif­
ferent jurisdictions to inform agreements about the operation in these situations. It is a tool 
that can facilitate a transition from disaster planning considering the resources and needs of 
single States, to a coordinated response leveraging the resources from different states and 
the proximity between them. This case is an excellent example of how cross-jurisdictional 
collaboration needs to be considered. After running the model, it is evident that it is compli­
cated to balance the workload between the three states in instances with free mobility. After 
looking at this scenario, there are different options that can be taken. Initially, the excess 
workload allocated to Morelos can be discussed to reach agreements about how the other 
jurisdictions can ease that workload. It can also be agreed to limit the level of freedom of 
mobility of the people affected to reach acceptable levels. Alternatively, as the model is con­
sidering both objective functions, it can easily be run reversing the order of the objectives to 
ensure the workload is fairly distributed first, looking at the best policy to minimize distance 
within those constraints. The purpose of this analysis is to investigate different policies and 
agree on the best approach to ensure people are protected at the same time as there is a com­
mon understanding and acceptance about the workload for the different jurisdictions.
We used a sensitivity analysis with partial coordination to see the behavior of the 
system. The results can be seen in Table 10. All the gaps were below 5% and all solu­
tion times were below 5 min, which shows that the solutions obtained are very close 
to the optimal value in all the instances and these are reached within a sensible time. 
The model is forcing a percentage of people (from 10% to 100%) to be served in their 
original State at the first stage, although there is flexibility to move to another jurisdic­
tion in the second stage. The results show consistent changes in distance and cost when 
the percentage of people is modified. There is also an increase in the number of people 
crossing jurisdictions at the second stage when moving across jurisdiction at the first 
stage is increasingly discouraged.
The sensitivity analysis shows how the least flexibility is allowed for people to go 
to other States, the higher the distance they need to travel to reach a safe destination. 
This can be seen as an opportunity to improve current plans. Facility planning and 
evacuation routes promoting isolated response within States (Civil_Protection_Puebla, 
2025) limit the flexibility of people affected to attend different shelters. That can be 
problematic considering the uncertainty about the damage to local infrastructure caused 
by the disaster and the potential need to relocate people. A coordinated approach across 
jurisdictions can benefit the public and also authorities, who can make agreements for 
the collaboration and use their resources efficiently whilst serving the public. When 
Cost/person/jurisdiction
EDOMEX
PUEBLA
MORELOS
Total coordination
715.28
891.11
1,828.76
Partial coordination
740.43
872.28
1,096.03
No coordination
713.93
659.92
769.18
Table 9  Cost per person per 
jurisdiction
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
cross-jurisdictional coordination is not allowed at the first stage, the number of people 
moving across jurisdictions increases later on. The major benefits from the perspective 
of people affected are gained when cross-jurisdictional coordination is allowed from 
the beginning. That stresses the importance of planning and preparing for coordination 
between different jurisdictions to improve the conditions faced by people affected by 
disasters. Maximum cost per person per jurisdiction is less clear because it depends on 
the results of the minimization of the total distance travelled and the particular network 
in study.
Overall, the results from the numerical examples and the case study support three 
main points: (i) coordination and interoperability between jurisdictions makes a signifi­
cant difference in the service provided to people affected by disasters; (ii) it is important 
to contemplate the possibility of failures in primary shelters and the need of secondary/
backup shelters to successfully provide housing for people displaced by the disaster; 
and (iii) ignoring the uncertainty in the event when making sheltering decisions has a 
significant negative effect in the performance of humanitarian operations.
5  Conclusions
This article introduces a two-stage stochastic model for the selection of primary and 
backup shelters for vulnerable population considering the coordination of different 
jurisdictions. The balance between the service provided to people affected by the disas­
ter and the use of individual resources from each one of the jurisdictions is tackled 
using a stochastic bi-objective formulation. The model introduces different levels of 
coordination between jurisdictions to develop strategies considering failure in the infra­
structure. This study is the first one in the literature to incorporate cross-jurisdictional 
coordination into primary and backup shelter location.
The results from numerical experiments show the importance of infrastructure fail­
ure in situations with medium and high impact, the value of allowing people to move 
across jurisdictions, and the importance of considering uncertainty in the formulation. 
An interesting finding is the latent risk of capacity shortage in cases where there is facil­
ity failure or when the capacity of the facilities is not considered, as in many cases in the 
Same
jurisdic­
tion
(%)
Total distance
travelled (km)
Max cost/
person/
jurisdiction
(MXN)
Max people
crossing
jurisdictions
(stage 1)
Max people
across 
jurisdictions
(stage 2)
10
1,320,293.53
1,790.93
25,840
442
20
1,364,022.34
1,753.10
22,964
374
30
1,417,004.34
1,734.19
20,081
454
40
1,490,484.15
1,647.18
17,235
712
50
1,586,394.40
1,584.34
14,368
1,034
60
1,710,150.91
1,722.72
11,564
3,382
70
1,860,978.08
1,402.67
8,806
3,908
80
2,050,855.03
1,311.74
5,856
4,566
90
2,280,056.95
1,152.80
2,898
4,987
100
2,519,124.89
1,096.04
0
4,796
Table 10  Sensitivity analysis
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
literature. The case study using real information highlighted the importance of backup 
shelters in real conditions and the increased value of allowing cross-jurisdictional coor­
dination at the first stage over the alternative of allowing coordination only at the sec­
ond stage or not at all.
It is important to note that the model can be used by authorities to facilitate trans­
boundary coordination and to implement a shelter strategy considering backup shelters 
in different conditions. The formulation can be implemented using risk maps and infor­
mation about vulnerable areas to different types of disasters and it is appropriate for 
planning purposes up to a short period before the occurrence of the disaster, as shown 
by the solution times from the analysis. Although the model considers existent shelters 
based on current practice, it is flexible to the use prospective areas for shelters to sug­
gest the location of temporary facilities or new shelters as well. One important aspect 
to note is the assumption of horizontal collaboration between independent jurisdictions. 
The model can accommodate situations where jurisdictions work independently (within 
or between countries) or where they fall under the umbrella of a coordinating emer­
gency body (Rodríguez-Espíndola et al., 2018). However, the application of the model 
needs to carefully consider the governance systems, along with the type of collaboration 
agreed between jurisdictions, especially when international collaboration is required. 
This includes when jurisdictions are not contiguous, as that can limit the flow of people 
between them and the effectiveness of the model.
The literature on cross-jurisdictional coordination is still at a nascent stage, but the 
findings from this study show that ignoring the interaction between authorities from dif­
ferent jurisdictions can negatively affect the experience of people affected by disasters. 
Although jurisdictional and political issues can affect disaster planning, this article pro­
vides evidence that a well-coordinated joint response can deliver benefits for authorities 
and people affected. There are different avenues for further research building on the 
results of this article. The extension of approaches such as the p-next center problem 
with capacity constraints can foster the advancement of similar models in the future 
(Albareda-Sambola et al., 2015). The development of integrated models incorporating 
cross-jurisdictional aspects based on the expertise and experience of different jurisdic­
tions would advance the efficiency and effectiveness of humanitarian supply chains. 
The design of dynamic models for cross-jurisdictional coordination would be useful for 
complex emergencies caused by simultaneous and secondary hazards. Finally, the use 
of robust optimization can be valuable for problems where the stochastic parameters are 
difficult to estimate.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors have no competing or conflicting interests to declare that are relevant to the 
content of this article.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
References
Aghaie, S., & Karimi, B. (2022). Location-allocation-routing for emergency shelters based on geographical 
information system (ArcGIS) by NSGA-II (case study: Earthquake occurrence in Tehran (District-1)). 
Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 84, 101420. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seps.2022.101420
Albareda-Sambola, M., Hinojosa, Y., Marin, A., & Puerto, J. (2015). When centers can fail: A close second 
opportunity. Computers & Operations Research, 62, 145–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2015.01.002
Albareda-Sambola, M., Martínez-Merino, L. I., & Rodríguez-Chía, A. M. (2019). The stratified p-center 
problem. Computers & Operations Research, 108, 213–225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2019.04.013
Alem, D., Clark, A., & Moreno, A. (2016). Stochastic network models for logistics planning in disaster relief. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 255(1), 187–206. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​e​j​o​r​.​2​0​1​6​.​0​4​.​0​
4​1​
An, S., Cui, N., Li, X., & Ouyang, Y. (2013). Location planning for transit-based evacuation under the risk 
of service disruptions. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 54, 1–16. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
0​1​6​/​j​.​t​r​b​.​2​0​1​3​.​0​3​.​0​0​2​
Ansell, C., Boin, A., & Keller, A. (2010). Managing transboundary crises: Identifying the Building blocks of 
an effective response system. JOURNAL OF CONTINGENCIES AND CRISIS MANAGEMENT, 18(4), 
195–207. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​4​6​8​-​5​9​7​3​.​2​0​1​0​.​0​0​6​2​0​.​x
Babashahi, M., Shahanaghi, K., Gholamian, M. R., & Yavari, A. (2020). A bi-objective hierarchical hub 
location model with facility failure. Scientia Iranica, 27(4), 2009–2020. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​2​4​2​0​0​/​s​c​i​.​
2​0​1​8​.​5​3​5​8​.​1​2​2​9​
Baghersad, M., Emadikhiav, M., Huang, C. D., & Behara, R. S. (2023). Modularity maximization to design 
contiguous policy zones for pandemic response. European Journal of Operational Research, 304(1), 
99–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2022.01.012
Baharmand, H., Vega, D., Lauras, M., & Comes, T. (2022). A methodology for developing evidence-based 
optimization models in humanitarian logistics. Annals of Operations Research, 319(1), 1197–1229. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04762-9
Balcik, B., Beamon, B. M., Krejci, C. C., Muramatsu, K. M., & Ramirez, M. (2010). Coordination in humani­
tarian relief chains: Practices, challenges and opportunities. International Journal of Production Eco­
nomics, 126(1), 22–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2009.09.008
Beamon, B. M., & Balcik, B. (2008). Performance measurement in humanitarian relief chains. International 
Journal of Public Sector Management, 21(1), 4–25. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513550810846087
Bera, S., Gnyawali, K., Dahal, K., Melo, R., Li-Juan, M., Guru, B., & Ramana, G. V. (2023). Assessment of 
shelter location-allocation for multi-hazard emergency evacuation. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
DISASTER RISK REDUCTION, 84, 103435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2022.103435
Birge, J. R., & Louveaux, F. (2011). Introduction to stochastic programming. Springer New York.
Boin, A., Rhinard, M., & Ekengren, M. (2014). Managing transboundary crises: The emergence of European 
Union capacity. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 22(3), 131–142. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​1​1​1​/​1​4​6​8​-​5​9​7​3​.​1​2​0​5​2​
British_Red_Cross (2023). Morocco earthquake 2023: Red Cross Red Crescent response. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​r​e​
d​c​r​o​s​s​.​o​r​g​.​u​k​/​s​t​o​r​i​e​s​/​d​i​s​a​s​t​e​r​s​-​a​n​d​-​e​m​e​r​g​e​n​c​i​e​s​/​w​o​r​l​d​/​m​o​r​o​c​c​o​-​e​a​r​t​h​q​u​a​k​e​-​2​0​2​3​-​l​a​t​e​s​t​-​n​e​w​s​-​a​n​d​-​u​p​d​
a​t​e​s
Burkart, C., Nolz, P. C., & Gutjahr, W. J. (2017). Modelling beneficiaries’ choice in disaster relief logistics. 
Annals of Operations Research, 256(1), 41–61. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-015-2097-9
Chang, Y., Song, Y., & Eksioglu, B. (2022). A stochastic look-ahead approach for hurricane relief logistics 
operations planning under uncertainty. Annals of Operations Research, 319(1), 1231–1263. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​1​-​0​4​0​2​5​-​z​
Civil_Protection_Edomex (2025). Plan Operativo Popocatépetl. Retrieved 16th May from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​c​g​p​r​o​t​e​c​c​
i​o​n​c​i​v​i​l​.​e​d​o​m​e​x​.​g​o​b​.​m​x​/​p​l​a​n​_​p​e​r​a​t​i​v​o​_​p​o​p​o​c​a​t​e​p​e​t​l
Civil_Protection_Morelos (2019). Plan Popocatépetl del Estado de Morelos. Retrieved 16th May from ​h​t​t​p​s​
:​/​/​w​w​w​.​p​r​e​p​a​r​a​d​o​s​.​g​o​b​.​m​x​/​a​p​p​s​/​r​u​t​a​s​v​o​l​c​a​n​/​p​l​a​n​p​o​p​o​c​a​t​e​p​e​t​l​/​P​l​a​n​M​o​r​e​l​o​s​2​0​1​9​.​p​d​f
Civil_Protection_Puebla (2025). PROGRAMA ESPECIAL PARA CONTINGENCIAS DEL VOLCÁN POPO­
CATEPETL Retrieved 16th May from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​p​r​o​t​e​c​c​i​o​n​c​i​v​i​l​.​p​u​e​b​l​a​.​g​o​b​.​m​x​/​i​m​a​g​e​s​/​s​i​t​e​/​p​l​a​n​e​s​/​P​R​O​G​
R​A​M​a​E​S​P​E​C​I​A​L​-​P​O​P​O​C​A​T​E​P​E​T​L​.​p​d​f
Coskun, A., Elmaghraby, W., Karaman, M. M., & Salman, F. S. (2019). Relief aid stocking decisions under 
bilateral agency Cooperation. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 67, 147–165. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​
6​/​j​.​s​e​p​s​.​2​0​1​8​.​1​0​.​0​0​9​
Dang, D. C., Currie, C. S. M., Onggo, B. S., Chaerani, D., & Achmad, A. L. H. (2023). Budget allocation 
of food procurement for natural disaster response. European Journal of Operational Research, 311(2), 
754–768. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2023.05.015
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
EM-DAT (2024). People left homeless from natural disasters, All disasters, 1900 to 2024 ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​o​u​r​w​o​r​l​d​i​n​
d​a​t​a​.​o​r​g​/​g​r​a​p​h​e​r​/​n​u​m​b​e​r​-​h​o​m​e​l​e​s​s​-​f​r​o​m​-​n​a​t​u​r​a​l​-​d​i​s​a​s​t​e​r​s
Eom, S., Umemoto, M., & Suzuki, T. (2022). Cross-border evacuation and intermunicipal Cooperation dur­
ing large-scale flood disasters. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 79, 103159. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​
i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​i​j​d​r​r​.​2​0​2​2​.​1​0​3​1​5​9​
Ergün, S., Usta, P., Alparslan Gök, S. Z., & Weber, G. W. (2023). A game theoretical approach to emergency 
logistics planning in natural disasters. Annals of Operations Research, 324(1), 855–868. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​1​-​0​4​0​9​9​-​9​
Eriskin, L., & Karatas, M. (2024). Applying robust optimization to the shelter location–allocation problem: 
A case study for Istanbul. Annals of Operations Research, 339(3), 1589–1635. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​
/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​2​2​-​0​4​6​2​7​-​1​
Esposito Amideo, A., Scaparra, M. P., & Kotiadis, K. (2019). Optimising shelter location and evacuation 
routing operations: The critical issues. European Journal of Operational Research, 279(2), 279–295. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.12.009
Farahani, R. Z., Lotfi, M. M., Baghaian, A., Ruiz, R., & Rezapour, S. (2020). Mass casualty management in 
disaster scene: A systematic review of OR&MS research in humanitarian operations. European Journal 
of Operational Research, 287(3), 787–819. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.03.005
Gangwal, U., Siders, A. R., Horney, J., Michael, H. A., & Dong, S. (2023). Critical facility accessibility and 
road criticality assessment considering flood-induced partial failure. Sustainable and Resilient Infra­
structure, 8(sup1), 337–355. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​2​3​7​8​9​6​8​9​.​2​0​2​2​.​2​1​4​9​1​8​4
Gao, X. (2022). A bi-level stochastic optimization model for multi-commodity rebalancing under uncertainty 
in disaster response. Annals of Operations Research, 319(1), 115–148. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​
9​-​0​1​9​-​0​3​5​0​6​-​6​
García, A. R., Zavala-Hidalgo, J., Delgado-Granados, H., Garcia-Escalante, J., Gómez-Ramos, O., & Her­
rera-Moro, D. (2023). An automated Ash dispersion forecast system: Case study Popocatépetl volcano, 
Mexico. Journal of Applied Volcanology, 12(1), 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13617-023-00135-4
Geng, S., Hou, H., & Zhou, Z. (2021). A hybrid approach of vikor and bi-objective decision model for emer­
gency shelter location–allocation to respond to earthquakes [Article]. Mathematics, 9(16), Article 1897. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/math9161897
Gutjahr, W. J., & Nolz, P. C. (2016). Multicriteria optimization in humanitarian aid. European Journal of 
Operational Research, 252(2), 351–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.12.035
Henstra, D. (2010). Evaluating local government emergency management programs: What framework should 
public managers adopt? Public Administration Review, 70(2), 236–246. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​5​4​0​
-​6​2​1​0​.​2​0​1​0​.​0​2​1​3​0​.​x. https://doi.org/https://doi.
Hinojosa, Y., Marín, A., & Puerto, J. (2023). Dynamically second-preferred p-center problem. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 307(1), 33–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2022.09.019
Hollis, S. (2020). Crisis management in europe: Exploring transgovernmental solutions to transboundary prob­
lems. Journal of Transatlantic Studies, 18(2), 231–252. https://doi.org/10.1057/s42738-020-00042-1
Jamali, A., Ranjbar, A., Heydari, J., & Nayeri, S. (2022). A multi-objective stochastic programming model to 
configure a sustainable humanitarian logistics considering deprivation cost and patient severity. Annals 
of Operations Research, 319(1), 1265–1300. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04014-2
Kamyabniya, A., Sauré, A., Salman, F. S., Bénichou, N., & Patrick, J. (2024). Optimization models for disas­
ter response operations: A literature review. Or Spectrum. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00291-024-00750-6
Kilci, F., Kara, B. Y., & Bozkaya, B. (2015). Locating temporary shelter areas after an earthquake: A case 
for Turkey. European Journal of Operational Research, 243(1), 323–332. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​e​j​
o​r​.​2​0​1​4​.​1​1​.​0​3​5​
Kınay, Ö. B., Kara, Y., Saldanha-da-Gama, B., F., & Correia, I. (2018). Modeling the shelter site loca­
tion problem using chance constraints: A case study for Istanbul. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 270(1), 132–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.03.006
Kumar, P., & Singh, R. K. (2022). Application of industry 4.0 technologies for effective coordination in 
humanitarian supply chains: A strategic approach. Annals of Operations Research, 319(1), 379–411. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03898-w
Lane, L., & Hesselman, M. (2017). Governing disasters: Embracing human rights in a multi-level, multi-duty 
bearer, disaster governance landscape. Politics and Governance, 5(2), 93–104. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​7​6​4​
5​/​P​A​G​.​V​5​I​2​.​8​9​9​
Lebcir, R. M., & Roy, P. (2023). Impact of coordination on post-earthquake last Mile relief distribution opera­
tions in India. International Journal of Emergency Management, 18(3), 293–316. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​5​
0​4​/​I​J​E​M​.​2​0​2​3​.​1​3​2​3​9​0​
Liu, Q., Ruan, X., & Shi, P. (2011). Selection of emergency shelter sites for seismic disasters in mountainous 
regions: Lessons from the 2008 Wenchuan Ms 8.0 Earthquake, China. Journal of Asian Earth Sciences, 
40(4), 926–934. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jseaes.2010.07.014
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Lu, Y., Yang, C., & Yang, J. (2022). A multi-objective humanitarian pickup and delivery vehicle routing 
problem with drones. Annals of Operations Research, 319(1), 291–353. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​
7​9​-​0​2​2​-​0​4​8​1​6​-​y​
Ma, D., Chu, J., Wang, Z., & Sun, T. (2016). Study on disaster shelter complement location problem after 
disaster shelter failure. World Earthquake Engineering, 32(1), 117–123.
Mahootchi, M., & Golmohammadi, S. (2018). Developing a new stochastic model considering bi-directional 
relations in a natural disaster: A possible earthquake in Tehran (the capital of Islamic Republic of Iran). 
Annals of Operations Research, 269(1), 439–473. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2596-y
Mohamadi, A., Yaghoubi, S., & Pishvaee, M. S. (2019). Fuzzy multi-objective stochastic programming 
model for disaster relief logistics considering telecommunication infrastructures: A case study. Opera­
tional Research, 19(1), 59–99. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12351-016-0285-2
Mutebi, H., Muhwezi, M., Ntayi, J. M., Mayanja, S. S., & Munene, J. C. K. (2022). Organisational networks, 
organisational learning, organisational adaptability and role clarity among humanitarian organisations 
during relief delivery. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 12(2), 249–
284. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-04-2021-0034
Nazemi, N., Parragh, S. N., & Gutjahr, W. J. (2021). Bi-objective facility location under uncertainty with an 
application in last-mile disaster relief. Annals of Operations Research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​
9​-​0​2​1​-​0​4​4​2​2​-​4​
Nigg, J. M., Barnshaw, J., & Torres, M. R. (2006). Hurricane katrina and the flooding of new orleans: Emer­
gent issues in sheltering and temporary housing. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science, 604, 113–128. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25097784
Nowell, B., Steelman, T., Velez, A., & Albrecht, K. (2022). Co-management during crisis: Insights from 
jurisdictionally complex wildfires. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 31(5), 529–544. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​
.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​7​1​/​W​F​2​1​1​3​9​
Nurmala, N., de Leeuw, S., & Dullaert, W. (2017). Humanitarian–business partnerships in managing humani­
tarian logistics. Supply Chain Management: an International Journal, 22(1), 82–94. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​1​0​8​/​S​C​M​-​0​7​-​2​0​1​6​-​0​2​6​2​
Olsson, E. K. (2015a). Transboundary crisis networks: The challenge of coordination in the face of global 
threats. Risk Management, 17(2), 91–108. http://www.jstor.org/stable/43695458
Ommi, S., & Janalipour, M. (2022). Selection of shelters after earthquake using probabilistic seismic after­
shock hazard analysis and remote sensing. NATURAL HAZARDS, 113(1), 345–363. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​0​0​7​/​s​1​1​0​6​9​-​0​2​2​-​0​5​3​0​3​-​0​
Ozbay, E., Çavuş, Ö., & Kara, B. Y. (2019). Shelter site location under multi-hazard scenarios. Computers & 
Operations Research, 106, 102–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2019.02.008
Polese, M., Tocchi, G., Babič, A., Dolšek, M., Faravelli, M., Quaroni, D., & Prota, A. (2024). Multi-risk 
assessment in transboundary areas: A framework for harmonized evaluation considering seismic and 
flood risks [Article]. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 101, 104275. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​i​j​d​r​r​.​2​0​2​4​.​1​0​4​2​7​5​
Rahmani, D., Zandi, A., Peyghaleh, E., & Siamakmanesh, N. (2018). A robust model for a humanitarian relief 
network with backup covering under disruptions: A real world application. IInternational Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction, 28, 56–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2018.02.021
Renkli, Ç., & Duran, S. (2015). Pre-Positioning disaster response facilities and relief items. Human and 
Ecological Risk Assessment: an International Journal, 21(5), 1169–1185. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​0​8​
0​7​0​3​9​.​2​0​1​4​.​9​5​7​9​4​0​
Rodríguez-Espíndola, O. (2022). Multiperiod model for disaster management in simultaneous disasters. 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2022.3227329
Rodríguez-Espíndola, O. (2023). Two-stage stochastic formulation for relief operations with multiple agen­
cies in simultaneous disasters. Or Spectrum. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00291-023-00705-3
Rodríguez-Espíndola, O., Albores, P., & Brewster, C. (2018). Decision-making and operations in disasters: 
Challenges and opportunities. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 38(10), 
1964–1986. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-03-2017-0151
Rodríguez-Espíndola, O., Dey, P., Albores, P., & Chowdhury, S. (2023). Sustainability and intermodality in 
humanitarian logistics: A two-stage multi-objective programming formulation. Annals of Operations 
Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05459-3
Rui, C., Sharman, R., Rao, H. R., & Upadhyaya, S. J. (2008). Coordination in emergency response manage­
ment. Communications of the ACM, 51(5), 66–73. https://doi.org/10.1145/1342327.1342340
Ruktanonchai, N. W., Floyd, J. R., Lai, S., Ruktanonchai, C. W., Sadilek, A., Rente-Lourenco, P., & Tatem, 
A. J. (2020). Assessing the impact of coordinated COVID-19 exit strategies across Europe. Science, 
369(6510), 1465–1470. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abc5096
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Save_the_Children (2023). Türkiye/Syria – One in 3 children displaced by Türkiye earthquakes still home­
less while needs at record levels in Syria. Retrieved 09th July 2024 from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​s​a​v​e​t​h​e​c​h​i​l​d​r​e​n​
.​n​e​t​/​n​e​w​s​/​t​-​r​k​i​y​e​s​y​r​i​a​-​o​n​e​-​3​-​c​h​i​l​d​r​e​n​-​d​i​s​p​l​a​c​e​d​-​t​-​r​k​i​y​e​-​e​a​r​t​h​q​u​a​k​e​s​-​s​t​i​l​l​-​h​o​m​e​l​e​s​s​-​w​h​i​l​e​-​n​e​e​d​s​-​r​e​c​o​r​d
Schulz, S. F., & Blecken, A. (2010). Horizontal Cooperation in disaster relief logistics: Benefits and impedi­
ments [Article]. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 40(8), 636–
656. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600031011079300
Seraji, H., Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R., Asian, S., & Kaur, H. (2022). An integrative location-allocation model 
for humanitarian logistics with distributive injustice and dissatisfaction under uncertainty. Annals of 
Operations Research, 319(1), 211–257. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04003-5
Serrano-Guevara, O. S., Huertas, J. I., Mogro, A. E., & Quirama, L. F. (2022). Consumo Energético de vehícu­
los Pesados En México. Informador Técnico, 87(1), 29–39. https://doi.org/10.23850/22565035.5123
Shapiro, A., & Nemirovski, A. (2005). On complexity of stochastic programming problems. In V. Jeyakumar 
& A. Rubinov (Eds.), Continuous optimization: current trends and modern applications (pp. 111–146). 
US: Springer.
Snyder, L. V., & Daskin, M. S. (2005). Reliability models for facility location: The expected failure cost case. 
Transportation Science, 39(3), 400–416. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1040.0107
Valaei Sharif, S., Moshfegh, H., P., & Kashani, H. (2023). Simulation modeling of operation and coordination 
of agencies involved in post-disaster response and recovery. Reliability Engineering and System Safety, 
235, 109219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2023.109219
Wang, Y., & Xu, Z. (2023). An emergency shelter location model based on the sense of security and the reli­
ability level. Journal of Systems Science and Systems Engineering, 32(1), 100–127. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​0​0​7​/​s​1​1​5​1​8​-​0​2​3​-​5​5​5​0​-​3​
Wang, Q., Liu, Z., Jiang, P., & Luo, L. (2022). A stochastic programming model for emergency supplies pre-
positioning, transshipment and procurement in a regional healthcare coalition. SOCIO-ECONOMIC 
PLANNING SCIENCES, 82, 101279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seps.2022.101279
Wojtalewicz, C., Kirby, A., & Dietz, J. E. (2014). Implementation and modeling of a regional hub reception 
center during mass evacuation operations. J Emerg Manag, 12(3), 197–210. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​5​0​5​5​/​j​e​
m​.​2​0​1​4​.​0​1​7​2​
Yahyaei, M., & Bozorgi-Amiri, A. (2019). Robust reliable humanitarian relief network design: An integration 
of shelter And supply facility location. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 897–916. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​1​8​-​2​7​5​8​-​6​
Zhu, L., Gong, Y., Xu, Y., & Gu, J. (2019). Emergency relief routing models for injured victims considering 
equity and priority. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 1573–1606. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​0​4​7​
9​-​0​1​8​-​3​0​8​9​-​3​
Zikeloglou, I., Lekkas, E., Lozios, S., & Stavropoulou, M. (2024). Community’s evacuation planning and 
response for the 2021–2022 fire seasons in Greece. Safety Science, 172, 106434. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
1​6​/​j​.​s​s​c​i​.​2​0​2​4​.​1​0​6​4​3​4​
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3