TITLE: Detecting fake news and disinformation using artificial intelligence and machine learning to avoid supply chain disruptions
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05015-5
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Accepted: 27 September 2022 / Published online: 1 November 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Detecting fake news and disinformation using artificial 
intelligence and machine learning to avoid supply chain 
disruptions
Pervaiz Akhtar1,2
 · Arsalan Mujahid Ghouri3 · Haseeb Ur Rehman Khan4 · 
Mirza Amin ul Haq5 · Usama Awan6 · Nadia Zahoor7 · Zaheer Khan1,9 · Aniqa Ashraf8
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-05015-5
 Abstract
Fake news and disinformation (FNaD) are increasingly being circulated through various 
online and social networking platforms, causing widespread disruptions and influencing 
decision-making perceptions. Despite the growing importance of detecting fake news in 
politics, relatively limited research efforts have been made to develop artificial intelligence 
(AI) and machine learning (ML) oriented FNaD detection models suited to minimize sup­
ply chain disruptions (SCDs). Using a combination of AI and ML, and case studies based 
on data collected from Indonesia, Malaysia, and Pakistan, we developed a FNaD detection 
model aimed at preventing SCDs. This model based on multiple data sources has shown 
evidence of its effectiveness in managerial decision-making. Our study further contributes 
to the supply chain and AI-ML literature, provides practical insights, and points to future 
research directions.
Keywords  Fake news · Disinformation · Misinformation · Artificial intelligence · 
Machine learning · Supply chain disruptions · Effective decision making
1  Introduction
The increased scholarly focus has been directed to fake news detection given their wide­
spread impact on supply chain disruptions, as was the case with the COVID-19 vaccine. 
Fake news and misinformation are highly disruptive, which create uncertainty and disrup­
tions not only in society but also in business operations. Fake news and disinformation-
related problems are exacerbated due to the rise of social media sites. Regarding this, using 
artificial intelligence (AI) to counteract the spread of false information is vital in acting 
against disruptive effects (Gupta et al., 2021). It has been observed that fake news and dis­
information (FNaD) harm supply chains and make their operation unsustainable (Churchill, 
2018). According to research, fake news can be classified into two distinct concepts of 
misinformation and disinformation (Petratos, 2021; Allcott & Gentzkow, 2017) defined 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
fake news as “news articles that are intentionally and verifiably false, and could mislead 
readers” (p. 213). According to Wardle (2017), misinformation refers to “the inadvertent 
sharing of false information”, while disinformation can be defined as “the deliberate cre­
ation and sharing of information known to be false”. Among the negative consequences that 
fake news can have for companies are loss of sponsorships, reduced credibility, and loss of 
reputation which can adversely affect performance (Di Domenico et al., 2021). In such a 
context AI is shaping decision-making in an increasing range of sectors and could be used 
to improve the effectiveness of fake news timely detection and identification (Gupta et al., 
2021). Whereas many new efforts to develop AI-based fake news detection systems have 
concentrated on the political process, the consequences of FNaD on supply chain operations 
have been relatively underexplored (Gupta et al., 2021).
Kaplan and Haenlein (2019) addressed AI “as a system’s ability to interpret external data 
correctly, to learn from such data, and to use those learnings to achieve specific goals and 
tasks through flexible adaptation” (p.17). Although emerging technologies such as AI may 
sometimes have negative effects, they can be utilized to combat disinformation. As scholar­
ship is showing increasing interest in how AI can improve operationally and supply chain 
efficiencies (Brock & von Wangenheim, 2019), researchers have recently called for more 
studies on how organizational strengths and the use of AI influence the outcomes for deci­
sion-making structures (Shrestha et al., 2019). Fake news has considerable negative effects 
on firms’ operations, such as repeated disruptions of supply chains (Churchill, 2018). FNaD 
influence the use of a company’s product or services (Zhang et al., 2019; Sohrabpour et al., 
2021) argued that leveraging AI to improve supply chain operations will likely improve 
firms’ planning, strategy, marketing, logistics, warehousing, and resource management in 
the presence of any environmental uncertainty, including that caused by FNaD.
Scholars have called for research to attain an in-depth understanding of AI and of how 
to tailor it to enhance business efficiencies and minimize supply chain disruptions (SCDs) 
(e.g., Grewal et al., 2021; Churchill, 2018). The extant literature has drawn mixed conclu­
sions on whether AI-driven or hybrid AI decision-making benefits a firm’s supply chain 
(Shrestha et al., 2019). The question of why some firms are more effective than others in 
using AI to manage SCDs has largely been overlooked (Toorajipour et al., 2021). Increased 
research efforts are being made to identify and manage fake news risk in supply chain 
operations (Reisach, 2021). In today’s digital media landscape, the term ‘fake news’ has 
gained relevance following the 2016 US presidential elections (Allcott & Gentzkow, 2017). 
People have been observed to be unable to clearly distinguish between fake and real news 
and to tend to perceive ‘fake news’ as a more significant issue within the current information 
landscape (Tong et al., 2020). Therefore, decision-makers are often influenced by FNaD, 
thus ending up making erroneous decisions and drawing inaccurate conclusions regarding 
current scenarios (e.g., Lewandowsky et al., 2012; Di Domenico et al., 2021). From a supply 
chain perspective, researchers have highlighted how FNaD can lead to SCDs (e.g., Gupta 
et al., 2021; Kovács & Sigala, 2021; Sodhi & Tang, 2021), which can have a far-reaching 
impact on the functioning of global supply chains.
Additionally, the United Nations (2020) have suggested that, despite the measures put 
in place to build confidence in people, businesses, and supply chain operations, SCDs have 
remained a problematic area for businesses in recent years. Resilinc (2021) revealed that 
SCDs have been increasing by 67% year-over-year, with 83% of such disruptive events 
being caused by human activity—not natural disasters. EverStream Analytics (2020) found 
1 3
634

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
that 40.5% and 33.4% of businesses are respectively getting their information and intelli­
gence relating to supply chain issues from their customers and social media. The detection 
of fraudulent information is thus critical to avoid such consequences (Kim & Ko, 2021), and 
businesses need to set up specific processes or routines to filter incoming business-related 
information and mitigate any possible related harm to their operations (Kim & Ko, 2021; 
Kim & Dennis, 2019) emphasized research underpinning emerging technologies such as AI 
suited to tackle FNaD. As FNaD have become increasingly relevant in the field of opera­
tions management, and given their effects on decision-making, there is a need to understand 
what business processes require to be implemented to contain their spread and minimize 
SCDs.
However, there is still a limited understanding of how AI techniques can help in eliminat­
ing FNaD. We, therefore, sought to define an AI-oriented business process suited to remove 
the effects of FNaD on decision-making and set our research question as: “How can firms 
integrate AI in their operations to reduce the impact of FNaD regarding SCDs?” In answer­
ing this question, our study makes three contributions to the literature. First, it develops a 
new theoretical framework suited to mitigate the impacts of FNaD on SCDs and it analyses 
the relationship using a specific dataset and support-vector machine. The resulting busi­
ness process manages the dissemination of information, accurately mitigating FNaD and 
enabling correct decision-making in regard to tackling complex issues (e.g., Jayawickrama 
et al., 2019). Second, by presenting key findings gleaned by interviewing senior managers 
from three different countries (Indonesia, Malaysia, and Pakistan) with expertise in supply 
chains, our study provides new theoretical evidence regarding how firms can avoid SCDs 
in emerging economies. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first to focus on the 
implications and integration of AI in business processes to the end of mitigating the effects 
of FNaD on SCDs. Our framework thus links the supply chain and AI literature and expli­
cates their utility in mitigating SCDs against the backdrop of fake news and disinformation 
campaigns. In our study, we adopted a qualitative method that involved integrating the AI 
literature with research on fake news to reveal how the effectiveness of decision-making 
can be ensured within supply chain operations. Much previous research has advanced our 
understanding of fake news detection mechanisms using graphs and summarization tech­
niques (Kim & Ko, 2021). Furthermore, a recent study has proposed an AI-based, real-
time fake news detection system by conducting a systematic literature review (Gupta et al., 
2021). Third, our study fills a gap in the literature by providing a practical solution aimed at 
eliminating or reducing FNaD in business scenarios, specifically acting to minimize SCDs. 
The extant literature is somewhat scattered and fragmented that has not helped research­
ers to address many questions about FNaD (Di Domenico & Visentin, 2020). Our study 
proposes an AI-oriented business process that flags/reduces/eliminates FNaD before it can 
reach decision-makers and allows authentic news and information to filter through to supply 
chain operation resilience and prevent SCDs.
This paper is structured as follows. Section2 presents a discussion of the related lit­
erature, which is followed by an illustration of our research methodology in Sect. 3. In 
Sect. 4, the implementation details, findings, and proposed model are provided. In Sect. 5, 
the implications of our model are discussed and, to conclude, future research directions are 
suggested.
1 3
635

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
2  Literature review
2.1  Theoretical background
Organizational Information Processing Theory (OIPT) proposes a systematic comprehen­
sion of processing and exchanging of information to increase capacities. OIPT reasons that 
firms need a stabilizing mechanism by possessing resources and capacities in operations to 
cope with uncertainties and manage unforeseen events that disturb normal business and sup­
ply chain operations (Wong et al., 2020). Scholarship suggests that SCDs could be caused 
by disinformation (e.g., Konstantakis et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2020). It is ultimately inevitable 
for supply chains to cultivate the capability and capacity to proactively engage the filtration 
of the information and news to improve supply chain operations. Firms could either opt 
to rely on mechanistic organizational resources for reducing their reliance on information 
or enhance their information processing capabilities. The more environmental uncertainty 
facing firms, the more information they need to gather and process to achieve better per­
formance (Bode et al., 2011). OIPT proposing the primary goal of organizational-related 
process designs is linked with uncertainty by acquiring, analyzing, and sharing informa­
tion from the business environment (Swink & Schoenherr, 2015; Yu et al., 2019). OIPT 
addresses the development of organizational capabilities to fill their information processing 
requirements (Wamba et al., 2020). SCDs can be avoided by the filtration of receiving accu­
rate and timely information. Di Domenico et al., (2021) suggested that FNaD during disrup­
tions i.e., the supply chain may cause the loss of preventable lives, misguiding information 
on business activities and innovation. Fact-checking measures like “know why”, “know 
how”, “know what”, and “know when” could be checked by emerging technologies and 
information processing capabilities (Jayawickrama et al., 2016; Swanson & Wang, 2005). 
In this perspective, AI and Machine Learning (ML) could manage the dissemination of real 
information by accurately detecting and mitigating false information and making correct 
decisions when tackling difficult issues (Endsley, 2018; Jayawickrama et al., 2019; Roozen­
beek and van der Linden, 2019). OIPT thus focuses on linking uncertainty with information 
needs and information processing capacities and prescribes organizational designs to reduce 
uncertainty. Our study thus seeks to provide a holistic theoretical framework (integrated 
with AI and ML) built based on OIPT to minimize the chances of SCDs.
2.2  Artificial intelligence and supply chain operations
In academia, the concept of AI was first established in the 1950s (Haenlein & Kaplan, 
2019). However, McCulloch & Pitts (1943) ideas on logical expression represent a nota­
ble landmark, as they led to the development of a neurocomputer design (Milner, 2003). 
While the exact year is unknown, the origins of AI can thus be dated to the 1940s; notably, 
to Isaac Asimov’s 1942 short tale ‘Runaround’, published in ‘Science Fiction’ magazine. 
In it, Asimov formalized his three laws of robotics: first, a robot cannot harm a human 
being; second, a robot must follow human commands; and third, a robot must defend itself 
(Haenlein & Kaplan, 2019). In 1955, in a research project on AI (McCarthy et al., 1955) 
Dartmouth college defined it as “making a machine behave in ways that would be called 
intelligent if a human were so behaving” (p.11). Since 1955, AI has evoked the idea of 
relevant human intuition and artificial machines that could stimulate the human brain and 
1 3
636

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
come up with environmental abstractions to work on difficult problems. During the follow­
ing decade, in 1966, Joseph Weizenbaum created the famous ELIZA computer program, a 
‘natural language processing (NLP) tool that was capable of holding a conversation with 
a human being and maintaining the illusion of comprehension. This was labelled heuris­
tic programming and AI (Weizenbaum, 1966). In the 1980s, research on backpropagation 
in neural networks saw rapid development (Zhang & Lu, 2021). Under Ernst Dickmanns, 
Mercedes-Benz developed and commercialized a driverless vehicle fitted with cameras and 
sensors and an onboard computer system controlling the steering (Delcker, 2018). With 
the continuous development of AI tools, the success of IBM’s ‘Deep Blue’ chess-playing 
supercomputer laid the foundations for research on and the application of expert systems 
(Haenlein & Kaplan, 2019).
AI is viewed as a game-changer and as being able to facilitate both the “abilities to self 
learn and a race to improve decision quality” (Vincent, 2021, p. 425). Kaplan and Haenlein 
(2019) defined AI “as a system’s ability to interpret external data correctly, to learn from 
such data, and to use those learnings to achieve specific goals and tasks through flexible 
adaptation” (p.17). In supply chain management and the manufacturing industry, there has 
been an upsurge in AI (Kumar et al., 2019) that has significantly impacted operations and 
human roles in firms (Vincent, 2021; Awan et al., 2021) suggested that AI initiatives in firm 
supply chain operations can improve knowledge of the processes used to generate business 
performance. AI is a complex and multifaceted construct with profound implications for 
firm operations management (Zeba et al., 2021). The supply chain literature has recently 
emphasized the link between the application of AI and process improvement (Toorajipour 
et al., 2021). Although several AI-based supply chain applications have appeared in recent 
years, little research has explored their use (Riahi et al., 2021). While the debate on the 
operational outcomes of AI is still ongoing, there is little evidence in the operations manage­
ment literature of how the adoption of AI may improve supply chain operations (Raisch & 
Krakowski, 2020).
Recent advancements in material and production technologies hold great possibilities 
for a better understanding of how to improve other manufacturing and supply chain opera­
tions (Grewal et al., 2021). AI-based models provide near-optimal solutions to a wide vari­
ety of routing challenges, ensuring on-time deliveries and optimizing warehouse transport 
(Riahi et al., 2021). However, little attention has been devoted to how the use of AI tech­
niques may affect the reverse auctioning that involves supply chain partners and planning 
for vehicle routing and volume discount acquisition (Toorajipour et al., 2021). By affecting 
decision-making and increasing effective knowledge creation aimed at developing products 
customized for specific situations, AI technologies may have significant implications for a 
firm’s production capabilities (Awan et al., 2021). As a creative and frequently disruptive 
technology, AI facilitates the design of new products, services, industrial processes, and 
organizational structures that meet client needs. Further, product, service, manufacturing, 
or organizational processes can be designed using AI (Wamba-Taguimdje et al., 2020). For 
B2B companies, customer understanding is critical to boost products or services (Paschen 
et al., 2019). The integration of AI with the industrial Internet of Things holds significant 
potential for solving production-process problems and making better-informed decisions 
(Zeba et al., 2021). Early adopters of AI have created new and improved goods, which 
has enabled them to outperform the competition (Behl et al., 2021). By analyzing market 
intelligence, AI can uncover themes and patterns in data and may provide insights into how 
1 3
637

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
users creatively alter products and services (Paschen et al., 2019). A growing number of 
scholars are maximizing the influence of AI on supply chain risk management and moni­
toring systems to avoid SCDs (Toorajipour et al., 2021). However, little is known about 
its role in shaping monitoring, and controlling supply chain operations (Pournader et al., 
2021). Although research has found that AI is used to improve supply chain performance, 
just a few AI approaches and algorithms have been explored and are used in supply chain 
processes (Riahi et al., 2021).
AI is linked to analytical, self-learning, and predictive machine learning approaches 
(Shrestha et al., 2019). These methods offer a variety of answers and prescriptive inputs 
to choose from when deciding how to proceed with complicated scenarios (Belhadi et al., 
2021). Even though researchers have focused on the use of AI in different fields of study, it 
is important to note that very few studies have looked at how AI can be used in enhancing 
supply chain operations. However, the importance of AI in predicting and mitigating supply 
chain risk has been well established in the literature (Riahi et al., 2021). AI can accurately 
and rapidly detect relevant supply chain information by using analytics produced through 
AI techniques and models. They give managers a greater understanding of how each system 
operates and help them to discover areas in which they can improve those operations. The 
development of AI has made it possible to deploy predictive algorithms that allow for faster 
evaluations and more effective risk minimization across supply chains (Ni et al., 2020). The 
extant literature on AI argues that applying different machine learning approaches with AI 
can substantially decrease SCDs (Riahi et al., 2021). AI and ML enhance operations in many 
domains, including supply chain management, logistics, and inventory management (Bel­
hadi et al., 2021; Ni et al., 2020) showed that supply chain managers can use AI to watch 
for and avoid incidents interrupting supply chain operations. This includes everything from 
the most prevalent occurrences to unknown factors such as delivery delays, quality defects, 
among others (Belhadi et al., 2021).
AI provides the opportunities and promises to move toward data-driven decision support 
systems. Despite the integration of AI in many firm processes, there are still challenges 
regarding the design of a firm supply chain that depends heavily on human contributions 
(Kumar et al., 2019). However, it has been established in the operations management (OM) 
literature that AI has a positive impact on various supply chain management activities 
(Dubey et al., 2021). Still, it rarely addresses how AI is applied in the OM field, such as in 
manufacturing, production, warehousing and logistics, and robot dynamics (Toorajipour et 
al., 2021). Even though the supply chain literature has acknowledged that many AI applica­
tions include production forecasting, supplier selection, material consumption forecasting, 
and customer segmentation (Toorajipour et al., 2021), the AI literature typically revolves 
around understanding effective ways to combine human intuition and decision-making 
(Vincent, 2021). The use of AI technologies gives marketers a competitive edge that reflects 
marketing tactics and customer behaviors (Jabbar et al., 2020). Customer order processing 
can be automated with AI, and chatbots can handle any follow-up chores (Paschen et al., 
2019), which can increase supply chain effectiveness. It is possible to take proactive mea­
sures to combat supply chain risks by uncovering new trends in the data; this is expected 
to assist in achieving adaptability and higher levels of supply chain maturity (Riahi et al., 
2021). Multiple courses of action are open to firms confronted with the risk linked to invest­
ing in AI and its positive impacts on supply chain activities. The proliferation of evolving AI 
technology has led to premature and conflicting conclusions regarding specific outcomes.
1 3
638

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
Scholars increasingly recognize the importance of AI in lowering downtime costs, bet­
ter utilizing real-time data, better scheduling, and preserving firm operations from risks 
(Chen et al., 2021). Additionally, Chen et al., (2021) suggested a predictive maintenance 
framework for the management of assets under pandemic conditions, including new tech­
nologies, such as AI, for pandemic preparedness and the avoidance of business disruptions. 
The implementation of AI-based systems influences supply chain inventory management, 
“for instance performance analysis, resilience analysis or demand forecasting” (Riahi et 
al., 2021, p.13). This raises the question of whether the use of AI systems to determine 
short-order policies and mitigate any bullwhip effects has been adequately addressed in the 
literature (Preil & Krapp, 2021). A review found that the adoption of AI in supply chains 
improves performance, lowers costs, minimizes losses, and makes such chains more flex­
ible, agile, and robust (Riahi et al., 2021). Recent advances in AI help supply chain firms to 
enhance their analytics capabilities, leading to improved operational performance (Dubey 
et al., 2021). AI-enabled supply chain performance is becoming increasingly important to 
enhance financial performance; yet, no studies have been hitherto conducted to the end of 
gaining a better understanding of the critical antecedents of AI in driving supply chain ana­
lytics (Dubey et al., 2021). The direct and positive impact of AI-based relational decision-
making on firm performance has been established (e.g., Bag et al., 2021; Behl et al., 2021).
2.3  Fake news, disinformation, and supply chain disruptions
Fake news (Oxford English Dictionary, 2021a) is defined as: “false reports of events, written 
and read on websites.” Furthermore, disinformation (Oxford English Dictionary, 2021b) is 
construed as: “false information that is given deliberately”. The impact of FNaD is sub­
stantial, disrupting economic operations and societal activities. FNaD also threaten brand 
names and potentially affect the consumption of products and services, ultimately impacting 
supply chain operations and demand (Zhang et al., 2019; Petratos, 2021). These are affected 
by panic-driven or bad decisions based on disinformation (e.g. Ahmad et al., 2019; Matheus 
et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2021). SCD is defined as a disturbance in the flows of material, 
financial, and information resources between firms and their major stakeholders—e.g., sup­
pliers, manufacturers, distributors, retailers, and customers. Disruption may affect supply 
chain operations for random periods (Mehrotra & Schmidt, 2021). Supply chains encom­
pass the activities needed for firms to deliver products and services to their final consumers, 
and accurate information is an integral part of such chains, as it enables decision-makers 
to make decisions on future demand, supply, cash flows, returns, among other supply chain 
operations. There are historical examples of how FNaD can affect the supply chain and 
business operations. From the 1950s to 1990, the tobacco industry constantly shared disin­
formation on the adverse effects of active and secondhand smoke exposure by manipulating 
research, data, and the media (Bero, 2005; Dearlove et al., 2002). In September 2006, the 
Royal Society, Britain’s premier scientific academy, wrote to ExxonMobil urging it to stop 
funding the dozens of groups spreading disinformation on global warming and claiming that 
the global temperature rise was not related to increases in carbon dioxide levels in the atmo­
sphere (Adam, 2006). In 2013, the Associated Press official Twitter account was hacked and 
a tweet was made about two explosions injuring President Barack Obama; within hours, 
this wiped US$130billion from the stock market (Parsons, 2020; Tandoc et al., 2018), which 
affected stock supply chain operations. In 2017, six UK Indian restaurants fell victim to 
1 3
639

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
fake news stories claiming that they were serving human flesh (Barns, 2017; Mccallum, 
2017). One restaurant had to cut staff hours and saw its revenue fall by half (National Crime 
Agency, 2018). Such events could also have indirect effects on supply chain operations, 
ultimately being conducive to SCDs.
The persuasive power of fake news could continuously damage global supply chains, 
such as meat, vegetables, fresh food, and fruits in different parts of the world (Xu et al., 
2020). All businesses have felt the rapid dissemination of false information and propaganda 
among suppliers and distributors. Many countries such as France, Germany, India, and the 
US imposed restrictions on products from entering and leaving different countries due to 
disinformation and fake news about Covid-19 (Xu et al., 2020). Moreover, several fake 
social media posts or misinformation about the U.S. food plant fire caused the food supply 
disruption. The USDA told Reuters via email that it is not true that these fires were started 
on purpose (Reuters, 2022). Due to the widespread false information about COVID-19, 
there was an epidemic of methanol poisoning. It is claimed that 796 Iranians lost their lives 
to the alcohol intoxication after reading online claims that alcohol may treat their illnesses 
(Mahdavi et al., 2021). This echoed the rapid dissemination of false information regarding 
COVID-19 on social media at the outbreak’s onset and disrupted the supply of many food 
items (Mahdavi et al., 2021). Some people falsely claim that using alcohol to rinse the 
mouth and avoid COVID-19 infection works (Delirrad & Mohammadi, 2020; Soltaninejad, 
2020). The global supply chains have been shaken by the widespread of fake news caus­
ing widespread disruptions and affecting firms’ reputations. The effects of fake news on 
COVID-19 are still being felt by supply chains across many sectors, and it has irrevocably 
affected long-term supply chain strategies.
In more recent times, the COVID-19 pandemic has spawned high volumes of FNaD. 
One example of disinformation pertaining to a COVID-19 remedy involved a herb named 
‘Senna Makki’ in Pakistan., Someone started sharing on social media as a cure for the virus, 
which caused escalating demand and an increase in price from 1.71USD to 8.57-11.43USD 
per kg within two months (The News, 2020). This kind of fake news could affect vaccine 
supply chains. In the stock market, Clarke et al., (2020) revealed that a well-known crowd-
sourced content service for financial market websites had been generating fake news sto­
ries due to the editors’ lack of ability to detect them. This attempted use of fake news had 
‘widespread short-term implications for the financial markets. The Kroll global fraud and 
risk report of 2019/20 shared an incident of fake news in the banking industry. The rival 
institution purchased an African bank, the purchaser was confronted with a negative social 
media campaign, fabricated news, and stories, and manipulated closed-circuit television 
footage (Booth et al., 2019). These examples demonstrate how FNaD can disrupt supply 
chains and business operations.
Our review of past studies yielded Table 1, which summarizes key studies interlinking 
AI, SCDs, and FNaD. These studies are selected from top-ranked journals (e.g., CABS 3 
ranked and above) published in the last three years. The lack of research on all three aspects 
is very clear, with no studies emphasizing their combination. Our study significantly con­
tributes to bridging this gap.
1 3
640

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
3  Methodology
We used mixed methods, the AI and ML-driven method, and our case study interviews to 
further validate our model. The following procedure was used to execute the AI and ML-
driven method for data analysis. (1) The Dataset Enrichment was based on two techniques—
i.e., Porter stemmer (PS) and Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TFIDF). (2) 
Query Expansion was utilized for natural language processing (NLP) to precisely predict 
the accuracy of fake news. (3) The Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier was utilized to 
train the model and then finally evaluate fake and real news outcomes for effective decision-
making SCDs. Table 2 provides further justification for this approach. The studies also used 
other measures such as precision, recall, and accuracy and we also integrated similar mea­
sures in our analysis.
Table 1  Selective studies on AI and supply chain operations
Author, year, 
journals a
Key Points
Research gap
AI + SCDs + FNaD
(Behl et al., 2021)
(AOR)
AI, operational ef­
ficiency, trust, and 
transparency
How does a firm establish 
links between AI, SCM, and 
risk management?
Enabling artificial intel­
ligence by limiting errone­
ous information.
(Chen et al., 2021)
(AOR)
Proactive maintenance 
and human-centered AI 
decision system.
What is the impact of Trust in 
AI on human-centric decision 
support
AI’s application for predic­
tive maintenance to reduce 
uncertainty.
(Bag et al., 2021)
(IMM)
AI, relationship 
management, and firm 
performance
The use of AI is a prerequi­
site for market knowledge 
creation.
Artificial intelligence
Fake news and relationship 
management.
(Dubey et al., 
2021) (IMM)
Alliance management, 
AI, and pandemic 
crises
The examination of the key 
antecedents of AI, as driven 
by Supply Chain Analytics
AI-driven supply chain 
firms’ internal dynamic ca­
pabilities lower the SCDs.
(Grewal et al., 
2021)
(JBR)
The dark side of AI
Does it make procure­
ment more efficient?
How can AI improve fraud 
detection in SC?
AI is expected to minimize 
the SCDs caused by uncer­
tain external events.
(Mikalef et al., 
2021)
(IMM)
AI capability, uncertain 
environment, and firm 
performance.
The examination of the 
antecedents of developing 
resources inside your own 
company
AI can improve the deci­
sion-making process, and 
Lowering risk facilitates 
high-value analysis.
(Pournader et al., 
2021)
(IJPE)
AI, operational perfor­
mance, and Informa­
tion Management
The examination of the re­
lationship between MIS and 
human behavior in SCM
AI can gain SC operational 
performance in the face of 
information uncertainty.
(Zeba et al., 2021)
(TFSC)
AI technologies pro­
duction systems.
AI technologies produc­
tion systems and leveraging 
knowledge on firm sustain­
ability performance.
AI supports knowledge 
protection and minimizes 
the risk of disinformation 
to do so.
(Farrokhi et al., 
2020)
(IMM)
AI, crisis management, 
and decision-making.
The use of AI to explain 
business situations is still 
evolving.
AI can be used to detect 
disinformation and 
misinformation.
(Shrestha et al., 
2019)
(CMR)
AI trust and developing 
internal capabilities.
How is the hybrid human-
AI decision-making process 
beneficial?
AI could be useful for 
accurate decision-making 
regarding disinformation 
and the reduction of risk.
Note: a(AOR): “Annals of Operations Research, (CMR): “California Management Review, (IMM): 
“Industrial Marketing Management”, (IJPE): “International Journal of Production Economics, (JBR); 
“Journal of Business Research”, (TFSC); “Technological Forecasting & Social Change”
1 3
641

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
Secondly, the involved cases for interviews were from Indonesia, Malaysia, and Paki­
stan. These countries share similarities. Furthermore, these are emerging countries with 
common economic and political ties as well as government-to-government contacts. Simi­
larly, these nations are making strides toward digitization and AI. Numerous previous stud­
ies (e.g., Atkin et al., 2017; Ghazali et al., 2018; Rahi et al., 2019; Siew et al., 2020) also 
used targeted populations from these countries to conduct studies on comparable issues. The 
case study method was best suited to achieve the objectives of our study, considering the 
explanatory nature of the research question (Eisenhardt & Graebner, 2007; Yin, 2014) and 
the fact that this is an emergent research area to be combined with modern methodological 
innovations such as ML (Gupta et al., 2021; Kovács & Sigala, 2021; Sodhi & Tang, 2021; 
Sheng et al., 2020). Further, multiple case studies are assumed to be more reliable because 
they enable phenomena to be observed and studied in many contexts—thereby helping to 
provide replication logic for particular cases, which would otherwise be viewed as indepen­
dent (Yin, 2014)—and because they are useful for theory development (Eisenhardt, 1989).
A goal-directed sampling technique—i.e., an incremental selection method (Denzin & 
Lincoln, 2005)—was employed to investigate the flagging/reducing/eliminating process of 
FNaD. This technique is effective for the collection of both qualitative and quantitative data 
because the sample is purposely chosen based on the project’s unique requirements and the 
evaluator’s judgment (Polit & Beck, 2012; Vos et al., 2011). The data acquired using this 
Study
Application
Approach/classifiers/algorithm
Jiang et al., 
(2021)
Fake news detection
SVM
Logistic Regression
Decision Tree and others
Random Forest
TFIDF
Wang et al., 
(2020)
Fake News 
Detection
SVM
Binary Classifier
Zhou et al., 
(2020)
Early fake news 
detection
SVM
Logistic Regression
Random Forests and others
Kareem & 
Awan (2019)
Fake news 
classification
SVM
K-Nearest Neighbor
Random Forest and others
PS
Ibrishimova 
& Li (2018; 
2019)
Fake news detection
Binary Classifier
TensorFlow’s
Linear Classifier and others
Semantic similarity measures 
and WordNet ontology
Poddar & 
Umadevi 
(2019)
Accurate fake news 
detection
Support Vector
Machine (SVM)
Logistic Regression
Decision Tree
Artificial Neural Networks
Sabeeh et al., 
(2019)
Enhanced fake news 
detection
SVM
Decision Tree
FNaD (our 
study)
Fake news and 
disinformation
SVM
PS
TDIF
Semantic similarity measures 
& WordNet
Table 2  Algorithms and ap­
proaches used by previous stud­
ies for FNaD detection
 
1 3
642

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
approach and technique tend to be of a high standard only if the participants are willing 
and able to provide accurate information that will enable the researcher to gain a thorough 
knowledge of an experience. We thus adopted this sampling technique because our target 
key management functionaries would be the participants best suited to furnish the essential 
data for our study (Creswell, 2014), providing useful insight into what works and what does 
not in terms of its theoretical and technical components. Any case variations were scruti­
nized based on the industry to achieve a better understanding of FNaD impacts.
To conduct the interviews, we approached 33 firms—36.36% Malaysian, 36.36% Paki­
stani, and 27.28% Indonesian ones. Eventually, a total of 16 firm representatives participated 
in our study—six each from Malaysia and Pakistan, and four from Indonesia. According to 
Teddlie & Yu (2007), this was a sample size sufficient to produce narrative records adequate 
to provide viewpoints directly relevant to the topic under study. The sample firms were 
small and medium-sized, with staff numbers ranging from 18 to 183. Small businesses have 
learning systems that are complex and dynamic and geared to generate the efficiency needed 
to sustain such firms in the market (Zhang et al., 2006). Therefore, an in-depth investigation 
was needed to understand the stances of small and medium-sized firms about FNaD. Fifteen 
semi-structured in-depth interviews were prepared, based on the interviewees’ understand­
ing of their respective firms and the inflow and outflow information features such as sources, 
routines, systems, and processes. The interviewees were owners, chief executive officers, 
directors, and associated top managers. The participants’ varied perspectives reduced 
dependency on a single participant’s perspective, enriching the data obtained. We also used 
project reports, operational policies, and other relevant documentation to identify and trian­
gulate themes during the data analysis (Yin, 2014). Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, 90% 
of the interviews were conducted over the internet (e.g., GoogleMeet) and any observations 
were recorded and reviewed later.
We followed the interview protocol to integrate the philosophy, processes, and questions 
of the study to attain reliability (Frost et al., 2020; Ponterotto, 2005). To delve deep into the 
situation about the impacts of fake news and any remedial actions, we used relevant prompts 
in open-ended questions. The extensive conversations provided key findings regarding the 
solutions adopted to counter the effects of fake news on business and supply chain opera­
tions by reflecting on three industry and technology developments, gathering din depth 
and valuable narratives in the process. All interviews were audio-recorded, converted into 
MSWORD, and thematically analyzed via NVIVO 12. To ensure validity and reliability, 
each researcher independently coded the responses given to the open-ended questions to 
fully grasp any concepts that were not readily provided by existing theories or field research. 
The answers were discreetly coded to fully understand any new sentiments, knowledge, and 
opinions that may not be available in the literature on the selected industries and countries. 
This practice provided an AI-based solution to fake news issues in business. Furthermore, 
other consistency checks were carried out, whereby the data and preliminary interpretations 
were presented to the interviewees from whom they had been sourced to determine their 
credibility and incorporate any necessary changes, and the scripts were then finalized fol­
lowing their approval (Merriam, 2009).
1 3
643

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
4  Implementation procedures, findings, and proposed model
4.1  AI and ML implementation
4.1.1  Obtaining the dataset
The dataset for the AI and ML approach was drawn from four Pakistani major online news 
sources—i.e., ‘Geo News’, ‘The Dawn’, ‘Express Tribune’, and ‘The News’. Approxi­
mately 500 pages from each source were scrutinized to extract the relevant affairs and topics 
from January to April 2021. SCD data were divided into natural, human-caused, maritime, 
and mass disruptions related to FNaD. Table 3 provides some examples.
The words were used in different contexts. For example, Words such as health, vaccine, 
Covid-19, and pandemic were mostly used in the main text in articles related to health sup­
ply chains and their disruptions, and words like political, freedom, rights, democracy, and 
military were applied in political articles. We followed a step-by-step procedure for the 
implementation.
4.1.2  Pre-processing dataset
 
●
• PS (Porter Stemmer) was used to index each news page/article to filter out any stop, 
repeated, and common words to avoid noise in the dataset. The algorithm was used, 
over several rounds, to remove any non-relevant words from the datasets/textual scripts 
before considering all criteria or defined rules (Zhang et al., 2020). Such an algorithm 
has been proven to be one of the best techniques in terms of performance (Joshi et al., 
2016).
 
●
• TDIF (Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency) was utilized for the classi­
cal ML models. TDIF is a text classification technique utilized for organizing textual 
Natural
Human-caused
Maritime
Mass
“Tornadoes 
and Severe 
Storms”
“Hurricanes”
“Tropical 
Storms”
“Floods”
“Wildfires”
“Earthquakes”
“Drought”
“Industrial 
accidents”
“Shootings”
“Acts of terrorism”
“Mass Labor 
strikes”
“Incidents of mass 
violence”
“Nuclear Facilities 
failure”
“Political Crises”
“Wars”
“Offshore Oil Rig 
Mishaps”
“Cruise Vessel 
Mishaps”
“Commercial Fish­
ing Mishaps”
“Accidents on 
Tugboats”
“Accidents on 
Crude Oil” “
Tankers and Cargo 
Ships”
“Grounding of 
Ships”
“Crane Mishaps”
“Accidents in 
Shipyards”
“Cargo Hauling 
Accidents”
“Port Delays”
“Infec­
tious 
disease 
out­
breaks”
“Inci­
dents of 
com­
munity 
unrest”
“Mass 
migra­
tion and 
refu­
gees”
“Covid-
19”
“Pan­
demic”
Table 3  Examples of SCD-relat­
ed words/data
 
1 3
644

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
documents from raw datasets into predefined categories to obtain useful informa­
tion. This is done by representing textual documents into feature vectors consisting of 
weights that indicate the contribution of each term in text classification (Deng et al., 
2004; Dogan & Uysal, 2019). The effectiveness of TDIF has also been proven to be 
significant in the weighting process (Dogan & Uysal, 2019).
4.1.3  Dimension reduction and features engineering
The Query Expansion.
In the field of natural language processing (NLP) and information retrieval such as met­
rics of text semantic similarity are the most used techniques (Zhu et al., 2018, 2020; Gao et 
al., 2015). The query expansion approach was utilized for natural language processing to 
precisely compute the relevancy of keywords related to FNaD by calculating the semantic 
distance between keywords related to SCDs. This phase explained the keywords used in 
SCDs to train the classifier to predict the appropriateness of SCDs in the news. As a fea­
ture, we analyzed the significance of each SCD keyword to a news category. We had the 
news articles in the business category and we wanted to evaluate whether it is appropriate 
for SCDs. The degree of appropriateness was based on the feature’s relevancy score; +1 
perfectly appropriate and − 1 vice versa. The outputs of fake or real were decided based on 
the scores. Each keyword pair of news category and supply chain disruptions were consid­
ered appropriate if the relevancy score is + 0.65. As a result, we trained the SCD keywords 
appropriateness to predict based on the remaining dataset. We trained various frequently 
used classifiers and reported SVM results as SVM outperformed others.
Query Expansion: The query expansion approach was utilized for natural language pro­
cessing (NLP) to precisely compute the relevancy of keywords related to FNaD by calculat­
ing the semantic distance between keywords related to SCDs, queries, and news articles. 
This phase explains the keywords used in SCDs to train a classifier to predict the appropri­
ateness of SCDs in the news. We analyze the significance of each SCD keyword to a news 
category. We have news articles in the category “Business” and we wish to evaluate whether 
it is appropriate for a SCD example such keywords in the category; “natural disasters”, 
“man-made disasters”, “marine incidents”, and “mass trauma incidents”. We consider the 
degree of appropriateness of the news category with each of the SCD keywords based on the 
feature’s relevancy score. In this scenario, -1 represents that a news item with the category 
“sports” is utterly inappropriate to be examined with supply chain disruption keywords “off­
shore oil rig mishaps,“ but a + 1 score suggests that it is perfectly appropriate. Table 4 shows 
the examples of the relevancy score of the news category against supply chain disruption 
keywords present in our database.
The WordNet ontology (Leão et al., 2019) was utilized here for calculating semantic dif­
ferences between the multiple keywords. The semantic similarity analysis is performed to 
determine the degree of semantic similarity between the texts. In the fields of NLP, natural 
language understanding (NLU), and information retrieval, such metrics of text semantic 
similarity are the most used such as WordNet ontology as a linguistic source because of its 
wide vocabulary and the explicit definite semantic hierarchy (Zhu et al., 2018, 2020; Gao 
et al., 2015).
1 3
645

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
4.1.4  Determine the ML task and position the dataset
Classifier Training: The problem of SCD appropriateness to a news article is formulated 
into two possible outcomes “fake” or “real” as a binary classification. The training set was 
created from the randomly selected news articles from the dataset. To interpret the training 
dataset, a supervised learning task was performed with human assistance to make machine 
learned if a news category “world” is appropriate in supply chain disruption keywords such 
as “Wildfires”, “Political Crises”, and “Mass migration”. Each keyword pair of news cat­
egory and SCDs were considered appropriate if the relevancy score is + 0.65. We trained 
the SCD keywords appropriateness on the selected articles in the training set to predict the 
appropriateness scores in the test set. We trained numerous frequently used classifiers to 
train the proposed model, however, because Support Vector Machines (SVM) produced 
the best results, therefore, we only provide the findings of the SVM classifier in this study.
4.1.5  Machine learning technique and interpreting results
Support Vector Machine: We develop a model for each news item by training a binary clas­
sifier using two possible outcomes positive (real) and negative (false) news with the appro­
priateness of SCDs. We chose a binary classification because it is assumed that a responsible 
user will want to verify the news before spreading it. In order to determine whether the news 
is real or fake, the user would most likely check online sources (databases/publishers), and 
in the process, the user may be able to verify or refute the information depending on the 
source. Subsequently, if the model is trained using a supervised learning technique with 
only two possible outcomes, the model is forced to make a binary decision, this increases 
the model’s accuracy significantly. Therefore, the Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Cortes 
& Vapnik, 1995) classifier was utilized to train the model. SVM is based on a binary classi­
fication model, which divides the training samples into two further classes based on multiple 
support vector hyperplanes in a vector space (Melki et al., 2017; Tharwat, 2019). The super­
Model
MRR
P@5
NCDG@5
Training Set
0.663
0.681
0.594
Test Set
0.647
0.656
0.511
Note: Mean Reciprocal Rank = MRR; Precision at 5 = P@5; 
Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain = NCDG@5
Table 5  Model results
 
Category (News) Supply Chain Disruption
Relevan­
cy Score
Appro­
priate 
(Output)
World
Wildfires
+ 0.72
Yes
Politics
Political Crises
+ 1
Yes
Opinion
Mass migration
+ 0.54
No
Tech
Natural Disasters
-0.87
Yes
Science
Nuclear Facilities failure
+ 0.21
No
Health
Infectious disease outbreaks
+ 1
Yes
Business
Port Delays
0.68
Yes
Sports
Offshore Oil Rig Mishaps
0.00
No
Table 4  Example of supply chain 
disruption features
 
1 3
646

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
vised learning approach such as SVM is a widely used machine learning method utilizing 
training examples or datasets to train the model that can be used to solve classification, and 
regression problems (Melki et al., 2018a, b).
The metrics we utilized for evaluation were; Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) (Ghanbari 
& Shakery, 2019), Precision at 5 (P@5) (Sharma et al., 2020), and Normalized Discounted 
Cumulative Gain at 5 (NCDG@5) (Alqahtani et al., 2020). A threshold was used for the 5 
best matches and the top match was given as the output. These evaluation measures account 
for the testing accuracy of the constructed model. The comparison between the training set 
and test set values for MRR, P@5, and NCDG@5 depicted slight differences, this validates 
the accuracy of the model in the test set with 0.647, 0.656, and 0.511 respectively.
4.2  Interview-based validation and proposed model
The impact of fake news on supply chain operations emerged as the first theme from the 
analysis. When asked about their knowledge and understanding of FNaD, the respondents 
gave detailed replies. Some argued that it is one of the most harmful aspects of the internet, 
with the potential to create SCDs. Respondent 4 said that “Internet information makes us 
more attentive.” Respondents 1, 5, 9, 11, and 13 shared the negative impacts of FNaD on 
quick, routine, and time-consuming decision making: “Quick decisions based on the inclu­
sion of the FNaD could be a transcendent disaster for any firm’s supply chain” (Respondent 
5). “if FNaD is included in routine or prolonged decision making, it definitely agonizes 
the future result” (Respondent 2), and “If any decision is based on lies, how can someone 
expect positive consequences?” (Respondent 11). Two respondents shared that the purpose 
of spreading FNaD is to create a specific mindset and narrative in the economy/market to 
manipulate it: “Misleading information supposed to build a specific narrative and sentiment 
in the market, enemies and indirect competitors usually involve in it” (Respondent 1). The 
respondents indicated that fake news directly affects operations and has an indirect influence 
on supply chain operations, contributing to SCDs.
Dealing with FNaD emerged as the second theme of the analysis. The respondents pro­
vided numerous options in this regard, suggesting that global communities, social media 
sites, government, technology, and top management can play key roles in countering FNaD. 
FNaD should be dealt with smoothly and promptly; otherwise, it will negatively affect sup­
ply chain performance: “As a business community, together we should deal with mislead­
ing information and news. Otherwise it could become a scar in business performance” 
(Respondent 16). Respondents 12, 15, and 16 mentioned that FNaD should be dealt with as 
a pandemic like the COVID-19 one. Some respondents mentioned the names of the entities 
they considered to be primarily responsible for keeping FNaD under control, with Respon­
dents 8, 2, and 11 pointing at the global internet community, social media sites, and the 
government. On the other hand, respondents 1, 3, 9, 10, 12, and 13 believed that the respon­
sibility of curbing the effects of FNaD on supply chain performance and decision-making 
should fall on specific industries and businesses. Respondent 13 further explained that “as a 
business entity, we need to find a mechanism which guides us that specific news or informa­
tion is legit or not”, while Respondent 6 opined that “in today’s world, if your business isn’t 
data-driven, then you are definitely living in the jungle.”
FNaD filtering and counter modeling process suggestions and preparations became the 
third theme of the analysis. This enriched session contributed many insights into and inputs 
1 3
647

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
about countermeasures to FNaD in business and supply chain operations. When we asked 
Respondent 7 about this, he shared the following Bill Gates quote “The world won’t care 
about your self-esteem. The world will expect you to accomplish something before you feel 
good about yourself”, and further added “As a business caretaker, this is my responsibility is 
to shelter and protect my company from fake news, so that, at the end of the day, I will have 
no regrets.” Respondents 3, 5, 7, 10, 14, 15, and 16 suggested that AI will provide solutions 
suited to control and counter FNaD. Respondent 10 advised that “Data crawler integration 
with AI could provide a solution to FNaD”. Respondent 11 shared a similar thought “Each 
government should prepare AI-based processes according to specific society and economy 
to rectify the impact of fake news, and that process in the form of software should be pro­
vided free of cost to businesses”. The participants also highlighted the importance of using 
multiple sources to determine whether the news is fake or real, as a single source could 
be biased or politically driven. Based on the procedure applied for AI, the SVM, and the 
interview-based validation, we proposed the FNaD detection model shown in Fig. 1, which 
encapsulates the key findings.
As depicted in Fig. 1, the practical decision-making for SCDs is characterized by the pre­
dominant use of experiences, judgments, and multiple media resources. These can be cate­
gorized as real and fake news. Data demonstrates that the severity of the fake news impact is 
prompting businesses to invest in more robust, collaborative, and networked supply chains 
and should prepare AI-based processes according to specific societies and economies to 
Fig. 1  A fake news and disinformation detection model that uses AI and ML
 
1 3
648

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
rectify the impact of fake news. Datasets from multiple sources teach decision-makers about 
whether the particular news or information is legit or not. The data from multiple sources 
allows decision makers to apply the machine learning approaches and use artificial intel­
ligence. They can therefore better select the appropriate mechanisms to detect fake and real 
news.
5  Contributions, implications, conclusion, and future research 
directions
5.1  Contributions and theoretical implications
Our study fills the knowledge gap about SCDs by utilizing AI and ML that assist to act 
against FNaD affecting supply chain operations. Loureiro et al., (2020) suggested that AI 
has diverse applications in several industrial domains. Dolgui & Ivanov (2021) hinted that 
AI could assist in improving resilience against and mitigation of SCDs. We combined a 
case qualitative method, AI, and SVM in order to reveal how effective decisions could be 
made within supply chain operations. The extant research advanced our understanding of 
fake news detection mechanisms using graph and summarization techniques (Kim & Ko, 
2021). Furthermore, a recent study proposed an AI-based real-time fake news detection 
system by conducting a systematic literature review (Gupta et al., 2021). Our study is novel 
and distinct from the previous ones in that it developed an effective decision-making model 
for SC firms to avoid any disruptions caused by FNaD. As such, it contributes to the SCDs 
literature that will be of interest to scholars and practitioners.
Additionally, the study bridges a gap in the literature by providing a practical solution 
suited to eliminate FNaD in business scenarios affected by SCDs. The scattered and frag­
mented extant literature had left many questions about FNaD unanswered (Di Domenico 
& Visentin, 2020). Therefore, the main contribution of our study is to propose an AI- and 
ML-oriented process capable of flagging/reducing/eliminating FNaD before it reaches 
decision-makers and of identifying any authentic news and information, thus counteracting 
SCD-aimed news.
The United Nations (2020) has urged the implementation of actions against misinforma­
tion and cybercrime. Edwards et al., (2021) concluded that such ‘digital wildfire’ spreads 
faster than original and legit news. We propose a process, named FNaD integrated with AI 
that initiates when news or information is embedded in it. It then begins verification within 
defined sources (e.g., major newspapers’ websites) and, in the next step, it starts seeking 
similarities between news or information keywords. Once the AI process reaches a decision, 
it provides an output by classifying the news item as FNaD (rejection) or real/ authentic 
news or information (acceptance).
FNaD can be significant determinants of SCDs, as is highlighted in research (Kovács & 
Sigala, 2021). They adversely influence firms’ operations, import, and export, and alter pur­
chasing behaviors (e.g., Di Domenico et al., 2021; Petit et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021). The 
FNaD model shows the ability to control the inclusion of FNaD into firms’ activities. Our 
study contributes to the management and detection of FNaD in firms’ supply chain opera­
tions by proposing and testing a FNaD detection model that uses AI and ML. This model 
could help to control the potential digital wildfire before it damages firms’ operations. FNaD 
1 3
649

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
create unnatural phenomena that interrupt supply chain operations and enhance demand-
supply loopholes (e.g., De Chenecey 2018; Dwivedi et al., 2020).
5.2  Managerial and policy implications
Our model detects FNaD early before they can affect firms or managerial decision-mak­
ing. The current pandemic scenario has turned the attention of managers and governments 
toward FNaD and their impacts on supply chain operations, economy, and society. On the 
other hand, with AI and ML becoming an integral part of firms and operations, managers 
should consider their adoption to deal with FNaD, given their potential to detect and filter 
them out. Our model is executed and managed based on major local databases and news out­
lets to support supply chain operations. Should managers wish to integrate adding any fur­
ther international data and news outlets, they could do so based on their requirements. The 
implementation of our model would depend on a willing and authoritative IT infrastructure, 
with even small and medium enterprises being able to invest in its application. We proposed 
a process capable of detecting and filtering out FNaD. This process protects firms from the 
impacts of FNaD, enabling managers to engage in decision-making based on legitimate and 
valid news or information.
From the perspective of specific industries, newsrooms could utilize the FNaD detection 
model to confirm a news item from different sources. In other words, the FNaD detection 
model can help in the timely development of a counter-strategy by detecting any fake news 
before it spreads and causes SCDs. The phenomenon has recently been seen in the context 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, with people sharing unverified news items on the virus and the 
side effects of vaccines over social media, thus causing SCDs in vaccine distribution. More­
over, pre-emptive fake news detection can be equally beneficial in avoiding financial market 
crashes. For government policymakers, the FNaD detection model can be a comprehensive 
tool to be used during pandemics or similar situations. Governments have been seen to 
regularly change their decisions, rules, and regulations. Therefore, at the government level, 
the FNaD detection model can ensure that accurate and on-time legitimate information is 
received to deal with any economic, social, and health conditions. Another implication for 
governments pertains to the provision of this process—for free or at a discount—to all 
business-related entities, especially micro, small, and medium firms. Such a decision would 
create trust between the government and those entities.
5.3  Conclusion and future research directions
SCDs are problematic for business operations. It is believed that SCDs could cause obsta­
cles due to disinformation. Therefore, we proposed the FNaD model that filters the FNaD 
by utilizing AI and ML. This model takes help from different sources on internet to verify 
the received information. It then decides and notifies whether that received news is authen­
tic or not. By using a mixed-method approach, we proposed a way to tackle SCD-creating 
FNaD using AI- and ML-based techniques. In this regard, future research could, first, focus 
on more specific FNaD and supply chain operation case studies, such as the detection of 
FNaD in humanitarian operations using AI and ML approaches. Additionally, they could 
integrate specific operational performance measures in these approaches, combining them 
with advanced visual methods. Also, given the fast pace of scientific development, any new 
1 3
650

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
and effective algorithm or technique could be used in the proposed model in the future. Fur­
thering, testing the model based on longitudinal studies aimed at exploring and understand­
ing the developments in SCDs linked with FNaD would make it more reliable and refined.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, 
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the 
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is 
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory 
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adam, D. (2006). Royal Society tells Exxon: stop funding climate change denial.The Guardian, https://www.
theguardian.com/environment/2006/sep/20/oilandpetrol.business
Ahmad, A., Webb, J., Desouza, K. C., & Boorman, J. (2019). Strategically-motivated advanced persistent 
threat: Definition, process, tactics and a disinformation model of counterattack. Computers & Security, 
86, 402–418
Allcott, H., & Gentzkow, M. (2017). Social media and fake news in the 2016 election. Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 31(2), 211–236
Alnaied, A., Elbendak, M., & Bulbul, A. (2020). An intelligent use of stemmer and morphology analysis for 
Arabic information retrieval. Egyptian Informatics Journal, 21(4), 209–217
Alqahtani, A., Alnefaie, M., Alamri, N., & Khorsi, A. (2020). Enhancing the capabilities of solr information 
retrieval system: Arabic language. In 2020 3rd International Conference on Computer Applications & 
Information Security (ICCAIS) (pp.1–5). IEEE
Awan, U., Kanwal, N., Alawi, S., Huiskonen, J., & Dahanayake, A. (2021). Artificial intelligence for supply 
chain success in the era of data analytics. Studies in Computational Intelligence, 935, 3–21
Atkin, D., Chaudhry, A., Chaudry, S., Khandelwal, A. K., & Verhoogen, E. (2017). Organizational barriers 
to technology adoption: Evidence from soccer-ball producers in Pakistan. The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 132(3), 1101–1164
Bag, S., Gupta, S., Kumar, A., & Sivarajah, U. (2021). An integrated artificial intelligence framework for 
knowledge creation and B2B marketing rational decision making for improving firm performance. 
Industrial Marketing Management, 92, 178–189
Barns, S. (2017). Trolls show people how to create fake news stories and spread them on Facebook… as curry 
houses fall victim to false ‘human meat’ claims. The Scottish Sun
https://www.thescottishsun.co.uk/living/1077871/trolls-show-people-how-to-create-fake-news-stories-and-
spread-them-on-facebook-as-curry-houses-fall-victim-to-false-human-meat-claims/
Behl, A., Dutta, P., Luo, Z., & Sheorey, P. (2021). Enabling artificial intelligence on a donation-based crowd­
funding platform: a theoretical approach.Annals of Operations Research,1–29
Belhadi, A., Mani, V., Kamble, S. S., Khan, S. A. R., & Verma, S. (2021). Artificial intelligence-driven 
innovation for enhancing supply chain resilience and performance under the effect of supply chain 
dynamism: an empirical investigation. Annals of Operations Research
Bero, L. A. (2005). Tobacco industry manipulation of research. Public Health Reports, 120(2), 200–208
Bode, C., Wagner, S. M., Petersen, K. J., & Ellram, L. M. (2011). Understanding responses to supply chain 
disruptions: Insights from information processing and resource dependence perspectives. Academy of 
Management Journal, 54(4), 833–856
Booth, A., Hamilton, B., & Vintiadis, M. (2019). Fake news, real problems: combating social media disinfor­
mation. Global Fraud and Risk Report 2019/20 11th annual edition.
https://www.kroll.com/-/media/kroll/pdfs/publications/global-fraud-and-risk-report-2019-20.pdf
Brock, J. K. U., & von Wangenheim, F. (2019). Demystifying AI: What digital transformation leaders can 
teach you about realistic artificial intelligence. California Management Review, 61(4), 110–134
Cao, G., Duan, Y., Edwards, J. S., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2021). Understanding managers’ attitudes and behav­
ioural intentions towards using artificial intelligence for organizational decision-making. Technovation, 
106, 102312
1 3
651

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
Chen, J., Lim, C. P., Tan, K. H., Govindan, K., & Kumar, A. (2021). Artificial intelligence-based human-
centric decision support framework: an application to predictive maintenance in asset management 
under pandemic environments.Annals of Operations Research.1–24
Churchill, F. (2018). Unilever says fake news makes digital supply chain unsustainable. https://www.cips.
org/supply-management/news/2018/february/unilever-says-fake-news-makes-digital-supply-chain-
unsustainable/. Accessed 29 November 2021
Clarke, J., Chen, H., Du, D., & Hu, Y. J. (2020). Fake news, investor attention, and market reaction. Informa­
tion Systems Research, 32(1), 35–52
Cortes, C., & Vapnik, V. (1995). Support-vector networks. Machine Learning, 20(3), 273–297
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Cui, L., Wu, H., Wu, L., Kumar, A., & Tan, K. H. (2022). Investigating the relationship between digital tech­
nologies, supply chain integration and firm resilience in the context of COVID-19.Annals of Operations 
Research,1–29
De Chenecey, S. P. (2018). The post-truth business: How to rebuild brand authenticity in a distrusting world. 
Kogan Page Publishers
Dearlove, J. V., Bialous, S. A., & Glantz, S. A. (2002). Tobacco industry manipulation of the hospitality 
industry to maintain smoking in public places. Tobacco Control, 11(2), 94–104
Delcker, J. (2018). The man who invented the self-driving car (in 1986). https://www.politico.eu/article/delf-
driving-car-born-1986-ernst-dickmanns-mercedes/. Accessed 26 November 2021
Deng, Z. H., Tang, S. W., Yang, D. Q., Li, M. Z. L. Y., & Xie, K. Q. (2004). A comparative study on fea­
ture weight in text categorization. In Asia-Pacific Web Conference (pp.588–597). Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2005). The SAGE Handbook of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage
Di Domenico, G., & Visentin, M. (2020). Fake news or true lies? Reflections about problematic contents in 
marketing. International Journal of Market Research, 62(4), 409–417
Di Domenico, G., Sit, J., Ishizaka, A., & Nunan, D. (2021). Fake news, social media and marketing: A sys­
tematic review. Journal of Business Research, 124, 329–341
Dogan, T., & Uysal, A. K. (2019). On term frequency factor in supervised term weighting schemes for text 
classification. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, 44(11), 9545–9560
Dolgui, A., & Ivanov, D. (2021). Ripple effect and supply chain disruption management: new trends and 
research directions. International Journal of Production Research, 59(1), 102–109
Dubey, R., Bryde, D. J., Blome, C., Roubaud, D., & Giannakis, M. (2021). Facilitating artificial intelligence-
powered supply chain analytics through alliance management during the pandemic crises in the B2B 
context. Industrial Marketing Management, 96, 135–146
Dwivedi, Y. K., Kelly, G., Janssen, M., Rana, N. P., Slade, E. L., & Clement, M. (2018). Social media: The 
good, the bad, and the ugly. Information Systems Frontiers, 20(3), 419–423
Dwivedi, Y. K., Ismagilova, E., Hughes, D. L., Carlson, J., Filieri, R., Jacobson, J., Jain, V., Karjaluoto, H., 
Kefi, H., Krishen, A. S., Kumar, V., Rahman, M. M., Raman, R., Rauschnabel, P. A., Rowley, J., Salo, 
J., Tran, G. A., & Wang, Y. (2020). Setting the future of digital and social media marketing research: 
Perspectives and research propositions.International Journal of Information Management, 102168
Edwards, A., Webb, H., Housley, W., Beneito-Montagut, R., Procter, R., & Jirotka, M. (2021). Forecasting 
the governance of harmful social media communications: Findings from the digital wildfire policy 
Delphi. Policing and Society, 31(1), 1–19
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management Review, 
14(4), 532–550
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Graebner, M. E. (2007). Theory building from cases: Opportunities and challenges. 
Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 25–32
Endsley, M. R. (2018). Combating information attacks in the age of the Internet: new challenges for cognitive 
engineering. Human factors, 60(8), 1081–1094
EverStream (2020). COVID-19: The future of supply chain. Retrieved from https://www.everstream.ai/
risk-center/special-reports/covid-19-the-future-of-supply-chain/
Farrokhi, A., Shirazi, F., Hajli, N., & Tajvidi, M. (2020). Using artificial intelligence to detect crisis related 
to events: Decision making in B2B by artificial intelligence. Industrial Marketing Management, 91, 
257–273
Frost, D. M., Hammack, P. L., Wilson, B. D., Russell, S. T., Lightfoot, M., & Meyer, I. H. (2020). The quali­
tative interview in psychology and the study of social change: sexual identity development, minority 
stress, and health in the generations study. Qualitative Psychology, 7(3), 245–266
Gadri, S., & Moussaoui, A. (2015, May). Information retrieval: A new multilingual stemmer based on a sta­
tistical approach. In 2015 3rd International Conference on Control, Engineering & Information Tech­
nology (CEIT) (pp.1–6). IEEE
1 3
652

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
Gao, J. B., Zhang, B. W., & Chen, X. H. (2015). A WordNet-based semantic similarity measurement combin­
ing edge-counting and information content theory. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 
39, 80–88
Ghanbari, E., & Shakery, A. (2019). ERR. Rank: An algorithm based on learning to rank for direct optimiza­
tion of Expected Reciprocal Rank. Applied Intelligence, 49(3), 1185–1199
Ghazali, E. M., Mutum, D. S., Chong, J. H., & Nguyen, B. (2018). Do consumers want mobile commerce? 
A closer look at M-shopping and technology adoption in Malaysia. Asia Pacific Journal of Marketing 
and Logistics, 30(4), 1064–1086
Grewal, D., Guha, A., Satornino, C. B., & Schweiger, E. B. (2021). Artificial intelligence: The light and the 
darkness. Journal of Business Research, 136, 229–236
Grover, P., Kar, A. K., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2020). Understanding artificial intelligence adoption in operations 
management: insights from the review of academic literature and social media discussions. Annals of 
Operations Research. Springer US
Guess, A., Nagler, J., & Tucker, J. (2019). Less than you think: Prevalence and predictors of fake news dis­
semination on Facebook. Science Advances, 5(1), eaau4586
Gupta, A., Li, H., Farnoush, A., & Jiang, K. (2021). W. Understanding Patterns of COVID Infodemic: A 
Systematic and Pragmatic Approach to Curb Fake News.Journal of Business Research
Haenlein, M., & Kaplan, A. (2019). A brief history of artificial intelligence: On the past, present, and future 
of artificial intelligence. California Management Review, 61(4), 5–14
Hopp, T., Ferrucci, P., & Vargo, C. J. (2020). Why do people share ideologically extreme, false, and mislead­
ing content on social media? A self-report and trace data–based analysis of countermedia content dis­
semination on Facebook and Twitter. Human Communication Research, 46(4), 357–384
Ibrishimova, M. D., & Li, K. F. (2019). A machine learning approach to fake news detection using knowledge 
verification and natural language processing. In International Conference on Intelligent Networking and 
Collaborative Systems (pp.223–234). Springer, Cham
Ibrishimova, M. D., & Li, K. F. (2018). Automating incident classification using sentiment analysis and 
machine learning. In International Conference on Intelligent, Secure, and Dependable Systems in Dis­
tributed and Cloud Environments (pp.50–62). Springer, Cham
Jabbar, A., Akhtar, P., & Dani, S. (2020). Real-time big data processing for instantaneous marketing deci­
sions: A problematization approach. Industrial Marketing Management, 90, 558–569
Jayawickrama, U., Liu, S., Hudson Smith, M., Akhtar, P., & Bashir, A., M (2019). Knowledge retention in ERP 
implementations: the context of UK SMEs. Production Planning & Control, 30(10–12), 1032–1047
Jayawickrama, U., Liu, S., & Smith, M. H. (2016). Empirical evidence of an integrative knowledge com­
petence framework for ERP systems implementation in UK industries. Computers in Industry, 82, 
205–223
Jiang, T., Li, J. P., Haq, A. U., Saboor, A., & Ali, A. (2021). A Novel Stacking Approach for Accurate Detec­
tion of Fake News. Ieee Access : Practical Innovations, Open Solutions, 9, 22626–22639
Joshi, A., Thomas, N., & Dabhade, M. (2016). Modified porter stemming algorithm. International Journal of 
Computer Science and Information Technologies, 7(1), 266–269
Kampakis, S., & Adamides, A. (2014). Using Twitter to predict football outcomes.arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1411.1243
Kaplan, A., & Haenlein, M. (2019). Siri, Siri, in my hand: Who’s the fairest in the land? On the interpreta­
tions, illustrations, and implications of artificial intelligence. Business Horizons, 62(1), 15–25
Kareem, I., & Awan, S. M. (2019). Pakistani Media Fake News Classification using Machine Learning Clas­
sifiers. In 2019 International Conference on Innovative Computing (ICIC) (pp.1–6). IEEE
Katsaros, D., Stavropoulos, G., & Papakostas, D. (2019). Which machine learning paradigm for fake news 
detection?. In 2019 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI) (pp.383–387). 
IEEE
Konstantakis, K. N., Cheilas, P. T., Melissaropoulos, I. G., Xidonas, P., & Michaelides, P. G. (2022). Supply 
chains and fake news: a novel input–output neural network approach for the US food sector.Annals of 
Operations Research,1–16
Kim, A., & Dennis, A. R. (2019). Says who? The effects of presentation format and source rating on fake 
news in social media. MIS Quarterly: Management Information Systems, 43(3), 1025–1039
Kim, G., & Ko, Y. (2021). Effective fake news detection using graph and summarization techniques. Pattern 
Recognition Letters, 151, 135–139
Kovács, G., & Sigala, I. F. (2021). Lessons learned from humanitarian logistics to manage supply chain 
disruptions. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 57(1), 41–49
Kumar, V., Rajan, B., Venkatesan, R., & Lecinski, J. (2019). Understanding the role of artificial intelligence 
in personalized engagement marketing. California Management Review, 61(4), 135–155
Leão, F., Revoredo, K., & Baião, F. (2019). Extending WordNet with UFO foundational ontology. Journal 
of Web Semantics, 57, 100499
1 3
653

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
Lewandowsky, S., Ecker, U. K. H., Seifert, C. M., Schwarz, N., & Cook, J. (2012). Misinformation and its 
correction: Continued influence and successful debiasing. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 
13(3), 106–131
Li, L., Zhang, Q., Wang, X., Zhang, J., Wang, T., Gao, T., Duan, W., Tsoi, K. K., & Wang, F. (2020). Charac­
terizing the propagation of situational information in social media during COVID-19 epidemic: A case 
study on Weibo. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, 7(2), 556–562
Loureiro, S. M. C., Guerreiro, J., & Tussyadiah, I. (2020). Artificial intelligence in business: State of the art 
and future research agenda. Journal of Business Research, 129, 911–926
Mahdavi, S. A., Kolahi, A. A., Akhgari, M., Gheshlaghi, F., Gholami, N., Moshiri, M., Mohtasham, N., 
Ebrahimi, S., Ziaeefar, P., McDonald, R., Tas, B., Kazemifar, A. M., Amirabadizadeh, A., Ghadirzadeh, 
M., Jamshidi, F., Dadpour, B., Mirtorabi, S. D., Farnaghi, F., Zamani, N., & Hassanian-Moghaddam, H. 
(2021). COVID-19 pandemic and methanol poisoning outbreak in Iranian children and adolescents: A 
data linkage study. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 45(9), 1853–1863
Matheus, R., Janssen, M., & Maheshwari, D. (2020). Data science empowering the public: Data-driven 
dashboards for transparent and accountable decision-making in smart cities. Government Information 
Quarterly, 37(3), 101284
Mccallum, S. (2017). Restaurant hit by ‘human meat’ fake news claims, BBC. https://www.bbc.com/news/
newsbeat-39966215
McCarthy, J., Minsky, M. L., Rochester, N., & Shannon, C. E. (2006). A proposal for the Dartmouth summer 
research project on artificial intelligence, august 31, 1955. AI Magazine, 27(4), 12
McCulloch, W. S., & Pitts, W. (1943). A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity. The Bul­
letin of Mathematical Biophysics, 5(4), 115–133
Mehrotra, M., & Schmidt, W. (2021). The value of supply chain disruption duration information. Production 
and Operations Management, 30(9), 3015–3035
Melki, G., Cano, A., & Ventura, S. (2018a). MIRSVM: multi-instance support vector machine with bag rep­
resentatives. Pattern Recognition, 79, 228–241
Melki, G., Kecman, V., Ventura, S., & Cano, A. (2018b). OLLAWV: online learning algorithm using worst-
violators. Applied Soft Computing, 66, 384–393
Melki, G., Cano, A., Kecman, V., & Ventura, S. (2017). Multi-target support vector regression via correlation 
regressor chains. Information Sciences, 415, 53–69
Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass
Mikalef, P., Conboy, K., & Krogstie, J. (2021). Artificial intelligence as an enabler of B2B marketing: A 
dynamic capabilities micro-foundations approach. Industrial Marketing Management, 98, 80–92
Milner, P. (2003). A brief history of the Hebbian learning rule. Canadian Psychology, 44(1), 5–9
National Crime Agency (2018). UK national cyber security centre, the cyber threat to UK business, 2017–
2018 Report, April 10, 2018. Unclassified, National Security Archive.https://nsarchive.gwu.edu/
media/17676/ocr
Ni, D., Xiao, Z., & Lim, M. K. (2020). A systematic review of the research trends of machine learning in sup­
ply chain management. International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 11(7), 1463–1482
Niessner, M. (2018). Does fake news sway financial markets?”Yale Insights.https://insights.som.yale.edu/
insights/does-fake-news-sway-financial-markets
Oxford English Dictionary (2020a). Oxford, UK:Oxford University Press. https://www.oxfordlearnersdic­
tionaries.com/definition/english/fake-news
Oxford English Dictionary (2020). Oxford, UK:Oxford University Press. https://www.oxfordlearnersdiction­
aries.com/definition/english/disinformation
Parsons, D. D. (2020). The impact of fake news on company value: evidence from tesla and galena bio­
pharma. Chancellor’s Honors Program Projects.https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_chanhonoproj/2328
Paschen, J., Kietzmann, J., & Kietzmann, T. C. (2019). Artificial intelligence (AI) and its implications for 
market knowledge in B2B marketing. Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing, 34(7), 1410–1419
Petratos, P. N. (2021). Misinformation, disinformation, and fake news: Cyber risks to business. Business 
Horizons, 64(6), 763–774
Petit, T. J., Croxton, K. L., & Fiksel, J. (2019). The evolution of resilience in supply chain management: A 
retrospective on ensuring supply chain resilience. Journal of Business Logistics, 40(1), 56–65
Poddar, K., & Umadevi, K. S. (2019). ). Comparison of various machine learning models for accurate detec­
tion of fake news. In 2019 Innovations in Power and Advanced Computing Technologies (i-PACT) 
(Vol.1, pp.1–5). IEEE
Polit, D. F., & Beck, C. T. (2012). Gender bias undermines evidence on gender and health. Qualitative Health 
Research, 22(9), 1298
Ponterotto, J. G. (2005). Qualitative research in counseling psychology: A primer on research paradigms and 
philosophy of science. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 52(2), 126–136
1 3
654

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
Pournader, M., Ghaderi, H., Hassanzadegan, A., & Fahimnia, B. (2021). Artificial intelligence applications in 
supply chain management. International Journal of Production Economics, 241, 108250
Preil, D., & Krapp, M. (2021). Artificial intelligence-based inventory management: a Monte Carlo tree search 
approach.Annals of Operations Research,1–25
Rahi, S., Ghani, M. A., & Ngah, A. H. (2019). Integration of unified theory of acceptance and use of technol­
ogy in internet banking adoption setting: Evidence from Pakistan. Technology in Society, 58, 101120
Raisch, S., & Krakowski, S. (2020). Artificial Intelligence and Management: The Automation-Augmentation 
Paradox. Academy of Management Review, 46(1), 1–48
Ransbotham, S., Kiron, D., Gerbert, P., & Reeves, M. (2017). Reshaping business with artificial intelligence: 
Closing the gap between ambition and action. MIT Sloan Management Review, 59(1). Retrieved from 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/1950374030?pq-origsite=gscholar&fromopenview=true
Reisach, U. (2021). The responsibility of social media in times of societal and political manipulation. Euro­
pean Journal of Operational Research, 291(3), 906–917
Resilinc (2021). Supply chain disruptions up 67% in 2020 with factory fires taking top 
spot for second year in a row. Retrieved from https://www.resilinc.com/press-release/
supply-chain-disruptions-up-67-in-2020-with-factory-fires-taking-top-spot-for-second-year-in-a-row/
Reuters (2022). Fact check-Food processing plant fires in 2022 are not part of a conspiracy 
to trigger U.S. food shortages. Reuters. Retrieved from https://www.reuters.com/article/
factcheck-processing-fire-idUSL2N2WW2CY
Riahi, Y., Saikouk, T., Gunasekaran, A., & Badraoui, I. (2021). Artificial intelligence applications in the 
supply chain: A descriptive bibliometric analysis and future research directions. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 173, 114702
Roozenbeek, J., & Van Der Linden, S. (2019). The fake news game: actively inoculating against the risk of 
misinformation. Journal of Risk Research, 22(5), 570–580
Roscoe, R. D., Grebitus, C., O’Brian, J., Johnson, A. C., & Kula, I. (2016). Online information search and 
decision making: Effects of web search stance. Computers in Human Behavior, 56, 103–118
Sabeeh, V., Zohdy, M., & Al Bashaireh, R. (2019). Enhancing the Fake News Detection by Applying Effec­
tive Feature Selection Based on Semantic Sources. In 2019 International Conference on Computational 
Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI) (pp.1365–1370). IEEE
Sharma, M., Luthra, S., Joshi, S., & Kumar, A. (2021). Implementing challenges of artificial intelligence: 
Evidence from the public manufacturing sector of an emerging economy.Government Information 
Quarterly,101624
Sharma, V. K., Mittal, N., & Vidyarthi, A. (2020). Context-based translation for the out of vocabulary words 
applied to Hindi-English cross-lingual information retrieval.IETE Technical Review,1–10
Sheng, J., Amankwah-Amoah, J., Khan, Z., & Wang, X. (2020). COVID-19 Pandemic in the New Era of 
Big Data Analytics: Methodological Innovations and Future Research Directions. British Journal of 
Management, 32(4), 1164–1183
Shrestha, Y. R., Ben-Menahem, S. M., & von Krogh, G. (2019). Organizational Decision-Making Structures 
in the age of artificial intelligence. California Management Review, 61(4), 66–83
Siew, E. G., Rosli, K., & Yeow, P. H. (2020). Organizational and environmental influences in the adoption 
of computer-assisted audit tools and techniques (CAATTs) by audit firms in Malaysia. International 
Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 36, 100445
Sodhi, M., & Tang, C. (2021). Supply chain management for extreme conditions: Research opportunities. 
Journal of Supply Chain Management, 57(1), 7–16
Sohrabpour, V., Oghazi, P., Toorajipour, R., & Nazarpour, A. (2021). Export sales forecasting using artificial 
intelligence. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 163, 120480
Swanson, E. B., & Wang, P. (2005). Knowing why and how to innovate with packaged business software. 
Journal of Information Technology, 20(1), 20–31
Swink, M., & Schoenherr, T. (2015). The effects of cross-functional integration on profitability, process effi­
ciency, and asset productivity. Journal of Business Logistics, 36(1), 69–87
Talamo, A., Marocco, S., & Tricol, C. (2021). “The Flow in the funnel”: Modeling organizational and indi­
vidual decision-making for designing financial AI-based systems. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 697101
Tandoc, E. C. Jr., Lim, Z. W., & Ling, R. (2018). Defining “fake news” A typology of scholarly definitions. 
Digital Journalism, 6(2), 137–153
Teddlie, C., & Yu, F. (2007). Mixed methods sampling: A typology with examples. Journal of Mixed Methods 
Research, 1(1), 77–100
The News (2020). Growing demand drives herb prices up, The News. https://www.thenews.com.pk/
print/669097-growing-demand-drives-herb-prices-up
Tharwat, A. (2019). Parameter investigation of support vector machine classifier with kernel functions. 
Knowledge and Information Systems, 61(3), 1269–1302
1 3
655

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
Tong, C., Gill, H., Li, J., Valenzuela, S., & Rojas, H. (2020). Fake news is anything they say!”—Conceptual­
ization and weaponization of fake news among the American public. Mass Communication and Society, 
23(5), 755–778
Toorajipour, R., Sohrabpour, V., Nazarpour, A., Oghazi, P., & Fischl, M. (2021). Artificial intelligence in 
supply chain management: A systematic literature review. Journal of Business Research, 122, 502–517
United Nations (2020). UN tackles ‘infodemic’ of misinformation and cybercrime in COVID-
19 
crisis. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.un.org/en/un-coronavirus-communications-team/
un-tackling-%E2%80%98infodemic%E2%80%99-misinformation-and-cybercrime-covid-19
Vincent, V. U. (2021). Integrating intuition and artificial intelligence in organizational decision-making. Busi­
ness Horizons, 64(4), 425–438
Vos, A. D., Strydom, H., Fouche, C. B., & Delport, C. S. L. (2005). Research at grassroots. For the social 
sciences and human service professions. Pretoria: Van Schaik Publishers
Wamba, S. F., Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., & Akter, S. (2020). The performance effects of big data analyt­
ics and supply chain ambidexterity: The moderating effect of environmental dynamism. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 222, 107498
Wamba-Taguimdje, S. L., Wamba, F., Kala Kamdjoug, S., J. R., & Wanko, T., C. E (2020). Influence of 
artificial intelligence (AI) on firm performance: the business value of AI-based transformation projects. 
Business Process Management Journal, 26(7), 1893–1924
Wang, X., Reger, R. K., & Pfarrer, M. D. (2021). Faster, hotter, and more linked in: managing social disap­
proval in the social media era. Academy of Management Review, 46(2), 275–298
Wang, Y., Qian, S., Hu, J., Fang, Q., & Xu, C. (2020). Fake news detection via knowledge-driven multimodal 
graph convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Multimedia 
Retrieval (pp.540–547)
Wardle, C. (2017). Fake news. It’s complicated. https://medium.com/1st-draft/fake-news-its-complicated-
d0f773766c79. Accessed 29 November 2021
Weizenbaum, J. (1966). ELIZA—A Computer Program For the Study of Natural Language Com­
munication Between Man And Machine. Communications of the ACM, 9(1), 36–45. https://doi.
org/10.1145/357980.357991
Wong, C. W., Lirn, T. C., Yang, C. C., & Shang, K. C. (2020). Supply chain and external conditions under 
which supply chain resilience pays: An organizational information processing theorization. Interna­
tional Journal of Production Economics, 226, 107610
Xu, Z., Elomri, A., Kerbache, L., & Omri, E., A (2020). Impacts of COVID-19 on global supply chains: Facts 
and perspectives. IEEE Engineering Management Review, 48(3), 153–166
Yin, R. K. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods (5th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications
Yu, W., Chavez, R., Jacobs, M., Wong, C. Y., & Yuan, C. (2019). Environmental scanning, supply chain 
integration, responsiveness, and operational performance: an integrative framework from an organi­
zational information processing theory perspective. International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, 39(5), 787–814
Zeba, G., Dabić, M., Čičak, M., Daim, T., & Yalcin, H. (2021). Technology mining: Artificial intelligence in 
manufacturing. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 171, 120971
Zhang, C., Gupta, A., Kauten, C., Deokar, A. V., & Qin, X. (2019). Detecting fake news for reducing mis­
information risks using analytics approaches. European Journal of Operational Research, 279(3), 
1036–1052
Zhang, C., & Lu, Y. (2021). Study on artificial intelligence: The state of the art and future prospects. Journal 
of Industrial Information Integration, 23, 100224
Zhang, M., Li, X., Yue, S., & Yang, L. (2020). An empirical study of TextRank for keyword extraction. Ieee 
Access : Practical Innovations, Open Solutions, 8, 178849–178858
Zhang, M., Macpherson, A., & Jones, O. (2006). Conceptualizing the learning process in SMEs: improving 
innovation through external orientation. International Small Business Journal, 24(3), 299–323
Zheng, K., Zhang, Z., Chen, Y., & Wu, J. (2021). Blockchain adoption for information sharing: risk decision-
making in spacecraft supply chain. Enterprise Information Systems, 15(8), 1070–1091
Zhou, X., Jain, A., Phoha, V. V., & Zafarani, R. (2020). Fake news early detection: A theory-driven model. 
Digital Threats: Research and Practice, 1(2), 1–25
Zhu, X., Li, F., Chen, H., & Peng, Q. (2018). An efficient path computing model for measuring semantic 
similarity using edge and density. Knowledge and Information Systems, 55(1), 79–111
Zhu, X., Yang, X., Huang, Y., Guo, Q., & Zhang, B. (2020). Measuring similarity and relatedness using mul­
tiple semantic relations in WordNet. Knowledge and Information Systems, 62(4), 1539–1569
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
656

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:633–657
 Authors and Affiliations
Pervaiz  Akhtar1,2 · Arsalan Mujahid  Ghouri3 · Haseeb Ur Rehman  Khan4 · 
Mirza  Amin ul Haq5 · Usama  Awan6 · Nadia  Zahoor7 · Zaheer  Khan1,9 · Aniqa  Ashraf8
 
 Pervaiz Akhtar
pervaiz.akhtar@abdn.ac.uk
Arsalan Mujahid Ghouri
arsalan.ghouri@ymail.com
Haseeb Ur Rehman Khan
haseebrkhan6@gmail.com
Mirza Amin ul Haq
amin.ulhaq@iqra.edu.pk
Usama Awan
Usama.awan@lut.fi
Nadia Zahoor
nadia.zahoor@strath.ac.uk
Zaheer Khan
zaheer.khan@abdn.ac.uk
Aniqa Ashraf
Aniqa@mail.ustc.edu.cn
1 
University of Aberdeen Business School, University of Aberdeen, King’s College, 
AB24 5UA Aberdeen, UK
2 
Imperial College London, SW7 2BU London, UK
3 
Faculty of Management and Economics, Universiti Pendidikan Sultan Idris, Tanjong Malim, 
Malaysia
4 
Faculty of Art, Computing, and Creative Industry, Universiti Pendidikan Sultan Idris, Tanjong 
Malim, Malaysia
5 
Department of Business Administration, Iqra University, Karachi, Pakistan
6 
Department of Business Administration, Inland School of Business and Social Sciences, 
Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences, Hamar, Norway
7 
School of Business and Management, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
8 
CAS-Key Laboratory of Crust-Mantle Materials and the Environments, School of Earth and 
Space Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, 230026 Hefei, PR China
9 
Innolab, University of Vaasa, Vaasa, Finland
1 3
657