TITLE: The implications of complexity for humanitarian logistics: a complex adaptive systems perspective
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2020
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03658-w
---

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03658-w
S.I.: DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT OF HUMANITARIAN SUPPLY
CHAINS
The implications of complexity for humanitarian logistics:
a complex adaptive systems perspective
Sarah Schiﬄing1
· Claire Hannibal1
· Matthew Tickle2
· Yiyi Fan3
Received: 15 March 2020 / Revised: 6 May 2020 / Accepted: 15 May 2020 / Published online: 29 May 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
In this study we argue that recognising humanitarian logistics (HL) as a complex system is a
key step in developing supply chain design and management strategies that meet the needs of
stakeholders. This study draws on complex adaptive systems theory to examine the character-
istics and implications of complexity for HL. Through case-study research of humanitarian
responses in Haiti and Pakistan, characteristics of complexity across organisational bound-
aries are identiﬁed. We ﬁnd that the complexity of the context impacts the outcome of the
humanitarian response and conclude that HL must not only react to its environment, it must
also create its environment. As HL must work within signiﬁcantly differing environments to
create solutions, the standardised approaches used to manage supply chains are less desirable.
While this paper focuses on HL, wider applicability to other complex logistics operations is
also discussed, informing the design and management of contextually speciﬁc supply chains.
Keywords Humanitarian logistics · Complex adaptive system (CAS) · Case study · Supply
chain management
1 Introduction
The frequency and intensity of large-scale and catastrophic disasters, natural or human-made,
continues to increase (Day 2014). It has been reported that more than 200 million people
are affected by natural disasters each year (Yao et al. 2018) and their survival often relies
on the humanitarian assistance provided by private, military, government, and/or national
and international non-governmental organisations (NGOs) (Kovács and Spens 2009; Tatham
B Sarah Schifﬂing
s.a.schifﬂing@ljmu.ac.uk
1
Liverpool Business School, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK
2
Management School, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
3
Management School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
123

1380
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
and Houghton 2011; Kovács et al. 2012; Pérouse de Montclos 2012; Chapman and Mitchell
2018).
Humanitarian assistance is provided through humanitarian logistics (HL), a system con-
cerned with ‘planning, implementing and controlling the effective, cost-efﬁcient ﬂow and
storage of goods and materials as well as related information, from the point of origin to the
point of consumption for the purpose of meeting the end beneﬁciary’s requirements’ (Thomas
and Mizushima 2005, p. 60). The annual expenditure of humanitarian assistance is estimated
at more than US$25 billion (Tatham and Pettit 2010), with HL activities approximated to
account for as much as 60–80% of the total cost of humanitarian operations (Blecken 2010).
Balancing the moral imperative that drives HL with the economic imperative for ensuring
value for money presents challenges for humanitarian logisticians (Beamon and Balcik 2008;
Gonçalves and Castañeda 2018; Naor et al. 2018; Cachon et al. 2020). In short, failure to
provide sufﬁcient supply in a timely manner has the potential to cause serious losses or even
death (Thomas 2004; Tatham et al. 2009; Day et al. 2012; Turkeš et al. 2017; Chapman and
Mitchell 2018).
Academic and managerial interest in HL was piqued after the catastrophic HL failures of
the 2004 tsunami in South East Asia, with operational concerns such as custom clearance and
the congestion of ports and airports being of particular interest (Kovács and Spens 2011). It
has been suggested that HL presents a ‘wicked’ problem (Tatham and Houghton 2011). The
sheer number of stakeholders (each with their wildly differing views and objectives) leads to
increased complexity and performance issues (Hilhorst 2002; Vaillancourt 2016), in addition
to the ‘customers’ within the supply chain (SC) including both beneﬁciaries of aid and the
donors that provide it (Oloruntoba and Gray 2009; Charles et al. 2010; Schifﬂing and Piecyk
2014). Furthermore, HL must operate under extreme time pressure (Dubey et al. 2019), often
in environments that have neither a functioning logistics system nor adequate administrative
or governmental structures (Pettit and Beresford 2009; Day et al. 2012). While there have
been some efforts towards standardisation in HL, each response is unique and depends on
local needs assessment and signiﬁcant adaptations beyond the initial emergency response
phase (Kovács and Spens 2009; Richey 2009; Kunz et al. 2014).
The HL context poses distinct challenges for the logistics function when compared with the
demand-driven, steady-state SCs found in commercial industries where the required inputs
to achieve the desired results are generally known (Kovács and Spens 2007; Olaogbebikan
and Oloruntoba 2017; Besiou and Van Wassenhove 2020). Compared to the demand-driven,
steady-state commercial industries, HL operates in an exceedingly uncertain and dynamic
environment that is far beyond the control of any individual manager or organisation (Van
Wassenhove 2006; Day et al. 2012). However, due to their humanitarian mandate, humanitar-
ian organisations will not withdraw from such an environment, which necessitates agile and
resilient SCs (Stewart and Ivanov 2019). Given this challenging operational context, many
of the current frameworks we use to manage SCs have proven inadequate in the disaster
response context (Balcik et al. 2010). The ﬁeld of HL is therefore considered to be a highly
dynamic, complex system (Gonçalves 2008). Research illustrates how managing HL efforts
cannot be approached in the same manner as for unidirectional, linear SCs, but should instead
be examined as a dynamic system (Day 2014).
By examining humanitarian relief efforts in Haiti and Pakistan, we focus on the com-
plexity of the context and how the HL response adapts to complexity in order to provide
timely and sufﬁcient resources to where they are needed. To do this, we adopt the theoretical
lens of complex adaptive systems (CAS). In the operations management literature, supply
networks have been characterised as CAS (Choi et al. 2001; Pathak et al. 2007). Similarly,
HL can also be viewed from the CAS perspective (Day 2014). It is characterised as complex
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1381
and dynamic given that the agents generate nonlinear interactions over time, resulting in a
potential emerging system behaviour, e.g. supply network resilience (Day 2014). We took
a similar view and consider HL as a CAS. By utilising CAS theory we are able to develop
a detailed analysis of the key tenets of complexity from which we provide theoretical and
practical insights for HL.
HL has been recognised as an important research area by numerous scholars because of the
considerable ﬁnancial, as well as moral implications of HL performance (Jabbour et al. 2017;
Banomyong et al. 2019; Anaya-Arenas et al. 2014). In parallel with its recognised importance
is the acknowledgement that HL operations are complex (Hilhorst 2002; Vaillancourt 2016),
yet much of this research ignores the complicating factors of HL (Day et al. 2012) and research
examining the implications of complexity for HL is currently under-developed. Speciﬁcally,
the characteristics of complexity across organisational boundaries and the ways in which HL
responses interact with complexity are not sufﬁciently explored. By utilising the theoretical
lens of CAS we are able to shed light on how and why humanitarian response efforts can
yield vastly differing outcomes and offer recommendations as to how these differences can
be overcome.
Our study addresses the following research questions:
RQ1 What are the main characteristics of complexity in humanitarian logistics?
RQ2 How does the humanitarian logistics response adapt to complexity?
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 examines the operating environment of
HL, explains our rationale for using CAS, and details the application of CAS to HL. In
the subsequent research design section, the data collection and data analysis are detailed.
Section 4 presents the case studies and Sect. 5 the cross-case analysis, structured by the three
foci of CAS. By drawing on our ﬁndings, we address our research questions in Sect. 6, before
we conclude the paper by reﬂecting on key theoretical and managerial insights as well as
discussing limitations and future research directions in Sect. 7.
2 Literature review
2.1 Understanding the complex operating environment of humanitarian logistics
The challenges of HL have been explored in great depth in the extant literature in recent years
(Behl and Dutta 2019; Gupta et al. 2019) and a common theme is the impact that the unique
and complex operating environment has on HL operations (Turkeš et al. 2017; Gunasekaran
et al. 2018). As this paper focuses on the main characteristics of complexity in HL, this
section reviews prior research on complexity within HL.
Firstly, the operating environment is dynamic, whereby temporary SCs must be hastily
formed under conditions of extreme uncertainty (Day 2014; Gao 2019). Secondly, the number
ofstakeholdersissigniﬁcant,withmilitary,governmental,andprivateorganisationsofvarious
sizes and motivations typically involved (Kovács and Spens 2009; Balcik et al. 2010; Larson
and Foropon 2018). Stakeholders often have differing levels of capability and their conﬂicting
views and objectives often have a signiﬁcant impact on HL performance (Hilhorst 2002;
Heaslip et al. 2012; Vaillancourt 2016). Thirdly, responses have to be timely, yet they are
often carried out in conﬂict zones with signiﬁcant security threats, whilst also considering
long-term recovery as well as short-term emergency aid (Gustavsson 2003; Oloruntoba and
Kovács 2015).
123

1382
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
While these characteristics alone make for an extremely challenging operating environ-
ment, HL is further complicated by the uncertainties inherent in the humanitarian relief
industry. Many humanitarian organisations are facing skills and funding shortages, particu-
larly a lack of investment in technology and communication tools (Gustavsson 2003; Kovács
and Tatham 2010; Kovács et al. 2012). Logistics is often undervalued at a strategic level,
resulting in a lack of expertise in the area, which can impact on the accuracy of the infor-
mation needed to develop an informed HL response (Sandwell 2011). Added to all of this is
the over-reliance on donor funding, whereby donors become increasingly powerful players
in the SC due to their ability to only provide ﬁnancial and material support if their individual
preferences and mandates are met (Hilhorst 2002; Kovács and Spens 2008). Co-ordination
and collaboration between the humanitarian organisations involved is paramount if a HL
operation is to succeed, and yet these activities are made more difﬁcult as all of these organi-
sations differ vastly in their size and approach (Kovács and Spens 2009; Moshtari 2016), and
knowledge sharing is hampered by the chaotic and uncertain environment of HL (Pateman
et al. 2013; Heaslip and Barber 2014; Altay and Pal 2014; Gao 2019).
While there is a growing body of research in HL, scholars are critical of HL research that
ignores complicating factors or distorts the situations faced in practice (Day et al. 2012). HL
researchers are therefore encouraged to guard against over-simplifying inherently complex
and ill-structured situations (Apte 2009). Inspired by this, Day (2014) concluded that the dif-
ferences in the ﬂows of ﬁnance, information, and resources are so great that HL efforts cannot
be managed in the same manner as unidirectional, linear SCs, but should instead be exam-
ined as dynamic and complex systems to better understand HL and to ‘generate more reliable
disaster relief performance’ (Day 2014, p. 1985). Other scholars have characterised HL as a
highly complex (Seybolt 2009; L’Hermitte et al. 2015; Stauffer et al. 2018) or ‘wicked’ prob-
lem (Tatham and Houghton 2011). However, deﬁnitions of the actors, processes and contexts
that comprise the dynamic and complex system of HL are under-developed in the literature.
Therefore, this paper aims to explore not only the characteristics of complexity experienced
in this scenario, but also the impact these characteristics have on HL responses. We present
ﬁndings from case-study research on complexity in HL and enhance our understanding of
the divergent outcomes of different humanitarian responses.
2.2 Theoretical lens: complex adaptive systems
The term CAS emerged from complexity theory (Prigogine and Stengers 1984; Lewin 1993;
Kauffman 1995), which focuses on the emergence of order in dynamic and non-linear systems
that operate at the edge of chaos (Schneider and Somers 2006). A CAS is a type of system
that functions without any central control and lacks a permanent, ﬁxed structure, yet is
nonetheless distinguishable from its surroundings, with examples including ecosystems and
cities (Holland 1995). Within a CAS, developing an understanding of its constituent ‘parts’
does not necessarily convey an understanding of the whole system’s behaviour (Brownlee
2007). The ‘parts’ of a CAS are independent agents. In operations management terms, an
agent may be an individual or an organisation, yet in scientiﬁc terms an agent may be a
molecule or a species. A CAS is considered complex, as it is diverse, and adaptive in that the
system has the capacity to alter and change based on learning from experience (Begun et al.
2003).
Studies that have viewed HL through a CAS lens have examined the applicability of
commercial SC thinking to humanitarian SC relationships (McLachlin and Larson 2011),
co-ordination in HL (Krejci 2015), and how HL resilience can be enhanced (Day 2014).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1383
Other studies also refer to HL as a CAS, however the deﬁnition of CAS is not always made
explicit, or the notion of HL as a CAS is taken as read and is not elaborated upon (e.g.
de Faria Cordeiro et al. 2015; Shaﬁee and Berglund 2016; Handayani et al. 2017). Prior
research suggests that this theoretical approach could add to the body of knowledge in HL
(Gupta et al. 2019). To better understand the complex interplay inherent in supply networks,
researchers suggest a CAS perspective (Langdon and Sikora 2006; Pathak et al. 2007; Li
et al. 2010; Schoenherr et al. 2012). Indeed, the humanitarian aid community as a whole
has been described as a complex, open, adaptive system (Seybolt 2009). HL exhibits the
characteristics of a CAS as the system-level behaviour that emerges cannot be predicted by
observing individual agents. It is complex in that it operates in a dynamic network of diverse
interacting agents, and it is adaptive in that the system redesigns over time corresponding
to internal or external stimuli. The activity of redesign is termed as self-organisation (Choi
et al. 2001). In its ability to learn from its experience, a CAS evolves based not only on
the dynamic interactions among its agents but also based on the interactions between the
environment and the agents. As part of a humanitarian response, individual organisations can
be seen as interacting adaptive agents that are united in a common purpose, i.e. providing
humanitarian assistance (Kovács and Spens 2009; Tatham and Houghton 2011; Kovács et al.
2012; Pérouse de Montclos 2012). No single agent can claim to manage and control the
entirety of the humanitarian effort. However, a system can support overall behaviour that is
signiﬁcantly more complex than the behaviour of any individual agent (Van Dyke Parunak
1997).
2.3 Application of CAS to HL
We contribute to the extant literature by offering a more ﬁne-grained approach that adopts
an analytical framework developed by Choi et al. (2001) which considers supply networks
as a CAS. By utilising a framework developed speciﬁcally to consider supply networks as a
CAS, Choi et al. (2001) argue that behaviours across the supply network can be interpreted
in a more complete manner and therefore interventions can be developed that are more likely
to deliver positive results. Both Krejci (2015) and Day (2014) refer to this framework in the
context of HL and we offer an extension to this body of work by offering empirical examples.
As per Choi et al. (2001), we consider an examination of a CAS to comprise the interplay
between the system and its environment, and the co-evolution of both the system and its
environment. For HL the system is the network of organisations that provide the humani-
tarian response and the environment is the context in which the humanitarian response is
provided (e.g. geographical location, political situation, accessibility) (Balcik et al. 2010).
In considering supply networks as a CAS, Choi et al. (2001) suggest three foci; internal
mechanisms, environment and co-evolution. The dynamics of these three foci provide the
framework for our study and allow us to examine and develop suggestions as to how the
design and management of HL can be improved. In contextualising each of these foci to
HL, we consider internal mechanisms as concerned with the agents (e.g. individuals and
organisations) that comprise the humanitarian relief effort. We are concerned with the con-
nectivity and the ability to self-organise in and between the agents and how information and
resources ﬂow. Here, we also examine the norms, values, beliefs and assumptions that are
shared among agents. The environment exists external to the CAS; for HL this focus would
concern contextual, cultural, geographical, political and ﬁnancial factors that could inﬂuence
change within the CAS. These environmental factors may be dynamic, and hence force the
CAS to exploit existing knowledge and explore new knowledge as part of the change (Choi
123

1384
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
Table 1 The three foci of complex adaptive systems in humanitarian logistics
CAS focus
Humanitarian logistics context
Internal mechanisms
Concerned with the agents that comprise the CAS
Agents are individuals and organisations that provide the humanitarian relief
effort. For example, private, military, governmental and non-governmental
organisations, donors and beneﬁciaries
Examines connectivity and ability to self-organise within and across these
individuals and organisations
Develops understanding of norms, values, beliefs and assumptions that are shared
among individuals and organisations
Environment
Concerned with factors outside of the boundary of the CAS
For HL the environment may comprise contextual, cultural, geographical, political
and ﬁnancial inﬂuences
Environmental factors may be dynamic in HL, and force the CAS to adapt quickly
to changing inﬂuences
Co-evolution
Concerned with the CAS both reacting to and creating its environment
Concerned with changes in the equilibrium state between a CAS and its
environment
For HL, political instability, for example, in the geographic location where HL is
required can lead to unpredictable changes that inﬂuence the behaviour within
the CAS
Examines non-linearity as regards how a large change in input does not necessarily
result in a signiﬁcant change in output
et al. 2001). The third focus, co-evolution, concerns the CAS both reacting to and creating
its environment. Feedback between the system and its environment forces change within the
CAS and also within the environment. Co-evolution may instigate a change from equilibrium
to disequilibrium between a system and its environment. For instance, political instability in
the geographic location where HL is required can lead to unpredictable changes that inﬂu-
ence the behaviour within the CAS; an example of this would be the local government being
overthrown, resulting in changes to the balance of power, thereby forcing some HL actors to
withdraw from the region. Change is often non-linear in a CAS. Non-linearity implies that
there is an inconsistent relationship between the cause and effect of CAS events, such that
cause and effect can be difﬁcult to predict, and this relationship may not be repeated, or that
extreme events may yield disproportionately negative or positive results (Wycisk et al. 2008).
For example, a large change in input (e.g. additional funds as donations) does not necessarily
lead to large changes in outcome (e.g. additional funds may not be used to their greatest
effect, or additional supplies purchased with the funds may not reach the intended recipi-
ents). Conversely, a small change in input may lead to a signiﬁcant change in output (either
positive or negative). A CAS can therefore be hypersensitive to changes in its environment
(Choi et al. 2001). A summary of these three foci is included as Table 1.
Thesethreefociarenotindependentofeachother,meaningthat,forexample,non-linearity
(co-evolution focus) is affected by the CAS agents’ adaptation efforts but can also introduce
new patterns of self-organisation and emergence (internal mechanism focus) (McCarthy
et al. 2006). This may imply that different agents at different levels of a CAS share the same
concerns, such as increasing delivery speed and reducing costs (Surana et al. 2005; Wycisk
et al. 2008). As such, each individual agent aims to address their own concerns but may end
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1385
up instigating the emergence of similar collective patterns at the wider system level (Pathak
et al. 2007).
In summary, HL can be deﬁned as a CAS as it emerges over time into a coherent form and
adapts and organises itself without any singular entity deliberately managing or controlling
it (Holland 1995). Hence, employing the established theoretical lens of a CAS is regarded as
an important step towards understanding how the highly-complex operations of HL can be
designed and managed, and will enable the development of theoretical and practical insights
into how collective behaviours in delivering humanitarian responses can be coordinated
(Surana et al. 2005; Moshtari 2016). We do this by examining the humanitarian responses
to the Haitian earthquake and Pakistan ﬂoods (both of 2010) and outline our research design
below.
3 Research design
This study utilises a case study research design. Case studies are deﬁned as ‘empirical enquiry
that investigate a contemporary phenomenon within its real life context’ (Yin 2014, p. 14)
and are characterised by the collection of contextually rich data. This makes them a suitable
approach for the study of complex social phenomena in which a variety of variables, some
of them unknown to the researchers, shape particular responses or outcomes in a network of
interactions (Stake 2000; Flyvbjerg 2013). Case studies are commonly used to explore, and
make sense of, complexity (Flyvbjerg 2013; Yin 2014; Kreye et al. 2015; Campus et al. 2019),
with qualitative methods being noted as particularly appropriate for ‘allowing researchers to
deal with complexity, context and persona and their multitude of factors, relationships and
fuzzy phenomena’ (Cassell and Gummesson 2006, p. 167).
3.1 Data collection
Semi-structured interviews and document analysis provided the multiple data sources nec-
essary ‘to seek convergence and corroboration through the use of different data sources
and methods’ (Bowen 2009, p. 28). This ‘combination of methodologies in the study of the
same phenomenon’ (Denzin 1970, p. 291) achieves triangulation, thus reducing any potential
biases and substantiating ﬁndings across datasets (Voss et al. 2002; Bowen 2009). Publicly
available documents for each of the organisations that participated in the interviews were
collected; these included mission reports, annual reports, operational updates, and intra-, as
well as inter-organisational reviews. In total, 18 interviews were conducted. Respondents all
worked within humanitarian NGOs, many with considerable experience at the time of the
interview (See Table 2 for details).
Interviewees were identiﬁed using a combination of theoretical sampling and snowball
sampling; some interviewees were contacted directly based on their role and the organisations
they worked for, while others were identiﬁed via referrals (Saunders et al. 2006; Bryman
2012). As most respondents were actively conducting humanitarian work around the world,
most interviews were conducted by phone or online via Voice Over IP. To protect their
anonymity, participants are only identiﬁed by an alphanumerical code, where ‘H’ stands for
participation in the Haiti case study and ‘P’ for Pakistan. A number is assigned at random to
each interviewee.
Four different types of non-proﬁt organisations were included in this sample; UN agen-
cies, religious organisations conducting humanitarian operations according to faith-based
123

1386
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
Table 2 Length of service and job title of interviewees (adapted from Makepeace et al. 2017)
Interviewee
Length of service within the
sector (years)
Length of service within the
organisation (years)
Job title
H1
8
5
Programmes Coordinator
H2
5
3
Head of Operations
H3
13
8
Head of Logistics and
Supply
H4
5
5
Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
H5
4
1
Logistics and Procurement
Coordinator
H6
11
7
Director of Programmes
H7
9
6
Logistics Advisor
H8
12
9
Deputy Director
Procurement and
Logistics
H9
8
6
Operations Manager
H10
16
4
Country Supply Ofﬁcer
P1
9
7
Medical Supply Ofﬁcer
P2
4
2
Mission Support
P3
17
10
Operations Director
P4
4
1
Logistics and Procurement
Coordinator
P5
9
6
Logistics Advisor
P6
6
4
Mission Coordinator
P7
13
8
Head of Logistics and
Supply
P8
12
9
Deputy Director
Procurement and
Logistics
Total
165
101
objectives, Dunantist and Wilsonian organisations. Following the classiﬁcation by Stoddard
(2003), Dunantist organisations are independent of, or even oppositional to, government
and are advocacy-focussed; in comparison, Wilsonian organisations are more dependent
and cooperative with government and are focussed on service delivery. Table 3 provides a
summary of the organisations that participated in the study.
As previous research has highlighted, humanitarian efforts do not end instantaneously after
the emergency response, but often merge into long-term efforts of recovery and rebuilding
(Day et al. 2012; Oloruntoba and Kovács 2015) with these interconnected phases being
a recognised source of complexity (McEntire 2004). Thus, interviews were conducted in
2014 and 2015 to allow for longer-term reﬂections on the humanitarian responses, including
considerations of outcomes. Asking respondents to recall events from several years ago
allowed the authors to focus on the immediate disaster response, whilst also acknowledging
the potential wider impacts of complexity.
While the sample size may be considered relatively limited when compared with large
scale logistics studies in different contexts, the poor availability of data in HL is widely
acknowledged (Kovács and Spens 2007; Natarajarathinam et al. 2009; Kunz and Reiner 2012;
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1387
Table 3 Organisational characteristics
Organisation
Type
Haiti
Pakistan
Interviewees
Base
Area Served
A
Dunantist
1
H9
Single Country
Global
B
Dunantist
1
1
H3, P7
Global
Global
C
Dunantist
1
1
H7, P5
Global
Global
D
Dunantist
1
P3
Global
Global
E
Dunantist
2
P1, P6
Global
Global
F
Religious
1
H1
Single Country
Single Country
G
Religious
1
H2
Single Country
Global
H
UN
1
H10
Global
Global
I
UN
1
1
H5, P2
Global
Global
J
Wilsonian
1
H6
Global
Global
K
Wilsonian
1
H4
Single Country
Global
L
Wilsonian
1
1
H8, P8
Single Country
Global
M
Wilsonian
1
P4
Single Country
Global
Pedraza-Martinez et al. 2013; Kovács and Moshtari 2019). Figure 1 provides an overview
of the boundaries of the two case studies. It highlights the different types of organisations
and visualises their differences in size. Care was taken in the sampling process to include
organisations of varying sizes, however in practice fewer smaller organisations responded to
the ﬂoods in Pakistan. Organisations B, C, I, and L were represented in both case studies. All
four of these organisations are of a considerable size and operate globally, with all except
organisation L also having a global base.
3.2 Data analysis
As interviewees were asked to recall events that had occurred some years ago, comparisons
across interviewee responses and with the secondary data were made after every interview to
establish any inconsistencies (Smith 2001). As inconsistencies were not identiﬁed across the
recollection of events, the associated challenges of analysing multiple versions of the ‘facts’
(whether misremembered, misinformed, withheld or untrue) did not need to be addressed
(Polishuk 1998). The interviews were recorded and their transcripts analysed in NVivo using,
initially, an a priori coding process (Miles et al. 2014).
In analysing our primary and secondary data, we drew on the approach adopted by Bhakoo
and Choi (2013). A priori ﬁrst level codes were derived from the three interdependent foci
of the CAS framework utilised (internal mechanisms, environment, and co-evolution) (Choi
et al. 2001) and drew on contextual information as presented in Table 1. As per Table 1, opera-
tional deﬁnitions of each code were developed, thus providing a clear guideline regarding the
contents to be coded. For example, when coding against ‘internal mechanisms’, interview
comments and secondary data referring to connectivity between agents and/or the norms,
values, beliefs and assumptions shared between the agents were of interest. For ‘environ-
ment’, the coding process was concerned with identifying primary and secondary data about
factors outside of the boundary of the CAS, which were expected to be based around con-
textual, cultural, geographical, political and ﬁnancial inﬂuences. Finally, for ‘co-evolution’,
coding focused on collecting interview responses and secondary data detailing changes in
123

1388
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
Haiti
Pakistan
Org A
H9
Single base, 
global 
operations
Org F
H1
Single base, 
single 
operation
Org J 
H6
Global base, global 
operations
Org B
H3, P7
Global base, global 
operations
Org I
H5, P2
Global base, global 
operations
Org C
H7, P5
Global base, global 
operations
Org D
P3
Global base, 
global 
operations
Org E
H7, P5
Global base, global 
operations
Org G
H2
Single base, 
global 
operations
Org H
H10
Global base, global 
operations
Org L 
H8, P8
Single base, global 
operations
Org K
H4
Single base, 
global 
operations
Org M
P4
Single base, 
global 
operations
Bubble size gives an 
indication of 
organisational size.
Types of 
organisations: 
Dunantist
Religious
UN
Wilsonian
Fig. 1 Overview of case studies and interview participants
the equilibrium state between the CAS and its environment and examples of non-linearity.
Each interview was coded on at least two separate occasions as recommended by Miles et al.
(2014), revisiting the initial coding after several days to ensure internal consistency. The data
analysis process continued until a point of saturation was reached (Robson 2011).
Validity and reliability are key considerations in presenting the ﬁndings of the case-study
research (Creswell 2014). We conducted a cross-case analysis, which allows for some repli-
cation in ﬁndings (Stuart et al. 2002). Internal validity (Lincoln and Guba 1986) was ensured
by triangulating data from interviews and document analysis (Bowen 2009). With several
sources of information available for each organisation in the sample, ﬁndings did not depend
on the interpretations and opinions of any one respondent. Our case selection is not based on
representative random samples (Eisenhardt and Graebner 2007) but rather focussed on the
contextual uniqueness of the cases studied, allowing for a detailed account of the cases that
can enable researchers to make an informed judgment about the possible transferability of
ﬁndings (Johnson et al. 2006). Reliability or dependability (Guba and Lincoln 1994; Lincoln
and Guba 1986; Lincoln et al. 2013) is achieved here by maintaining a case study database,
and using electronic storage of all data and notes that clearly document the research process,
thus allowing future researchers to repeat the analytical procedures (Stuart et al. 2002). A
well-deﬁned case study protocol was also employed which included an interview guide, as
well as clear procedures to be followed when using it (Ellram 1996).
In the following section, we discuss each of the two humanitarian responses individually
and then detail the results of our cross-case analysis, building up a rich picture of the three
interdependent foci of the CAS framework as applied to HL responses.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1389
4 Case studies
The two case studies selected were the humanitarian responses to the January 2010 earth-
quake in Haiti and the July 2010 ﬂoods in Pakistan. These two natural disasters occurred in
the same year, but garnered differing levels of public interest, resulting in different funding
and organisational proﬁles in the responses, thus forming interesting and relevant divergent
cases. These two disasters were the largest of 2010, and both affected signiﬁcant areas of
developing nations, impacting millions of inhabitants and causing economic damage amount-
ing to billions of dollars. Disasters several years in the past were deliberately chosen to enable
respondents to reﬂect on the HL design and management approaches that were utilised at the
time, speciﬁcally, the ways in which HL responses interact with complexity and why they
can yield such differing outcomes.
4.1 Haiti
The emergency response to the January 2010 earthquake in Haiti was seen to be particularly
pertinent due to the high media attention and extensive levels of global aid, as well as the
signiﬁcant problems associated with HL. On the 12th of January 2010, an earthquake with
a magnitude of 7.0 on the Richter scale devastated the Haitian capital Port-au-Prince and
surrounding areas, with a series of strong aftershocks adding to the destruction (Margesson
and Taft-Morales 2010). The Em-Dat database (2015) lists the number of total deaths as
222,570 with 3,700,000 people affected and a total economic damage of US $30 billion, thus
making it the largest natural disaster of 2010. By December 2012, US $6.373 billion had
been pledged by nations and international institutions such as the European Commission,
the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank (Ofﬁce of the Special Envoy for Haiti
2013). With a GDP of US $6.623 billion in 2010 and a GDP per capita of US $665.63, Haiti
was both a small economy and among the lowest income countries in the world (World Bank
Data 2020) and already the recipient of extensive developmental humanitarian assistance
(Margesson and Taft-Morales 2010).
HL was complicated by damage to the port of Port-au-Prince, which only became oper-
ational again ten days after the earthquake due to the anchoring of a ﬂoating pier (United
States Southern Command 2010). The US military took over management of the only inter-
national airport and created a system for coordinating its limited capacity (Haiti Logistics
Cluster 2010). The main road connection to the Dominican Republic was also damaged, but
promptly repaired by the neighbouring country (Holguín-Veras et al. 2012). The Logistics
Cluster determined that the capital of the Dominican Republic, Santo Domingo, would be
used as a staging area for inbound air and sea shipments before onward transportation by air,
road, or sea to delivery points within Haiti (Haiti Logistics Cluster 2010). On the demand
side, shelter and drinking water were priorities, particularly as water was in insufﬁcient sup-
ply even before the earthquake. Food supplies were also urgently needed as much of the
personal, commercial, and humanitarian organisation’s inventories within the country had
been destroyed by the disaster (Holguín-Veras et al. 2012). Efforts were made to ensure that
the humanitarian response addressed needs outside of Port-au-Prince, as demand was high
across large parts of the country (Inter-Agency Standing Committee 2010). The international
humanitarian response was signiﬁcant, with an estimated 400 international actors deployed
to Haiti by the end of January 2010, with estimates of between 1000 and 2000 international
agencies being involved in the response (Inter-Agency Standing Committee 2010). Due to the
geographical proximity, a multitude of US organisations were involved, and signiﬁcant media
123

1390
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
attention resulted in new actors engaging with the response, many of whom were inexperi-
enced humanitarians (DARA 2011). The response originated from a wide range of nations
including non-traditional donor countries like Brazil, Venezuela, and Cuba (Margesson and
Taft-Morales 2010; DARA 2011).
4.2 Pakistan
Pakistan had a GDP of US $177.66 billion in 2010 and a GDP per capita of US $987.41, both
of which were signiﬁcantly higher than in Haiti (World Bank Data 2020). In contrast to the
Haiti case study, the emergency response to the Pakistan ﬂoods of July 2010 suffered from
a lack of media attention and global aid. On 26th July 2010, heavy monsoon rains in several
regions of Pakistan resulted in a major ﬂood in the Indus River Basin, with water covering
up to 20% of Pakistan’s total surface area, and not receding until the autumn (Singapore
Red Cross 2010; International Development Committee 2011). The Em-Dat database (2015)
lists the number of total deaths as 1985 with 13,400,000 people affected and total economic
damage of US $9.5 billion, thus affecting signiﬁcantly more people than the earthquake in
Haiti in the same year, but causing less deaths and economic damage. It is estimated that
more than 12 million people were displaced and 1.7 million homes were either damaged or
completely destroyed, which demanded a humanitarian response on an unprecedented scale,
putting strain upon the resources of both humanitarian aid organisations and donor countries
that were already stretched by the Haiti response (International Development Committee
2011). The scale of the damage resulted in the largest appeal in the history of the UN,
as the Government of Pakistan requested US $459 million for a three-month period and a
funding requirement of US $1.9 billion was identiﬁed for a one-year period (International
Development Committee 2011).
Given the scale of the emergency and the insufﬁcient local capacity and experience in
disaster management, the response suffered from limitations in terms of aid delivery (Polas-
tro et al. 2011). As a result of the Haiti earthquake, stocks of nationally-produced relief
items such as tents were depleted and there was no production capacity to match demand
(Polastro et al. 2011). NATO offered assets including an air bridge from Europe to Islam-
abad to facilitate fast and cost-efﬁcient movement of goods, but while use of the air bridge
by humanitarian organisations was strongly advocated by the UK, US, and Pakistan gov-
ernments, many viewed this use of military assets as a breach of humanitarian principles
(International Development Committee 2011; Madiwale and Virk 2011). The impact of the
ﬂood was very different in each province due to the changing nature of the disaster, the dif-
ferent levels of preparedness, and the access to individual and common resources (Polastro
et al. 2011). Demand was greatest for improved water and sanitation, with food, medicines
and healthcare increasing in importance 6 months after the disaster as households reported
unmet needs (Kirsch et al. 2013). The government of Pakistan distributed cash-based assis-
tance under the Watan scheme, which provided much needed local aid, but was also criticised
for being overly bureaucratic and inﬂexible (International Development Committee 2011).
Across the response, there was extensive usage of military assets for transport; Pakistan’s
armed forces spent nearly a quarter of their annual budget on the ﬂood response, but in areas
such as Balochistan, which was in armed conﬂict with the Pakistan government at the time,
using the army for humanitarian purposes was not possible (Madiwale and Virk 2011). The
army was praised for its swift initial response and its effort in restoring transport infrastructure
and enabling road access (International Development Committee 2011). Signiﬁcant funding
and donations in kind were raised outside of the UN appeal, often originating from emerging
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1391
Table 4 Summary of ﬁndings
CAS Focus
Common Themes
Haiti
Pakistan
Internal Mechanisms
Multiple agents with
limited connectivity
Unwillingness or
inability to
self-organise
Concerns about
maintaining neutrality
Focus on donor priorities
rather than beneﬁciary
involvement
Highly competitive
environment with
many NGOs
Limited beneﬁciary
involvement due to
security concerns
Competition, but some
collaboration between
NGOs
Environment
High degree of
uncertainty on the
ground
Out-dated information
and challenges in
evidencing cause and
effect
High dependence on
global political
agendas and media
attention
Uncooperative national
government
Evasion of local
governance structures
Access issues to the
country
High reliance on
government funding
politicised the response
Inﬂuence of tribal
structures
High reliance on local
knowledge
Government
constraining access to
certain regions
Co-Evolution
Struggle to adapt to
constant changes
Limited understanding
of systemic issues
Reluctance to work
together to improve the
system
Many inexperienced
newcomers
Overall response did not
deliver on outcomes
Weak government and
humanitarian
structures
Global competition of
NGOs negatively
impacts cooperation
Efforts by national
government and
international bodies to
structure the relief
efforts
and non-traditional donors such as Turkey and Saudi Arabia, the Pakistani Diaspora, and the
private sector (Polastro et al. 2011).
5 Cross-case analysis
The previous sections have provided an overview of the complexity of the operational envi-
ronment to the two humanitarian responses. Issues highlighted are in concordance with the
extant literature, for example the uncertainties of funding in humanitarian organisations. In
this section, we conduct a cross-case analysis of the effects of that complexity across organ-
isational boundaries, and the ways in which HL responses interact with them. We conduct
the cross-case analysis from the perspective of HL as a CAS by using Choi et al.’s (2001)
framework of three CAS interdependent foci; internal mechanisms, environment, and co-
evolution as outlined in Table 1. We consider each of these foci in turn, offer examples from
the ﬁeld, and discuss the implications for HL across the two case studies in accordance with
the research questions. A summary of the ﬁndings is presented in Table 4 outlining common
themes that emerged in both cases and themes that were distinct to each case.
5.1 Internal mechanisms
To function as a CAS, agents connect with other agents in the system and make decisions
based on imperfect information (Schein 1994; Choi et al. 2001). Our data indicates that there
123

1392
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
are similar characteristics in both cases regarding agents’ attributes and their interaction.
Beneﬁciaries, donors, the military, and local and international NGOs were the key actors
involved in both humanitarian responses. These agents form a complex network.
To deliver humanitarian assistance as part of a CAS, agents must work together. We
found, however, that in both case studies, there was limited connectivity among agents and
that a culture of sharing was less evident. Agents appeared to be working independently and
in competition, thus reducing the opportunities for shared learning that is necessary for a
coherent and structured humanitarian response. The lack of shared learning was linked back
to the lack of experience and expertise of some agents:
‘The performance of the cluster system was mixed […] only those agencies with
operational experience and a proven record in the sector should be involved in cluster
meetings and that information should be shared with others in a less resource intensive
manner.’ (P8)
Agents from diverse sectors and with a variety of motivations can be connected in the con-
text of HL and enter into competition for resources, services, donations, and beneﬁciaries. In
Pakistan, there was intense competition between agents on both the donor and the beneﬁciary
side of the humanitarian response (P2, P4, P6). The Haiti response had media attention and
sufﬁcient funding, but had agents scrambling for their share of the overall monetary ﬂow
(H1, H2, H6, H7, H8). Agents readily acknowledged the competitive culture, which was
perceived by some as a threat to the overall relief operation:
‘Unfortunately, you have to say that it is quite a big competition […] the real problem
is that people do not want those efﬁciencies. The brand of an organization has to be
seen ﬁrst, particularly in sexy disasters. Every organisation wants to be seen as leading
the way.’ (H6)
The impact of the culture of competition and lack of connectivity was an unwillingness,
or inability, to self-organise as a HL relief effort. The outcome of agents’ self-organisation
was the duplication of efforts, with interviewees acknowledging that ‘there is very little
cooperation […] we need to stop replication and draw on each other’s strengths’ (P6).
In the Haiti response, beneﬁciary involvement was seen as the most crucial aspect of stake-
holder management owing to the very complex situation in a country that was already deeply
impoverished before the earthquake (H1, H2, H4, H6, H9), but respondents acknowledged
that donor demands were frequently prioritised (H1, H6, H7). In the Pakistan response, ben-
eﬁciary involvement was limited because of the security concerns inherent to the response,
despite organisations realising that having closer interactions with beneﬁciaries was essential
for the sustainability and impact of their work (P3, P6, P8). Limited interaction with ben-
eﬁciaries carried the risk of jeopardising humanitarian principles, as safe areas and groups
of people are prioritised, rather than those in most need of assistance (P8), which in turn
can create further security concerns (P5). This highlights the complexity of interactions with
beneﬁciaries as key agents in the CAS.
Within the deﬁnition of internal mechanisms, the dimensionality of a CAS is deﬁned as
the degrees of freedom that the individual agent is able to act autonomously without relying
on other agents (Dooley and Van de Ven 1999). We found that there were three main factors
that reduce the agents’ degrees of freedom in the context of HL. First, maintaining neutrality
appeared to reduce dimensionality; we found that maintaining neutrality in these highly
political disaster responses presented a major challenge (H1, H6, H7, P5, P6, P7, P8). While
some organisations were very open in their approach to lobbying, describing it as essential
to ‘work with the governments and the ones that decide where the money goes’ (H1), others
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1393
were very sceptical of any political engagement, insisting that their neutrality was their very
raison d’être (H2, H7). While most organisations ﬁrmly insist on their neutrality, even if they
closely cooperate with the military for practical reasons (P4, P8), they also acknowledge the
intense political nature of their work:
‘There’s a lot that’s ﬂuff, policy and other things and politics in these organisations but
by and large we are probably a more political organisation than anything else.’ (P7)
‘Neutrality and all that rubbish… those are all ﬁne principles, but it is a very political
context and everybody who does not admit that is simply telling lies.’ (H6)
Second, accountability to donors also limits dimensionality. The requirement for high
visibility in order to attract donations made the response a matter of prestige for HL organ-
isations, both established ones and newcomers to the humanitarian industry (H1, H7). This
would indicate that agents’ actions for attracting and maintaining donations might be pri-
oritised over the concerns of the beneﬁciaries. Donor involvement was seen as a substantial
challenge, but also of high importance as accountability to donors shapes and guides perfor-
mance in HL (H2, H3, H6, P1, P4, P7). Donors gave guidelines for an organisation’s spending
and demand accountability (H6), or earmarked funding for particular activities (P3). There
was a drive towards the efﬁcient use of resources, as donors demanded evidence of how their
money was being used, thus increasing ﬁnancial prudence and having a signiﬁcant impact on
how resources are deployed (H1, H5, H9). Respondents also pointed out that donor demands
were not always reasonable and that they struggled to comply with them whilst trying to focus
on beneﬁciary needs (H3, H6, P5, P7). Haiti was seen as an anomaly among respondents
as the extensive media engagement resulted in a signiﬁcant inﬂux of donations; this was in
sharp contrast to other disaster responses in the same year that struggled for funding (H6,
H8, H9):
‘Earthquake Haiti, everybody wants to donate everything, but other areas don’t receive
quite as much media attention, it’s a lot more difﬁcult.’ (H5)
Delays to the disbursement of requested funds in the Pakistan case study (P8) led to it being
‘a struggle to keep all of that funded’ (P3) continuously, particularly as media attention tends
to move away from longer-term disasters such as ﬂoods over time (P4, P7). The resources
of many agents were already stretched due to the Haiti earthquake earlier in the year and the
willingness and ability of donors to contribute to yet another major humanitarian response
was questionable at best (P8). Much of the received funding was ear-marked for Haiti and
therefore could not be used in Pakistan (P1, P4, P7, P8). Therefore, needs in Pakistan remained
unmet (P5, P7), while in Haiti money might have been spent carelessly by some agents (H1).
Third, in both responses, military involvement was a signiﬁcant concern, which can further
limit dimensionality (H5, H7, H9, H10, P1, P2, P4, P7, P8). The Pakistan army had previously
been employed in some of the affected regions in a defensive capacity; this resulted in
tensions with the affected populations, as well as reports of humanitarian organisations being
denied access to certain affected areas (P2, P5, P8). However, the signiﬁcant contribution of
the national military forces (especially in the immediate aftermath of the ﬂoods) was also
acknowledged by some who felt ‘the Pakistan military played a pivotal role in the response
across the country in rescuing the stranded population and providing the basic services’ (P3).
Similarly, international military forces were deployed despite unease about their impact on
the key humanitarian principles (P1, P2, P5):
123

1394
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
‘We strongly support key humanitarian principles of neutrality and impartiality. Using
military assets for the delivery of humanitarian assistance is generally an option of
last resort in conﬂict-affected areas because the intentions of such assistance could be
misconstrued.’ (P8)
In Haiti, US Army support was accepted by the Haitian president to help coordinate
the inﬂux of goods into the single airport in the country, which was clogged up with aid
deliveries and not utilising its full capacity due to inefﬁcient air trafﬁc control (H9). Intervie-
wees recognised that the involvement of the US Army enabled essential support that allowed
humanitarian organisations to better coordinate their efforts, whilst also ensuring that desper-
ately needed supplies could actually enter the country (H7, H10). Some participants, however,
voiced concerns over the undue inﬂuence a foreign military power may have in shaping the
fate of a sovereign nation (H5, H7).
Taken together, although the agents’ degrees of freedom were limited by accountability
to donors, maintaining neutrality and concerns about military involvement, they were still
able to act in an autonomous fashion on the ground. This was demonstrated in the form
of the simultaneous and parallel actions of agents with different skillsets and motivations.
Therefore, with no one agent deliberately organising and controlling the HL activities, we
see that the focus of the agents’ response efforts remains at the organisational, rather than
systemic level, which may have a negative impact on a uniﬁed, effective systemic response.
Neither case study exhibited clear examples of connectivity, or of shared learning, between
the agents that comprised the humanitarian responses.
5.2 Environment
HL operates in a particularly challenging external environment, which is dynamic as it is con-
stantly changing. Respondents described the environment as ‘volatile’ (P1) and ‘an uncertain
business’ (P7), which made it difﬁcult for agents to collect real-time information. Conse-
quently, plans and actions are based on out-dated information (H2, H3, H10). Humanitarian
operations(particularlyintheinitialstages)wereseverelyhamperedbyout-datedinformation
on which plans and actions were based (H2, H3), for example through inaccurate numbers of
inhabitants in an area resulting in insufﬁcient amounts of goods being distributed, or incorrect
maps causing transport delays (H10). In some cases, even when every effort was made to
collect pertinent data centrally, by the time it was distributed and ready to be used in the
ﬁeld, logisticians found themselves working to situations that had changed signiﬁcantly; this
resulted in inadequate needs assessment, which led to aid not meeting the needs of bene-
ﬁciaries or, even worse, not even reaching some beneﬁciaries (H2, H3). External sources
of data were often not adequate or suitable for the particular challenges of HL (H3, H10).
In contrast to Pakistan, where more local knowledge was utilised, agents in Haiti failed to
successfully adapt to the rapid changes as they were unable to obtain real-time informa-
tion. Thus, local knowledge was considered as the best source of information and was of
vital importance when coordinating and instigating the humanitarian response (P1, P2, P4).
For example, local connections enabled extensive local sourcing as potential suppliers were
already known to NGOs (P2, P4, P8).
There was a clear awareness that the information base needed to be improved in order
to progress the development of HL, and that a variety of inputs from various views was
required (H1, H4, H10). Whenever it was available, the use of actual, accurate data had a
highly positive impact on logistics performance by improving purchasing and forecasting
accuracy, forcing agents to prioritise data collection (H3, H9, H10, P2, P4). However, there
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1395
was also a feeling that record keeping took attention away from more important tasks, with
P5 stating ‘the focus is on the patient, not on the records.’
Thelackofinfrastructurewasamajorchallengeforhumanitarianagentsintheaftermathof
bothdisasters(H6,H7,H9,P1,P2,P6).However,agentswereexperiencedinimprovisationin
order to reach beneﬁciaries and set up supply lines (P1, P6). In Haiti, respondents recounted
their difﬁculties in physically getting goods, as well as personnel, into the country to an
extent that astonished even experienced logisticians (H7). Once goods had entered Haiti, the
situation did not improve, as the national transport infrastructure had been destroyed or had
never existed to begin with (H6), an issue that was also highlighted in Pakistan (P2). In some
cases, the only way to reach affected communities was with military vehicles and expertise
(P8). It was then also noted that the military controlled access to assets and monopolised
some of the existing transport infrastructure, further impeding access to certain areas (P2,
P8). Another characteristic of the dynamic environment that is reﬂected in the two cases is
how the boundaries of systems temporarily shift as different agents are included or excluded
(e.g. including new sourcing partners (P2, P4, P8) or excluding the military (H1, H7)). We
found clear evidence of the dynamic environment of HL characterised by constantly shifting
norms, rules and performance criteria.
In Haiti, global political priorities were felt to determine the amount of attention and
resources the humanitarian response received, and as such they had to be managed carefully
(H1, H7, H8, H10). In Pakistan, high levels of funding from international governmental
donors resulted in high reliance on global political priorities and as such called humani-
tarian principles into question (P2, P3, P4, P8). In both responses, there was concern for
the sustainability of projects initiated based on political agendas rather than on interaction
with beneﬁciaries and recipient communities (H2, H7, H8, P2, P3). While most organisations
maintained their neutrality and political independence as a core humanitarian principle, there
was generally an acknowledgement that for the continuity of their humanitarian work in a
particular area, agents needed to respect the politics in the context they operated in to a certain
degree (P1, P2, P3, P8).
The same was true for local political impact. Humanitarian organisations often saw their
role as advocates for the people they interact with and took their task of inﬂuencing and shap-
ingpoliticalagendasseriously(P5,P6,P8).Therewasanacknowledgementthathumanitarian
work could potentially drive political change for the better, especially since politics often
directly affected the populations that humanitarian organisations worked with (P5, P6). Inter-
viewees observed that the national government of Haiti had been criticised for uncooperative
behaviour, exerting its sovereignty particularly with regard to importing humanitarian sup-
plies (H1, H3, H7, H9). On a local level in Pakistan, tribal structures played a very important
role in reaching affected populations and ensuring the safety of humanitarian organisations
(P1, P2, P8). Some of the areas most affected by the ﬂoods were Federally Administered
Tribal Areas and others had a very strong presence of local governance structures that were
in some instances outside of the inﬂuence of the federal government of Pakistan, which con-
trolled the access and mobility of humanitarian agents on a local level (P8). This inﬂuenced
the ways in which agents could operate signiﬁcantly, necessitating interactions with a mul-
titude of different groups to gain access to affected populations (P1, P2). These examples
illustrate the many factors that are outside of the boundary of the CAS but nevertheless have
a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the humanitarian response.
123

1396
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
5.3 Co-evolution
In a developed CAS, co-evolution would gradually occur whereby a state of quasi-equilibrium
becomes the norm and the system can retain some semblance of order and also be agile enough
to react to environmental changes (Goldstein 1994). As a consequence of its challenging
operating environment, the quasi-equilibrium of HL is consistently disrupted. In examining
the internal mechanisms dimension, it was recognised that competition detracted from the
shared learning that could enable better adaptation to the changing realities. While the Haiti
earthquake response highlighted signiﬁcant problems and emphasised the importance of
managing HL relationships (H9), these lessons were not learned for the Pakistan ﬂoods (P1,
P7). Simultaneous and parallel actions of independent agents according to their individual
priorities resulted in inefﬁciencies across the CAS with duplication of efforts a problem
in both Haiti (H6, H7, H8) and Pakistan (P1, P2, P6). Furthermore, excessive bureaucracy
slowed down the delivery of humanitarian aid (P1, P4), for example with customs barriers:
‘Containers stuck in customs for months on end in Haiti for reasons that are unclear
to us and I don’t know if that’s politics at play or just inefﬁciency of the systems or
something else’ (H9)
While individual agents were practiced in adapting to constant changes, the overall adapt-
ability of the CAS was a challenge. For example, interacting with changing local contacts
required a high degree of cultural sensitivity that was easier to achieve for organisations that
had a long-standing presence in the affected area, while others attempted, with little success,
to employ standardised approaches developed in other responses (H8, P2, P5).
While both case studies started out as humanitarian responses to large-scale natural dis-
asters, the interactions of agents and environment created different outcomes for the CAS
in each case. In both Haiti and Pakistan, the environment and the network of agents were
highly complex and dynamic. However, the Haiti response is recognised as particularly poor
by respondents (H1, H2, H4, H6, H9). Respondents in the Haiti case study criticised a lack
of engagement with competitors, highlighting an over-reliance on wider political priorities
and the whims of donors rather than any actual engagement with the local communities (H1,
H2, H9). The Haiti response is well-known for setting a very negative example:
‘We are mainly concerned with aid reaching the beneﬁciaries. Which it often doesn’t.
A lot of it gets lost. Haiti is probably the prime example for how the international aid
industry — it really is an industry! — can create even more of a disaster.’ (H1)
Due to cultural difﬁculties and access issues, stakeholder interactions in Pakistan had to be
far more collaborative than in other responses (P2, P3, P4, P8), especially when planning
longer-term relief efforts (P5, P8). In CAS terms, this demonstrates a somewhat higher level
of connectivity between agents in Pakistan, while connectivity was limited in Haiti.
In both case studies, respondents did see opportunities for improvement across their oper-
ations ‘if we harmonised supply chains across not just organisations, but companies as well’
(H9). However, respondents were also critical of the initiatives to bring some organisation
and coordination to the aid efforts:
‘There has been the Log Cluster […] it was absolutely derided there. It doesn’t organise
anything, it’s just another way for people to feel important about themselves.’ (H6)
A high degree of ﬂexibility was required to enable organisations and their HLs to respond to
the constantly changing local demands (H3, H10), with improvisation often being the only
way to respond (H3, H8, P1, P2, P7). This demonstrates adaptation as the CAS develops.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1397
In Pakistan, attention was only drawn to HL because of signiﬁcant supply problems, which
several interviewees welcomed as an opportunity to highlight the necessity of investment in
logistics in order to make improvements (P1, P7). In such a volatile environment where both
sourcing and distribution were a challenge, interviewees acknowledged that ‘you are much
more aware of logistics’ (P1). Interviewees highlighted the difﬁculties that every agent faced
when logistics was challenged with overwhelming issues such as impeded access to affected
regions (P1, P6). A similar effect was observed in Haiti:
‘The earthquake deﬁnitely changed the way that people view supply chain and really
emphasised the importance of having a really strong, solid supply chain system.’ (H9)
A CAS both reacts to and creates its environment (Choi et al. 2001). However, assessing
the impact of HL activities proved to be almost impossible. While organisations were able to
measure input and output, the actual impact of their work remained unknown (P2, P3). There
was usually a good understanding of centralised events within HL, and a general overview of
the input and output of each of the humanitarian responses an organisation was involved in.
However, as impact assessment needed to be conducted at a local level, a general overview
only provided organisations with a fragmented and unreliable understanding of their work
(P2, P3). In consequence, organisations’ understanding of their own work, and the metrics
theyreportedtodonorsandotherinterestedparties,usuallydidnotincludeimpactassessment,
even though the desirability and even necessity of such measures was appreciated (P5, P7).
Thus, it was deemed impossible to clearly evidence cause and effect within the CAS.
While Pakistan was described as a more structured environment, co-evolution failed to
achieve any sort of quasi-equilibrium in Haiti. Interviewees blamed the very chaotic situation
in the already deeply impoverished country, compounded by the death of many ofﬁcials
and local humanitarian workers (H3, H6, H8), as well as the inexperience of many of the
humanitarian organisations that sprung up to respond to the earthquake (H1, H4, H5, H8).
In Haiti, the capital Port-au-Prince was the focal point of the majority of the international
aid shipments and grew congested very quickly (H2, H3, H7, H10). Generally, there was
very little patience with the plentiful newcomers, as ‘we know what we are doing and we
are not here to waste our time teaching some little goody two shoes’ (H7). The lack of
experience and expertise of these newcomers was accused of reducing the efﬁciency of the
relief operation; for example, the newcomers were perceived to prolong meetings and thus
detract from the actual delivery of aid (H6). Cooperation with both non-proﬁt and commercial
organisations was identiﬁed as a solution by interviewees, but there was limited reﬂection
as to how this would work in practice (H2, H4, H9). Furthermore, the severely disrupted
government and international aid structures in Haiti that resulted from the earthquake created
an added layer of complexity, obscuring cause and effect relationships on a local level.
This resulted in unchecked and uncoordinated agent activity that failed to achieve desirable
systemic outcomes, leading to respondents remarking that ‘Haiti is known as the Republic
of NGOs’ (H9).
Our ﬁndings suggest that optimisation of sourcing at the local level was difﬁcult to achieve.
Respondents highlighted that their ‘biggest issue is the way of sourcing and the continuity’
(P3) and many struggled to move aid deliveries into the affected areas (P1, P3, P4, P6, P8).
It was noted that local sourcing was highly desirable for the ease of logistics (especially with
regard to avoiding additional import costs) as well as supporting, instead of undermining, the
economy of the affected area; however, interviewees pointed out the difﬁculties of sourcing
locally in a country that had been devastated to such a scale as Pakistan in these ﬂoods
(P1, P3, P6). Similar issues were present in Haiti (H5) where ‘there isn’t enough food that
you could buy locally, again with consistency, quality throughout the year’ (H2). Therefore,
123

1398
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
global sourcing was popular, for economies of scale, as well as the development of long-term
relationships that guaranteed reliable supplies with acceptable quality. When organisations
relied mainly on a small number of global suppliers (H2, H10, P4, P8), this had the potential
to make global sourcing ‘the easiest part, because we are working globally, we are procuring
with 10–20 different suppliers’ (H10), especially for demand that was consistent across
different humanitarian responses.
A lack of willpower in making sustainable changes in the political and social landscape
of Haiti was observed both among humanitarian organisations and local structures (H1, H2,
H6, H9, H10). Respondents observed an attitude among humanitarian organisations that was
not focussed on actually improving the situation within the country, but rather often actively
contradicting or evading local governance structures (H1, H9, H10):
‘You have all of these entities operating within a sovereign country that are not really
listening or following the directives of the sovereign country, an —albeit question-
ably— democratically elected, but nonetheless a democratically elected government’
(H9)
This led one respondent to a sobering conclusion that questions the very morality and moti-
vation of the whole humanitarian sector:
‘The NGOs really don’t want to be held accountable. […] It’s bitter, but it’s true;
nobody has an interest in making things better. They have an interest in keeping their
own jobs, that’s all. And they keep their jobs if they keep the people in the country
small and the suffering continues’ (H1)
This conclusion also demonstrates the difﬁculties of improving operations in a CAS as agents’
efforts are contingent on the performance of other parts of the system.
6 Discussion
This study has showcased not only the complexity of HL in both the academic literature
and in practice but has also extended the current body of knowledge by applying CAS
to this research area using data gathered from practitioners. We have examined the main
characteristics of complexity in HL alongside how the humanitarian response reacts to this
complexity. By adopting CAS as our theoretical frame, our ﬁndings show how co-evolution
in HL is critical to delivering outcomes; examples show how shortcomings in co-evolution
severelyhamperedreliefefforts.WethereforeofferatheoreticalcontributiontotheﬁeldofHL
by positing that a humanitarian SC must not only react to its environment, it must also create
its environment. Previous work has discussed how in complex operating environments, the
logistics function has to adapt and become more anticipatory to survive not merely disruption
within SCs, but also macro-level volatility (Christopher 2005; Harrington et al. 2011). We
go further by proposing that adaptability is insufﬁcient for all HL contexts and, rather than
reactively adapting, in some instances HL must proactively create the conditions under which
humanitarianreliefcanbedelivered.AfailuretodosocannegativelyimpactHLperformance,
which is, as previous work highlights, crucial for ﬁnancial, as well as moral reasons (Jabbour
et al. 2017; Banomyong et al. 2019; Anaya-Arenas et al. 2014).
By examining how the complexity inherent in HL impacts HL outcomes, our study demon-
strates the importance of highly complex systems that are formed for a speciﬁc purpose and
for a limited time frame; a clear departure from the notion of stable, long-term, linear SCs and
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1399
networks. We show how HL operates as a CAS and offer practical examples of HL complexity
and how these impact on the outcome of the humanitarian response. In the dynamic context
of HL, given the inability of one type of response to ﬁt the requirements of every situation,
performance appears to be contingent on HL’s ability not only to react to but also to create its
environment. CAS as a theoretical lens furthers our understanding of how and why humani-
tarian response efforts can yield vastly differing outcomes. Our discussion below addresses
each of the research questions in turn and develops propositions to provide a springboard for
further research.
6.1 What are the main characteristics of complexity in humanitarian logistics?
Our ﬁndings support previous work that acknowledges the complexity of HL (Hilhorst 2002;
Vaillancourt 2016), and furthermore demonstrate that HL exhibits the characteristics of a
CAS (Choi et al. 2001). Our particular focus is on characteristics of complexity across
organisational boundaries (which we achieved by making the humanitarian response our unit
of analysis) and the ways in which HL interacts with complexity. In addressing research
question 1: ‘What are the main characteristics of complexity in humanitarian logistics?’, we
ﬁnd the internal mechanisms and environment perspectives from our analytical framework to
be helpful. We ﬁnd three important examples of characteristics of complexity emerging from
our cross-case analysis that have a negative impact on the humanitarian response; (1) multiple
agents with limited connectivity, (2) concerns about maintaining neutrality, and (3) the high
degree of environmental uncertainty. These complexity characteristics are inter-related and
impact the humanitarian response. We provide a full discussion of each below.
Multiple agents with limited connectivity was a key facet of the internal mechanisms of the
humanitarian response in both case studies and was stressed repeatedly by every respondent,
with particular reference to the involvement of beneﬁciaries in the responses, accountability
to and communication with donors, as well as interactions with the military. Rather than
connecting, competition between agents featured strongly in both case studies, as working
together was often seen not to be in their best interest. The dichotomy of cooperation and
competition inherent to a CAS (Surana et al. 2005) was frequently addressed by interviewees,
showing evidence that it creates emergent and highly dynamic realities.
Despite the lack of ﬁnancial remuneration, beneﬁciaries are customers of HL (Oloruntoba
and Gray 2009; Charles et al. 2010; Schifﬂing and Piecyk 2014), yet limited connectivity
posed challenges to reaching consensus on a diverse range of opinions, particularly those
related to local involvement and security. An inability to agree on the course of action slowed
down the humanitarian response and the ability to meet the needs of beneﬁciaries. Satisfying
the accountability requirements from donors was also hampered by limited connectivity.
Accountability to donors is growing, as many parties increasingly scrutinise the humanitarian
organisations’ spending (Tomasini and Van Wassenhove 2009; Moore and Taylor 2011),
which made respondents more aware of the need to report back to donors, yet reaching
agreement on how this should be done posed challenges between agents. In the Haiti response,
the relationship with the media was hampered by the limited connectivity between multiple
agents. While the relationship with the media is often a strained one, it retains a vital function
in soliciting donations and communicating with stakeholders (Faulkner 2001; Ritchie 2004;
Van Wassenhove 2006; Lettieri et al. 2009).
A related consequence of the limited connectivity between agents appeared to be their
unwillingness, or inability, to self-organise. The lack of self-organisation increased com-
plexity for HL due to the interdependency of its constituent parts. Complexity here was
123

1400
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
characterised by the duplication of efforts across agents due to a lack of self-organisation.
Duplication has previously been identiﬁed as a problem in HL and various efforts have been
made to avoid it (Kovács and Spens 2009; Day 2014), with limited success as per the ﬁndings
from our study.
In further examining the relationship between limited connectivity and the humanitarian
response, we offer the following proposition:
Proposition 1 Limited connectivity between agents inhibits the ability of HL to self-organise
resulting in a negative impact on the speed of the humanitarian response.
Concerns about maintaining neutrality were linked to complexity. There was signiﬁcant
concern about maintaining neutrality in both humanitarian responses, which links to the fun-
damental humanitarian principles (Van Wassenhove 2006). Global political priorities shaped
the responses, as well as the inﬂuence of local governments. Previous studies discussed the
problem of donations being tied to external agendas rather than the precise needs of the
humanitarian organisations (Beamon and Balcik 2008; Jahre and Heigh 2008). In this study,
differences between agents were particularly apparent as they had different philosophical
backgrounds (Dunantist versus Wilsonian), making them more or less willing to tie them-
selves to political agendas or interact with military forces in their work or to compromise
neutrality in the interest of reaching beneﬁciaries (Stoddard 2003). Their stance on neutral-
ity placed restrictions on how individual agents operated, particularly at the local level, thus
reducing autonomy and causing frustration. Differing views on neutrality increased complex-
ity due to a lack of clarity and agreement about the most appropriate course of action. The
impact of neutrality has signiﬁcant implications for HL and hence we develop the following
proposition:
Proposition 2 The diversity of approaches to interactions with military and political entities
gives agents greater autonomy to make decisions at a local level, and ampliﬁes differences
in outcomes in parts of the humanitarian response.
The high degree of environmental uncertainty impacted both of the humanitarian responses
due to the limited ability to formulate a workable strategy prior to arriving in the country.
A common feature in the HL literature is the destruction or general lack of infrastructure
(Thomas and Kopczak 2005; Altay et al. 2009; Holguín-Veras et al. 2012), which was also
a key ﬁnding from our study. In both cases the extent of the destruction needed to be wit-
nessed ﬁrst-hand prior to a response being developed. Signiﬁcant uncertainty arose from the
continually changing situation, which inhibited the development of routines, as is typical
in emergency responses (Beamon and Balcik 2008; Chandes and Pache 2010). Our study
found that humanitarian logisticians did not appear to be particularly concerned about how
this uncertainty increased the complexity of their work; there was a sense of pride in being
able to cope with such challenges and conduct their daily business to a reasonable standard
despite all the adversities that inhibit the development of routines. Yet the constant disrup-
tion and change had a negative impact on the image of logistics, which has been linked to a
dearth of professionalism (Walker 2004; Kovács et al. 2012), and an exclusion of the profes-
sion from strategic planning (Van Wassenhove 2006; Pettit and Beresford 2009), which has
implications for the humanitarian response. We therefore posit that:
Proposition 3 Developing routines as part of the humanitarian response has a signiﬁcant
positive impact on the HL outcome and professional standing.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1401
Our study presents three important characteristics of complexity in HL. We ﬁnd that the
individual agent’s response can increase and/or add new and different complexity to the
setting. This has been illustrated, for example, in our discussions on the willingness of agents
to connect and self-organise, or on an agent’s position regarding maintaining neutrality.
We have shown how agents are not collaborating, which leads to inefﬁciencies including
duplication and limited shared learning, and a slower response to the humanitarian disaster.
In essence, the behavioural response by agents is adding to the overall complexity of HL,
which leads to our fourth proposition:
Proposition 4 In the context of HL the behavioural response by agents has the potential to
increase the level of complexity.
6.2 How does the humanitarian response adapt to complexity?
In addressing research question 2: ‘How does the humanitarian response adapt to complex-
ity?’ we draw on the co-evolution dimension of our theoretical framework. It is important to
note that whilst our two case studies were focused on the same outcome, providing humani-
tarian relief following a disaster, the Pakistan example is perceived by the respondents in our
study to have delivered a more successful response than Haiti. The perceived success of the
Pakistan response is noteworthy because the scale of those affected by the disaster was greater
than that of Haiti and the funds were signiﬁcantly lower. Despite the different circumstances
outlined above, it would therefore appear that the Pakistan humanitarian response was able
to adapt to complexity to deliver outcomes in perhaps a more sustained manner than the Haiti
response.
We see from the Pakistan case study that the co-evolution of internal mechanisms and the
environment resulted in the relief effort being able to respond to a disaster that impacted a
vast geographical area, particularly when compared with the more localised disaster in Haiti.
While the response to the Haiti earthquake was much better funded than that of the Pakistan
ﬂoods (and the earthquake affected fewer people across a smaller area), this did not translate
into better outcomes for the country. ‘Haiti is known as the Republic of NGOs’ (H9) and is
still struggling to recover a decade after the earthquake, with many subsequent issues blamed
on the initial disaster response. In this example, there appears to be no correlation between
the level of investment and the outcome.
A key aspect of the Pakistan response that appeared to support the relief effort was that
the CAS co-evolved by collaborating with actors within and outside of its boundary (e.g.
local organisations and the military) to shape the humanitarian response. It was recognised
that the environment of the Pakistan response was highly politicised, and this impacted
on the CAS as it struggled to ﬁnd an equilibrium between delivering aid and maintaining
neutrality. Individual agents adapted to this challenge by deﬁning their own priorities, shaping
their environment and deciding which compromises, if any, were viable for them. In other
instances, this approach may have led to sub-optimisation of the CAS as a whole, yet in
this context it achieved successful outcomes. We therefore offer an important theoretically
driven contribution by positing that in the HL context a CAS must both react to and create
its environment. It must therefore adapt and also create by developing bespoke approaches
to each humanitarian relief operation. Underestimating how a humanitarian response reacts
to and creates its environment could be a major reason why tools and techniques from
commercial logistics do not always apply in a humanitarian context. This ﬁnding leads to
our ﬁnal proposition:
123

1402
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
Proposition 5 A humanitarian relief effort must react to and create its environment, therefore
bespoke approaches to HL are essential.
While there is an acknowledgement that people are drivers of dynamic SCs (Mangan et al.
2008), it has also been stated that HL research has a tendency to over-simplify situations (Apte
2009; Day et al. 2012). This could explain why there is insufﬁcient research addressing the
behavioural elements of HL, or in fact other complex logistics operations. Such operations
could include expeditionary military logistics and SCs for large sporting events such as the
Olympics or the Football World Cup. Complex logistics operations have to consider how to
address elements of behavioural complexity to ensure a holistic and sustainable approach.
It has previously been highlighted that behavioural studies in logistics and SC management
could be beneﬁcial (Tokar 2010), and our study and propositions provide a springboard for
further work. Any concerted effort to improve HL and other complex logistics operations
has to originate from a thorough understanding of the complexities of the HL organisations’
response. It is not appropriate to ignore the complicating factors faced in practice if research
is to be relevant (Day et al. 2012; Day 2014).
Due to the complex nature of the setting, and of the two HL responses examined in our
case-study research, we show how each humanitarian response must react to and create its
environment. While standardisation has its place, even within complex logistics operations,
we cannot approach every humanitarian response in the same way. In tailoring approaches,
and ultimately solutions, to a given problem situation it is vital to consider its inherent
behaviouralcomplexity,e.g.agents’connectivity,interandintraCAScompetition,competing
values of agents and willingness for shared learning, as we found in this study. Logistics
research, within and beyond the conﬁnes of HL, all too often ignores the individuals involved
and the interactions between them in favour of standardised approaches. In an era of volatility,
uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity, this mentality is no longer ﬁt for purpose within HL,
or indeed within wider SC research and practice.
7 Conclusions and research implications
7.1 Theoretical implications
This study has presented a rich picture of two humanitarian responses, focussing on issues
inherent to HL, rather than to a particular organisation. Our study makes two important
theoretically driven contributions that have practical relevance. First, drawing on CAS theory,
we illustrate the main characteristics of complexity in HL and show how complexity impacts
the humanitarian response, thus extending our theoretical understanding of this complex
operating environment. CAS have previously been used in SC literature (Choi et al. 2001;
Pathak et al. 2007; Pathak et al. 2009), but have only received limited attention in HL (Day
2014). In general, there is a lack of engagement with theory in HL research (Oloruntoba et al.
2019). Our theoretical framing of the dimensions of a CAS offer a new way to conceptualise
HL on the wider scale of humanitarian responses or even the entire sector. To attempt to
solve problems within only one agency is a failure to understand interconnectedness which
cannot adequately address challenges of complex logistics operations. Complex problems can
only be approached holistically, with reductionist approaches yielding no or unsatisfactory
results (Gell-Mann 1994). Research needs to acknowledge that modern logistics may not be
suitable for study if the unit of analysis is a single organisation. This study has shown that
while differences between individuals and organisations exist, there are also over-arching
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1403
issues that affect HL in particular responses irrespective of the organisational context. We
have highlighted connectedness, self-organisation and maintaining neutrality. With this, we
add to the growing body of research on HL by utilising empirical evidence (Kovács and Spens
2009; Tatham and Houghton 2011; Kovács et al. 2012; Pérouse de Montclos 2012; Wagner
and Thakur-Weigold 2018). To tackle the issues examined, the establishment of an evidence
base that reaches across organisational boundaries is vital.
7.2 Managerial implications
We have shown how HL needs to both react to and create its environment in order to thrive in
this complex context. HL is a CAS that interacts extensively with its environment. Our ﬁnd-
ings suggest that managers in humanitarian organisations need to reassess the utility of tools
and techniques borrowed from commercial SCs. Managers also need to take a more holistic
perspective and develop interventions that are more likely to be effective, thereby building a
bridge between commercial and HL practices. Particular attention should be paid to equipping
the humanitarian response to react to and create its environment, and the acknowledgement
that bespoke HL solutions are required to attain better performance.
7.3 Limitations and future research directions
Our study is not without its limitations, most signiﬁcantly with the primary data collected.
Given the importance of stakeholders that emerged from the primary data, only including
actors from humanitarian organisations in the sample does not provide a comprehensive pic-
ture of the entire system. No beneﬁciaries, political decision makers, commercial suppliers,
media representatives, or other stakeholders have been included in the sample. While such
stakeholders might have limited direct involvement in HL, they have considerable inﬂuence.
Each case study also includes a limited number of interviews. While care was taken to repre-
sentarangeoforganisationsandjobroles,theseinterviewscannotclaimtoprovideacomplete
picture of the humanitarian responses. The balance of organisational sizes represented in the
sample skews towards larger organisations, which are likely to be more established, but could
also be less ﬂexible than smaller organisations. Furthermore, the majority of interviewees
were male, including all of those identifying as logisticians. Future studies in this area should
address the size and composition of samples.
Notwithstanding these limitations, our study draws on important qualitative ﬁndings to
provide a rich picture of two highly complex HL contexts. By offering theoretically driven
insights garnered from those working in the ﬁeld, our study goes some way to addressing the
limited empirical evidence base of HL and provides an important foundation for additional
studies on this crucial topic.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
123

1404
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
References
Altay, N., & Pal, R. (2014). Information diffusion among agents: Implications for humanitarian operations.
Production and Operations Management, 23(6), 1015–1027. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12102
Altay, N., Prasad, S., & Sounderpandian, J. (2009). Strategic planning for disaster relief logistics: Lessons
from supply chain management. International Journal of Services Sciences, 2(2), 142–161. https://doi.
org/10.1504/IJSSCI.2009.024937.
Anaya-Arenas, A. M., Renaud, J., & Ruiz, A. (2014). Relief distribution networks: A systematic review. Annals
of Operations Research, 223(2014), 53–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-014-1581-y.
Apte, A. (2009). Humanitarian logistics: A new ﬁeld of research and action (Vol. 3, Foundations and Trends
in Technology, Information and OM, Vol. 1). Hanover, MA: NOW Publishers.
Balcik, B., Beamon, B. M., Krejci, C. C., Muramatsu, K. M., & Ramirez, M. (2010). Coordination in humanitar-
ian relief chains: Practices, challenges and opportunities. International Journal of Production Economics,
126(1), 22–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2009.09.008.
Banomyong, R., Varadejsatitwong, P., & Oloruntoba, R. (2019). A systematic review of humanitarian opera-
tions, humanitarian logistics and humanitarian supply chain performance literature 2005 to 2016. Annals
of Operations Research, 283(2019), 71–86. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2549-5.
Beamon, B. M., & Balcik, B. (2008). Performance measurement in humanitarian relief chains. International
Journal of Public Sector Management, 21(1), 4–25. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513550810846087.
Begun, J. W., Zimmermann, B., & Dooley, K. (2003). Health care organisations as complex adaptive systems.
In S. S. Mick & M. E. Wyttenbach (Eds.), Advances in health care organization theory. San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Behl, A., & Dutta, P. (2019). Humanitarian supply chain management: A thematic literature review and future
directions of research. Annals of Operations Research, 283(2019), 1001–1044. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-018-2806-2.
Besiou, M., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2020). Humanitarian operations: A world of opportunity for relevant and
impactful research. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2
019.0799.
Bhakoo, V., & Choi, T. (2013). The iron cage exposed: Institutional pressures and heterogeneity across the
healthcare supply chain. Journal of Operations Management, 31(6), 432–449. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jom.2013.07.016.
Blecken, A. (2010). Supply chain process modelling for humanitarian organizations. International Journal of
Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 40(8–9), 675–692. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600031
011079328.
Bowen, G. A. (2009). Document analysis as a qualitative research method. Qualitative Research Journal, 9(2),
27–40. https://doi.org/10.3316/QRJ0902027.
Brownlee, J. (2007). Complex adaptive systems. CIS Technical Report. Melbourne: Complex Intelligent Sys-
tems Laboratory, Centre for Information Technology Research, Faculty of Information Communication
Technology, Swinburne University of Technology.
Bryman, A. (2012). Social research methods (4th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cachon, G. P., Girotra, K., & Netessine, S. (2020). Interesting, important, and impactful operations man-
agement. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 22(1), 214–222. https://doi.org/10.1287/
msom.2019.0813.
Campus, P. F., Trucco, P., & Huatuco, L. H. (2019). Managing structural and dynamic complexity in supply
chains: Insights from four case studies. Production Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/0953
7287.2018.1545952.
Cassell, C., & Gummesson, E. (2006). Qualitative research in management: Addressing complexity, context
and persona. Management Decision, 44(2), 167–179. https://doi.org/10.1108/00251740610650175.
CentreforResearchontheEpidemiologyofDisasters.(2015).Disasterproﬁles.http://www.emdat.be/disaster_
proﬁles/index.html. Accessed 17 April 2019.
Chandes, J., & Pache, G. (2010). Investigating humanitarian logistics issues: From operations management to
strategic action. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 21(3), 320–340. https://doi.org/10.
1108/17410381011024313.
Chapman, A. G., & Mitchell, J. E. (2018). A fair division approach to humanitarian logistics inspired by
conditional value-at-risk. Annals of Operations Research, 262(2018), 133–151. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-016-2322-1.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1405
Charles, A., Lauras, M., & Van Wassenhove, L. (2010). A model to deﬁne and assess the agility of supply
chains:Buildingonhumanitarianexperience.InternationalJournalofPhysicalDistributionandLogistics
Management, 40(8–9), 722–741. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600031011079355.
Choi, T. Y., Dooley, K. J., & Rungtusanatham, M. (2001). Supply networks and complex adaptive systems:
Control versus emergence. Journal of Operations Management, 19(3), 351–366. https://doi.org/10.101
6/s0272-6963(00)00068-1.
Christopher, M. (2005). Logistics and supply chain management: Creating value-adding networks. Harlow:
Financial Times Prentice Hall.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches (4th ed.).
Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
DARA. (2011). The humanitarian response index: Focus on Haiti.
Day, J. M. (2014). Fostering emergent resilience: The complex adaptive supply network of disaster relief.
International Journal of Production Research, 52(7), 1970–1988. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.20
13.787496.
Day, J. M., Melnyk, S. A., Larson, P. D., Davis, E. W., & Whybark, D. C. (2012). Humanitarian and disaster
relief supply chains: A matter of life and death. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 48(2), 21–36.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-493x.2012.03267.x.
de Faria Cordeiro, K., Campos, M. L. M., & Borges, M. R. S. (2015). aDApTA: Adaptive approach to
information integration in dynamic environments. Computers in Industry, 71(2015), 88–102. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.compind.2015.03.002.
Denzin, N. K. (1970). The research act: A theoretical introduction to sociological methods. New Brunswick
and London: AldineTransaction.
Dooley, K., & Van de Ven, A. (1999). Explaining complex organizational dynamics. Organization Science,
10(3), 358–372. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.10.3.358.
Dubey, R., Altay, N., & Blome, C. (2019). Swift trust and commitment: The missing links for humanitarian
supply chain co-ordination? Annals of Operations Research, 283, 159–177. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10
479-017-2676-z.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Graebner, M. E. (2007). Theory building from cases: Opportunities and challenges.
Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 25–32. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2007.24160888.
Ellram, L. M. (1996). The use of the case study method in logistics research. Journal of Business Logistics,
17(2), 93–138.
Faulkner, B. (2001). Towards a framework for tourism disaster management. Tourism Management, 22(2),
134–147. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0261-5177(00)00048-0.
Flyvbjerg, B. (2013). Five misunderstandings about case-study research. Qualitative Inquiry, 12(2), 219–245.
Gao, X. (2019). A bi-level stochastic optimization model for multi-commodity rebalancing under uncertainty
in disaster response. Annals of Operations Research, 283(2019), 1–34. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-
019-03506-6.
Gell-Mann, M. (1994). The Quark and the Jaguar: Adventures in the simple and the complex. London: Little
Brown.
Goldstein, J. (1994). The unshackled organization. Portland, OR: Productivity Press.
Gonçalves, P. (2008). System dynamics modeling of humanitarian relief operations. MIT Sloan School Working
Paper, 4704-08.
Gonçalves, P., & Castañeda, J. A. (2018). Stockpiling supplies for disaster response: An experimental analysis
of prepositioning biases. Production Planning and Control, 29(14), 1207–1219. https://doi.org/10.108
0/09537287.2018.1542173.
Guba, E., & Lincoln, Y. (1994). Competing paradigms in qualitative research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln
(Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 105–117). London: Sage.
Gunasekaran, A., Dubey, R., Fosso Wamba, S., Papadopoulos, T., Hazen, B. T., et al. (2018). Bridging human-
itarian operations management and organisational theory. International Journal of Production Research,
56(21), 6735–6740. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1551958.
Gupta, S., Altay, N., & Luo, Z. (2019). Big data in humanitarian supply chain management: A review and
further research directions. Annals of Operations Research, 283(2019), 1153–1173. https://doi.org/10.1
007/s10479-017-2671-4.
Gustavsson, L. (2003). Humanitarian logistics: Context and challenges. Forced Migration Review, 18(1), 6–8.
Haiti Logistics Cluster. (2010). Operation: Haiti earthquake response concept of operations. Logistics Cluster.
Handayani, D., Sopha, B. M., Hartono, B., & Herliansyah, M. K. (2017). The behavioural rules of people
during disaster emergency evacuation: A case study of mount merapi eruption in Indonesia. Journal of
Engineering and Applied Sciences, 12(21), 5443–5451. https://doi.org/10.3923/jeasci.2017.5443.5451.
Harrington, L. H., Boyson, S., & Corsi, T. M. (2011). X-SCM: The new science of X-treme supply chain
management. New York, NY: Routledge.
123

1406
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
Heaslip, G., & Barber, E. (2014). Using the military in disaster relief: Systemising challenges and opportunities.
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics & Supply Chain Management, 4(1), 60–82. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JHLSCM-03-2013-0013.
Heaslip, G., Sharif, A. M., & Althonayan, A. (2012). Employing a systems-based perspective to the identiﬁca-
tion of inter-relationships within humanitarian logistics. International Journal of Production Economics,
139(2), 377–392. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2012.05.022.
Hilhorst, D. (2002). Being good at doing good? Quality and accountability of humanitarian NGOs. Disasters,
26(3), 193–212. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-7717.00200.
Holguín-Veras, J., Jaller, M., & Wachtendorf, T. (2012). Comparative performance of alternative humanitarian
logistic structures after the Port-au-Prince earthquake: ACEs, PIEs, and CANs. Transportation Research
Part A, 46(10), 1623–1640. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2012.08.002.
Holland, J. H. (1995). Hidden order: How adaptation builds complexity. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Inter-Agency Standing Committee. (2010). Response to the humanitarian crisis in Haiti: Following the 12
January 2010 Earthquake.
International Development Committee. (2011). The humanitarian response to the Pakistan ﬂoods. http://www.
publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect/cmintdev/615/61504.htm. Accessed 17 April 2019.
Jabbour, C. J. C., Sobreiro, V. A., de Sousa Jabbour, A. B. L., de Souza Campos, L. M., Mariano, E. B.,
& Renwick, D. W. S. (2017). An analysis of the literature on humanitarian logistics and supply chain
management: Paving the way for future studies. Annals of Operations Research, 283(2019), 289–307.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2536-x.
Jahre, M., & Heigh, I. (2008). Does failure to fund preparedness mean donors must be prepared to fund failure
in humanitarian supply chains? Beyond business logistics. NOFOMA conference proceedings, Helsinki,
Finland (pp. 265–282).
Johnson, P., Buehring, A., Cassell, C., & Symon, G. (2006). Evaluating qualitative management research:
Towards a contingent criteriology. International Journal of Management Reviews. https://doi.org/10.11
11/j.1468-2370.2006.00124.x.
Kauffman, S. A. (1995). At home in the universe: The search for laws of self-organization and complexity.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kirsch, T., Siddiqui, M. A., Perrin, P. C., Robinson, W. C., Sauer, L. M., & Doocy, S. (2013). Satisfaction with
the humanitarian response to the 2010 Pakistan ﬂoods: A call for increased accountability to beneﬁciaries.
Emergency Medicine Journal, 30(7), 565–571. https://doi.org/10.1136/emermed-2012-201226.
Kovács, G., & Moshtari, M. (2019). A roadmap for higher research quality in humanitarian operations: A
methodological perspective. European Journal of Operational Research, 276(2), 395–408. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejor.2018.07.052.
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. M. (2007). Humanitarian logistics in disaster relief operations. International Journal
of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 37(2), 99–114. https://doi.org/10.1108/0960003071
0734820.
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. (2008). Humanitarian logistics revisited. In J. Stentoft Arlbjorn, A. Halldorsson,
M. Jahre, & K. Spens (Eds.), Northern lights in logistics and supply chain management (pp. 217–232).
Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School Press.
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. (2009). Identifying challenges in humanitarian logistics. International Journal of
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 39(6), 506–528. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600030910
985848.
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. (2011). Humanitarian logistics and supply chain management: The start of a new
journal. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics & Supply Chain Management, 1(1), 5–14. https://doi.org/1
0.1108/20426741111123041.
Kovács, G., & Tatham, P. (2010). What is special about a humanitarian logistician? A survey of logistic skills
and performance. Supply Chain Forum, 11(3), 32–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/16258312.2010.1151723
8.
Kovács, G., Tatham, P., & Larson, P. D. (2012). What skills are needed to be a humanitarian logistician?
Journal of Business Logistics, 33(3), 245–258. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2158-1592.2012.01054.x.
Krejci, C. C. (2015). Hybrid simulation modeling for humanitarian relief chain coordination. Journal
of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 5(3), 325–347. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JHLSCM-07-2015-0033.
Kreye, M. E., Roehrich, J. K., & Lewis, M. A. (2015). Servitising manufacturers: The impact of service
complexity and contractual and relational capabilities. Production Planning and Control, 26(14–15),
1233–1246. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2015.1033489.
Kunz, N., & Reiner, G. (2012). A meta-analysis of humanitarian logistics research. Journal of Humanitarian
Logistics & Supply Chain Management, 2(2), 116–147. https://doi.org/10.1108/20426741211260723.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1407
Kunz, N., Reiner, G., & Gold, S. (2014). Investing in disaster management capabilities versus pre-positioning
inventory: A new approach to disaster preparedness. International Journal of Production Economics,
157, 261–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.11.002.
Langdon, C. S., & Sikora, R. T. (2006). Conceptualizing co-ordination and competition in supply chains as
complex adaptive system. Information Systems and e-Business Management, 4(1), 71–81. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10257-005-0005-6.
Larson, P. D., & Foropon, C. (2018). Process improvement in humanitarian operations: An organisational
theory perspective. International Journal of Production Research, 56(21), 6828–6841. https://doi.org/1
0.1080/00207543.2018.1424374.
Lettieri, E., Masella, C., & Radaelli, G. (2009). Disaster management: Findings from a systematic review.
Disaster Prevention and Management, 18(2), 117–136. https://doi.org/10.1108/09653560910953207.
Lewin, R. (1993). Complexity: Life at the edge of Chaos. London: Dent.
L’Hermitte, C., Bowles, M., Tatham, P., & Brooks, B. (2015). An integrated approach to agility in humanitarian
logistics. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 5(2), 209–233. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JHLSCM-04-2014-0016.
Li, G., Yang, H., Sun, L., Ji, P., & Feng, L. (2010). The evolutionary complexity of complex adaptive supply
networks: A simulation and case study. International Journal of Production Economics. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijpe.2009.11.027.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1986). But is it rigorous? Trustworthiness and authenticity in naturalistic
evaluation. New Directions for Evaluation, 1986(30), 73–84. https://doi.org/10.1002/ev.1427.
Lincoln, Y. S., Lynham, S. A., & Guba, E. G. (2013). Paradigmatic controversies, contradictions, and emerging
conﬂuences revisited. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The landscape of qualitative research.
London: Sage.
Madiwale, A., & Virk, K. (2011). Civil–military relations in natural disasters: A case study of the 2010 Pakistan
ﬂoods. International Review of the Red Cross, 93(884), 1085–1105.
Makepeace, D., Tatham, P. H., & Wu, Y. (2017). Internal integration in humanitarian supply chain management:
Perspectives at the logistics-programmes interface. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain
Management, 7(1), 26–56. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-12-2015-0042.
Mangan, J., Lalwani, C., & Butcher, T. (2008). Global logistics and supply chain management. Chichester:
Wiley.
Margesson, R., & Taft-Morales, M. (2010). Haiti earthquake: Crisis and response. Washington DC: Congres-
sional Research Service.
McCarthy, I. P., Tsinopoulos, C., Allen, P., & Rose-Anderssen, C. (2006). New product development as a
complex adaptive system of decisions. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 23(5), 437–456.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5885.2006.00215.x.
McEntire, D. A. (2004). Development, disasters and vulnerability: A discussion of divergent theories and the
need for their integration. Disaster Prevention & Management, 13(3), 193–198.
McLachlin, R., & Larson, P. D. (2011). Building humanitarian supply chain relationships: Lessons from
leading practitioners. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics & Supply Chain Management, 1(1), 32–49.
https://doi.org/10.1108/20426741111122402.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Moore, D. M., & Taylor, D. H. (2011). Humanitarian logistics professionalism. In M. Christoper & P. Tatham
(Eds.), Humanitarian logistics meeting the challenges of preparing for and responding to disasters.
London: Kogan Page Limited.
Moshtari, M. (2016). Inter-organizational ﬁt, relationship management capability, and collaborative perfor-
mancewithinahumanitariansetting.ProductionandOperationsManagement,25(9),1542–1557.https://
doi.org/10.1111/poms.12568.
Naor, M., Dey, A., Goldstein, S. M., & Rosen, Y. (2018). Civilian-military pooling of health care resources in
Haiti: A theory of complementarities perspective. International Journal of Production Research, 56(21),
6741–6757. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2017.1355121.
Natarajarathinam, M., Capar, I., & Narayanan, A. (2009). Managing supply chains in times of crisis: A review
of literature and insights. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 39(7),
535–573. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600030910996251.
Ofﬁce of the Special Envoy for Haiti, U. (2013). New York conference recovery pledge status and modalities
as of December 2012 in USD millions. New York, NY: UN Ofﬁce of the Special Envoy for Haiti.
Olaogbebikan, J. E., & Oloruntoba, R. (2017). Similarities between disaster supply chains and commercial
supply chains: A SCM process view. Annals of Operations Research, 259(1–2), 1–26. https://doi.org/1
0.1007/s10479-017-2690-1.
123

1408
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
Oloruntoba, R., & Gray, R. (2009). Customer service in emergency relief chains. International Journal of
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 39(6), 486–495. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600030910
985839.
Oloruntoba, R., Hossain, G. F., & Wagner, B. (2019). Theory in humanitarian operations research. Annals of
Operations Research, 283(2019), 543–560. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-016-2378-y.
Oloruntoba, R., & Kovács, G. (2015). A commentary on agility in humanitarian aid supply chains. Supply
Chain Management: An International Journal, 20(6), 708–716. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-06-2015-
0244.
Pateman, H., Hughes, K., & Cahoon, S. (2013). Humanizing humanitarian supply chains: A synthesis of key
challenges. The Asian Journal of Shipping and Logistics, 29(1), 81–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajsl.2
013.05.005.
Pathak, S. D., Day, J. M., Nair, A., Sawaya, W. J., & Kristal, M. M. (2007). Complexity and adaptivity in
supply networks: Building supply network theory using a complex adaptive systems perspective. Decision
Sciences, 38(4), 547–580. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5915.2007.00170.x.
Pathak, S. D., Dilts, D. M., & Mahadevan, S. (2009). Investigating population and topological evolution in
a complex adaptive supply network. The Journal of Supply Chain Management: A Global Review of
Purchasing and Supply, 45(3), 54–67. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-493X.2009.03171.x.
Pedraza-Martinez,A.J.,Stapleton,O.,&VanWassenhove,L.N.(2013).Ontheuseofevidenceinhumanitarian
logistics research. Disasters, 37, S51–S67. https://doi.org/10.1111/disa.12012.
Pérouse de Montclos, M.-A. (2012). Humanitarian action in developing countries: Who evaluates who? Eval-
uation and Program Planning, 35(1), 154–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2010.11.005.
Pettit, S., & Beresford, A. (2009). Critical success factors in the context of humanitarian aid supply chains.
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 39(6), 450–468. https://doi.org/
10.1108/09600030910985811.
Polastro, R., Nagrah, A., Steen, N., & Zafar, F. (2011). Inter-Agency real time evaluation of the humanitarian
response to Pakistan’s 2010 Flood Crisis. DARA.
Polishuk, S. (1998). Secrets, lies and misremembering: the perils of oral history interviewing. Journal of
Women Studies, 19(3), 14–23. https://doi.org/10.2307/3347085.
Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1984). Order out of Chaos: Man’s new Dialogue with nature. London: Heinemann.
Richey, R. G. (2009). The supply chain crisis and disaster pyramid A theoretical framework for understanding
preparedness and recovery. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management,
39(7), 619–628. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600030910996288.
Ritchie, B. W. (2004). Chaos, crises and disasters: A strategic approach to crisis management in the tourism
industry. Tourism Management, 25(6), 669–683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2003.09.004.
Robson, C. (2011). Real world research: A resource for users of social research methods in applied settings
(3rd ed.). Chichester: Wiley.
Sandwell, C. (2011). A qualitative study exploring the challenges of humanitarian organisations. Journal of
Humanitarian Logistics & Supply Chain Management, 1(2), 132–146. https://doi.org/10.1108/2042674
1111158430.
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2006). Research methods for business students (4th ed.). Harlow:
Financial Times Prentice Hall.
Schein, E. (1994). Organizational culture and leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Schifﬂing, S., & Piecyk, M. (2014). Performance measurement in humanitarian logistics: A customer-oriented
approach. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 4(2), 198–221. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JHLSCM-08-2013-0027.
Schneider, M., & Somers, M. (2006). Organizations as complex adaptive systems: Implications of complexity
theory for leadership research. Leadership Quarterly, 17(4), 351–365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.
2006.04.006.
Schoenherr, T., Modi, S. B., Benton, C. W., Carter, C. R., Choi, T. Y., et al. (2012). Research opportunities in
purchasing and supply management. International Journal of Production Research, 50(16), 4556–4579.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2011.613870.
Seybolt, T. B. (2009). Harmonizing the humanitarian aid network: Adaptive change in a complex system.
International Studies Quarterly, 53(4), 1027–1050. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2478.2009.00567.x.
Shaﬁee, M. E., & Berglund, E. Z. (2016). Agent-based modeling and evolutionary computation for dissem-
inating public advisories about hazardous material emergencies. Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, 57(2016), 12–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2016.01.001.
Singapore Red Cross. (2010). Pakistan ﬂoods: The Deluge of disaster—Facts & ﬁgures as of 15
September 2010. http://reliefweb.int/report/pakistan/pakistan-ﬂoodsthe-deluge-disaster-facts-ﬁgures-1
5-september-2010. Accessed 17 April 2019.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
1409
Smith, R. C. (2001). Analytic strategies for oral history interviews. In J. F. Gubrium & J. A. Holstein (Eds.),
Handbook of interview research (pp. 711–731). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Stake, R. E. (2000). The case study method in social inquiry. In R. Gomm, M. Hammersley, & P. Foster (Eds.),
Case study method (pp. 19–26). London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Stauffer, J. M., Pedraza-Martinez, A. J., Yan, L., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2018). Asset supply networks in
humanitarian operations: A combined empirical simulation approach. Journal of Operations Managa-
ment, 63, 44–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2018.07.002.
Stewart, M., & Ivanov, D. (2019). Design redundancy in agile and resilient humanitarian supply chains. Annals
of Operations Research, 283(2019), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-019-03507-5.
Stoddard, A. (2003). Humanitarian NGOs: Challenges and trends. New York, NY: Humanitarian Policy
Group.
Stuart, I., McCutcheon, D., Handﬁeld, R., McLachlin, R., & Samson, D. (2002). Effective case research in
operations management: A process perspective. Journal of Operations Management, 20(5), 419–433.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0272-6963(02)00022-0.
Surana, A., Kumara, S., Raghavan, U. N., & Greaves, M. (2005). Supply-chain networks: A complex adaptive
systems perspective. International Journal of Production Research, 43(20), 4235–4265. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00207540500142274.
Tatham, P., & Houghton, L. (2011). The wicked problem of humanitarian logistics and disaster relief aid.
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics & Supply Chain Management, 1(1), 15–31. https://doi.org/10.1108/
20426741111122394.
Tatham, P. H., & Pettit, S. J. (2010). Transforming humanitarian logistics: the journey to supply network
management.InternationalJournalofPhysicalDistribution&LogisticsManagement,40(8–9),609–622.
https://doi.org/10.1108/09600031011079283.
Tatham, P., Spens, K., & Taylor, D. (2009). Development of the academic contribution to humanitarian logistics
and supply chain management. Management Research News, 32(11), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1108/mrn.
2009.02132kaa.001.
Thomas, A. (2004). Elevating humanitarian logistics. International Aid & Trade Review, 102–106.
Thomas, A. S., & Kopczak, L. R. (2005). From logistics to supply chain management: The path forward in
the humanitarian sector. San Francisco, CA: Fritz Institute.
Thomas, A., & Mizushima, M. (2005). Logistics training: necessity or luxury? Forced Migration Review, 22,
60–61.
Tokar, T. (2010). Behavioural research in logistics and supply chain management. International Journal of
Logistics Management, 21(1), 89–103. https://doi.org/10.1108/09574091011042197.
Tomasini, R. M., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2009). From preparedness to partnerships: Case study research
on humanitarian logistics. International Transactions in Operational Research, 16(5), 549–559. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-3995.2009.00697.x.
Turkeš, R., Cuervo, D. P., & Sörensen, K. (2017). Pre-positioning of emergency supplies: Does putting a price
on human life help to save lives? Annals of Operations Research, 283(2017), 865–895. https://doi.org/1
0.1007/s10479-017-2702-1.
United States Southern Command. (2010). Narrative history of operation uniﬁed response. November 1 2010.
Vaillancourt, A. (2016). A theoretical framework for consolidation in humanitarian logistics. Journal of
Humanitarian Logistics & Supply Chain Management, 6(1), 2–24. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-
01-2015-0001.
Van Dyke Parunak, H. (1997). “ Go to the ant”: Engineering principles from natural multi-agent systems.
Annals of Operations Research, 75(1997), 69–101. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1018980001403.
Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2006). Blackett memorial lecture—Humanitarian aid logistics: Supply chain man-
agement in high gear. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 57(5), 475–489. https://doi.org/10.1
057/palgrave.jors.2602125.
Voss, C., Tsikriktsis, N., & Frohlich, M. (2002). Case research in operations management. International
Journal of Operations and Production Management, 22(2), 195–219. https://doi.org/10.1108/01443570
210414329.
Wagner, S. M., & Thakur-Weigold, B. (2018). Supporting collaboration in humanitarian supply chains—In-
sights from a design science project. Production Planning and Control, 29(14), 1130–1144. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09537287.2018.1542175.
Walker, P. (2004). What does it mean to be a professional humanitarian? The Journal of Humanitarian Assis-
tance, 14, 5–10.
World Bank Data. (2020). World Bank Open Data. https://data.worldbank.org. Accessed 15 April 2020.
Wycisk, C., McKelvey, B., & Hülsmann, M. (2008). “Smart parts” supply networks as complex adaptive
systems: Analysis and implications. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Man-
agement. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600030810861198.
123

1410
Annals of Operations Research (2022) 319:1379–1410
Yao, X., Huang, R. T., Song, M. L., & Mishra, N. (2018). Pre-positioning inventory and service outsourcing of
relief material supply chain. International Journal of Production Research, 56(21), 6859–6871. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1495853.
Yin, R. K. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods (5th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123