TITLE: Analysing the benefits of trajectory deviations for planar trajectory optimisation
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05302-9
---

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05302-9
ORIGINAL - OR MODELING/CASE STUDY
Analysing the beneﬁts of trajectory deviations for planar
trajectory optimisation
Salman Arif1
· Jason Atkin1 · Geert De Maere1
Accepted: 17 March 2023 / Published online: 19 April 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Aircraft traverse airspace sectors under the supervision of Air Trafﬁc Controllers by follow-
ing navigation points. The trajectories can deviate from these points under the supervision of
controllers. However, the controllers have to consider various factors for managing air trafﬁc
which increases their workload. We aim to ofﬂine analyse the potential beneﬁts of trajectory
deviations, by tactically shifting navigation points for planar trajectory optimisation of mul-
tiple aircraft at an enroute sector level. Historic deviations of trajectories are considered for
this analysis to implement them at practical level. Within nominal speed and turning rate of
aircraft trajectories, 5.47% reduction in time cost and an annual fuel saving worth US$ 29.32
million has been estimated using shifts for an airspace sector.
Keywords Air tyrafﬁc ﬂow management · Trajectory deviations · Navigation points ·
Trajectory optimisation · Air Trafﬁc Controllers
1 Introduction
The enroute airspace is divided into various sectors, each one having entry and exit points
by which the aircraft enter and leave the sectors, and waypoints by following which the
aircraft traverse the airspace in these sectors (Kistan et al., 2017; Flener et al., 2007). These
navigation points are located on airways that are similar to highways on the ground, by
following which the aircraft complete their traversal along routes determined by the airlines
(Gurtner et al., 2017; Clarke et al., 1997). However, the delay in ﬂights in enroute airspace
has been majorly contributing to the overall (Air Trafﬁc Flow Management) ATFM delay for
This work was supported by the University of Nottingham.
B Salman Arif
salman.arif@nottingham.ac.uk
Jason Atkin
jason.atkin@nottingham.ac.uk
Geert De Maere
geert.demaere@nottingham.ac.uk
1
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Jubilee Campus, Wollaton Road, Nottingham,
UK
123

538
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
last ten years due to the shortage in the enroute airspace capacity (Eurocontrol, 2020, 2018).
In order to improve the airspace capacity and safety for air trafﬁc, next generation systems
considered by NextGen in the US and SESAR (Single European Sky ATM Research) in
Europe have planned the automated trajectory optimisation to be a key component for the
improved decision making by the Air Trafﬁc Controllers (ATCs) (Schuster & Ochieng, 2014;
Planning, 2008; SESAR, 2007).
Aircraft Trajectory Optimisation is mainly focussed on optimising the aircraft trajectories
by reducing their direct operational costs (fuel and time costs), resolving conﬂicts among
them and enabling easy manoeuvres during their traversal. It is a multi-objective problem with
multiple stakeholders (Yang et al., 2017). The pilots prefer easy manoeuvres for routing the
aircraft without intense speed changes or sharp turns while the airlines aim to maximise their
revenue by saving fuel and time costs (Cook et al., 2009). On the other hand, the ATCs are
responsible for the safety and regulation of air trafﬁc within their respective sectors (Barnier
& Brisset, 2004), and consider multiple factors that can impact the complexity of air trafﬁc
situation (Ren & Li, 2018; Flener et al., 2007), like airway structure, positions of entry, exit
and waypoints, the number of aircraft, speed and heading of the air trafﬁc. This makes it
difﬁcult for the ATCs to manually optimise the aircraft trajectories in air trafﬁc situations
due to high complexity.
This paper provides an ofﬂine analysis of the potential beneﬁts of trajectory deviations, by
tactically (i.e. at ﬂying time, when information is available about other aircraft) shifting the
positions of navigation points for automated trajectory optimisation of multiple aircraft at a
planar (2D) level in an enroute sector. A Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model
has been formulated for analysing the beneﬁts by extending the model given in Richards and
How (2002). The proposed model is also a step forward towards automation for trajectory
optimisation as itoffers beneﬁts for the aforementioned stakeholders;by formulating the basic
ATC activities for rerouting trajectories across the sector; by focussing on minimisation of
direct operational costs for the beneﬁt of airlines; and by restricting intense speed changes
and sharp turns to ease manoeuvring for the pilots. It will be seen in Sect.5 that these beneﬁts
are estimated to save fuel and reduce time cost for trajectories.
Following the problem description and literature review in Sect.2, an analysis has been
conducted in Sect.3 for ﬁnding the real world deviations of aircraft trajectories from the route
centreline, to make the implemented deviations by the model manageable in practice for the
ATCs. This section also elaborates a side analysis for estimating the aircraft trajectories that
traverse at a constant ﬂight level (planar level) in historic real world data, for signifying the
importanceofplanartrajectoryoptimisation.TheproposedmodelisthenformulatedinSect.4
and validated against scenarios based on the real world airway structure and operational air
trafﬁc data in Sect.5.
2 Problem description and previous work
The traversal through an airspace sector takes place in three phases. The aircraft in the ﬁrst
phase enters the sector through an assigned entry point, traverses through the sector during
the second phase by visiting its deﬁned series of waypoints and leaves the sector through
an assigned exit point in the ﬁnal phase. For conﬂict avoidance, the aircraft is bounded by
a cylindrical safety region with radius of 5 nautical miles (NM) (Chaimatanan et al., 2015).
To regulate the ﬂow of air trafﬁc and resolve conﬂicts among the aircraft trajectories, the
ATCs implement trajectory based operations by rerouting, changes in speed or ﬂight level
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
539
Fig. 1 Planar rerouting of aircraft trajectory using shifts in navigation points, compared to initial route without
using shifts in an enroute airspace sector. (Color ﬁgure online)
(Alonso-Ayuso et al., 2014). The ﬁrst two manoeuvres are implemented at constant ﬂight level
for planar (2D) trajectory optimisation, which makes it common in Air Trafﬁc Management
(ATM) models as the enroute airspace is vertically stratiﬁed in layers of ﬂight levels (Richards
& How, 2002). The third manoeuvre extends the problem at 3D level for spatial trajectory
optimisation, and is more likely to perturb passenger comfort level as compared to the ﬁrst
two manoeuvres due to change in ﬂight levels (Frazzoli et al., 2001).
The pilots during traversal through the sector may ask the ATCs to allow deviation from
the route centreline or vice versa, the ATCs may direct them to do so for various reasons
(Carreras-Maide et al., 2020). We assume this problem at planar level by ﬁxing the ﬂight
levels for the trajectories and modelling safety region around them to be circular. A planar
trajectory in a straight line with reduced travelling distance, obtained by changing its initial
route using the shifts during its traversal through an enroute airspace sector is shown in Fig.1.
The literature on trajectory optimisation can be categorised based upon the scope of its
application. The studies focussed on optimisation of an individual aircraft trajectory can be
classiﬁed under Trajectory Planning, which is focussed on the reduction of direct operational
costs,noise,gasemissionandcontrailformation.However,thestudiesfocussedonoptimising
multiple trajectories have a common feature of simultaneously resolving conﬂicts among
those trajectories and can be grouped under Trajectory Deconﬂiction.
Murrieta Mendoza and Botez (2014) aim to reduce the direct operational costs in climb
and descent for a trajectory while Soler et al. (2014) aim to manage the trade-off between
fuel consumption and contrail formation for trajectories at an individual level. However,
Adacher et al. (2017) implement rerouting at inter-sector level by forming a network of
aircraft trajectories and, Richards and How (2002) use rerouting with ﬁxed waypoints while
keeping speed constant at maximum. At 3D level, Chaimatanan et al. (2015) focus on spatial
trajectory optimisation while considering uncertainty in the position of aircraft. Similarly,
Vela et al. (2009) use speed changes and ﬂight level assignments for conﬂict resolution.
Some studies highlight the importance of trajectory deviations. Bongiorno et al. (2017);
Carreras-Maide et al. (2020) suggest that the aircraft trajectories in the real world are more
likely to deviate from their planned path (i.e. route in their ﬂight plan) by shifting from
navigation points to reduce their length and direct operational costs. As per the ATCs, these
deviations happen to allow aircraft to traverse in straight lines, as the airways constituting their
route are not conﬁgured in straight lines. The routes in ﬂight plans are not optimised but help
123

540
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
the ﬂights to be predictable for the ATCs. This signiﬁes the importance of the proposed work
here. But, there are hardly any studies that focus on exploiting the positions of navigation
points for trajectory deconﬂiction in spite of their impact on the complexity of air trafﬁc
situation, the number of potential conﬂicts and consequently the workload for ATCs (Hossain
et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2018). For example, the complexity of air trafﬁc situation can increase
two folds when an aircraft approaches an entry or exit point from 20 Nautical Miles (NM)
to 10NM (Delahaye & Puechmorel, 2000). Some studies, for example Chaimatanan et al.
(2014, 2015), consider planar shifts in waypoints for strategically resolving conﬂicts among
trajectories at continental level using metaheuristics like simulated annealing. Krozel et al.
(2004, 2006) implement shifts in entry and exit points for synthesizing routes in weather
constrained regions, using optimal path algorithms and dynamic programming. Similarly,
Alam et al. (2015) consider optimising planar shifts of aircraft trajectories from oceanic
entry points about 1-2 NM as per the Strategic Lateral Offset Procedure (SLOP), by using an
evolutionary algorithm. However, Carreras-Maide et al. (2020) seems to be the only study as
per its claim and also in our knowledge that analyses the impact of trajectory deviations on the
ﬁnancial costs of aircraft trajectories. This makes researchers less aware of the importance
for trajectory deviations and explains why few studies considered shifting aircraft trajectories
in optimisation.
Alternative approaches adopted by the aforementioned previous studies used metaheuris-
tics for trajectory optimisation, that generally give a good solution but do not guarantee an
optimal solution. However, dynamic programming has been commonly adopted by previous
studies for deriving optimal control paths for aircraft trajectories. On the other hand, integer
programming and MILP has been commonly used for optimising multiple aircraft trajectories
by discretising space or time (Qian et al., 2017; Richards & How, 2002), and the proposed
approach in this article also uses MILP which guarantees an optimal solution. Obtaining an
optimal solution using MILP helps to accurately analyse the potential beneﬁts of trajectory
deviations, which is the main objective of this paper. In order to build a decision support
system to implement real-time trajectory deviations for the ATCs, heuristics could be used
as they give solution in less computation time as compared to using MILP.
The next section analyses the historic aircraft trajectory deviations based on the real world
data, to implement deviations using the proposed model that are manageable in practice for
the ATCs.
3 Finding historic deviations of aircraft trajectories from route
centreline
144 Aircraft trajectories were studied from three major enroute sectors of UK airspace,
Strumble, Daventry and Clacton, as shown in Fig.2during the timeline from March 2018
to February 2019. These airspace sectors cover most of London Flight Information Region
(FIR) and, have different airspace characteristics like (airway structure, position of entry and
exit points) and air trafﬁc characteristics (like the load and heading of air trafﬁc). Twelve
aircraft trajectories were selected in each month. The root mean square (RMS) and maximum
value of their deviations is shown in Fig.3. These deviations have been calculated based on
the distance of every individual trajectory from its closest airway.
Even by removing the case of outliers, many trajectories have been observed to show
deviations of RMS value more than 2NM and the maximum value more than 5NM as shown
in Fig.4.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
541
Fig. 2 Plots of aircraft trajectories used in our survey against real world airway structure in Strumble, Daventry
and Clacton Airspace Sectors. (Color ﬁgure online)
Fig. 3 Plots of RMS and maximum value for deviations of aircraft trajectories used in our analysis. (Color
ﬁgure online)
123

542
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
Fig. 4 Histogram for a RMS value and b maximum value of deviations for aircraft trajectories used in our
survey. (Color ﬁgure online)
Furthermore, the largest maximum value of deviation has been found to be 27NM that is
high in magnitude to occur from a route centreline. It has been observed in north-west region
of Strumble where airways are relatively more distant from each other. Although as per the
ATCs, it is noted and conﬁrmed that larger trajectory deviations are possible under adverse
weather conditions. Therefore, it is not unusual for the aircraft trajectories to deviate from
the route centreline under the supervision of the ATCs, which indicates the signiﬁcance of
trajectory deviations.
Moreover, the aircraft trajectories that traversed at a constant ﬂight level and those that
traversed at variable ﬂight levels in enroute airspace are also observed in Fig.3, using the
indicators C and V respectively. 43.1% of the trajectories have been found to traverse at a
constantﬂightlevelwhichisaconsiderableamountascomparedtotheothersetoftrajectories.
4 Model formulation
This section introduces a multi-objective Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model
for tactically rerouting aircraft trajectories at planar level, both with and without shifts in
navigation points across an enroute airspace sector. The proposed model improves the pre-
vious models in limiting the turning rate of aircraft within its nominal value, and the speed
within its nominal and minimum ﬂyable value unlike Chaimatanan et al. (2014, 2015) that do
not consider implementation of these limits. The model also implements order in visiting of
navigation points across the sector and allows speed changes for trajectory rerouting unlike
Richards and How (2002), that do not ensure order in visiting navigation points and only
allows maximum turning rate but with constant speed and limited force. Moreover, the model
formulates the safety region around aircraft more accurately than Richards and How (2002),
who formulate the region in the form of a square. These improvements help in deriving
trajectory solutions closer to real world conditions.
The time instances or steps for this model have been discretised. The proposed model
begins with the formulation of dynamics of aircraft, followed by formulation of constraints
for conﬂict avoidance and trajectory rerouting through shifted navigation points, ending up
at the derivation of objective function.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
543
Fig. 5 Linear approximations for non-linear constraints of velocity and force
4.1 Discrete dynamics for aircraft
The discrete dynamics for aircraftare formulated by considering a totalnumber of NA aircraft,
each having a point mass on a 2D plane, in a set of total T discrete time steps. Then, the
constraints for position (xip, yip), velocity (vxip, vyip) and force i.e. acceleration ( fxip, fyip),
for aircraft p at an ith time step are formulated in Eqs.(1) and (2) as follows.
∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
x(i+1)p ≤xip + vxip + Mgip
x(i+1)p ≥xip + vxip −Mgip
(1)
y(i+1)p ≤yip + vyip + Mgip
y(i+1)p ≥yip + vyip −Mgip
∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
vx(i+1)p ≤vxip + fxip + Mgip
vx(i+1)p ≥vxip + fxip −Mgip
(2)
vy(i+1)p ≤vyip + fyip + Mgip
vy(i+1)p ≥vyip + fyip −Mgip
where the boolean decision variable gip becomes 1 and relaxes the above formulated con-
straints as soon as the aircraft p visits its respective exit point using M, which has a value
larger than any possible distance. This decision variable is deﬁned in Eq.(20).
Moreover, the constraints on position for an aircraft p at an ith time step are given in
Eq.(3). Velocity and force are modelled as two rectangular components for x and y. A
simple calculation of absolute velocity and force using these components

x2 + y2 is not
linear, so a series of R linear constraints are applied to ensure that the absolute velocity and
force are kept below a speciﬁed limit. This is formulated below in Eqs.(4) and (5) from
Richards and How (2002), as shown in Fig.5.
∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
xmin ≤xip ≤xmax
(3)
123

544
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
and ymin ≤yip ≤ymax
∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀r ∈[1 . . . R]
vxip sin
2πr
R

+ vyip cos
2πr
R

≤vnom(1 −gip)
(4)
∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀r ∈[1 . . . R]
fxip sin
2πr
R

+ fyip cos
2πr
R

≤fmax(1 −gip)
(5)
Where Eq.(3) deﬁnes limits on the position of aircraft p, the constraints in Eq.(4) restrict
the velocity components for aircraft p from exceeding its nominal (usual) speed vnom during
all i time steps and, the constraints in Eq.(5) restrict the magnitude of force components from
exceeding their maximum value fmax. However, gip relaxes these constraints once aircraft
leaves the sector, so that the velocity and force contribute zero value to the objective function
in Eq.(26).
The constraints for minimum ﬂyable speed vmin_ f ly and nominal turning rate wnom are
formulated similar to Eqs.(4) and 5. The aircraft p is restricted to remain above the limit of
vmin_ f ly, that is required to maintain ﬂight at a constant ﬂight level using Eq.(6). Similar
to Richards and How (2002), the force in Eq.(5) at ith time step is required to turn aircraft
p having mass m p travelling with velocity in Eq.(4) within the limit of wnom as given in
Eq.(7).
∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀r ∈[1 . . . R]
vxip sin
2πr
R

+ vyip cos
2πr
R

≥vmin_ f ly −Mgip
(6)
∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀r ∈[1 . . . R]
ωnom ≥
fxip sin
 2πr
R

+ fyip cos
 2πr
R

m p

vxip sin
 2πr
R

+ vyip cos
 2πr
R
 −Mgip
(7)
where wnom equals 3°/s for all aircraft trajectories (Archibald et al., 2008), and the R con-
straints are formulated separately for both velocity and force. It is to be noted that restricting
velocity and turning rate for aircraft trajectories within their nominal value prevents intense
speed changes and sharp turns, which consequently enables easy manoeuvres favouring the
pilots.
4.2 Conflict avoidance constraints
The constraints for circular safety region around the aircraft are formulated by considering
the constraints on velocity in Eq.(4) and force in Eq.(5). Following the same notation as in
Sect.4.1, a conﬂict between aircraft p having position (xip, yip) and aircraft q having position
(xiq, yiq) will be avoided at ith time step if the distance between these two aircraft is greater
than or equal to the radius of safety region smin, which is shown in Fig.6and formulated as
follows in Eq.(8):
∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] ∀p, q ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀r ∈[1 . . . R]
|xip −xiq| sin
2πr
R

+ |yip −yiq| cos
2πr
R

(8)
≥smin −Mgip −Mgiq
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
545
Fig. 6 Conﬂict avoidance between the aircraft p and q. (Color ﬁgure online)
4.3 Trajectory rerouting through shifted navigation points
The constraints for rerouting aircraft trajectories through shifted navigation points across the
sector are formulated based on the formulation in Richards and How (2002) for rerouting
an aircraft towards its destination. These constraints also represent basic ATC activities for
trajectory rerouting i.e. assignment of entry and exit points, and rerouting through navigation
points.
By following the same notation in Sect.4.1, an aircraft p is rerouted to its required
destination (xdp, ydp) as formulated below in Eq.(9) and Eq.(10):
∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
xip −xdp ≤
M(1 −bip)
xip −xdp ≥−M(1 −bip)
(9)
yip −ydp ≤
M(1 −bip)
yip −ydp ≥−M(1 −bip)
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
T
 
i=1
bip = 1
(10)
where the boolean decision variable bip = 1 means that the aircraft p is required to reach
its destination at the ith step and bip = 0 relaxes the constraints in Eq.(9). By doing so, this
decision variable decides the choice of time step at which the aircraft reaches its destination
through Eq.(10), which forces bip to become 1 at any ith time step from the set of all time
steps. Using these constraints, the aircraft is required to visit its destination only once, which
also applies for visiting waypoints, entry and exit points.
123

546
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
4.3.1 Phase 1 and 3: assignment and rerouting for shifted entry and exit points
The sector boundaries are polygon shaped, while the entry and exit points are located at
the vertices or sides (edges) of these linear boundaries. For rerouting the aircraft trajectories
through entry points, the constraints in Eqs.(9) and (10) are extended by assuming Nen p
number of entry points located on a sector boundary that are in proximity to the trajectory
of aircraft p. The assignment of an entry point l and rerouting of the aircraft p to that
entry point’s location (xenlp, yenlp) required to be completed by a certain time step Ten p is
formulated in Eq. 11, 12 and 13 as follows:
∀i ∈[1 . . . Ten p] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀l ∈[1 . . . Nen p]
xip −xenlp ≤
M(1 −benip) + M(1 −clp)
xip −xenlp ≥−M(1 −benip) −M(1 −clp)
(11)
yip −yenlp ≤
M(1 −benip) + M(1 −clp)
yip −yenlp ≥−M(1 −benip) −M(1 −clp)
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
Ten p
 
i=1
benip = 1
(12)
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
Nen p
 
l=1
clp = 1
(13)
where the boolean decision variable benip = 1 decides the choice of ith time step at which
the aircraft has to visit an entry point. Similarly, the boolean decision variable clp decides
the assignment of entry point l to the aircraft p.
Now, implementation of shifts in the entry points are considered as given in Fig.7a. These
points can be linearly shifted on either side of the boundary so that their coordinates follow
the line denoting the side of the sector boundary. Each side can be deﬁned by a linear equation
using slope-intercept formula for shifting entry points within a certain range of parameters,
while considering entry points as reference points for shifts. An entry point l from a set of
Nen p number of entry points in proximity to the aircraft p is shifted along x-axis by xen_shi f tlp
and along y-axis by yen_shi f tlp on either side of the sector boundary, using slope men_slope(1)lp
for Side 1 or men_slope(2)lp for Side 2 respectively. This is shown in Fig.7a and formulated
in Eq.(14) as follows.
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀l ∈[1 . . . Nen p]
xen_min(1)lp ≤xen_shi f tlp ≤xen_max(1)lp
yen_min(1)lp ≤yen_shi f tlp ≤yen_max(1)lp
yen_shi f tlp = men_slope(1)lpxen_shi f tlp
OR
(14)
xen_min(2)lp ≤xen_shi f tlp ≤xen_max(2)lp
yen_min(2)lp ≤yen_shi f tlp ≤yen_max(2)lp
yen_shi f tlp = men_slope(2)lpxen_shi f tlp
where xen_max(1)lp and xen_min(1)lp are the parameters deﬁning maximum and minimum
limits for shift along x-axis xen_shi f tlp on Side 1 and, yen_max(1)lp and yen_min(1)lp deﬁne
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
547
Fig. 7 Shifting a entry points, b
exit points and c waypoints using
planar shifts. (Color ﬁgure
online)
123

548
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
maximum and minimum limits for shift along y-axis yen_shi f tlp on the same side. Similarly,
xen_max(2)lp, xen_min(2)lp, yen_max(2)lp, yen_min(2)lp, are the parameters that deﬁne range for
these shifts on Side 2. All these parameters are constants that limit variable shifts xen_shi f tlp
and yen_shi f tlp on each side of the sector boundary, considering shifts happen only on one
side of the boundary individually for each aircraft, either on Side 1 or on Side 2.
The above formulation allows entry points to shift on the sector boundary within a cer-
tain range of units (for example Nautical Miles) and analyse the impact on rerouting these
trajectories by varying the limitation for shifts. Now the constraints for rerouting aircraft
trajectories through assigned entry points in Eq.(11) are reformulated using the shifts for
entry points derived in Eq.(14) as follows in Eq.(15).
∀i ∈[1 . . . Ten p] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀l ∈[1 . . . Nen p]
(15)
xip −(xenlp + xen_shi f tlp) ≤
M(1 −benip) + M(1 −clp)
xip −(xenlp + xen_shi f tlp) ≥−M(1 −benip) −M(1 −clp)
yip −(yenlp + yen_shi f tlp) ≤
M(1 −benip) + M(1 −clp)
yip −(yenlp + yen_shi f tlp) ≥−M(1 −benip) −M(1 −clp)
The exit points as shown in Fig.7b serve as entry points by allowing the aircraft to enter
another airspace sector by exiting from their current airspace sector. Therefore, the constraints
for rerouting the aircraft trajectories through shifted exit points can be derived similarly to
the above formulated constraints for rerouting the trajectories through shifted entry points.
An exit point n having position (xexnp, yexnp) assigned to aircraft p is shifted along slope
mex_slope(1)np for Side 1 or mex_slope(2)np for Side 2 of the sector boundary, using shifts
xex_shi f tnp yex_shi f tnp in the following Eq.(16) as shown in Fig.7b:
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀n ∈[1 . . . Nex p]
xex_min(1)np ≤xex_shi f tnp ≤xex_max(1)np
yex_min(1)np ≤yex_shi f tnp ≤yex_max(1)np
yex_shi f tnp = mex_slope(1)npxex_shi f tnp
OR
(16)
xex_min(2)np ≤xex_shi f tnp ≤xex_max(2)np
yex_min(2)np ≤yex_shi f tnp ≤yex_max(2)np
yex_shi f tnp = mex_slope(2)npxex_shi f tnp
Using Eq.(16), the constraints for rerouting aircraft trajectories from their last waypoints
towards shifted exit points are formulated as follows in Eq.(17), by considering an aircraft
p required to visit an exit point n by time step Tex p:
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀n ∈[1 . . . Nex p]
∀i ∈[TWp . . . Tex p

 Tex p ≤T ]
(17)
xip −(xexnp + xex_shi f tnp) ≤
M(1 −bexip) + M(1 −dnp)
xip −(xexnp + xex_shi f tnp) ≥−M(1 −bexip) −M(1 −dnp)
yip −(yexnp + yex_shi f tnp) ≤
M(1 −bexip) + M(1 −dnp)
yip −(yexnp + yex_shi f tnp) ≥−M(1 −bexip) −M(1 −dnp)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
549
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
Texp
 
i=TWp
bexip = 1
(18)
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
Nexp
 
n=1
dnp = 1
(19)
where T represents the largest time step, TWp represents time step by which aircraft visited
its last waypoint Wp and Nex p represents the number of exit points close to the aircraft at the
sector boundary. Moreover, bexip in Eq.(18) decides the time step for aircraft p to reach exit
point n in the time window between time steps TWp and Tex p, and dnp in Eq.(19) decides the
choice for assignment of exit point to aircraft p. The boolean variable gip for relaxing the
constraints in Sect.4.1 and 4.2 is derived as follows in Eq.(20) using bexip:
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀i ∈[1 . . . T ] g(i+1)p = gip + bexip
(20)
where bexip becomes 1 as the aircraft leaves the airspace sector and activates gip to relax the
constraints for the rest of i time steps.
4.3.2 Phase 2: rerouting through shifted waypoints
Consider an aircraft p required to reach a waypoint w with location (xwp, ywp) within the
time interval between time steps T(w−1)p and Twp. Then, the constraints for rerouting aircraft
p for total Wp number of waypoints are formulated in Eqs.(21) and (22) as follows:
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀w ∈[1 . . . Wp]
∀i ∈[T(w−1)p . . . Twp

 T(0)p = Ten p]
xip −xwp ≤
M(1 −bwaywip )
xip −xwp ≥−M(1 −bwaywip )
(21)
yip −ywp ≤
M(1 −bwaywip )
yip −ywp ≥−M(1 −bwaywip ) ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]∀w ∈[1 . . . Wp]
Twp
 
i=T(w−1)p
bwaywip = 1
(22)
where Twp is the time step by which aircraft p has to reach the waypoint w and T(w−1)p is
the time step by which this aircraft had visited the previous waypoint, given T(w−1)p = Ten p
when the aircraft begins its traversal for ﬁrst waypoint w = 1 after already visiting the entry
point by Ten p. By forcing every aircraft p to visit its waypoint w during the time window
between Twp and T(w−1)p as given in Eq.(21), each aircraft is restricted to visit waypoints
in order of the time steps associated with them. Moreover, bwaywip decides the choice of ith
time step in the time window between Twp and T(w−1)p at which the aircraft has to visit the
waypoint w.
For shifting the waypoints, it must be noted that these points unlike entry and exit points
are not located on the sector boundary, and therefore can be shifted in any direction within
a certain region inside the sector airspace. This region can be speciﬁed by a certain set of
parameters as shown in Fig.7c. Considering a waypoint w for aircraft p in a 2 D plane to be
the reference point for shift along x-axis xway_shi f twp and shift along y-axis yway_shi f twp in
123

550
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
its original position (xwp, ywp) taken as reference, then these shifts within their respective
limits are formulated as follows in Eq.(23):
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀w ∈[1 . . . Wp]
|xway_shi f twp| ≤|xway_maxwp|
(23)
|yway_shi f twp| ≤|yway_maxwp|
where |xway_maxwp| limits xway_shi f twp on x-axis between two extremes xway_maxwp and
−xway_maxwp while |yway_maxwp| restricts yway_shi f twp between upper bound yway_maxwp and
lower bound −yway_maxwp on y-axis as shown in Fig.7c. These parameters help us to shift
waypoint from its original position within a certain range of units (like Nautical Miles) and
analyse the impact of varying shifts on aircraft trajectories.
By using the formulated shifts for waypoints in Eq.(23), the constraints for rerouting
aircraft trajectories through a series of waypoints in Eq.(21) are reformulated to reroute the
trajectories through a series of shifted waypoints as follows in Eq.(24):
∀w ∈[1 . . . Wp] ∀p ∈[1 . . . NA]
∀i ∈[T(w−1)p . . . Twp

 T(0)p = Ten p]
(24)
xip −(xwp + xway_shi f twp) ≤
M(1 −bwaywip )
xip −(xwp + xway_shi f twp) ≥−M(1 −bwaywip )
yip −(ywp + yway_shi f twp) ≤
M(1 −bwaywip )
yip −(ywp + yway_shi f twp) ≥−M(1 −bwaywip )
and Eq.(22) can now be used to decide the time step at which the reroute for the trajectories
has to take place through shifted waypoints.
The overall rerouting of aircraft through an airspace sector by shifting entry points,
waypoints and exit points based on the sequence of time steps is elaborated in Fig.8.
4.4 Objective function
The airlines aim for revenue maximisation which can be contributed to by minimisation of
fuel and time cost. The fuel cost of aircraft trajectories in the objective function is quantiﬁed
in terms of their force (acceleration) and velocity cost. However, the time cost for every
trajectory is calculated based on the time steps at which aircraft visit their navigation points,
as given in Eq.(25). Here Ti is the actual value of time elapsed at an ith time step and decision
variables benip, bwaywip and bexip indicate the time steps i at which aircraft p visits its entry
point, waypoints and exit point respectively. By ﬁnding the total time cost, the velocity and
force costs are incorporated in our objective function as follows in Eq.(26):
∀p ∈[1 . . . NA] ∀i ∈[1 . . . T ]
CTip = Ti

benip + bwaywip + bexip

(25)
min J =
T
 
i=1
NA
 
p=1

α CTip + β

|vxip| + |vyip|

(26)
+ γ

| fxip| + | fyip|

123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
551
Fig. 8 An illustration of sector level rerouting of aircraft trajectory through shifted entry, exit and waypoints.
(Color ﬁgure online)
where α, β and γ are the weights for time, velocity and force costs respectively. The value
of these weights decides the priority for each cost and consequently affects the derived
trajectory solutions. However, the objective function in Richards and How (2002) ignores
cost for velocity and prioritises time cost for devising minimum time trajectory solutions.
5 Model validation and analysis of results
The model is tested in two stages, i.e., by individually rerouting aircraft trajectories to evaluate
their dynamics, and by simulating multiple aircraft trajectories at sector level to validate
their traversal through the sector using shifts. For model validation, the limitation in shifts is
varied for individual aircraft trajectories to analyse the beneﬁts of these shifts. The air trafﬁc
scenarios are solved using CPLEX optimisation software installed on a 3.5 GHz processor
having 32 GB RAM, and the results obtained are analysed and plotted using Matlab 2017b.
5.1 Testing the dynamics for individual aircraft
The dynamics of trajectory rerouting formulated in Sect.4.1 are evaluated by testing the
model against artiﬁcially generated complex air trafﬁc scenarios. This is done to evaluate
turning rates, ﬂight speeds and acceleration for individual aircraft.
123

552
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
Fig. 9 Single aircraft trajectory rerouting with and without shifts in navigation points. (Color ﬁgure online)
By considering the parameters of a commercial aircraft Boeing-747 given by Abdel-
Raheem et al. (2019) and Cavcar (2004) for nominal speed vnom = 259m/s, minimum
ﬂyable speed vmin_ f ly = 128m/s, and maximum force fmax = 0.5N with a point mass of
1kg, and the weights α = 1 for cost of time, β = 1 for cost of velocity and γ = 1 for cost of
force in objective function, the dynamics for a single aircraft are discretised at a time step of
3 s. The value of R = 40 is considered for force and velocity constraints in Eqs.(4) and (5),
and conﬂict avoidance constraints in Eq.(8) which gives a small error value of 0.0031% in
comparison to the implementation of actual non-linear representation for these constraints.
This aircraft is simulated by the model to visit the waypoints in sequence of time steps,
inside the sector for two cases, with and without shifts as shown in Fig.9. It is seen that the
aircraft by using shifts traverses a short and easy path in the form of a straight line, and on
the contrary, without using shifts follows a complex zig-zag path with numerous turns. This
scenario veriﬁes the successful traversal of aircraft trajectory through sector for both cases
and shows the beneﬁts that can be obtained by allowing trajectory deviations. Therefore,
it can be said the dynamics formulated in Sect.4.1 allow the aircraft trajectories to reroute
individually through an airspace sector with and without shifts in the navigation points.
Considering the impact of weights in objective function in Eq.(26) on the formulated
dynamics, the aircraft is again simulated under the same scenario as shown in Fig.9 without
using shifts. The impact is analysed by varying the value for each weight individually along
a certain scale. Figures10, 11and 12show the different set of trajectories obtained by varying
weights of α, β and γ respectively for a range of values on a scale of 0.2 −8. The impact of
theseweightsonthetrajectoriesbecomesclearerinitiallyduetothehorizoneffect,butreduces
as the horizon effect decreases. This effect occurs as the computer searches limited solution
space for rerouting the trajectories, based on the initial parameter values of trajectories that
are given as input. This also hinders ﬁnding better trajectory solutions.
Figure10 shows that increasing the value of α which is the weight for time cost, increases
sharpness of turns for the aircraft trajectory initially due to the horizon effect. However,
increasing the value of β for velocity cost in Fig.11 and γ for force cost in Fig.12 decreases
the sharpness of turns. It is also observable in these ﬁgures that the aircraft trajectory in every
case has been able to sequentially visit all the waypoints.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
553
Fig. 10 An illustration of rerouting aircraft trajectory by varying value of alpha α. (Color ﬁgure online)
Fig. 11 An illustration of rerouting aircraft trajectory by varying value of beta β. (Color ﬁgure online)
5.2 Validating model for multiple aircraft trajectories at an airspace sector level
This section aims to validate the proposed model using the real world data for rerouting
multiple aircraft trajectories through an airspace sector, by using shifts in navigation points
individually for each trajectory. The results obtained by implementation of these shifts are
also analysed at the end of this section.
123

554
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
Fig. 12 An illustration of rerouting aircraft trajectory by varying value of gamma γ . (Color ﬁgure online)
5.2.1 Using real world data for model validation
Using operational data for real world air trafﬁc and airway structure can help to validate our
model by simulating results close to real world conditions, and also allow the readers of this
paper to visualise how aircraft trajectories could possibly deviate from the route centreline and
get optimised by shifting real world navigation points. However, many previous studies have
not considered validating their models against scenarios based on the real world operational
data.
We test our model at a time step of 3 s against a series of scenarios derived from operational
data of enroute air trafﬁc on the day of 13thOctober, 2017 from Strumble airspace sector, and
consider its actual airway structure at enroute level for shifting navigation points. By using the
same parameters mentioned in Sect.5.1 for vnom, vmin_ f ly and fmax with the values of α = 1,
β = 1 and γ = 1, we simulate scenarios by varying limitation of aforementioned shifts on a
scale from 0−27NM and analyse the impact of this variation on the plots of devised trajectory
solutions, and the objective function value for each scenario. The maximum limitation for
the pertinent shifts has been chosen to be 27NM as this was the maximum deviation of an
aircraft trajectory that we observed in the real world data (see Sect.3). The air trafﬁc which
traversed Strumble on 13th October, 2017 is shown in Fig.13a which also elaborates how
real world aircraft trajectories can possibly deviate from airways while traversing through
the sector.
There are certain assumptions that we are required to make for creating scenarios from
this operational data. Although most aircraft enter the sector, travel along identiﬁable airways
and exit the sector, some deviate from this. These have been categorised into three different
groups and the assumptions made for each group are explained as follows.
1. For the ﬁrst group of aircraft trajectories shown in the Fig.13b, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd airways
being followed by them as they cross many airways and seem to follow the waypoints
located on multiple, but closely allocated airways. For this set of trajectories, we consider
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
555
Fig. 13 a Complete set of real aircraft trajectories, b the trajectories that cross multiple airways in strumble
airspace sector, c those that ﬂy outside sector boundary and d those that disappear and/or initiate within sector
boundary. (Color ﬁgure online)
the position of navigation points that are located closest to them as an assumption for
their original route.
2. For the second group, consisting of a few aircraft trajectories shown in Fig.13c, it is
observed that they ﬂy outside Strumble airspace sector but interact with the trajectories
ﬂying inside it, and therefore have been included in the air trafﬁc scenarios for model
validation.
3. For the aircraft trajectories belonging to the third group as shown in Fig.13d, it is seen
that they disappear and/or initiate within the sector boundary as their portion lying in
enroute airspace is only visible. Therefore, these trajectories are assumed to have ﬁxed
entry and exit points at their point of appearance and disappearance inside the sector
airspace.
123

556
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
Fig. 14 Comparison of aircraft trajectory solutions with minimum (0NM) and maximum (27NM) limitation
for shifts. (Color ﬁgure online)
Moreover, the number of entry and exit points located close to every aircraft trajectory for
assignment have been considered equal to three.
5.2.2 Obtaining and analysing results
The results are obtained by creating scenarios and varying the limitation for shifts in
navigation points for implementing trajectory deviations.
The plots of devised trajectory solutions for all scenarios, with limitation of shifts up to
0NM and 27NM are shown in Fig.14a and b respectively. It can be clearly seen in Fig.14a
that every aircraft trajectory without the allowance of shifts is forced to reroute through
the exact position of its navigation points while avoiding conﬂicts. Moreover, some aircraft
trajectories are forced to traverse in curves while following their path. On the other hand,
Fig.14b shows that all the trajectories have been able to traverse without conﬂicts by using
shifts and are similar to the set of real aircraft trajectories given in Fig.13a, as both sets of
trajectories travel in straight lines. This shows that the devised trajectory solutions obtained
using maximum limitation of shifts are close to the real world conditions. Furthermore, the
curves found in the trajectories in Fig.14a are not found in trajectories in Fig.14b, which
shows that the devised trajectory solutions with maximum limitation of shifts are easy to
traverse in manoeuvring as well for the pilots.
The speeds of all aircraft trajectories derived using both ways i.e. with and without shifts,
were observed to satisfy the lower bound of minimum ﬂyable speed vmin_ f ly, the upper
bound of nominal speed vnom. Therefore, the trajectory solutions for both cases were ﬂyable
with respect to their speeds. Moreover, the turning rates for both cases of trajectories were
also observed to satisfy the limit of nominal turning rate ωnom, which indicates the absence
of sharp turns and veriﬁes the ease in manoeuvring for the aircraft trajectories. Hence, the
derived trajectory solutions are close to real world conditions.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
557
Fig. 15 Impact of varying limitation for shifts in navigation points on the objective function values for air
trafﬁc scenarios. (Color ﬁgure online)
The impact on objective function values due to the variation in limitation of the shifts is
shown in Fig.15demonstrates how relaxing constraints to allow larger shifts minimises the
objective function value for every scenario, which could possibly help optimise trajectory
solutions by reducing their time cost and fuel (velocity and acceleration) cost.
By using shifts up to 27NM, a saving of 4.04 miles (3.52 NM) in total travelling distance
and 55.35s in total travelling time (i.e. 5.47% reduction in time costs) per ﬂight has been
calculated, as compared to without using shifts. A Boeing-747 uses 5 gallons or 15.20kg of
fuel per mile (William Roberson & Adams, 2007) and 190kg of fuel per minute (NATS, 2013)
by estimate. By these calculations, saving in total travelling time and distance is quantiﬁed
to save 236kg of fuel per ﬂight which as per Flybe estimates in (NATS, 2013) can yield
US$ 29.32 million worth annual savings. However, a reduction of 221.05s in total travelling
time and 5.4 miles (4.67 NM) in total travelling distance per ﬂight has also been calculated
when the trajectory solutions using maximum limitation for shifts are compared with the real
aircraft trajectories, with estimated annual fuel savings of 782kg fuel savings per ﬂight found
using the same calculations (William Roberson & Adams, 2007; NATS, 2013). Therefore,
using shifts up to 27NM in trajectories saves fuel and time costs as compared to the trajectories
derived without using shifts and, also as compared to the real aircraft trajectories as shown
in Fig.16a and b, which beneﬁts the airlines.
Based on the above analysis, it is clear that increasing the ﬂexibility for shifts in navigation
points for allowing trajectory deviations not only allows the aircraft trajectories to perform
easy manoeuvring by traversing in straight lines within nominal speed and turning rate, but
also reduces fuel and time costs while avoiding conﬂicts. Adding ﬂexibility to straighten
the trajectory should continue to give beneﬁts until the trajectory has reached the optimal,
straight path, at which point further ﬂexibility will give no further beneﬁt.
123

558
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
Fig. 16 Comparison of average travelling time and distance by real and devised aircraft trajectories. (Color
ﬁgure online)
6 Conclusion
This article ofﬂine analysed the potential beneﬁts of trajectory deviations, by shifting the
navigation points for planar trajectory optimisation at tactical level in an enroute airspace
sector. A MILP model was built to allow optimisation of trajectories for aircraft. By analysing
real world data for trajectory deviations, the proposed model implemented shifts in navigation
points within real world limits to make them manageable in practice by the ATCs. The model
was validated using real world data and the aircraft trajectories were optimised in terms of
easy manoeuvring, reduced fuel and time costs by allowing limited deviations. Results from
the model indicate beneﬁts achievable for major stakeholders of ATM by formulating basic
ATC activities at enroute sector level, easing manoeuvres of trajectory rerouting for the pilots
and, saving fuel and time costs for the airlines.
Author Contributions Methodology, formal analysis and investigation, and writing-original draft preparation
was performed by Salman Arif. All authors contributed to the conceptualisation, data collection, writing-review
and editing of this research. All authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Funding This work was funded by the University of Nottingham.
Data availability The data used for the ﬁndings of this research is easily available.
Code Availability The code used for the ﬁndings of this research is available on request.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent for publication Not applicable.
Ethics approval Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
559
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdel-Raheem, A. A. M., Hanna, P. A. S., Abdel-Hameed, I. A. M. (2019). Aerodynamic study of boeing
airfoil. 4th IUGRC International Undergraduate Research Conference
Adacher, L., Flamini, M., & Romano, E. (2017). Sectors co-operation in air trafﬁc management. IFAC-
PapersOnLine, 50(1), 4222–4227.
Alam, S., Hossain, M. M., Al-Alawi, F., & Al-Thawadi, F. (2015). Optimizing lateral airway offset for collision
risk mitigation using differential evolution. Air Trafﬁc Control Quarterly, 23(4), 301–324.
Alonso-Ayuso, A., Escudero, L. F., & Martín-Campo, F. J. (2014). On modeling the air trafﬁc control coor-
dination in the collision avoidance problem by mixed integer linear optimization. Annals of Operations
Research, 222(1), 89–105.
Archibald, J. K., Hill, J. C., Jepsen, N. A., Stirling, W. C., & Frost, R. L. (2008). A satisﬁcing approach to
aircraft conﬂict resolution. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications
and Reviews), 38(4), 510–521.
Barnier, N., & Brisset, P. (2004). Graph coloring for air trafﬁc ﬂow management. Annals of Operations
Research, 130(1), 163–178.
Bongiorno, C., Gurtner, G., Lillo, F., Mantegna, R., & Miccichè, S. (2017). Statistical characterization of devi-
ations from planned ﬂight trajectories in air trafﬁc management. Journal of Air Transport Management,
58, 152–163.
Carreras-Maide, J., Lordan, O., & Sallan, J. M. (2020). Cost savings from trajectory deviations in the European
air space. Journal of Air Transport Management, 88, 101887.
Cavcar, M. (2004). Stall speed. Tech rep., Anadolu University, School of Civil Aviation, Turkey, Technical
report
Chaimatanan, S., Delahaye, D., & Mongeau, M. (2015). Aircraft 4d trajectories planning under uncertainties.
Computational Intelligence (pp. 51–58). IEEE Symposium Series on, IEEE.
Chaimatanan, S., Delahaye, D., & Mongeau, M. (2014). A hybrid metaheuristic optimization algorithm for
strategic planning of 4d aircraft trajectories at the continental scale. IEEE Computational Intelligence
Magazine, 9(4), 46–61.
Clarke, L., Johnson, E., Nemhauser, G., & Zhu, Z. (1997). The aircraft rotation problem. Annals of Operations
Research, 69, 33–46.
Cook, A., Tanner, G., Williams, V., & Meise, G. (2009). Dynamic cost indexing-managing airline delay costs.
Journal of Air Transport Management, 15(1), 26–35.
Delahaye, D., Puechmorel, S. (2000). Air trafﬁc complexity: Towards intrinsic metrics. Proceedings of the
third USA/Europe Air Trafﬁc Management R & D Seminar
Eurocontrol (2018). Annual network operations report.
Eurocontrol (2020). Monthly network operations report.
Flener, P., Pearson, J., Ågren, M., Garcia-Avello, C., Celiktin, M., & Dissing, S. (2007). Air-trafﬁc complexity
resolution in multi-sector planning. Journal of Air Transport Management, 13(6), 323–328.
Frazzoli, E., Mao, Z. H., Oh, J. H., & Feron, E. (2001). Resolution of conﬂicts involving many aircraft via
semideﬁnite programming. Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, 24(1), 79–86.
Gurtner, G., Bongiorno, C., Ducci, M., & Miccichè, S. (2017). An empirically grounded agent based simulator
for the air trafﬁc management in the SESAR scenario. Journal of Air Transport Management, 59, 26–43.
Hossain, M. M., Alam, S., Symon, F., & Blom, H. (2014). A complex network approach to analyze the effect
of intermediate waypoints on collision risk assessment. Air Trafﬁc Control Quarterly, 22(2), 87–114.
Kistan, T., Gardi, A., Sabatini, R., Ramasamy, S., & Batuwangala, E. (2017). An evolutionary outlook of air
trafﬁc ﬂow management techniques. Progress in Aerospace Sciences, 88, 15–42.
Krozel, J., Penny, S., Prete, J., Mitchell, J. (2004). Comparison of algorithms for synthesizing weather avoid-
ance routes in transition airspace. AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference and Exhibit, p.
4790.
Krozel, J., Jakobovits, R., & Penny, S. (2006). An algorithmic approach for airspace ﬂow programs. Air Trafﬁc
Control Quarterly, 14(3), 203–229.
123

560
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 326:537–560
MurrietaMendoza,A.,Botez,R.(2014).Verticalnavigationtrajectoryoptimizationalgorithmforacommercial
aircraft. AIAA/3AF Aircraft Noise and Emissions Reduction Symposium, p. 3019.
NATS (2013). Ten steps to ﬂight efﬁciency
Planning ,J. (2008). Development ofﬁce. next generation air transportation system integrated work plan: A
functional outline. Tech. rep., Technical report, Joint Planning and Development Ofﬁce, Washington,
DC.
Qian, X., Mao, J., Chen, C. H., Chen, S., & Yang, C. (2017). Coordinated multi-aircraft 4d trajectories
planning considering buffer safety distance and fuel consumption optimization via pure-strategy game.
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 81, 18–35.
Ren, P., & Li, L. (2018). Characterizing air trafﬁc networks via large-scale aircraft tracking data: A comparison
between china and the us networks. Journal of Air Transport Management, 67, 181–196.
Richards, A., How, J. P. (2002) Aircraft trajectory planning with collision avoidance using mixed integer linear
programming. Proceedings of the American Control Conference, 2002. IEEE, vol. 3, pp. 1936–1941.
Schuster, W., & Ochieng, W. (2014). Performance requirements of future trajectory prediction and conﬂict
detection and resolution tools within SESAR and NextGen: Framework for the derivation and discussion.
Journal of Air Transport Management, 35, 92–101.
SESAR. (2007). Milestone deliverable d3: The atm target concept. Technical report.
Soler, M., Zou, B., & Hansen, M. (2014). Flight trajectory design in the presence of contrails: Application
of a multiphase mixed-integer optimal control approach. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, 48, 172–194.
Vela, A., Solak, S., Singhose, W., Clarke, J. P. (2009) A mixed integer program for ﬂight-level assignment
and speed control for conﬂict resolution. Decision and Control, 2009 held jointly with the 2009 28th
Chinese Control Conference. CDC/CCC 2009. Proceedings of the 48th IEEE Conference on, IEEE, pp.
5219–5226.
Wang, H., Song, Z., & Wen, R. (2018). Modeling air trafﬁc situation complexity with a dynamic weighted
network approach. Journal of Advanced Transportation. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/5254289
William Roberson, R. R., Adams, D. (2007). Fuel Conservation Strategies: Cruise Flight
Yang, Y., Prandini, M., Cao, X., & Du, W. (2017). A multi-criteria decision-making scheme for multi-aircraft
conﬂict resolution. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 50(1), 14674–14679.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123