TITLE: Resilience in supply chain risk management in disruptive world: rerouting research directions during and after pandemic
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06126-x
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06126-x
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Resilience in supply chain risk management in disruptive
world: rerouting research directions
during and after pandemic
Peter Madzík1
· Lukáš Falát2 · Lukáš Copuš1 · Karol ˇCarnogurský3
Received: 17 March 2023 / Accepted: 17 June 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
The pandemic and a series of subsequent disruptive events fully exposed the vulnerability
of supply chains. Research in the ﬁeld of resilience in supply chain risk management has
recorded signiﬁcant interest across a wide range of academic disciplines. Therefore, there is
a need to synthesize, categorize and explain existing and newly emerging research directions,
which may represent relevant platforms for developing supply chain concepts in the future.
This study addresses this need by providing a bibliometric review of published papers on
resilience in supply chain risk management. By analyzing more than 2500 published papers
through bibliometric and machine-learning-based methods, we identiﬁed ten topics related
to risk and resilience of supply chains: Pandemic impacts of food supply chain; Practices for
capability and performance; Supplier-related modeling and optimization; System security
and critical infrastructure; Production changes; IT in manufacturing process; Sustainability
in global economy; Management and business approach; Modeling and design of complex
networks; Operational strategies for risk mitigation. By analyzing articles published since
2020, we also identiﬁed a change in the direction of research dedicated to supply chain risk
and resilience; we identiﬁed three other topics that were not recognized as distinct topics
prior to 2020—Operational management; strategy; Sustainable production. The results of
this study help in understanding the change in the direction of research in the area of risk
and resilience of supply chains and thus provide up-to-date information for further research
in this dynamically developing area.
B Peter Madzík
peter.madzik@gmail.com
Lukáš Falát
lukas.falat@fri.uniza.sk
Lukáš Copuš
lukas@copus.sk
Karol ˇCarnogurský
karol.carnogursky@ku.sk
1
Department of Management, Comenius University Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia
2
Department of Macro and Microeconomy, University of Žilina, Žilina, Slovakia
3
Department of Management, Catholic University in Ružomberok, Ružomberok, Slovakia
123

Annals of Operations Research
Keywords Bibliometric review · Supply chain · Risk · Resilience · Text mining · Topic
modeling
1 Introduction
Within the economic cycle, the world goes through periods of economic growth and, thus,
prosperity, but on the other hand, economic decline and, therefore, more difﬁcult periods.
(Gross, 2021; Uzunidis, 2021). Nowadays, however, it may seem that there are no longer
any cycles but that the world is moving from one massive crisis to another. The COVID-19
pandemic has brought enormous shock and disruption to the business (Moosavi et al., 2022;
Yu et al., 2021), affecting organizations operating in all ﬁelds. When it seemed that the world
was slowly getting out of the enormous problems, another disruption came, namely the war
conﬂict in Ukraine, which deepened many unresolved problems caused by the pandemic
and brought new ones (Allam et al., 2022; Tárik, 2022). Among other things, organizations
currently struggle with high input prices and their unavailability (Sokhanvar & Lee, 2022)
caused by sanctions and supply chain disruptions (Jagtap et al., 2022), not only in the man-
ufacturing industry (Klee et al., 2023), but also in the food market (Salo et al., 2022), or in
the services industry (Mbah & Wasum, 2022), which is further reﬂected in areas that affect
our daily life. Risk management plays a vital role in the supply chain in uncertain times by
preventing organizations from acting rashly and incorrectly to become ﬂexible and resilient
(Settembre-Blundo et al., 2021). However, since the world has changed and the standard
approach in supply chain management no longer applies, it is relevant to look at how the
approach to risk management and priorities to ensure long-term sustainability and resilience
of the supply chain in times of constant disruptions has changed over time.
Interest in supply chain risk management in its modern perception reached management
at the turn of the millennium, even though the risk in supply-customer chains, for example,
in terms of shipwrecks or piracy, was a signiﬁcant factor already centuries ago (Zsidisin &
Henke, 2018). One of the most signiﬁcant factors that recently shaped modern risk man-
agement in this area has been the Industry 4.0 period, mainly associated with digitalization
(Qader et al., 2022). Thanks to increasing digitalization in all industries, the supply chain
has gradually become more complex, widespread and vulnerable to disruptions (Arlinghaus
et al., 2020), but not to the extent that it can easily cope with the current situation. However,
the new concept of Industry 5.0, of which digitalization is a natural part, emphasizes three of
its principles (European Commission, 2022): human-centrism, resilience, and sustainability.
In their essence, these principles partly respond to the current problems of risk manage-
ment (Ivanov, 2022) in the context of the supply chain, emphasizing the ability to deal with
unpredictable disruptions built on the resilience of organizations.
However, what speciﬁc areas and trends are currently researched in the supply chain risk
management ﬁeld? Furthermore, to what extent does research respond to the need for building
resilient organizations capable of responding to disruptive events in the context of Industry
5.0? The aim of this study is to present a science map of risk and resilience issues in the
supply chain and thus help to more comprehensively understand the current development of
this dynamically developing area.
123

Annals of Operations Research
2 Literature review
2.1 Bibliometric reviews overview
As in every ﬁeld, and resilience in supply chain risk research is no exception, experts world-
wide devote themselves to processing an overview of the professional literature. This ﬁeld
is in great demand, so we present a literary overview of the most important works based
on recent bibliometric reviews. From the above, we try to indicate which main phrases our
publication will also use. Researchers in various ﬁelds have adopted bibliometric analysis in
conjunction with the systematic literature review (SLR) procedure for mapping the evolution
of the concept in their research domain. (Manders et al., 2017; Rojas-Sánchez et al., 2022).
These analyzes uncovered major patterns in the research area and formed the foundations of
potentially transformative suggestions for further research.
An up-to-date and unique study for the food supply chain (FSC) sector is provided by
Rejeb et al. (2022), where 287 journal articles were extracted and analyzed using bibliometric
techniquesfromScopustodeterminethetemporalevolutionofFSCresearch.TheVOSviewer
program was used to construct a network of critical occurrences and categorize relevant
literature.TheﬁndingsdemonstratetherapidexpansionofFSCresearchduringthepandemic.
Barbosa (2021) carried out a similar bibliometric analysis to critically examine the research
ﬁeld’s development in the period 2008–2019. This study identiﬁed frequently used keywords,
newandcurrentresearchtopics,andoftenstudiedsupplychainmanagement(SCM)practices.
Currentresearchtopicsincludelifecycleassessment,environmentalimpact,packaging,water
use, food waste prevention, food waste generation, blockchain and carbon footprint.
A unique strategy in literature search is presented in the study by Xu et al. (2020), which
offered a comprehensive bibliometric review and visualization of the supply chain ﬁeld based
on 1,310 documents from the Web of Science database. This study analysed data which
includes approximately 18,000 high-quality journals and 1.3 billion cited references starting
from 1900. Tat-Dat Bui et al. (2021) provide a data-driven literature review on sustainable
supply chain management trends towards ambiguity and disruption. A hybrid approach of
data-driven analysis based on content and bibliometric review, fuzzy Delphi method, entropy
weight method and fuzzy decision-making test and evaluation laboratory is used on 273 key-
words and 22 indicators obtained based on expert evaluation. The review’s main contribution
is identifying a knowledge frontier, which subsequently leads to a discussion of the per-
spectives of future studies and practical implementation. A study by Shishodia et al. (2021)
identiﬁed nine critical areas of research and mapped the structural relationships between
dimensions of supply chain resilience (SCRES), namely vulnerabilities, capabilities, strate-
gies and performance metrics.
A speciﬁc procedure for bibliometric literature review is offered in a study by Pournader
et al. (2020). Their study examines supply chain risk publications in nine prestigious man-
agement, operations and supply chain journals to explore trends and emerging topics. Using
a reﬁned set of keywords, it extracted and ﬁltered the most relevant articles on supply chain
risk management (SCRM) from Scopus between 2001 and 2019. The methodology imple-
mented used bibliometric and co-citation analysis of publications in selective management
and operations and supply chain management journals. Bevilacqua et al. (2019) conducted a
broad literature overview on resilience in supply chain research. The study analyzed research
trends and publications on this topic and creates bibliometric maps summarizing the main
scientiﬁc trends within the given topics. They identiﬁed 3,016 articles and ubsequently, the
data set was exported and analyzed using the VOSviewer software.
123

Annals of Operations Research
2.2 Systematic literature reviews overview
Helpful studies were also carried out using a systematic literature overview. Finally, following
the primary goal of our article, we analysed the most up-to-date and most cited professional
sources related to the selected topic.
The authors Suryawanshi and Dutta (2022) offer current results, whose article presents
an overview of quantitative models of supply chain resilience by bibliometric and network
analyses. The authors analyzed 3,672 articles highlighted the intertemporal dimensions of
decision-making and classiﬁes articles based on their applicability to real-world applications.
Systematic mapping using co-citations and the PageRank algorithm resulted in seven key
research themes, and micro-level analysis of these themes provided future research directions.
A study by reveals current cyber threats, disruptions and blockchain paradigms trends. It
opens the door for newcomers who want to use any identiﬁed themes as the focus of their
research.
A pervasive analysis of resilience in business and management was carried out by Lin-
nenluecke (2015). Based on a systematic evaluation of signiﬁcant publications among 339
papers, books and book chapters published between 1977 and 2014, this paper revealed
advances and knowledge gaps in business and management research on resilience. The ﬁnd-
ings indicate opportunities to integrate further and extend current knowledge and approach
to examine resilience in business and management studies. They also point to developing
research trends and directions for future research. Golan et al. (2020) discovered that while
threat uncertainty is uncommon, speciﬁc disruption scenarios are used to create and evaluate
supply chain resilience models. Publications that employ more complex models frequently
neglect adjacent system elements like transportation and command and control networks and
exclusively concentrate on supply chain networks. They saw a sharp rise in the quantity of
relevant publications. Yet just 47 relevant papers were released from 2007 to 2016 and 94
from 2017 to 2019. How does collaboration aid the supplier’s chain in responding to and
recovering from disruption is the subject addressed in the study by Duong and Chong (2020).
They studied a total of 157 papers since 2000. The thematic and descriptive analysis identiﬁed
the usefulness, applied research methodologies, mechanisms of collaboration and inﬂuential
factors of cooperation.
Several authors, in their contributions, addressed systematic literature reviews between
2000 and 2017. The most relevant 228 peer-reviewed research are chosen after Kochan and
Nowicki (2018) have examined 383 articles using the systematic literature review approach.
These peer-reviewed research are organized and synthesized using the context-interventions-
mechanisms-outcomes (CIMO) logic. The classiﬁcation of the SCRES literature using the
CIMO framework leads to the development of a typological framework. Similarly, Hosseini
et al. (2019) conceptualize and comprehensively present a systematic review of supply chain
resilience literature from 2002 to 2017 with quantitative SCR modelling while signiﬁcantly
referring to the original concept of resilience capacity. A total of 168 papers are reviewed in
this study. Karl et al. (2018) conducted a thorough literature analysis to examine how non-
ﬁnancial key performance indicators (KPIs) affect the development of supply chain resilience
(SCRes). The KPIs that had a big an impact on resilience were order and delivery lead time,
on-time delivery, supplier delivery efﬁciency, and customer satisfaction. The ﬁndings aid
managers in the real world by deﬁning particular KPIs for resilience building and contribute
to theory by illuminating an issue that has not received enough attention.
The ﬁndings of a systematic literature review and content analysis are presented by Bier
et al. (2019) and Wan et al. (2017) to offer a thorough overview of the techniques currently
employed to prevent supply chain disruption. The ﬁndings of the literature review suggest
123

Annals of Operations Research
that this ﬁeld of study is interdisciplinary and that no universal modelling language has
yet to be established. They discovered that few works had focused on the junction of risk
and structure, with most prior contributions treating both separately. Following a title and
keyword search, the resultant list of 629 journal articles was further ﬁltered for relevancy.
Subsequently, the abstracts and conclusions of the contributions were analyzed. Accord-
ing to Sabahi and Parast (2019), innovation can help a company’s agility, adaptability, and
knowledge-sharing skills, all of which have a substantial impact on resilience. As a result,
they demonstrated the value of innovation in strengthening a company’s resistance to sup-
ply chain disruption. They presented a conceptual framework that illustrated the connection
between a ﬁrm’s resilience and innovativeness after identifying this relationship. The impact
of each of the most well-known methods to boost resilience (ﬂexibility, agility, redundancy,
and cooperation) while mitigating each form of supply chain disruption was evaluated by
Shekarian and Parast (2020), who conducted a thorough systematic review of the literature
(demand, supply, process disruptions, controls and the environment).
According to Spieske and Birkel (2021), there isn’t a thorough examination of the rela-
tionship between Industry 4.0 and supply chain resilience in the academic literature. To close
this research gap, they provided evidence from a thorough literature evaluation that included
62 papers from reputable journals. They propose a comprehensive framework that illustrates
the relationship between the two domains while examining the state of the art based on the
categorization of Industry 4.0 enabling technologies and the antecedents of supply chain
resilience. The ﬁndings show that big data analysis is especially well suited to enhancing
supply chain resilience. Furthermore, they stress that implementing Industry 4.0 will have
the most positive impact on visibility and speed, which are the antecedents of resilience.
2.3 Research gap
The studies mentioned above focused on the analysis and possibly the development of various
aspects of risk management and disruption in the supply chain. However, the two most
common types of reviews—systematic literature reviews (SLR) and bibliometric literature
reviews (BLR)—naturally have their advantages and disadvantages. Systematic literature
reviews usually work with several dozen studies that they analyze in depth. Their results
are generally narrowly oriented (Shamseer et al., 2015; Page et al., 2021). Development
of the SLR is based on a manual review of the content of selected articles with a given
focus. In SLR, researchers usually focus on capturing latent patterns or common or different
features, which usually lead to a better systematization of the given topic. The purpose of
bibliometrically based studies is to capture the broader scope of the researched area and
possibly capture and explain trends (Cobo et al., 2011). Researchers implementing BLR
usually work with a large number of papers, while their goal is not to examine the internal
content of these papers. Thematically, however, these papers are connected by the fact that
a chain of speciﬁc keywords was used to identify them. BLR results most often show the
broader landscape of the researched topic by indicating the development of the number
of papers over time, the most frequented journals, authors, countries, or an overview of
research impact measured through the number of citations. Currently, however, the trend of
supplementing bibliometric studies with additional information of a more profound nature
is starting to prevail. Compared to standard bibliometric information—such as analyzing
keywords, co-occurrence of authors/keywords etc.—space is opened for using progressive
machine learning tools to identify latent patterns in textual data (Han, 2020; Mariani &
Baggio, 2021). According to some studies, machine text analysis is an effective way to
123

Annals of Operations Research
process a bibliometric review, reducing time when identifying groups of thematically similar
papers (Asmussen & Møller, 2019; Madzík & Falát, 2022).
The aim of our study is to present a scientiﬁc map of risk and resilience issues in the supply
chain. In the study, we present a novel approach based on combining bibliometric tools with
machine learning tools to analyze unstructured text. The study presents the results of this
"smart literature review", which allow a broader and deeper capture of trends in the risk and
resilience in the supply chain as one of the most dynamically developing research areas.
To better operationalize the main objective of this study, we formulated three interrelated
research questions (RQ):
What is the development trend of academic papers in terms of research subject areas related
to risk and resilience issues in supply chain research? (RQ1)
What are the dominant research topics, and how do their research interest and research impact
develop over time? (RQ2)
How have research topics changed under the inﬂuence of the pandemic and other disruptive
events? (RQ3)
3 Methodology
3.1 Research methodology
The methodology of our research consisted of ﬁve main steps: data collection, bibliometric
analysis, text preprocessing, topics allocation using Latent Dirichlet allocation and term-
occurrence analysis. The ﬁrst phase consisted of data collection through the deﬁnition of a
search query and the subsequent acquisition of data from the Scopus database. In this phase,
we also matched subject areas to individual documents. The second phase consisted of a
bibliometric analysis, in which we performed trends discovery, deﬁned metrics for analyses,
analyzed top journals, investigated the development of the number of papers over years, and
also analyzed research interest and research impact in individual subject areas. In the third
phase, we implemented preprocessing of the text corpus using text processing procedures.
The fourth phase "topic modeling" included the creation of a document-term matrix and the
subsequent application of the topic modeling procedure using Latent Dirichlet Allocation.
After the allocation of topics, we visualized the results in a suitable way. For the period after
2019, in addition to LDA, we also performed term-occurrence analysis. The whole process
of how we proceeded in terms of the methodology of our research is shown in Fig. 1.
3.2 Data collection
We used the Scopus database to ﬁnd relevant sources connected to the topic of interest. One
of the most prestigious scientiﬁc databases, the Scopus database, houses a vast amount of
scholarly resources. (Gasparyan & Kitas, 2021; Schotten et al., 2017; Meneses et al., 2015).
The next step was deﬁning the search query. As part of it, we tried to capture articles that
relate to risk in the supply chain and are also related to the so-called resilience. We have also
deﬁned the term through similar words with these words. We ﬁnally deﬁned the search query
as: ( "risk" OR "disrupt*" OR "uncertain*") AND "supply chain" AND ( "resilien*" OR "risk
reduction"). The search criterion was set to TITLE-ABS-KEY, i.e., we selected those articles
where the mentioned query appeared either in the title of the article or in the abstract or in
the keywords of the article.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Research protocol
Furthermore, we did not limit the articles in any other way. As the theme of resilience is
a new theme in the ﬁeld of supply chain, we did not ﬁnd many articles from the old period
through the search. The search criteria returned 2,563 results, mostly from the most recent
time period. We kept all the records from the mentioned set of results. The resulting dataset
had the size of 2563 records.
Individual records contained several items. In addition to the title of the article itself, the
authors, the year of publication, and the name of the source, we also recorded the number of
citations of the given paper, as well as the abstract of the article itself, author keywords and
index keywords. In addition, we expanded the dataset by individual subject areas, of which
there were 26. The reason for this step was the fact that when answering the research question
RQ1, we structured the results according to individual subject areas.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.3 Descriptive analysis
Throughout our research, we monitored two metrics—research interest and research impact.
We deﬁned research interest as the number of papers that were produced during the given
period. We deﬁned research impact as the number of citations to papers from the above set.
Descriptive analysis included several procedures that mainly related to the research ques-
tion RQ1, such as: structuring the number of published articles from the given area for
individual years, tracking the moving mean, structuring the results according to individ-
ual subject areas, or processing the top 10 journals related to of the monitored topic. A
4-year moving mean was selected because it strikes a balance between capturing long-term
trends and preserving some short-term ﬂuctuations. It is slightly less sensitive to short- and
medium-term trends than the 3-year mean and more sensitive than the 5-year mean, while
still providing some level of smoothness. In addition, in research questions RQ2 and RQ3, we
also used frequency tables to represent the most frequently used words in individual topics.
In order to visualize the results, in addition to standard bar graphs, we also used an
intertopic distance map represented by 2D space using the main components. In order to be
able to examine the relationship between identiﬁed topics and individual subject areas, we
created circular layout charts, known by the abbreviation Circos (Krzywinski et al., 2009).
Finally, we monitored changes in the inclusion of articles after 2020 related to the emergence
of the pandemic, i.e. j. transition from general topics to pandemic topics. We monitored the
above using the Sankey diagram.
3.4 Data preprocessing
The entire topic modeling process was implemented in the R programming language. For
this purpose, we used the text mining library (library name: tm) and SnowballC library.
For modeling topics from abstracts of scientiﬁc articles using the latent dirichlet allocation
method, the ﬁrst and necessary step was the creation of a corpus of abstracts.
The next step was the preprocessing of the text of abstracts. Machine pre-processing of the
text is carried out for two reasons: to increase the speed of processing and for more accurate
processing. Even if the words are almost the same, a different preﬁx or sufﬁx can cause the
machine to evaluate these words as different in machine processing. For this reason, we ﬁrstly
performed so-called basic text cleaning. Basic text cleaning included several procedures. We
performed the following procedures. As a ﬁrst step, we retyped all letters to lowercase.
The reason for performing the lowercase was the consistency of the text corpus. Since the
computer evaluates letters according to a character table (e.g. ASCII), each letter has its own
code. An uppercase letter of the same character has a different code than a lowercase letter
of the same character. It means that even if it is the same letter for a human, for computer
processing the lowercase and uppercase letters are two different characters (different codes).
Therefore, to avoid the inconsistency of the results, we performed lowercase. If we did not
perform the lowercase procedure, it could happen that two words that consist of the same
letters and mean the same thing could be evaluated by the computer as two separate terms,
for example because one of the words would be capitalized or would be at the beginning of a
sentence. This fact could affect the accuracy of the results of the LDA procedure. Therefore,
we decided to perform the lowercase procedure.
We also removed punctuation and numbers. The next step was the deletion of the so-called
stopwords. It is a set of words that are not of a full meaning and that do not add value during
processing. Examples of such words are, for example, prepositions, conjunctions, particles
123

Annals of Operations Research
or pronouns. To remove such words, we used the variable stopwords("english"), which was
deﬁned in the text-mining package called tm in the R language. As a next step, we removed
the extra spaces that remained in the text after the removed stopwords. Next, we carried out
stemming—cutting words to a word base. The mentioned procedure is standard in machine
text processing and guarantees more efﬁcient and accurate processing.
In addition to standard text cleaning, we performed a second phase of removing stopwords,
which we deﬁned manually.1 Again, these were words that have a general meaning and do
not add value when processed.
Finally, we deﬁned in a similar way even more words, which we called resilience stop-
words,2 and which we deleted in the third phase. The reason was that although these are
not non-speciﬁc words in themselves, in the ﬁeld of supply chain they are words that have
a general meaning and their presence in the LDA analysis would distort the results. The last
step was to delete the excess spaces after we removed such words. In addition to the entire
dataset, we also modeled topics on the so-called pandemic dataset (RQ3). There, as part of
removing unnecessary words, we also removed two more words: "covid", "pandem" (only
root words were used in the modeling, for this reason we removed only "pandem" instead of
"pandemic").
3.5 Document-term matrix
Before the topic modeling itself, we still needed to change the internal data structure. From
the corpus of abstracts, we created the so-called document-term matrix, the structure of which
was as follows: the number of rows of this matrix was the number of documents (abstracts).
The number of columns was equal to the number of all words that occurred even once in
the corpus. In the case of the analysis of the entire dataset, the total number of words (after
preprocessing) was 12,361.3 Since the given matrix also contained words that appeared very
rarely in our abstracts, it was not of great importance to take them into account in the topic
modeling itself. For this reason, we reduced the dtm matrix by removing words that appeared
1 "can","say","one","way","use","also","howev","tell","will","much","need","take","tend","even","like",
"particular","rather","said","get","well","make","ask","come","end","ﬁrst","two","help","often","may",
"might","see","someth","thing","point","post","look","right","now’","think", "re","anoth","put","set","new",
"good","want","sure","kind","larg","yes,","day","etc.","quit","sinc",
"attempt","lack","seen","awar","littl",
"ever","moreov","though","found","abl","enough","far","earli","away","achiev","draw","last","never","brief",
"bit","entir","brief","great","lot".
2 "suppli", "chain", "resili", "risk", "disrupt", "studi", "â©", "research", "paper", "result", "propos",
"approach", "provid", "identiﬁ", "analysi", "ﬁnd", "base", "framework", "literatur", "method", "consid",
"case", "level", "present", "author", "includ", "time", "uncertainti", "relat", "show", "natur", "focus", "pur-
pos", "signiﬁc", "futur", "potenti", "review", "contribut", "problem", "high", "build", "publish", "understand",
"implement", "analyz", "work", "address", "discuss", "current", "examin", "implic", "articl", "mani", "issu",
"solut", "indic", "face", "appli", "context", "elsevi", "continu", "various", "within", "area", "among", "the-
ori", "explor", "associ", "enabl", "addit", "lead", "major","exist", "main", "methodolog", "activ", "custom",
"insight", "suggest", "function", "becom", "creat", "therefor", "ﬁnal", "across", "analys", "collect", "test",
"part", "demonstr", "three", "determin", "ensur", "tool", "term", "recent", "springer", "depend", "better",
"specif", "avail", "originalityvalu","toward", "multipl", "emerald", "state", "number", "reveal", "highlight",
"follow", "total", "allow", "nation", "initi", "involv", "thus", "analyt", "possibl", "year", "exampl", "type",
"respond", "illustr","relev", "âe “", "ﬁeld", "overal", "switzerland", "along", "novel", "essenti", "theoret",
"goal", "action", "link", "must", "organis", "obtain", "general", "second", "consider", "franci", "taylor", "char-
acterist", "regard", "occur", "incorpor", "interest", "best", "describ", "topic", "four", "attent","uncertain",
"view", "especi", "furthermor", "ieee", "introduc", "comprehens", "individu", "appropri", "stage", "scienc",
"access", "numer", "solv", "â©", "ltd", "ie".
3 In the case of the analysis of the pandemic dataset, this number was 9206.
123

Annals of Operations Research
in less than 3 documents. Threshold three documents represented a rounded value of 0.1
percent of all documents (2.563).
In addition, we kept only words whose length was more than 3 characters and less than 21
in the document-term matrix. Words that have only three characters are often conjunctions,
parts, prepositions, or other meaningless words. We assume that most of these words have
been removed in previous stages of preprocessing. However, even after preprocessing, words
without full meaning could remain in the corpus, and we got rid of them with this step. It is
possible that words with a length of three characters were also full-meaning terms. However,
the relevance of full-meaning words with a length of three characters is questionable. Regard-
ing the upper limit of the maximum word length, from the analysis carried out by Sigurd
et al. (2004) words of more than 20 characters occur in the English language have a very low
proportion (0.015 percent). For this reason, as well as the fact that these are often compound
words (e.g. links to websites), we have decided not to take these words into account. The
resulting dtm matrix, which was the input for the theme modeling process, had a dimension
of: 2563 × 3827.
3.6 Latent Dirichlet allocation
Topic modeling is an advanced method of text analytics that allows extracting essential
information from text data without reading the text. The mentioned machine processing of
the text seems to be an advantage, especially if we have a huge amount of text and its manual
reading and processing would take a lot of time. A similar problem was the problem of
processing abstracts of articles from the selected research area. By default, this problem
is solved through a standardized method called systematic literature review. However, this
procedure is very time-consuming and is not suitable for processing such a large corpus of
documents, as it was in our case (2,563 documents). For this reason, we have chosen an
approach based on machine learning, which has topic modeling.
The actual implementation of topic modeling was done in the R programming language
using the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). LDA is a very popular technique for topic
modelling (Jelodar et al., 2019). LDA is a generative probabilistic model of a corpus (Blei
et al., 2003). LDA is able to probabilistically divide the entire corpus of documents into
several clusters (parts) based on the structure of individual documents. From the point of
view of artiﬁcial intelligence, it is an unsupervised machine learning approach based on a
probability distribution of the Dirichlet type.
Resulting from the original paper of Blei et al. (2003), LDA is based on two basic assump-
tions. A topic is a set of multiple documents, and a document is composed of multiple words.
The idea is that based on the composition of individual words in the documents, we are able
to derive the composition of latent topics. Each document is generated by a process that has
a Dirichlet probability distribution with parameter alpha. Based on the mentioned process,
we are then able to calculate theta (probability distribution of topics for documents) and
thereby select the topic and subsequently draw individual words. In other words, documents
are represented as random mixtures over latent topics, where each topic is characterized by a
distribution over words. According to Blei and Lafferty (2009), LDA assumes the following
process for each document w in a corpus D:
1.
For each topic create a distribution over words βk ~ DirV (η)
2.
For each document
a. Create distribution θd ~ Dir (α)
123

Annals of Operations Research
b. For each of the N words wn:
a)
Choose a topic zd,n ~ Multinomial (θd)
b) choose a word wd,n from Multinomial(βz(d,n)), a multinomial probability conditioned on
the topic zd,n.
A k-dimensional Dirichlet random variable θ has the following probability density on this
simplex
p(θ|α ) =

k
i=1 αi

k
i=1 (αi)
θα1−1
1
. . . θαk−1
k
,
(1)
where the parameter α is a k-vector with components α > 0, and where (x) is the Gamma
function (Blei et al., 2003).
3.7 Topic modelling implementation
We implemented the topic modeling using the LDA method. The input parameter to LDA
procedure was the reduced dtm matrix from Sect. 3.5. The output of the LDA algorithm was
the probabilistic assignment of each document to an individual topic (probability cluster) with
a certain probability. The sum of the individual probabilities of assigning a given document
to a given cluster was equal to 1 for each document. On the basis of the above, we then
assigned the document to the cluster where the probability of assignment was maximum for
further purposes.
The LDA method can be implemented in several ways. In our case, we chose to estimate
the parameters of this method through Gibbs sampling (Grifﬁths & Steyvers, 2004; Grun
& Hornik, 2011). In addition, we set the following hyperparameters of the LDA method.
We set the number of iterations to 1000, while the ﬁrst 100 were not taken into account
when creating the probability distribution due to possible distortion (burnin parameter). Due
to the limitation of the autocorrelation of the results, we took into account only every 40th
observation (parameter thin). We chose the number of clusters k by experimental testing
and expert evaluation. To increase objectivity, we performed each experiment (for each k)
ﬁve times, saving only the best of the ﬁve executed program runs. The set of handles we
tested for all k was the same and contained the following handles (12, 387, 9147, 5438,
101). We performed all the mentioned procedures in the R programming language using the
topicmodels library.
Thus, for each k (number of clusters), we performed ﬁve runs, always saving only the best
results. Subsequently, we used an expert approach to assess the best number of clusters k. In
addition to the interpretability of individual topics, we also took into account the consistency
and structure of the topic. In this way, we evaluated the number of clusters k = {7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14}. Based on the mentioned procedure, we chose the number of clusters k =
10.4
Subsequently, for better explainability of individual topics, we used the LDAvis library
for visualization of created topics in the 2D space of the main components (Sievert & Shirley,
2014).
4 For the pandemic dataset, we ﬁnally selected the number of clusters to k = 8.
123

Annals of Operations Research
3.8 Term-occurrence analysis
To answer research question RQ3, we performed a subset of the entire set of observations.
Only articles published after 2020 were included in the analysis—i.e., after the outbreak of
the Covid-19 pandemic. Our assumption was that the Covid pandemic affected the entire risk
supply chain sector. From the entire dataset, we subsequently obtained 1,465 articles that
met the above criteria.
We performed the analysis of term occurrence for the Abstract variable in selected articles.
We used the VOS Viewer software to analyze term occurrences. Counting method was chosen
as full counting and minimum number of occurrences of a term was chosen to be 10. Such a
condition was met by 994 words in our set of pandemic abstracts. From the above set of words,
we subsequently removed some high-frequency words that had a generic or unimportant
meaning and would distort the results of term-occurrence analysis. Based on the resulting
set of words, a network visualization of term occurrences of the most frequent terms in the
dataset was subsequently created.
4 Results
After entering the search query, the Scopus database returned 2,563 documents related to
risk and resilience issues in supply chain research. These documents cover approximately
the last 20 years. When processing the results, we proceeded with the established research
questions. The results are thus structured to respond sequentially to the three established
research questions—Sect. 4.1 is devoted to RQ1, Sect. 4.2 is devoted to RQ2, and Sect. 4.3
is devoted to RQ3.
4.1 Development trend of academic papers in terms of research subject areas
related to risk and resilience issues in supply chain research
Topics related to risk in the supply chain have been well-adopted in the research community
since 2000. Around this time, topics related to resilience, which is perceived as one of the
components of risk management, also began to appear. An overview of the development of
the number of published papers can be found in Fig. 2.
The data was collected on November 21st 2022, so it can still be assumed that further
studies on this topic will still grow slightly in 2022. Nevertheless, a clear trend can be seen
that points to a continuous increase in interest in the topics of risk and resilience in the
supply chain. At the same time, however, the graph shows that the long-term trend had a
linear character until 2019. The year 2020 was crucial from the point of view of scientiﬁc
interest in the mentioned topics—this year saw a signiﬁcant increase in scientiﬁc interest.
The pandemic, the consequences of which began to manifest themselves in 2020, pointed to
the vulnerability of supply chains and the need for research into robust solutions that mitigate
the risks associated with unpredictable environmental disruptions (Settembre-Blundo et al.,
2021).
The collected data allowed the results to be classiﬁed into groups according to subject
areas. Scopus classiﬁes each scientiﬁc journal into one or more subject areas, recognizing
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Development of published papers related to risk and resilience in supply chain research
26 subject areas.5 For our research, we can use subject areas to indicate research interest
and research impact of risk and resilience issues in supply chain research. It should be noted
that one paper can be included in more than one subject area, depending on the subject areas
to which a speciﬁc resource is assigned (journal, book, proceedings). Therefore, a certain
distortion of the results can occur, even though it is a natural occurrence. Past studies have
pointed out this distortion, but at the same time stated that the reliability of the results was
affected only to a small extent (Madzík & Falát, 2022; Madzík et al., 2023). The number of
published papers can measure research interest, and the total number of citations to articles
in a given subject area can measure research impact. Figure 2 shows the research impact and
research interest in individual subject areas.
According to Fig. 3, it can be seen that research on risk and resilience issues in supply
chain research dominates primarily in three subject areas—BUSI, ENGI and DECI. This
dominance concerns both research interest and research impact. More than half of published
papers (54.3%) were published precisely in these three subject areas, and more than 2/3
(69.2%) of all citations are related to them. However, a more accurate picture of the industry
focus of the analyzed articles can be provided by the analysis of journals. Therefore, we again
conducted such an analysis from the perspective of research interest and research impact.
The results can be found in Table 1, sorted by the total number of citations.
The journal with the most signiﬁcant research impact in the monitored area is the Inter-
national Journal of Production Research. By far, the most high-impact studies (90) were
published in this journal, while more than half (48) of them were published in the last three
5 AGRI—Agricultural and Biological Sciences; ARTS—Arts and Humanities; BIOC—Biochemistry,
Genetics and Molecular Biology; BUSI—Business, Management and Accounting; CENG—Chemi-
cal Engineering; CHEM—Chemistry; COMP—Computer Science; DECI—Decision Sciences; DEN-
T—Dentistry; EART—Earth and Planetary Sciences; ECON—Economics, Econometrics and Finance;
ENER—Energy; ENGI—Engineering; ENVI—Environmental Science; IMMU—Immunology and Microbi-
ology; HEAL—Health Professions; MATE—Materials Science; MATH—Mathematics; MEDI—Medicine;
NEUR—Neuroscience; NURS—Nursing; PHAR—Pharmacology, Toxicology and Pharmaceutics; PHYS—-
Physics and Astronomy; PSYC—Psychology; SOCI—Social Sciences; VETE—Veterinary.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 Research impact and research interest in particular subject areas
years. The most signiﬁcant interest in the scientiﬁc community was noted on the article by
Ivanov et al. (2019), which focuses on the impact of digitalization and Industry 4.0 on the
ripple effect and disruption risk control analytics in the supply chain. In this article, the
authors focus primarily on explaining the relationships between several aspects of digital
technologies and supply chain disruption risks.
Another journal with a relatively high research impact is the International Journal of
Production Economics. Although the number of articles in this journal is smaller than in the
previous case, several interesting articles are devoted to the risk and resilience issue. The
article with the most signiﬁcant research impact was published in 2008 by Tang and Tomlin.
In their study, the authors looked at a previously overlooked problem—how much ﬂexibility
is needed to mitigate supply chain risks. The article discusses strategies based on the agility
principle, which enables the supply chain to become more ﬂexible to reduce the negative
implications of particular events associated with supply, process, and demand risks.
Supply Chain Management is a reasonably respected journal in the scientiﬁc community,
which is in third place in the table. As one of the few periodicals speciﬁcally focused on
supply chain research, it covers a relatively wide range of topics—not excluding risk or
resilience.ThestudybyJüttnerandMaklan(2011)hadthehighestresearchimpact.Thisstudy
set out to conceive supply chain resilience as well as empirically pinpoint and investigate
its connections to related ideas like supply chain vulnerability and risk management. The
authors document the positive impact of supply chain risk on supply chain resilience and
the positive effect of supply chain resilience on supply chain vulnerability. They also claim
that through enhancing the supply chain’s ﬂexibility, visibility, velocity, and collaboration
capacities, supply chain risk tends to improve supply chain resilience.
The scientiﬁc journal Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review is another periodical with a signiﬁcant share of publications in this area. The biggest
impact published in this journal was the recently published article by the above-mentioned
author Ivanov (2020a, 2020b, 2020c). The author of this paper concentrated on forecasting
how epidemic outbreaks will affect international supply networks and enhancing supply chain
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Top 10 journals related to risk and resilience issues in supply chain research
Journal
1996–2022 +
2020–2022 +
Top paper
Papers
Citations
Papers
Citations
Paper
Citations
International
Journal of
Production
Research
90
7755
48
2322
Ivanov et al. (2019)
591
International
Journal of
Production
Economics
48
4337
25
914
Tang and Tomlin
(2008)
547
Supply Chain
Management
44
3179
17
207
Jüttner and Maklan
(2011)
558
Transportation
Research Part
E: Logistics
and Trans-
portation
Review
26
3048
12
1340
Ivanov (2020a, 2020b,
2020c)
862
MIT Sloan
Management
Review
3
2728
0
0
Chopra and Sodhi
(2004)
1407
The
International
Journal of
Logistics
Management
3
2530
0
0
Christopher and Peck
(2004a, 2004b)
1579
Journal of
Business
Logistics
12
2038
5
138
Pettit et al., (2010a,
2010b)
625
Computers and
Industrial
Engineering
41
1668
24
276
Soni et al., (2014))
233
European
Journal of
Operational
Research
15
1520
5
179
Klibi et al. (2010)
583
Omega
13
1399
4
59
Heckmann et al.,
(2015a, 2015b)
543
resilience. His simulation-based analysis was based on the coronavirus outbreak case. The
author views epidemic breakouts as a speciﬁc case of supply chain hazards that are charac-
terized by high unpredictability, long-term disruption existence, and disruption propagation.
Although only three older studies focused on supply chain risk management in the context
of resilience were published in the scientiﬁc journal MIT Sloan Management Review, these
studies have had a signiﬁcant impact. The most cited study was the one by Chopra and Sodhi
(2004). According to them, supply chain risk can be caused by a variety of events, including
terrorism, labor disputes, natural catastrophes, and supplier bankruptcy. Potential supply
chain risks include delays, disruptions, inaccurate forecasts, system failures, intellectual
123

Annals of Operations Research
property violations, poor procurement, inventory concerns, and capacity issues. They then
concentrated on comprehending the causes, practical mitigation strategies, and variety and
interconnectedness of the aforementioned supply chain risks so that managers could develop
balanced, efﬁcient risk-reduction strategies for their businesses in order to create resilient
organizations.
Only three older studies were also published in The International Journal of Logistics
Management, but they also had a signiﬁcant impact. Among all the studies presented in
this review, the study by Christopher and Peck (2004a, 2004b) received the most citations.
They state that the supply chain becomes essential for many organizations in uncertain and
turbulent times. Yet, they also make the point that as supply networks get more intricate as a
result of international sourcing and the ongoing "leaning down" tendency, supply chain risk
rises. As a result, they view it as difﬁcult to control and reduce that risk by developing more
robust supply chains.
Another journal with a relatively high impact is the Journal of Business Logistics. From
the point of view of citations, the most signiﬁcant article is by Pettit et al., (2010a, 2010b). As
interruptions can occur in even the most clearly planned supply chain, they view resilience as
a critical competence. To assist organizations in managing risk and change, they present the
new Supply Chain Resilience Framework. Their ﬁndings imply that two dimensions—vul-
nerabilities and capabilities—can be used to evaluate supply chain resilience. It is suggested
that businesses will be most lucrative in the long run when they are in the Zone of Resilience,
which is described as the optimal equilibrium between vulnerabilities and capabilities.
A relatively large number of articles focused on the investigated issue were published
in the journal Computers and Industrial Engineering, while more than half were published
in the previous three years. The article by Soni et al. gained the most signiﬁcant interest
of the professional public (2014). They provide an innovative method for calculating the
supply chain resilience index, which promotes a signiﬁcant advantage in a dynamic company
environment. Developing robust supply chains to reduce risk is one of an organization’s key
problems.
Another inﬂuential scientiﬁc journal in this research area is the European Journal of
Operational Research. Klibi et al. (2010) published the article that had the strong impact on
the ﬁeld of research. The supply chain network design issue under uncertainty is covered in
this article. The paper examines signiﬁcant random environmental factors and discusses the
types of signiﬁcant disruptive events that pose a threat to the supply chain network through
an analysis of supply chain uncertainty sources and risk exposures. The authors conclude
by stating that in order to guarantee resilient and sustainable value creation, supply chain
robustness must be evaluated.
As part of our review, we will also mention the scientiﬁc journal Omega and the scientiﬁc
study by the authors Heckmann et al., (2015a, 2015b), which focused on a critical review of
supply chain risk. They claim that as supply chain disruptions have happened more frequently
and with more serious results in the past, interest in risk management has grown. Because
well-informed decisions are necessary for maintaining resilient organizations, this research
reviews existing quantitative supply chain risk management approaches with an emphasis on
the deﬁnition of supply chain risk and related concepts.
4.2 Dominant research topics and their development over time
Using the LDA algorithm, we analyzed the text data, which contained abstracts of all 2,563
analyzed documents. This algorithm compares the co-occurrence of terms in each paper and
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Intertopic distance map and frequencies of terms
accordingly creates groups of co-occurring words. A topic was created by frequency and
content analysis of the composition of words in each group. One term could also be found in
several topics but with different frequencies. The intermingling of terms indicated the internal
heterogeneity of the topics and, thus, their unclear mutual distinction. In order to get unique
topics that would overlap as little as possible, we performed several experiments. We analyzed
the results for the number of topics 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14. For each experiment, we
subsequently assessed the interpretive reliability of the results (by expert evaluation of the
relatedness of the words in the given topic). In this combined way, we determined the ﬁnal
number of topics. The best interpretable results with sufﬁcient perplexity were identiﬁed for
ten topics, shown in Fig. 4.
Research interest is given by the size of the bubble of each topic, and the size of the bar
around the bubble gives research impact. The intertopic distance map represents a multidi-
mensional scaling view of topics (the axis represents principal components). It is necessary
to say that stopwords (terms that were not included in the analysis) also included the search
phrases entered by us—"risk"; "disrupt*"; "uncertain*"; "supply chain"; "resilien*"; "risk
reduction". Since they formed the basis for the search, their frequencies were extremely
high, and this caused a low degree of perplexity and high heterogeneity of topics.
Note that the term structure contains only word stems, not whole words. The mentioned
phenomenon of word shortening is related to the pre-processing phase of the text performed
before LDA modeling. After creating the text corpus, various procedures for text processing
were subsequently applied to it. One of the mentioned procedures was stemming—cutting
words down to a root word (word stem). In general, this standard procedure is performed
due to the higher consistency of the corpus and consequently the higher credibility of the
LDA results. If the procedure was not carried out, it could happen that two terms, which
basically mean the same thing (have the same word base), would be evaluated by the model
as two separate words. However, we wanted to ensure that words with the same word stem,
whose essential meaning is the same (from the point of view of computer processing), were
123

Annals of Operations Research
merged together. So we performed stemming because we wanted to group words with the
same meaning and word stem into one concept.
From the interpretation point of view, it must be said that each topic, in addition to
the most frequent words, also contains three investigated components—risk, resilience and
supply chain. The naming of the topics was also adapted to this, which are as follows:
Pandemic impacts on food supply chain (Topic-01). This topic is represented by terms that
are closely related to food and the pandemic—"food", "pandem", "covid", "impact", and
"country". It is a relatively large topic, the research impact of which is medium. The highest
impact of this topic was on research on demand-side shock on food supply chains (e.g.
panic buying behaviours, sudden change in consumption patterns) (Hobbs, 2020), unexpected
ﬂuctuations in waste composition and quantity and biomedical, plastic and food management
(Sharma et al., 2020), or using simulation to demonstrate disruptions in the food supply chain
(Singh et al., 2020).
Practices for capability and performance (Topic-02). The composition of words in this topic
is closely related to the issue of capability and performance—"ﬁrm", "capabl", "practic", "per-
form", and "limit". It is a topic with a relatively high research interest but has the highest
research impact among all topics. The most important articles in this topic focus, for exam-
ple, on understanding supply chain resilience and the concepts of resilience and robustness
(Brandon-Jones et al., 2014), factors that contribute to the development of ﬁrm resilience to
supply chain disruptions (Ambulkar et al., 2015), or the effect of relational competencies for
the resilience of supply chains (2013).
Supplier-related modeling and optimization (Topic-03). Within this topic, words such as
"model", "supplier", "cost", "decis", and "optim" dominated, which are closely related to the
issue of optimization. It is a relatively important topic, the research interest of which is the
highest among all (a total of 375 published articles) and at the same time, its research impact
is also very high. Research within this topic focuses, for example, on analyzing the severity
of supply chain disruptions (Craighead et al., 2007), disruptive events related to supply chain
network design (Klibi et al., 2010), effects of disruption risk in a supply chain (Babich et al.,
2006).
System security and critical infrastructure (Topic-04). The most frequent words in this topic
were "system", "secur", "critic", "servic", and "infrastructure". It is a topic with a medium
research interest but minimal research impact. The studies in this topic focus, for example,
on the protection of critical infrastructure—e.g. petrochemical supply chain (Vugrin et al.,
2011), security threats in global supply chains (Sarathy, 2006), or energy supply chains and
building resilience against exogenous security threats (Urciuoli et al., 2014), or developing
qualitative measures for modelling engineering resilience (Yodo & Wang, 2016).
Production changes (Topic-05). This topic was named after the most common terms, which
include "product", "change", "increas", "adapt", and "develop". The topic has little research
impact and research interest. Research here is focused, for example, on collaboration amongst
producers for reducing supply chain vulnerability (Leat & Revoredo-Giha, 2013), assessment
of the vulnerability of critical material supply chain (Gaustad et al., 2018), or research of
complex multi-product and multi-country supply chain for improving operational resilience
(Priya Datta et al., 2007).
ITinmanufacturingprocess(Topic-06).Thetitleofthistopicwasbasedonthemostfrequent
terms such as "industri", "process", "inform", "technolog", and "manufactur". This topic
has medium research interest and minor research impact. The research focuses on various
IT aspects and technologies associated with production. The most cited studies concern,
for example, the use of blockchain technology to increase transparency, accountability and
123

Annals of Operations Research
resilience of supply chains (Kshetri, 2018; Min, 2019) or the investigation of the role of
technologies in mitigation risk related to disruptions like Covid-19 (Belhadi et al., 2021).
Sustainability in global economy (Topic-07). The title of this topic is related to the words
"sustain", "global", "econom", "disast", and "region". It has medium research interest and
lower research impact. Studies within this topic focus on supply chain sustainability learning
from the covid pandemic (Sarkis, 2020), the global economy throughout supply chain risk
based on ﬂood risks (Haraguchi & Lall, 2015), shift from traditional risk through security to
resilience and sustainability (Wan et al., 2018).
Management and business approach (Topic-08). In this topic, words related to business
procedures such as "manag", "busi", "company", "factor", and "logist" appear most often.
The research interest of this topic is relatively high, as is its research impact. Scientiﬁc
publications on this topic deal with managing and mitigating risk through creating more
resilient supply chains (Christopher & Peck, 2004a, 2004b), building ﬂexibility by resilient
companies into each of essential supply chain elements (Rice & Shefﬁ, 2005), perspectives on
the ways of building perspectives using knowledge from several disciplines like psychology
or ecosystems (Ponomarov & Holcomb, 2009).
Modeling and design of complex networks (Topic-09). This topic contains words related
mainly to designing networks, speciﬁcally the words "network", "model", "effect", "com-
plex", and "design". This topic has a higher research interest and a very high research impact.
The studies in this topic focus, for example, on the viability of intertwined supply networks
and on extending the supply chain resilience angles towards survivability (Ivanov & Dolgui,
2020), economic networks and systems also built on supply chains (Schweitzer et al., 2009),
or on a redesign of structures and replanning of performance with long-term impacts on a
supply chain to achieve viability (Ivanov, 2020a, 2020b, 2020c).
Operational strategies for risk mitigation (Topic-10). In this topic, the words "strategi",
"oper","impact","mitig"and"event"appearedmostoften.Thistopichaslessresearchinterest
but a medium research impact. Research within this topic includes, for example, the analysis
of drivers and effective mitigation strategies (Chopra & Sodhi, 2004), robust strategies for
mitigating supply chain disruptions (Tang, 2006), or critical issues for managing supply chain
disruptions (Blackhurst et al., 2005).
As for the representation of individual subject areas, the composition of individual topics
is not homogeneous. For example, the subject area BUSI dominates the most in Topic-02
(Practices for capability and performance), while ENGI has the highest representation in
Topic-09 (Modeling and design of complex networks). Since BUSI and ENGI are the most
numerous subject areas, it could be assumed that their representation will be signiﬁcant in all
topics. However, this is not the case because, in Topic-10 (Pandemic impacts on food supply
chain), the representation is very heterogeneous and consists of almost all subject areas.
A high degree of heterogeneity was also shown for Topic-04 (System security and critical
infrastructure) and Topic-05 (Production changes). The composition of all topics concerning
the representation of individual subject areas can be found in Fig. 5 in the Circos display
(Krzywinski et al., 2009). For a better display, we showed only the nine most numerous
subject areas, while the others have been merged into the 10-Other category.
When analyzing the topics themselves, we also examined their development over time.
To determine the dynamics of development, we analyzed topics for the period 2008–2022
(the last 15 years) since the number of articles before this period was negligible. The results
are shown in Fig. 6, where we have shown the development of research interest (measured
through the number of published papers in a given year) and research impact (measured
through the number of citations of all articles in a given year).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Relatioships between topics and subject areas
We analyzed the development of research interest and research impact. Based on the
results, we can classify the topics into three groups—growing, stable and decreasing. The
ﬁrst group consists of growing topics. From the results, it can be seen that Topic-01 (Pandemic
impacts on food supply chain) recorded the most signiﬁcant change. This topic practically
did not exist until 2020, while it is currently the topic with the highest research interest
and research impact. This result only conﬁrms the massive impact of the pandemic on the
perception of risk management and resilience. The pandemic highlighted the supply chain’s
vulnerability, which resulted in a dramatic increase in research aimed at eliminating the
impacts of such disruptive events (Kumar & Kumar Singh, 2022). An increase in research
impact was also noted for Topic-06 (IT in manufacturing process). The role of IT in elim-
inating risks caused by disruptive events would grow signiﬁcantly. Digitalization and the
vast possibilities of prevention against external risks associated with it are currently among
prospective research trends (Mukherjee et al., 2021). The slightly growing research inter-
est also corresponds to this. The third growing topic was Topic-02 (Practices for capability
and performance). This topic played an essential role in the scientiﬁc space about a decade
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Development of research interest and research impact of particular topics
ago, and its "rebirth" under the inﬂuence of disruptive events starting in 2019 is interesting.
According to some researchers, the pandemic and other unpredictable crises were an exter-
nal impetus for developing innovative practices that would increase performance. From this
point of view, disruptive events are not perceived as a threat but as an opportunity (Nikookar
& Yanadori, 2022), which can partially explain the increase in interest and impact of this
topic.
Trend analysis also revealed topics that are relatively stable over time. This category
includes, for example, Topic-08 (Management and business approach), which is relatively
stable in terms of research interest and research impact. It is a relatively generic topic that
deals with various aspects of management related to risk and resilience (El Korchi, 2022).
Another topic with a similarly stable long-term trend is Topic-07 (Sustainability in global
economy). Although it is a less important topic with less research impact, it still constitutes a
relevantresearchdirection.Thisisprobablyduetothestablescientiﬁcinterestintopicsrelated
to sustainability (Shen et al., 2022). Among the stable topics is also Topic-05 (Production
123

Annals of Operations Research
changes), which shows long-term stagnation, and its impact is practically negligible. It can
be assumed that the reason may be the relative generality of this topic. It may also be because,
over time, more speciﬁc scientiﬁc directions were deﬁned into which this topic was dissolved
(e.g. Brink et al., 2022). An interesting topic with a stable trend is Topic-03 (Supplier-related
modelling and optimization). It is a topic with a strong research interest, which is important
in topics related to risk management and supply chain resilience. The highest research impact
for this topic was recorded in 2015–2018, but it has stabilized currently. Building a resilient
supply chain is also largely related to the optimization and modelling approach, which is
often narrowly related to suppliers (Kabak & Oztek, 2022). That would explain the stability
of this topic over time.
The development of individual topics also pointed to those that are declining over time and
may be replaced by more current research directions in the future. This is, for example, Topic-
04 (System security and critical infrastructure). This topic recorded high research interest in
the period 2008–2012, but since then, it has been slowly decreasing. The research impact of
this topic is negligible in the entire observed period. Topic, which has been decreasing in the
last three years, is also Topic-09 (Modeling and design of complex networks). Such a topic
had signiﬁcant research interest and research impact, especially in the period 2013–2019.
However, in the pandemic years 2020–2022, both the interest and the impact of the topic
dropped to almost half. This could probably be explained by the fact that the issue of complex
networks is becoming more specialized in sub-topics over time (e.g. Hosseini et al., 2020).
The last topic with a downward trend is Topic-10 (Operational strategies for risk mitigation).
This topic decreases continuously during the entire observed period. At the same time, its
research impact is negligible, so it can be expected that this trend will probably continue.
4.3 Change of research topics under the influence of the pandemic and other
disruptive events
The Covid-19 pandemic has triggered a chain of negative effects that strongly impact practi-
cally all aspects of life. These impacts, together with other strong disruptive events (energy
and food crisis, war conﬂict in Europe, migration waves, etc.) exposed the vulnerability of
supply chains. The results presented in the previous chapter showed a signiﬁcant change in
long-term research trends. For a more detailed understanding of this change, in this section,
we looked at articles published in the "age of disruptive events" (2020–2022). We narrowed
the total number of published articles to the mentioned period and thus analyzed 1465 papers.
We processed the results from the analysis of term occurrences in the VOS Viewer program.
Network visualization of term occurrences in the analyzed papers is shown in Fig. 7.
It can be seen from the picture that the best interpretable results with sufﬁcient perplexity
were identiﬁed for eight topics: Food sector; Performance and capabilities; Supplier network
modelling; Sustainable production; Critical system issues; Industrial technologies; Strategy;
and Operations Management. From the perspective of the composition and frequency of
individual terms, it can be concluded that some topics have remained more or less unchanged
compared to the original ones. In some cases, however, it is possible to talk about newly
created topics that were not the subject of scientiﬁc interest or did not exist before the "age of
disruptive events". Since we included papers published in 2020–2022 not only in this analysis
but also in identifying overall topics presented in the previous section, we can compare the
change in topics. The results can be found in Fig. 8.
From the picture, we can see that some topics were reshaped. It is primarily about Opera-
tionsmanagement(NewTopic-08),whichwascreatedbythefusionofallprevioustopics.This
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 7 Visualization of term occurrences in abstracts of papers published in 2020 +
topic contains a relatively broad spectrum of smaller research topics and will likely continue
to develop over time (Sajjad, 2021). Another newly created topic is Strategy (NewTopic-07),
a mixture of all previously identiﬁed topics. The strategic implications of risk management
and resilience of the supply chain are apparent, but only disruptive events pointed more
signiﬁcantly to the area of strategy (Masruroh et al., 2022). Another new research area is
Sustainable production (NewTopic-04), which is also the result of merging several previous
topics. Sustainability is increasingly gaining importance, and disruptions from the external
environment only contribute to this (Song et al., 2022). A partially new topic that has appeared
since 2020 is Critical system issues (NewTopic-05). This topic was created by combining the
original Topic-04 (System security and critical infrastructure) and other topics. According to
developments, it looks like a relevant scientiﬁc direction associated with risk management
and supply chain resilience could play a role in the future (Linkov et al., 2022).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 8 Change of research topics caused by disruptive events
5 Discussion
5.1 Summary of main findings
The aim of this study was to present a science map of risk and resilience issues in the supply
chain. We formulated three research questions that were supposed to help achieve the stated
goal. The results presented in chapters 4.1 to 4.3 contain information reﬂecting these research
questions. However, for overview reasons, we can summarize the main ﬁndings as follows:
Scientiﬁc interest in the issue of risk and resilience of the supply chain began to increase
dramatically around 2020 due to the impact of the pandemic.
The most scientiﬁc articles were published in the subject areas BUSI, ENGI and DECI,
while the journals with the highest research impact and research interest are the following:
International Journal of Production Research, International Journal of Production Economics,
Supply Chain Management, Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review.
Research topics of risk and resilience of supply chain fall into ten topics. While some of
them have a long-term rising trend (Pandemic impacts on food supply chain; IT in manufac-
turing process; Practices for capability and performance), some are stable (Management and
business approach; Sustainability in global economy; Production changes; Supplier-related
modelling and optimization) and some have a decreasing trend (System security and critical
infrastructure; Modeling and design of complex networks; Operational strategies for risk
mitigation).
The pandemic and other more or less related disruptive events caused a change in the research
topics devoted to risk and resilience of supply chain—from the original 10 topics, research is
currently focused on only eight. Three of them are new (Operations management; Strategy;
Sustainable production), and one is partially new (Critical system issues).
123

Annals of Operations Research
5.2 Implications
The volatility of the external environment and the permanent occurrence of disruptive events
in recent years have exposed the vulnerability of supply chains. Past research has sought
to eliminate supply chain failures by developing risk management concepts and solutions.
However, international, national and local supply chains no longer operate in a risk environ-
ment but in an uncertain environment, where changes are unpredictable, and their impact on
the functioning of the supply chain is fundamental. For this reason, the scientiﬁc community
is making enormous efforts to conceptually deﬁne this "new normal" (Raghavan et al., 2021;
Bonacini et al., 2020; Brouder et al., 2020)) and to ﬁnd a scientiﬁc consensus regarding ways
to mitigate the vulnerability of the supply chain in a disruptive world.
Current research initiatives are directed to the ﬁeld of resilience, which could offer possible
solutions for the efﬁciency and robustness of supply chains. The topic of the resilience of
supply chain appeared for the ﬁrst time in 2004–2005 (e.g. Deleris et al., 2004; Rice & Shefﬁ,
2005), but for many years it was among marginal research topics. The turning point occurred
only in 2020 when the number of published papers on this topic increased signiﬁcantly. Just
forillustration—inthelasttwoyears(2021+2022),almostasmanyarticlesonthetopicofthe
resilience of supply chain were published as in the entire previous period (2004–2020). Thus,
resilienceappearstobeoneofthepossibleresearchsolutionstothefrequentandunpredictable
occurrence of disruptive events. The credit for this dynamic development certainly goes to
the Covid-19 pandemic, which was the catalyst for the dramatic increase in research into
this issue. The sequence of other global disruptive events that directly or indirectly impacted
supply chains only conﬁrmed the validity of research focused on resilience.
Although at ﬁrst glance it may seem that the research of resilience of supply chain is a
research area narrowly deﬁned by industry, in reality, this is not the case. Our results showed
that this is a multidisciplinary topic. Although three subject areas primarily dominate the
research—BUSI, ENGI and DECI—topics related to the resilience of supply chain are also
relevant for other subject areas such as COMP (for example, the use of simulations to increase
the robustness of supply chains), MEDI (delivery of vaccines), ENVI (ecological aspects of
logistics), SOCI (perception of resilience aspects by stakeholders) etc. Subject areas cannot
be perceived as isolated and unconnected entities. Our results showed that the subject areas
are diverse in several research topics. For example, the COMP area often offers IT solutions
supporting the resilience of the supply chain, but these are primarily applied in the ENGI
area.
Based on our results, we believe that research on the risk and resilience of the supply
chain itself is currently in a transit stage. The scientiﬁc direction (and, in a certain way, also
the scientiﬁc consensus) from the pre-pandemic period is no longer completely up-to-date
under the inﬂuence of disruptive events. For this reason, it is necessary to ﬁnd new research
directions that would prove to be relevant for the elimination of the vulnerability of the
supply chain. We believe that current research is in a transit stage between the old scientiﬁc
consensus (supply chains in a risk environment) and the future scientiﬁc consensus (supply
chains in an uncertain and disruptive environment). The new scientiﬁc directions that are
emerging, which we have partially identiﬁed in our analysis, may (but may not) prove to
be suitable solutions for mitigating the impact of disruptive events on supply chains in the
following years. New research topics will probably arise evolutionarily—by connecting and
combining other topics. This was ﬁnally shown in our analysis when we identiﬁed three new
topics created by the fusion of all previously identiﬁed topics.
The evolutionary development of research topics can also be observed in emerging con-
cepts that try to solve the issue of resilience of the supply chain. One of them is, for example,
123

Annals of Operations Research
the Industry 5.0 concept, which is based on three pillars—human-centrism, resilience and
sustainability (European Comission, 2022). It is a relatively new concept, which is presented
as the next stage of development of the industrial revolution. However, the pillars built on the
concept already existed in the scientiﬁc space for a longer time, and Industry 5.0 connects
them to an organic whole. Also, based on this, we assume that some new topics that will
appear in the following years in connection with research on supply chain resilience will
have a similar evolutionary character.
We live in an era of global disruptive events, and there is no indication that this situation
should change. Fundamental changes brought about by such disruptive events (some-
times called "black swans") are often permanent and change the functioning of the entire
socio-economic system. For this reason, we assume that the scientiﬁc but mainly practical
importance of supply chain resilience will increase and over time, solutions will arrive that
can face such events in the ﬁeld of supply chains.
5.3 Limitations
Several research limitations can be identiﬁed in our study. The ﬁrst limitation is the use of
only one scientiﬁc database. In our research, we focused on scientiﬁc papers from the Scopus
database. However, in addition to this database, there are other large scientiﬁc databases, the
most famous of which are the Web of Science and Google Scholar. We decided to use only
the Scopus database because when answering the research question RQ1, we also evaluated
the results concerning individual subject areas, which are deﬁned differently in the Web of
Science database. Additionally, there is a signiﬁcant overlap between these databases. Many
articles found in Scopus are also found in Web of Science, and vice versa. Even though
the overlap between the two databases is not absolute, merging two datasets could pose
a problem in determining the correct number of citations, as the citation count differs for
individual articles in both databases. While combining both databases would increase the
research sample (the number of analyzed articles), it would decrease the consistency of the
results. For this reason, only the Scopus database was selected.
The second limitation is in using our approach for the synthesis of results. In our research,
a machine learning approach was used. However, the standard approach for processing a
selected scientiﬁc ﬁeld is a systematic literature review. The reason why we did not use a
standardized approach was the robustness of the input dataset. SLR studies are typically
performed on much smaller numbers of documents. From the point of view of the human
form of processing, it is not usual to process such an extensive range of articles. The reason
is the time-consuming nature of such processing using the SLR methodology. The machine
learning approach can process a much larger number of documents in a shorter time and use
the proper techniques, such as topic modelling, and at the same time, reveal latent topics in
a large number of documents without manual assessment.
The third limitation lies in the structure of the search query. Our effort was to capture
the scientiﬁc ﬁeld related to the area of risk and resilience in the supply chain. In order to
increase the probability of ﬁnding relevant articles, we also chose their synonyms in addition
to the keywords risk and resilience. Those words were not synonyms in the proper linguistic
sense of the word, but from the point of view of the topic, they were words that are very
often used to describe these areas. Of course, other words could be relevant for searching for
articles in the ﬁeld of risk management or resilience. However, after several experiments, we
concluded that these words cover most articles from our deﬁned area.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The fourth limitation is the representativeness of the results due to the use of abstracts.
In our research, when answering RQ2 and RQ3, we used only the abstracts of the found
scientiﬁc articles as inputs to the LDA method. Someone can argue that the results could be
different and more accurate if the whole article were used. First, although we have access
to the world’s large databases, we do not have access to every single scientiﬁc article, so
this procedure would not be possible. In addition, we think the results would not change
signiﬁcantly since the abstract contains the most critical ﬁndings from the article, and its
representativeness is, therefore, very high. In addition, it is possible that in the case of using
the entire article, this could lead to a distortion of the results. The primary problem would
be the differing length and structure of the articles, as well as the non-textual elements (e.g.,
graphics) containing essential information.
The limitation also lies in the evaluation of the results of our experiments. In our approach,
we chose expert assessment of the results based on human judgment and manual assessment
of the created topics. In addition to the interpretability of the topics, we also emphasized the
internal structure and consistency of the topics. In addition to the human judgment approach,
a statistical approach is a common way of assessing and choosing the correct number of
topics. In that case, statistical metrics (perplexity, topic coherence) are calculated, and the
number of topics is chosen based on the mentioned criteria. However, the disadvantage of
this approach is that a situation arises when the statistical approach identiﬁes many topics
that are no longer understandable from the point of view of human interpretability. Since we
wanted to avoid this, we decided to have an expert judge our results.
The last limitation is the naming of the topics. We tried to choose the names of particular
topics so that the name was sufﬁciently concise and, at the same time, represented as many
articles in individual topics as possible. However, it is evident that it is not always possible
to choose 2–3 words that will represent all the articles in the given topic well. It is, therefore,
possible that some articles that appear in a given topic may not always correspond precisely
with the selected topic name. However, from a holistic point of view, we think that the short
topics represent a large set of articles relatively well and tend to generalize the results to
substantial contexts that make sense.
6 Conclusion and future research
Thepandemicandlaterdisruptiveeventsfullyrevealedthevulnerabilityofsupplychains.Asa
result, some past research directions focused on supply chain risk management may no longer
be current. Moreover, this ﬁeld’s structure of research topics has changed signiﬁcantly over
the last two years. The aim of this study was to present a science map of risk and resilience
issues in the supply chain and thus help to more comprehensively understand the current
development of this dynamically developing area. Based on the bibliometric analysis, we
tried to capture not only the past and current state of research interest and research impact
of risk and resilience of supply chains but also to identify latent topics in which the given
research is ongoing. This study thus offers an up-to-date and vital view of the development
of scientiﬁc topics and their change caused by a series of disruptive events that directly or
indirectly affected supply chains.
Based on the results presented in this study, there may be potential for further research
opportunities. In our bibliometric study, we analyzed a large number of published papers
and identiﬁed relatively broad research topics. However, the research topics contain more
complex issues that can be explored. Since the number of such papers in individual topics is
123

Annals of Operations Research
generally lower (up to 300 articles), a systematic literature review can be used to analyze a
particular topic. Another opportunity is the analysis of grey literature (reports, consultancy
agencies analyses, blogs etc.) as another source of information about supply chain resilience.
Last but not least, the opportunity to expand the search to other databases (e.g. Web of
Science) or to use a broader or narrower search string to expand or narrow the focus can also
be mentioned. Despite the open research directions, we believe this study offers an original
and up-to-date view of the dynamically developing research on risk and resilient supply
chains.
Acknowledgements Funding was provided by Vedecká Grantová Agentúra MŠVVaŠ SR a SAV Grant Nos.
(VEGA 1/0113/24 Emerging digital technologies and their inﬂuence on elimination of supply chain vulner-
ability - Building lean, agile, resilient and green supply chains in the age of unpredictable disruptive events,
VEGA 1/0614/23 Preparedness of companies for the challenges associated with Industry 4.0 in terms of
business processes and business process management).
Funding Open access funding provided by The Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the
Slovak Republic in cooperation with Centre for Scientiﬁc and Technical Information of the Slovak Republic.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
Informed consent Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Allam, Z., Bibri, S. E., & Sharpe, S. A. (2022). The rising impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the
Russia-Ukraine War: energy transition, climate justice, global inequality, and supply chain disruption.
Resources, 11(11), 99.
Ambulkar, S., Blackhurst, J., & Grawe, S. (2015). Firm’s resilience to supply chain disruptions: Scale devel-
opment and empirical examination. Journal of Operations Management, 33–34, 111–122.
Arlinghaus, J. C., Zimmermann, M., & Zahner, M. (2020). The inﬂuence of cognitive biases on supply chain
risk management in the context of digitalization projects. Lecture Notes in Logistics, 137–147.
Asmussen, C. B., & Møller, C. (2019). Smart literature review: A practical topic modelling approach to
exploratory literature review. Journal of Big Data, 6(1).
Babich, V., Ritchken, P. H., & Burnetas, A. (2006). Competition and diversiﬁcation effects in supply chains
with supplier default risk. SSRN Electronic Journal.
Barbosa, M. W. (2021). Uncovering research streams on agri-food supply chain management: A bibliometric
study. Global Food Security, 28, 100517.
Belhadi, A., Kamble, S., Jabbour, C. J. C., Gunasekaran, A., Ndubisi, N. O., & Venkatesh, M. (2021). Man-
ufacturing and service supply chain resilience to the COVID-19 outbreak: Lessons learned from the
automobile and airline industries. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 163, 120447.
Bevilacqua, M., Ciarapica, F. E., & Marcucci, G. (2019). Supply chain resilience research trends: A literature
overview. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 52(13), 2821–2826.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Bier, T., Lange, A., & Glock, C. H. (2019). Methods for mitigating disruptions in complex supply chain
structures: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Production Research, 1–22.
Blackhurst, J., Craighead, C. W., Elkins, D. A., & Handﬁeld, R. B. (2005). An empirically derived agenda
of critical research issues for managing supply-chain disruptions. International Journal of Production
Research, 43, 4067–4081.
Blei, D. M., & Lafferty, J. D. (2009). Topic models. In Text mining (pp. 101–124). Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3, 993–1022.
Bonacini, L., Gallo, G., & Scicchitano, S. (2020). Working from home and income inequality: Risks of a ‘new
normal’ with COVID-19. Journal of Population Economics, 34, 303–360.
Brandon-Jones, E., Squire, B., Autry, C. W., & Petersen, K. J. (2014). A contingent resource-based perspective
of supply chain resilience and robustness. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 50(3), 55–73.
Brink, S.V., Kleijn, R., Sprecher, B., Mancheri, N.A., & Tukker, A. (2022). Resilience in the antimony supply
chain. Resources, Conservation and Recycling.
Brouder, P., Teoh, S., Salazar, N. B., Mostafanezhad, M., Pung, J. M., Lapointe, D., Desbiolles, F. H., Haywood,
M., Hall, C. M., & Clausen, H. B. (2020). Reﬂections and discussions: Tourism matters in the new normal
post COVID-19. Tourism Geographies, 22, 735–746.
Bui, T.-D., Tsai, F. M., Tseng, M.-L., Tan, R. R., Yu, K. D. S., & Lim, M. K. (2021). Sustainable supply chain
management towards disruption and organizational ambidexterity: A data driven analysis. Sustainable
Production and Consumption, 26, 373–410.
Chopra, S., & Sodhi, M. S. (2004). Managing risk to avoid supply-chain breakdown. MIT Sloan Management
Review, 46, 53–61.
Christopher, M., & Peck, H. (2004a). Building the resilient supply chain. The International Journal of Logistics
Management, 15(2), 1–14.
Christopher, M. J., & Peck, H. (2004b). Building the resilient supply chain. The International Journal of
Logistics Management, 15, 1–14.
Cobo, M. J., López-Herrera, A. G., Herrera-Viedma, E., & Herrera, F. (2011). Science mapping software tools:
Review, analysis, and cooperative study among tools. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 62(7), 1382–1402.
Craighead, C. W., Blackhurst, J., Rungtusanatham, M. J., & Handﬁeld, R. B. (2007). The severity of supply
chain disruptions: Design characteristics and mitigation capabilities. Decision Sciences, 38(1), 131–156.
Deleris, L.A., Elkins, D.A., & Paté-Cornell, M. (2004). Analyzing losses from hazard exposure: A conservative
probabilistic estimate using supply chain risk simulation. In Proceedings of the 2004 winter simulation
conference, 2 (pp. 1384–1391).
Duong, L. N. K., & Chong, J. (2020). Supply chain collaboration in the presence of disruptions: A literature
review. International Journal of Production Research, 1–20.
El Korchi, A. (2022). Survivability, resilience and sustainability of supply chains: The COVID-19 pandemic.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 377, 134363–134363.
Gasparyan, A. Y., & Kitas, G. D. (2021). Editorial strategy to get a scholarly journal indexed by scopus.
Mediterranean Journal of Rheumatology, 31(4), 1.
Gaustad, G., Krystoﬁk, M., Bustamante, M., & Badami, K. (2018). Circular economy strategies for mitigating
critical material supply issues. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 135, 24–33.
Golan, M. S., Jernegan, L. H., & Linkov, I. (2020). Trends and applications of resilience analytics in supply
chain modeling: systematic literature review in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Environment
Systems and Decisions.
Grifﬁths, T. L., & Steyvers, M. (2004). Finding scientiﬁc topics. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 101, 5228–5235.
Gross, M. (2021). Beautiful cycles: A theory and a model implying a curious role for interest. SSRN Electronic
Journal.
Grun, B., & Hornik., K. (2011). Topicmodels: An R package for ﬁtting topic models. Journal of Statistical
Software, 40(13), 1–30.
Han, X. (2020). Evolution of research topics in LIS between 1996 and 2019: An analysis based on latent
Dirichlet allocation topic model. Scientometrics, 125(3), 2561–2595.
Haraguchi, M., & Lall, U. (2015). Flood risks and impacts: A case study of Thailand’s ﬂoods in 2011 and
research questions for supply chain decision making. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction,
14, 256–272.
Heckmann, I., Comes, T., & Nickel, S. (2015a). A critical review on supply chain risk—Deﬁnition, measure
and modeling. Omega, 52, 119–132.
Heckmann, I., Comes, T., & Nickel, S. (2015b). A critical review on supply chain risk—Deﬁnition, measure
and modeling. Omega-International Journal of Management Science, 52, 119–132.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Hobbs, J. E. (2020). Food supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic. Canadian Journal of Agricultural
Economics/revue Canadienne D’agroeconomie, 68(2), 171–176.
Hosseini, S., Ivanov, D.A., & Blackhurst, J. (2020). Conceptualization and measurement of supply chain
resilience in an open-system context. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 1–16.
Hosseini, S., Ivanov, D., & Dolgui, A. (2019). Review of quantitative methods for supply chain resilience
analysis. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 125, 285–307.
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2019). The impact of digital technology and Industry 4.0 on the ripple
effect and supply chain risk analytics. International Journal of Production Research, 57(3), 829–846.
Ivanov, D.A. (2020). Viable supply chain model: integrating agility, resilience and sustainability perspec-
tives—Lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Annals of Operations Research
1–21.
Ivanov, D. (2022). The Industry 5.0 framework: viability-based integration of the resilience, sustainability,
and human-centricity perspectives. International Journal of Production Research, 1–13.
Ivanov, D. (2020a). Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on global supply chains: A simulation-based
analysis on the coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2) case. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review, 136, 101922.
Ivanov, D. A. (2020b). Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks on global supply chains: A simulation-
based analysis on the coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2) case. Transportation Research
Part E, Logistics and Transportation Review, 136, 101922–101922.
Ivanov, D. A., & Dolgui, A. (2020). Viability of intertwined supply networks: Extending the supply chain
resilience angles towards survivability. A position paper motivated by COVID-19 outbreak. International
Journal of Production Research, 58, 2904–2915.
Jagtap, S., Trollman, H., Trollman, F., Garcia-Garcia, G., Parra-López, C., Duong, L., Martindale, W.,
Munekata, P. E. S., Lorenzo, J. M., Hdaifeh, A., Hassoun, A., Salonitis, K., & Afy-Shararah, M. (2022).
The Russia-Ukraine conﬂict: Its implications for the global food supply chains. Foods, 11(14), 2098.
Jelodar, H., Wang, Y., Yuan, C., Feng, X., Jiang, X., Li, Y., & Zhao, L. (2019). Latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) and topic modeling: Models, applications, a survey. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 78,
15169–15211.
Jüttner, U., & Maklan, S. (2011). Supply chain resilience in the global ﬁnancial crisis: An empirical study.
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 16(4), 246–259.
Kabak, M., & Öztek, G. (2022). A multi-criteria approach to sustainable risk management of supplier portfolio:
a case study at defense industry. Gazi University Journal of Science.
Karl, A. A., Micheluzzi, J., Leite, L. R., & Pereira, C. R. (2018). Supply chain resilience and key performance
indicators: A systematic literature review. Production, 28(0).
Klee, S., Janson, A., & Leimeister, J. M. (2023). Automotive manufacturers and their stumble from one supply
crisis to another: Procurement departments could be the game changer by using data analytics, but. In
Hawaii International conference on system sciences (HICSS). Maui, Hawaii, USA.
Klibi, W., Martel, A., & Guitouni, A. (2010). The design of robust value-creating supply chain networks: A
critical review. European Journal of Operational Research, 203(2), 283–293.
Kochan, C. G., & Nowicki, D. R. (2018). Supply chain resilience: A systematic literature review and typological
framework. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management.
Krzywinski,M.,Schein,J.,Birol,˙I,Connors,J.,Gascoyne,R.,Horsman,D.,Jones,S.J.,&Marra,M.A.(2009).
Circos: An information aesthetic for comparative genomics. Genome Research, 19(9), 1639–1645.
Kshetri, N. (2018). Blockchain’s roles in meeting key supply chain management objectives. International
Journal of Information Management, 39, 80–89.
Kumar, P., & Kumar Singh, R. (2022). Strategic framework for developing resilience in Agri-Food Supply
Chains during COVID 19 pandemic. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 25,
1401–1424.
Leat, P., & Revoredo-Giha, C. (2013). Risk and resilience in agri-food supply chains: The case of the
ASDA PorkLink supply chain in Scotland. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 18(2),
219–231.
Linkov, I., Trump, B. D., Trump, J., Pescaroli, G., Hynes, W., Mavrodieva, A., & Panda, A. (2022). Resilience
stress testing for critical infrastructure. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 82, 103323.
Linnenluecke, M. K. (2015). Resilience in business and management research: A review of inﬂuential publi-
cations and a research agenda. International Journal of Management Reviews, 19(1), 4–30.
López-Meneses, E., Vázquez-Cano, E., & Román-Graván, P. (2015). Analysis and implications of the impact
of MOOC movement in the scientiﬁc community: JCR and scopus (2010–13). Comunicar, 22(44), 73–80.
Madzík, P., & Falát, L. (2022). State-of-the-art on analytic hierarchy process in the last 40 years: Literature
review based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation topic modelling. PLoS ONE, 17(5), e0268777.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Madzík, P., Falát, L., & Zimon, D. (2023). Supply chain research overview from the early eighties to Covid
era—Big data approach based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 183,
109520. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2023.109520
Manders, J. H. M., Caniëls, M. C. J., & Ghijsen, P. W. T. (2017). Supply chain ﬂexibility. The International
Journal of Logistics Management, 28(4), 964–1026.
Mariani, M., & Baggio, R. (2021). Big data and analytics in hospitality and tourism: A systematic literature
review. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 34(1), 231–278.
Masruroh, N. A., Putra, R. K. E., Mulyani, Y. P., & Rifai, A. P. (2022). Strategic insights into recovery from
supply chain disruption: A multi-period production planning model. Journal of the Operational Research
Society, 1–25.
Mbah, R. E., & Wasum, D. F. (2022). Russian-Ukraine 2022 War: A review of the economic impact of Russian-
Ukraine Crisis on the USA, UK, Canada, and Europe. Advances in Social Sciences Research Journal,
9(3), 144–153.
Min, H. (2019). Blockchain technology for enhancing supply chain resilience. Business Horizons, 62(1),
35–45.
Moosavi, J., Fathollahi-Fard, A. M., & Dulebenets, M. A. (2022). Supply chain disruption during the COVID-
19 pandemic: Recognizing potential disruption management strategies. International Journal of Disaster
Risk Reduction, 75, 102983.
Mukherjee, A. A., Singh, R. K., Mishra, R., & Bag, S. (2021). Application of blockchain technology for sus-
tainability development in agricultural supply chain: Justiﬁcation framework. Operations Management
Research, 1–16.
Nikookar, E., & Yanadori, Y. (2022). Preparing supply chain for the next disruption beyond COVID-19:
Managerial antecedents of supply chain resilience. International Journal of Operations & Production
Management.
Page, M. J., McKenzie, J. E., Bossuyt, P. M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T. C., Mulrow, C. D., & Moher, D. (2021).
The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. International
Journal of Surgery, 88, 105906.
Pettit, T. J., Fiksel, J., & Croxton, K. L. (2010a). Ensuring supply chain resilience: Development of a conceptual
framework. Journal of Business Logistics, 31(1), 1–21.
Pettit, T. J., Fiksel, J., & Croxton, K. L. (2010b). Ensuring supply chain resilience: Development of a conceptual
framework. Journal of Business Logistics, 31, 1–21.
Ponomarov, S. Y., & Holcomb, M. C. (2009). Understanding the concept of supply chain resilience. The
International Journal of Logistics Management, 20, 124–143.
Pournader, M., Kach, A., & Talluri, S. (Sri). (2020). A review of the existing and emerging topics in the supply
chain risk management literature. Decision Sciences.
Priya Datta, P., Christopher, M., & Allen, P. (2007). Agent-based modelling of complex production/distribution
systems to improve resilience. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 10(3),
187–203.
Qader, G., Junaid, M., Abbas, Q., & Mubarik, M. S. (2022). Industry 4.0 enables supply chain resilience and
supply chain performance. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 185, 122026.
Raghavan, A., Demircioglu, M. A., & Orazgaliyev, S. (2021). COVID-19 and the new normal of organizations
and employees: An overview. Sustainability, 13(21).
Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Appolloni, A., Iranmanesh, M., Treiblmaier, H., & Jagtap, S. (2022). Exploring food
supply chain trends in the COVID-19 era: A bibliometric review. Sustainability., 14, 12437.
European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, Renda, A., Schwaag Serger, S., &
Tataj, D. (2022). Industry 5.0, a transformative vision for Europe : governing systemic transformations
towards a sustainable industry, Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union. https://doi.org/10.2777/17322
Rice, J. B., & Shefﬁ, Y. (2005). A supply chain view of the resilient enterprise. MIT Sloan Management Review,
47, 41–48.
Rojas-Sánchez, M. A., Palos-Sánchez, P. R. & Folgado-Fernández, J. A. (2022). Systematic literature review
and bibliometric analysis on virtual reality and education. Education and Information Technologies.
Sabahi, S., & Parast, M. M. (2019). Firm innovation and supply chain resilience: A dynamic capability
perspective. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 1–16.
Sajjad, A. (2021). The COVID-19 pandemic, social sustainability and global supply chain resilience: A review.
Corporate Governance: THe International Journal of Business in Society, 21(6), 1142–1154.
Salo, I. A., Kopytets, N. H., Cheremisina, S. G., & Voloshyn, V. M. (2022). Inﬂuence of economic cycles on
the development of elements of the industry structure of the food market. IOP Conference Series: Earth
and Environmental Science, 949(1), 012036.
Sarathy, R. (2006). Security and the global supply chain. Transportation Journal, 45(4), 28–51.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Sarkis, J. (2020). Supply chain sustainability: Learning from the COVID-19 pandemic. International Journal
of Operations & Production Management.
Schotten, M., El Aisati, M., Meester, W. J. N., Steiginga, S., & Ross, C. A. (2017). A brief history of Scopus:
The world’s largest abstract and citation database of scientiﬁc literature. In Research analytics: Boosting
university productivity and competitiveness through scientometrics (pp. 31–58). CRC Press.
Schweitzer, F., Fagiolo, G., Sornette, D., Vega-Redondo, F., Vespignani, A., & White, D. R. (2009). Economic
networks: The new challenges. Science, 325, 422–425.
Settembre-Blundo, D., González-Sánchez, R., Medina-Salgado, S., & García-Muiña, F. E. (2021). Flexibility
and resilience in corporate decision making: A new sustainability-based risk management system in
uncertain times. Global Journal of Flexible Systems Management, 22(S2), 107–132.
Shamseer, L., Moher, D., Clarke, M., Ghersi, D., Liberati, A., Petticrew, M., Shekelle, P., & Stewart, L. A.
(2015). Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015:
Elaboration and explanation. BMJ, 349(jan02 1), g7647–g7647.
Sharma, H. B., Vanapalli, K. R., Cheela, V. S., Ranjan, V. P., Jaglan, A. K., Dubey, B., Goel, S., & Bhattacharya,
J. (2020). Challenges, opportunities, and innovations for effective solid waste management during and
post COVID-19 pandemic. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 162.
Shekarian, M., & Mellat Parast, M. (2020). An Integrative approach to supply chain disruption risk and
resilience management: a literature review. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications,
1–29.
Shen, S., Chang, R. H., Kim, K., & Julian, M. (2022). Challenges to maintaining disaster relief supply chains
in island communities: Disaster preparedness and response in Honolulu, Hawai’i. Natural Hazards, 114,
1829–1855.
Shishodia, A., Sharma, R., Rajesh, R., & Munim, Z. H. (2021). Supply chain resilience: A review, conceptual
framework and future research. The International Journal of Logistics Management.
Sievert, C. and Shirley, K. (2014). “LDAvis: A method for visualizing and interpreting topic. In: Proceed-
ings of the workshop on interactive language learning, visualization, and interfaces, association for
computational linguistics note (pp. 63–70).
Singh, S., Kumar, R., Panchal, R., & Tiwari, M. K. (2020). Impact of COVID-19 on logistics systems and
disruptions in food supply chain. International Journal of Production Research, 59(7), 1993–2008.
Sigurd,B.,Eeg-Olofsson,M.,&Weijer,J.V.(2004).Wordlength,sentencelengthandfrequency:Zipfrevisited.
Studia Linguistica, 58, 37-52.
Sokhanvar, A., & Lee, C.-C. (2022). How do energy price hikes affect exchange rates during the war in
Ukraine? Empirical Economics.
Song, M., Zheng, C., & Wang, J. (2022). The role of digital economy in China’s sustainable development in
a post-pandemic environment. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 35(1), 58–77.
Soni, U., Jain, V., & Kumar, S. (2014). Measuring supply chain resilience using a deterministic modeling
approach. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 74, 11–25.
Spieske, A., & Birkel, H. (2021). Improving supply chain resilience through industry 4.0: A systematic
literaturereviewundertheimpressionsoftheCOVID-19pandemic.Computers&IndustrialEngineering,
158, 107452.
Suryawanshi, P., & Dutta, P. (2022). Optimization models for supply chains under risk, uncertainty, and
resilience: A state-of-the-art review and future research directions. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review, 157, 102553.
Tang, C. S. (2006). Robust strategies for mitigating supply chain disruptions. International Journal of Logistics
Research and Applications, 9, 33–45.
Tang, C., & Tomlin, B. (2008). The power of ﬂexibility for mitigating supply chain risks. International Journal
of Production Economics, 116(1), 12–27.
Tárik, M. (2022). The Russo-Ukrainian War is a threat to food security in the Arab world. Atlas Journal, 8(48),
2748–2755.
Urciuoli, L., Mohanty, S., Hintsa, J., & Gerine Boekesteijn, E. (2014). The resilience of energy supply chains:
A multiple case study approach on oil and gas supply chains to Europe. Supply Chain Management: An
International Journal, 19(1), 46–63.
Uzunidis, D. (2021). Cycles—The long cycles of the economy and the question of innovation. Innovation
Economics, Engineering and Management Handbook, 1, 107–114.
Vugrin, E. D., Warren, D. E., & Ehlen, M. A. (2011). A resilience assessment framework for infrastructure
and economic systems: Quantitative and qualitative resilience analysis of petrochemical supply chains
to a hurricane. Process Safety Progress, 30(3), 280–290.
Wan, C., Yang, Z., Zhang, D., Yan, X., & Fan, S. (2017). Resilience in transportation systems: A systematic
review and future directions. Transport Reviews, 38(4), 479–498.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Wan, C., Yang, Z., Zhang, D., Yan, X., & Fan, S. (2018). Resilience in transportation systems: A systematic
review and future directions. Transport Reviews, 38, 479–498.
Xu, S., Zhang, X., Feng, L., & Yang, W. (2020). Disruption risks in supply chain management: A literature
review based on bibliometric analysis. International Journal of Production Research, 1–19.
Yodo, N., & Wang, P. (2016). Resilience modeling and quantiﬁcation for engineered systems using Bayesian
networks. Journal of Mechanical Design, 138(3).
Yu, Z., Razzaq, A., Rehman, A., Shah, A., Jameel, K., & Mor, R. S. (2021). Disruption in global supply chain
and socio-economic shocks: A lesson from COVID-19 for sustainable production and consumption.
Operations Management Research, 15(1–2), 233–248.
Zsidisin, G. A., & Henke, M. (2018). Research in supply chain risk: Historical roots and future perspectives.
Revisiting Supply Chain Risk, 1–12.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123