TITLE: Blockchain as the “trust-building machine” for supply chain management
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2022
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04868-0
---

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-022-04868-0
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Blockchain as the “trust-building machine” for supply chain
management
Kongmanas Yavaprabhas1
· Mehrdokht Pournader1
· Stefan Seuring2
Accepted: 28 June 2022 / Published online: 5 August 2022
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
This paper aims to investigate the impact of blockchain application on trust levels in supply
chains. Through the systematic review of the relevant literature, three dimensions of trust,
i.e., the trustor–trustee perspective, forms of trust, and time orientation, are investigated. Our
ﬁndings show that, ﬁrst, there are three pairs of trustors and trustees involved in blockchain
implementation: (a) the user and the blockchain, (b) two supply chain partners, and (c) the
consumer/public and a supply chain unit. Second, the two forms of trust, namely cognition-
based and institution-based trust, are likely to be enhanced by blockchain execution, while
affect-based trust may not be directly impacted by the technology. Third, the presence of
blockchain technology would facilitate swift trust-building between unknown supply chain
partners under speciﬁc circumstances. Moreover, we also ﬁnd contradicting assertions among
scholars on the implications of blockchain for trust in supply chains. While some stud-
ies pointed out that blockchain will enable a trustless trusted scheme, others expected the
reinforcementofinterorganizationaltrust.Totesttheseassertions,wedeveloptheblockchain-
entrusted supply chain models to present the three-step process of how trust is developed
through the blockchain and diffused to supply chain partners and external stakeholders.
Keywords Blockchain · Trust · Supply chain · Systematic review
1 Introduction
Althoughtrusthasbeenconsideredoneofthekeysuccessfactorsinsupplychainmanagement
(e.g., Brinkhoff et al., 2015; Kwon & Suh, 2004), in recent years, global supply chains
B Mehrdokht Pournader
medo.pournader@unimelb.edu.au
Kongmanas Yavaprabhas
dean.yavaprabhas@unimelb.edu.au
Stefan Seuring
seuring@uni-kassel.de
1
Department of Management and Marketing, The University of Melbourne, Level 10, The Spot, 198
Berkeley Street, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
2
Chair of Supply Chain Management, Faculty of Business and Economics, The University of Kassel,
Kassel, Germany
123

50
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
across numerous industries have experienced the issue of trust deterioration (Guenther, 2020).
This is despite the fact that across industries, CEOs and executives unanimously believe
maintaining and increasing trust in supply chain relationships is at the core of successful
supply chain operations (Rajah, 2019). To address this concern, supply chains globally have
started embracing technology-based, trust-building remedies, such as blockchain technology
(Sneader & Sternfels, 2020). Due to its capability to enhance information authenticity and
transparency, blockchain is believed to have the promising potential to radically transform the
supply chain trade paradigm into a trusted ecosystem of exchange. Moreover, and accelerated
by the recent COVID-19 disruption to supply chains, blockchain-enabled trusted supply
chains have triggered interest from academics (Nguyen et al., 2020).
Academic literature has therefore initiated investigations into how to build trust through
blockchain technology (e.g., Howson, 2020) and address the following question:
How can blockchain technology impact trust in supply chain management?
While one group of academic thought leaders argue that the execution of blockchain will
enable ﬁrms to trade in a trustless ecosystem where there is no need for building trusted
relationships between trading partners (e.g., Asante et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2020), others
believe that blockchain will enhance trust between supply chain partners and create a trusted
ecosystem of exchange (e.g., Centobelli et al., 2021; Di Vaio & Varriale, 2020). Caldarelli
et al. (2020) explicitly stated that early blockchain literature believed that blockchain is a
means for creating trust, but more recently, scholars seem to focus on blockchain capabilities
to enable transactions performed in a trustless environment. Likewise, while some academics
show that blockchain installation can generate trust which will subsequently add to a trusted
relationship between trading parties (Joo & Han, 2021), others believe that trust generated
from the blockchain cannot directly transfer into trading partners, and trust management
between parties is still required (Kopyto et al., 2020). Whether these seemingly contrasting
views can converge to a single trust-based framework for application of blockchains to supply
chains is what we are aiming to address in this paper.
To date, there has not been a comprehensive review that synthesizes the state-of-the-art
body of knowledge regarding blockchain implications on trust for supply chain management.
The current study aims at ﬁlling this gap by conducting a systematic literature review of
blockchain and trust in supply chains. We initially use the three dimensions of trust from
management research, namely the trustor–trustee perspective, a form of trust, and temporal
orientation, as a framework for content analysis. We adopt a combination of inductive and
deductive approaches to analyse content and gain insights from our selection of 94 relevant
academic publications published between 2018 and 2021. Subsequently, we developed a
three-step trusted ecosystem model of the blockchain-based supply chain that demonstrates
how trust is formed by adopting blockchain to supply chains and disseminating to other supply
chain stakeholders. The proposed models are developed in three variations to consolidate and
converge the aforementioned contradicting views of blockchain application to supply chains
as well as making a case for swift trust formation under certain circumstances in supply
chains.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: ﬁrst, we provide an overview of the
literature on the deﬁnitions and assessment of trust in supply chains as well as a theoretical
background of three dimensions of trust leading to Sect. 3, where we outline the underly-
ing methodology. In Sect. 4 we discuss the outcome of the literature review regarding the
blockchain implication on trust in supply chains and subsequently develop three models of
the blockchain-entrusted supply chain. Our contributions to theory and practice are outlined
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
51
in Sect. 5. Finally, we provide the conclusion of this study and several avenues for future
research in Sect. 6.
2 Conceptual foundation
Blockchain is a decentralized network system comprising a number of blocks, each of which
is capable of storing and sharing real-time, encrypted digital information to other blocks
within the network (Nakamoto, 2008). By perceiving each supply chain member as a block,
hypothetically, every participant is allowed to know “who is performing what actions in
which location and at what time” in real-time (Crosby et al., 2016). With this exceptional
characteristic, blockchain equipment is projected to bring the superiority of system security
and information visibility to supply chain operations (Carson et al., 2018). During the past
three years, numerous comprehensive reviews of blockchain technology and its application
to supply chains have been conducted (e.g., Chang & Chen, 2020; Luo & Choi, 2021; Müßig-
mann et al., 2020; Pournader et al., 2020b; Saberi et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019a). While we
refer the readers to these reviews for an in-depth discussion of blockchain application to sup-
ply chains, in this section we primarily focus on the literature on trust and trust dimensions,
to be adopted as a core framework in the following sections.
2.1 Trust in supply chain management
Trust has been considered at the core of relationship management between supply chain part-
ners (e.g., Brinkhoff et al., 2015; Kwon & Suh, 2004). As the relationship between supply
chain partners is often fragile and involves a certain level of risk in terms of opportunis-
tic behaviour, there is a need for trust to bind these relationships and manage those risks
(Spekman, 1988). When supply chain members possess a high level of trust in one another,
they are likely to feature positive attributes including greater collaboration (Ha et al., 2011),
operational efﬁciency (Ha et al., 2011), responsiveness (Handﬁeld & Bechtel, 2002), innova-
tiveness (Fawcett et al., 2012), ﬂexibility and agility (Kabra & Ramesh, 2016), and resilience
(Jain et al., 2017).
Trust is deﬁned in the extant literature as “a willingness to be vulnerable” (Mayer et al.,
1995), “the extent to which a person is conﬁdent in, and willing to act on the basis of, the
words,actions,anddecisionsofanother”(McAllister,1995),“thewillingnesstobevulnerable
under conditions of risk and interdependence” (Rousseau et al., 1998), and “conﬁdent positive
expectations regarding another’s conduct” (Lewicki et al., 1998). It is noticeable that from
multiple proposed deﬁnitions, trust always involves at least two actors, a trustor who is
in a vulnerable position through risks and interdependence, and a trustee who is entrusted
and can take advantage of the trustor by not fulﬁlling his or her expectation. Trustor and
trustee entities can vary as trust can be bestowed upon an individual (McAllister, 1995),
an organization (Kramer, 1999; Zaheer et al., 1998), political institutions (Kim, 2005), and
other objects. Extending the latter deﬁnitions of trust to supply chains, the willingness to
be vulnerable occurs when one entity (trustor) agrees to have conﬁdence in the behaviours
or actions of another entity (trustee) and has an expectation that the trustee will fulﬁll their
obligations independent of the trustor’s ability to monitor or control such behaviours.
123

52
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
2.2 Dimensions of trust
Existing literature indicates that trust primarily consists of three dimensions, namely the
pairs of trustor–trustees (Janowicz & Noorderhaven, 2006), forms of trust (Laeequddin
et al., 2010), and time orientation (Dubey et al., 2019). Collectively, these dimensions should
further clarify “who” the trustor and trustee roles are in supply chains, as well as the forms
of trust that are bestowed upon them.
(1) Trustor–trustee perspective. Trust involves at least one trustor and one trustee entities,
such as a buyer and a supplier. It is crucial to determine who the trustor and trustees are
before conducting a trust investigation. Janowicz and Noorderhaven (2006) suggested that a
change in a pair of trustors and trustees in supply chains can lead to the need for variation in
the approaches for trust assessment. For instance, the conceptualization and assessment of
interorganizational trust between supply chain partners (e.g., Capaldo & Giannoccaro, 2015;
Janowicz & Noorderhaven, 2006) varies from the trust external consumers place on supply
chain management and members (e.g., Hoejmose et al., 2012; Macready et al., 2020).
(2) Form of trust. Trust in supply chain management has variations in its form (Laeequd-
din et al., 2010). Although forms of trust are represented in different names in previous
studies in the management arena, they seem to be grounded on the three rudimentary cate-
gories namely institution-based trust, cognition-based trust, and affect-based trust (Lewis
& Weigert, 1985; Rousseau et al., 1998; Wong et al., 2008). These three fundamental forms
of trust in management research can be adopted for discussing the trust element in supply
chains.
Institution-based trust or system-based trust refers to the trust that emerges from formalized
arrangements and control mechanisms which normally manifest in the form of legal sys-
tems, regulations, bureaucratic sanctions, and contracts and agreements between two parties
(Lewis & Weigert, 1985; Wong et al., 2008). As institutional trust can help deter a party’s
opportunistic behaviour due to law and reputational sanctions, a trustor is likely to bestow a
higher level of trust on a trustee in the presence of such arrangements and control mechanisms
(Rousseau et al., 1998).
Cognition-based trust or rational trust refers to trust that involves high rationality and low
emotionality through which a trustee shows “good reasons” and evidence to justify their
intentions to perform an action which the trustor perceives as beneﬁcial (Lewis & Weigert,
1985; Wong et al., 2008). Basically, a trustor bestows this type of trust based on their calcu-
lation of the costs and beneﬁts as well as their prediction of the outcomes and the possibility
that a trustee will complete their obligations as agreed (Doney & Cannon, 1997). Therefore,
credible information from trustees regarding their competencies and intentions is paramount
in the formation of cognition-based trust (Rousseau et al., 1998; Wong et al., 2008).
Affect-based trust or emotional trust is signiﬁed by high emotionality and low rationality.
It refers to the trust that involves affectional bonds and attachment between the trustor and
trustee (Lewis & Weigert, 1985; Rousseau et al., 1998). McAllister (1995) also indicated
that a trustor may manifest this type of trust by showing intention to provide extra help
and assistance to a trustee without gaining anything in return. Affect-based trust is typically
considered as traditional trust between partners within supply chains (Wong et al., 2008).
(3) Temporal orientation trust. In management research, there is a speciﬁc type of trust
that can be built rapidly in certain conditions, in contrast to traditional trust that develops
over the long term (Meyerson et al., 1996; Robert et al., 2009). Long-term versus swift
trust-building practices are included within the domain of temporal orientation. Originally
coined by Meyerson et al. (1996), swift trust is a speciﬁc type of trust that can be established
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
53
Table 1 Summary of trust dimensions, descriptions, and categorizations
Trust dimensions
Description
Categories
Trustor–trustee
perspective
Identify two actors of trustor and trustee
Form of trust
Identify different forms of trust bestowed from trustor to
trustee
Institution-based
trust
Cognition-based
trust
Affect-based trust
Temporal orientation
Identify the required time and situation in which trust
can be developed
Swift trust
Long-term oriented
trust
rapidly for a temporary group of people or entities to accomplish task-speciﬁc objectives
in a short period of time. It normally stems from the combination of current circumstances
and conditions evaluated by the trustor including group members’ reputations, assigned
responsibilities,consistentinformationexchange,andcommittednorms,andrules.Swifttrust
has recently gained the increasing attention of supply chain scholars interested in increasing
supply chain coordination and agility (e.g., ; Dubey et al., 2019). At the other end of the
spectrum, long-term oriented trust is the conventional concept of trust that is built over a
certain period of time. Long-term developmental trust typically requires a combination of
different forms of trust (Rousseau et al., 1998). A summary of three dimensions of trust
and the categories in each dimension adopted from management research are provided in
Table 1.
3 Methodology
In order to investigate the literature surrounding the impact of blockchain on trust in supply
chains, we opted for a systematic literature review approach. According to Tranﬁeld et al.
(2003), there are two main objectives for conducting a literature review: (1) drawing con-
nections from fragmented knowledge pieces and consolidating the intellectual frontier of a
certain research area, and (2) identifying knowledge gaps and uncharted territories waiting
for future investigation. Prior studies in the supply chain management ﬁeld have used sys-
tematic literature review to serve two such purposes in a variety of research arenas such as
risk management in supply chains (Ho et al., 2015; Pournader et al., 2020a), sustainability
issues in supply chain management (Yawar & Seuring, 2017) and blockchain in supply chains
(Pournader et al., 2020b; Saberi et al., 2019).
Inthisregard,wefollowedthefourstepsofasystematicliteraturereviewprocesssuggested
by Bryman (2016): source identiﬁcation, source selection, source evaluation, and content
analysis.
3.1 Source identification and selection
We opted to use the Scopus search engine (www.scopus.com) which has been used for
previous systematic literature reviews in supply chain management arenas (e.g., Pournader
123

54
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
et al., 2020a; Fahimnia et al., 2019; Pournader et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2019a). Based
on previous studies and our personal experience, Scopus has provided exhaustive coverage
of papers published in the ﬁelds of business, economics, management, and social sciences
compared to other search engines such as Google Scholar and Web of Science (Martín-Martín
et al., 2018; Mongeon & Paul-Hus, 2016; Pournader et al., 2020b). We conducted our search
using the following three systematic steps:
Step 1: We added selective keywords to the following search algorithm to look for key-
words in titles, abstracts and keywords of the sources:
TITLE-ABS-KEY (“blockchain” OR “distributed ledger” OR “distributed technology”
AND “supply chain” OR “supply network” OR “value chain” OR “logistic” AND
“trust*”).
To ensure maximum coverage of the literature on blockchain and trust in supply chains,
the search strings are adopted from previous systematic literature reviews of blockchain for
supply chains (Pournader et al., 2020b; Wang et al., 2019a) and those of trust in supply
chains (Delbufalo, 2012; Paluri & Mishal, 2020) that are published in quarter one (Q1) of the
2020 SCImago Journal Rank (SJR). We combined the search strings relate to blockchain and
supply chains from the systematic literature reviews of blockchain for supply chains with the
keywords of trust from the systematic literature reviews of trust in supply chains. The search
continued until the end of 2021. There were 699 records shown in the document records.
Step 2: We then limited our search to articles and articles in the review which were
published in English. The search results presented 289 records.
Step 3: We assessed the titles, abstracts, and keywords of each article to determine its
suitability for inclusion. If required, we also closely investigated other sections of the articles
including discussions, ﬁndings, and conclusions. Articles that were aligned with our two
selection criteria are selected. First, the chosen articles needed to be related to the blockchain
implication of trust in supply chains. Articles that were selected need to clearly state supply
chain activities that are supported by blockchain or the purposes of blockchain implemen-
tation that need to be related to supply chain management (Bryman, 2016). Articles that
used blockchain for other purposes such as using the technology to explain cryptocurrencies
in other contexts beyond supply chain management were excluded. It is worth noting that
we only included articles that investigated “the impact of blockchain adoption on trust” and
excluded articles that examined “the impact of trust on blockchain adoption” as our objective
of this study focuses on the implication or potential impact of blockchain on trust in supply
chains after being adopted.
Second, the selected articles needed to be published in Q1 of the 2020 SJR such as
International Journal of Production Research, Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal, International Journal of Information Management, Decision Sciences, and IEEE
Access. The SJR indicator is a widely accepted measurement of journal rankings which are
evaluated based on both the journal’s number of citations as well as the journal’s prestige
(Mañana-Rodríguez, 2015). After applying this screening method, we eventually came up
with 94 sample articles.
Thus, using this method we further minimized the selection bias in the source identiﬁca-
tion process by enabling a recursive and iterative process of reviewing and reﬁning search
keywords (Saunders et al., 2009). Furthermore, each of the coauthors independently reviewed
the articles and double-checked their screening outcomes and came to a consensus, further
decreasing the selection bias.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
55
3.2 Source evaluation
The outcome of the bibliometric analysis showed that all 94 articles selected were published
in 2018 (two articles), 2019 (11 articles), 2020 (32 articles), and 2021 (49 articles). IEEE
Access with 20 articles contained a high number of publications, followed bythe International
Journal of Production Research and Sustainability with six articles. The remaining journals
that have more than two publications are Computers & Industrial Engineering with ﬁve
articles, Journal of Cleaner Production with three articles, and International Journal of
Information Management with three articles published. It can be said that the published
journals are quite scattered as most papers came from different journals. This is possibly due
to the investigation of blockchain implications of trust in different supply chains.
3.3 Content analysis
We adopted a combination of inductive and deductive approaches to conduct content analysis
on the selected pool of articles. Initially, we utilized the theoretical ground of three trust
dimensions as our underlying framework for analyzing the body of literature.
3.3.1 Inductive approach for the trustor–trustee perspective
AsJanowiczandNoorderhaven(2006)suggestedthattherearedifferencesinthetrustelement
between different pairs of trustors and trustees, yet no speciﬁc pairs of relationships are
provided, there is a multiplicity of possibilities for pairs of trustors and trustees. As the
trustor–trustee perspective does not have any predeﬁned category, we utilized the inductive
approach to extract new themes and subthemes from selected publications and to develop
new main categories (Seuring & Gold, 2012; Tranﬁeld et al., 2003). We followed the two-
step approach recommended by Seuring and Gold (2012) to establish the basic framework of
categories that emerged from the literature analysis and to inductively reﬁne each category
during the coding process. We adopted the three-step coding process suggested by Yin (2015),
starting with open coding to extract important quotes from literature, followed by axial coding
and selective coding to form subthemes and themes within the trustor–trustee framework,
respectively. We performed the analysis back and forth between literature and our emergent
themes to reach data saturation. With this rigorous inductive approach, the literature review
can be deemed as an effective approach in new theory development (Seuring et al., 2020).
3.3.2 Deductive approach for the forms of trust and time orientation
For both dimensions of the forms of trust and time orientation, as predetermined categories
are from management literature, we employed a deductive approach to link those existing
categories to a body of literature reviewed in the blockchain context. This approach allowed
us to simply borrow those categories as referencing codes in the coding process. Speciﬁcally,
we used the categories of institution-based trust, cognition-based trust and affect-based trust
to code forms of trust found in selected articles. The form of trust was either typically latent or
not manifested clearly in the literature. In other words, we needed to delicately interpret the
meanings contained within the articles to extract the exact forms of trust that each publication
referred to. For the time orientation dimension, we used the categories of swift trust and long-
term oriented trust in the coding process. This deductive approach to borrow theory outside
the ﬁeld of supply chain management to enrich phenomena in supply chains is considered a
123

56
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
Table 2 Summary of the content analysis and coding process
Approach
Trust dimensions
Predeﬁned categories
Coding process
Inductive
Trustor–trustee perspective
Open coding—to extract
important quotes,
Axial coding—to form
categories as subthemes,
Selective coding—to
group subthemes into
the main themes as new
categories
Deductive
Forms of trust
Institution-based trust
Cognition-based trust
Affect-based trust
Use predeﬁned categories
to code selected
publications
Time orientation
Swift trust
Long-term oriented trust
Use predeﬁned categories
to code selected
publications
justiﬁed approach for theory extensions (Seuring et al., 2020). The summary of the coding
process in our literature review is outlined in Table 2.
3.4 Material evaluation
To ensure the reliability and validity of data analysis, we adopted the following measures.
First, we included all the coauthors in the process of content analysis. Speciﬁcally, during
the coding process, each coauthor performed the coding independently. Using the judgement
of multiple coauthors to interpret latent content in a body of literature, together with intense
discussions among the research team, broadly enhanced the internal validity and reliability of
theﬁndings(Duriauetal.,2007).Second,weadoptedatheoreticalcategorizationschemewith
clear deﬁnitions from management scholarship for both inductive and deductive approaches,
and also utilized the predeﬁned categories for deductive analysis. The analysis based on
these theoretical grounds increased the reliability of the coding (Seuring & Gold, 2012). In
addition, the de-contextualisation and focus on theoretically-based trust in our coding process
further strengthened the generalisability and thus external validity (Avenier, 2010). Finally,
we followed the discursive alignment of interpretation approach suggested by Seuring and
Gold (2012), in which there are inconsistent judgements occurring during the coding process.
This approach allowed us to resolve contentious issues by allowing the research team to
gradually and deliberately reinterpret the meaning embodied in the texts which referred to
latent contents, until consensus was reached. After completing this iterative process of content
analysis, we summarized the explanation of blockchain and trust in supply chains from all
94 selected articles. This is detailed in online Appendix A.
4 Blockchain and trust in supply chains
From the inductive analysis, we extracted three emergent pairs of relationships in the
blockchain and supply chain literature with respect to the trustor–trustee perspective. We
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
57
also found two emerging subthemes under one pair of relationships. As for deductive analy-
sis, we adopted the proposed trust categories in Sect. 2 to explain the impact of blockchain
on trust in supply chains across the dimensions of the form of trust and time orientation.
4.1 The trustor–trustee perspective
Content analysis revealed three distinct themes as the pairs of relationships in blockchain-
enabled trust in supply chains contexts, i.e., a user and the blockchain, two supply chain
partners, and consumers/public and the supply chain entity. Moreover, for the pair of supply
chain partners, we found two subthemes that showed the main disparities in implications of
blockchain adoption and the actors who assume the roles as trustors and trustees.
In terms of the number of papers, 78 papers investigated the impact of blockchain on two
supply chain partners, in which 41 articles revolved around the ﬁrst subtheme of Trustless
trusted scheme (TTS), in which two supply chain partners are trustors and the blockchain
solution acts as a trustee. The other 38 articles discussed the impact of blockchain within the
second subtheme of Interorganizational trust reinforcement (ITR), in which interorganiza-
tional trust between supply chain partners are enhanced and one supply chain partner acts as
a trustor while the other partner acts as a trustee. In addition, 57 papers mentioned the direct
impact of blockchain on users’ trust and 31 articles examined the impact of the blockchain
supply chain on consumers and the public. The emergent three pairs of trustor–trustees
showed different levels of units of analysis. Speciﬁcally, the blockchain solution and its user
pairs, as well as the two supply chain partners pairs demonstrated the impact of blockchain on
an organizational level, while the consumers/public and a unit of supply chain pairs demon-
strated the impact of blockchain adoption on supply chain level. The summary of emergent
themes under the framework of the trustor–trustee is shown in Table 3.
4.1.1 User and blockchain pairs
The trustor–trustee pair belongs to the trustor of an organization that utilizes the blockchain
and the trustee of such a system. The reviews of existing literature suggest that from the users’
Table 3 Summary of emergent themes within the framework of trustor–trustee perspective
Emergent themes
Subthemes
Trustor
Trustee
No. of
papers
Unit of
analysis
The pair of users
and blockchain
The system
users
Blockchain
57
Organization
The pair of two
supply chain
partners
Trustless trusted
scheme (TTS)
Two supply
chain
partners
Blockchain
41
Organization
Interorganizational
trust
reinforcement
(ITR)
A supply
chain
partner
A supply
chain
partner
38
The pair of con-
sumers/public
and a unit of
supply chain
Consumers
and the
public
A unit of
supply
chain
31
Supply chain
123

58
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
viewpoint, the capability of the blockchain platform to fulﬁll its obligation of storing and
exchanging information is enhanced compared to the traditional interorganizational systems
(Garrard & Fielke, 2020). For instance, Hu et al. (2021) suggested that with blockchain,
the trust perceived by users is enhanced in both the perspective of system trust (trust in
labelling and certiﬁcation processes, normally rooted in institutions) and technology trust
(the technological system’s performance and quality attributes). We coined this as the trust
of users in the blockchain-based system. The enhanced trust stems from three main sources
of the blockchain’s reinforced capacity, namely the superiority of information security (e.g.,
Kayikci et al., 2020; Treiblmaier & Sillaber, 2021), faster data transmission speed (e.g., Palas
& Bunduchi, 2020; Tseng & Shang, 2021), self-executing governance, and monitoring (e.g.,
Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020; Velmovitsky et al., 2021).
Superiority of information security
As blockchain ledgers are encrypted and only allow
authorized parties to access records, they cannot be tampered with if all relevant parties do not
agree (Ahmad et al., 2021). Using blockchains, attempts to corrupt or falsify data within the
system will be rendered unsuccessful (Köhler & Pizzol, 2020). Furthermore, as information
in the system is copied to every digital ledger in the blockchain network, hacking or manip-
ulating all ledgers is almost impossible (Babich & Hilary, 2020; Musamih et al., 2021). This
superiority of the blockchain security mechanism is expected to substantially reduce fraud-
ulent activities that might occur in an interorganizational setting, i.e., the supply chain (Cha
et al., 2020; Garrard & Fielke, 2020). Therefore, with the application of blockchain, users
are likely to show greater trust in system security and data within the system (Viriyasitavat
et al., 2019).
4.1.2 Faster data processing and transmission
As blockchain operation is governed by self-executing smart contracts, the communication
process between different entities in the blockchain is subsequently automated and stream-
lined (Wang et al., 2019b). Theoretically, data is communicated on a nearly real-time basis
within the blockchain (Crosby et al., 2016). Thus, with the increase in speed and efﬁciency
of communication and transaction processes, users are likely to view the higher capability in
fulﬁlling transactions favourably compared to traditional systems and bestow a higher level
of trust in blockchain (Palas & Bunduchi, 2020).
Self-executing governance and monitoring
With the application of self-executing smart
contracts, blockchain users can be assured that ﬁnancial transactions are automatically gov-
erned and monitored to be completed as agreed in advance between supply chain partners
(Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020). If the system is interrupted or damaged, appropriate actions
will be automatically executed to rectify the issue (e.g., Alkhoori et al., 2021). With such
highly reliable processing and monitoring mechanisms, it is likely that users will bestow
higher trust to blockchain platforms compared to the traditional supply chain systems with-
out smart contracts (e.g., Pawar et al., 2021).
4.1.3 Two supply chain partners pairs
The second trustor–trustee pair is the two supply chain partners. There exist discrepancies in
the literature with respect to the implications of blockchain on trust in supply chain partners
as well as the actors who assume the roles of trustor and trustee. Speciﬁcally, there are two
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
59
distinct views, as shown in Table 4, one arguing that blockchain deployment will enable
trustless trusted supply chain operation (i.e., TTS) where there is no need for interorganiza-
tional trust development, and the other school of thought arguing that blockchain adoption
will initiate and reinforce trust between supply chain partners (i.e., ITR).
(a) Trustless trusted scheme (TTS). Academics believe that the integration of blockchain
into supply chain operating systems will allow supply chain partners to perform transactions
in a trustless fashion (e.g., Treiblmaier & Sillaber, 2021; Viriyasitavat et al., 2019). Academics
further elucidate that blockchain employment will eliminate the necessity of trust-building
between different parties and transfer trust provided from each party toward the blockchain
(Kumar et al., 2020; Pournader et al., 2020b). In other words, blockchain itself acts as the
trusted third party that facilitates transactions between supply chain partners (Cha et al.,
2020). In this regard, the blockchain solution is viewed as more trustworthy due to its three
sources of capacity: the superiority of information security, faster data transmission speed,
and self-executing governance and monitoring. Therefore, in TTS, scholars believe that with
the presence of blockchain, supply chain parties do not need to trust each other as they can
merely trust information and the authenticity of entries added to the system (Kumar et al.,
2020; Tezel et al., 2021).
(b) Interorganizational trust reinforcement (ITR). In contrast to TTS, scholars argue that
one of the major contributions of blockchain adoption is the enhancement of trust between
different trading parties (e.g., Dubey et al., 2020b; Joo & Han, 2021). This enhanced trust is
likely to be interorganizational trust—the collaborative trust between supply chain partners
(Fawcett et al., 2012). The main arguments surrounding such interorganizational trust are
rooted in the three reasons below.
Transfer of the strengthened trust in a blockchain
The leveraged trust between organi-
zations is directly transferred from the enhanced trust in the blockchain. Since a trustee
organization executes the trusted blockchain with the improved capability of fulﬁlling obli-
gations, and fewer chances of hacking or fraud, a trustor party may bestow a higher level of
trust to such a system operator (Surjandari et al., 2021). For instance, Hunt et al. (2021) and
Shahid et al. (2020) demonstrated the utilization of a blockchain-based reputation system or
Table 4 The two distinct views of blockchain implications for trust between two supply chain partners
Distinct views
Blockchain application
implications
Trustor
Trustee
Trustless trusted scheme
(TTS)
There is no need for
interorganizational trust
development
The two supply chain
parties only trust
blockchain
Trust is redistributed and
more centralized toward
the operating system
Two supply chain
partners
Blockchain
Interorganizational trust
reinforcement (ITR)
Blockchain help initiate and
reinforce
interorganizational trust
between two supply chain
partners
A supply chain partner
A supply chain
partner
123

60
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
a peer-rating system that trace the interaction of participants within the supply chain network
and actively compute reputation scores for each of them. The calculated score then reﬂects an
organization’s capability to complete the desired obligation. Due to the security and reliability
of the blockchain-based reputation system, organizations with a higher score are perceived as
more trustworthy in the eyes of their partner organizations in the supply chain. In other words,
trust translates from the trustworthiness of the blockchain to trust in trading partners within
the supply chain. In contrast to this view, Kopyto et al. (2020) states that trust-associated
advantages of blockchain technology that are shifted into an interorganizational setting, such
as a supply chain, cannot be directly transferred to the trustworthiness in the trading partner
as the authenticity of data entered into the blockchain cannot be guaranteed. Blockchain can
only create the cryptographic proof of digital data in the system, not the physical information
which means that trust management to reduce data manipulation before entering into the
system is still a prerequisite, even when a blockchain solution is adopted.
Information transparency
The second underlying reason for increase in interorganizational
trust stems from the establishment of the information transparency paradigm and the repeated
pairwise exchange of information between the two partners (e.g., Ghode et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2020). Considering the two parties within the supply chain, when a trustee entity discloses and
inputs the required information into the blockchain, another party as a trustor will gain more
knowledge regarding the trustee’s capability to satisfy the two parties’ obligations. Therefore,
theyarelikelytoprovideahigherleveloftrusttothetrusteewithmoretransparentinformation
(Akkermans et al., 2004; Wan et al., 2020). As blockchain requires all participants within the
network to share essential information in a real-time manner (Crosby et al., 2016), from the
pairwise perspective of trading partners, the presence of blockchain then helps promoting
trust bestowed from one to the other (Pan et al., 2020). For instance, Di Vaio and Varriale
(2020) performed a single case study of blockchain applications in the aviation industry
and found that blockchain-enabled information sharing did encourage trust and cooperation
between airlines, airport operators, ground handlers, and air trafﬁc controllers.
The execution of smart contracts and consensus mechanisms
Formalized arrangements
of smart contracts and consensus mechanisms in the blockchain application also promote
trust between supply chain parties (Palas & Bunduchi, 2020; Velmovitsky et al., 2021). The
enforcement of a self-executing smart contract can ensure that transactions between two
parties are governed and controlled by pre-agreed contracts and ﬁnes will be applied if one
party exhibits opportunistic behaviour (Juma et al., 2019). Thus, trust bestowed from a trustor
entity to other supply chain partners is expected to be improved (Baharmand et al., 2021; Qian
& Papadonikolaki, 2020). For example, L’Hermitte and Nair (2020) argued that enhanced
trust between participants stems from blockchain-enabled smart contracts that automate the
resources matching and payment process as soon as pre-agreed conditions are met.
4.1.4 Consumers/public and a unit of supply chain pairs
The third pair of relationships belongs to the trustor of the two external stakeholders: con-
sumers/the public and the trustee of the supply chain unit. In this regard, consumers and the
public mainly evaluate the degree of trustworthiness of a supply chain through their percep-
tions of the trustee’s ability to commit to the delivery of desired end products (Sirdeshmukh
et al., 2002). Such perception is dependent on information provided from the supply chain
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
61
regarding products’ provenance, authenticity, custody, and integrity as well as production,
modiﬁcation, and supply chain protocol (Montecchi et al., 2019; Suhail et al., 2020).
Blockchain implementation comes into play by increasing the information authenticity
and transparency of the supply chain which could lead to enhanced trustworthiness perceived
by external stakeholders. This is mainly since the technology is able to promote information
sharing from every supply chain member and tampers the risk of fraudulent practices such
as counterfeit product and forgery reports (Garrard & Fielke, 2020; Kayikci et al., 2020). In
other words, consumer and public acknowledgement regarding the material ﬂow and product
journey across the value chain are improved (Hasan et al., 2020; Köhler & Pizzol, 2020). For
instance, Luzzani et al. (2021) empirically revealed that the blockchain-enabled collection
of transparent information regarding soil and water features, climate condition, treatment
with pesticides and fertilizers, production process, traceability, and labour and human rights
helped enhance consumers’ trust placed on wine producers, and this was reﬂected in sales
growth. Hence, it is expected that the trustor entity will have more conﬁdence in supply
chain commitment and bestow a higher level of trust to the supply chain showing quality
data recorded for the whole supply chain process and activities (Cao et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2020).
The enhancement of consumer trust is critically important in supply chains that require
high quality and safety standards, such as food and pharmaceutical (e.g., X. Yang et al.,
2021b; Yong et al., 2020), and supply chains that are subjected to asymmetric information
such as second-hand markets (e.g., de Boissieu et al., 2021; Subramanian & Thampy, 2021).
For instance, Yong et al. (2020) discussed how blockchain can help improve consumer and
public trust in the vaccine distribution supply chain by tracking the ﬂow of medicine along
the supply chain using authentic drug identity and showing such information to consumers
and the public. By the same token, the ﬁndings from previous literature also indicated that the
employment of blockchain-predicated solutions helped increase brand reputation protection
and customers’ trust establishment in the second-hand luxury market (de Boissieu et al.,
2021) as well as the pre-owned, online electric-vehicle market (Subramanian & Thampy,
2021).
4.2 Forms of trust
From the outcome of the deductive analysis using the three foundational categories of trust
proposed by Rousseau et al. (1998) and Lewis and Weigert (1985), we found that the
blockchain literature mainly discussed cognition-based trust (90 articles) and institution-
based trust (48 papers), and rarely mentioned affect-based trust (nine articles).
4.2.1 Institution-based trust
The literature review revealed that institutional trust was mainly enhanced by the imple-
mentation of blockchain within pairs of trading partner relationships through smart contract
applications and credit-based payment mechanisms (e.g., Palas & Bunduchi, 2020; Qian &
Papadonikolaki, 2020).
Smart contract applications. Blockchain uses a consensus mechanism which all network
participants need to agree to before executing the system (Cao et al., 2019; Pan et al., 2020).
This means that when an issue arises, participants within the network can be conﬁdent that
appropriate sanctions to rectify the issue will automatically be enforced through the smart
contract (Chang & Chen, 2020; Pranto et al., 2021). With this effective control mechanism,
123

62
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
the smart contract can help a trustor organization ensure that its trading partners within
the supply network are discouraged from conducting opportunistic behaviours. Hence, the
utilization of the blockchain platform is expected to increase the trustworthiness of a trustee
party in performing trade with a trustor organization.
Credit-based payment mechanisms
Moreover, blockchain also facilitates effective pay-
ment mechanisms to prevent deferred payments (Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020). As included
in an agreed contract and also integrated with the tracking record, the payment protocol will
automatically prevent the incidence of late payments (L’Hermitte & Nair, 2020; Tezel et al.,
2021). Therefore, the blockchain-enabled, credit-based payment scheme can also fortify
institution-based trust between supply chain members (Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020; Viriy-
asitavat et al., 2019).
4.2.2 Cognition-based trust
The blockchain literature demonstrates that cognition-based trust is likely to be enhanced by
the execution of the blockchain solution in all three pairs through the increase in information
authenticity and transparency (Di Vaio & Varriale, 2020; Hasan et al., 2020; Juma et al.,
2019). The superiority of data security and the consensus mechanism of blockchain execution
facilitates the continual sharing of information from all relevant parties in the system (Kshetri,
2018), and it is reasonable to expect that a trustor will gain more knowledge of a trustee.
Considering each pair of relationships, cognitive trust is increased for system users when
blockchain enhances the data integrity and authenticity of its equipped system (Cha et al.,
2020; Juma et al., 2019). Similarly, the calculative trust between supply chain partners is
expected to be substantively enhanced when the blockchain is presented, as the authenticity
of essential business information of all relevant parties in the supply chain is veriﬁed and
such information in the blockchain platform becomes visible to all supply chain parties (e.g.,
Centobelli et al., 2021; Di Vaio & Varriale, 2020; Wan et al., 2020).
For instance, Liu et al. (2021) explained that the transparent information system based
on the blockchain can help address the lack of trust issue in ﬁnancing between deep-tier
retailers that are likely to be small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and commercial banks.
This is mainly because blockchain increases visibility in SMEs’ credibility which leads to
an increase in the cognitive trustworthiness that ﬁnancial institutions place on SMEs.
In a similar fashion, the increased transparency and availability of information across the
end-to-end supply chain also promotes consumers’ and the public’s cognition-based trust
in the supply chain unit (e.g., Hasan et al., 2020; Rogerson & Parry, 2020). For example,
blockchain can help inform consumers regarding the origin of products’ components and the
production process of the ﬁnished products in the ﬁshery supply chain, which consequently
helps solve the trust crisis issue in ﬁsh consumption which mainly stems from a deﬁciency
of information (Probst, 2020). Similarly, blockchain deployment can foster consumers’ trust
and help address the issue of serious health and safety concerns in food supply chains during
the COVID-19 pandemic through the reinforcement of information visibility (L. Yang et al.,
2021a).
4.2.3 Affect-based trust
From our review of the existing literature, it can be said that blockchain may not have a
direct impact on the enhancement of affect-based trust between organizations. For instance,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
63
Joo and Han (2021) stated that distributed trust along supply chains that was developed
through blockchain, resembles the system-like trust (consists of reliability, functionality, and
helpfulness) more than human-like trust (consists of integrity, ability, and benevolence). In
addition, Wang et al., (2019a) highlighted that blockchain is more likely to instantly build
digital trust rather than traditionally relational trust that takes years to build.
There are two reasons to support this:
1. As technology cannot prevent opportunistic behaviour and an organization’s misconduct
in organizing physical information, technology is not able to promote emotional trust
betweentwoentities(Kopytoetal.,2020).Speciﬁcally,forsupplychainpartners,Schmidt
and Wagner (2019) and Qian and Papadonikolaki (2020) argued that there is still a need
to develop relational governance to facilitate affective trust in the long term, to maintain
harmonious relationships between supply chain partners even though the blockchain is
adopted.
2. For interorganizational trust between supply chain partners, several scholars stated that
the employment of blockchain will shift the form of trust from affect-based trust to insti-
tutional and cognitive trust as technology facilitates the superiority of digital information
security and transparency and enables credible control mechanisms (e.g., Schmidt &
Wagner, 2019). It is reasonable to perceive that blockchain transforms and quantiﬁes
traditional, relational trust in the supply chain into a digital credit (Fu et al., 2020).
4.3 Temporal orientation
From the outcome of deductive analysis using two predeﬁned categories, the temporal
dimension of trust is the least attention gained from blockchain scholars as only six papers
investigated blockchain-enabled swift trust and another six papers implicitly discussed trust
developed in the long term after implementing the technology.
4.3.1 Swift trust
From the six blockchain papers that discussed it, swift trust was found to be developed
in the humanitarian supply chain where multiple aid agencies, emergency responders, and
commercial organizations worked together to complete the speciﬁc, time-limited tasks of
providing relief aid and minimizing suffering and death to those people affected by disasters
(e.g., Dubey et al., 2020b; Hunt et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2021).
The execution of blockchain can enhance swift trust in the disaster-relief supply chain
through three mechanisms. First, blockchain operation can increase ongoing information
sharing and the visibility of secured, veriﬁed information which leads to the construction
of rapid trust among various stakeholders in the supply network (Baharmand et al., 2021;
Dubey et al., 2020b). For instance, Khan et al. (2021) found that transparency mediates the
relationship between blockchain execution and trust performance in supply chains. Second,
as the blockchain facilitates a real-time performance rating to each involved unit (a peer-rating
system), accumulated rating scores can help indicate service users and providers’ capability
and help establish a rapid trust among unknown actors (Hunt et al., 2021; L’Hermitte & Nair,
2020). Third, blockchain platforms help establish clear, consensual protocols and norms
which help clarify roles and responsibilities and govern the actions of unknown users and
providers of logistics resources (Hunt et al., 2021; L’Hermitte & Nair, 2020).
123

64
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
Notably, previous studies of swift trust mostly focused on supply network partner pairs and
the forms of swift trust examined were mainly a combination of institution-based trust (pro-
tocols and rules) and cognition-based trust (knowledge from rating system and information
sharing).
4.3.2 Long-term oriented trust
From the six papers that discussed the implication of blockchain on trust formation in the
long term, there were two main streams of discussion: the possibility and issue of blockchain
implication on trust between supply chain partners in the long term (Kopyto et al., 2020;
Schmidt & Wagner, 2019), and the conjecture of users’ trust in the blockchain in the long
term (Cha et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021b).
For supply chain partners, blockchain may not be able to mitigate opportunistic behaviours
if there are no effective governance structures and active trust management between supply
chain members (Kopyto et al., 2020; Schmidt & Wagner, 2019). Thus, affective trust may
not be built due to the reduced honesty and integrity of each party (Sheppard & Sherman,
1998) and cognitive trust may deteriorate due to the negative perceptions of other partners
(Doney & Cannon, 1997). Ultimately, blockchain alone may not be capable of building an
ideal trusted ecosystem of supply chain networks. In the long run, other instruments and
mechanisms are required to be involved in the sustainable enhancement of trust in supply
chain management.
With regard to users’ trust in blockchain technology, Cha et al. (2020) emphasized the
importance of blockchain, especially for long-lifecycle systems in securing the standard of
data integrity, security, availability, and conﬁdentiality in the long term. This helps stress the
possibility that blockchain equipment can help facilitate system-associated trust in the long
term if the technology still maintains its performance standards. In the same vein, Li et al.,
(2021a, 2021b) argued that blockchain needs to overcome the current security challenges of
encryption algorithms and the consensus mechanisms which will enhance system security to
make blockchain performance more rigorous and reliable at a future date.
4.4 The literature summary and gap spotting
We summarize our discussions of blockchain and trust in supply chains grounded on the three
trust dimensions in Table 5. The summary of trust discussion also highlights prominent gaps
with respect to the various dimensions of trust and makes suggestions for future research
accordingly.
4.5 The blockchain-entrusted supply chain models
From the summary of the existing literature review, we can see that there are multiconnections
between categories within the three trust dimensions. Therefore, in order to visualize all such
linkages between various trust elements in the three proposed dimensions and consolidate
the ﬁndings of this literature-based study, we developed a conceptual model that illustrates
the formation of trust when implementing blockchain technology and the diffusion of trust
through different components in the ecosystem of the supply chain.
As there are two schools of thought regarding the effect of trust on supply chain partners,
we developed two different trust development models, called TTS and ITR models, with each
model comprising three connected steps. Each step of each model portrays the implication
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
65
Table 5 The roles of blockchain in facilitating trust in supply chains grounded on the three trust dimensions and identiﬁed research gaps
Trust dimension
The roles of blockchain
Research gaps
I. Trustor–trustee
Perspective
1. The users and blockchain pairs
Due to an increase in the capability of the blockchain to perform
information storage and exchange, an organization as a user is
likely to bestow a higher level of trust to the blockchain
compared to traditional supply chain systems (Garrard & Fielke,
2020)
Three sources of a trustee’s perceived higher capacity:
(1) Blockchain’s superiority of security strength (e.g., Köhler &
Pizzol, 2020; Musamih et al., 2021)
(2) Blockchain’s faster speed of data processing and transmission
speed (e.g., Palas & Bunduchi, 2020; Wang et al., 2019a,
2019b)
(3) Blockchain’s self-executing governance and monitoring (e.g.,
Alkhoori et al., 2021; Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020)
2. The two supply chain partners
pairs
There are two schools of thought, TTS and ITR, possessing
different views on the implications of blockchains on the trust
element between two supply chain partners. Actors who assume
the roles of a trustor and trustee in this pair of relationships are
also different
The dichotomy of views regarding blockchain implications for
trust in supply chains could be an important issue for future
investigation, especially the supply chain contexts which each
view can be ﬁtted into
2.1 TTS
In TTS, there is no need for interorganizational trust development
between the two supply chain parties as they can both act as a
trustor and bestow trust to the blockchain when performing
exchanges (Kumar et al., 2020; Tezel et al., 2021)
Put differently, blockchain solution plays a role as the trusted
third party that facilitates transactions between supply chain
members, thus trust from each member is redistributed and more
centralized toward the operating system (Cha et al., 2020;
Pournader et al., 2020b)
123

66
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
Table 5 (continued)
Trust dimension
The roles of blockchain
Research gaps
2.2 ITR
In ITR, blockchain employment is expected to contribute to the
reinforcement of interorganizational trust between supply chain
partners (e.g., Dubey et al., 2020b; Surjandari et al., 2021)
There are three primary arguments to support such trust
enhancement:
(1) Transference of the capabilities and strengthened
trustworthiness in the blockchain to the organization that uses
the system (e.g., Hunt et al., 2021)
(2) Increase in the continuous exchange of information between
two supply chain partners encouraged by the blockchain
mechanism (e.g., Di Vaio & Varriale, 2020)
(3) The facilitation of automated governance and monitoring of
transactions performed using the application of smart contracts
and consensus mechanisms (e.g., Palas & Bunduchi, 2020)
Trustor: consumer and public
Trustee: supply chain
Blockchain implementation helps strengthen the trust of
consumers and the public through the enhancement of
information authenticity and the transparency of various supply
chain activities, the ﬂow of materials and products along the
supply chain, and the risks of supply chain breach or failure to
perform (e.g., de Boissieu et al., 2021; Garrard & Fielke, 2020;
Kayikci et al., 2020)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
67
Table 5 (continued)
Trust dimension
The roles of blockchain
Research gaps
II. Form of Trust
1. Institution-based trust
The implementation of blockchain mainly bolsters
institution-based trust between a user and the blockchain (e.g.,
Cao et al., 2021) as well as supply chain trading partners (e.g.,
Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020) through:
(1) The application of automated smart contracts ensure that
sanctions will be incurred appropriately by parties responsible
for misconduct; this discourages supply chain partners from
engaging in opportunistic behaviours (e.g., Palas & Bunduchi,
2020; Pranto et al., 2021)
(2) Credit-based payment mechanisms which help prevent the
incidence of late payment through the self-executing tracking
record (e.g., Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020; Tezel et al., 2021)
2. Cognition-based trust
Blockchain deployment is expected to increase cognition-based
trust in each of
the three pairs of relationships through the following mechanisms:
(1) For trust in the operating system, blockchain integration can
promote users’ cognitive trust through the enhancement of
data integrity and authenticity (Cha et al., 2020; Juma et al.,
2019)
(2) For supply chain partners, blockchain adoption can reinforce
cognition-based trust through the encouragement of credible
information sharing and the visibility of real-time updated
information (e.g., Liu et al., 2021; Wan et al., 2020)
(3) For the trust of consumers/public in a supply chain unit,
blockchain implementation can strengthen the
cognition-based trust in the supply chain through the
authenticity and transparency of information regarding various
activities end-to-end across the supply chain (e.g., Rogerson &
Parry, 2020; Yong et al., 2020)
123

68
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
Table 5 (continued)
Trust dimension
The roles of blockchain
Research gaps
3. Affect-based trust
Blockchain employment may not have a direct inﬂuence on
affect-based trust between supply chain partners for two reasons:
(1) If not equipped with suitable governance mechanisms, the
technology alone may not be able to prevent the opportunistic
behaviour of a supply chain partner in organizing physical
information (Kopyto et al., 2020)
(2) Affect-based trust may be quantiﬁed and transformed into
cognition-based trust in the form of digital credit (Qian &
Papadonikolaki, 2020)
More conceptual and empirical research is needed to examine
affect-based trust and blockchain adoption in various settings
III. Time Dimension
1. Swift trust
The blockchain shows the potential to increase swift trust in
disaster-relief supply chains through the three following
mechanisms:
(1) Encouragement of ongoing information sharing between
unknown partners and enhancement of information visibility
and transparency end-to-end throughout supply chains
(Baharmand et al., 2021; Dubey et al., 2020b; Khan et al.,
2021)
(2) Provision of the real-time performance rating system which
allows unknown partners to rapidly discern the capability of
others to perform (Hunt et al., 2021; L’Hermitte & Nair, 2020)
(3) Clear and consensual protocols for governance actions of
unknown supply chain partners (Hunt et al., 2021; L’Hermitte
& Nair, 2020)
There is a possibility that a blockchain can assume the role of a
swift trust facilitator in other contexts apart from disaster-relief
supply chains
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
69
Table 5 (continued)
Trust dimension
The roles of blockchain
Research gaps
2. Long-term oriented trust
Blockchain implications for long-term oriented trust is only
discussed in the trust between two supply chain partners and the
user’s trust in the technology-based system
(1) As blockchain may not be able to reduce the opportunistic
behaviours of trading partners over the long term when proper
governance and active trust management are absent, the
technology may have a minimal effect on trust formation for
supply chain partners (Kopyto et al., 2020; Schmidt &
Wagner, 2019)
(2) For system users, blockchain is promising in its enhancement
of the trustworthiness of its equipped system in the long term
if the technology can maintain its standards of
information-related capabilities and overcome the challenges
associated with encryption algorithms and consensus
mechanisms (Cha et al., 2020; Z. Li et al., 2021b)
More conceptual and empirical studies are needed to reﬁne the
concept and investigate how different forms of trust are
affected by the presence of blockchain technology over a
longer time period
123

70
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
of blockchain on a pair of trustors and trustees. In both versions of the proposed models, in
the ﬁrst step, we started from a pair of technology users and the blockchain to illustrate the
direct impact of blockchain adoption on origination that uses the technology, as shown in
Fig. 1. In the second step of both models, we illustrate the blockchain implications on the
trust element between two supply chain partners, as presented in Fig. 2 for the TTS model
and Fig. 4 for the ITR model. In this step, the two versions display the main differences in
the impact of blockchains and actors who assume the roles of trustors and trustees in both the
TTS and ITR models. In the third step, we completed the blockchain-enabled trust diffusion
model with an increase in trust of a supply chain unit by the external stakeholder viewpoints
as illustrated in Fig. 3 for the TTS model and Fig. 5 for the ITR model.
The three steps of trust development and dissemination start from the direct impacts of
blockchain on its users, move to other supply chain members in a subsequent step and end
with the extent of impact on a whole supply chain unit from the eyes of external consumers
and public. This approach delicately reﬂects the step-by-step ramiﬁcation of blockchain
adoption on trust subject within a range of stakeholder entities involved in the supply chain
ecosystem. Different forms of trust are also incorporated to help explain trust bestow between
each trustor–trustee pair. Moreover, to clearly show the development of swift trust between
supply chain partners under certain circumstances, we developed a separate three-step model
of swift trust development (STD). From our analysis of the literature, it is likely that the STD
model is the emulation of the ITR model with modiﬁed components in step two, as shown
in Fig. 6.
User/ 
organisation
[Trustor]
A supply chain 
Blockchain [Trustee]
Cognition-based 
trust
The superiority of 
system security /data 
transmission speed
Institution-based 
trust
Governance 
/payment 
mechanism
form of enhanced trust 
=
=
trustor/trustee
=
= trust enhancement mechanism
direction of trust bestowed
Due to blockchain’s information 
capabilities and protocols, an 
organisation as a user is expected 
to place increased institution-based 
trust and cognition-based trust on 
the blockchain-equipped system 
when compared with traditional 
supply chain systems.
Fig. 1 The enhancement of the organization’s trust in the blockchain in the Trustless trusted scheme (TTS)
model
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
71
4.5.1 The TTS model of blockchain-entrusted supply chains
The ﬁrst step of the TTS model expounds trust in a pair of blockchains and users. As shown
in Fig. 1, the adoption of a blockchain instead of a traditional operating system in the supply
chain is expected to increase institution-based trust (e.g., Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020; Tezel
et al., 2021) and cognition-based trust (e.g., Alkhader et al., 2021; Kayikci et al., 2020) in
a system user or an organization that operates the technology. An increase in institutional
trust is the outcome of a pre-agreed governance protocol and payment mechanism which
will be self-executed when operating the blockchain (Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020). As
the blockchain as a trustee entity demonstrates such an effective governance mechanism in
performing transactions, an organization is believed to attribute the trustee with a higher
capability to complete an exchange and bestow a higher trust to the system (e.g., Asante
et al., 2021; Palas & Bunduchi, 2020).
Increased cognition-based trust mainly stems from the two capabilities of blockchain to
enhance system security strength and speed of data transmission which collectively create
the visibility of nearly real-time, credible information (e.g., Hu et al., 2021; Viriyasitavat
et al., 2019). As there is more authentic information available, a trustee will have more
knowledge regarding the trustee’s enhanced capability. Therefore, an organization operating
the blockchain as a trustor entity is expected to bestow higher trust to the supply chain system
equipped with blockchain.
The second step of the TTS model provides the delineation of the impact of blockchain on
trust between a pair of trading partners. As scholars believe that blockchain implementation
eliminates the need for developing trust between the two organizations (e.g., Kumar et al.,
2020; Pournader et al., 2020b), there is no direct trust linkage from one organization to
the other, as shown in Fig. 2. Moreover, as the TTS intellectual community believes that the
blockchain acts as a trusted third party and redistributes the trust of two supply chain partners
towards itself, there are two straight lines connecting the two parties to the blockchain.
As in step one, as the blockchain solution shows an increase in capability to store and
exchange information when organizations perform their transactions, the two organizations
as trustors are likely to provide more trust to the blockchain compared to traditional supply
chain systems. The forms of trust are also identical to those in the ﬁrst step: institution-based
and cognition-based trust. The logic as to why two such forms of trust are enhanced also
resembles the ﬁrst step with the duplication of two organizations, thus there is no further
explanation provided in this step.
The third step in the TTS model delineates the trust enhancement of an end-to-end sup-
ply chain from the view of external consumers and the public, as shown in Fig. 3. Due to
blockchain-enabled superior security of information sharing and the faster speed of informa-
tion transmission, every supply chain member is expected to exchange authentic and credible
information through the third-party blockchain solution in a hypothetically real-time fash-
ion (Garrard & Fielke, 2020; Kayikci et al., 2020). Therefore, information authenticity and
transparency of a whole supply chain unit are likely to be enhanced, leading to more credi-
ble knowledge provided to external stakeholders (Subramanian & Thampy, 2021). It is then
logical to expect that consumers and the public will gain conﬁdence and provide more trust-
worthiness to the supply chain entrusted with blockchain (Musamih et al., 2021; Pawar et al.,
2020; Yong et al., 2020).
123

72
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
A supply chain 
The superiority of 
system security/data 
transmission speed
Cognition-based 
trust
Governance 
/payment 
mechanism
Institution-
based trust
Blockchain [Trustee]
Partner
[Trustor]
Partner
[Trustor]
form of enhanced trust 
=
=
trustor/trustee
=
= trust enhancement mechanism
direction of trust bestowed
Similar to a focal organisation, its partner 
in the supply chain is expected to place 
increased institution-based trust and 
cognition-based trust on the blockchain-
equipped system. The two partners perform 
transactions through blockchain (a trusted 
third party) without a direct trust linkage.
Fig. 2 The impact of blockchain on trust between a pair of supply chain partners in the Trustless trusted scheme
(TTS) model
4.5.2 The ITR model of blockchain-entrusted supply chain
As the ﬁrst step of the model only shows the trust relationship between the blockchain
and its user, the logical explanation of the direct blockchain impact according to distinct
features of the technology in the ITR model is identical to the TTS model. Therefore, no
further explanation is provided in this step. In ITR intellectual commitment, scholars believe
that the presence of blockchain helps enhance trust bestowed between a pair of supply chain
partnersthroughthreecomplementarymechanisms,namely:(1)theself-executedgovernance
mechanism, (2) direct transferring of blockchain capabilities to a trustee organization, and
(3) the reinforcement of the information sharing paradigm. As presented in Fig. 4, there are
two lines of trust connection: the curved line that passes through a blockchain and the straight
line that directly connects two supply chain partners. The curved line represents mechanisms
of trust creation (1) and (2), in which trust is enhanced in the form of institution-based trust
and cognition-based trust, respectively.
Increased institutional trust in the curved line
Similar to the TTS model, the blockchain
application of smart contracts enables an effective mechanism to govern a transaction between
two parties, thus increasing the level of institution-based trust to both supply chain part-
ners (e.g., Palas & Bunduchi, 2020; Qian & Papadonikolaki, 2020). This effective governance
capability is transferred from blockchain intrinsic features to the trustee organization that
operates the technology.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
73
Member 
1
A supply chain 
[Trustee]
Consumers
/public 
[Trustor]
Blockchain
Information 
authenticity/ 
transparency
Cognition-
based trust
Member 
2
Member 
3
form of enhanced trust 
=
=
trustor/trustee
=
= trust enhancement mechanism
direction of trust bestowed
Due to enhanced information 
authenticity and transparency of a 
whole supply chain unit, 
consumers and the public are 
expected to place higher cognition-
based trust on the blockchain-
based supply chain.
Fig. 3 The trust enhancement of consumer and public in the blockchain-entrusted supply chain in the Trustless
trusted scheme (TTS) model
Increased cognition-based trust in the curved line
As a trustee organization provides more
credible, nearly real-time information when equipped with the blockchain, it is reasonable
to expect that a trustor organization will have more knowledge of the trustee and bestow
a higher level of cognitive trust (K. Li et al., 2021a). Such enhancement in credibility and
speed of information communication stems from the transference of the blockchain’s superior
capability of security systems and data transmission speed (Palas & Bunduchi, 2020).
Increased cognition-based trust in the straight line
Since the information in blockchain
is safely secured and there are appropriate, pre-agreed sanctions for those who perform
information misconduct, the presence of the blockchain encourages the two supply chain
parties to continuously share their business information with each other (e.g., Ghode et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020). The enhancement of information sharing leads to the establishment of
an information transparency paradigm and increases the trustor’s knowledge regarding the
trustee, thus there is likely to be more trust exchanged between the two partners (e.g., Pan
et al., 2020).
As in the TTS model, the third step of the ITR model portrays the perceived increase
in cognition-based trust of a supply chain unit from the eyes of external consumers and
the public, as shown in Fig. 5. Since the constellation of (1) reinforcement of information
sharing between multiple supply chain members, (2) superior security of information ﬂowing
end-to-end along the supply chain, (3) faster speed of information communication between
123

74
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
A supply chain 
Blockchain
The superiority of 
system security /data 
transmission speed
Cognition-based 
trust
Governance/
payment 
mechanism
Institution-based 
trust
Information 
transparency
Cognition-based 
trust
Partner
[Trustor/trustee]
Partner
[Trustor/trustee]
form of enhanced trust 
=
=
trustor/trustee
=
= trust enhancement mechanism
direction of trust bestowed
Blockchain helps enhance institution-
based trust and cognition-based trust
between two partners in the supply 
chain through (1) the self-executed 
governance mechanism, (2) direct 
transference of blockchain capabilities 
to a trustee organisation, and (3) the 
reinforcement of the information 
sharing paradigm.
Fig. 4 The impact of blockchain on trust between a pair of supply chain partners in the Interorganizational
trust reinforcement (ITR) model
multiple pairs of participants, and (4) self-executing governance and payment mechanisms
that apply to all pairs of supply chain partners, it is reasonable to expect a tremendous increase
in information authenticity and the transparency of the whole supply chain. Hence, external
stakeholders, consumers, and the public will be likely to gain more credible knowledge
regarding the multitude of activities inside the supply chain, leading to an enhancement of
conﬁdence and greater trust in a supply chain with blockchain (Hasan et al., 2020; Köhler &
Pizzol, 2020; Lee & Yeon, 2021).
4.5.3 The STD model of blockchain-entrusted supply chain
Again, since the ﬁrst step of the swift trust model starts from the direct impact of blockchain
adoption on its users’ trust, the rationale behind the trust development is the resemblance of
step one in TTS and ITR models. Therefore, no further explanation is provided in this step.
From the body of literature reviewed, the mechanisms of swift trust building in the second
step are identical to that of the ITR model. Therefore, we developed this step of the STD
model by emulating the second step of the ITR model and modifying essential components,
as shown in Fig. 6.
Speciﬁcally,wechangedaunitofsupplychainintheITRmodeltotemporarysupplychain,
which serves task-speciﬁc objectives and will last for a short time period. This temporary
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
75
Due to the enhanced information 
authenticity and transparency of a 
whole supply chain unit, 
consumers and the public are 
expected to place higher cognition-
based trust on the blockchain-
based supply chain.
Blockchain
A supply chain 
[Trustee]
Consumers
/public 
[Trustor]
Information 
authenticity/
transparency
Cognition-
based trust
Member 
2
Member 
1
Member 
3
form of enhanced trust 
=
=
trustor/trustee
=
= trust enhancement mechanism
direction of trust bestowed
Fig. 5 The trust enhancement of consumers and the public in the blockchain-entrusted supply chain in the
Interorganizational trust reinforcement (ITR) model
supply chain is typically found in the humanitarian supply chain, which prior studies have
found appropriate for swift trust-building (Dubey et al., 2020b; Hunt et al., 2021; L’Hermitte
& Nair, 2020). Furthermore, we changed from partner in the ITR model to unknown partner
in the STD model, as swift trust is hypothetically built between two organizations that have
never worked together before (Dubey et al., 2019). Since the logic behind the enhancement
of trust between unknown partners from blockchain in swift trust resembles the second step
of the ITR model, no further explanation is provided in this section. It is also crucial to
mention that there is no study indicating the implication of blockchain on swift trust using
the mechanism of the TTS model.
From the result of the literature review, the discussion about the blockchain implication
on the development of the swift trust in the whole supply chain unit is limited. However,
since the mechanism of swift trust formation in the second step is identical to that in the ITR
model, we can expect the constellation of four trust enhancement mechanisms which lead to
an increase in information authenticity and transparency of an end-to-tend temporary supply
chain. External stakeholders of a temporary supply chain then gain more credible knowledge
of activities inside, hence they are likely to bestow higher trust to the blockchain-entrusted
supply chain.
123

76
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
A temporary supply chain
with a time-limited, task-specific
objective
Blockchain
The superiority of 
system security /data 
transmission speed
Cognition-based 
trust
Governance/
payment 
mechanism
Institution-based 
trust
Information 
transparency
Cognition-based 
trust
Unknown partner
[Trustor/trustee]
Unknown partner
[Trustor/trustee]
form of enhanced trust 
=
=
trustor/trustee
=
= trust enhancement mechanism
direction of trust bestowed
Blockchain helps enhance institution-
based trust and cognition-based trust
between the two unknown partners in 
the temporary supply chain through 
(1) the self-executed governance 
mechanism, (2) direct transferring of 
blockchain capabilities to a trustee 
organisation, and (3) the 
reinforcement of the information 
sharing paradigm.
Fig. 6 The development of the swift trust between unknown supply chain partners in a temporary supply chain
in the swift trust development (STD) model
4.6 Further discussions on the proposed TTS, ITR, and STD models
After exploring the TTS, ITR, and STD models in detail, we can see that there are several
commonalities of blockchain impact and trust development in the three models. Nevertheless,
there are also the main components in each model that disparate one from the others. We,
therefore, summarize commonalities and differences in this section.
First, the three models share the same trust developmental process in step one which
describes the direct impact of the blockchain on an organization operating the technology. In
other words, the adoption of blockchain technology is the absolute origin of trust dissemina-
tion in the supply chain ecosystem. Second, although the mechanisms of trust development
inside a supply chain in the three models are heterogeneous, the blockchain-entrusted supply
chain is likely to enhance external consumer and public trust in a whole supply chain unit.
Third, institutional-based trust, as well as cognition-based trust, are the two forms of trust
that contribute to the trust development and diffusion in all three models.
The main differences between the three models lie in the second step of the model
where there is trust enhancement between two supply chain partners with the presence of a
blockchain. Speciﬁcally, for the TTS model, there is no direct linkage between two supply
chain parties, yet the two organizations act as trustors who bestow trust to the blockchain (e.g.,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
77
Cocco et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2020). In this scenario, the blockchain plays the role of a
trustee who shows a higher capability to perform transactions with the superiority of system
security and information transmission speed (e.g., Palas & Bunduchi, 2020; Viriyasitavat
et al., 2019). In contrast, in the ITR and STD models, the blockchain acts as a facilitator
that enables trust development between the two supply chain parties. In this scenario, the
two parties both act as a trustor who renders trust and a trustee who is perceived as having
greater trustworthiness. Such an increase in the trustworthiness of a trustee party comes from
two mechanisms. First, the capabilities of blockchain regarding such superiority of system
security and information communication speed are transferred into an organization operat-
ing the technology (e.g., K. Li et al., 2021a; Shahid et al., 2020). Also, the implementation
of blockchain encourages two supply chain parties to exchange information, leading to the
establishment of an information transparency paradigm (e.g., Ghode et al., 2020; Li et al.,
2020).
With regard to the main differences between the ITR and STD models, step two of the STD
model is a modiﬁed version of that in the ITR model. Speciﬁcally, the STD model presents
a particular context in which swift trust can be developed with the presence of blockchain: a
short-lived,temporarysupplychainwithtask-speciﬁcobjectivesandtrustexchangedbetween
unknown partners (Dubey et al., 2020b; Hunt et al., 2021). In this scenario, both institution-
based trust and cognition-based trust are expected to develop swiftly and only last for a short
period of time. The summary of commonalities and differences of the three proposed models
are shown in Table 6.
Table 6 Commonalities and differences of the TTS, ITR, and STD models
Model
Commonalities
Differences
TTS
Blockchain is an absolute origin of trust
diffusion. The ﬁrst step in the three models
shares the identical trust enhancement
mechanism
A supply chain equipped with blockchain is
likely to enhance external consumer and
public trust
Two forms of trust enhanced in the three
models are institutional-based trust as well as
cognition-based trust
In step two:
No direct linkage between two supply
chain parties
The blockchain act as the third party
when two parties perform an exchange
ITR
In step two:
The blockchain acts as a facilitator that
enables trust development between the
two supply chain parties
Increase in trust exchange between the
two parties comes from the transfer of
blockchain security and information
communication capabilities as well as the
establishment of an information
transparency paradigm
STD
In step two:
Same trust enhancement mechanism as in
the ITR model
Modify two components of the ITR
model to a temporary supply chain and
trust exchanged between unknown
partners
123

78
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
5 Discussion
In this literature-based review, we used the three dimensions of trust adopted from manage-
ment research as a theoretical background to frame the content analysis and we used the
perceived trustee’s capability to fulﬁll obligations from the eyes of the trustor to explain how
such capability is enhanced by the presence of blockchain. The blockchain-entrusted model
was then developed in the three variations to converge the contradicting views of blockchain
application to trust in supply chains as well as present a case for swift trust formation mecha-
nisms between unknown partners within supply chains. The main contributions of this study
to theory and practice are discussed below.
5.1 Theoretical implications
This study has been the ﬁrst attempt to consolidate the body of knowledge addressing
blockchain and trust in supply chains. Based on the three dimensions of trust adopted from
management literature, the concept of trust in the supply chains adopting blockchain technol-
ogy is elaborated. Using inductive and deductive approaches to review the extant literature,
we classiﬁed trust in supply chains into categories according to the trustor–trustee perspec-
tive, forms of enhanced trust, and temporal orientation. For the trustor–trustee perspective, the
outcome of the inductive content analysis revealed three pairs of trustor and trustee involved
in supply chains using blockchains, i.e., a user and the blockchain, two supply chain part-
ners, and consumer/public and a supply chain unit. The paired perspective indicated how
blockchain capabilities facilitated the trustees’ capabilities in fulﬁlling obligations from the
perception of trustors in each paired relationship. Likewise, the two subthemes under the two
supply chain partners, namely TTS and ITR, emerged as contrasting views. These two views
propose rather contradicting ideas on blockchain implications for trust in supply chains and
the actors who assume the roles of trustor and trustee. Additionally, for the forms of trust, the
outcome of deductive analysis using three rudimentary categories from management scholar-
ship indicated that cognition-based and institution-based trust were likely to be enhanced by
blockchain implementation, while affect-based trust, which is typically considered as tradi-
tional interorganizational trust, was not directly impacted by the technology. This dimension
clariﬁed how utilizing advanced technologies such as blockchain in supply chain settings fur-
ther enhanced trust between two supply chain partners even though those technologies had a
minimal effect on traditional trust between partners, characterized by bonds and attachments
(Wong et al., 2008).
With respect to time orientation, the outcome of the deductive analysis through the cat-
egorization of swift trust and long-term oriented trust illustrated that swift trust increased
between unknown supply chain partners under certain circumstances. Although the existing
literature merely showed the potential of blockchain on swift trust formation in the human-
itarian supply chain, the concept of blockchain-enabled swift trust can be applied to other
supply chain settings in which two or more unknown partners need to be coordinated in a
short-lived period to fulﬁll immediate goals. We subsequently developed the three models
of blockchain-entrusted supply chains that showed the multiconnectivity of multiple aspects
of trust enhanced by blockchain. The proposed model discussed three connected steps to
initially develop trust through the implementation of blockchain that were subsequently dif-
fused to supply chain partners and external stakeholders. The three variations of the model
also discussed the TTS and ITR schools of thought as well as the STD model, which por-
trays the swift trust development in a temporary supply chain. Though these three models
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
79
shared similarities, the review of the literature revealed that in the TTS model, trust was
redistributed from supply chain partners to the blockchain as the third-party intermediary.
This is somewhat in contrast with the ITR model, where trust between supply chain partners
was enhanced through blockchain.
Our explanation of how blockchain is able to engender trust between supply chain partici-
pants also responds to the question raised by Böckel et al. (2020): “the question remains how
a technology might be able to create trust, if there is a lack of trust in the ﬁrst place” (p. 536).
By using the TTS model, supply chain entities can perform transactions through the trusted
blockchain as a third party. This means that they can only trust blockchain and information
exchanged in the platform, not necessarily each other. In other words, as the two supply
chain partners can trust blockchain and perform trusted transactions through the blockchain
platform, there is no need for any type of trust to exist in the ﬁrst place. The development of
the TTS model also responds to the concern raised by Caldarelli et al. (2020): “in the early
literature, the blockchain was viewed as a means for creating trust, while it is now widely
held that blockchain provides a way to transact in a trustless environment” (p. 10). In the
TTS model, blockchain as a trusted third party does create trust between a pair of supply
chain parties and the blockchain system, and also enables a trustless scheme of transactions
performed among supply chain participants.
In addition, the contrasting views of the TTS and ITR models lay the foundation for future
studies to validate these models through the empirical investigation of a variety of supply
chains. Both models could be valid to explain practical blockchain use cases, yet each of
them would only suit certain supply chain contexts. In particular, given the different trust
formationanddiffusionmechanismsinthetwomodels,avariationintheinitialtrustcondition
of participants in different supply chain contexts would affect the model’s suitability. Finally,
the swift trust creation mechanisms illustrated in the STD model also provides the basis for
further research to verify this model in other contexts apart from humanitarian supply chains.
Although existing literature has developed the concept of swift trust from humanitarian
contexts, some certain conditions of the STD model, i.e., temporary settings and unknown
partners, could be applied to other supply chain settings.
5.2 Managerial implications
The outcomes of this study can help corroborate the impact of blockchain implementation on
trust in supply chains. The study can support an organization’s decision to adopt blockchain
technology for managing its supply chain, particularly when supply chain operations are
disrupted, such as is the case with COVID-19, when high levels of trust are required in supply
chains to manage disruptions. According to a survey of more than 600 procurement, supply
chain and business leaders, Procurious (2020) found that the COVID-19 crisis caused 65% of
respondents’ ﬁrms to not have conﬁdence in their current suppliers and to prepare alternative
sources of supplies as they had insufﬁcient information regarding those suppliers and their
upstream supply chain. Similarly, the Lloyd’s Register’s survey of 100 senior executives
in the beverage industry found that due to an increase in food fraud after the COVID-19
outbreak, only 22% of respondents showed conﬁdence that their suppliers had met food
safety standards (Berry, 2021). In these kinds of trust-disruption situations, the adoption
of blockchain may be a promising solution for an organization in disrupted supply chains
to regain trust in their supply chain partners. By adopting either the TTS or ITR models,
supply chain partners beneﬁt from the enhanced institution-based and cognition-based trust
enabled by blockchain. The concept of swift trust-building and the STD model can also be
123

80
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
practised for rapid trust-building between supply chain partners who might not be known to
each other, especially during times of crisis. Trust is a core component in crisis management
and blockchain promises to build such trust in a timely manner through the STD model. To
summarize, blockchain technology is not only capable of providing a remedy for managing
supply chain disruptions through trust, it can also mitigate trust-related disruptions.
In addition, the three blockchain-enabled trust models could be practically adopted in
various supply chain contexts to address the long-standing trust issue between participating
organizations. For instance, the TTS and ITR models could be adopted in food and phar-
maceutical supply chains to address several trust-associated concerns such as food safety
in cross-border food trade (ESCAP, 2018), the authenticity of halal-labelled food (Johari,
2016), and the standards of vaccine distribution (Woodley, 2019). With blockchain execu-
tion, cognition, and institution-based trust placed in the information exchanged, in other
supply chain participants, and in the whole supply chain system are expected to be enhanced.
Therefore, real-world trust issues revolving around product safety and standards could be
alleviated by the utilization of blockchain (Alkhoori et al., 2021; Qian et al., 2020; Surjandari
et al., 2021). Likewise, the adoption of either the TTS or ITR model in multilevel supply
chains could also resolve the persistent problem of a lack of trust in deep-tier SMEs ﬁnancing
(Stolberg-Larsen, 2019). Since blockchain enables information visibility, SMEs’ credibility
is enhanced, and the cognition trust from commercial banks is expected to increase (Liu
et al., 2021). With such increased trust, the deep-tier SMEs could ﬁnd it more manageable
to seek loans from ﬁnancial institutions with the presence of blockchain. Besides this, the
TTS and ITR models could also be applied to address chronic trust-related problems arising
from asymmetric information in second-hand markets (Jackson, 2020). As information and
knowledge are more transparent due to blockchain capabilities, the buyer–seller information
asymmetry is therefore mitigated. The buyers’ trust placed in second-hand products is then
projected to increase (de Boissieu et al., 2021; Subramanian & Thampy, 2021).
6 Conclusion
This review aimed to serve as the ﬁrst comprehensive study that synthesizes and consolidates
prior studies of blockchain and trust to answer the question of how this technology can impact
the trust element in supply chains. The paper used the three dimensions of trust adopted from
management research to provide a framework for the content analysis and model building.
With the combination of the inductive and deductive approaches, we extracted 94 selected
publications in top-tier journals, published between 2018 and 2021. We then developed a
blockchain-entrusted model showing the interconnection of the three trust dimensions based
on the result of content analysis. The main ﬁndings of the study highlight the contradicting
assertions among scholars on the implications of blockchain for trust in supply chains (Shao
et al., 2022). While some studies pointed out that blockchain would enable a trustless scheme,
others expected the reinforcement of interorganizational trust. The blockchain-entrusted sup-
ply chain models are developed in three variations to conceptualize these assertions as well as
a case for swift trust formation under certain circumstances in supply chains. The proposed
models also present the three-step process of how trust is enhanced through the blockchain
and diffused to supply chain partners and external stakeholders. The outcome of this literature
synthesis and the proposed blockchain-entrusted models helped identify several gaps in the
extant literature and lay foundations for future research implications as follows.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
81
First, future studies need to empirically examine the contradicting views expressed by
scholars with respect to TTS and ITR models. At this stage, considering that there is a lim-
ited number of blockchain practical use cases owning to a very early stage of the blockchain
applications for supply chains, we cannot ﬁnd an appropriate example of actual blockchain
use cases that suits the TTS and ITR models. Nevertheless, we conjectured that the two
models would ﬁt with different contexts of supply chains. Given a difference in the initial
trust condition of participants, both TTS and ITR would be only appropriate to certain supply
chain contexts. Speciﬁcally, the TTS model is suitable for explaining blockchain implemen-
tation in the low trust climate supply chains, while the ITR model is suitable for blockchain
implementation in the high trust climate supply chains.
For the TTS model, the existing literature suggested that the key strengths of blockchain
that enable the trusted exchange of data directly without an intermediary make the technology
more suitable for low-trust ecosystems (e.g., Hijazi et al., 2021; Longo et al., 2019). Kumar
et al. (2020) stated that in a comparison of blockchain and other interorganizational tech-
nologies, the disseminated power of blockchain infrastructure that reduces the need for trust
among supply chain actors and for an intermediary leads to the suitability of blockchain in
low-trust climate supply chains, while in supply chains where there is high trust among par-
ties and low traceability and visibility required, conventional technologies such as electronic
data interchange would be more appropriate.
For the ITR model, the existing literature suggested that blockchain-enabled information
transparency and traceability may help maintain high levels of trust among participants in
supply chains where trust has already been built over years (Caldarelli et al., 2020). This
means that blockchain would not be a “trust creator” developing interorganizational trust
from zero, yet the technology would play a role as “trust maintainer/sustainer,” which works
well in an environment where trust is at a maximum by providing defensive mechanisms
against external threats such as counterfeit products (Caldarelli et al., 2020; Mendling et al.,
2018). As blockchain is capable of enhancing cognition and institution-based trust, the role of
blockchainasatrustsustainerinthesupplychainsexhibitingahightrustestablishmentamong
supply chain actors is then well-grounded by the explanation that blockchain transforms such
long-established, interorganizational trust (likely to be affect-based trust) into cognition and
institutional trust, and maintains the overall level of trust among participants.
Nonetheless, these conjectures about the contextual suitability of our proposed models
still need further veriﬁcation. We then call for future research to test the conceptual model
of blockchain-enabled trust in multiple supply chain contexts.
Second, the investigation of swift trust application to supply chains beyond studies sur-
rounding humanitarian supply chains is required. Currently, the study of swift trust outside
the humanitarian supply chain is very limited, with the possibility of future disruption in mul-
tiple supply chains, the formation of swift trust in other contexts may be worth investigating
(Casady & Baxter, 2020). For instance, with the widespread interruptions of COVID-19,
many supply chains experienced disastrous impacts from disruption in their upper-tier sup-
pliers. Downstream buyers then needed to source raw materials from new suppliers that they
might not have worked with before (Kilpatrick, 2020). In the situation where downstream
purchasers are required to form a short-lived relationship with unknown suppliers, the use of
blockchain technology could help create swift trust and facilitate the completion of material
delivery during a time of crisis.
Finally, although current studies argue that blockchains might not be directly linked to
enhanced affect-based trust in supply chain relationships, they still suggested that the tech-
nology may have an indirect, positive impact on the reinforcement of relational trust between
supply chain partners through the facilitation of cognition and institutional trust (Schmidt &
123

82
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
Wagner, 2019). Future investigations on blockchain and the trust formation process between
supply chain partners would provide insightful information on the dynamic formation of trust
and the role of blockchain technology in facilitating such a process in the long term.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-022-04868-0.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ahmad, R. W., Hasan, H., Jayaraman, R., Salah, K., & Omar, M. (2021). Blockchain applications and
architectures for port operations and logistics management. Research in Transportation Business and
Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2020.106982
Akkermans, H., Bogerd, P., & Van Doremalen, J. (2004). Travail, transparency and trust: A case study of
computer-supported collaborative supply chain planning in high-tech electronics. European Journal of
Operational Research, 153(2), 445–456. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-2217(03)00164-4
Alkhader, W., Salah, K., Sleptchenko, A., Jayaraman, R., Yaqoob, I., & Omar, M. (2021). Blockchain-based
decentralized digital manufacturing and supply for COVID-19 medical devices and supplies. IEEE
Access, 9, 137923–137940. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3118085
Alkhoori, O., Hassan, A., Almansoori, O., Debe, M., Salah, K., Jayaraman, R., Arshad, J., & Rehman, M. H.
U. (2021). Design and Implementation of CryptoCargo: A blockchain-powered smart shipping container
for vaccine distribution. IEEE Access, 9, 53786–53803. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3070911
Asante, M., Epiphaniou, G., Maple, C., Al-Khateeb, H., Bottarelli, M., & Ghafoor, K. Z. (2021). Distributed
ledger technologies in supply chain security management: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Transactions
on Engineering Management. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3053655
Avenier, M.-J. (2010). Shaping a constructivist view of organizational design science. Organization Studies,
31(9–10), 1229–1255. https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840610374395
Babich, V., & Hilary, G. (2020). OM forum—distributed ledgers and operations: What operations management
researchers should know about blockchain technology. Manufacturing & Service Operations Manage-
ment, 22(2), 223–240. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2018.0752
Baharmand, H., Maghsoudi, A., & Coppi, G. (2021). Exploring the application of blockchain to humanitarian
supply chains: Insights from Humanitarian Supply Blockchain pilot project. International Journal of
Operations and Production Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-12-2020-0884
Böckel, A., Nuzum, A.-K., & Weissbrod, I. (2020). Blockchain for the circular economy: Analysis of the
research-practice gap. Sustainable Production and Consumption. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.
12.006
Brinkhoff, A., Özer, Ö., & Sargut, G. (2015). All you need is trust? An examination of inter-organizational
supply chain projects. Production and Operations Management, 24(2), 181–200. https://doi.org/10.1111/
poms.12234
Bryman, A. (2016). Social research methods. Oxford University Press.
Caldarelli, G., Rossignoli, C., & Zardini, A. (2020). Overcoming the blockchain oracle problem in the trace-
ability of non-fungible products. Sustainability, 12(6), 2391. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12062391
Cao, B., Li, Y., Zhang, L., Zhang, L., Mumtaz, S., Zhou, Z., & Peng, M. (2019). When Internet of Things
meets blockchain: Challenges in distributed consensus. IEEE Network, 33(6), 133–139. https://doi.org/
10.1109/MNET.2019.1900002
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
83
Cao, S., Powell, W., Foth, M., Natanelov, V., Miller, T., & Dulleck, U. (2021). Strengthening consumer trust in
beef supply chain traceability with a blockchain-based human-machine reconcile mechanism. Computers
and Electronics in Agriculture, 180, 105886. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105886
Capaldo, A., & Giannoccaro, I. (2015). Interdependence and network-level trust in supply chain networks:
A computational study. Industrial Marketing Management, 44, 180–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
indmarman.2014.10.001
Casady, C. B., & Baxter, D. (2020). Pandemics, public-private partnerships (PPPs), and force majeure| COVID-
19 expectations and implications. Construction Management and Economics, 38(12), 1077–1085. https://
doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2020.1817516
Centobelli, P., Cerchione, R., Del Vecchio, P., Oropallo, E., & Secundo, G. (2021). Blockchain technology
for bridging trust, traceability and transparency in circular supply chain. Information and Management.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2021.103508
Cha, S., Baek, S., & Kim, S. (2020). Blockchain based sensitive data management by using key escrow
encryption system from the perspective of supply chain. IEEE Access, 8, 154269–154280. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3017871
Chang, S. E., & Chen, Y. (2020). When blockchain meets supply chain: A systematic literature review on
current development and potential applications. IEEE Access, 8, 62478–62494. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2020.2983601
Cocco, L., Mannaro, K., Tonelli, R., Mariani, L., Lodi, M. B., Melis, A., Simone, M., & Fanti, A. (2021).
A blockchain-based traceability system in Agri-Food SME: Case study of a traditional bakery. IEEE
Access, 9, 62899–62915. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3074874
de Boissieu, E., Kondrateva, G., Baudier, P., & Ammi, C. (2021). The use of blockchain in the luxury industry:
Supply chains and the traceability of goods. Journal of Enterprise Information Management. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JEIM-11-2020-0471
Delbufalo, E. (2012). Outcomes of inter-organizational trust in supply chain relationships: A systematic litera-
ture review and a meta-analysis of the empirical evidence. Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/13598541211246549
Di Vaio, A., & Varriale, L. (2020). Blockchain technology in supply chain management for sustainable per-
formance: Evidence from the airport industry. International Journal of Information Management, 52,
102014. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.09.010
Doney, P. M., & Cannon, J. P. (1997). An examination of the nature of trust in buyer–seller relationships.
Journal of Marketing, 61(2), 35–51. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299706100203
Dubey, R., Altay, N., & Blome, C. (2019). Swift trust and commitment: The missing links for humanitarian
supply chain coordination? Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 159–177. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10479-017-2676-z
Dubey, R., Bryde, D. J., Foropon, C., Graham, G., Giannakis, M., & Mishra, D. B. (2020a). Agility in
humanitarian supply chain: An organizational information processing perspective and relational view.
Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-020-03824-0
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Bryde, D. J., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Papadopoulos, T. (2020b). Blockchain technol-
ogy for enhancing swift-trust, collaboration and resilience within a humanitarian supply chain setting.
International Journal of Production Research, 58(11), 3381–3398. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2020.1722860
Duriau, V. J., Reger, R. K., & Pfarrer, M. D. (2007). A content analysis of the content analysis literature in
organization studies: Research themes, data sources, and methodological reﬁnements. Organizational
Research Methods, 10(1), 5–34. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428106289252
Fahimnia, B., Pournader, M., Siemsen, E., Bendoly, E., & Wang, C. (2019). Behavioral operations and supply
chain management–a review and literature mapping. Decision Sciences, 50(6), 1127–1183. https://doi.
org/10.1111/deci.12369
Fawcett, S. E., Jones, S. L., & Fawcett, A. M. (2012). Supply chain trust: The catalyst for collaborative
innovation. Business Horizons, 55(2), 163–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2011.11.004
Fu, H., Zhao, C., Cheng, C., & Ma, M. (2020). Blockchain-based agri-food supply chain management: case
study in China. International Food and Agribusiness Management Review, 23, 667–679. https://doi.org/
10.22004/ag.econ.308814
Garrard, R., & Fielke, S. (2020). Blockchain for trustworthy provenances: A case study in the Australian
aquaculture industry. Technology in Society, 62, 101298. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101298
Ghode, D. J., Yadav, V., Jain, R., & Soni, G. (2020). Blockchain adoption in the supply chain: An appraisal
on challenges. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-11-
2019-0395
123

84
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
Ha, B. C., Park, Y. K., & Cho, S. (2011). Suppliers’ affective trust and trust in competency in buyers: Its effect on
collaboration and logistics efﬁciency. International Journal of Operations and Production Management.
https://doi.org/10.1108/01443571111098744
Handﬁeld, R. B., & Bechtel, C. (2002). The role of trust and relationship structure in improving sup-
ply chain responsiveness. Industrial Marketing Management, 31(4), 367–382. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0019-8501(01)00169-9
Hasan, H. R., Salah, K., Jayaraman, R., Yaqoob, I., & Omar, M. (2020). Blockchain architectures for physi-
cal internet: A vision, features, requirements, and applications. IEEE Network. https://doi.org/10.1109/
MNET.021.2000442
Hijazi, A. A., Perera, S., Calheiros, R. N., & Alashwal, A. (2021). Rationale for the integration of BIM and
blockchain for the construction supply chain data delivery: A systematic literature review and validation
through focus group. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 147(10), 03121005. https://
doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0002142
Ho, W., Zheng, T., Yildiz, H., & Talluri, S. (2015). Supply chain risk management: A literature review.
International Journal of Production Research, 53(16), 5031–5069. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.
2015.1030467
Hoejmose, S., Brammer, S., & Millington, A. (2012). “Green” supply chain management: The role of trust and
top management in B2B and B2C markets. Industrial Marketing Management, 41(4), 609–620. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2012.04.008
Howson, P. (2020). Building trust and equity in marine conservation and ﬁsheries supply chain management
with blockchain. Marine Policy, 115, 103873. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.103873
Hu, S., Huang, S., Huang, J., & Su, J. (2021). Blockchain and edge computing technology enabling organic
agricultural supply chain: A framework solution to trust crisis. Computers and Industrial Engineering,
153, 107079. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2020.107079
Hunt, K., Narayanan, A., & Zhuang, J. (2021). Blockchain in humanitarian operations management: A review
of research and practice. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seps.2021.101175
Jain, V., Kumar, S., Soni, U., & Chandra, C. (2017). Supply chain resilience: Model development and empirical
analysis. International Journal of Production Research, 55(22), 6779–6800. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2017.1349947
Janowicz, M., & Noorderhaven, N. (2006). 15 Levels of inter-organizational trust: Conceptualization and
measurement. Handbook of Trust Research. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781847202819.00023
Joo, J., & Han, Y. (2021). An evidence of distributed trust in blockchain-based sustainable food supply chain.
Sustainability, 13(19), 10980. https://doi.org/10.3390/su131910980
Juma, H., Shaalan, K., & Kamel, I. (2019). A survey on using blockchain in trade supply chain solutions.
IEEE Access, 7, 184115–184132. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2960542
Kabra, G., & Ramesh, A. (2016). Information technology, mutual trust, ﬂexibility, agility, adaptability: Under-
standingtheirlinkagesandimpactonhumanitariansupplychainmanagementperformance.Risk,Hazards
and Crisis in Public Policy, 7(2), 79–103. https://doi.org/10.1002/rhc3.12096
Kayikci, Y., Subramanian, N., Dora, M., & Bhatia, M. S. (2020). Food supply chain in the era of Industry
4.0: blockchain technology implementation opportunities and impediments from the perspective of peo-
ple, process, performance, and technology. Production Planning and Control. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09537287.2020.1810757
Khan, M., Imtiaz, S., Parvaiz, G. S., Hussain, A., & Bae, J. (2021). Integration of Internet-of-Things with
blockchain technology to enhance humanitarian logistics performance. IEEE Access. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2021.3054771
Kim, J.-Y. (2005). “Bowling together” isn’ta cure-all: The relationship between social capital and political
trust in South Korea. International Political Science Review, 26(2), 193–213. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0192512105050381
Köhler, S., & Pizzol, M. (2020). Technology assessment of blockchain-based technologies in the food supply
chain. Journal of Cleaner Production, 269, 122193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122193
Kopyto, M., Lechler, S., Heiko, A., & Hartmann, E. (2020). Potentials of blockchain technology in supply
chain management: Long-term judgments of an international expert panel. Technological Forecasting
and Social Change, 161, 120330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120330
Kramer, R. M. (1999). Trust and distrust in organizations: Emerging perspectives, enduring questions. Annual
Review of Psychology, 50(1), 569–598. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.50.1.569
Kshetri, N. (2018). 1 Blockchain’s roles in meeting key supply chain management objectives. International
Journal of Information Management, 39, 80–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.12.005
Kumar, A., Liu, R., & Shan, Z. (2020). Is blockchain a silver bullet for supply chain management? Techni-
cal challenges and research opportunities. Decision Sciences, 51(1), 8–37. https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.
12396
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
85
Kwon, I. W. G., & Suh, T. (2004). Factors affecting the level of trust and commitment in supply chain
relationships. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 40(1), 4–14. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-493X.
2004.tb00165.x
Laeequddin, M., Sahay, B., Sahay, V., & Waheed, K. A. (2010). Measuring trust in supply chain partners’
relationships. Measuring Business Excellence. https://doi.org/10.1108/13683041011074218
Lee, H., & Yeon, C. (2021). Blockchain-based traceability for anti-counterfeit in cross-border e-commerce
transactions. Sustainability, 13(19), 11057. https://doi.org/10.3390/su131911057
Lewicki, R. J., McAllister, D. J., & Bies, R. J. (1998). Trust and distrust: New relationships and realities.
Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 438–458. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1998.926620
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. (1985). Trust as a social reality. Social Forces, 63(4), 967–985. https://doi.org/10.
1093/sf/63.4.967
L’Hermitte, C., & Nair, N. K. C. (2020). A blockchain-enabled framework for sharing logistics resources
during emergency operations. Disasters. https://doi.org/10.1111/disa.12436
Li, J., Maiti, A., Springer, M., & Gray, T. (2020). Blockchain for supply chain quality management: Challenges
and opportunities in context of open manufacturing and industrial internet of things. International Journal
of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 33(12), 1321–1355. https://doi.org/10.1080/0951192X.2020.
1815853
Li, K., Lee, J.-Y., & Gharehgozli, A. (2021a). Blockchain in food supply chains: A literature review and
synthesis analysis of platforms, beneﬁts and challenges. International Journal of Production Research.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.1970849
Li, Z., Zhong, R. Y., Tian, Z., Dai, H.-N., Barenji, A. V., & Huang, G. Q. (2021b). Industrial blockchain: A
state-of-the-art Survey. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 70, 102124. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.rcim.2021.102124
Liu, L., Li, Y., & Jiang, T. (2021). Optimal strategies for ﬁnancing a three-level supply chain through blockchain
platform ﬁnance. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.
2001601
Longo, F., Nicoletti, L., Padovano, A., d’Atri, G., & Forte, M. (2019). Blockchain-enabled supply chain: An
experimental study. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 136, 57–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.
2019.07.026
Luo, S., & Choi, T.-M. (2021). Great partners: How deep learning and blockchain help improve business
operations together. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04101-4
Luzzani, G., Grandis, E., Frey, M., & Capri, E. (2021). Blockchain technology in wine chain for collecting
and addressing sustainable performance: An exploratory study. Sustainability, 13(22), 12898. https://doi.
org/10.3390/su132212898
Macready, A. L., Hieke, S., Klimczuk-Kocha´nska, M., Szumiał, S., Vranken, L., & Grunert, K. G. (2020).
Consumer trust in the food value chain and its impact on consumer conﬁdence: A model for assessing
consumer trust and evidence from a 5-country study in Europe. Food Policy, 92, 101880. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.foodpol.2020.101880
Mañana-Rodríguez, J. (2015). A critical review of SCImago journal and country rank. Research Evaluation,
24(4), 343–354. https://doi.org/10.1093/reseval/rvu008
Martín-Martín, A., Orduna-Malea, E., Thelwall, M., & López-Cózar, E. D. (2018). Google Scholar, Web
of Science, and Scopus: A systematic comparison of citations in 252 subject categories. Journal of
Informetrics, 12(4), 1160–1177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2018.09.002
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of organizational trust. Academy
of Management Review, 20(3), 709–734. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1995.9508080335
McAllister, D. J. (1995). Affect-and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation in
organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 24–59. https://doi.org/10.5465/256727
Mendling, J., Weber, I., Aalst, W. V. D., Brocke, J. V., Cabanillas, C., Daniel, F., Debois, S., Ciccio, C.
D., Dumas, M., & Dustdar, S. (2018). Blockchains for business process management-challenges and
opportunities. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS), 9(1), 1–16. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3183367
Meyerson, D., Weick, K. E., & Kramer, R. M. (1996). Swift trust and temporary groups. Trust in Organizations:
Frontiers of Theory and Research, 166, 195.
Mongeon, P., & Paul-Hus, A. (2016). The journal coverage of web of science and scopus: A comparative
analysis. Scientometrics, 106(1), 213–228. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-015-1765-5
Montecchi, M., Plangger, K., & Etter, M. (2019). It’s real, trust me! Establishing supply chain provenance
using blockchain. Business Horizons, 62(3), 283–293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2019.01.008
Musamih, A., Salah, K., Jayaraman, R., Arshad, J., Debe, M., Al-Hammadi, Y., & Ellahham, S. (2021). A
blockchain-based approach for drug traceability in healthcare supply chain. IEEE Access, 9, 9728–9743.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3049920
123

86
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
Müßigmann, B., von der Gracht, H., & Hartmann, E. (2020). Blockchain technology in logistics and supply
chain management—A bibliometric literature review from 2016 to January 2020. IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, 67(4), 988–1007. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2020.2980733
Nguyen, D., Ding, M., Pathirana, P. N., & Seneviratne, A. (2020). Blockchain and AI-based solutions to
combat coronavirus (COVID-19)-like epidemics: A survey. IEEE Access Journal. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2021.3093633
Palas, M. J. U., & Bunduchi, R. (2020). Exploring interpretations of blockchain’s value in healthcare: A
multi-stakeholder approach. Information Technology and People. https://doi.org/10.1108/ITP-01-2019-
0008
Paluri, R. A., & Mishal, A. (2020). Trust and commitment in supply chain management: A systematic review
of literature. Benchmarking: An International Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-11-2019-0517
Pan, X., Pan, X., Song, M., Ai, B., & Ming, Y. (2020). Blockchain technology and enterprise operational
capabilities: An empirical test. International Journal of Information Management, 52, 101946. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.05.002
Pawar, R. S., Sonje, S. A., & Shukla, S. (2020). Food subsidy distribution system through Blockchain tech-
nology: A value focused thinking approach for prototype development. Information Technology for
Development. https://doi.org/10.1080/02681102.2020.1841714
Pawar, R. S., Sonje, S. A., & Shukla, S. (2021). Food subsidy distribution system through Blockchain tech-
nology: A value focused thinking approach for prototype development. Information Technology for
Development, 27(3), 470–498. https://doi.org/10.1080/02681102.2020.1841714
Pournader, M., Kach, A., & Talluri, S. (2020a). A review of the existing and emerging topics in the supply
chain risk management literature. Decision Sciences, 51(4), 867–919. https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12470
Pournader, M., Shi, Y., Seuring, S., & Koh, S. L. (2020b). Blockchain applications in supply chains, transport
and logistics: A systematic review of the literature. International Journal of Production Research, 58(7),
2063–2081. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1650976
Pournader, M., Ghaderi, H., Hassanzadegan, A., & Fahimnia, B. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence applications
in supply chain management. International Journal of Production Economics, 241, 108250. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2021.108250
Pranto, T. H., Noman, A. A., Mahmud, A., & Haque, A. B. (2021). Blockchain and smart contract for IoT
enabled smart agriculture. PeerJ Computer Science, 7, e407. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj-cs.407
Probst, W. N. (2020). How emerging data technologies can increase trust and transparency in ﬁsheries. ICES
Journal of Marine Science, 77(4), 1286–1294. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsz036
Qian, X., & Papadonikolaki, E. (2020). Shifting trust in construction supply chains through blockchain tech-
nology. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/ECAM-12-
2019-0676
Qian, J., Wu, W., Yu, Q., Ruiz-Garcia, L., Xiang, Y., Jiang, L., Shi, Y., Duan, Y., & Yang, P. (2020). Filling
the trust gap of food safety in food trade between the EU and China: An interconnected conceptual
traceability framework based on blockchain. Food and Energy Security, 9(4), e249. https://doi.org/10.
1002/fes3.249
Robert, L. P., Denis, A. R., & Hung, Y.-T.C. (2009). Individual swift trust and knowledge-based trust in face-
to-face and virtual team members. Journal of Management Information Systems, 26(2), 241–279. https://
doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222260210
Rogerson, M., & Parry, G. C. (2020). Blockchain: Case studies in food supply chain visibility. Supply Chain
Management: An International Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-08-2019-0300
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after all: A cross-
discipline view of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 393–404. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.
1998.926617
Saberi, S., Kouhizadeh, M., Sarkis, J., & Shen, L. (2019). Blockchain technology and its relationships to
sustainable supply chain management. International Journal of Production Research, 57(7), 2117–2135.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1533261
Schmidt, C. G., & Wagner, S. M. (2019). Blockchain and supply chain relations: A transaction cost theory
perspective. Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 25(4), 100552. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pursup.2019.100552
Seuring, S., & Gold, S. (2012). Conducting content-analysis based literature reviews in supply
chain management. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/
13598541211258609
Seuring, S., Yawar, S. A., Land, A., Khalid, R. U., & Sauer, P. C. (2020). The application of theory in literature
reviews–illustrated with examples from supply chain management. International Journal of Operations
and Production Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-04-2020-0247
123

Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
87
Shahid, A., Almogren, A., Javaid, N., Al-Zahrani, F. A., Zuair, M., & Alam, M. (2020). Blockchain-based
agri-food supply chain: A complete solution. IEEE Access, 8, 69230–69243. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2020.2986257
Shao, Z., Zhang, L., Brown, S. A., & Zhao, T. (2022). Understanding users’ trust transfer mechanism in
a blockchain-enabled platform: A mixed methods study. Decision Support Systems. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.dss.2021.113716
Sheppard, B. H., & Sherman, D. M. (1998). The grammars of trust: A model and general implications. Academy
of Management Review, 23(3), 422–437. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1998.926619
Sirdeshmukh, D., Singh, J., & Sabol, B. (2002). Consumer trust, value, and loyalty in relational exchanges.
Journal of Marketing, 66(1), 15–37. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.66.1.15.18449
Spekman, R. E. (1988). Strategic supplier selection: Understanding long-term buyer relationships. Business
Horizons, 31(4), 75–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/0007-6813(88)90072-9
Subramanian, G., & Thampy, A. S. (2021). Implementation of hybrid blockchain in a pre-owned electric
vehicle supply chain. IEEE Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3084942
Suhail, S., Hussain, R., Khan, A., & Hong, C. S. (2020). Orchestrating product provenance story: When IOTA
ecosystem meets electronics supply chain space. Computers in Industry, 123, 103334. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.compind.2020.103334
Surjandari, I., Yusuf, H., Laoh, E., & Maulida, R. (2021). Designing a permissioned blockchain network for
the halal industry using hyperledger fabric with multiple channels and the raft consensus mechanism.
Journal of Big Data, 8(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-020-00405-7
Tezel, A., Febrero, P., Papadonikolaki, E., & Yitmen, I. (2021). Insights into blockchain implementation
in construction: models for supply chain management. Journal of Management in Engineering, 37(4),
04021038. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000939
Tranﬁeld, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed
management knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of Management, 14(3), 207–222.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.00375
Treiblmaier, H., & Sillaber, C. (2021). The impact of blockchain on e-commerce: A framework for salient
research topics. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 48, 101054. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.elerap.2021.101054
Tseng, C.-T., & Shang, S. S. (2021). Exploring the sustainability of the intermediary role in blockchain.
Sustainability, 13(4), 1936. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13041936
Velmovitsky, P. E., Bublitz, F. M., Fadrique, L. X., & Morita, P. P. (2021). Blockchain applications in health
care and public health: increased transparency. JMIR Medical Informatics, 9(6), e20713. https://doi.org/
10.2196/20713
Viriyasitavat, W., Anuphaptrirong, T., & Hoonsopon, D. (2019). When blockchain meets Internet of Things:
Characteristics, challenges, and business opportunities. Journal of Industrial Information Integration,
15, 21–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2019.05.002
Wan, P. K., Huang, L., & Holtskog, H. (2020). Blockchain-enabled information sharing within a supply chain:
A systematic literature review. IEEE Access, 8, 49645–49656. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.
2980142
Wang, Y., Han, J. H., & Beynon-Davies, P. (2019a). Understanding blockchain technology for future supply
chains: A systematic literature review and research agenda. Supply Chain Management: An International
Journal. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-03-2018-0148
Wang, Y., Singgih, M., Wang, J., & Rit, M. (2019b). Making sense of blockchain technology: How will it
transform supply chains? International Journal of Production Economics, 211, 221–236. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.02.002
Wong, W. K., Cheung, S. O., Yiu, T. W., & Pang, H. Y. (2008). A framework for trust in construction contracting.
International Journal of Project Management, 26(8), 821–829. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2007.
11.004
Yang, L., Zhang, J., & Shi, X. (2021a). Can blockchain help food supply chains with platform operations
during the COVID-19 outbreak? Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 49, 101093. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2021.101093
Yang, X., Li, M., Yu, H., Wang, M., Xu, D., & Sun, C. (2021b). A trusted blockchain-based traceability
system for fruit and vegetable agricultural products. IEEE Access, 9, 36282–36293. https://doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2021.3062845
Yawar, S. A., & Seuring, S. (2017). Management of social issues in supply chains: A literature review exploring
social issues, actions and performance outcomes. Journal of Business Ethics, 141(3), 621–643. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2719-9
123

88
Annals of Operations Research (2023) 327:49–88
Yong, B., Shen, J., Liu, X., Li, F., Chen, H., & Zhou, Q. (2020). An intelligent blockchain-based system for
safe vaccine supply and supervision. International Journal of Information Management, 52, 102024.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.10.009
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B., & Perrone, V. (1998). Does trust matter? Exploring the effects of interorganizational
and interpersonal trust on performance. Organization Science, 9(2), 141–159. https://doi.org/10.1287/
orsc.9.2.141
Berry, K. (2021). Fraud concerns undermine supply chain conﬁdence. Food and Drink Business. https://www.
foodanddrinkbusiness.com.au/news/fraud-concerns-undermine-supply-chain-conﬁdence
Carson, B., Romanelli, G., Walsh, P., & Zhumaev, A. (2018). Blockchain beyond the hype: What is the
strategic business value. McKinsey & Company. https://cybersolace.co.uk/CySol/wp-content/uploads/
2018/06/McKinsey-paper-about-Blockchain-Myths.pdf
Crosby, M., Pattanayak, P., Verma, S., & Kalyanaraman, V. (2016). Blockchain technology: Beyond bitcoin.
Applied Innovation Review. https://j2-capital.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/AIR-2016-Blockchain.
pdf
ESCAP, U. (2018). Facilitating compliance to food safety and quality for cross-border trade. https://hdl.
handle.net/20.500.12870/277
Guenther, C. (2020). Amplify serialization to build trust: The danger of COVID-19-related counterfeit products
is real. Accenture. https://www.accenture.com/us-en/blogs/life-sciences/amplify-serialization-to-build-
trust
Jackson, K. (2020). When Second Hand Doesn’t Mean Second Best. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
katejacksonk/2020/09/03/when-second-hand-doesnt-mean-second-best/?sh=39e5d6555684
Johari, R. E. (2016). Fraud on halal food: More than just food safety at stake. https://www.pwc.com/my/en/
assets/services/fraud-on-halal-food-my.pdf
Kilpatrick, J. (2020). COVID-19: Managing supply chain risk and disruption. Deloitte. https://www2.deloitte.
com/content/dam/Deloitte/ca/Documents/ﬁnance/Supply-Chain_POV_EN_FINAL-AODA.pdf
Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system (2008). http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf:
bitcoin.org.
Procurious. (2020). Supply Chain Conﬁdence Index: Risk Management In-Focus. Procurious. https://www.
technologyconcepts.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/risk-management-in-focus.pdf
Rajah, S. (2019). In supply chain we must trust: Trust is the must have factor for supply networks. https://
www.scmr.com/article/in_supply_chain_we_must_trust
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2009). Research methods for business students. Pearson education.
Sneader, K., & Sternfels, B. (2020). From surviving to thriving: Reimagining the post-COVID-19 return.
McKinsey Global Institute. https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Industries/Public%20and%
20Social%20Sector/Our%20Insights/Future%20of%20Organizations/From%20surviving%20to%
20thriving%20Reimagining%20the%20post%20COVID%2019%20return/From-surviving-to-thriving-
Reimagining-the-post-COVID-19-return.pdf
Stolberg-Larsen, M. (2019). Deep-tier ﬁnancing: what is it and why should you care? https://www.
theglobaltreasurer.com/2019/12/06/deep-tier-ﬁnancing-what-is-it-and-why-should-you-care/
Woodley, M. (2019). Tip of the cold chain iceberg? Vaccines worth $26 million lost. newsGP. https://www1.
racgp.org.au/newsgp/clinical/tip-of-the-cold-chain-iceberg-vaccines-worth-26-mi
Yin, R. K. (2015). Qualitative research from start to ﬁnish. Guilford publications.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123