TITLE: Supply chain integration in mass customization
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05202-y
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05202-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Supply chain integration in mass customization
Bin Shen1 · Jianing Zhang1 · Ming Cheng1 · Shu Guo2
· Renlong He3
Accepted: 18 January 2023 / Published online: 8 February 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
New technology such as 3D printing, robotic manufacturing, and the Internet of things can
shorten the production time of mass customization (MC) products, enhance the self-design
fun of consumers, and improve channel integration connectivity. In this study, we examine
the impact of MC waiting time and self-design fun from the purchase of MC products on
supply chain integration. We consider a supply chain consisting of one manufacturer, one
retailer, and one customizer. The manufacturer produces and sells standardized products
through the retailer, whereas the customizer sells customized products to consumers directly.
The customizer can decide whether to integrate with the manufacturer (i.e., manufacturer—
customizer integration) or with the retailer (i.e., retailer–customizer integration). We ﬁnd
that manufacturer–customizer integration can achieve a win–win–win outcome for all three
supply chain members when the MC waiting time is within a moderate range and the prob-
ability of consumers being satisﬁed with the product quality is high, but retailer–customizer
integration cannot achieve such an outcome, as the manufacturer will not be beneﬁted if
it does not participate in the integration. Furthermore, integration reduces the customizer’s
investment in the level of self-design fun, which implies that the negative effect owing to the
low level of self-design fun in the supply chain integration can be compensated by the com-
petition mitigation effect owing to supply chain integration. With endogenized self-design
fun, the achievability of a win–win–win outcome for all three supply chain members in the
manufacturer–customizer integration will remain unchanged.
Keywords Supply chain integration · Mass customization · Self-design fun · Waiting time ·
Retailer–customizer integration · Manufacturer–customizer integration
B Shu Guo
eunice.guo@liverpool.ac.uk
1
Glorious Sun School of Business and Management, Donghua University, Shanghai, China
2
Management School, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
3
Shanghai Innovation Institute for Smart Process Manufacturing, Shanghai, China
123

596
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
1 Introduction
1.1 Background and motivation
For more than two decades, mass customization (MC) has become increasingly popular in
industries (Jost & Süsser, 2020). Levi Strauss & Co. is one of the pioneers of customization
services, allowing consumers to name their jeans (Levi Strauss & Co., 1999). Subsequently,
many fashion ﬁrms, including Brooks Brothers, Lands’ End, Ralph Lauren, Nike, and Adi-
das, launched their own MC product lines (Guo et al., 2022). Samsung created a customized
refrigerator product line Samsung’s Bespoke Refrigerator, which provide a personalized and
unique design for consumers in terms of a range of door color options, different number
of refrigerator door types and refrigerator sizes (Menafn, 2022). Tesla offers many outlook
options to consumers and let they design and customize their own cars (Seabrook, 2022).
Recently, MC products emerged in industries such as fashion, food, furniture, home appli-
ances, and automotive (Gandhi et al., 2014).
In the past decade, new technology such as 3D printing, robotic manufacturing, and
the Internet of things drove the next wave of MC (Ivanov, 2021, 2022; Shen et al., 2019).
The Internet of things can easily and cost effectively detect consumers’ preferences, 3D
printing technology can assemble affordable and scalable products that consumers want, and
robotic manufacturing can improve production efﬁciency and reduce losses (Gandhi et al.,
2014; Ivanov et al., 2021). In industry, Adidas built its Speedfactory, utilizing 3D printing,
robotic manufacturing, and an advanced information system. Meanwhile, Nike developed its
Nike Zoom Vaporﬂy Elites product line by using a customizable 3D-printed textile upper.
By considering consumers’ unique feet shape, customized footwear can also incorporate
consumers’ original designs and features, such as outlook, posture, materials, and style of
walking, into MC products (Guo & Choi, 2022).
Customizers offer individually tailored products on a large scale (Dolgui & Ivanov, 2021;
Zipkin, 2001). Customization often entails a long waiting time owing to conﬁgured cus-
tomization but provides a product that perfectly ﬁts consumers’ unique design tastes through
the use of the self-design fun function (Esenduran et al., 2022). Waiting time and product
quality are potential tradeoffs for consumers in choosing between standardized or customized
items (Gandhi et al., 2014). First, MC waiting time is a disutility for consumers to purchase
customized products. MC waiting time can be shortened through the use of smart algorithms,
improved data-processing capacity, and automation. For example, a US pizza company may
invest in a smart algorithm design to shorten the waiting time for customized pizza (Gandhi
et al., 2014). However, shortening the waiting time may be costly (Piller, 2021) as well as
improving the accuracy of smart algorithms, enhancing data processing capacity, and invest-
ing in automation technology. In addition to the tradeoff between waiting time and product
quality, customization creates value for consumers by providing a co-design function. Self-
design fun is part of co-design in the process of MC. The fashion brand Lacoste allows
consumers to use self-design functions and produce items with robotic tools (Esenduran
et al., 2022). Consumers can gain positive utility by experiencing self-design fun. Therefore,
if the individual customization process has been designed more effectively, then consumers
can experience more self-design fun from purchasing customized products on an MC plat-
form.
Supply chain integration can enhance supply chain competitiveness (Shen et al., 2022a). In
practice, MC supply chains are integrated. Speciﬁcally, the customizer can integrate with the
manufacturer, which is known as manufacturer–customizer integration (Fung et al., 2021).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
597
For example, Ralph Lauren, which is a famous fashion retailer, works with a third-party
company to develop on-demand colored polo shirts in stores, in which consumers can choose
the color of the dye. In addition, the customizer can integrate with the retailer, which is known
as retailer–customizer integration (Fung et al., 2021). For instance, Nike opened its Nike by
You Studio at 45 Grand St. in New York, which completes the customization process by
merging digital designs in the store (Kicksonﬁre, 2017; Shen et al., 2021). The sportswear
retailer Adidas developed its Speedfactory to sell MC shoes using robotic manufacturing and
3D printing (Boute et al., 2022). Motivated by actual practices for supply chain integration
withMC,wetrytoanswerthequestionofwhichintegrationstrategyisidealforthecustomizer
and other supply chain members.
1.2 Core research questions and contributions
In this study, we aim to investigate the effects of MC waiting time and self-design fun on
supply chain integration with MC. We consider a supply chain consisting of one standardized
product manufacturer, one retailer who sells standardized products, and one customizer who
sells customized products. The customizer can decide whether to integrate with the retailer
or with the manufacturer. We take the case in which the customizer works with neither the
retailer nor the manufacturer as the benchmark. If the customizer works with the manu-
facturer, then the manufacturer sells the standardized products through the retailer but the
customized products to consumers directly (manufacturer–customizer integration). However,
if the customizer works with the retailer, then the retailer sells customized ones to consumers
directly (retailer–customizer integration) and the standardized products ordered from the
manufacturer. Motivated by actual practices, we present the following research questions
(RQs):
RQ1: What is the impact of waiting time on supply chain integration with MC?
RQ2: How can an all-win outcome be realized through supply chain integration with MC?
RQ3: What is the effect of self-design fun on an all-win outcome with MC in the supply
chain?
We provide new perspectives on the impact of MC waiting time on supply chain integra-
tion. When the MC waiting time is short, customized products are attractive, because they are
of high quality, whereas if the MC waiting time is long, then consumers will likely purchase
standardized products that are readily available. As a result, a short MC waiting time can
reduce the proﬁts of standardized product manufacturers and retailers, and vice versa.
Our study contributes to the literature on the incentives of supply chain integration with
MC. We ﬁnd that manufacturer–customizer integration can achieve a win–win–win outcome
for all three supply chain members, but retailer–customizer integration cannot achieve such
an outcome. Our analytical results show that when the MC waiting time is within a moderate
range, retailer–customizer integration can achieve a win–win outcome for the retailer and
customizer, but the manufacturer will not beneﬁt, because integration weakens the compet-
itiveness of retailer and customizer. However, the manufacturer cannot earn high proﬁts in
such an integrated supply chain owing to the drop in the market demand for standardized
products. Thus, retailer–customizer integration beneﬁts the involved members but harms the
uninvolved member (i.e., manufacturer). Moreover, we ﬁnd that manufacturer–customizer
integration can achieve a win–win–win outcome for the involved members in the supply chain
when the MC waiting time is moderate. Consumers will likely buy a standardized product
that is readily available if the product has a high likelihood of being able to satisfy them.
123

598
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
All the supply chain members can beneﬁt from launching MC products, as the incremental
demand generated by standardized products can beneﬁt the retailer.
Furthermore, we highlight the effect of self-design fun on supply chain integration with
MC. Our results indicate that integration reduces the customizer’s investment in the level
of self-design fun. The logic behind this result lies in the competitiveness of supply chain
integration. As a supply chain is highly competitive with integration, the customizer can
reduce its investment in the level of self-design fun. The negative effect owing to the low
level of self-design fun in the supply chain integration can be compensated by the com-
petition mitigation effect owing to supply chain integration. With endogenized self-design
fun, the achievability of a win–win–win outcome for all three supply chain members remains
unchanged, though the condition for an all-win outcome is strict in manufacturer–customizer
integration. Speciﬁcally, the product quality level should not be too low.
1.3 Organization of the paper
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature, and Sect. 3
introduces the basic model. Section 4 presents the equilibrium analysis, and Sect. 5 shows
the impact of supply chain integration. Section 6 evaluates endogenous self-design fun, and
Sect. 7 summarizes the conclusions, managerial insights, and future research directions. All
the technical proofs are included in Online Appendix B.
2 Literature review
This study is relevant to three research streams: MC in supply chains, MC waiting time, and
supply chain integration with MC.
2.1 MC in Supply Chains
Product variety and price competition are examined jointly in the literature on MC in supply
chains. Dewan et al. (2003) investigated a market selling standard and customized products
and found that customization reduces product differentiation between standard products but
does not increase price competition. Alptekino˘glu and Corbett (2008) assessed the interaction
between MC and mass production for variety and price competition and determined that a
mass customizer will decrease product variety, and a mass producer will reduce prices in
competition. Alptekino˘glu and Örsdemir (2022) developed a model to evaluate sustainability
in the fashion industry with MC. A ﬁrm maximizes its proﬁts by deciding the optimal product
variety, price, and inventory level. The authors proposed that MC can achieve a win–win
outcome for proﬁtability and sustainability but may increase overproduction and hurt the
environment.
Lead time is important in the evaluation of the interaction between standardized and
customized products. Lead time refers to the time interval between the time of customer
initiating an order and the arrival time of the order at the buyer’s place. Lead time is an
important consideration for supply chain members. Xia and Rajagopalan (2009) compared
the standardization and customization decisions of two ﬁrms in a competitive setting with
product variety and lead time and reported that increasing product variety will not consistently
intensify price competition. Alptekino˘glu and Corbett (2010) examined the tradeoff between
lead time and product variety for MC and identiﬁed that with lead time competition for
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
599
customized products and product variety for standard products, hybrid product lines with
customized and standard products could make a ﬁrm perform better compared with either an
all-custom or all-standard product line.
Consumers gain extra utility from co-designing when placing orders from MC platforms.
Syam et al. (2008) found that consumer regret aversion causes unwillingness to purchase
a standard product rather than a custom one despite the co-designed customized products
reﬂecting the attributes of the available standard products. Basu and Bhaskaran (2018) devel-
oped a model to evaluate the impact of customer co-design on a ﬁrm’s decisions and showed
that the provision of a co-design function could encourage the ﬁrm to improve its standard
product quality. Esenduran et al. (2022) investigated how product returns affect MC decisions
and deﬁned and modeled the “I designed it myself” effect into the consumer utility function
when purchasing customized products. The authors reported that offering product returns
may be an optimal strategy for selling customized products.
Choi et al. (2019a, 2019b) assessed the impact of risk aversion on supply chains that sell
customized products and found that in the competitive market environment, consumers can
enjoy MC services, but the supply chain performance may decline in terms of degree of risk
aversion. Yazdani et al. (2020) evaluated the effect of customers’ ﬁt sensitivity on MC and
observed that customizers can earn higher proﬁts when consumers’ ﬁt sensitivity is relatively
high, whereas traditional ﬁrms can earn more when consumers’ ﬁt sensitivity is moderate.
Our study contributes to the literature on waiting time, self-fun design, and price competition
in MC. By contrast, different from the extent literature, the focal point of our study is the
achievability of an all-win outcome in supply chain integration with MC, the all-win outcome
is crucial in supply chain network since although supply chain members are competing for
the consumers, they are also cooperating for improving the entire supply chain’s proﬁtability.
The achievability of an all-win outcome in MC supply chain network is underexplored in the
literature.
2.2 MC waiting time
Consumers are satisﬁed with a short waiting time for receiving products (Liu et al., 2020).
Mendelson and Parlaktürk (2008) evaluated a market consisting of traditional and customiz-
ing ﬁrms competing in prices and product variety, with lead time for standard products and
waiting time for customized products. The authors identiﬁed that consumers who purchase
customized products incur waiting costs until they receive their order. Su et al. (2005) stud-
ied the total supply chain cost and expected customer waiting time for MC and provided
solutions for shortening MC waiting time. Su et al. (2010) examined how customers’ waiting
time can be shortened in an MC system and found that delayed differentiation could lead to a
shortened waiting time. Shao (2013) compared a centralized system with a decentralized one
selling customized products and argued that demand for a customized product is sensitive
to the waiting time. The author found that the mixed MC strategy dominates pure standard
product strategies in the centralized system, which is not always the case in the decentralized
system. Guo et al. (2022) studied the use of 3D printing in MC, with additional self-design
fun, and incorporated waiting time for customized products into their model. They found that
MC products with the self-design fun function can enhance consumer surplus. Following the
extant literature, we regard the waiting time as an important factor that affects the consumers’
utility. Therefore, in this paper, we incorporate the waiting time into the utility function of
consumers. This implies that consumers who choose customized products need to wait for a
certain time before obtaining them. Waiting time in our paper is similar to the lead time to a
123

600
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
certain extent, but our perspective focuses on consumers rather than supply chain members.
Waiting time always brings a negative utility to consumers, and the length of waiting time
determines the size of negative utility. We also examine the effect of waiting time on con-
sumers’ willingness to purchase MC products, and our results show how the waiting time for
MC products affects supply chain integration.
2.3 Supply chain integration with MC
Several supply chain members, who are integrated as one group, are involved in supply
chain integration (Shen et al., 2022a). MC supply chains are restructured through channel
integration. First, a customizer can be integrated with a retailer. Wang and Lesmono (2013)
evaluated the value of product customization enhancement in a vertically differentiated mar-
ket and developed an integrated model in which production and marketing decisions are
incorporated. The authors found that if consumers can be involved in the supply chain, then
the level of customization can be enhanced. Zhang and Zheng (2021) investigated the effects
of the integration of customized and standard products for e-tailers and retailers and observed
that e-tailers’ proﬁts will increase with the customization cost if an extra standard product
line is introduced. Their results indicated that with channel integration, omnichannel e-tailers
should offer customized products online and standard products ofﬂine.
Moreover, a customizer can be integrated with a manufacturer. Li et al. (2015) examined
a supply chain in which the manufacturer sells standard products through the retailer but cus-
tomizedproductsonlinedirectly.Theauthorsconsideredasupplychainoptimizationproblem
with consumers’ level of acceptance of the online channel and ﬁxed costs. They asserted that
the manufacturer is more likely to sell customized products in a decentralized supply chain
than in an integrated one because of horizontal competition alleviation. Shao (2020) assessed
an integrated ﬁrm that balances product lines between customized and standard products and
showed that a high-level MC system may not necessarily improve the ﬁrm’s proﬁts. Guo
et al. (2020) investigated supply chain coordination with MC and utilized a two-part tariff
contract to achieve win–win coordination with different levels of ﬂexibility. Meanwhile, Jost
and Süsser (2020) studied the effect of MC in a manufacturer’s production process with
opportunity costs of buying standardized products and observed that selling MC products
is proﬁtable for the manufacturer. The manufacturer has an incentive to offer reduced-price
standardized products when the cost of the MC products is relatively high. In this study,
motivated by actual MC practices, we compare the supply chain performance of manufactur-
er–customizer and retailer–customizer integration. To the best of our knowledge, our study
is the ﬁrst to evaluate the value of supply chain integration (manufacturer–customizer and
retailer–customizer integration) in mass customization. The customizer can decide to work
with the retailer or manufacturer to achieve an all-win outcome for the entire supply chain.
The results of our research can provide guidelines for supply chain integration with MC.
Table 1 shows the positioning of our study compared with the literature.
3 The model
In this study, we consider a supply chain consisting of one manufacturer, one retailer, and
one customizer. The manufacturer sells standardized products through the retailer, and the
customizer produces and sells customized products. Consumers can decide to buy standard-
ized/customized products or nothing. We let s and c denote the standardized and customized
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
601
Table 1 Positioning of current study compared with the literature
Studies
MC
MC waiting
time
Channel
integration
Supply chain
Co-design
Alptekino˘glu and
Corbett (2008, 2010),
Alptekino˘glu and
Örsdemir (2022),
Dewan et al. (2003),
Xia and Rajagopalan
(2009)
✓
Basu and Bhaskaran
(2018), Esenduran
et al. (2022), Guo
et al. (2022), Syam
et al. (2008),
✓
✓
Mendelson and
Parlaktürk (2008), Su
et al. (2005), Su et al.
(2010)
✓
✓
Choi et al., (2019a,
2019b)
✓
✓
Li et al. (2015), Wang
and Lesmono (2013)
✓
✓
✓
Jost and Süsser (2020),
Shao (2020), Zhang
and Zheng (2021)
✓
✓
Shao et al. (2013)
✓
✓
✓
Current study
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
products, respectively. The unit price of product i (i ∈{s, c}) is pi, where pc > ps, and the
unit wholesale price of the standardized products is w.
Consumers can purchase standardized products directly from retailers without waiting.
However, ordering customized products requires consumers to wait owing to on-demand
production and distribution. Thus, we consider the waiting time for buying the standardized
products as zero but that for purchasing the customized items as nonzero. Following Su et al.
(2005), we use t to represent customers’ waiting time to obtain the customized products. For
consumers who are sensitive to the waiting time of products, a long waiting time will bring
them great losses. Therefore, the customizer should pay attention to waiting time reduction.
In order to improve production and transportation efﬁciency and reduce the waiting time of
consumers, the customizer will be charged additional costs to purchase advanced equipment
and develop technology. Following Xia et al. (2009), we denote this additional cost is μ
t ,
where μ refers to the coefﬁcient of the production and transportation costs for the customized
products, and the shorter the waiting time t, the higher the customization cost.
Product quality is included in consumer’s utility for purchasing the products. Product
quality refers to outlook and functions. The customized products could provide unique out-
look and advanced functions. We consider the perceived product quality level as having α
probability of being high quality q (i.e., level of product quality that is satisfactory to the
consumers) and (1 −α) probability of being low quality qL (i.e., the product is useless),
123

602
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
where q implies the highest quality that can be achieved. For simpliﬁcation, we assume that
qL = 0, that is, the consumers consider the product to be useless. Thus, the expected product
quality of the standardized products qs is αq, that is, qs = αq, where α ∈(0, 1). The cus-
tomized products can satisfy the consumers’ need for product quality. Hence, we consider
the expected product quality of the customized products qc to be equal to the highest product
quality that the consumers perceive, that is, qc = q.
The consumer utility for purchasing the standardized and customized products is as fol-
lows:
Us = qsv −ps, and Uc = qcv −pc −βt,
where v represents the consumers’ willingness to pay for a product, and β (β > 0) represents
sensitivity to the waiting time. We assume that v is uniformly distributed v ∈(0, 1), with
a density of 1. The production cost of product i is ci, where cc > cs. For simpliﬁcation,
we normalize cs as zero. The market demand for product i is Di. Table 2 summarizes the
major notations used in this paper. All the thresholds used in this paper are summarized in
Appendix A.
In the basic model, we evaluate the impact of the customizer in the supply chain. We take
the non-customizer case (Case N) as the benchmark and compare the results of Case Y (with
customizer presence) with those of the benchmark. The sequence of the game for Case N is
as follows: the manufacturer ﬁrst decides the wholesale price of the standardized products,
then the retailer decides the corresponding retail price. For Case Y, the customizer enters the
market and sells the customized products. Thus, similar to Case N, after the manufacturer
ﬁrst decides the wholesale price of the standardized products and the retailer decides the
associated retail price, the customizer determines the retail price of the customized products
on the basis of the retailer’s decision. Figure 1 illustrates the supply chain structure and game
sequence for Cases N and Y.
Table 2 Major notation used in the paper
Notation
Deﬁnition
qi
Quality of product i (i = s, c) denotes the standardized and customized products; qs < qc,
and qs = αq, where q is the quality level when consumers are satisﬁed with the product,
and α is the probability of consumers obtaining such a perception
t
Customers’ waiting time for MC products
β
Sensitivity to waiting time
μ
Coefﬁcient of production and transportation costs for customized products
v
Consumers’ willingness to pay for the products, which is uniformly distributed over [0,1]
Ui
Utility received by a consumer from purchasing product i
ci
Unit production cost for product i
w
Unit wholesale price of standardized products
pi
Retail price of product i
Di
Market demand for product i
π j
Proﬁts of supply chain member j, where j = m,r, c
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
603
Fig. 1 Supply chain structure and game sequence for Case N and Case Y (numbers in circles indicate the
sequence of the game in the two basic strategies)
4 Model analysis
4.1 Case N: non-customizer
In this subsection, we consider a case in which the customizer does not exist in the market,
and the manufacturer sells standardized products through the retailer. The consumer utility
for purchasing the standardized product is Us = qsv −ps = αqv −ps. Consumers will
purchase a product if and only if Us ≥0. Thus, the market demand for the standard products
is Ds = 1 −ps
αq . The proﬁt function of the retailer and manufacturer is as follows:
max
ps πr = (ps −w)Ds, and max
w πm = wDs.
Using backward induction, we can obtain the equilibrium outcomes for the retailer and
manufacturer. The equilibrium results are presented in Table 3.
4.2 Case Y: presence of customizer
In this subsection, we consider a case in which customized products are provided by the
customizer, and the customized products compete with the standardized ones. Deriving the
consumer utility functions for purchasing the standardized and customized products Us =
qsv −ps and Uc = qcv −pc −βt, the market demand for the standardized and customized
products is Ds =
pc+βt−ps
(1−α)q
−ps
αq and Dc = 1 −pc+βt−ps
(1−α)q , respectively. We denote π j
( j = m,r, c) as the proﬁts of supply chain member j. The proﬁt function of the retailer,
123

604
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
Table 3 Equilibrium results of Case N and Case Y
Indicators
Case N
Case Y
Wholesale price
qα
2
α(cc+q−qα+tβ)
4−2α
Retail price of standard products
3qα
4
3α(cc+q−qα+tβ)
4(2−α)
Retail price of custom products
/
(α−8)(cc+q−qα)+t(8−7α)β
8(α−2)
Demand for standard products
1
4
cc+q−qα+tβ
8q(1−α)
Demand for custom products
/
q(α−8)(α−1)+(cc+tβ)(7α−8)
8q(α−2)(α−1)
Manufacturer’s proﬁts
qα
8
α(cc+q−qα+tβ)2
16q(α−2)(α−1)
Retailer’s proﬁts
qα
16
α(cc+q−qα+tβ)2
32q(α−2)(α−1)
Customizer’s proﬁts
/
(q(α−8)(α−1)+(cc+tβ)(7α−8))2
64q(α−2)2(1−α)
−μ
t
manufacturer, and customizer is
max
ps πr = (ps −w)Ds, max
w πm = wDs, and max
pc πc = (pc −cc)Dc −μ
t .
Using backward induction, we show the equilibrium results of Case N and Case Y in Table
3.
4.3 Equilibrium analysis
In this subsection, we compare the results of Case N and Case Y.
Proposition 1
i.
The retail price and wholesale price of the standardized products in Case N are lower
than those in Case Y, that is, pY∗
s
< pN∗
s
, and wY∗< wN∗.
ii. The proﬁts of the manufacturer and retailer in Case N will be higher than those in Case
Y if and only if t is sufﬁciently small, that is, πY∗
r
< π N∗
r
, and πY∗
m
< π N∗
m
if and only
if 0 < t < t1.
Proposition 1(i) implies that the wholesale and retail prices of the standardized products
are reduced with the presence of the customized products, because the customized products
provide the consumers with a new option, and the manufacturer and retailer will reduce the
wholesale and retail prices to maintain the competitiveness of the standardized products in
the market.
Conventional wisdom implies that price reduction and competitor entry are unproﬁtable
for ﬁrms. However, Proposition 1 (ii) shows that the manufacturer and retailer can beneﬁt
when the customizer enters the market. When the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently short,
the proﬁts of the manufacturer and retailer will be lower than those in the case without the
presence of the customizer. However, when the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently long, the
proﬁts of the manufacturer and retailer will be higher than those in the case without the
presence of the customizer. Customized products have higher product quality but longer
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
605
waiting times compared with standardized ones. A short waiting time for MC products can
help the customizer earn a market share and increase the market demand for customized
products. As a result, when the MC waiting time is short, standardized products will be less
competitive, and the proﬁts of the manufacturer and retailer will be reduced. Meanwhile, if
the MC waiting time is too long, consumers will likely buy standardized products readily
available in stores. As a result, the proﬁts of the manufacturer and retailer will increase.
Shortening the MC waiting time could enhance market competitiveness. However, its
heavy investment may be less proﬁtable or unproﬁtable for the customizer. If the customizer
is not willing to invest in technology to shorten the waiting time, then consumers may wait
a long time for customized products. However, if the customizer invests substantially in
technology to shorten the waiting time, then consumers will likely purchase customized
products, and investments to shorten the MC waiting time will increase. The production
process will not only be detrimental to the proﬁts of the manufacturer and retailer if the
customizer has adequate investments in waiting-time reduction technology but may also be
unproﬁtable for the customizer if its waiting-time reduction technology is inefﬁcient.
5 Supply chain integration
5.1 Case RI: retailer–customizer integration
In this subsection, we consider a case in which the customizer is integrated with the retailer
(Case RI). The game sequence is as follows: the manufacturer ﬁrst determines the wholesale
price of the standardized products, then the retailer and customizer decide the retail price of
the standardized and customized products, respectively.
Similarly, the consumer demand for the standardized and customized products is Ds =
pc+βt−ps
(1−α)q −ps
αq and Dc = 1−pc+βt−ps
(1−α)q , respectively. We use πRI to express the total proﬁts of
the members when the customizer and retailer are integrated. In Case RI, the proﬁt functions
are as follows:
max
w πm = wDs, and max
ps,pc πRI = πr + πc = (ps −w)Ds + (pc −cc)Dc −μ
t .
Using backward induction, we show the equilibrium results of Case RI in Table 3. We
compare the results of Case Y and Case RI. The results of the comparison between the two
cases are presented below.
Proposition 2 The retail price of the standardized and customized products in Case RI is
higher than that in Case Y, that is, pRI∗
s
> pY∗
s , and pRI∗
c
> pY∗
c , and the wholesale price
of the standardized products in Case RI is lower than that in Case Y, that is, wRI∗< wY∗.
This result implies that the retail price of the standardized and customized products is
higher, and the wholesale price of the standardized products is lower in retailer–customizer
integration compared with in Case Y. The manufacturer will reduce the wholesale price and
induce the retailer to sell more standardized products, because retailer–customizer integration
weakens retail competition between standardized and customized products. Thus, a group
with an integrated retailer and customizer will increase its prices.
Proposition 3
i.
The proﬁts of the manufacturer in Case RI are lower than those in Case Y, that is,
π RI∗
m
< πY∗
m .
123

606
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
ii. The proﬁts of the retailer in Case RI will be lower than those in Case Y if and only if t
is sufﬁciently small, that is, π RI∗
r
< πY∗
r
if and only if 0 < t < t2.
iii The proﬁts of the customizer in Case RI will be higher than those in Case Y if and only
if t is sufﬁciently small, that is, π RI∗
c
> πY∗
c
if and only if 0 < t < t3.
This result implies that with retailer–customizer integration, the manufacturer’s proﬁts will
be lower than in the case in which the customizer is integrated with neither the manufacturer
nor the retailer, because though the reduction in the wholesale price will lead to increased
consumption by the retailer, it will not be sufﬁcient to compensate for the proﬁt loss due to
the price reduction.
When the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently short, retailer–customizer integration will reduce
the retailer’s proﬁts but increase the customizer’s proﬁts. A possible reason for this outcome
is that retailer–customizer integration weakens retail competition between retailers and cus-
tomizers. This ﬁnding is consistent with the actual case of Nike By You, which is a Nike
customized product. Nike Makers’ Experience opened the Nike By You Studio at 45 Grand
St. in New York, which completes the customization process by merging digital design
(dynamic object tracking and projection systems) with traditional footwear manufacturing
and allowing consumers to customize their shoes in less than 90 min (Kicksonﬁre, 2017). As
the waiting time for Nike’s MC products is short (i.e., 90 min), the customized products are
competitive, and consumers are inclined to purchase such products, making them proﬁtable
to the customizer. By contrast, the market demand for standardized products decreased as
well as the retailer’s proﬁts.
When the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently long, standardized products will be more com-
petitive than customized ones, and consumers will prefer the standardized products that are
readily available. Thus, the retailer’s proﬁts will increase. Although the price of customized
products will increase, it will not be adequate to compensate for the customizer’s proﬁt losses;
thus, the customizer’s proﬁts will decrease. Adidas built its state-of-the-art sneaker Speedfac-
tory in Germany in partnership with the Silicon Valley additive manufacturing startup Carbon.
The two ﬁrms integrated Carbon’s technology to produce unique SKUs of 3D-printed sneak-
ers through continuous liquid interface production, whose R&D investment increased by
35%. In 2020, Adidas closed its Speedfactory owing to an unbalanced investment and return
(Hernández, 2020). Our results can provide guidelines for developing and selling customized
products in retailer–customizer integration.
In this paper, we evaluate the achievability of an all-win outcome in supply chains. The
all-win outcome is crucial in supply chain network since although supply chain members are
competing the proﬁts, they are also cooperating.
Corollary 1 Retailer–customizer integration will lead to a win–win outcome for the retailer
and customizer only when t falls into a moderate range, that is, when t2 < t < t3, π RI∗
r
>
πY∗
r , and π RI∗
c
> πY∗
c , but cannot lead to a win–win–win outcome for all the supply chain
members.
This result implies that when the MC waiting time is moderate, the customizer and retailer
can beneﬁt from retailer–customizer integration. Thus, the retailer and customizer have an
incentive to integrate. With retailer–customizer integration, retail competition is weakened.
When the MC waiting time is moderate, the retailer and customizer will not be competing
aggressively and will be able to gain sufﬁcient beneﬁts through integration and achieve a
win–win outcome. However, when the MC waiting time is too short, customized products
with a high retail price will generate considerable proﬁts for the customizer, whereas the
low consumer demand for standardized products will be unproﬁtable for the retailer. This
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
607
situation is reversed when the waiting time is too long. The retailer–customizer integration can
achieveawin–winresultunderthecertaincircumstancebutisdetrimentaltothemanufacturer.
The potential reason is that the manufacturer can attract the retailer to order standardized
products only by lowering the wholesale price, but the advantages of customized products
stimulate consumers to purchase, which leads to the lack of demand for standardized products
in the market. The proﬁt brought by the reduction of the wholesale price of standardized
products is always insufﬁcient to make up for the loss brought by the lack of demand for
the standardized products. Owing to this barrier, the manufacturer will not be able to beneﬁt
from the retailer–customizer integration.
MC waiting time deserves considerable attention. If the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently
short, then the customizer may beneﬁt, whereas if it is too long, then the retailer may beneﬁt.
Only when the MC waiting time is moderate can a win–win situation be realized for the
retailer and customizer. However, regardless of the length of the waiting time, the manufac-
turer will consistently be the victim and reluctant to participate in a supply chain in which
integration occurs between the retailer and customizer. Our results suggest that retailer—
customizer integration can beneﬁt the involved parties but is detrimental to the interests of
others.
5.2 Case MI: manufacturer–customizer integration
In this subsection, we consider a case in which the customizer is integrated with the manu-
facturer (Case MI). The game sequence is as follows. First, the manufacturer determines the
wholesale price of the standardized products. Second, the retailer decides the retail price of
the standardized products. Finally, the customizer decides the retail price of the customized
products. We use πM I to express the total proﬁts of the members when the manufacturer and
customizer are integrated. In Case MI, the proﬁt functions are as follows:
max
w,pc πM I = πm + πc = wDs + (pc −cc)Dc −μ
t , and max
ps πr = (ps −w)Ds.
Using backward induction, we obtain the equilibrium results of Case MI, as shown in
Table 4. We compare the results of Case Y and Case MI. The results of the comparison
between the cases are presented below.
Proposition 4 The retail price of the standardized and customized products and wholesale
price of the standardized products in Case MI are greater than those in Case Y, that is,
pM I∗
s
> pY∗
s , pM I∗
c
> pY∗
c , and wM I∗> wY∗.
This result implies that with manufacturer–customizer integration, the wholesale price of
the standardized products and retail price of both types of products will increase, because
the manufacturer may intentionally increase the wholesale price. Thus, the retail price of the
standardized products will also increase. The high retail price of the standardized products
may weaken their competitiveness in the market. As a result, the retail price of the customized
products may also be increased to earn considerable proﬁts.
Proposition 5
i.
The proﬁts of the manufacturer in Case MI will be lower than those in Case Y if and
only if t is sufﬁciently small, that is, π M I∗
m
< πY∗
m if and only if 0 < t < t4.
ii.
The proﬁts of the retailer in Case MI will be lower than those in Case Y if and only if t
is sufﬁciently small, that is, π M I∗
r
< πY∗
r
if and only if 0 < t < t5.
123

608
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
Table 4 Equilibrium results of Case RI and Case MI
Indicators
Case RI
Case MI
Wholesale price
1
2 α(cc + tβ)
1
2 α(q −α(cc+tβ)
8−5α+α2 )
Retail price of
standard products
1
4 α(cc + 2q + tβ)
1
2 α(q −(α−4)(cc+tβ)
8−5α+α2
)
Retail price of
custom products
1
2 (cc + q −tβ)
1
2 (q + cc(8−3α)+tβ(7α−2α2−8)
8−5α+α2
)
Demand for
standard products
cc+tβ
4q(1−α)
(α−2)(cc+tβ)
q(α−1)(8−5α+α2)
Demand for custom
products
(cc+tβ)(α−2)−2q(α−1)
4q(1−α)
1
2 + (8+(α−7)α)(cc+tβ)
2q(α−1)(8+(α−5)α)
Manufacturer’s
proﬁts
α(cc+tβ)2
8q(1−α)
(α−2)α(cc+tβ)(q(8−5α+α2)−α(cc+tβ))
2q(α−1)(8−5α+α2)2
Retailer’s proﬁts
α(cc+tβ)(cc−2q+tβ)
16q(α−1)
2(α−2)α(cc+tβ)2
q(α−1)(8−5α+α2)2
Customizer’s proﬁts
(cc+tβ−q)((cc+tβ)(α−2)−2q(α−1))
8q(α−1)
−μ
t
ϵ1
4q(α−1)(8+(α−5)α)2 −μ
t
ϵ1 = ((cc + tβ)((7 −2α)α −8) + q(8 + (α −5)α))((cc + tβ)(8 + (α −7)α) + q(α −1)(8 + (α −5)α))
iii. The proﬁts of the customizer in Case MI will be higher than those in Case Y if and only
if t is sufﬁciently small, that is, π M I∗
c
> πY∗
c
if and only if 0 < t < t6.
This result implies that when the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently short, integration will
decrease the proﬁts of the manufacturer and retailer but increase the proﬁts of the customizer.
A possible reason for this outcome is that the standardized products will be at a competitive
disadvantage, and the market demand for such products will decrease, so the integrated
manufacturer will reduce its production of customized products. Meanwhile, the market
demand for the customized products will increase, so the customizer can gain increased
proﬁts.
Corollary 2 Manufacturer–customizer integration (i.e., Case MI) will lead to a win–win–win
outcome for the manufacturer, retailer, and customizer when 2 −
√
2 < α < 1 and t is
moderate, that is, when 2 −
√
2 < α < 1 and t5 < t < t6, π M I∗
m
> πY∗
m , π M I∗
r
> πY∗
r , and
π M I∗
c
> πY∗
c .
When the probability of a product being of high quality is high and the waiting time is mod-
erate, the customizer and manufacturer participating in manufacturer–customizer integration
may obtain higher proﬁts than when they are independent. Standardized and customized
products are differentiated in terms of product quality. The manufacturer and customizer in
the upstream supply chain are integrated to realize a win–win situation. The nonintegrated
retailer will beneﬁt from the change in the standardized products owing to product quality
differentiation. Thus, ultimately, manufacturer–customizer integration can achieve an all-win
outcome for all the supply chain members. Our results imply that Ralph Lauren should strate-
gically postpone the delivery of customized products to consumers regardless of whether its
on-demand colored polo shirts are completed in the store and consumers’ waiting time may
be very short. Moreover, Ralph Lauren should provide more color choices to consumers, who
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
609
can choose the dye color for their customized polo shirts. Thus, the probability of the product
being of high quality will be high. In a supply chain in which the customizer is integrated
with the manufacturer, the importance of the probability of a product being of high quality
cannot be ignored. The manufacturer should work on improving consumer perception of the
probability of a product being able to satisfy consumers as much as possible. In addition,
managing the waiting time for MC products within a moderate range is necessary for the
customizer.
When the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently short, the nature of the customized product
to satisfy consumer demand will make it highly competitive. As the price of customized
products is high, such products are highly proﬁtable for the customizer. Standardized products
are bound to be eclipsed by strong competitors, and the manufacturer and retailer will suffer.
When the probability of a product being able to satisfy consumers is low, even when the MC
waiting time is moderate, an all-win outcome will not be achieved. A possible reason for
this outcome is that when consumers’ probability of obtaining a satisfactory product is low,
though the MC waiting time is not very long, the consumers’ utility loss from the waiting time
will be relatively large compared with that for a standardized product that can be obtained
immediately. As a result, more consumers will buy the standardized product, which will be
proﬁtable for the manufacturer but detrimental to the customizer. As the retailer endures the
high wholesale price dominated by the manufacturer, the proﬁt margin will not be adequately
large to compensate for the proﬁts generated by the increased demand at this time, which
will be unproﬁtable for the retailer.
6 Endogenous self-design fun
In recent years, more and more personalized customization that only focuses on the personal
taste of consumers has appeared. The increasing number of customized products is allow-
ing consumers to participate in product design and manufacturing. Consumers can design
products as the designer and experience enjoyment through self-design. Compared with
traditional mass customization, customization with self-design is free and more ﬂexible in
product function and design, which can enable consumers to enjoy a high degree of product
satisfaction. Therefore, customization with self-design fun attracts consumers inject special
needs into their unique preferences through self-design and create new selling points for
mass customization. We propose that if the customizer invests substantially, then consumers
can experience considerable self-design fun. The customizer can decide the level of self-
design fun n, and its cost is 1
2n2 (Guo et al., 2022). That is, a large n (n ≥0) implies that
consumers experience a high level of self-design fun, and the customizer pays a consider-
able amount of money. The utility that a consumer gets from a customized product follows
Uc = qcv −pc −βt + n.
With self-design fun, the market demand for the standardized and customized products is
as follows:
Ds = pc + βt −ps −n
(1 −α)q
−ps
αq , and Dc = 1 −pc + βt −ps −n
(1 −α)q
.
We indicate the customizer’s proﬁt function as max
pc,n πc = (pc −cc)Dc −μ
t −n2
2
in Case Y and the total proﬁt function of the retailer integrating with the customizer
as
max
ps,pc,n πRI
= (ps −w)Ds + (pc −cc)Dc −μ
t −n2
2
in Case RI. In addition, we
indicate the total proﬁt function of the manufacturer integrating with the customizer as
123

610
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
max
w,pc,n πM I = wDs + (pc −cc)Dc −μ
t −n2
2 in Case MI. The customizer maximizes its
proﬁts by determining n and the price of the customized products pc simultaneously, and the
other game sequences are consistent with those in the previous section.
Through backward induction, with endogenous self-design fun, the level of product quality
q >
1
2−2α will ensure that the Hessian matrix is negatively deﬁnite in the three cases (i.e.,
Case Y, Case RI, and Case MI). This assumption is realistic, because the product quality
should be adequately high; otherwise, the market demand may be negative. We show the
equilibrium results of Case Y, Case RI, and Case MI in Table 5. With endogenous self-design
fun, we compare the results of Case Y and Case RI and Case Y and Case MI. The main results
with endogenous self-design fun are consistent with those in the previous section. Therefore,
we omit them here.
Proposition 6 The customizer will invest less in self-design fun if it integrates with the
retailer or manufacturer, but the level of self-design fun will be higher when the customizer
integrates with the retailer than when the customizer integrates with the manufacturer, that
is, nM I∗< nRI∗< nY∗.
This result implies that the level of self-design fun from purchasing MC products decreases
with integration and is the lowest in manufacturer–customizer integration. A possible reason
for this decrease in the level of self-design fun in integration is that ﬁrst, an integrated supply
chain is highly competitive. When the customizer integrates with the retailer or manufacturer,
the competitive relationship between the two involved parties will be diminished. Second, for
both involved members in the supply chain, setting high prices for high proﬁts will become the
guideline for their actions. As a result, the integrated customizer will not invest considerably
in self-design fun.
The level of self-design fun from purchasing MC products when the customizer integrates
with the retailer is higher than when the customizer integrates with the manufacturer. The
intuition behind this ﬁnding is as follows: in retailer–customizer integration, the customizer
and retailer sell both types of products directly to consumers and set a higher retail price than
in the case in which they are not involved in the integration. In manufacturer–customizer inte-
gration, customized products will have a high retail price only when the MC waiting time is
sufﬁciently short. If the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently long, then the price of the customized
products will be low, because they will not be fully competitive. In retailer–customizer inte-
gration, the high retail price is undoubtedly a barrier for consumers to purchase customized
products. The customizer should raise its investment in self-design fun and enhance the
attractiveness of purchasing customized products through a high level of self-design fun.
Compared with retailer–customizer integration, the customizer must also evaluate the MC
waiting time when setting the retail price in manufacturer–customizer integration. Only when
the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently short can customized products be relatively competitive.
Thus, though the retail price will be high, investing considerable effort to improve the level of
self-design fun from purchasing MC products will be worthwhile. Conversely, when the MC
waiting time is sufﬁciently long, the customizer will not increase its investments to improve
the level of self-design fun from purchasing MC products.
Proposition 7 With endogenous self-design fun, when the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently
short, the retail price of the customized products will increase with integration, that is, 0 <
t < t7, and pY∗
c
≤min{pM I∗
c
, pRI∗
c
}, whereas when the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently large,
the retail price of the customized products will increase in retailer–customizer integration
but decrease in manufacturer–customizer integration, that is, t > t7, pRI∗
c
> pY∗
c
> pM I∗
c
.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
611
Table 5 Equilibrium results of Case Y, Case RI, and Case MI with endogenous self-design fun decision
Case Y
Case RI
Case MI
w∗
qα(1+q(α−1)−cc−tβ)
2+2q(α−2)
qα(2cc+2tβ−1)
2(2q−1)
qα(2+q2(8−5α+α2)−q(8+α(cc+tβ−3)))
4+q(5α−16)+2q2(8−5α+α2)
p∗
s
3qα(1+q(α−1)−cc−tβ)
4+4q(α−2)
qα(2cc+4q+2tβ−3)
8q−4
qα(3−cc(2+q(α−4))−2tβ+q(q(8−5α+α2)+3α−tβ(α−4)−10))
4+q(5α−16)+2q2(8−5α+α2)
p∗
c
cc(4+q(q(α−8)(α−1)+8α−12))
4(1+q(α−2))(1+2q(α−1))
+
q(α−1)(tβ(q(8−7α)−4)−q(q(α−8)(α−1)+α−4))
4(1+q(α−2))(1+2q(α−1))
2cc(q(6+4q(α−1)−3α)−2)
4(2q−1)(1+2q(α−1))
+
q(8q2(α−1)−α+2tβ(α−2)+q(4−8tβ(α−1)))
4(2q−1)(1+2q(α−1))
cc(4+qϵ2)+q(ϵ5−ϵ6+2(α+2tβ))
(1+2q(α−1))(4+q(5α−16)+2q2(8−5α+α2))
n∗
q(q(α−8)(α−1)+α−4)+(tβ+cc)(4+q(7α−8))
4(1+q(α−2))(1+2q(α−1))
2cc(1+q(α−2))+2tβ+q(α−2)(1+2tβ)−4q2(α−1)
2(1−2q)(1+2q(α−1))
(cc+tβ)ϵ3+q(3α−4+q(16+α(5α−19)+2q(α−1)(8−5α+α2)))
(1+2q(α−1))(4+q(5α−16)+2q2(8−5α+α2))
D∗
s
1+q(α−1)−cc−tβ
4+8q(α−1)
1−2cc−2tβ
4+8q(α−1)
(2q−1)(1+q(α−2))(2cc+2tβ−1)
(1+2q(α−1))(4+q(5α−16)+2q2(8−5α+α2))
D∗
c
q(q(α−8)(α−1)+α−4)+(tβ+cc)(4+q(7α−8))
4(1+q(α−2))(1+2q(α−1))
2cc(1+q(α−2))+2tβ+q(α−2)(1+2tβ)−4q2(α−1)
2(1−2q)(1+2q(α−1))
(cc+tβ)ϵ3+q(3α−4+q(16+α(5α−19)+2q(α−1)(8−5α+α2)))
(1+2q(α−1))(4+q(5α−16)+2q2(8−5α+α2))
π∗
m
qα(cc+q(1−α)+tβ−1)2
8(1+q(α−2))(1+2q(α−1))
qα(2cc+2tβ−1)2
8(1−2q)(1+2q(α−1))
q(2q−1)(1+q(α−2))α(2cc+2tβ−1)(2+q(q(8−5α+α2)−α(cc+tβ−3)−8))
(1+2q(α−1))(4+q(5α−16)+2q2(8−5α+α2))2
π∗
r
qα(cc+q(1−α)+tβ−1)2
16(1+q(α−2))(1+2q(α−1))
qα(2cc+2tβ−1)(1+2cc+2tβ−4q)
16(2q−1)(1+2q(α−1))
(1−2q)2q(1+q(α−2))α(2cc+2tβ−1)2
(1+2q(α−1))(4+q(5α−16)+2q2(8−5α+α2))2
π∗
c
(q(q(α−8)(α−1)+α−4)+(tβ+cc)(4+q(7α−8)))2
32(1+q(α−2))2(2q(1−α)−1)
−μ
t
(cc+tβ−q)(2cc+2tβ+q(α−2)(2cc+2tβ+1)−4q2(α−1))
4(2q−1)(1+2q(α−1))
−μ
t
2qϵ3(ϵ4+ϵ5−ϵ6+2(α+2tβ))−ϵ32
2(1+2q(α−1))2(4+q(5α−16)+2q2(8−5α+α2))2 −μ
t
ϵ2 = q(32 −2q(α −1)(3α −8) + α(4α −29)) + 9α −20, ϵ3 = 4 + q(2q(α2 −7α + 8) + 7α −16), ϵ4 = cc(4 −4α + q((23 −8α)α −2q(α −1)(2α2 −7α + 8) −16)), ϵ5 =
q(4α2 −5α −4 + 2q2(α −1)(8 −5α + α2) + q(α(2α2 −3α −11) + 16)), ϵ6 = tβ(4α + q(8α2 −23α + 16 + 2q(α −1)(2α2 −7α + 8)))
123

612
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
Proposition 7 implies that with endogenous self-design fun, in manufacturer–customizer
integration, when the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently short, the retail price of customized
products will increase with supply chain integration owing to their product competitiveness in
the market. In addition, customized products can bring about self-design fun for consumers.
Therefore, the customizer will become price dominant and increase the price to get increased
beneﬁts.WhentheMCwaitingtimeissufﬁcientlylong,theretailpriceofcustomizedproducts
will decrease with integration, and consumers will likely buy standardized products owing to
the long MC waiting time. However, in retailer–customizer integration, the waiting time is not
a factor affecting the price setting. Retailer–customizer integration weakens the competitive
relationship between the retailer and customizer. As both sell products directly to consumers,
the retailer and customizer will consistently raise retail prices to maximize their proﬁts
regardless of the length of the waiting time.
Corollary
3 When
⎧
⎨
⎩
1
2−2α < q <
√
2α+2−2α
2(α2−4α+2)
q ≥
√
2α+2−2α
2(α2−4α+2) and 2 −
√
2 < α < 1
, manufacturer–customizer
integration will achieve a win–win–win outcome for the manufacturer, retailer, and cus-
tomizer if t is medium, that is, when
1
2−2α < q <
√
2α+2−2α
2(α2−4α+2) or q ≥
√
2α+2−2α
2(α2−4α+2), and 2 −
√
2 < α < 1 if t9 < t < t10, then π M I∗
m
> πY∗
m , π M I∗
r
> πY∗
r , and π M I∗
c
> πY∗
c . Thus,
retailer–customizer integration cannot realize a win–win–win outcome for the manufacturer,
retailer, and customizer.
In contrast to Corollary 2, product quality that satisﬁes consumers becomes a factor to
be considered. When the quality of the satisfactory product and waiting time are moderate,
or when the quality of the satisfactory product and probability of the product being of high
quality are sufﬁciently high and the waiting time is moderate, the three supply chain members
(the manufacturer and customizer are involved in the integration) may gain higher proﬁts
through the integration and achieve a win–win–win outcome than in the case in which the
customizer is not integrated with the manufacturer and retailer.
If the level of self-design fun is endogenous, then self-design fun can generate extra utility
for the consumers, which can reduce their need for product quality. However, our results imply
that customization can bring about self-design fun and prompt consumers to require product
quality, because self-design fun is a special factor for consumers who devote their time to
designing customized products and experiencing fun while expecting a product to be highly
satisfying.
If consumers have high quality requirements for products they are satisﬁed with, then cus-
tomized products are bound to fulﬁll them, and the additional utility that self-design can bring
to consumers will make customized products highly attractive. For example, Samsung has
realized the necessity for consumers to freely match their own tastes on refrigerators. Sam-
sung’s Bespoke Refrigerator opens a personalized and unique design journey for consumers.
Consumers need a certain waiting time to obtain their customized Bespoke Refrigerator
after ordering. Samsung’s Bespoke Refrigerators are modular and come in a range of door
color options, different number of refrigerator door types and refrigerator sizes (Menafn,
2022). Moreover, in the United States, Samsung’s Bespoke Refrigerators launched “Design
an Original Fridge with MyBespoke Custom Panels”, which allows consumers to print their
favorite panels on the refrigerator door (Samsung US, 2022). Samsung also provides a lot cus-
tomization options of intelligent refrigerator technology based on the existing refrigeration
preservation technology. The customized choices ensure sufﬁciently high product quality.
However, standardized products have a high degree of uncertainty in satisfying consumers’
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
613
needs, so only when α is sufﬁciently large (i.e., when the probability of a consumer receiv-
ing a satisfactory standardized product is high) will demanding consumers make a tradeoff
between the effects of “the long waiting time but a satisfactory product” and “readily available
but a potentially unsatisfactory product.”
With self-design fun, the realization of a win–win–win situation depends on the coordina-
tion of three factors: the probability of the standardized product being of high quality (α), the
quality of the product with which the consumer is satisﬁed (q), and the customization wait-
ing time (t). The manufacturer and customizer should strive to avoid producing low-quality
products. If consumers do not have a high standard for product quality, then the customizer
must maintain the MC waiting time at a moderate level. However, if consumers have a high
standard for product quality, in addition to a moderate MC waiting time, the probability of a
product being of high quality should be increased as much as possible to satisfy demanding
consumers and realize the proﬁts of all supply chain members.
7 Conclusions, managerial insights, and future research directions
Motivated by actual MC practices, consumers can tailor their unique tastes into customized
products. In the era of new technology boom, technology such as 3D printing, robotic man-
ufacturing, and the Internet of things can shorten the time for manufacturing MC products,
enhance consumers’ self-design fun, and improve channel integration connectivity. In this
study, we consider a supply chain consisting of one standardized product manufacturer, one
retailer who sells standardized products, and one customizer who sells customized products.
The manufacturer produces and sells the standardized products through the retailer, and the
customizer sells the customized products to consumers directly. The customizer can decide
whether to integrate with the manufacturer (i.e., manufacturer–customizer integration) or
with the retailer (i.e., retailer–customizer integration). We provide new perspectives on the
impact of MC waiting time on supply chain integration. In addition, we ﬁnd that manufac-
turer–customizer integration can achieve a win–win–win outcome for all three supply chain
members, but retailer–customizer integration cannot achieve such an outcome. Our study
highlights the effect of self-design fun on supply chain integration with MC. Furthermore,
we ﬁnd that integration reduces the customizer’s investment in the level of self-design fun.
The main managerial insights into supply chain integration with MC are summarized in Table
6.
Our study has several limitations. First, we consider a supply chain system in which the
manufacturer sells standardized products through the retailer, and the customizer sells cus-
tomized products to consumers directly. This setting is intentional, because it is consistent
with actual industry practice. In future research, extending the supply chain network and
considering that the manufacturer can also be the customizer may be interesting (Choi et al.,
2019a, 2019b; Dong et al., 2019). Second, we deem demand to be deterministic for standard-
ized products. The main reason for this setting is that we focus on examining pricing problems
in the supply chain instead of inventory problems. In future research, evaluating the effect of
demand uncertainty on the interaction between standardized and customized products in a
supply chain may also be interesting (Shen et al., 2022c). Third, in future research, it would
be interesting to incorporate emerging technologies such as blockchain into MC supply chain
network (Cao & Shen, 2022; Shen et al., 2022a, 2022b, 2022c).
123

614
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
Table 6 Managerial insights into supply chain integration with MC
Main content
Managerial insights
Management of MC waiting time
When the MC waiting time is sufﬁciently long, MC
will be proﬁtable for the original supply chain
members (i.e., manufacturer and retailer)
Realization of all-win situation through integration
Manufacturer–customizer integration can achieve an
all-win outcome for all the members, with a moderate
MC waiting time and high probability of the product
satisfying consumers
Retailer–customizer integration cannot achieve a
win–win–win outcome but can achieve a win–win
outcome for the retailer and customizer, as the
manufacturer will not consistently beneﬁt from
such an integration
Enhancement of self-design fun
Integration reduces the customizer’s investment in the
levelofself-designfunfrompurchasingMCproducts
An all-win outcome can be achieved, but conditions
can become complicated, because the quality of the
product that consumers are satisﬁed with should
also be considered
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10479-023-05202-y.
Acknowledgements This paper is partially supported by National Science Foundation of China (Grant Num-
bers: 72271050, 71871051, 71832001).
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest Bin Shen declares that he has no conﬂict of interest. Jianing Zhang declares that she has
no conﬂict of interest. Ming Chen declares that she has no conﬂict of interest. Shu Guo declares that she has
no conﬂict of interest. Renlong He declares that he has no conﬂict of interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with animals performed by any of the authors.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Alptekino˘glu, A., & Corbett, C. J. (2008). Mass customization vs. mass production: Variety and price compe-
tition. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 10(2), 204–217.
Alptekino˘glu, A., & Corbett, C. J. (2010). Leadtime-variety tradeoff in product differentiation. Manufacturing
& Service Operations Management, 12(4), 569–582.
Alptekino˘glu, A., & Örsdemir, A. (2022). Is adopting mass customization a path to environmentally sustainable
fashion? Manufacturing & Service Operations Management. In Press.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
615
Basu, A., & Bhaskaran, S. (2018). An economic analysis of customer co-design. Information Systems
Research., 29(4), 787–786.
Boute, R. N., Disney, S. M., Gijsbrechts, J., & Van Mieghem, J. A. (2022). Dual sourcing and smoothing
under nonstationary demand time series: Reshoring with speedfactories. Management Science, 68(2),
1039–1057.
Cao, Y., & Shen, B. (2022). Adopting blockchain technology to block less sustainable products’ entry in global
trade. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review., 161, 102695.
Choi, T. M., Ma, C., Shen, B., & Sun, Q. (2019a). Optimal pricing in mass customization supply chains with
risk-averse agents and retail competition. Omega, 88, 150–161.
Choi, T. M., Cai, Y., & Shen, B. (2019b). Sustainable fashion supply chain management: A system of systems
analysis. IEEE Transaction on Engineering Management., 66(4), 730–745.
Dewan, R., Jing, B., & Seidmann, A. (2003). Product customization and price competition on the internet.
Management Science, 49(8), 1055–1070.
Dolgui, A., & Ivanov, D. (2021). Ripple effect and supply chain disruption management: New trends and
research directions. International Journal of Production Research, 59(1), 102–109.
Dong, C., Liu, Q., & Shen, B. (2019). To be or not to be green? Strategic investment for green product
development in a supply chain. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review,
131, 193–227.
Esenduran, G., Letizia, P., Ovchinnikov, A. (2022). Customization and returns. Management Science (in press).
Fung, Y., Chan, H., Choi, T., & Liu, R. (2021). Sustainable product development processes in fashion: Supply
chains structures and classiﬁcations. International Journal of Production Economics, 231, 107911.
Gandhi, A., Magar, C., Roberts, R. (2014). How technology can drive the next wave of mass customization.
McKinsey. Available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/dotcom/client_service/bto/pdf/
mobt32_02-09_masscustom_r4.ashx
Gupta, V., Ivanov, D., & Choi, T. M. (2021). Competitive pricing of substitute products under supply disruption.
Omega, 101, 102279.
Guo, S., Choi, T. M., Shen, B., & Jung, S. (2020). Coordination and enhancement schemes for quick response
mass customization supply chains with consumer returns and salvage value considerations. IEEE Trans-
actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: System, 50(2), 673–685.
Guo, S., Choi, T. M., & Chung, S. H. (2022). Self-design fun: Should 3D printing be employed in mass
customization operations? European Journal of Operational Research, 299, 883–897.
Hernández, A. (2020). Learning from Adidas’ Speedfactory Blunder. Supply Chain Dive. Feb 4. Available at:
https://www.supplychaindive.com/news/adidas-speedfactory-blunder-distributed-operations/571678/
Ivanov, D. (2022). Blackout and supply chains: Performance, resilience and viability impact analysis. Annals
of Operations Research (in press).
Ivanov, D. (2021). Viable supply chain model: Integrating agility, resilience and sustainability perspectives:
Lessons from and thinking beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Annals of Operations Research. in Press.
Ivanov, D., Dolgui, A., & Sokolov, B. (2022). Cloud supply chain: Integrating industry 4.0 and digital platforms
in the “supply chain-as-a-service. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review,
160, 102676.
Jost, P. J., & Süsser, T. (2020). Company-customer interaction in mass customization. International Journal
of Production Economics, 220, 107454.
Kicksonﬁre, (2017). The Nike Makers’ experience allows you to customize shoes in less than 90 minutes.
Available at: https://www.kicksonﬁre.com/nike-makers-experience/
Menafn (2022). Samsung’s Bespoke refrigerator ushers in a new era of customization. July 7. Avail-
able at: https://menafn.com/1104604460/Samsungs-Bespoke-Refrigerator-Ushers-In-A-New-Era-Of-
Customization.
Mendelson, H., & Parlaktürk, A. K. (2008). Product-line competition: Customization vs proliferation. Man-
agement Science, 54(12), 2039–2053.
Levi Strauss & Co. (1999). How Levi Strauss & Co. Puts an original spin on mass customization. Retrieved
from http://yjﬁle.tripod.com/levi1.htmon04.04.2016.
Li, G., Huang, F., Cheng, T. C. E., & Ji, P. (2015). Competition between manufacturer’s online customization
channel and conventional retailer. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 62(2), 150–157.
Liu, N., Chow, P., & Zhao, H. (2020). Challenges and critical successful factors for apparel mass customization
operations: Recent development and case study. Annals of Operations Research, 291, 531–563.
Piller, F. (2021). Individuality as a trump card. Stylepark. August 26. Available at: https://www.stylepark.com/
en/news/mass-customisation-individual-conﬁguration
Samsung US. (2022). Design a fridge that ﬁts your style. Available at: https://www.samsung.com/us/home-
appliances/bespoke/refrigerators/
123

616
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 344:595–616
Seabrook,J.(2022).whatshouldanine-thousand-poundelectricvehiclesoundlike?TheNewYorker.August8.
Available at: https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2022/08/08/what-should-a-nine-thousand-pound-
electric-vehicle-sound-like
Shen, B., Xin, Y., Choi, T.M., Zhang, K. (2022a). Integration strategies of luxury rental operations: Is it wise
to operate with the manufacturer or co-operate with the competitor? International Journal of Production
Research (in press).
Shen, B., Dong, C., & Minner, S. (2022b). Combating copycats in the supply chain with permissioned
blockchain technology. Production and Operations Management., 31(1), 138–154.
Shen, B., Zhang, T., Xu, X., Chan, L., & Choi, T. M. (2022c). Pre-ordering in luxury fashion: Will additional
demand information bring negative effects to the retailer? Decision Sciences., 53(4), 681–711.
Shen, B., Xu, X., Chan, H. L., & Choi, T. M. (2021). Collaborative innovation in supply chain systems: Value
creation and leadership structure. International Journal of Production Economics., 235, 108068.
Shen, B., Choi, T. M., & Chan, H. L. (2019). Selling green ﬁrst or not? A Bayesian analysis with service
levels and environmental impact considerations in the big data era. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change., 144, 412–420.
Shao, X. (2013). Integrated product and channel decision in mass customization. IEEE Transactions on Engi-
neering Management, 60(1), 30–45.
Shao, X. (2020). What is the right production strategy for horizontally differentiated product: Standardization
or mass customization? International Journal of Production Economics, 223, 107527.
Su, J. C. P., Chang, Y., & Ferguson, M. (2005). Evaluation of postponement structures to accommodate mass
customization. Journal of Operations Management, 23, 305–318.
Su, J. C. P., Chang, Y., Ferguson, M., & Ho, J. C. (2010). The impact of delayed differentiation in make-to-order
environments. International Journal of Production Research, 48(19), 5809–5829.
Syam, N., Krishnamurthy, P., & Hess, J. D. (2008). That’s What I Thought I Wanted? Miswanting and regret
for a standard good in a mass-customized world. Marketing Science, 27(3), 379–397.
Wang, H., & Lesmono, D. (2013). On the evaluation of product customization strategies in a vertically differ-
entiated market. International Journal of Production Economics, 144, 105–117.
Xia, N., & Rajagopalan, S. (2009). Standard vs. custom products: Variety, lead time, and price competition.
Marketing Science, 28(5), 887–900.
Yazdani, A., Cil, E. B., & Pangburn, M. S. (2020). What if Hotelling’s ﬁrms can mass customize? Decision
Sciences, 51(2), 395–422.
Zipkin, P. (2001). The limits of mass customization. MIT Sloan Management Review, 42(3), 81–87.
Zhang, C., & Zheng, X. (2021). Customization strategies between online and ofﬂine retailers. Omega, 100,
102230.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123