TITLE: Extending application of explainable artificial intelligence for managers in financial organizations
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05825-9
---

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05825-9
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Extending application of explainable artiﬁcial intelligence
for managers in ﬁnancial organizations
Renu Sabharwal1 · Shah J. Miah1
· Samuel Fosso Wamba2 · Peter Cook3
Received: 27 March 2023 / Accepted: 1 January 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Anomalies are a signiﬁcant challenge for businesses in all industries. Artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) based machine learning (ML) detection models can help ﬁnd aberrant customer trans-
action behaviour in ﬁnancial datasets. However, the output responses provided by these
AI-based ML models lack transparency and interpretability, making it challenging for ﬁnan-
cial managers to comprehend the reasoning underlying the AI detections. Suppose managers
cannot comprehend how and why AI models develop responses based on the input infor-
mation. In such cases, AI is unlikely to enhance data-driven decision-making and add value
to organizations. This article’s primary objective is to illustrate the capacity of the SHapley
Additive exPlanations (SHAP) technique to give ﬁnance managers an intuitive explanation
of the anomaly detections AI-based ML models generate for a speciﬁc customer transaction
dataset. Theoretically, we contribute to the literature on international ﬁnance by offering
a conceptual review of AI algorithmic explainability. We discuss its implications for sus-
taining a competitive advantage using the concepts of action design research methodology
following the research onion framework. We also suggest an explainable AI implementation
methodology based on SHAP as a valuable guide for ﬁnance managers seeking to boost
the transparency of AI-based ML models and to alleviate trust difﬁculties in data-driven
decision-making.
Keywords Artiﬁcial intelligence · Machine learning · Financial organization · Supervised
learning · Unsupervised learning
1 Introduction
In recent years Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) applications have been widely studied in the oper-
ational research domain. AI is currently the most common disruptive technology capable
of transforming business operations. Previous AI research has established various related
B Shah J. Miah
shah.miah@newcastle.edu.au
1
Newcastle Business School, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia
2
TBS Business School, Toulouse, France
3
Novatti Group, Melbourne, Australia
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
/ Published online: 30 January 2024

schools of thought on such disruption, such as using AI for enhancing business innovation
(Wamba-Taguimdje et al., 2020), re-engineering of business processes (Al-Anqoudi et al.,
2021), analysing customer requirements (Zhou et al., 2020), and using data analytics for
improved and precise managerial decision support (Gupta et al., 2022). While many studies
have indicated signiﬁcant as well as potential beneﬁts of AI applications in business opera-
tions,theimpactofclearlyexplainableandunderstandableAIintransformingbothbusinesses
and customers has yet to be fully developed. This could not only provide simpliﬁcation in
managerial decision-making, but also address an apparent lack of concern.
Transparent or explainable AI offers end users suitable understandability regarding the
decisions or predictions derived by the system (Arrieta et al., 2020). The idea of explainable
AI articulates a position which has the opposite role of AI as a “black box”, as the machine of
which “its designers cannot explain why an AI arrived at a speciﬁc decision” (Castelvecchi,
2016; Sample, 2017). Explainable AI intends to address managers’ concerns by establishing
positive attitudes and enhancing trust in the AI output through a context of transparency. This
positivity can help create a sense of facilitating understandable insights on how the machine
learning (ML) algorithm treats and transforms data to generate new insights in a hitherto
hidden, obscure space.
In transparency context, explainable AI attempts to answer a basic question regarding
the decision-making process, also considering human and machine-level explainable AI for
better decision outcomes (Yang et al., 2022). Previous literature has discussed technical
speciﬁcations regarding AI application validity; however, not many studies refer to issues of
value and productivity improvement in businesses. The low transparency and explainability
of AI output has emerged as a fundamental obstacle to achieving the anticipated beneﬁts
that would conﬁdently transform data-centric decisions into practical strategies (Chowdhury
et al., 2022a, 2022b; Makarius et al., 2020; Shin & Park, 2019). While AI-based models have
become increasingly critical for data-driven decision-making in many management sectors,
the complex nature of these models often creates a barrier to comprehending and interpreting
them. Put differently, building trust and ownership of AI processed is paramount in ensuring
their use. Despite spending time, effort, and resources on AI, many organizations cannot reap
the envisaged beneﬁts, primarily due to a lack of digital skills, cognitive skills in dealing with
AI complexity, and information-processing expertise (Makarius et al., 2020). The ability to
provide explanations for AI results will most likely eliminate bias in organizational opera-
tions, processes, and decision-making, thereby improving fairness (Satell & Sutton, 2019).
For example, the lack of transparency in AI systems that set credit card borrowing limitations
has led to companies’ and their customers’ mistrust (BBC, 2020).
Further, Chowdhury et al. (2022c) have explained the value of AI transparency in iden-
tifying and resolving ﬂaws in ML models, thereby enhancing their utility for business
organizations. Jabeur et al. (2021) exemplify this in their empirical analysis, which applied
ML models in forecasting gold price ﬂuctuations. Building on these insights, this above study
speciﬁcally concentrates on utilizing data from January 1986 to December 2019. Although
the research context is different, it demonstrates that the XGBoost algorithm has superior
prediction accuracy compared to other algorithms, as various statistical tests also supported.
They also provided a sensitivity analysis and comparisons with other established approaches
(Jabeur et al., 2021).
Furthermore, the above-mentioned study utilizes SHAP to enhance the interpretability
of the model, thereby assisting policymakers in comprehending the crucial elements that
inﬂuence gold prices. Using XGBoost with SHAP demonstrates its efﬁcacy in reliability
prediction and interpretability. The results have signiﬁcant consequences for policymakers,
investors, and researchers.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
310

This paper aims to introduce a newly developed AI-based SHAP ML model designed to
assist managers in understanding what the AI system is doing, how it generates particular
output responses, and why a given response is generated in the context of a ﬁnancial organi-
zation. The positive operational view is to help managers conﬁdently understand and assess
the accuracy of the responses they get from AI, based on their expertise. This, we assume,
will enhance their trust in using ML. The ability to consume explanations for the AI output
can also potentially reduce biases in business processes, operations, and decision-making,
thus enhancing accountability and transparentability.
In addressing the complexities surrounding the application of AI in ﬁnancial organizations,
this paper aims to bridge two main gaps in the existing literature: (1) the transparency and
explainability of AI-driven systems, and (2) the identiﬁcation of organizational resources
required to leverage AI transparency (Makarius et al., 2020; Chowdhury et al., 2022c). The
research presented in this paper, therefore, intends to ﬁll the above-mentioned knowledge
gaps, as they are graphically depicted in Fig. 1. Our study is inspired by action design
research (ADR), which is a “method for developing and evaluating ensemble IT artifacts
in an organizational environment to produce prescriptive design knowledge” (Sein et al.,
2011, p.40) within a structure that uses the research onion framework. It addresses two
issues that appear unrelated at ﬁrst glance: Firstly, it considers intervening and evaluating a
problem situation observed in a speciﬁc organizational setting, and secondly, it reﬂects on
“constructing and evaluating an IT artifact that addresses the problem category exempliﬁed
by the observed situation” (Sein et al., 2011, p.40). ADR identiﬁes the stages and concepts
embedded in problem formation for the ensemble artefacts on which it focuses (Sein et al.,
2011). This research procedure is depicted in Fig. 2 below. Inspired by the ADR methodology
(Sein et al., 2011), our study addresses this challenge taking a theoretical and practical
perspective (Bromiley & Rau, 2016; Mikalef & Gupta, 2021). ADR serves as the theoretical
lens that allows us to engage with the problem through both organizational intervention and
IT artefact construction. It aims to develop prescriptive design knowledge that enhances AI
transparency. Hence, we propose two research questions:
RQ1: How can ML algorithms, based on AI, effectively identify anomalies in ﬁnancial
organizations?
Fig. 1 The AI transparency gaps
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
311

Fig. 2 The ADR model (Source: Sein et al., 2011)
RQ2: What mechanism can be incorporated into ML algorithms to ensure transparency
and justify the output developed by these algorithms in detecting anomalies?
The answers to these research questions could improve organizational executives’ and
managers’ capacity to conﬁdently use AI-based decision support systems utilizing ML
algorithms (RQ1) and could assist these organizational executives and managers in com-
prehending how these algorithms detect anomalies in developing strategies and initiatives
towards combating fraud and money laundering (RQ2).
Answers to these concerns are crucial since organizational researchers have noted and
acknowledged the growing use and inﬂuence of AI in decision-making processes to obtain a
competitive advantage (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2020; Shrestha et al., 2019, 2021).
The importance of introducing explainable AI-based decision support systems, or of
explaining how the outputs of AI algorithms are formed, is widely acknowledged and appar-
ent (Chowdhury et al., 2022c). Such explanations are not well-established in the academic
literature on basic management and ﬁnancial issues. In the light of technological and algo-
rithmic advancements, the challenge now is for scholars to clarify how AI algorithms produce
the conclusions they present rather than being obliged to collect huge amounts of data which
they can turn into knowledge and conclusions (Kersting & Meyer, 2018; Belizón & Kieran,
2022; Gunasekaran et al., 2017). This will make it easier to establish trust in the management
and to transform AI conclusions into useful information.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
312

Our study utilizes ADR as methodology and additionally employs the research onion
framework, as given in Fig. 3, to enhance methodological rigour. Using this dual framework
technique offers a methodical strategy for clarifying the intricacies of our research questions
(Mardiana, 2020). The research onion allows us to elucidate our pragmatic philosophical per-
spective while supporting inductive reasoning, which integrates effectively with the ADR’s
naturally iterative and problem-solving nature. Utilizing this layered approach enables us to
delineate pragmatic problem-solving approaches targeted at tangible issues in the real world
while establishing a strong theoretical framework. Taking the ADR’s iterative approach, our
research employs a longitudinal methodology to encompass the necessary temporal scope
for numerous cycles of implementation and evaluation. To achieve our research aims, we
have chosen to utilize quantitative data collection approaches and employ rigorous statis-
tical analysis. Using this multifaceted methodology ensures a comprehensive and steadfast
approach that can effectively address the research questions and objectives. We frame the
implications of this work and its contributions to the ﬁnancial sector in the following ways by
combining AI literature with theoretical tenets of ADR within the research onion framework.
Considering the ADR methodology (Boxall, 1996) in anomaly detection, we have investi-
gated the explicability and transparency of AI-based ML models as a strategic resource.
Technology is frequently one of the organization’s fundamental strategic resources, crucial
to achieving and maintaining a competitive edge (Alalie et al., 2018). Adopting and utilising
a technology resource can signiﬁcantly impact the organization’s effectiveness (Wernerfelt,
1984). Technology adoption and value creation will suffer if there is a lack of trust in what
the technology can achieve (Andriopoulos & Lewis, 2009). For AI-based ML models to be a
successful strategic resource, they must include transparency (Raisch & Krakowski, 2021),
allowing decision-makers to use AI’s analytical and computational capabilities to support
and drive data-centric decision-making.
By creating an implementation framework which incorporates explainability components
in AI-based systems, we can advance the ﬁeld of AI. Such a framework in the ﬁnancial sector
will make it easier for managers to comprehend the reasoning behind decisions the AI systems
suggest. AI applications must be transparent and understandable now and in the future to
Fig. 3 The research onion (Source: Saunders et al., 2007)
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
313

supplement and support human intellect in taking decisions. This will promote ethical and
responsible AI use in businesses (Brock & Von Wangenheim, 2019; Shrestha et al., 2021).
Various AI applications have been used in other areas of practice, such as in healthcare
(Lasaga & Santhana, 2018; Šabi´c et al., 2021), stock market forecasting (Bao et al., 2017),
customer retention (Motiwalla et al., 2019), and even social media (Grandinetti, 2021; Munk
et al., 2022). In the ﬁnancial service industries, the science of detecting anomalies (Ahmed
et al., 2016) has been developed by applying different ML algorithms for credit card fraud,
mobile phone fraud, insurance claim fraud, and insider trading fraud (Sariannidis et al.,
2020). The ML approaches were used to distinguish various kinds of fraud using synthetic
data.Ourresearchdesign,therefore,proposesanewtransparentAIartefacttoidentifyinsights
with a high degree of precision for the decision-making process using a synthetic and real-
world dataset which we collected in a ﬁnancial organization. We investigated how applying
AI technologies can produce more accurate results to address these issues in the ﬁnancial
domain.
There is a growing realization that a responsible approach to AI technologies is necessary
toensurethebeneﬁcial,transparentandexplainableuseofAItechnologiesandtocomprehend
the AI concept of machines taking moral decisions. Several efforts try to propose standards
and principles for responsibly developing and using AI technologies. Rapid advances in
autonomy and ML enable AI technologies to make decisions and take actions without direct
human control. Greater autonomy must be accompanied by greater responsibility. However,
comparedtodealingwithhumansubjects,theseconceptsnecessarilyhaveadifferentmeaning
when applied to computers. Ensuring that systems are constructed responsibly contributes
to our faith in their behaviour. This also involves accountability, i.e., the capacity to explain
and justify decisions and improve transparency, Thus, technologies should support the human
ability to comprehend how systems make decisions and which data they use (Felzmann et al.,
2020).
Developments in individual autonomy and knowledge have signiﬁcantly empowered AI
technologies to determine necessary actions and operate independently (Calvo et al., 2020).
To date, algorithm development has been driven by the desire to improve performance,
but such development has resulted in opaque black boxes. Nonetheless, demands now are
that increased machine autonomy must be accompanied by increased levels of company
responsibility and the ability to explain decisions. Transparency is likely to be the foundation
of trust in AI since if humans cannot connect to how machines operate, trust falters. Putting
human values at the centre of AI technologies requires a mental shift on the part of researchers
and engineers. The objective should be to enhance transparency rather than performance,
which could imply the development of unique and fascinating algorithms (Müller, 2020).
This is the central focus of our paper.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Firstly, we present relevant back-
ground by giving a brief exposition of previous literature covering ML used in ﬁnance.
Secondly, we describe the research methodology, including how an ML model is developed
to detect anomalies, and thirdly, we evaluate and discuss the results using SHAP techniques
from the ML algorithms proposed for this research also considering how as they indicate
future research directions.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
314

2 Literature review
This section provides a comprehensive review of the existing literature pertaining to three
crucial areas: anomaly detection, ML in the realm of AI, and explainable AI. This study aims
to illuminate the current knowledge gaps, particularly regarding the application of AI for
improving data-driven decision-making and ensuring the explainability of AI algorithms.
2.1 Anomaly detection
The increasing supply of big data in the contemporary digital environment presents organi-
zations with opportunities and challenges. Despite the expanding availability of data, many
organizations still have difﬁculties with transforming raw data into practical and useful
insights. Utilizing ML algorithms in anomaly detection plays a pivotal role in bridging the
gap between data analytics and informed decision-making in the business context. Bishop
and Nasrabadi (2007) ﬁnd that this technology enables organizations to efﬁciently identify
outliers or anomalies in extensive and intricate datasets, thereby facilitating the optimization
of the decision-making process.
ML technologies have become a crucial instrument in addressing these intricacies.
Anomaly detection catalyses enhanced organizational efﬁciency by repairing the dispar-
ity between data measurements and business operations. By employing ML techniques and
specialized algorithms designed for anomaly detection, organizations can identify abnormal
patterns in massive data sets, particularly when they are confronted with non-analogous vari-
ables. In the context of the information age, ML brings a transformative paradigm change
that can signiﬁcantly improve the operational efﬁciency of diverse businesses. ML is a subset
of AI that provides a robust framework for facilitating automated learning and enhancement
through experience, which eliminates the need for manual updates (Bishop & Nasrabadi,
2006).
2.2 Machine learning
Numerous scientiﬁc disciplines rely heavily on ML and its applications permeate our every-
day lives. For example, among other applications, it is used for email spam ﬁltering, weather
forecasting, clinical ﬁndings, product suggestions, facial recognition, and fraud detection.
ML research investigates learning deﬁned as obtaining information through experience. The
ML cycle often entails gathering information and formulating a hypothesis that enables users
to make predictions or, more generally, conduct analytical actions. For PCs, experience,
or the ability to learn, is provided by data. Hence, we can deﬁne ML as the process of
extracting knowledge from data. This data-driven learning is crucial in numerous sectors,
such as ﬁnance, healthcare and education. Speciﬁcally, ML methods are broadly categorized
into supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning. Despite the ML advantages, in
the current context of multiple organizations, anomalies have occurred that could result in
money laundering, identity theft and credit card fraud in the ﬁnancial domain, medical errors
and a decreased patient survival rate in the clinical domain, as well as a decline in student
enrolment and a higher teacher attrition rate in the educational domain.
This paper uses explainable AI technologies to approach the particular problem of pre-
dicting and detecting anomalies using a certain technology, namely an ML-based model,
using a dataset of customers’ ﬁnancial transactions. We developed an automated process for
performing this task in future transactions and improving the decision-making processes.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
315

We, therefore, studied recent literature that presents a wide range of highlighted datasets, AI
technologies used to detect anomalies, and the relevant supplemental material. ML uses data
and algorithms to gradually imitate how humans interact to improve AI programs’ accuracy
(Chen et al., 2021; Jarrin et al., 2019; Sarker et al., 2021).
2.3 Explainable AI
Explainable AI is a set of techniques and strategies that enable human users to interpret and
therefore also rely on the output and results ML algorithms produce, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
The term “explainable AI” characterises a given kind of AI model, its anticipated impact,
and any potential biases. It assists in identifying model accuracy, fairness, transparency and
outcomes in AI-powered decision-making. Explainable AI is essential for a company to cre-
ate trust and conﬁdence before deploying AI models, and it facilitates adopting a responsible
approach to AI development in an organization. Organization needs to thoroughly under-
stand the AI decision-making processes, including model monitoring and AI responsibility,
rather than blindly trust them. For instance, organizations sacriﬁce rust if a model’s creators
cannot describe how, it determines credit results, nor identify which elements impacted the
results the most. The emerging ﬁeld of explainable AI can aid ﬁnancial organizations in
navigating trust and transparency concerns and provide a better understanding of their AI
governance. The ﬁeld aims to make AI models more explicable, intuitive, and intelligible
to human users without losing performance or forecast accuracy (Gunning & Aha, 2019).
Explainable AI is also a growing concern for ﬁnancial organizations who want to ensure that
their ﬁnancial personnel “reasonably comprehend” AI procedures and outputs. Explainable
AI techniques assist organizations in implementing explainability, transparency and accuracy.
Further, explainable AI ensures that organizations conduct non-biased evaluations of AI
systems. The explainable AI techniques explain and interpret AI models. Also, the system
and its techniques synchronize methods and strategies to enable AI technology. These meth-
ods and techniques can be explained through data visualization, the logistic regression ML
model, decision tree ML models, the neural network learning model, SHAP, and LIME, each
contributing to human users comprehending the model outcomes.
Bussmann et al. (2021) offer an empirical assessment of this concept in their study on credit
risk management in the context of peer-to-peer lending. The approach incorporates SHAP
values and correlation networks to group comparable risk proﬁles using a dataset including
15,000 small and medium-sized ﬁrms (SMEs). The empirical investigation demonstrates
that borrowers, regardless of their risk level, can be classiﬁed based on common ﬁnancial
characteristics, which improves the accuracy and dependability of credit score forecasts.
In a different context, i.e., in solar energy forecasting, Khan et al. (2022) illustrates the
adaptability and efﬁcacy of advanced ML techniques. Utilizing the DSE-XGBstacked ensem-
ble approach, they integrated artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) and LSTM base models. The
Fig. 4 Explainable AI process
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
316

technique was tested and veriﬁed using four separate datasets and a range of meteorolog-
ical circumstances. Compared to standard models such as ANN, LSTM and Bagging, the
approach demonstrates an improvement in Rˆ2 values ranging from 10 to 12%. To enhance
the outcome’s interpretability, these researchers implemented the SHAP framework, which
provided insight into the model’s uncertainties and the elements that had a signiﬁcant impact.
The challenge of typically high computing demands associated with SHAP, especially when
dealing with large datasets and deep learning models, could be mitigated by incorporating it
with XGBoost. Using XGBoost’s rapid convergence, it was possible to develop an efﬁcient
model informed by the data.
The idea of transparency encompasses the speciﬁcs of service rationale and other sorts
of data management involving sensible data and/or the potential repercussions of the system
indirectly gaining user knowledge (Ananny & Crawford, 2018). The signiﬁcance of algo-
rithmic transparency became apparent in resolving the matter of Facebook’s role in Russian
interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election. The concepts of explainability that have
become topical relate to whether stakeholders can interpret and comprehend the system’s
operation and results. Users are not required to have comprehensive and transparent access
to a dataset and the underlying algorithms if a qualiﬁed, trusted professional or entity pro-
vides them with easily accessible information on the system. When people understand how
a system operates, they are more likely to use it correctly and to have faith in its designers
and developers (Lee & Boynton, 2017).
In recent years, ﬁnancial services have rapidly started to utilize AI technologies. This
research paper is the ﬁrst to propose transparent AI technologies that emphasize the
researchers’ obligation to explain not only the algorithm’s inputs and outputs but also which
decisions the machines make, and why. Since the objective is to comprehend how an algo-
rithmic system arrives at decisions, we ensure that the model can be described, can detect
anomalies, and can perform a meta-analysis on ML application in a ﬁnancial context (Nelson,
2019).
2.4 Knowledge gap
Although the ﬁnance literature offers conceptual frameworks on AI applications, we do not
ﬁnd demonstrations of these frameworks being actually implemented in empirical studies
employing AI-based algorithms to comprehend the limitations presented by these algorithms’
lacking transparency for decision-makers. A few reports on AI frameworks incorporate
explainability in the ﬁnancial literature, as well as in the health and educational domains. This
calls for additional research in the ﬁeld of explainable AI to enhance conﬁdence in the auto-
mated analytic capabilities AI technologies provide in the digital era and to supplement such
AI with managers’ perceptive and social intelligence, both centred on AI’s intangible exper-
tise than can expedite data-driven strategic decision-making. Enhancing the transparency
and explainability of AI algorithm responses by providing useful insight into the algorithms’
accuracy, relevance and methodology can help to increase managers’ trust in these models.
Therefore, globally, and locally, AI transparency can facilitate strategic changes in ﬁnancial
processes, decision-making, and policies.
We eventually propose an ML-based solution artefact that can help other researchers create
ML models that will assist in detecting anomalies. We validate this research by comparing
two ML models of which the codes are provided in GitHub (https://github.com/MachineLea
rning-UON/ML-Financial_transaction.git).
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
317

2.5 Existing solutions and limitations
Several studies have investigated anomaly detection across multiple domains they often lack
code transparency or applicability. For instance, Chang and Chang (2010) use X-Means
clustering approaches to identify changes in the data that indicate fraudulent behaviour in
online auction fraud. However, this experimental work does not provide a coding strategy
to help other researchers and it does not explain how the results were generated. Le Khac
and Kechadi’s (2010) study employ K-Means ML algorithms to identify money laundering
in CE banks. However, the research is limited to money laundering at CE banks without
covering model validation. In a similar context, Glancy and Yadav’s (2011) study presents
a computational model to detect fraud in ﬁnancial reporting; however, elements such as
transactions, credit cards, and the absence of algorithmic openness, are not addressed. Ngai
et al.’s (2011) literature analysis indicates that logistic models, neural networks, Bayesian
belief networks, and decision trees are the most often employed strategies for detecting
fraud. The research examines four categories of fraud, namely those in banking, insurance,
securities, and commodities, but it provides neither a comprehensive understanding of fraud
nor explains how the models could detect the fraud.
Chang and Chang (2012) present a cost-effective method for early identiﬁcation of online
auction fraud. This study’s focus is limited to online auction fraud, yet the proposed model
does not demonstrate that it can also be utilized to detect other unknown facts. Another study,
Ahmed et al. (2016), provides a comprehensive overview of several clustering approaches
for detecting anomalies and comparing methodologies. Their analysis compares clustering
algorithms but provides no ﬁndings. Further, it lacks an experimental study to determine
the optimal strategy. Similarly, Abdallah et al. (2016) did a survey leading to a systematic
and exhaustive review of the obstacles that hamper the operation of fraud detection and
prevention systems. The study focuses only on the factors that impede fraud detection and
prevention systems’ performance and delivers conclusions based on previous research. There
is no experimental study validating the outcomes.
West and Bhattacharya (2016) show the results of a survey on using classiﬁcation algo-
rithms to detect ﬁnancial fraud while also analysing the algorithm’s weaknesses and strengths.
The study focuses solely on classifying various kinds of ML, examining the literature from
2004 to 2014 that could have inﬂuenced the survey results. Yaram’s (2016) research pro-
poses employing document clustering and classiﬁcation algorithms to detect insurance claim
fraud; however, the research focuses on fraud detection without describing the type of fraud.
Additionally, the study compares ML algorithms without recommending any speciﬁc algo-
rithm for future implementation. Ahmed et al. (2017) analyses the underlying assumptions
of ﬁnding unusual untold facts using partition-based and hierarchical-based clustering algo-
rithms on historical Australian Security Exchange (ASX) data. The research describes the
assumptions; however, it provides neither the local outlier factor (LOF) nor the clustering-
based multi-variate Gaussian outlier factor (CMGOS) codes. Therefore, the study could not
conﬁrm whether these strategies are effective. Bao et al. (2017) present a deep learning
framework that predicts stock prices by combining wavelet transformations (WT), stacked
auto-encoders (SAEs), and long and short-term memory (LSTM). The research is limited to
the time-series component of ﬁnance.
Huang et al. (2018) introduces the CoDetect framework for detecting ﬁnancial fraud
by analysing network and feature data. With a focus on ﬁnancial fraud, numerous other
types of fraud that can occur in a ﬁnancial institution are not identiﬁed, which could deliver
ambiguous ﬁndings. A review by Ryman-Tubb et al. (2018) presents a survey on credit card
fraud detection, identifying eight strategies that could be used to detect credit card fraud in the
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
318

ﬁnancial industry. The research focuses on detecting fraudulent card payments but ignores
other types of fraud, such as money laundering, identity theft, account takeover, and risk
modelling fraud. Further, Chalapathy and Chawla (2019) investigate credit card transactions
using deep learning. This instrument demonstrates that the absence of consistent patterns
presents the largest obstacle in combating credit card fraud. The paper discusses twelve
distinct models without endorsing any particular model for detecting anomalies. Magomedov
et al.’s (2018) analysis provides an anomaly detection solution for fraud control based on
ML and a graph database. The article gives experimental results utilizing Random Forest
and MinMaxScaler but cannot support these algorithms’ ability to detect anomalies in fraud
management. Pourhabibi et al.’s (2020) research outlines the graph-based anomaly detection
method. They examine and evaluate articles published between 2007 and 2018, which we
deem too wide to yield excellent ﬁndings.
3 Research methodology
The methodology we employ in this paper is based on the information system literature
used to develop a predictive analytics data science resource for qualitative researchers
(Ciechanowski et al., 2020), the fundamentals of using machine and deep learning algo-
rithms (Shrestha et al., 2021), and ML models used for predicting (Hwang et al., 2020). We
provide a framework for deploying ML that incorporates explainable AI to detect anomalies.
Many methods to detect anomalies are in use, but the demand to process them in real-time
poses one of the greatest challenges (Chalapathy & Chawla, 2019). The existing approaches’
accuracy in detecting anomalies is generally lower than that of classiﬁcation or regression
ML-based models. Existing approaches are also time-consuming and slow in identifying
the patterns in ﬁnancial transactions. Another challenge is that the proﬁles of common and
abnormal transactions depend on consistent change, whereas existing information about
abnormal behaviour is regularly skewed and is, therefore, unreliable. Although many ML
approaches have been introduced over the past few years, we discuss only those that ﬁt
our requirements for building an artefact. The term ‘solution artefact’ refers to “a thing
that has been or can be transformed into material existence as an artiﬁcially made object
(e.g., model, instantiation) or process (e.g., method, software). Many IT artifacts have some
degree of abstraction but can be readily converted to material existence; for example, an
algorithm converted to operational software” (Gregor & Hevner, 2013, p.341). Kafai (1996)
developed an artefact by establishing a link between learning and designing, whereas we
want an artefact with the potential to create operational software in the ﬁnancial industry to
support their regular business.
AI refers to a collection of algorithms and methods that can automatically incorporate,
process, and learn from data and then utilize such learnt knowledge to accomplish particular
goals and activities (Haenlein & Kaplan, 2019). AI-based applications can aid in anticipating
organization development, i.e., predicting anomalous ﬁnancial transactions or increases in
sales. However, these applications lack transparency and explainability, making it challenging
for organizational managers to accept the AI results (Bieda, 2020; Chowdhury et al., 2022a;
Rai, 2020). From a transparency perspective, it is regarded as ideal that AI should promote
the disclosure of how data is incorporated in an algorithm, analysed by the algorithm, and
used to gain knowledge (Cheng & Hackett, 2019). The problem with explainability is that
organizational managers do not grasp how the AI-based ML algorithm processes input data
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
319

to produce outputs, either because the algorithm is conﬁdential or because the mathematical
computational models are difﬁcult to comprehend (Shin & Park, 2019).
3.1 Proposed ML-based solution artefact
ThesolutionweproposeconsistsofthestepssetoutinFig.5below,whichshouldhelpprepare
the ML-based model to detect anomalies. The artefact model is constructed by following the
steps as illustrated.
3.2 Data acquisition
This study utilizes a systematic methodology for collecting and preparing data, acknowl-
edging its crucial signiﬁcance in constructing a customized model suitable for predictive or
classiﬁcation purposes. We used two datasets to conduct a full evaluation of the efﬁcacy of
the model we built. The initial dataset was acquired from Kaggle, a popular repository for
ML resources, while the second real-world dataset was procured through an actual ﬁnan-
cial organization. We recognized that, as elsewhere, our raw data necessitated signiﬁcant
pre-processing from databases, ﬁles, or other sources, regardless of origin, because factors
such as missing values, extreme data points, and disorganized textual or noisy data could be
present and confounding. Therefore, we implemented meticulous data preparation protocols
to guarantee the utmost quality and dependability of the datasets included in our research.
3.3 Data pre-processing—extraction, wrangling and visualization
Data pre-processing is one of ML’s most important steps because it helps build more accurate
ML models. There is an 80/20 rule in ML, according to which 80% of the time is spent on pre-
processing data and 20% on analysis. Pre-processing a dataset means cleaning the raw data,
carrying out data wrangling and visualization using data conversion, sometimes ignoring the
missing values, at other times ﬁlling in the missing values, and detecting outliers to convert
raw data into a clean dataset, which can then be used to train the model. In real life, raw data
is often messy due to missing, noisy and inconsistent data.
Data extraction consists of collecting or retrieving disparate types of data from various
sources, many of which might be poorly organized or completely unstructured. Systematic
extraction makes it possible to consolidate, process and reﬁne data to be stored in a central
location for transformation. Data wrangling consists of cleaning and converting ’raw data’
into a format that enables convenient consumption. Data analysis involves selecting and
ﬁltering the data needed to prepare the model. Data visualization consists of translating huge
datasets into charts or graphs for presentation. Data visualization enables users to identify
data trends, recognize outliers, and impart new insights on the information represented in the
dataset.
3.3.1 Training and testing algorithms
The training algorithm is prepared in the training dataset to understand the patterns and
rules that govern the data, whereas the testing dataset determines the model’s accuracy. In
other words, a split training and testing algorithm is used to estimate the ML algorithm’s
performance when it is used to make predictions on the dataset, not to train the model. This
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
320

Machine Learning Algorithms Artefact
Data Acquisition
Data Extraction, Wrangling 
and Visualization
Train Algorithm
Supervised Learning
Unsupervised Learning
Test Algorithm
Model Implementation
Fig. 5 Proposed ML framework
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
321

Fig. 6 Training and testing techniques with a ‘sufﬁciently large’ dataset
fast and simple technique enables the results to compute an ML algorithm’s performance for a
predictive modelling problem. This technique can also be used in classiﬁcation or regression
problems by dividing the data into two subsets, as shown in Fig. 5. The ﬁrst aim is to ﬁt the
model. Therefore, we refer to the ﬁrst subset as the training dataset. The second subset is not
used to train the model; rather, the input element of the dataset is fed into the model, and
then the resulting predictions are contrasted with the expected values.
The training dataset is used to ﬁt the ML model. The testing dataset is used to evaluate
the ﬁtted ML model. The training and the testing algorithm’s objective is to gauge the ML
model’sperformanceonanewdataset,nottotrainthemodel.Thepossibilityofadatasetbeing
‘sufﬁciently large’ is explicit in every predictive modelling problem. It implies enough data to
split the dataset into separate training and testing datasets, where every dataset appropriately
portrays the problem domain. An appropriate representation of the problem domain implies
enough records to cover all the common and uncommon causes of patterns. Notably, the train-
test technique is not appropriate if the dataset is small since, then, dividing it into training
and testing datasets is problematic. A small dataset does not offer enough information in the
preparation dataset for the model to learn an effective mapping of input and output, and it
does not provide enough data in a testing dataset to evaluate the model’s performance (Fig. 6).
The train-test technique has one fundamental conﬁguration parameter: the size of the
training and testing datasets. This is most commonly expressed as a percentage between 0
and 1 for the training and testing datasets. For example, a training set with a size of 0.67
(67%) means that the remaining percentage of 0.33 (33%) is assigned to the testing set. The
split rate depends on the computational case of the training model or the computational case
when the model of the project’s objectives has to be evaluated. The most commonly used
split percentages are:
Training: 80%, Testing: 20%
Training: 67%, Testing: 33%
Training: 50%, Testing: 50%
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
322

3.3.2 Model implementation
Suppose that the speed and accuracy of the ML model are acceptable. In such a case, the
model should be implemented in the real system in the target operational environment of the
ﬁnancial organization. This can be done using the following:
A trained model ready to deploy — save the model into a ﬁle to be further loaded and used
by the web service.
A web service that gives a purpose for a model to be used in practice. The common platforms
used to deploy trained models include Flask, Docker, Django, and Flask GitHub.
A cloud service provider — a special cloud server required to deploy the application. The
services that can be used for simplicity include Heroku, AWS, and GCP.
3.3.3 Artefact evaluation
One of the greatest challenges in research involving ﬁnancial organizations is the absence
of publicly accessible datasets. This is mostly due to privacy issues because the existing
datasets can contain sensitive and personal information on the clients. Below we list publicly
accessible datasets that, to the best of our knowledge, are not obsolete. Figure 7 shows the
synthetic dataset processes with two pipelines, taking Gregor and Hevner’s (2013) experi-
mental evaluation as guideline. The ﬁrst pipeline obtains the data, analyses the data using
data wrangling and visualization, prepares the model using the train-test technique and then
carries out an evaluation.
This model can be prepared accurately and speedily, after which we move to the second
pipeline, which helps the prepared ML model to detect anomalies in the new dataset. Var-
ious organizations can develop this to automate anomaly detection. Our study is limited to
implementing the prepared model because there are no publicly available sources that will
deploy a fully equipped ML model.
The freely accessible data sourced from the Kaggle website contains 6,362,620 data
instances built from 11 features to present ﬁnancial transactions identiﬁed as follows: step,
type, amount, nameOrig, oldbalanceOrg, newbalanceOrig, nameDest, oldbalanceDest, new-
balanceDest, isFraud, isFlaggedFraud. The ﬁnancial transaction dataset ’isFraud’ feature is
annotated such that ’0’ represents a ’normal transaction’ and ’1’ an ’anomalous transaction’
(Fig. 8).
Fig. 7 Process ﬂow of the proposed ML modelling
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
323

Fig. 8 Synthetic data dictionaries
Fig. 9 Process ﬂow of the ML
modelling
We have renamed some columns for clariﬁcation and to show the new features, as in Fig. 9:
We use common libraries shown in Fig. 10 and some additional libraries as required for
the outcome.
We have plotted some graphs to visualize the dataset. If the correlation values in the
heatmap need to be seen, we note that these features are highly correlated: newBalanceDest
and oldBalanceDest, newBalanceOrig and oldBalanceOrig. Hence, we can remove one of
the two features from dataset to balance the corelation. In future, we could remove old-
BalanceDest and oldBalanceOrig. Figure 11 presents the visual explanation of the heatmap
using some features, whereas Fig. 12 displays the heatmap plotting the amount of money and
isFraud features.
The graph in Fig. 13 presents the relationship between the number of transactions and the
days, hours and weeks.
The graph in Fig. 14 below shows the transaction when a fraudulent incident happened
(yellow graph) and when no fraudulent incident happened (blue graph), marking the time as
during which hours of the day, then which day of the month, and then which weeks of the
month.
Besides adding additional features using One-hot encoding to simplify the features pro-
vided, this dataset does not need any pre-processing because it is already in a clean format.
The ‘step’ feature extended to three directly encoded features, such as ‘hour’, presents the
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
324

Fig. 10 ML common basic libraries
Fig. 11 Heatmap using a synthetic dataset for anomaly detection
number of hours from the ﬁrst transaction in a 24-h time cycle with a range of 0–23. The
‘step_day’ feature represents the day in a month with the feature range 1–30, and ‘step_week’
represents the day in a seven-day week cycle with a feature range of 1–7. Another ‘hot’ encod-
ing is carried out on the ’type’ feature, which creates another ﬁve columns: type_CASH_IN,
type_CASH_OUT, type_DEBIT, type_PAYMENT, and type_TRANSFER.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
325

Fig. 12 Heatmap using amount
and is Fraud
Fig. 13 Graph presenting the number of transactions according to days, hours and weeks
Fig. 14 Fraud and no fraud during hours, days and weeks
The synthetic dataset has been extended, and the new dataset consists of 6,362,620 and
23 instances. The box plot has been created in the data visualization process, as presented in
Fig. 14 below. It shows that the number of outliers for all features is high, and therefore, the
contamination factor used in later methods should not be too low. The box plots also show
that none of the dataset features are distributed uniformly, while the box plot indicates that
the features amount, oldbalanceOrg, newbalanceOrig, oldbalanceDest, and newbalanceDest
are highly skewed and should be further processed before use in training ML models.
We performed the ML algorithms (see Fig. 15) below to detect an anomaly and then
presented the results. The list of supervised ML algorithms includes K-Neighbors Classiﬁer,
GaussianNB (Gaussian Naïve Bayes), Logistic Regression, SVC (Support Vector Classiﬁer),
Decision Tree Classiﬁer, Random Forest Classiﬁer, and Gradient Boosting Classiﬁer.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
326

Fig. 15 ML algorithms used in the
model
Figure 16 below presents the accuracy, precision and recall scores in the training dataset
(LHS) and accuracy, precision and recall in the testing dataset (RHS).
To evaluate the validity of the proposed ML framework given in Fig. 17, we used the ML
algorithm to detect anomalies in real-world datasets and shared the results on GitHub (https://
github.com/MachineLearning-UON/ML-Financial_transaction.git). The dataset consists of
8963 instances and 26 features which are deﬁned as: ’id’, ’trans_type’, ’trans_ref’, ’sta-
tus’, ’ppan’, ’cts’, ’bsb’, ’account_no’, ’indicator’, ’trans_code’, ’currency’, ’amount’,
’description’, ’lodgement_ref’, ’remitter_bsb’, remitter_account_no’, remitter_name’, with-
hold_tax_amount’, ’trans_data_id’, ’stan’, ‘post_date’, ’approval_code’, ’hold_number’,
‘exchange_rate’, ’ext_trans_no’, ’error_msg’.
The data are in a raw format and need time to be cleansed and analysed. We carried out
One-hot encoding on the ’trans_type’ feature, which added more features to the dataset and
removed others that did not contribute to the outcome. We also carried out data visualization
and created the heatmap shown in Fig. 18.
Figure 19 below shows the outliers in the amount feature since no outcome was provided.
Then, it divided the amount into ﬁve parts ranging from 0 to 2000, 2000 to 4000, 4000 to
6000, 6000 to 8000, and then 8000 to 10,000. Next, we predicted that instances in the amount
0–2000 category are normal transactions. Using different algorithms in the more-than-2000
categories would be deﬁned as an anomaly, as shown in the three Figs. 19, 20 and 21 below.
Figure 19 shows the box plot graph using the seaborn library.
We carried out an unsupervised K-means ML because no outcome is given in the dataset.
Figure 20 below shows that after 2000 transactions, one was detected as an anomaly.
We used another isolation Forest unsupervised algorithm, shown in Fig. 21 to compare
the results. The ﬁgure shows the inliers and outliers in the amount of data.
In this research, we used the SHAP framework for explainable AI, speciﬁcally in the
context of anomaly detection within ﬁnancial organizations. Based on the principles of
cooperative game theory, SHAP ensures a consistent and equitable attribution of feature
importance. In contrast to alternative global interpretability techniques such as feature impor-
tance and partial dependence plots and to local methods like LIME, SHAP offers both
local and global interpretability. Its simultaneous consideration of transactional and systemic
aspects provides valuable insights for comprehensive anomaly identiﬁcation. The SHAP
method effectively captures complex feature interactions while maintaining a model-agnostic
approach. Whereas global approaches typically have limited local interpretative capabilities
and LIME may produce inconsistent outcomes, SHAP emerges as a comprehensive and
computationally efﬁcient approach that is particularly well-suited to addressing the intricate
complexities associated with ﬁnancial anomaly identiﬁcation (Elshawi et al., 2019; Khan
et al., 2022). SHAP enables a uniﬁed approach to predictions regardless of the ML model
employed, as Fig. 22 below shows in demonstrating the outcome. Here, the diagonals repre-
sent the SHAP values for the main effects, while the off diagonals represent the interaction
effects. Similar to the beeswarm plot, the colours are determined by the feature value for
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
327

Fig. 16 Machine Learning algorithms score
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
328

Fig. 17 Real-world dataset dictionaries
Fig. 18 The heatmap on real-world dataset detecting the untold fact
the y-axis feature. Examining interaction effects between variables inside an ML model pro-
vides signiﬁcant insight into the collaborative inﬂuence of features on prediction outcomes.
The analysed K-Means model reveals a notable interaction effect between the variables
“trans_ref” and “description”. The signiﬁcance and characteristics of this interaction effect
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
329

Fig. 19 The outliers in amounts of the transactions
Fig. 20 Detecting anomalies in the transaction data
indicate that the association between these two variables greatly inﬂuences the model’s pre-
dictive performance, exceeding what could be explained by examining each component
separately.
4 Discussion
AIcanequipﬁnancialmanagerswithanalyticaltoolstofacilitatedata-drivendecision-making
by leveraging their intuitive, social, and strategic intelligence regarding their interaction with
socio-economic systems and tacit experience (Brock & Von Wangenheim, 2019; Morse,
2020). According to Choo (1991) uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity are the three obsta-
cles that hamper organizational decision-making. However, data-driven decision-making
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
330

Fig. 21 Detecting anomalies in the amount of data
Fig. 22 Shap interaction value
also demands imaginative foresight, an awareness of an organisation’s complex social and
political processes, and social methods such as persuasion and bargaining to manage ambi-
guity and uncertainty. It seems improbable that AI, at its current level, can replicate human
problem-solving in all these domains. Additionally, sense-making, i.e., interpreting informa-
tion (Weick, 1995), and sense-giving, i.e., communicating the outcomes of sense-making, are
of the utmost importance for managers aiming to make decisions based on data and analytics.
However, opaque AI systems and a lack of AI literacy among managers make understanding
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
331

the logic underlying the automatic recommendations AI systems give, challenging (Choud-
hury et al., 2020).
The preceding section’s ﬁndings provide evidence of explainable AI and give signiﬁ-
cant insight into how the AI provides distinct complementing traits required for effective
data-driven decision-making to detect anomalies for future fraud prevention. Analytical and
intuitive methods are optimal for formulating data-based decisions (Hung, 2003; Martin
& Martin, 2009). In this context, representing AI output responses derived from incorpo-
rated transparency will assist managers in comprehending these outputs’ signiﬁcance. Such
understanding that results from AI transparency, will be crucial for strengthening trust in AI
systems, allowing people to make more efﬁcient and accurate judgments. Given the rise of
AI-based solutions in ﬁnancial business processes and practices (Vrontis et al., 2022), our
research adds a paradigm for incorporating transparency into AI-based systems, which can
boost managers’ trust.
4.1 Contribution to theory
Our research expands the theoretical framework by applying the ADR lens to investigate
explainable AI-based ML models for anomaly detection in ﬁnance. This perspective is
intended to solve a fundamental difﬁculty posed by AI technologies that are difﬁcult to
comprehend and that prevents them from becoming a vital strategic resource for businesses.
Adopting ADR highlights the signiﬁcance of technology as a strategic resource for sustain-
ing a competitive advantage in the research onion framework (Alturki, 2021; Bilandzic &
Venable, 2011). Regardless of how effective the decision support technology or model may
be, it will fail without managerial adoption and trust. Consequently, explainable AI-based
ML models can enable the conﬁdent realization of their value, overcoming trust concerns
connected to AI output in the managerial decision-making arena, which are caused by the
opaqueness of AI algorithms (Andriopoulos & Lewis, 2009; Raisch & Krakowski, 2021). In
this study, the ADR viewpoint moves the focus away from adopting new-age technologies
and tools (AI systems) to the trustworthiness of AI technology (via transparency and explain-
ability) as a strategic intangible resource for achieving sustained corporate competitiveness.
Explainable AI will enhance the capability of ﬁnance managers within organizations to
comprehend, interpret, and explain automated outputs, enabling them to understand why
anomalies occur and to devise effective prevention measures. It will also boost managers’
conﬁdence in the AI’s output which delivers answers, thus producing new information for
process and resource efﬁciency strategizing (Tambe et al., 2019). This will increase the
organization’s potential to develop capabilities that favourably impact employee and business
productivity (Makarius et al., 2020). In addition, AI model defects can be easily recognized,
evaluated, and systematically corrected, thereby enhancing the accuracy of output answers
(Satell & Sutton, 2019). Lastly, explainable AI will enhance justice and accountability, as
managers can explain the plans, practises, and policies developed based on AI output to the
workforce.
4.2 Contribution to practice and policy
Our study provides practical insights for developing AI systems by emphasizing the
imperative of incorporating cross-disciplinary teams. Teams consisting of data scientists,
AI professionals and domain specialists play a crucial role in understanding technical and
business aspects of AI applications. (In addition to domain experience, the implementation
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
332

team needs to grasp the relevance of the data utilized in the analysis and to assess the cor-
rectness of the suggestions to evaluate the algorithms training process’s efﬁcacy (Keding,
2021). While the demand for data scientists, ML specialists, and robot engineers is rising,
creativity, leadership, emotional intelligence, domain expertise, and tacit experience are the
essential skills required to push AI transparency and ultimately to enhance ML algorithms
(Correani et al., 2020; Jarrahi, 2018). This study refers to areas where AI can augment rather
than replace people in decision-making, showing how collective complementary intelligence
might evolve AI models through explainability resulting form AI transparency. Our ﬁndings
lead to suggestions for organizations contemplating AI implementations, as follows:
Organizations should ﬁrst evaluate the necessary decision-making activities, determine
the essential skills and competencies required to execute these jobs, and ﬁnally make strategic
decisions that divide the tasks between people and AI.
Investments in AI-literacy and AI-skills training for managers will help businesses gain
the beneﬁts of a human-AI symbiosis from explainable AI. This will help to consolidate
and maximize the suitable use of human talents such as creativity, communication, empathy,
negotiation, intuition, persuasion and negotiation, which are necessary for the organization
to grow and which currently show up the limitations of AI (Davenport & Bean, 2017).
To strike a good balance between investing in intelligent technology and preserving estab-
lished business procedures, organizations will need to understand which skills managers use
in decision-making, as well as evaluate the AI limitations within a given environment (Dav-
enport, 2018). Additionally, new AI governance mechanisms are required to ensure that
automated decisions adhere to legislative criteria and are ethical. This will result in a redeﬁ-
nition and reconsideration of the decision-making process regarding accountability, rewards,
risks, investments, and long-term viability (Kiron & Schrage, 2019). In the organizational
policy context, we present novel governance methods to ensure that regulatory norms of AI
outputs are ethical and adhered to. This will also lead to organizational decision-making
procedures being reconﬁgured.
4.3 Limitations of the study and future research directions
Our research is not without limitations. Primarily, emphasizing the ﬁnancial sector raises
concerns about the applicability of our ﬁndings to other businesses, which indicates a need
for further investigation. Further, managers’ different levels of AI literacy could be a notable
obstacle to the efﬁcient implementation and use of AI technologies in organizational decision-
making.
These constraints point to numerous possible directions for further research. A compelling
research direction is to expand the scope of our explainable AI models to encompass a wide
range of industries. Thereby our AI models’ effectiveness in various organizational settings
could be assessed. A further area of potential exploration is one examining the impact of
managers’ AI literacy levels on adopting and proﬁciently utilizing explainable AI systems.
Additionally,werecommendthatfutureresearchendeavoursinvestigatetheseMLmodels’
potential efﬁcacy in analysing diverse datasets to reveal latent information or anomalies. This
couldberelevantincaseswhereoutcomesarepredetermined(observedinsupervisedlearning
models) or entirely uncertain (observed in unsupervised learning models).
The recent progress in deep learning technology presents compelling opportunities, par-
ticularly in its potential to uncover previously concealed information in ﬁnancial transactions
by identifying intricate hidden patterns. This promising investigation opportunity particularly
concerns the dynamic ﬁeld of ﬁnancial technology. In summary, our study adds signiﬁcantly
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
333

to the current body of literature and also stimulates further investigation, presenting various
avenues for both theoretical and empirical enquiry.
5 Conclusion
The globalization of multinational corporations and their activities have resulted in strategic
management and retention of human resources becoming crucial factors in organizations’
overall performance and productivity. Despite the interest in and claims surrounding the
beneﬁts of AI systems in ﬁnancial processes, creating regulatory compliance, detecting fraud,
improving investment appraisal, and reducing operational costs and risks, we have limited
research on how to achieve explainable AI (Budhwar & Malik, 2020; Budhwar et al., 2022).
To adopt AI in management decision-making, developing the foundations of trust in these
systems is required. This has become a focal point in ﬁnance and general ﬁnance research
literature. This article contributes to the ﬁnance literature by presenting an implementation
framework that demonstrates the use of SHAP in explaining the illustrative instance of
AI-based ML models’ anomaly detection. Thereby we demonstrate a method to enhance
AI transparency and explainability. These explanations will increase the dependability and
credibility of AI-based ML models among ﬁnance managers and executives, thus improving
the effectiveness and efﬁciency of data-driven strategic ﬁnancial decision-making to produce
long-term value for organizations.
AI technologies are used extensively in data analysis, producing different classiﬁcation
and regression techniques. However, having reviewed the related works, we structured our
experiment to explain how AI technologies are used transparently to prepare ML algorithms
in detecting anomalies for decision-making. We conclude our work with a transparent assess-
ment and brief explanation of the proposed ML-based analytical artefacts model, the proposed
model’s results, and the implications this study has for further research.
We developed a new explainable AI technology, an ML-based artefact to detect anomalies,
as shown through the ML framework, to improve our knowledge of how anomalies can
be detected using synthetic and real-world datasets. With the transparent AI technology,
utilizing supervised and unsupervised ML techniques, we explained both synthetic and real-
world datasets and developed ML-based artefacts. The experimental case studies offered
methodological steps that any design researcher could follow in designing data analytics. We
recognized that the SVC and decision tree methods presented the most accurate results in the
training and testing the synthetic dataset’s data. This ML framework can be put to industrial
use and used in academic research because all the ML-based algorithms are transparent
on GitHub for its reusability and further applications (https://github.com/MachineLearning-
UON/ML-Financial_transaction.git).
Gregor and Hevner (2013) provided four quadrants to categorize research design, vari-
ously named improvement, invention, routine design, and exaptation. The ﬁrst research type
develops a new solution for known problems (providing research opportunities and knowl-
edge contribution); the second invents new solutions for new issues (again providing research
opportunities and knowledge contribution); the third applies known solutions to known prob-
lems (providing no major knowledge contribution); the fourth extends known solutions to
new situations (also providing research opportunities and knowledge contribution). Accord-
ing to these four study contribution quadrants, this research falls in the ﬁrst, the improvement
quadrant. Our study, therefore, proposes a new solution for known problems, which is to
detect anomalies in customer transactions in ﬁnancial organizations.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
334

The study’s contribution is three-fold: First, limited research has attempted to capture
ﬁnancial transaction behaviour. We investigated a synthetic data set and a real-world dataset
of a ﬁnancial organization in capturing ﬁnancial transactions to detect anomalies using ADR
methodology in the research onion framework. Second, we proposed a ﬁve-step ML frame-
work that should enable new researchers in this ﬁeld to use a similar analytical design using
supervised and unsupervised ML. Third, we developed an explainable AI technology-based
ML model with algorithms in which seven supervised ML routines are carried out, i.e.,
we used the KNeighbors classiﬁer, GaussianNB, Logistic Regression, SVC, Decision Tree
classiﬁer, Random Forest classiﬁer, Gradient Boosting classiﬁer, and two unsupervised ML
systems – K-Means and Isolation Forest. This is an ML problem-solving solution strategy for
developing further analytical solutions. We, therefore, argue that this paper makes a unique
contribution.
Acknowledgements The author(s) received ﬁnancial support, access to an operational payment platform, and
access to data for the research from the Novatti Group Ltd, Melbourne, Australia. The listed third author
contributed to the study by supplying anonymized transactional big data without disclosing human identities
or personal information, so that none would be compromised. All researchers ensured the ethical integrity of
the research.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interests The author(s) declare no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdallah, A., Maarof, M. A., & Zainal, A. (2016). Fraud detection system: A survey. Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, 68, 90–113.
Ahmed, M., Choudhury, N., & Uddin, S. (2017). Anomaly detection on big data in ﬁnancial markets. Paper
presented at the 2017 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis
and Mining (ASONAM).
Ahmed, M., Mahmood, A. N., & Islam, M. R. (2016). A survey of anomaly detection techniques in ﬁnancial
domain. Future Generation Computer Systems, 55, 278–288.
Alalie, H. M., Harada, Y., & Noor, I. M. (2018). A resource-based view: How information technology creates
sustainable competitive advantage to improve organizations. Journal of Advance Management Research,
6(12), 1–5.
Al-Anqoudi, Y., Al-Hamdani, A., Al-Badawi, M., & Hedjam, R. (2021). Using machine learning in business
process re-engineering. Big Data and Cognitive Computing, 5(4), 61.
Alturki, R. (2021). Research onion for smart IoT-enabled mobile applications. Scientiﬁc Programming, 2021,
1–9.
Ananny, M., & Crawford, K. (2018). Seeing without knowing: Limitations of the transparency ideal and its
application to algorithmic accountability. New Media & Society, 20(3), 973–989.
Andriopoulos, C., & Lewis, M. W. (2009). Exploitation–exploration tensions and organizational ambidexterity:
Managing paradoxes of innovation. Organization Science, 20(4), 696–717.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
335

Arrieta, A. B., Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A., Tabik, S., Barbado, A., García, S., Gil-López, S.,
Molina, D., Benjamins, R., Chatila, R., & Herrera, F. (2020). Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI):
Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI. Information Fusion, 58,
82–115.
Bao, W., Yue, J., & Rao, Y. (2017). A deep learning framework for ﬁnancial time series using stacked autoen-
coders and long-short term memory. PLoS ONE, 12(7), e0180944.
BBC. (2020). Apple’s ‘sexist’ credit card investigated by US regulator. Retrieved September 20, 2020, from
https://www.bbc.com/news/business-50365609
Belizón, M. J., & Kieran, S. (2022). Human resources analytics: A legitimacy process. Human Resource
Management Journal, 32(3), 603–630.
Bieda, L. (2020). How organizations can build analytics agility. MIT Sloan Management Review, Issue October,
2020, Available: https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/how-organizations-can-build-analytics-agility/
Bilandzic, M., & Venable, J. (2011). Towards participatory action design research: Adapting action research
and design science research methods for urban informatics. Journal of Community Informatics, 7(3),
1–15.
Bishop, C. M., & Nasrabadi, N. M. (2006). Pattern recognition and machine learning (Vol. 4). Springer.
Bishop, C. M., & Nasrabadi, N. M. (2007). Pattern recognition and machine learning. Journal of Electronic
Imaging, 16(4), 049901.
Boxall, P. (1996). The strategic HRM debate and the resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Human Resource
Management Journal, 6(3), 59–75.
Brock, J.K.-U., & Von Wangenheim, F. (2019). Demystifying AI: What digital transformation leaders can
teach you about realistic artiﬁcial intelligence. California Management Review, 61(4), 110–134.
Bromiley, P., & Rau, D. (2016). Operations management and the resource based view: Another view. Journal
of Operations Management, 41, 95–106.
Budhwar, P., & Malik, A. (2020). Call for papers for the special issue on Leveraging artiﬁcial and human
intelligence through Human Resource Management. In Human Resource Management Review. Retrieved
June, 24, 2020.
Budhwar, P., Malik, A., De Silva, M. T., & Thevisuthan, P. (2022). Artiﬁcial intelligence–challenges and
opportunities for international HRM: A review and research agenda. The International Journal of Human
Resource Management, 33(6), 1065–1097.
Bussmann, N., Giudici, P., Marinelli, D., & Papenbrock, J. (2021). Explainable machine learning in credit risk
management. Computational Economics, 57, 203–216.
Calvo, R. A., Peters, D., Vold, K., & Ryan, R. M. (2020). Supporting human autonomy in AI systems: A
framework for ethical enquiry. In C. Burr & L. Floridi (Eds.), Ethics of digital well-being (pp. 31–54).
Springer.
Castelvecchi, D. (2016). Can we open the black box of AI? Nature News, 538(7623), 20.
Chalapathy, R., & Chawla, S. (2019). Deep learning for anomaly detection: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1901.03407.
Chang, W.-H., & Chang, J.-S. (2010). Using clustering techniques to analyze fraudulent behavior changes in
online auctions. Paper presented at the 2010 International Conference on Networking and Information
Technology.
Chang, J.-S., & Chang, W.-H. (2012). A cost-effective method for early fraud detection in online auctions.
Paper presented at the 2012 Tenth International Conference on ICT and Knowledge Engineering.
Chen, K., Zhai, X., Sun, K., Wang, H., Yang, C., & Li, M. (2021). A narrative review of machine learning as
promising revolution in clinical practice of scoliosis. Annals of Translational Medicine, 9(1), 67.
Cheng,M.M.,&Hackett,R.D.(2019).AcriticalreviewofalgorithmsinHRM:Deﬁnition,theory,andpractice.
In Academy of management proceedings (Vol. 2019, No. 1, p. 18018). Academy of Management.
Choo, C. W. (1991). Towards an information model of organizations. The Canadian Journal of Information
Science, 16(3), 32–62.
Chowdhury, S., Budhwar, P., Dey, P. K., Joel-Edgar, S., & Abadie, A. (2022b). AI-employee collaboration and
business performance: Integrating knowledge-based view, socio-technical systems and organisational
socialisation framework. Journal of Business Research, 144, 31–49.
Chowdhury, S., Dey, P., Joel-Edgar, S., Bhattacharya, S., Rodriguez-Espindola, O., Abadie, A., & Truong,
L. (2022a). Unlocking the value of artiﬁcial intelligence in human resource management through AI
capability framework. Human Resource Management Review, 33, 100899.
Chowdhury,S.,Joel-Edgar,S.,Dey,P.K.,Bhattacharya,S.,&Kharlamov,A.(2022c).Embeddingtransparency
in artiﬁcial intelligence machine learning models: Managerial implications on predicting and explaining
employee turnover. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 34, 1–32.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
336

Ciechanowski, L., Jemielniak, D., & Gloor, P. A. (2020). TUTORIAL: AI research without coding: The art
of ﬁghting without ﬁghting: Data science for qualitative researchers. Journal of Business Research, 117,
322–330.
Correani, A., De Massis, A., Frattini, F., Petruzzelli, A. M., & Natalicchio, A. (2020). Implementing a digital
strategy: Learning from the experience of three digital transformation projects. California Management
Review, 62(4), 37–56.
Davenport, T. H. (2018). From analytics to artiﬁcial intelligence. Journal of Business Analytics, 1(2), 73–80.
Davenport, T. H., & Bean, R. (2017). How P&G and American express are approaching AI. Harvard Business
Review, 1–6. Available at https://hbr.org/2017/03/how-pg-and-american-express-are-approaching-ai
Elshawi, R., Al-Mallah, M. H., & Sakr, S. (2019). On the interpretability of machine learning-based model
for predicting hypertension. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 19(1), 1–32.
Felzmann, H., Fosch-Villaronga, E., Lutz, C., & Tamò-Larrieux, A. (2020). Towards transparency by design
for artiﬁcial intelligence. Science and Engineering Ethics, 26(6), 3333–3361.
Glancy, F. H., & Yadav, S. B. (2011). A computational model for ﬁnancial reporting fraud detection. Decision
Support Systems, 50(3), 595–601.
Grandinetti, J. (2021). Examining embedded apparatuses of AI in Facebook and TikTok. Ai & Society, 38,
1–14.
Gregor, S., & Hevner, A. R. (2013). Positioning and presenting design science research for maximum impact.
MIS Quarterly, 37, 337–355.
Gunasekaran, A., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., Wamba, S. F., Childe, S. J., Hazen, B., & Akter, S. (2017).
Big data and predictive analytics for supply chain and organizational performance. Journal of Business
Research, 70, 308–317.
Gunning, D., & Aha, D. (2019). DARPA’s explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI) program. AI Magazine, 40,
44–58. https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v40i2.2850
Gupta, S., Modgil, S., Bhattacharyya, S., & Bose, I. (2022). Artiﬁcial intelligence for decision support systems
in the ﬁeld of operations research: Review and future scope of research. Annals of Operations Research,
308, 1–60.
Haenlein, M., & Kaplan, A. (2019). A brief history of artiﬁcial intelligence: On the past, present, and future
of artiﬁcial intelligence. California Management Review, 61(4), 5–14.
Huang, D., Mu, D., Yang, L., & Cai, X. (2018). CoDetect: Financial fraud detection with anomaly feature
detection. IEEE Access, 6, 19161–19174.
Hung, S.-Y. (2003). Expert versus novice use of the executive support systems: An empirical study. Information
& Management, 40(3), 177–189.
Hwang, S., Kim, J., Park, E., & Kwon, S. J. (2020). Who will be your next customer: A machine learning
approach to customer return visits in airline services. Journal of Business Research, 121, 121–126.
Jabeur, S. B., Mefteh-Wali, S., & Viviani, J. L. (2021). Forecasting gold price with the XGBoost algorithm and
SHAP interaction values. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04187-w
Jarrahi, M. H. (2018). Artiﬁcial intelligence and the future of work: Human–AI symbiosis in organizational
decision making. Business Horizons, 61(4), 577–586.
Jarrin, E. P., Cordeiro, F. B., Medranda, W. C., Barrett, M., Zambrano, M., & Regato, M. (2019). A machine
learning-based algorithm for the assessment of clinical metabolomic ﬁngerprints in Zika virus disease.
Paper presented at the 2019 IEEE Latin American Conference on Computational Intelligence (LA-CCI).
Kafai, Y. (1996). Learning through artifacts: Communities of practice in classrooms. AI & SOCIETY, 10(1),
89–100.
Kaplan, A., & Haenlein, M. (2020). Rulers of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of artiﬁcial
intelligence. Business Horizons, 63(1), 37–50.
Keding, C. (2021). Understanding the interplay of artiﬁcial intelligence and strategic management: Four
decades of research in review. Management Review Quarterly, 71(1), 91–134.
Kersting, K., & Meyer, U. (2018). From big data to big artiﬁcial intelligence? Algorithmic challenges and
opportunities of big data. KI-Künstliche Intelligenz, 32, 3–8.
Khan, W., Walker, S., & Zeiler, W. (2022). Improved solar photovoltaic energy generation forecast using deep
learning-based ensemble stacking approach. Energy, 240, 122812.
Kiron, D., & Schrage, M. (2019). Strategy for and with AI. MIT Sloan Management Review, 60(4), 30–35.
Lasaga, D., & Santhana, P. (2018). Deep learning to detect medical treatment fraud. Paper presented at the
KDD 2017 Workshop on Anomaly Detection in Finance.
Le Khac, N. A., & Kechadi, M.-T. (2010). Application of data mining for anti-money laundering detection: A
case study. Paper presented at the 2010 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops.
Lee, T. H., & Boynton, L. A. (2017). Conceptualizing transparency: Propositions for the integration of situa-
tional factors and stakeholders’ perspectives. Public Relations Inquiry, 6(3), 233–251.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
337

Magomedov, S., Pavelyev, S., Ivanova, I., Dobrotvorsky, A., Khrestina, M., & Yusubaliev, T. (2018). Anomaly
detection with machine learning and graph databases in fraud management. International Journal of
Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 9(11), 33–38.
Makarius, E. E., Mukherjee, D., Fox, J. D., & Fox, A. K. (2020). Rising with the machines: A sociotechnical
framework for bringing artiﬁcial intelligence into the organization. Journal of Business Research, 120,
262–273.
Mardiana, S. (2020). Modifying research onion for information systems research. Solid State Technology,
63(4), 5304–5313.
Martin, R., & Martin, R. L. (2009). The design of business: Why design thinking is the next competitive
advantage. Harvard Business Press.
Mikalef,P.,&Gupta,M.(2021).Artiﬁcialintelligencecapability:Conceptualization,measurementcalibration,
and empirical study on its impact on organizational creativity and ﬁrm performance. Information &
Management, 58(3), 103434.
Morse, G. (2020). Harnessing artiﬁcial intelligence. Harvard Business Review. October, 23, 2021.
Motiwalla, L. F., Albashrawi, M., & Kartal, H. B. (2019). Uncovering unobserved heterogeneity bias: Mea-
suring mobile banking system success. International Journal of Information Management, 49, 439–451.
Müller, V. C. (2020). Ethics of artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics.
Munk, A. K., Olesen, A. G., & Jacomy, M. (2022). The thick machine: Anthropological AI between explanation
and explication. Big Data & Society, 9(1), 20539517211069892.
Nelson, G. S. (2019). Bias in artiﬁcial intelligence. North Carolina Medical Journal, 80(4), 220–222.
Ngai, E. W., Hu, Y., Wong, Y. H., Chen, Y., & Sun, X. (2011). The application of data mining techniques
in ﬁnancial fraud detection: A classiﬁcation framework and an academic review of literature. Decision
Support Systems, 50(3), 559–569.
Pourhabibi, T., Ong, K.-L., Kam, B. H., & Boo, Y. L. (2020). Fraud detection: A systematic literature review
of graph-based anomaly detection approaches. Decision Support Systems, 133, 113303.
Rai, A. (2020). Explainable AI: From black box to glass box. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
48(1), 137–141.
Raisch, S., & Krakowski, S. (2021). Artiﬁcial intelligence and management: The automation–augmentation
paradox. Academy of Management Review, 46(1), 192–210.
Ryman-Tubb, N. F., Krause, P., & Garn, W. (2018). How Artiﬁcial Intelligence and machine learning research
impacts payment card fraud detection: A survey and industry benchmark. Engineering Applications of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 76, 130–157.
Šabi´c, E., Keeley, D., Henderson, B., & Nannemann, S. (2021). Healthcare and anomaly detection: Using
machine learning to predict untold fact in heart rate data. AI & SOCIETY, 36(1), 149–158.
Sample, I. (2017). Computer says no: Why making AIs fair, accountable and transparent is crucial. The
Guardian, 5, 1–15.
Sariannidis, N., Papadakis, S., Garefalakis, A., Lemonakis, C., & Kyriaki-Argyro, T. (2020). Default avoidance
oncreditcardportfoliosusingaccounting,demographicalandexploratoryfactors:Decisionmakingbased
on machine learning (ML) techniques. Annals of Operations Research, 294(1), 715–739.
Sarker, I. H., Furhad, M. H., & Nowrozy, R. (2021). AI-driven cybersecurity: An overview, security intelligence
modeling and research directions. SN Computer Science, 2(3), 1–18.
Satell, G., & Sutton, J. (2019). We need AI that is explainable, auditable, and transparent. Harvard Business
Review.
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2007). Research methods. Business Students 4th Edition Pearson
Education Limited, England, 6(3), 1–268.
Sein, M. K., Henfridsson, O., Purao, S., Rossi, M., & Lindgren, R. (2011). Action design research. MIS
Quarterly, 35, 37–56.
Shin, D., & Park, Y. J. (2019). Role of fairness, accountability, and transparency in algorithmic affordance.
Computers in Human Behavior, 98, 277–284.
Shrestha, Y. R., Ben-Menahem, S. M., & Von Krogh, G. (2019). Organizational decision-making structures
in the age of artiﬁcial intelligence. California Management Review, 61(4), 66–83.
Shrestha, Y. R., Krishna, V., & von Krogh, G. (2021). Augmenting organizational decision-making with deep
learning algorithms: Principles, promises, and challenges. Journal of Business Research, 123, 588–603.
Tambe, P., Cappelli, P., & Yakubovich, V. (2019). Artiﬁcial intelligence in human resources management:
Challenges and a path forward. California Management Review, 61(4), 15–42.
Vrontis, D., Christoﬁ, M., Pereira, V., Tarba, S., Makrides, A., & Trichina, E. (2022). Artiﬁcial intelligence,
robotics, advanced technologies and human resource management: A systematic review. The Interna-
tional Journal of Human Resource Management, 33(6), 1237–1266.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
338

Wamba-Taguimdje, S. L., Wamba, S. F., Kamdjoug, J. R. K., & Wanko, C. E. T. (2020). Inﬂuence of artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) on ﬁrm performance: The business value of AI-based transformation projects. Business
Process Management Journal, 26(7), 1893–1924.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations (Vol. 3). Sage.
Wernerfelt, B. (1984). A resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 5(2), 171–180.
West, J., & Bhattacharya, M. (2016). Intelligent ﬁnancial fraud detection: A comprehensive review. Computers
& Security, 57, 47–66.
Yang, G., Ye, Q., & Xia, J. (2022). Unbox the black-box for the medical explainable AI via multi-modal and
multi-centre data fusion: A mini-review, two showcases and beyond. Information Fusion, 77, 29–52.
Yaram, S. (2016). Machine learning algorithms for document clustering and fraud detection. Paper presented
at the 2016 International Conference on Data Science and Engineering (ICDSE).
Zhou, F., Ayoub, J., Xu, Q., & Jessie Yang, X. (2020). A machine learning approach to customer needs analysis
for product ecosystems. Journal of Mechanical Design, 142(1), 1–13.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 354:309–339
339