TITLE: Longer healthy life, but for how many? A stochastic analysis of healthy lifespan inequality
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06203-1
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06203-1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Longer healthy life, but for how many? A stochastic analysis
of healthy lifespan inequality
Virginia Zarulli1
· Hal Caswell2
Received: 9 February 2024 / Accepted: 26 July 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Over the past 150 years, life expectancy doubled and healthy life expectancy increased.
Expectations reveal nothing about variability, so we present a stochastic analysis to investigate
changes over time, age and gender of variation, among individuals, in healthy lifespan, for
different levels of country income. To complement health-adjusted life expectancy (HALE)
data from the Global Burden of Disease Study, we use a stochastic model to compute the
standard deviation of healthy life (SDHL). The model is a ﬁnite-state absorbing Markov
chain with rewards. It includes stochastic survival, mortality, and loss of good health status.
An individual surviving from one age to the next gains, as a "reward," a year of good health.
This method provides all the moments of healthy longevity. The mean healthy longevity is
exactly the HALE. As a measure of variation, here we focus on the standard deviation of
healthy longevity. From 1990 to 2019, HALE increased, with greater increases at younger
ages. At the same time, SDHL at younger ages decreased and at older ages increased. The
most signiﬁcant changes at birth occurred in low- and lower-middle-income countries. High-
and upper-middle-income countries saw notable increases at old ages. Women generally
have longer HALE and higher SDHL, but the overall HALE increase was greater for men.
The reduction in SDHL over time suggests that more individuals beneﬁt from increased
longevity, particularly in low-income countries closing the gap with high-income countries.
However, improvements in healthy survival at older ages appear unevenly distributed among
individuals in high-income countries.
Keywords Healthy life expectancy · Health adjusted life expectancy · Healthy life
expectancy variation · Global burden of disease · Markov chain model · Markov chains
with rewards
Contents
1 Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 The Markov chain model for healthy longevity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3 Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B Virginia Zarulli
virginia.zarulli@unipd.it
1
Department of Statistics University of Padova, Padova, Italy
2
Faculty of Science, Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
123

Annals of Operations Research
4 Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 Introduction
Differences in how many years in good health individuals can expect to live are a fundamental
inequality of population health. Some have claimed that, because every other inequality
depends on being alive or not, the most fundamental inequality of all is thus the inequality
in the length of life (Van Raalte et al., 2018), although inequality in length of life differs in
important ways from other kinds of inequality (Caswell, 2023). But being alive and healthy
is as crucial as being alive, perhaps even more crucial, as most of the relevant dimensions of
social and population inequality we can think of, from gender to socioeconomic status, are
much more substantiated and affect more the life of the individuals when these are alive and in
good health than when they are simply alive. Surviving in good health is the essential basis for
acquiring human capital through education, training, experience and social mobility. Healthy
years of life are also a crucial part of the dynamics of the life cycle: as long as individuals
are healthy they are more likely to be productive, thus being net contributors to the society,
as showed by the stronger correlation of the expected number of working years with healthy
life expectancy than with (total) life expectancy (Loichinger & Weber, 2016).
As with any average quantity, similar levels of healthy life expectancy can be achieved by
different distributions of healthy lifespans: some more concentrated, where many individuals
share more similar number of years in good health, and others less concentrated, where some
individuals enjoy substantially higher numbers of years in good health than other individuals,
who suffer from ill health early on. How equally (or unequally) the healthy years of life
are distributed between the individuals is one of the fundamental distributional problems of
population health. Studying patterns and trends of the distribution of healthy lifespans among
the individuals is a crucial dimension of populations health, because a healthy population is
one in which not only people live a long healthy life on average, but also where long healthy
lives are enjoyed by everybody. Ensuring longer and healthier lives for as many individuals
as possible has become a pressing, international priority, with the mandate of Goal 3 of
the Sustainable Development Agenda of the United Nations. The study of healthy life space
variation is relevant also for its crucial socioeconomic implication, for example for retirement
and health policies, as highlighted by the analysis of the trends in working life expectancy
at age 50 in Europe, which found that this indicator has a higher correlation with healthy
life expectancy (based on self-reported health) than with total life expectancy (Loichinger
& Weber, 2016). Finally, shedding light on the patterns of healthy lifespan variation is also
relevant for the so called male–female survival paradox, which is the fact that women live
longer but have poorer health than men (Ahrenfeldt et al., 2019; Oksuzyan et al., 2008).
Recent results suggest that this paradox is a function of indicators of population health and
their gender differences Van Oyen et al. (2013). Undoubtedly, healthy lifespan variation
is such an indicator and, yet, indicators of healthy lifespan variation are missing from the
landscape of gender differences in health demography.
Since the concept of healthy life expectancy was introduced by Sanders (1964) and later
operationalized by Sullivan (1971), the increasing interest in healthy longevity has gener-
ated a vast literature (e.g., Murray et al., 2000; Robine et al., 1999; Siegel & Olshansky,
123

Annals of Operations Research
2012; Salomon et al., 2012) that has focused, however, on expected values and inequali-
ties between groups, disregarding the fundamental distributional question of how the healthy
lifespan is distributed between the individuals within the populations. In the last decade or so,
researchers working on mortality have recognized the importance of supplementing analyses
of average longevity (such as life expectancy) with analyses of variation in lifespan length in
the assessment of population health (Van Raalte et al., 2018), producing a wealth of research
(e.g., (Van Raalte et al., 2018; Aburto et al., 2020; Edwards & Tuljapurkar, 2005; Edwards,
2011; Engelman et al., 2010; Permanyer et al., 2018; Sasson, 2016; Smits & Monden, 2009;
Van Raalte and Caswell, 2013; Van Raalte et al., 2011; van Raalte et al., 2012, 2014; Vaupel
et al., 2011; Wilmoth and Horiuchi, 1999; Caswell, 2023)) whose main message is that, as
life expectancy has increased, the ages at death have become more similar, even though with
some exceptions and differences by gender and social class.
What about the healthy years of life? We know that today people reach older ages in
better health than what they used to do only a few decades ago because there has been a
general improvement of healthy survival and a postponement of debility (Ahrenfeldt et al.,
2018; Christensen et al., 2009; Jeune & Brønnum-Hansen, 2008; Vaupel, 2010). But we
don’t know what has happened to the distribution of this longer healthy lifespan among
individuals: do more individuals enjoy increasingly similar number of years of healthy life,
or the distribution has become more unequal?
Some insights come from the literature on the compression of morbidity, which shows a
shift to older age of the entry into the morbid (unhealthy) state. These results seem robust
despite the numerous differences in the deﬁnitions of disability, morbidity and functioning
indicators used in the analyses (Mor, 2005; Chatterji et al., 2015), even though there are
notable exceptions such as the United States, where an inversion of trend has been reported
between 1998 and 2006 (Crimmins & Beltrán-Sánchez, 2011). However, the analysis of the
compression of morbidity does not equal the analysis of variation in healthy lifespan and is
not necessarily informative about the distribution of healthy lifespans within the populations
because this is determined by the interaction between the structure of morbidity and of the
mortality schedule.
The growing availability of data on health and mortality has naturally led to an increased
interest in the theoretical issues related to the topic of healthy lifespan inequality (Permanyer
et al., 2022) and to studies of variability of healthy years of life in Europe (Muszy´nska-
Spielauer et al., 2024; Permanyer et al., 2022) and on a global scale (Zarulli and Caswell,
2022; Permanyer et al., 2023). To our knowledge, so far only one study other than the present
one has explored healthy lifespan variation and its implications at the global level (Permanyer
et al., 2023). Using the metric of HALE (Health-Adjusted Life Expectancy), those authors
found that globally, between 1990 and 2019 variation on healthy lifespan at age 65 increased
for both sexes, emphasizing that while improvements in longevity were evident, they did
not necessarily correspond with reductions in healthy lifespan variation. Furthermore, while
morbidity tended to compress overall, particularly in low and middle-income countries, it
stagnated in high-income nations. Notably, the variability in the ages at morbidity onset was
found to be larger than the variability in lifespans, a divergence that widened over time.
Their results remain the only ones so far and await conﬁrmation by further analyses. In
this study, we use the same dataset of Health-Adjusted Life Expectancy but employ different
methods. Unlike previous studies, we go beyond life table methods and use an explicit
stochastic model for healthy longevity. The resulting model has many advantages over life
table methods: it can be extended to many different kinds of health states, it provides as many
moments of healthy longevity as desired, and can be extended to multistate life histories.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Health adjusted life expectancy (HALE) is a measure of average longevity that combines
both mortality and morbidity. It is the average number of years that a person, of a speciﬁed
age, can expect to live in "full health," where health can be deﬁned according to the interests
of the investigator. Years of healthy longevity can be lost to mortality and to years lived
in less than full health due to disease or injury. HALE is used by numerous international
organizations, including the World Health Organization (WHO). It is calculated from the
data of the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) Study (Institute for Health, 2019; Lopez &
Murray, 1998). We use this measure to explore the variation among individuals in the length
of healthy life at the global level, using the estimates provided for 204 countries by the GBD.
This systematic assessment of the trends in healthy lifespan variation provides a global picture
of the international landscape of inequality in healthy longevity among individuals.
The variance among individuals in longevity or healthy longevity calculated from any life
table or Markov chain is the result of stochasticity, not of heterogeneity (or, in a strict sense,
inequality) among the individuals (Caswell, 2023). This is because the calculations explicitly
treat every individual of a given age as subject to the same demographic rates. Differences
among individuals in the outcome are the result of chance. Even so, this variation is real and
has social and economic consequences. It is also important to note that this variation arises
from demographic process and does not represent sampling or estimation errors.
We hypothesize that, as healthy life expectancy has increased, healthy lifespan variation
has decreased, following the same negative relation found between life expectancy and lifes-
pan variation. However, the relation between healthy lifespan length and healthy lifespan
variation may differ among ages because health systems might be more successful at pre-
venting health deterioration at some ages than at others, due to various factors ranging from
available medical technology to societal preferences towards preventing health deterioration
of speciﬁc age groups (for example children and young adult rather than old ages). Fur-
thermore, the variation in healthy years of life lived depends on the interaction between the
age-speciﬁc structures of health prevalence and survival, which may change differently over
time. Finally, historically, we know that the ﬁrst to beneﬁt from reductions in the uncertainty
of death were the young ages, which were gradually followed by the older ones (Vaupel et
al., 2011). Therefore, it is reasonable to think that the evolution over time of healthy lifespan
inequality and its relation with the healthy lifespan length can differ by age.
We also expect to ﬁnd differences among countries in the level of healthy life span variation
and its relation with the healthy lifespan length. Such differences could be related to the socio-
economic level of the countries. Again, we derive this hypothesis from past and present
knowledge. First, the fact that the leading countries in terms of life expectancy increase were
the ones who ﬁrst succeeded in reducing individual variation in the age at death (Vaupel
et al., 2011), and the various phases of the epidemiological shift proceeded in cycles of
divergence between countries, followed by convergence, when the late comers caught up
with the forerunners (Meslé & Vallin, 2011). Country differences in the level of development,
organization of the welfare systems, education levels and the general life standards have
played a role in this differentiation. Second, the fact that today there are still considerable
differences in welfare systems (Esping-Andersen, 1990), allocation of the health expenditures
(Glied & Smith, 2013) and socioeconomic indicators. These are not only associated with both
health and mortality outcomes (Kim & Kim, 2016) and greatly depend on the level of wealth
of the country, but also partly reﬂect the value a society assigns to health. Therefore, it i
reasonable to expect that healthy life span variation may differ by the country socioeconomic
level, in ways that still need to be investigated.
Finally, we anticipate to ﬁnd higher healthy lifespan variability in women compared to
men, contrary to what happens for the variation in total lifespan. Women live longer than
123

Annals of Operations Research
men (Austad & Fischer, 2016; UN, 2023) and have less variable total lifespans than men
(Permanyer et al., 2018; Sasson, 2016; Colchero et al., 2016). The male–female health-
survival paradox tells us that men are physically stronger, have fewer disabilities and report
higher health scores, while showing substantially higher mortality at all ages compared with
women (Oksuzyan et al., 2008; Crimmins et al., 2011; Oksuzyan et al., 2014; Alberts et
al., 2014; Ahrenfeldt et al., 2019). This results in women having, yes, a longer healthy life
expectancy than men, but a smaller health advantage over men than what is observed for total
life expectancy. This could be due, at least partly, to women having higher healthy lifespan
variation than men because such a wider distribution means higher numbers of women losing
their health at ages below the average value (healthy life expectancy) compared to men.
With this analysis we intend to delve into these questions, each serving as a compelling
research inquiry warranting thorough exploration in future analyses that we plan to conduct.
2 The Markov chain model for healthy longevity
Variation among individuals in healthy longevity results from two stochastic processes. One
is the continual chain of risks to which an individual is subject; living to a speciﬁed age
requires having the good fortune to avoid the accumulated risks of mortality up to that
age. The second process is the chance of encountering a disabling condition, estimated by
the prevalence of that condition among individuals at each age. Our model, known as a
Markov chain with rewards, accounts for both these processes. A Markov chain describes
the stochastic transitions of individuals from one age class to the next. A ‘reward’ process
incorporates the chance outcome of the disabling process. The model calculates the mean,
the variance and all other moments of lifetime accumulated reward; that is, the remaining
healthy longevity from each age.
The life of an individual is described by an absorbing Markov chain with transition matrix
P =
 U 0
qT 1

(1)
where U is a survival matrix and q is a vector of probabilities of mortality. The ﬁnal row
corresponds to an absorbing state. In the data available to us, this absorbing state corresponds
to death or loss of health. The block of zeros shows that the dead do not come back to life;
the 1 in the lower-right corner is the probability that individuals in the absorbing state remain
there.
For example, for 3 age classes the transition matrix is
P =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
0
0
0
0
pH(1)
0
0
0
0
pH(2)
0
0
qH(1) qH(2) qH(3) 1
⎞
⎟⎟⎠.
(2)
Markov chains with rewards were ﬁrst developed by Howard (1960) in the context of
dynamic programming. Caswell (2011) extended the approach to demographic applications
with random rewards in the context of lifetime reproduction (van Daalen & Caswell, 2017).
Markov chains with rewards were applied in the stochastic analysis of population health by
Caswell and Zarulli (2018) for prevalence-based health models and Caswell and van Daalen
(2021) for incidence-based models.
The Markov chain with rewards model tracks an individual through their life. At each
transition, until reaching the absorbing state, the individual collects a reward, which is a
123

Annals of Operations Research
random variable. The model calculates all the moments of the lifetime accumulated reward,
from any starting age.
In our case the reward is a year of healthy life. The ﬁrst two moments of lifetime reward
(i.e., the ﬁrst two moments of healthy longevity) are given by the vectors
˜ρ1 = NTZ (P ◦R1)T 1
(3)
˜ρ2 = NT 
Z (P ◦R2)T 1 + 2

U ◦ˆR1
T
˜ρ1

,
(4)
where P is the transition matrix, N = (I −U)−1 is the fundamental matrix, and R1 and R2 are
the reward matrices containing the ﬁrst and second moments of the reward associated with
each transition among age classes. The symbol ◦denotes the element-by-element product.
The matrix Z cleaves off the absorbing state, 1 is a vector of ones, and ˆRk is the submatrix
of Rk without the absorbing state.
The vectors containing means and variances of remaining health-adjusted years are
E(healthy longevity) = ˜ρ1
(5)
V (healthy longevity) = ˜ρ2 −(˜ρ1 ◦˜ρ1).
(6)
These are vectors whose elements are the remaining healthy life expectancy and variation of
remaining healthy life at each age. The mean healthy longevity is exactly the HALE. As a
measure of variation, we will focus on the standard deviation of healthy longevity, calculated
as the square root of the variance, which we denote as SDHL.
The analysis relies on the age-speciﬁc survival probabilities that appear in U and the
matrices P and N that are calculated from U. It remains only to deﬁne the reward matrices
R1 and R2. In the calculation of HALE, qH(x) is the probability of exiting the healthy state,
at age x, by mortality or by loss of optimal health. The loss could be due to the challenges
posed by diseases, disabilities, and/or impairments. The quantity pH(x) is the complementary
probability. Thus, an individual that moves from age class x to x + 1 remains healthy and
accumulates exactly one year of healthy life. An individual that dies or loses health between
x and x + 1 accumulates exactly a(x) years of healthy life. Such rewards are called ’ﬁxed’
(see van Daalen & Caswell, 2017 for discussion of types of rewards).
The matrix of the ﬁrst moments of the ﬁxed reward is, for the case of three age classes in
Eq. (2),
R1 =
⎛
⎜⎜⎝
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
a(1) a(2) a(3) 0
⎞
⎟⎟⎠.
(7)
Because the rewards are ﬁxed, the second moment matrices are
R2 = R1 ◦R1
(8)
where ◦denotes the element-by-element product.
3 Data
We use data from the Global Burden of Disease Study (Institute for Health, 2019), which
has compiled schedules of age-speciﬁc HALE for more than 200 countries around the world
123

Annals of Operations Research
from 1990 to 2019.1 Values are given for ages x = 0, 1, 5 and then by 5-year intervals to age
95.
HALE is as a comprehensive indicator that integrates data on mortality and health out-
comes not resulting in death. It denotes the anticipated number of years a person can live in a
state of good health, considering both the length and quality of life. The calculation of HALE
involves the use of disability weights, which are numerical values assigned to different health
states to reﬂect their impact on overall well-being. These disability weights are applied to
the time spent in different health conditions, allowing for the estimation of years lived with
disability (YLDs). By combining YLDs with years of life lost (YLLs) due to premature
mortality, HALE provides a comprehensive measure of the health status of a population.
Within the framework of HALE, "full health" signiﬁes a condition of well-being where an
individual enjoys optimal physical, mental, and social health-a life without the challenges of
diseases, disabilities, and impairments. The HALE metric adjusts life expectancy to account
for the duration lived in a state less than optimal health.
4 Application
The age-speciﬁc HALE function implies a life table that generates these values, with the
important distinction that the loss of individuals from the initial cohort occurs through either
deathorthelossof‘healthy’status.Wecallthisthe‘health-adjustedlifetable.’Theprobability
ofbeingeliminatedbyeitherdeathorlossofhealth,thehealth-mortalityeliminationschedule,
we call qH(x) and was used to apply the matrix model.
To obtain health-adjusted life table from HALE estimates, we used the fact that any column
of a life table can be calculated from any other column. The values of HALE provided by
GBD can be treated as life expectancy values e(x) for ages x = 0, 1, 5 and then by 5-year
intervals to age 95. We calculated probabilities of death qH(x) compatible with this e(x)
schedule. We used nonlinear least squares to solve for a qH(x) schedule that minimizes the
squared deviation between our calculated values and the GBD values for e(x). The resulting
qH(x) schedule was then interpolated to 1-year age intervals with the R-function pclm2D
(Pascariu et al., 2018). Age-speciﬁc survival probabilities (i.e., probabilities of being alive
and in good health at age x + 1) are given by pH(x) = 1 −qH(x).
We constrained the ﬁnal qH(x) value to be 1.0. Our method also assumes the a(x) values
(the number of person-years lived in the interval by those who exit the population in the
interval) are known. This is usually approximated by half of the interval (this means that,
on average, the individuals die halfway through the interval). For our estimation, in the
absence of speciﬁc literature on a(x) values for a health adjusted life table, we have adopted
a conservative approach by assuming that those who leave the healthy state (by death or
by acquisition of disability) do so, on average, half-way through the interval. Therefore, we
used a(x) values equal to half of the length of the age interval. The analysis was carried out
separately for men and women.
It is important to notice that the deﬁnition of healthy longevity in HALE calculations
differs in important ways from that of the traditional Sullivan method, or the Markov chain
analysis of (Caswell & Zarulli, 2018). In the latter analyses, the age-speciﬁc prevalence
of disability is used to divide life into healthy and unhealthy at each, implicitly permitting
individuals to recover from ill health. The HALE is calculated from the health-adjusted life
1 The data are available at https://www.healthdata.org.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Estimated HALE from authors’ calculation minus HALE reported by Global Burden of Disease (GBD)
table, in which the loss of an individual to poor health is as permanent as the loss due to
death, so recovery is impossible.2
A comparison of our estimates of HALE with those reported by GBD revealed an excellent
correspondence until age 80 (Fig. 1) Data after age 80 become scanty and the causes of the
discrepancy at those ages is an open problem. One plausible explanation is that, after age
80, the combined effects of health deterioration and mortality (referred to as the elimination
schedule from the state of full health) occur at values that, on average, differ somewhat
from half the width of the interval commonly used in life table calculations for mortality
processes alone. Consequently, the rates derived from life table backward calculations after
age 80 may not precisely align with the rates used to generate the HALE values in the GBD
dataset for those aged 80 and above. This interesting methodological aspect deserved further
investigation but is beyond the scope of this analysis.
5 Results
From 1990 to 2019, the GBD data shows that HALE at various ages has increased on average
in all countries for both men and women. The increment was more substantial at younger
ages than at older ages: HALE at birth increased from 59.61 to 64.71 (+5.1 years) for women
and from 56.68 to 62.23 for men (+5.55 years), while at age 65 the increase was more modest,
from 11.59 to 12.95 (+1.36 years) for women and from 10.01 to 11.39 (+1.38 years) for men.
It is important to say that this is the general average trend and that single countries can follow
more erratic year-by-year trends.
The picture is more complex when analyzed according to the income level of the countries
(according to the World Bank Income Categorization 2019), as shown in Fig. 2. HALE at
birth has increased, on average, more among low-income countries (+9.49 years and +9.48
2 A full treatment of transitions into and out of good health requires incidence-based analysis based on
longitudinal individual data (Caswell & van Daalen, 2021).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 HALE over time at different ages. All countries (faded points) and average value (solid lines). Source:
Global Burden of Disease (values from GBD)
years for women and men respectively) than among high-income countries (+3.71 years and
+4.79 years for women and men respectively): in the low-income countries HALE at birth
is now 57.46 years for women and 55.38 years for men, while in the high-income countries
it is 69.67 years and 67.45 years for men and women respectively. On the contrary, HALE
at older ages has increased more among high income countries than among lower-income
countries. For example, HALE at age 50 for women has increased by 2.65 years in high
income countries and 1.86 years among low-income countries. The values for men are 3.2
years and 1.93 years respectively. HALE at age 15, instead, has increased more among women
in low-income countries than in high income countries (+3.7 years vs. +3.1 years) but more
for men in high income countries than in low-income countries (+3.55 vs. +4.06 years).
The analysis of variation among individuals in healthy longevity shows an inverse trend:
on average, SDHL at younger ages decreased similarly for both men and women: at age 0
the reduction was of 2.13 years for women and 2.16 years for men and at age 15 it was of
0.74 years and 0.68 years. On the contrary, SDHL at older ages has slightly increased, and
slightly more for men than for women: for example, at age 65 the increased was of 0.23 years
for men and 0.16 years for women.
When analyzing the trends by country income groups (Fig. 3), it is striking how the
reduction of SDHL at birth (and to a lesser extend also at age 15) has been much more
substantial among low-income countries than among high income countries, with 3.5 to 5
times bigger reductions: −3.33 years versus −0.67 years for women and −3.03 years versus
−0.88 years for men. At older ages, instead, variation has increased, and it has done so
more among high income than among low-income countries, for both men and women: for
example, at age 60, in high income countries SDHL grew by 0.23 years for women and by
0.38 for men, while in low-income countries the increment was of 0.16 and 0.19 years for
women and men respectively.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 SDHL over time at different ages. All countries (faded points) and average value (solid lines). Source:
authors’ calculations
Moving beyond the analysis of average trends over time allows us to uncover a much
stronger and regular relation, different by age, between healthy lifespan length and variation
in healthy lifespan. Figure 4 reports the pairwise relation, for each country in each year,
between HALE and SDHL. At birth (and less strongly at age 15), the relation is negative and
all the countries, independently of their income level, have decreased the level of variation
while increasing healthy life expectancy. The tendency has been more pronounced for low
and lower middle-income countries than for upper middle- and high-income countries.
At adult ages the situation changes and the relation between healthy lifespan length and
healthy lifespan variation becomes positive. Also, this relation appears valid in all the coun-
tries and to be strengthening with age. However, at adult ages the positive relation is more
pronounced among upper middle- and high-income countries. Most notably, these countries
have increased both the mean and the standard deviation of healthy life span more than the
lower middle- and low-income countries.
Women tend to have longer healthy lifespan and higher healthy lifespan variation than
men, as indicated by the male to female ratio of both indicators, HALE and SDHL, smaller
than 1. Figure 5 shows the density function of these ratios for age 0 and Fig. 6 for age 65. Over
time the ratios are consistently below 1 for most of the countries. It is worth noticing that the
cases of longer healthy lifespan for men compared to women (and of higher variation) are
mostly located in low-income countries compared to high-income ones, both at age 0 and at
age 65.
From 1990 to 2019, among high-income countries, male and female healthy life expectan-
cies have become more similar (more at birth than at age 65), as showed by density of the ratio
of male to female HALE, that has become more concentrated and whose peak has gradually
shifted toward 1 - Figs. 5 and 6, upper panels. A similar trend, but much less pronounced, can
be spotted also among low-income countries. Nevertheless, women still beneﬁt from longer
healthy life expectancy than men. This difference is particularly pronounced at age 65.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Relation between HALE and STHL at different ages, from 1990 to 2019
Men and women had, instead, remarkably divergent trends of variation at age 0 in healthy
year of life lived among high- and low-income countries - Fig. 5, lower panel. While the
ratio in most cases remains solidly below 1, indicating a higher female variation in terms
of healthy years of life, the densities for the high- and low- income groups, practically
overlapping in 1990, have diverged substantially over time until 2019. At age 0, changes
over time have made the two groups of countries diverge: in low-income countries the male
to female ratio moved towards 1 and in high-income countries it moved further from 1. The
male to female difference in variation of healthy living at age 65, on the contrary, underwent
changes over time almost exclusively among high income countries, where the ratio became
sharply concentrated around values closer to 1 (Fig. 6, lower panel).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Male to female ratio at birth of HALE (upper panel) and SDHL (lower panel)
6 Discussion
In recent decades healthy life expectancy has increased around the world. Looking beyond
expectations to look at variation among individuals is important in aging societies because
uncertainty in lifespan is costly, both economically and medically (Edwards, 2013).
Our analysis differs from that of Permanyer et al. (2023) in the analytical methods we
employ, based on Markov chains with rewards. This stochastic model offers greater ﬂexibility
and analytical power compared to the traditional life table approaches used in other studies.
The concept of an individual life represented as a stochastic trajectory along which the
individual encounters “rewards” of various kinds is extremely powerful. We have used it
here for healthy life extracted from the GBD data, in which death and loss of health both
appear as absorbing states. Caswell and Zarulli (2018) have applied it to pure prevalence data
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 Male to female ratio at age 65 of HALE (upper panel) and SDHL (lower panel)
and to indices such as DALY (Disability-Adjusted Life Years) that incorporate competing
causes of death and disability. It has also been applied to multistate incidence models with
almost inﬁnitely diverse set of health measures (Caswell & van Daalen, 2021). Although we
have focused on the mean and variance (and standard deviation) here, the Markov chain with
rewards method can also provide all the moments of healthy longevity. It can be applied to
measures of lifetime fertility (van Daalen & Caswell, 2017), an aspect of health demography
that warrants further investigation.
Where our results overlap with those of Permanyer et al. (2023), the similarity is a welcome
robustness check using different methods.
We have shown that the relation between healthy lifespan and healthy lifespan variation
differs with age. It is negative at young ages and positive ad adult, old ages. As healthy life
span at birth and at younger age increased, the variation in healthy lifespan has decreased. As
healthy life expectancy at adult and older ages increased, instead, the variation increased. For
123

Annals of Operations Research
reduction in variation to happen, it is necessary that the interaction between the age structure
of survival and the age-structure of morbidity produces health improvements at ages below
speciﬁc threshold ages, below which the improvements are translated into a reduction of
variation (Aburto et al., 2020; Vaupel et al., 2011).
In contrast, improvements that happen at ages above the threshold ages produce an increase
of variation. Our results of a decreasing variation when considering the whole age-range or
almost (from birth or from age 15), to increasing variation when focusing only on older ages
(from 50 or from 65), indicates that improvements in healthy survival are happening across
all the age range. To assess to what extent and with which age-speciﬁc differences requires
the analysis of the age speciﬁc contributions to the relation between healthy life expectancy
and healthy lifespan variation. Such analysis goes beyond the scope of this paper, even though
it is a relevant and complex topic worth of investigation in a future study.
The most pronounced increase in healthy life expectancy at birth happened among the
lower- and lower-middle income countries, which also experienced the sharpest reduction
in healthy lifespan variation. Consequently, these countries have reduced the gap with the
high- and upper middle- income countries in terms of both average length of healthy life and
individual variation around it. This is encouraging and means that from low- to high-income
countries, the span of healthy life at birth is getting longer and more and more individuals
are beneﬁting from this prolongment (as indicated by the reduction of the variation).
At older ages, instead, the increase in healthy life expectancy has been more substantial
among the high- and upper middle-income countries, as well as the increase of the level of
variation. This is a double-sided phenomenon: on the one side, these countries are experi-
encing a sizeable improvement in healthy survival also at older ages, on the other side, these
improvements are more and more unequally distributed among the individuals. Whether
this is only due to the formal relation between the improvements in the age-speciﬁc healthy
survival rates and the dynamics of healthy lifespan-healthy lifespan variation (Aburto et
al., 2020; Vaupel et al., 2011), or also to other factors, for example social dynamics, is an
important open question awaiting for more research.
The high- low-income countries patterns that we have highlighted partly resemble the
phases of the life expectancy revolution (Oeppen & Vaupel, 2002) and the epidemiologic
transition (Omram, 2001), which happened ﬁrst in a group of leading countries, and then
gradually spread to the others. The striking leap forward in survival rates and the shift to a
disease pattern dominated by degenerative, chronic, and man-made diseases (which tend to
affect older ages), have more than doubled the life expectancy and reduced the individual
variation and uncertainty around the age at death. The major increases in survival start with
dramatic improvements at birth and then gradually shifts to older ages. By the time the
forerunners reach the stage where improvements are still possible (almost) only at old ages,
the late comers are tackling the initial stage of the phase and experience signiﬁcant survival
improvements at young ages.
The dynamics that we have described so far are not the same for men and women and the
gender trends appear different depending on the income level of the country. We have found
that women tend to have longer healthy lifespan and higher healthy lifespan variation than
men. We also have found that over time women tend to have both a longer mean healthy
lifespan and higher variation in healthy lifespan than men, with fewer cases where men have
longer healthy lifespan and higher variation compared to women. However, a breakdown of
the data by income level of the country reveals, moreover, that these cases are located more
in low-income countries than in high-income ones, both at when looking at the indicators of
healthy longevity at age 0 and at age 65. Overall, men and women in both groups of countries
have experienced an increase of healthy life expectancy, but this was more pronounced among
123

Annals of Operations Research
menandinhigh-incomecountries.Menandwomenhad,instead,divergenttrendsofvariation.
When considered at age 0, in low-income countries, men and women have gradually moved
towards similar level of healthy lifespan variation, while in high-income countries they have
become more and more different, with women experiencing higher levels of variation than
men in most cases. When considered at age 65, sizeable changes (towards more similar level
of healthy lifespan variation between the two sexes) were detected only among high-income
countries.
7 Conclusion
Today people reach older ages in better health than what they used to do only a few decades
ago,thereherehasbeenageneralimprovementofhealthysurvival,apostponementofdebility
and, overall, healthy life expectancy is increasing. However, to study health improvements
it is not enough to look at indicators of average population health, such as healthy life
expectancy, or at comparison of healthy life expectancy of population subgroups, such as
men versus women. There is a deeper level of inequality that average indicators do not
capture: the variation of the distribution of years of health life, that tells us how equally or
unequally the healthy life is distributed among the individuals within a population. This is
a crucial dimension of populations health because a healthy population is one in which not
only people live a long healthy life on average, but also where long healthy lives are enjoyed
by as many as possible. To measure progress towards the reduction of health inequalities for
as many individuals as possible we need to begin to understand such level of inequality. To
do so we need to map and measure the variation of healthy life and analyze its relationship
with healthy life expectancy.
In this study we have explored the international landscape of healthy lifespan variation
over time. Overall, as the healthy lifespan got longer, its variation decreased but the relation
is age dependent. As healthy lifespan increased both at birth and at older ages, the variation
decreased at birth but increased at older ages, with important differences: high-income coun-
tries showed a more pronounced increase of variation in healthy longevity than lower-income
countries and women had higher healthy lifespan variation than men, while they have lower
variation than men in total lifespan. In a small, but sizeable, number of cases, men had higher
healthy lifespan variation, but this happened predominantly in low-income countries.
The results showed gender speciﬁc patterns of healthy lifespan variation, differences by
the socio-economic level of the country and, ultimately, that in the realm of healthy longevity,
the relation between lifespan length and lifespan inequality might be different compared to
what happens in total longevity and it may change with age. Once we scratch the surface
and go beyond the sole measurement of healthy life expectancy and start looking and its
variation, a complex picture of healthy lifespan-inequality emerges. Such picture calls for
future research, to investigate other widely used measures of healthy life and the macro-level
factors that inﬂuence the observed patterns.
Acknowledgements Hal Caswell was supported by the European Research Council under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program, ERC Advanced Grant 788195 (FORMKIN).
Author Contributions Virginia Zarulli: Conceptualization, Data Curation, Formal Analysis, Investigation,
Methodology, Visualization, Writing - original draft, writing - review and editing. Hal Caswell: Methodology,
Writing - review and editing.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Padova within the CRUI-CARE
Agreement.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors have no relevant ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interests to disclose.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Aburto, J. M., Villavicencio, F., Basellini, U., et al. (2020). Dynamics of life expectancy and life span equality.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(10), 5250–5259.
Ahrenfeldt, L. J., Lindahl-Jacobsen, R., Rizzi, S., et al. (2018). Comparison of cognitive and physi-
cal functioning of Europeans in 2004–05 and 2013. International Journal of Epidemiology, 47(5),
1518–1528.
Ahrenfeldt, L. J., Möller, S., Thinggaard, M., et al. (2019). Sex differences in comorbidity and frailty in Europe.
International Journal of Public Health, 64, 1025–1036.
Alberts, S. C., Archie, E. A., Gesquiere, L. R., et al. (2014). The male-female health-survival paradox: a com-
parative perspective on sex differences in aging and mortality. In Sociality, hierarchy, health: comparative
biodemography: a collection of papers. National Academies Press (US)
Austad, S. N., & Fischer, K. E. (2016). Sex differences in lifespan. Cell Metabolism, 23(6), 1022–1033.
Caswell, H. (2011). Beyond R0: Demographic models for variability of lifetime reproductive output. PloS
ONE, 6(6), e20809.
Caswell,H.(2023).Thecontributionsofstochasticityandsocialinequalitytolifespanvariability. Demographic
Research, 49, 309–354.
Caswell, H., & van Daalen, S. F. (2021). Healthy longevity from incidence-based models: More kinds of health
than stars in the sky. Demographic Research, 45, 397–452.
Caswell, H., & Zarulli, V. (2018). Matrix methods in health demography: A new approach to the stochastic
analysis of healthy longevity and dalys. Population Health Metrics, 16, 1–14.
Chatterji, S., Byles, J., Cutler, D., et al. (2015). Health, functioning, and disability in older adults-present status
and future implications. The Lancet, 385(9967), 563–575.
Christensen, K., Doblhammer, G., Rau, R., et al. (2009). Ageing populations: The challenges ahead. The
Lancet, 374(9696), 1196–1208.
Colchero, F., Rau, R., Jones, O. R., et al. (2016). The emergence of longevous populations. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 113(48), E7681–E7690.
Crimmins, E. M., & Beltrán-Sánchez, H. (2011). Mortality and morbidity trends: Is there compression of
morbidity? Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 66(1), 75–86.
Crimmins, E. M., Kim, J. K., & Solé-Auró, A. (2011). Gender differences in health: Results from share, elsa
and hrs. European Journal of Public Health, 21(1), 81–91.
Edwards, R. D. (2011). Changes in world inequality in length of life: 1970–2000. Population and Development
Review, 37(3), 499–528.
Edwards, R. D. (2013). The cost of uncertain life span. Journal of Population Economics, 26(4), 1485–1522.
Edwards, R. D., & Tuljapurkar, S. (2005). Inequality in life spans and a new perspective on mortality
convergence across industrialized countries. Population and Development Review, 31(4), 645–674.
Engelman, M., Canudas-Romo, V., & Agree, E. M. (2010). The implications of increased survivorship for
mortality variation in aging populations. Population and Development Review, 36(3), 511–539.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990). The three worlds of welfare capitalism. Princeton University Press.
Glied, S., & Smith, P. C. (2013). The Oxford Handbook of Health Economics. Oxford University Press.
Howard, R. A. (1960). Dynamic programming and Markov processes. Wiley.
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation - IHME (2019) https://www.healthdata.org
123

Annals of Operations Research
Jeune, B., & Brønnum-Hansen, H. (2008). Trends in health expectancy at age 65 for various health indicators,
1987–2005, Denmark. European Journal of Ageing, 5, 279–285.
Kim, J. I., & Kim, G. (2016). Country-level socioeconomic indicators associated with healthy life expectancy:
Income, urbanization, schooling, and internet users: 2000–2012. Social Indicators Research, 129, 391–
402.
Loichinger, E., & Weber, D. (2016). Trends in working life expectancy in Europe. Journal of Aging and Health,
28(7), 1194–1213.
Lopez, A. D., & Murray, C. C. (1998). The global burden of disease, 1990–2020. Nature Medicine, 4(11),
1241–1243.
Meslé, F.,& Vallin, J. (2011). Historical trends in mortality. In International Handbook of Adult Mortality.
Springer, pp. 9–47
Mor, V. (2005). The compression of morbidity hypothesis: A review of research and prospects for the future.
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 53(9s), S308–S309.
Murray, C. J., Salomon, J. A., & Mathers, C. (2000). A critical examination of summary measures of population
health. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 78, 981–994.
Muszy´nska-Spielauer, M., Riffe, T., Spielauer, M., et al.Healthy lifespan statistics derived from cross-sectional
prevalence data using the sullivan method are informative summary measures of population health. Com-
parative Population Studies. https://doi.org/10.12765/CPoS-2024-03 https://doi.org/10.12765/CPoS-
2024-03
Oeppen, J., & Vaupel, JW. (2002). Broken limits to life expectancy
Oksuzyan, A., Juel, K., Vaupel, J. W., et al. (2008). Men: Good health and high mortality. Sex differences in
health and aging. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research, 20, 91–102.
Oksuzyan, A., Shkolnikova, M., Vaupel, J. W., et al. (2014). Sex differences in health and mortality in Moscow
and Denmark. European Journal of Epidemiology, 29, 243–252.
Omram, A. R. (2001). The epidemiologic transition: A theory of the epidemiology of population change.
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 79(2), 161–170.
Pascariu, M. D., Da´nko, M. J., Schöley, J., et al. (2018). Ungroup: An r package for efﬁcient estimation of
smooth distributions from coarsely binned data. Journal of Open Source Software, 3(29), 937.
Permanyer, I., Spijker, J., Blanes, A., et al. (2018). Longevity and lifespan variation by educational attainment
in Spain: 1960–2015. Demography, 55(6), 2045–2070.
Permanyer, I., Spijker, J., & Blanes, A. (2022). On the measurement of healthy lifespan inequality. Population
Health Metrics, 20(1), 1.
Permanyer, I., Villavicencio, F., & Trias-Llimós, S. (2023). Healthy lifespan inequality: Morbidity compression
from a global perspective. European Journal of Epidemiology, 38(5), 511–521.
Robine, J. M., Romieu, I., & Cambois, E. (1999). Health expectancy indicators. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 77(2), 181.
Salomon, J. A., Wang, H., Freeman, M. K., et al. (2012). Healthy life expectancy for 187 countries, 1990–2010:
A systematic analysis for the global burden disease study 2010. The Lancet, 380(9859), 2144–2162.
Sanders, B. S. (1964). Measuring community health levels. American Journal of Public Health and the Nations
Health, 54(7), 1063–1070.
Sasson, I. (2016). Trends in life expectancy and lifespan variation by educational attainment: United states,
1990–2010. Demography, 53(2), 269–293.
Siegel, J. S., & Olshansky, S. J. (2012). The demography and epidemiology of human health and aging (Vol.
1277). Springer.
Smits, J., & Monden, C. (2009). Length of life inequality around the globe. Social Science & Medicine, 68(6),
1114–1123.
Sullivan, D. F. (1971). A single index of mortality and morbidity. HSMHA health reports, 86(4), 347.
UN,. (2023). World Population Prospects 2022. Department for Economic and Social Affairs: United Nations.
van Daalen, S. F., & Caswell, H. (2017). Lifetime reproductive output: Individual stochasticity, variance, and
sensitivity analysis. Theoretical Ecology, 10(3), 355–374.
Van Oyen, H., Nusselder, W., Jagger, C., et al. (2013). Gender differences in healthy life years within the eu:
An exploration of the “health-survival” paradox. International Journal of Public Health, 58, 143–155.
Van Raalte, A. A., & Caswell, H. (2013). Perturbation analysis of indices of lifespan variability. Demography,
50(5), 1615–1640.
Van Raalte, A. A., Kunst, A. E., Deboosere, P., et al. (2011). More variation in lifespan in lower educated
groups: Evidence from 10 European countries. International Journal of Epidemiology, 40(6), 1703–1714.
van Raalte, A. A., Kunst, A. E., Lundberg, O., et al. (2012). The contribution of educational inequalities to
lifespan variation. Population Health Metrics, 10(1), 1–10.
van Raalte, A. A., Martikainen, P., & Myrskylä, M. (2014). Lifespan variation by occupational class:
Compression or stagnation over time? Demography, 51(1), 73–95.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Van Raalte, A. A., Sasson, I., & Martikainen, P. (2018). The case for monitoring life-span inequality. Science,
362(6418), 1002–1004.
Vaupel, J. W. (2010). Biodemography of human ageing. Nature, 464(7288), 536–542.
Vaupel, J. W., Zhang, Z., & van Raalte, A. A. (2011). Life expectancy and disparity: An international
comparison of life table data. BMJ Open, 1(1), e000128.
Wilmoth, J. R., & Horiuchi, S. (1999). Rectangularization revisited: Variability of age at death within human
populations. Demography, 36(4), 475–495.
Zarulli, V., & Caswell, H. (2022). Longer healthy life, but for how many? Insights on healthy lifespan inequality
from the Global Burden of Disease Study. medRxiv Preprint pp 2022–12
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123