TITLE: Linear optimization with local differential privacy for resource sharing
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07199-6
---

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07199-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Linear optimization with local differential privacy for
resource sharing
Utku Karaca1 · Nur¸sen Aydın2
· Sinan Yıldırım3 · ¸S. ˙Ilker Birbil4
Received: 25 February 2025 / Accepted: 19 March 2026 / Published online: 17 April 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
This study examines a resource-sharing problem involving multiple parties that agree to
use a set of capacities together. We start with modeling the whole problem as a mathemat-
ical program, where all parties are required to exchange information to obtain the optimal
objective function value. This information bears private data from each party in terms of the
coefﬁcients used in the mathematical program. Moreover, the parties also consider the indi-
vidual optimal solutions as private. In this setting, the concern for the parties is the privacy of
their data and their optimal allocations. We propose a two-step approach to meet the privacy
requirements of the parties. In the ﬁrst step, we obtain a reformulated model that is amenable
to a decomposition scheme. Although this scheme eliminates almost all data exchanges, it
does not provide a formal privacy guarantee. In the second step, we provide this guarantee
with a local differential privacy algorithm, which does not need a trusted aggregator, at the
expense of deviating slightly from the optimality. We provide bounds on this deviation and
discuss the consequences of these theoretical results. We also propose a novel modiﬁcation
to increase the efﬁciency of the algorithm in terms of reducing the theoretical optimality gap.
The study ends with a numerical experiment on a planning problem that demonstrates an
application of the proposed approach. As we work with a general linear optimization model,
our analysis and discussion can be used in different application areas, including production
planning, logistics, and revenue management.
Keywords Differential privacy · Resource sharing · Linear optimization · Decomposition
1 Introduction
Efﬁcient use of resources is one of the major objectives in every industry. Through col-
laboration, companies can coordinate their activities, increase their utilizations, and obtain
signiﬁcant savings. For instance, in freight logistics, companies share less-than-full vehicles
to compound the problem of excess capacity (Speranza, 2018). This collaboration helps them
B Nur¸sen Aydın
nursen.aydin@wbs.ac.uk
1
Erasmus University Rotterdam, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands
2
University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
3
Sabancı University, Istanbul, Turkey
4
University of Amsterdam, P.O. Box 15953, 11018 TV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
123

1008
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
to reduce transportation costs and improve their operational efﬁciencies. Similarly, airlines
provide joint services to increase their ﬂight capacity utilization (Topaloglu, 2012). In the
automotive industry, Toyota and Fuji Heavy Industries shared an existing manufacturing site
to increase the efﬁciency in manufacturing (Toyota, 2006). In supply chains, collaborative
planning improves production and replenishment decisions (Poundarikapuram and Veera-
mani, 2004). There are also other examples in lodging, telecommunication, and maritime
transportation where collaborations among companies occur by sharing resources, exchang-
ing information, or providing joint services (Chun et al., 2016; Guo and Wu, 2018).
Although coordinating activities and sharing resources can provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts
to companies, they also pose several challenges. These partnerships are mainly built around
information exchange to coordinate the collective decision-making process. However, indi-
vidual partners, though often working towards a common goal, can be competitors and may
be unwilling or unable to fully disclose sensitive information about their operations (Albrecht
and Stadtler, 2015; Hyndman et al., 2013). Sensitive information may involve demand fore-
casts, selling prices, operational costs, and available capacities. In air cargo transportation, for
example, airlines and freight forwarders collaborate to sell the ﬂight capacity. In this partner-
ship, the freight forwarders keep their demand information, operating costs, and reservation
prices private to protect their interests (Amaruchkul et al., 2011). While centralized decision-
making is desirable to achieve maximum gain from the collaboration, it may not be realistic
for collaborative planning due to restrictions in information exchange. Therefore, decompo-
sition and decentralization approaches have been studied to minimize information sharing
among participants (Albrecht and Stadtler, 2015; Ding and Kaminsky, 2020; Pérez-Perales
et al., 2024). In decentralized systems, individual parties release only the required informa-
tion at each step to obtain the optimal allocations of the shared resources with an iterative
solution approach. This information can also be exchanged via a central planner. Although
information exchange is reduced with a decentralization approach, the parties still have to
share information about their operations with others or the central planner. Speciﬁcally, in
a network resource-sharing setting, this shared information can be related to the optimal
capacity allocations or the bid (dual) prices, which may reveal private information, like indi-
vidual proﬁts and capacity utilizations (Albrecht and Stadtler, 2015; Poundarikapuram and
Veeramani, 2004; Pérez-Perales et al., 2024). It becomes a critical practical issue how to pro-
tect the privacy of such information. While numerous existing privacy protection methods
depend on transformation and encryption-based approaches, two main issues arise with these
methods: either they fail to strictly ensure privacy, or they become computationally infeasible
when applied to even small-scale problems (Chen et al., 2022; Karaca et al., 2023). The data
privacy concern in collaborations raises an important question: How can one mathemati-
cally guarantee data privacy while conducting optimization in a multi-party resource-sharing
setting?
1.1 Contributions
In this work, we address the aforementioned issues and the question above for a multi-party
resource-sharing model in a general linear optimization framework. We discuss next the main
methodological and literature contributions of the paper.
We consider a general linear optimization framework, where multiple parties would like
to collaborate by sharing some of their resources, but they do not want to reveal their private
information that consists of the coefﬁcients in the objective function and the individual
constraints. To this end, we ﬁrst discuss a decomposition approach, coupled with an iterative
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1009
solution algorithm based on a well-known subgradient method (Ertogral and Wu, 2000;
Kutanoglu et al., 1999). In this algorithm, each party is required to share only their allotments
at each iteration. Since this approach involves unprotected exchange of information among
parties, it does not meet the privacy requirements. In order to alleviate this, we mask each
allocation by adding a speciﬁcally adjusted noise to randomize the output. This randomization
allows us to give a formal data privacy guarantee by using the mathematically rigorous
deﬁnition of differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006). Differential privacy is a widely studied
concept in the computer science literature and has become an established privacy standard
in various industries. We also note a growing body of literature on differential privacy in
operations research, with applications in revenue management, logistics, and combinatorial
optimization (Chen et al., 2023; Cohen-Addad et al., 2022; Hoogervorst et al., 2019). The
key idea in differential privacy is that even if an adversary has access to the output of a
differentially private algorithm, making accurate inferences about the data of individuals used
in the algorithm remains challenging. As we have an iterative algorithm, differential privacy
theory dictates using only a ﬁnite number of iterations to preserve privacy at a given level.
Considering the random output and the limited number of iterations, our differentially private
decomposition algorithm may converge to a sub-optimal solution. Therefore, we provide
theoretical bounds on the difference between the approximate and the optimal objective
function values.
The private resource-sharing methods proposed in this paper satisfy a particular version of
differential privacy, namely local differential privacy. It is a stronger version of the standard
differential privacy, which is typically satisﬁed with a trusted aggregator. In contrast, local
differential privacy algorithms, like the ones studied in this paper, operate without the need
for a trusted aggregator (Duchi et al., 2013; Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011). To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst formal treatment of data privacy without any trusted party
in multi-party resource sharing via linear optimization. Using differential privacy without
the assumption of a trusted aggregator results in larger noise in the shared quantities. To
circumvent that problem, we further propose a novel modiﬁcation to increase the efﬁciency
of the private decomposition algorithm by reducing the noise variance and, consequently, the
optimality gap.
We support our methods and theoretical results with a set of numerical experiments on
a production planning example and present the trade-off between optimality and privacy
guarantee. We specify our framework for linear programming, as it addresses a wide range
of practical problems and is arguably the most frequently used optimization tool (Albrecht
and Stadtler, 2015; Ibaraki and Katoh, 1988; Pérez-Perales et al., 2024; Topaloglu, 2012).
We believe that our analyses could inspire further studies on privacy-aware operations man-
agement.
1.2 Review of related literature
Collaborative relationships between organizations have received considerable attention in the
literature, and it is very popular in many industries, including airlines (Wright et al., 2010),
logistics, maritime shipping (Lai et al., 2019; Verdonck et al., 2013), and retail (Guo and
Wu, 2018). Most of these studies assume complete information exchange among partners,
which may not be realistic in practice due to the regulations. Therefore, several studies focus
on the techniques to minimize information sharing in collaborative optimization problems.
Poundarikapuram and Veeramani (2004) propose a decentralized decision-making frame-
work based on the L-shaped method for a collaborative planning problem in a supply chain.
123

1010
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
In this framework, the centralized planning problem is decomposed into a master problem
that involves the common variables across all parties and several sub-problems that con-
tain each party’s private objectives and variables. The authors present an iterative procedure
where parties solve their local problems independently and share parts of their dual solutions
to solve the master problem at each iteration. Topaloglu (2012) focuses on capacity sharing
in airline alliances and proposes a decomposition approach to ﬁnd booking limits for each
alliance partner as well as bid prices for shared ﬂights. This approach, however, requires
parties to share their data. Kovács et al. (2013) study collaboration in lot-sizing problems
with two parties and investigate different solution approaches, including centralized and
decentralized methods. To minimize information exchange, the lot-sizing problem is decom-
posed and solved by each party sequentially in the decentralization approach. Albrecht and
Stadtler (2015) propose a scheme to coordinate the collaborative parties in a decentralized
environment where parties’ local private problems can be modeled as linear programs. In
the proposed scheme, each party exchanges proposals by sharing information on the primal
optimal solution of the linear programs.
Decomposition approaches have also attracted great attention in the machine-learning
community. Federated learning, initially proposed in Shokri and Shmatikov (2015); Koneˇcn`y
et al. (2016); Mcmahan et al. (2017), focuses on learning tasks in a distributed environment.
Commonly, machine learning models require a central training phase where all the data
needs to be shared. The use of decomposition approaches enables local training, eliminat-
ing the need for data exchange. Thus, while federated learning aims to avoid data sharing
through decomposition, it operates in a different context compared to our work. It is designed
for distributed model training, whereas our approach addresses distributed optimization for
resource sharing. Even if the data is not shared in federated learning, adversarial attacks are
still possible through the shared model parameters during the training process. To address
this, many studies in the literature provide privacy guarantees using various methods. Geyer
et al. (2017) design a differentially private federated learning algorithm. Yang et al. (2019)
and Tran et al. (2024) explore privacy in federated learning by combining differential privacy
with secure multi-party computation protocols. We refer the reader to Li et al. (2020) and
Mothukuri et al. (2021) for extensive literature reviews on federated learning and its privacy,
respectively.
One well-known approach to addressing privacy breaches in data sharing through collab-
orations is the use of transformation-based methods. These methods allow the reconstruction
of the given model with altered data while preserving the optimality. For instance, Vaidya
(2009) proposes a transformation method for linear programming models, where one party
owns the objective function and the other owns the constraints. The key idea is to transform the
linear programming problem into a new space using a linear transformation such that both the
objective function and constraints are modiﬁed. This allows the two parties to solve the prob-
lem using the transformed data without revealing their private information. However, Vaidya
(2009) acknowledges limitations in terms of security and practical scalability, particularly
when dealing with repeated use of the same data or more complex optimization scenarios.
In follow-up work, Bednarz et al. (2009) show that the proposed method by Vaidya (2009)
is valid under speciﬁc restrictions. Mangasarian (2011, 2012) present transformation-based
approaches to preserve privacy in both vertically and horizontally partitioned linear models
with speciﬁc constraints. Li et al. (2013) extend this approach by incorporating inequality
constraints into horizontally partitioned models. Later, Hong and Vaidya (2014) show that
this transformation method does not fully guarantee privacy and can be vulnerable to attacks,
where private data can be exposed by others. The authors revise the initial approach of Vaidya
(2009) to improve the level of privacy. All these studies focus on concealing both input data
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1011
and the primal decision variables. More recent work addresses privacy in larger, more com-
plex problem settings. Hastings et al. (2022) work on secure multi-party computation for
ﬁnancial networks and analyze the efﬁciency and convergence of their proposed algorithms.
Karaca et al. (2023) study data privacy in a collaborative network revenue management prob-
lem using a transformation-based approach. Unlike previous work, their method keeps both
primal and dual variables private to each party. However, they also highlight the computa-
tional challenges, as the transformed model could be difﬁcult to solve when problems become
large-scale. To address this, they propose an alternative approach, but it introduces the risk
of privacy leakage, where private data in the model could be inferred by others. Overall,
transformation-based methods face two main issues. They either fail to fully guarantee pri-
vacy or are computationally impractical for solving even small-scale problems (Hastings et
al., 2022; Karaca et al., 2023; Narayanan and Shmatikov, 2006; Toft, 2009). As an alternative,
differential privacy, ﬁrst introduced in the ﬁeld of computer science by Dwork (2006), has
gained signiﬁcant attention in the literature as a more robust solution for privacy-preserving
data sharing.
Differential privacy is a probabilistic deﬁnition of privacy that suggests using random
perturbations to minimize the probability of revealing speciﬁc records from neighboring
databases (Dwork et al., 2006). Several methods with differential privacy guarantees have
been adopted in industry (Apple Inc, 2017; Erlingsson et al., 2014). Chaudhuri et al. (2011)
study the differentially private empirical risk minimization in machine learning, where the
loss function and the regularizer are convex. Following the work of Dwork et al. (2006), they
propose two algorithms satisfying differential privacy based on output and objective function
perturbations, respectively. Bassily et al. (2014) consider special cases in convex empirical
risk minimization with (non)-smooth regularizer. Extending the work of Chaudhuri et al.
(2011), they propose a gradient perturbation approach to satisfy differential privacy. Wang
et al. (2017) also study the gradient perturbation approach for (non)-convex loss functions.
Zhang and Zhu (2017) present two differentially private algorithms using the alternating
direction method of multipliers for the empirical risk minimization problem. Recently, dif-
ferential privacy has gained signiﬁcant attention in the community of operations research and
management science. Hale and Egerstedty (2015) study a multi-party optimization problem
in a cloud structure, where the aim is to optimize a global objective function with global
inequality constraints. In the study, the parties send all the necessary data to the cloud, whose
role is to keep each party’s data private. Han et al. (2016) study a differentially private dis-
tributed constrained optimization problem in resource allocation, where they assume a convex
and Lipschitz objective function. They consider only shared resources in a speciﬁc structure,
called the server-client network structure. Even though this study is conducted for a resource
allocation setting, it differs from our study in that it involves the direct application of the
stochastic subgradient method and its lack of rigorous bounds on approximate optimality. We
also note that there is a growing body of literature on data privacy in service systems. Chen et
al. (2023), Chen et al. (2022) and Lei et al. (2023) study private sequential decision-making
and dynamic pricing. They develop pricing algorithms with differential privacy guarantees
for online and ofﬂine settings.
Hsu et al. (2014) study differential privacy in linear programs. They deﬁne variations of
neighboring datasets and analyze solution methods for each of the deﬁnitions. Later, Hsu et
al. (2016) focus on privacy in distributed convex programming models, where the solution is
naturally partitioned among the involved parties. In such problems, joint differential privacy
(a relaxed deﬁnition of differential privacy) is typically applied. Joint differential privacy
is usually achieved through the presence of a trusted aggregator who collects data from all
parties. Hsu et al. (2016) study privacy in resource allocation problems using joint differen-
123

1012
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
tial privacy with a trusted aggregator. This notion is widely used in mechanism design and
equilibrium computation in certain large games where the aggregator (or mediator) collects
data from players and recommends actions to form an equilibrium (Cummings et al., 2015;
Kearns et al., 2015, 2014; Rogers and Roth, 2014). Unlike previous studies, we adopt a
stronger notion of differential privacy, namely local differential privacy (LDP), as proposed
by Kasiviswanathan et al. (2011) and Duchi et al. (2013). LDP differs from traditional dif-
ferential privacy approaches in that it does not require a trusted aggregator. Recently, LDP
applications in distributed optimization algorithms within communication networks have
gained signiﬁcant attention, where agents cooperatively minimize the sum of their cost func-
tions while only communicating with their neighbors, such as in power grids or wireless
sensor networks (Wang et al., 2024). Huang et al. (2015) employ a differentially private dis-
tributed optimization algorithm by adding noise to the states, allowing agents to hide their
local cost functions. This approach has been extended to time-varying directed networks by
Zhu et al. (2018) and Zhao et al. (2024), where communication links between agents evolve.
Ding et al. (2021) propose a distributed algorithm that preserves the privacy of agents’ cost
functions and demonstrates linear convergence under strong convexity and Lipschitz gradient
assumptions. Additionally, Hu et al. (2023) focus on directed graphs, studying the robustness
of their approach against adversarial attacks. In these studies, agents iteratively update their
states based on some rules that typically incorporate previous state information, local cost
functions, and messages from neighboring agents. To ensure privacy, agents apply LDP to
perturb the messages they transmit, such as states or cost functions, before sharing them with
their neighbors. These distributed algorithms are heavily inﬂuenced by the structure of the
graph and the variations in communication channels (Wang et al., 2024). In contrast, our
approach focuses on a multi-party resource-sharing model within a general linear optimiza-
tion framework, where parties solve their local optimization problem at each iteration. As
discussed above, LDP locally perturbs each party’s input data, ensuring that only the data
owner has access to the original data, thus providing much stronger privacy protection. The
consequence of using LDP –without the assumption of a trusted aggregator– is the introduc-
tion of larger noise in the shared data. We address this issue with smart step-size selection
techniques as well as an adaptive clipping method designed to reduce noise while preserving
the same level of differential privacy. For a comprehensive review of LDP and its applications,
we refer readers to Yang et al. (2024).
2 Methodology
In this section, we introduce the mathematical model for multi-party resource-sharing and
our initial attempt to obtain a data-hiding solution approach with decomposition. Suppose
we have K > 1 parties that agree to collectively use m ≥1 shared resources with capacities
given in the vector c ∈[0, ∞)m. In addition, each party k has its mk private constraints; such
as individual resources, demand restrictions, production requirements, and ﬂow conservation.
We let bk ∈Rmk be the right-hand-sides of the private constraints of party k. Next, each party
k has matrices Ak ∈Rm×nk and Bk ∈Rmk×nk that include the technology coefﬁcients related
to the shared and private constraints, respectively. Here, nk represents the number of variables
controlled by party k, e.g., the number of products. The objective of the model is to ﬁnd the
optimal allocations of the parties such that the total utility is maximized (without loss of
generality, we give a maximization model, and all our discussion can be trivially extended
to a minimization setting). For each k, we let xk ∈Rnk be the vector of party k’s individual
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1013
variables and uk ∈Rnk be its utility vector. The canonical multi-party resource-sharing
model then becomes a linear program:
Z P = maximize
K

k=1
u⊺
k xk,
(1a)
subject to
K

k=1
Akxk ≤c,
(1b)
Bkxk ≤bk,
k = 1, . . . , K.
(1c)
The constraints in (1b) guarantee that the total consumptions of the parties do not exceed
the shared capacities, whereas those in (1c) express the private constraints of each party k.
We note that the linear model in (1a)-(1c) is already quite general and used in many real-
world applications from production planning to portfolio selection, from logistics to network
revenue management (Albrecht and Stadtler, 2015; Birbil et al., 2014; Ibaraki and Katoh,
1988; Topaloglu, 2012).
In its current form, the model (1a)-(1c) can be solved when all input is available. Before
raising the privacy concerns, let us ﬁrst formally deﬁne what constitutes the (private) dataset
for each party.
Deﬁnition 2.1 ( (Private) Dataset) The (private) dataset of party k is Dk = {Ak, Bk, bk, uk}.
Although the parties agree to solve the resource-sharing problem collectively, they are unwill-
ing to share their datasets with their fellow parties. This is because a dataset consists of
sensitive information for its corresponding party. For instance, in a network revenue man-
agement problem, a dataset of a party may consist of private information about its products,
capacities, and revenues (Karaca et al., 2023). Given this privacy concern, the main question
becomes: How can a party join the others to solve the resource-sharing problem collec-
tively, but keep its dataset private? To address this question, we ﬁrst propose a decomposition
approach, where each party ends up solving a sequence of sub-problems without sharing any
data with the other parties.
2.1 Data-hiding with decomposition
Our decomposition approach stems from a natural observation: If the shared capacities are
divided among the parties a priori, then there is no need to solve the overall problem, as each
party can independently solve its problem with the allocated capacity. However, ensuring a
feasible allocation of shared resources is not always possible unless we have sensitive infor-
mation from all parties. In addition, a priori partitioning of the shared capacities can easily
lead to a sub-optimal solution without maximizing the total utility; see e.g., the discussion
given by Birbil et al. (2014) on network capacity fragmentation. Therefore, we need to devise
a scheme that divides the shared capacity optimally among the parties without revealing their
private data. This decomposition approach is based on a well-known subgradient method
(Ertogral and Wu, 2000; Kutanoglu et al., 1999).
Deﬁne the new decision vector sk ∈Rm to be the allocation to party k from the shared
resources, and let c = K
k=1 sk. We can then write problem (1a)-(1c) equivalently as
123

1014
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
ZP = maximize
K

k=1
u⊺
k xk,
(2a)
subject to
Akxk ≤sk,
k = 1, . . . , K,
(2b)
Bkxk ≤bk,
k = 1, . . . , K,
(2c)
K

k=1
sk = c,
(2d)
sk ≥0,
k = 1, . . . , K.
(2e)
This model is almost separable except for the set of constraints (2d). We can relax this
constraint by introducing a Lagrange multiplier vector λ ∈Rm. Then, the objective function
of the relaxed problem becomes
L(x, s, λ) := c⊺λ +
K

k=1

u⊺
k xk −s⊺
k λ

,
where x := (x1, . . . , xK ) and s := (s1, . . . , sK ). If for each party k we further deﬁne the
sub-problem
g(λ; Dk) := maximize
u⊺
k xk −s⊺
k λ,
subject to
Akxk ≤sk,
Bkxk ≤bk,
sk ≥0,
(3)
and assume that its dual has a feasible solution, then we obtain the Lagrangian dual problem
ZL := min
λ max
x,s L(x, s, λ) = min
λ

c⊺λ +
K

k=1
g(λ; Dk)

.
(4)
Since we are dealing with linear programs, the strong duality trivially holds, and hence
ZP = ZL. This implies that we can solve the dual problem (4) instead of the primal problem
(1a)-(1c). We denote the optimal solution to (4) by x∗, s∗and λ∗.
It is important to observe that the dual problem becomes separable over the parties when
the Lagrange multiplier vector λ is ﬁxed. Moreover, the well-known subgradient algorithm
for solving the dual problem is based on updating the Lagrange multiplier vector iteratively
(Bertsekas, 2015), where the update at iteration t takes the form
λ(t+1) = λ(t) −ν(t)

c −
K

k=1
s(t)
k
 
.
(5)
In (5), ν(t) is the step-size at iteration t. Assuming that norms of subgradients and the dis-
tance ∥λ(0) −λ∗∥are bounded, the subgradient algorithm is guaranteed to decrease the
sub-optimality bound at the rate of t−0.5 for any choice of ν(t) as suggested by Boyd et al.
(2003).
The outline of the dual decomposition approach is illustrated for one iteration in Figure 1.
The primal solutions s(t)
k
are obtained by each party k solving its sub-problem g(λ(t); Dk)
on its own. Hence, there is no need for party k to share its sensitive dataset Dk, but only
the intermediate allocations s(t)
k , with the other parties. These intermediate allocations are
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1015
Fig. 1 Illustration of the dual decomposition approach to obtain the proposed data-hiding algorithm for multi-
party resource sharing.
gathered to obtain λ(t+1) as in (5). The resulting update at iteration t is given by
(x(t)
k , s(t)
k ) = arg max g(λ(t), Dk),
k = 1, . . . , K,
λ(t+1) = λ(t) −ν(t)

c −
K

k=1
s(t)
k
 
.
(6)
The overall algorithm may start with the dual feasible solution λ = 0 (for ease of reference,
we give the dual of (1a)-(1c) in the supplementary document).
In this setting, we assume that each party shares the obtained intermediate allocations with
other parties truthfully. This is a well-known assumption when parties want to collaborate
for their mutual beneﬁt, and hence, act honestly to obtain the correct results (Atallah et al.,
2003; Hyndman et al., 2013). Furthermore, in many cases, the collaboration between ﬁrms
lasts for more than one occasion. Therefore, a ﬁrm must consider the long-term prospects of
future collaborations that can be jeopardized by opportunistic behavior.
Updating with a momentum term:One can consider adding a momentum term in the update
step in (5) to improve the computational performance of the dual decomposition approach.
Accordingly, the new update step becomes
λ(t+1) = λ(t) −ν(t)

c −
K

k=1
s(t)
k
 
+ γ

λ(t) −λ(t−1)
.
(7)
Here, γ > 0 is a momentum parameter.
2.2 Differentially private resource allocation
Although the data-hiding approach in Section 2.1 prevents sharing sensitive data directly, it
does not give a formal guarantee of data privacy. The deterministic and iterative nature of
the approach could leak information regarding the datasets D1, . . . , DK . To this end, one can
123

1016
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
consider applying transformation, encryption, or anonymization techniques to ensure data
privacy. However, these methods either do not strictly guarantee privacy, or they are com-
putationally not feasible for solving even small-scale problems (Narayanan and Shmatikov,
2006; Sweeney, 1997; Toft, 2009).
For a formal data privacy guarantee, we consider differential privacy (Dwork, 2006).
In this section, we present a modiﬁed version of the data-hiding approach in Section 2.1
that provides differential privacy. We adopt a particular version of differential privacy for
our approach, namely local differential privacy (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011). We start
by providing essential background material on local differential privacy and subsequently
discuss its application to the multi-party resource allocation problem.
Background on local differential privacy
Local differential privacy (LDP) is a property that concerns randomized algorithms. A ran-
domized algorithm takes an input dataset and returns a random output, where the randomness
is intrinsic to the algorithm’s inner mechanisms. Let D be the set of all possible datasets for
a single party. A randomized algorithm that operates on datasets in D and outputs a random
value in a set O can be deﬁned as a pair A = (μ, A), where μ is a probability distribution on
 representing the source of randomness in the algorithm, and the function A : ×D →O
returns the random output A(ω, D) ∈O upon taking the random number w ∼μ and the
dataset D ∈D as its inputs. Throughout the paper, P will be used for probabilities induced
by the randomization. We give the formal deﬁnition of local differential privacy below.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Local Differential Privacy (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011)) Let ϵ, δ > 0. A
randomized algorithm A = (μ, A) is (ϵ, δ)-locally differential private if for all pairs of D, D′
and all S ⊆O, it satisﬁes
P[A(ω, D) ∈S] ≤eϵP[A(ω, D′) ∈S] + δ,
where and the randomness is due to ω ∼μ.
This deﬁnition implies an (ϵ, δ)-LDP algorithm outputs similarly when the input dataset
changes. Smaller ϵ and δ imply more privacy.
While Deﬁnition 2.2 characterizes the probabilistic behavior of the algorithm from a “sen-
sitive data →output” perspective, it is possible to draw inference-related (output →sensitive
data) interpretations from this deﬁnition. An LDP algorithm ensures that any statistical infer-
ence on the sensitive data using the algorithm’s random output (as its sample) has limited
inference quality. Speciﬁcally, Dong et al. (2022) offer a comprehensive discussion about the
Neyman-Pearson-type guarantees of (L)DP.
Local differential privacy is a stronger version of the standard differential privacy, also
referred to as centralized differential privacy. The difference between those two deﬁnitions is
signiﬁcant. Differential privacy concerns algorithms that operate on aggregate datasets from
multiple users, such as (D1, . . . , Dk, . . . , DK ), and it ensures that the output does not change
much when one user’s data in the aggregate dataset changes, e.g., leading to a neighbor
data collection (D1, . . . , D′
k, . . . , DK ). That is why differential privacy, and some of its
weaker variants such as joint differential privacy, typically require a trusted aggregator. Local
differential privacy, on the other hand, concerns algorithms that operate on a single party’s
data. In loose terms, each party protects its privacy by sharing a noisy version of a computation
performed solely on its own data. In this way, local differential privacy algorithms do not
require a trusted aggregator. Apart from this difference, the same mathematical tools can be
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1017
used for both types of differential privacy. In particular, properties such as composition and
post-processing apply to either type. Likewise, noise-adding mechanisms, like the Gaussian
mechanism, can be used to provide both types of privacy. Finally, relations between other
forms of privacy apply similarly to both types of differential privacy.
Most (local) differential privacy algorithms achieve randomization by adding noise to their
output. In this paper, we consider the Gaussian mechanism, where the added noise is drawn
from the normal distribution, whose variance depends on the sensitivity of the calculations
from the sensitive data to obtain the output. We next give the formal deﬁnition for sensitivity
that is used for calibrating the added noise in (local) differential privacy.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Sensitivity) The L2-sensitivity of a function f : D →Rd, d ≥1, is given
by
 f :=
sup
D,D′∈D
∥f (D) −f (D′)∥2.
LDP resource allocation: algorithmic details
Now we can present our LDP resource allocation algorithm. Consider the update in (6).
As the parties collaborate, they share the data-sensitive outputs s(t)
k
with each other. The
resource allocation algorithm can be made LDP if each party k shares their s(t)
k ’s with privacy-
preserving noise. Speciﬁcally, the update in (6) is modiﬁed as
(x(t)
k , s(t)
k ) = arg max g(λ(t), Dk),
k = 1, . . . , K,
(8a)
˜s(t)
k
= s(t)
k + ω(t)
k ,
k = 1, . . . , K,
(8b)
λ(t+1) = λ(t) −ν(t)

c −
K

k=1
˜s(t)
k
 
+ γ

λ(t) −λ(t−1)
.
(8c)
Algorithm 1 shows the proposed LDP algorithm run for T iterations. If we replace s(t)
k
with ˜s(t)
k
in Figure 1, then we obtain one iteration of the main loop in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Locally differential private resource allocation algorithm
Require: λ(0) = 0; number of iterations T ; privacy parameters (ϵ, δ);
datasets Dk = {Ak, Bk, bk, uk}, k = 1, . . . , K; step sizes ν(t), t = 1, . . . , T
Ensure: (x(T )
k
, s(T )
k
), k = 1, . . . , K
for t = 0, 1, . . . , T do
Each party k solves (3) and obtains its allocation, s(t)
k
as in (8a)
Each party k publishes noisy allocation, ˜s(t)
k
as in (8b)
Lagrange multiplier, λ(t+1) is calculated by all parties with (8c)
end for
The noise-adding step in (8b) is a Gaussian mechanism (Bun and Steinke, 2016), where
the privacy-preserving noise variables ω(t)
k s are independent and each has a zero-mean mul-
tivariate Gaussian distribution with diagonal covariance. To ensure that the resulting scheme
is (ϵ, δ)-LDP, the noise distribution in (8b) must be adjusted to the parameters ϵ, δ, m, T ,
and the L2-sensitivity of sk’s.
123

1018
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
We assume that each party k has an additional set of constraints sk ≤c added to its set of
private constraints {xk ∈Rnk : Bkxk ≤bk}. This is a reasonable assumption as the shared
capacities are known by all the involved parties. We can therefore ensure that
0 ≤sk, j ≤c j,
j = 1, . . . , m, k = 1, . . . , K.
(9)
Consequently, the L2-sensitivity of the mechanism in (8a) that computes sk, j is c j. Fur-
thermore, if the updates in (8a)-(8c) are run for T iterations, we end up with a composition
of T m Gaussian mechanisms. The L2-sensitivity for each component, together with a total
number of iterations T , determines the variance of ω(t)
k to provide (ϵ, δ)-LDP. The following
proposition speciﬁes that variance.
Proposition 2.1 The multi-party resource sharing algorithm using updates (8b) for T itera-
tions provides (ϵ, δ)-LDP if the random vectors are drawn as
ω(t)
k, j ∼N

0,
T mc2
j
2ρ(ϵ, δ)
 
,
k = 1, . . . , K; j = 1, . . . , m; t = 1, . . . , T ,
(10)
where ρ(ϵ, δ) = (

log(1/δ) + ϵ −

log(1/δ))2.
The proof of Proposition 2.1, given in the supplementary document, exploits a related def-
inition of differential privacy, namely zero-concentrated differential privacy (zCDP) (Bun
and Steinke, 2016). The proof ﬁrst establishes zCDP of the Gaussian mechanism in a single
iteration (Bun and Steinke, 2016, Proposition 6), then uses the composition property of zCDP
to calculate the privacy after T iterations (Bun and Steinke, 2016, Lemma 7), and ﬁnally uses
a conversion from zCDP to standard (ϵ, δ)-LDP (Bun and Steinke, 2016, Proposition 3). The
analysis tools needed for the proof are provided in the supplementary document.
2.3 Error bounds for LDP resource allocation algorithm
The privacy guarantee of the modiﬁed algorithm comes at the expense of stopping earlier,
possibly without reaching the optimal solution. Moreover, the stochasticity due to using noisy
subgradients also affects the convergence behavior of the algorithm. We give an upper bound
implying the suboptimality of the differentially private algorithm in the following theorem.
The theorem requires a typical assumption used in the analysis of subgradient methods (Boyd
et al., 2003).
Assumption 2.1 ∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2 ≤M for some M > 0.
We deﬁne the distance to the optimal objective function value at iteration t as
G(t) := L(x(t), s(t), λ(t)) −L(x∗, s∗, λ∗),
t ≥0.
Thefollowingtheoremestablishesanupperboundfortheexpectationof G(t) withoutmomen-
tum updates, i.e., γ = 0.
Theorem 2.1 Suppose Assumption 2.1 holds and Algorithm 1 is run for T iterations with a
ﬁxed step-size ν(t) = ν and with noise variances given in (10) to provide (ϵ, δ)-LDP. Then,
there exists a ν, for which the minimum expected distance to the optimal objective function
value is bounded as
min
t=0,1,...,T E[G(t)] ≤M B
√
T
,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1019
100
500
1000
2000
3000
0.1
0.5
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Fig. 2 B as a function of ϵ and K (with δ = 0.001).
where the constant B is deﬁned as
B = ∥c∥
 T mK
2ρ(ϵ, δ) + (K −1)2
1/2
.
(11)
The proof of this result is given in the supplementary document. Unlike in many applica-
tions using differential privacy, we observe that the bound increases with K. This is because
the variance of the overall noise with K parties is proportional to K, while the sum of the
non-noisy s(t)
k values targets c. That is why summing does not necessarily improve, unlike the
standard case, where the K variables are independent with a distribution independent of K.
This highlights the unique challenges and considerations in our scenario, where the standard
assumptions of differential privacy may not directly apply due to speciﬁc constraints and
characteristics of our problem setting.
Notethatρ(ϵ, δ) ≈ϵ2/(4 log(1/δ)).Hence,theboundinTheorem2.1couldbereducedby
increasing ϵ or δ, making the algorithm less private. This is a typical trade-off for differentially
private iterative algorithms, where either the privacy loss or the error increases with the
number of computations using the sensitive data (Ji et al., 2014).
To understand the impact of the privacy budget (ϵ) and the problem size (K) on the error
bound, Figure 2 illustrates how B (and consequently the error bound) changes in response
to variations in ϵ and K, with all other parameters held constant. As shown in the ﬁgure,
B decreases signiﬁcantly as the algorithm becomes less private, i.e., as ϵ increases. This
trend holds consistently across party sizes. Additionally, the ﬁgure reveals that as the number
of parties increases, the impact of a larger privacy budget on reducing B becomes more
prominent. For K = 5, the inﬂuence of ϵ on B remains relatively modest, whereas for
K = 10, the reduction in B is more substantial as ϵ grows. This indicates that in scenarios with
more participating parties, the balance between privacy and optimality becomes increasingly
critical.
To extend this analysis, Figure 3 additionally incorporates the effect of the number of
shared resources m. Recall that the upper bound for the expected optimality gap scales
123

1020
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
Fig. 3 B as a function of ϵ, K and m (with δ = 0.001).
proportionally to B = ∥c∥

T mK
2ρ(ϵ,δ) + (K −1)21/2
, which implies that the error bound
grows with both m and K. The ﬁgure illustrates this theoretical dependence. For ﬁxed ϵ and
K, increasing m shifts the curves upward, indicating a larger theoretical suboptimality bound.
Interestingly, the sensitivity of B to ϵ becomes more pronounced as either K or m increases.
In particular, when both K and m are large (e.g., K = 10, m = 10), the reduction in B as
ϵ grows is substantially steeper than in smaller-scale settings. This reﬂects the fact that in
higher-dimensional shared-resource environments, the privacy-induced variance term
T mK
2ρ(ϵ,δ)
dominates the bound. Consequently, the privacy–utility trade-off becomes more critical as
the problem size grows along either dimension.
When the momentum term is involved in the update (8c), i.e., γ > 0, it is also possible
to give a more speciﬁc bound on the suboptimality of Algorithm 1. The proof is deferred to
the supplementary document.
Theorem 2.2 Suppose Assumption 2.1 holds. If the multi-party resource-sharing algorithm
with momentum updates is run with a ﬁxed step-size for T iterations with (ϵ, δ)-LDP, the
minimum expected distance to the optimal objective function value is bounded as
min
t=0,1,...,T E[G(t)] ≤M2
2T ν + ν
2 B2
provided that the step-size satisﬁes 0 ≤ν ≤
√
G(0)2+(1−γ )B2T M2−G(0)
B2T
with B as in (11).
Remark.
With its current form, our differentially private algorithm uses the solution
obtained at the last iteration, T . This is because parties only share s(t)
k
at any iteration
t, and there is no way to assess whether the best solution is achieved in that iteration with-
out breaching privacy. However, the best solution could be tracked by extending the current
sharing scheme such that each party shares their objective function values in each iteration,
g(λ(t); Dk) in addition to s(t)
k . This additionally shared data-sensitive information would also
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1021
consume the privacy budget and have an impact on the achieved results due to a potential
increase in the noise variances.
2.4 Differential privacy with clipping and adaptive sensitivity
The bounds presented in Theorem 2.1 and Theorem 2.2 become loose when K, the number
of parties, increases. The main reason is as follows. Recall that for each k = 1, . . . , K the
sensitivity of sk is c. This results in the total variance of the noisy sum K
k=1 ˜s(t)
k
being
proportional to K. To overcome that problem, we propose an alternative update method that
reduces the sensitivity, thus reducing the amount of noise in ˜sk values, without introducing
additional privacy loss. Firstly, we determine a parameter α ≥1 and let ¯c = αc. For iteration
t, we introduce a capping variable, ¯s(t)
k , with the initialization ¯s(0)
k
= ¯c/K. Instead of the
update step presented in (8b), we have the following update steps:
(x(t)
k , s(t)
k ) = arg max g(λ(t), Dk),
k = 1, . . . , K,
(12a)
˜s(t)
k, j = min{¯s(t)
k, j, s(t)
k, j} + wk, j,
wk, j ∼N

0,
T m¯s(t)2
k, j
2ρ(ϵ, δ)
 
,
j = 1, . . . , m,
k = 1, . . . , K,
(12b)
λ(t+1) = λ(t) −ν(t)

c −
K

k=1
˜s(t)
k
 
+ γ

λ(t) −λ(t−1)
,
(12c)
¯s(t+1)
k, j
= ¯c j
max{min{c j, ˜s(t)
k, j}, τ}
K
k′=1 max{min{c j, ˜s(t)
k′, j}, τ}
,
j = 1, . . . , m,
k = 1, . . . , K,
(12d)
where τ is a small positive number (serving to avoid 0).
In this form of updates, even though the value of sk can change from 0 to c, we can make
the sensitivity smaller. This is because the deterministic part in (12b) is bounded above by
¯s(t)
k, j. Since K
k=1 ¯s(t)
k, j = αc j, the amount of noise in K
k=1 ˜s(t)
k, j is proportional to αc j. Since
α < K, this amount of noise is lower than the K c of the previous version of the algorithm.
Additionally, in (12d) we adjust ¯sk, j values in a predictive manner so that the capping value
¯s(t)
k, j for a party j is made larger for the next iteration if its actual sk, j value, estimated by
˜s(t)
k, j is larger. For completeness, we state that the modiﬁed algorithm that uses clipping to
reduce the amount of privacy-preserving noise is still (ϵ, δ)-LDP; a proof is given in the
supplementary document.
Corollary 2.1 The multi-party resource sharing algorithm using updates (12a)-(12d) for T
iterations is (ϵ, δ)-LDP.
As a result of the clipping and truncation operations in (12a)-(12d), the approximate step is
nolongeranunbiasedestimateofthesubgradient.Therefore,ourconvergenceandoptimality-
bound results above do not immediately apply. However, we have observed a favorable impact
of smaller variance due to clipping and truncation in our numerical experiments.
123

1022
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
3 Computational study
This section presents an application with the generic model (1a)-(1c). We simulate a produc-
tion planning problem with synthetic data to evaluate the efﬁciency of the proposed methods
and discuss the effects of the privacy parameters on the results. We start by explaining our
simulation setup in detail and then continue by presenting our numerical results. Our Python
implementation, along with the steps to conduct the simulation study are available at our
online repository (link).
3.1 Setup
We construct test instances with multiple parties that share a set of capacity constraints.
We consider two levels of shared capacities, namely m ∈{5, 10}, in order to assess the
effect of increasing the number of shared constraints across parties. The components of the
shared capacity vector c ∈Rm are randomly sampled from the interval [10, 20]. Each party
k ∈{1, . . . , K} has rk private capacities, and nk products to produce. We also introduce
demand constraints for each product, and hence, party k has a total of mk = nk + rk private
constraints designated by the right-hand-side vector bk ∈Rmk. The parameters rk and nk are
sampled from the sets {5, 6, . . . , 10} and {10, 11, . . . , 20}, respectively. The private capacity
limits are randomly sampled from the interval [0.0, 10.0]. To ensure feasibility with respect
to demand constraints, we ﬁrst solve the problem without demand limits and then deﬁne
sampling intervals for product demands accordingly. The components of the technology
matrices Ak ∈Rm×nk and Bk ∈Rmk×nk are obtained randomly from the intervals [0.0, 5.0]
and [0.0, 1.0], respectively. The utility coefﬁcients uk ∈Rnk of party k are sampled from the
interval [50.0, 150.0].
We evaluate the differentially private algorithm across various parameter settings, con-
sidering K ∈{5, 10} for both m = 5 and m = 10, to examine the effect of varying the
number of parties and shared capacities on performance. To further investigate scalability
in the number of parties, we conduct additional experiments with K ∈{15, 20} for m = 5.
These results are presented in Appendix E.
Aligned with industrial applications, we set the privacy budget at ϵ ∈{0.1, 0.5, 2.0, 4.0}
while keeping δ ﬁxed at 0.001 (Apple Inc, 2023; Erlingsson et al., 2014). The value of ϵ,
where ϵ > 0, serves as a determinant of the extent of privacy leakage, with smaller values
signifying stronger protection of participants’ privacy. Our computational results are reported
over 100 simulation runs for each experiment. In all our experiments for the differentially
private setting, we use the constant step-size scheme. The choice of step-length plays a crucial
role in inﬂuencing the convergence behavior of our differentially private algorithm due to
using noisy subgradients. In our numerical experiments, we identify instances where the
differentially private algorithms exhibit slower convergence or even divergence. To ensure a
fair comparison among different privacy-preserving algorithms, we present results from the
best-performing 90% of 100 replications based on the optimality gap in all experiments. It
is important to note that the primary objective of our numerical experiments is to assess the
inﬂuence of privacy parameter ϵ on different problem settings, rather than to compete with
state-of-the-art non-private solution algorithms.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1023
Fig. 4 The percentage differences between the objective function values of the non-private model and the
data-hiding model at different iterations. The subﬁgure shows an enlarged view of the rectangular region
marked with the dashed black line on the plot.
3.2 Results
We start with the data-hiding algorithm by looking at its performance over iterations. Recall
that most of the data exchange requirements are eliminated in this scheme. Parties need to
share only their allocation vectors sk at each iteration. In Figure 4, we report the percentage
distances to the optimal objective function values of model (1a)-(1c) for the ﬁrst 1,000
iterations. The solid line represents the mean across replications, while the shaded region
shows the maximum and minimum values. Note that on the vertical axis of the ﬁgure, we
present the percentage gaps with respect to the optimal objective function values.
As Figure 4 shows, the objective function value obtained with the data-hiding algorithm
can be less than 1% off the optimal objective function value. However, this percentage varies
signiﬁcantly as the problem instance changes. On average, when the number of iterations
reaches 790, the algorithm is already 25% away from the optimal objective function value.
Thisindicatesthatifpartiesusetheupdatesgiveninequation (6)onlyuptoacertainnumberof
iterations, they can still achieve an acceptable total utility by disclosing only their allotments
from the shared capacities at each iteration.
To provide a more interpretable measure of variability, we additionally report the empiri-
cal variance of the percentage gaps over iterations in Appendix D (Figure 12). The variance
decreases substantially during the early iterations and stabilizes afterward, indicating that
most of the instability occurs in the initial phase of the algorithm. This complements the
min–max bands in Figure 4 and conﬁrms that the dispersion narrows as the algorithm pro-
gresses.
We next incorporate momentum updates into the data-hiding algorithm to investigate
its impact on convergence. Figure 5 presents the results for the ﬁrst 1, 000 iterations. The
green shaded area represents the range between the maximum and minimum values for the
algorithm with momentum updates. The ﬁgure indicates that momentum updates improve the
123

1024
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
Fig. 5 Comparison between data-hiding algorithms (with and without momentum updates) concerning their
average percentage differences between the objective function values of the non-private model and the data-
hiding models for the ﬁrst 1,000 iterations.
convergence speed. On average, the algorithm with momentum reaches objective function
values within 15% of the optimal solution in approximately 284 iterations, whereas this level
is not attained within 1,000 iterations under the standard update. The variance analysis in
Appendix D further supports this observation, as the momentum scheme exhibits a faster
reduction in dispersion during the initial iterations. This demonstrates the potential beneﬁts
of incorporating momentum updates into the data-hiding algorithm.
Next, we conduct experiments with the differentially private algorithm and present our
results. We analyze the effects of parameters (ϵ, K, m) on the resulting objective function
values and the optimality gap, also known as the percentage regret in privacy literature (Chen
et al., 2023). To assess the impact of privacy on various market dynamics, we consider two
market share scenarios. In the ﬁrst scenario, we assume that a dominant participant, Party 1
(k = 1), is sufﬁciently inﬂuential to assert a claim of 50% of the shared resources, represented
as s1 ≤0.50c. The second scenario, where s1 ≤0.15c, simulates cases of moderate or low
claims depending on the number of participating parties. The upper bounds for the market
shares of the remaining parties are randomly generated. We also explore two scenarios to
examine the impact of buffer resources utilized for compensating for potential capacity
overﬂow. For those scenarios, we consider an upper bound sK for the total allocations for
all parties, such that K
k=1 sk ≤sK. In the ﬁrst scenario, we analyze a moderate market
where the total allocations for all parties can be at most 50% above the levels of the shared
resources; that is, sK = 1.5c. Then, we analyze an acquisitive scenario where sK = 2.0c. By
undertaking this analysis, we aim to observe the inﬂuence of diverse buffer resource policies
on the optimality gap. By varying the privacy budget, ϵ, the number of parties, K, and the
number of shared resources, m, we generate a total of 64 test instances across these different
scenarios. Figures 6 and 7 illustrate these market scenarios across different problem sizes.
We set the maximum number of iterations to T = 150 and the momentum parameter to
γ = 0.1 for all scenarios and adjust the other parameters accordingly. Recall that in our
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1025
Fig. 6 The shares of parties when K = 5.
Fig. 7 The shares of parties when K = 10.
differential private algorithm, the Lagrange multiplier vector is updated iteratively using the
noisy allocation vectors shared by the parties, as governed by local differential privacy. The
use of noisy Lagrange multipliers affects the convergence behavior of our algorithm. Momen-
tum updates incorporate information from previous steps, which can lead to an accumulation
of noise, particularly during the early iterations. Moreover, the algorithm is run for only a
limited number of iterations, and the initial oscillations of the momentum updates cannot
123

1026
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
be dampened, especially when the noise variance is high. Therefore, we set the momentum
parameter to a low value. Figures 8 to 11 plot the average percentage optimality gaps between
the objective function values obtained by the differentially private algorithms and the true
optimal objective value of the original non-private model.
In these ﬁgures, we investigate the performances of the differentially private models
with standard and momentum updates by comparing the respective optimality gaps with the
non-private model. We also present our results for the differentially private algorithm with
momentum updates and clipping. We ﬁrst observe that the average percentage gaps between
the non-private and the differentially private models decrease as the algorithm becomes less
private. This phenomenon is expected and attributed to the smaller magnitude of DP noise
added to sk for larger ϵ. This trade-off necessitates careful consideration when designing
differentially private multi-party resource-sharing mechanisms, as practitioners must strike a
balance that aligns with their speciﬁc privacy and utility requirements (Ryu et al., 2022). For
highly sensitive data, a smaller ϵ value may be chosen to ensure stronger privacy guarantees,
though this may result in larger optimality gaps and, consequently, reduced system efﬁciency.
On the other hand, in scenarios where privacy concerns are less stringent, a larger ϵ could be
used to achieve better performance with minimal privacy loss.
Analyzing the impact of buffer resources and the problem size yields interesting ﬁndings.
Recall that the market share scenarios s1 ≤0.50c and s1 ≤0.15c correspond to instances
where Party 1 either dominates the market or is dominated by other parties, respectively. In
the case of a smaller number of shared resources (m = 5), when a single party dominates the
market, the average optimality gap or regret is generally smaller. Interestingly, this pattern
changes when the number of shared resources increases to m = 10, particularly in the case
K = 5 (see Figures 10 and 11). The regret becomes relatively larger when a single party
holds a high share of the shared capacities. This result can be explained by the interaction
between dimensionality and local noise injection. When m increases, each party’s allocation
vector becomes higher-dimensional, and the noise added under local differential privacy is
applied component-wise. In the dominant-party scenario with K = 5, Party 1 controls a
large portion of a now higher-dimensional shared resource vector. Consequently, the injected
noise on its allocation has a more pronounced effect on the Lagrange multiplier updates and,
therefore, on the aggregate objective value. In contrast, when allocations are more evenly
distributed across parties, the impact of noise is effectively spread over multiple participants,
which mitigates its relative inﬂuence on the ﬁnal objective. Overall, the results indicate that
the relationship between market concentration and regret is not monotonic in m. Increasing
the number of shared resources changes how locally injected noise propagates through the
decomposition mechanism, especially in settings with a small number of parties.
Next, we compare the results of standard differential privacy, momentum updates, and
momentum updates with adaptive clipping. Figures 8 to 11 show that their overall perfor-
mance patterns are qualitatively similar across different conﬁgurations of (K, m). The impact
of the momentum update becomes more pronounced with an increase in the number of parties
and the utilization of buffer resources. Recall that, differently from the literature, our prob-
lem setting does not involve a trusted aggregator. Implementing differential privacy without
a trusted aggregator introduces more substantial noise into the shared resources. The use of
noisy subgradients impacts the convergence behavior of our differentially private algorithm,
leading to an increased optimality gap. This effect becomes more visible when the number
of parties is large and when the market is acquisitive (sK = 2.0c), since higher feasible allo-
cations amplify sensitivity. To further assess scalability with respect to the number of parties,
we conduct additional experiments with K ∈{15, 20} for m = 5, the results of which are
reported in Appendix E. The ﬁndings from these experiments conﬁrm that the optimality gap
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1027
Fig. 8 The average percentage differences between the objective function values of the non-private and the
differentially private models for K = 5, m = 5 and varying ϵ values.
increases gradually as K grows, particularly under small privacy budgets (ϵ = 0.1), while
the relative beneﬁts of momentum and adaptive clipping become more pronounced. Fig. 9
When the number of shared resources increases to m = 10, these effects are further
accentuated. A higher-dimensional shared capacity vector implies that noise is injected
component-wise in a larger space. As a result, the cumulative variance entering the mul-
tiplier updates increases, particularly under standard differential privacy. This is especially
evident in settings with K = 10, where the combination of more parties and more shared
constraints leads to a larger dispersion in objective values. This aligns with our theoretical
results, as a larger dataset inherently leads to greater variance. As illustrated by Figures 8
to 11 clipping and adaptive sensitivity enhance the efﬁciency of the private decomposition
algorithm by reducing the variance of the noise, and consequently, improve the optimality
gaps, particularly when the privacy budget is low (ϵ ∈{0.1, 0.5}). The main advantage of
this modiﬁed algorithm is the lower magnitude of variance added to sk values. In addition
to the altered update steps, we truncate the ˜sk values. This beneﬁts from the post-processing
property of a differentially private mechanism. Before sharing the noisy vector ˜sk, the party k
can truncate the noisy vector so that ˜sk ∈[ϵc, c]. This would not cause any privacy problems
since differential privacy is immune to post-processing (Dwork and Roth, 2014). Overall,
the results indicate that variance-reduction mechanisms such as momentum and adaptive
clipping become increasingly important as either the number of parties K or the number of
shared resources m grows.
4 Conclusion
We have formulated a multi-party resource-sharing model, where the primary question is
how to ensure the data privacy of the involved parties. We have started with a relaxation
of the original model to obtain a decomposition that minimizes the necessity of sharing
individual input data. This relaxation approach has led to a data-hiding scheme. Then, we have
123

1028
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
Fig. 9 The average percentage differences between the objective function values of the non-private and the
differentially private models for K = 10, m = 5 and varying ϵ values.
Fig. 10 The average percentage differences between the objective function values of the non-private and the
differentially private models for K = 5, m = 10, and varying ϵ values.
modiﬁed this scheme to beneﬁt from the mathematically well-deﬁned differential privacy
framework. The proposed LDP resource-sharing algorithm provides a mathematical privacy
guarantee. In LDP, parties retain direct control over data privatization, removing the need
for a trusted aggregator. This approach diverges from the standard differential privacy, where
parties entrust their data to a central entity. Our work is positioned as a ﬁrst step towards
formally addressing data privacy without reliance on any trusted party in the context of
multi-party resource sharing through optimization.
As differential privacy guarantee comes inevitably at the loss of optimality, we have also
given bounds on this loss for different privacy parameters of the proposed algorithm. We
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1029
Fig. 11 The average percentage differences between the objective function values of the non-private and the
differentially private models for K = 10, m = 10 and varying ϵ values.
have additionally proposed a modiﬁcation to the original algorithm to increase the efﬁciency
when the number of parties increases. Through a computational study on a planning problem
with synthetic data, we have validated our analysis, presented results for various privacy
parameters, and discussed the impact of privacy levels on optimality. Our ﬁndings for the
original algorithm have revealed that, as the number of parties decreases, the optimality gaps
also diminish. Importantly, our proposed modiﬁcation ensures that the optimality gap does
not escalate signiﬁcantly with an increasing number of parties.
In our view, the optimization perspective on differential privacy put forward in this paper
opens up several opportunities for future research. We have reserved this work for a linear pro-
gramming formulation because linear programs are used frequently in various applications.
The methodology presented in this paper could be extended to a more general setting, where
the objective function and the constraint functions are possibly nonlinear but deﬁne a convex
programming model. In such cases, it would be important to clearly deﬁne what constitutes
private and non-private datasets. Combined with an application, this could be an interesting
research topic. Collaboration among several parties requires not only efﬁciency but also fair
sharing of beneﬁts. While our proposed algorithm focuses on optimizing resource sharing and
maintaining privacy, the distribution of gains among parties is an important consideration.
Various mechanisms for revenue sharing are proposed in the literature (Guajardo and Rön-
nqvist, 2016). However, integrating these mechanisms within the framework of differential
privacy is an open question and requires further research.
A key challenge with any iterative differentially private algorithm is that privacy loss
accumulates with the number of iterations. Therefore, our differentially private algorithm also
stops after a ﬁxed number of iterations. This early termination affects not only the optimality
but also the feasibility of the algorithm. In other words, the resulting set of allocations
from our algorithm may exceed some of the shared capacities. We are not aware of another
approach that would lead to a differentially private algorithm that also guarantees feasibility.
Investigating this point further is certainly on our agenda for future research.
123

1030
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
Finally, the differential privacy noise variance in Proposition 2.1 is currently calculated
based on component-wise sensitivities. This approach is not the only option; one could instead
optimize component-wise variances, e.g., by minimizing their sum while maintaining the
required privacy level per iteration. This optimization could follow a similar approach to that
in Kuru et al. (2022), where a related noise-distribution problem is addressed. Integrating
such an approach into the proposed algorithm can constitute another line of future work.
A Appendix: proof of results related to LDP
First, we provide the tools of (local) differential privacy that we use in our work. In particular,
we deﬁne zero-concentrated differential privacy (zCDP) (Bun and Steinke, 2016) and provide
some results on its relation to LDP. We then proceed to the proofs of Proposition 2.1 and
Corollary 2.1.
A.1 Background information for differential privacy
We consider zCDP because it is well-suited to the Gaussian mechanism. With a slight abuse
of terminology, we will adapt the following deﬁnitions and results for LDP. We will consider
randomized algorithms that operate on a single user’s dataset in D.
Deﬁnition A.1 (zCDP (Bun and Steinke, 2016)) A is ρ-zCDP if for all D, D′ ∈D and all
α ∈(1, ∞), we have
Dα(A(ω, D)||A(ω, D′)) ≤ρα,
where ω ∼μ and Dα(A(ω, D)||A(ω, D′)) is the α-Rényi divergence between the distribu-
tions of A(ω, D) and A(ω, D′).
The next result gives the relationship between (local) differential privacy and zero con-
centrated (local) differential privacy that is due to Bun and Steinke (2016).
Theorem A.1 (LDP and zCDP (Bun and Steinke, 2016, Proposition 3)) If A is ρ-zCDP, it is
(ϵ, δ)-LDP for all δ > 0 and ϵ = ρ +

4ρ log(1/δ).
Most (local) differential privacy algorithms achieve randomization by adding noise to their
output. We consider the Gaussian mechanism in this paper, where the output of a function
of the sensitive data is distorted with random noise drawn from the normal distribution. The
variance of the normal distribution should be adjusted according to the L2 sensitivity of the
function (Dwork et al., 2006). The formal deﬁnition of L2 sensitivity of a function is provided
in Deﬁnition 2.3.
Theorem A.2 (Gaussian Mechanism (Bun and Steinke, 2016, Proposition 6)) Suppose that
A(ω, D) = f (D) + ω and μ = N(0, σ 2I). Then A is 2
f /2σ 2-zCDP.
When a differentially private algorithm outputs only a single value, verifying its privacy
guarantee is straightforward. However, in practical scenarios, differentially private algorithms
often entail multiple analyses, and it becomes necessary for the entire output to maintain
differential privacy. In computer science literature, the process of combining multiple outputs
from differentially private algorithms is termed composition. The following composition
theorem quantiﬁes the total privacy loss when multiple calculations of the sensitive data are
released.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1031
Theorem A.3 (Composition (Bun and Steinke, 2016, Lemma 7)) Let Ai = (μi, Ai), with
Ai :  × D →Oi, is ρi-zCDP for i = 1, . . . , m. Then, the composition A := (μ1 ⊗. . . ⊗
μm, A : D →O1 ⊗. . . ⊗Om) where
A((ω1, . . . , ωm), D) = (A1(ω1, D), . . . , Am(ωm, D)),
ωi ∼μi,
i = 1, . . . , m
is m
i=1 ρi -zCDP. Moreover, the same privacy guarantee holds even if Ai depends on the
outputs of its predecessors, A1, . . . , Ai−1 for all i = 1, . . . , m.
A.2 Proofs of Proposition 2.1 and Corollary 2.1
Proposition 2.1 The multi-party resource sharing algorithm using updates (8b) for T itera-
tions provides (ϵ, δ)-LDP if the random vectors are drawn as
ω(t)
k, j ∼N

0,
T mc2
j
2ρ(ϵ, δ)
 
,
k = 1, . . . , K; j = 1, . . . , m; t = 1, . . . , T ,
where ρ(ϵ, δ) = (

log(1/δ) + ϵ −

log(1/δ))2.
Proof To establish the (ϵ, δ)-LDP of the overall algorithm, we will show that each party k
shares its output in (ϵ, δ)-LDP during the whole course of the algorithm with T iterations.
Firstly, recall that the L2-sensitivity of calculating s(t)
k, j is c j as indicated in (9). Hence, by
Theorem A.2, for each component j, outputting ˆs(t)
k, j = s(t)
k, j +w(t)
k, j in (8b) is ρ0-zCDP where
ρ0 = ρ(ϵ, δ)/(T m). Since there are m components in sk, (8b) becomes mρ0 = ρ(ϵ, δ)/T -
zCDP by Theorem A.3. Moreover, the update in (8b) is performed for T iterations, so the
overall algorithm is T mρ0 = ρ(ϵ, δ)-zCMP. Finally, using the conversion in Theorem A.1
and checking that ρ(ϵ, δ) +

4ρ(ϵ, δ) log(1/δ) = ϵ, we end up with (ϵ, δ)-LDP.
⊓⊔
Corollary 2.1 The multi-party resource sharing algorithm using updates (12a)-(12d) for T
iterations is (ϵ, δ)-LDP.
Proof Note that the sensitivity of min{¯sk, j, ¯sk, j} in (12b) is ¯sk, j. Hence, by Theorem A.2,
for each component j, outputting ˆs(t)
k, j = s(t)
k, j + w(t)
k, j in (12b) is ρ0-zCDP where ρ0 =
ρ(ϵ, δ)/(T m). The rest of the proof follows the same lines as the proof of Proposition 2.1. ⊓⊔
B Appendix: proofs of optimality gap results
In this section, we prove the theorems on the upper bounds of the optimality gap for the
proposed methods. Before proceeding, we let G(t) = L(x(t), s(t), λ(t)) −L(x∗, s∗, λ∗) for
t ≥0 and G(t1,t2) = G(t1)−G(t2) = L(x(t1), s(t1), λ(t1))−L(x(t2), s(t2), λ(t2)) for t2 ≥t1 ≥0.
Theorem 2.1 Suppose Assumption 2.1 holds and Algorithm 1 is run for T iterations with a
ﬁxed step-size ν(t) = ν and with noise variances given in (10) to provide (ϵ, δ)-LDP. Then,
there exists a ν, for which the minimum expected distance to the optimal objective function
value is bounded as
min
t=0,1,...,T E[G(t)] ≤M B
√
T
,
where the constant B is deﬁned as
B = ∥c∥
 T mK
2ρ(ϵ, δ) + (K −1)2
1/2
.
123

1032
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
Proof Letρ = ρ(ϵ, δ).Recallthedifferentiallyprivateupdatesteps(8b)and ˜s(t)
k
= s(t)
k +ω(t)
k ,
where ω(t)
k, j ∼N(0, T mc2
j/(2ρ)) independently for j = 1, . . . , m. Let
˜g(t) = c −
K

k=1
˜s(t)
k
(13)
denote the approximate subgradient. Then, we have
E[∥˜g(t)∥2] ≤T mK∥c∥2
2ρ
+
(K −1)c
2
=
T mK
2ρ
+ (K −1)2

∥c∥2
= B2,
(14)
where B2 was deﬁned in (11). We also have
E[∥λ(t+1) −λ∗∥2|λ(t)] = E[∥λ(t) −λ∗−ν(t) ˜g(t)∥2|λ(t)]
= ∥λ(t) −λ∗∥2 −2ν(t)E[˜g(t)|λ(t)]⊺(λ(t) −λ∗)
+ (ν(t))2E[∥˜g(t)∥2|λ(t)].
Using the deﬁnition of subgradient, we have
L(x∗, s∗, λ∗) ≥E[˜g(t)|λ(t)]⊺(λ∗−λ(t)) + L(x(t), s(t), λ(t)),
which yields
E[∥λ(t+1) −λ∗∥2|λ(t)] ≤∥λ(t) −λ∗∥2 −2ν(t)G(t) + (ν(t))2E[∥˜g(t)∥2|λ(t)].
(15)
Then, taking the expectation of both sides of (15) leads to
2ν(t)E[G(t)] ≤E[∥λ(t) −λ∗∥2] −E[∥λ(t+1) −λ∗∥2] + (ν(t))2E[∥˜g(t)∥2].
(16)
By (14) we use B2 for an upper bound for the term E[∥˜g(t)∥2] in (16), and take the summation
of both sides to obtain
2
T −1

t=0
ν(t)E[G(t)] ≤E[∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2] −E[∥λ(T ) −λ∗∥2] + B2
T −1

t=0
(ν(t))2
≤E[∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2] + B2
T −1

t=0
(ν(t))2.
This inequality also implies
min
t=0,...,T −1 E[G(t)] ≤E[∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2] + B2 T −1
t=0 (ν(t))2
2 T −1
t=0 ν(t)
.
(17)
Recall that our assumption satisﬁes ∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2 ≤M2. With the constant step-size ν(t) =
M
B
√
T , inequality (17) becomes
min
t=0,...,T −1 E[G(t)] ≤M2 + B2 T −1
t=0 (ν(t))2
2 T −1
t=0 ν(t)
= M B
√
T
= M∥c∥

mK
2ρ + (K −1)2
T
.
This shows the desired result.
⊓⊔
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1033
Theorem 2.2 Suppose Assumption 2.1 holds. If the multi-party resource-sharing algorithm
with momentum updates is run with a ﬁxed step-size for T iterations with (ϵ, δ)-LDP, the
minimum expected distance to the optimal objective function value is bounded as
min
t=0,1,...,T E[G(t)] ≤M2
2T ν + ν
2 B2,
provided that the step-size satisﬁes 0 ≤ν ≤
√
G(0)2+(1−γ )B2T M2−G(0)
B2T
with B as in (11).
Proof The update step presented in (7) can be rewritten as
λ(t+1) = λ(t) −ν(t) ˜g(t) + γ

λ(t) −λ(t−1)
,
where the approximate subgradient ˜g(t) was deﬁned in (13).
We use an equivalent representation of the update step in (Ghadimi et al., 2015) and obtain
λ(t+1) + p(t+1) = λ(t) + p(t) −
ν(t)
1 −γ ˜g(t),
where
p(t) =

γ
1−γ

λ(t) −λ(t−1)
, t ≥1;
0,
t = 0.
Then, we proceed as
E

∥λ(t+1) + p(t+1) −λ∗∥2|λ(t)
= E

∥λ(t) + p(t) −λ∗−
ν(t)
1 −γ ˜g(t)∥2|λ(t)

= ∥λ(t) + p(t) −λ∗∥2 −E
⎡
⎣2ν(t)
1 −γ (λ(t) + p(t) −λ∗)⊺˜g(t) −

ν(t)
1 −γ
 2
∥˜g(t)∥2|λ(t)
⎤
⎦
= ∥λ(t) + p(t) −λ∗∥2
−E

2ν(t)
1 −γ (λ(t) −λ∗)⊺˜g(t) −2ν(t)
1 −γ

γ
1 −γ (λ(t) −λ(t−1))
⊺
˜g(t)|λ(t)

+ E
⎡
⎣

ν(t)
1 −γ
 2
∥˜g(t)∥2|λ(t)
⎤
⎦
= ∥λ(t) + p(t) −λ∗∥2 −2ν(t)
1 −γ E

(λ(t) −λ∗)⊺˜g(t)|λ(t)

−
2ν(t)γ
(1 −γ )2 E

λ(t) −λ(t−1)⊺
˜g(t)|λ(t)
+

ν(t)
1 −γ
 2
E

∥˜g(t)∥2|λ(t)
.
Using the deﬁnition of subgradient, we obtain
L(x∗, s∗, λ∗) ≥E[˜g(t)|λ(t)]⊺(λ∗−λ(t)) + L(x(t), s(t), λ(t)),
123

1034
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
which yields
E

∥λ(t+1) + p(t+1) −λ∗∥2|λ(t)
≤∥λ(t) + p(t) −λ∗∥2 −2ν(t)
1 −γ G(t)
+ E

−2ν(t)γ
(1 −γ )2

λ(t) −λ(t−1)⊺
˜g(t)
+

ν(t)
1 −γ
 2
∥˜g(t)∥2|λ(t)

.
Again, from the deﬁnition of subgradient, we have
L(x(t−1), s(t−1), λ(t−1)) ≥E[˜g(t)|λ(t)]⊺(λ(t−1) −λ(t)) + L(x(t), s(t), λ(t)).
We end up with
E

∥λ(t+1) + p(t+1) −λ∗∥2|λ(t)
≤∥λ(t) + p(t) −λ∗∥2 −2ν(t)
1 −γ G(t) +
2ν(t)γ
(1 −γ )2 G(t−1,t)
+

ν(t)
1 −γ
 2
E

∥˜g(t)∥2|λ(t)
.
We then take the expectation of both sides
2ν(t)
1 −γ E

G(t)
−
2ν(t)γ
(1 −γ )2 E

G(t−1,t)
≤E

∥λ(t) + p(t) −λ∗∥2
−E

∥λ(t+1) + p(t+1) −λ∗∥2
+

ν(t)
1 −γ
 2
E

∥˜g(t)∥2
.
If we take the step-size parameter ﬁxed, ν(t) = ν, G(t) = G(0) for t ≤0, and sum over
iterations t = 0, . . . , T −1, we obtain
2ν
1 −γ
T −1

t=0
E

G(t)
−
2νγ
(1 −γ )2 E

G(0,T−1)
≤E

∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2
−E

∥λ(T ) + p(T ) −λ∗∥2
+ T

ν
1 −γ
2
B2
≤E

∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2
+ T
 Bν
1 −γ
2
,
since E[∥˜g(t)∥2] ≤B2 by (14). This is equivalent to the following
2ν
T −1

t=0
E

G(t)
≤(1 −γ )E

∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2
+
2νγ
(1 −γ )E

G(0,T−1)
+ T (νB)2
1 −γ .
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1035
This inequality also implies
min
t=0,...,T −1 E[G(t)] ≤
(1 −γ )E∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2 +
2νγ
(1−γ )E

G(0,T−1)
+ T (νB)2
1−γ
2T ν
.
Recall the assumption ∥λ(0) −λ∗∥2 ≤M2, which implies that G(0) < ∞. This further
implies that E[G(0,t)] ≤G(0). Therefore,
min
t=0,...,T −1 E[G(t)] ≤
(1 −γ )M2 + 2νγ
1−γ G(0) + T (νB)2
1−γ
2T ν
.
To obtain a tighter bound, we need to satisfy the following inequality
(1 −γ )M2 + 2νγ
1−γ G(0) + T (νB)2
1−γ
2T ν
≤M2 + B2T ν2
2T ν
.
Thus, if we select ν as
0 ≤ν ≤

G(0)2 + (1 −γ )B2T M2 −G(0)
B2T
,
then we guarantee to have a tighter bound.
⊓⊔
C Appendix: dual formulation
Let α1, . . . , αK and β1, . . . , β K be the dual vectors corresponding to the constraints (2b)
and (2c), respectively. Further, we deﬁne λ as the dual vector for Constraint (2d). Then, the
dual formulation of (2a)-(2e) becomes
minimize
c⊺λ +
K

k=1
b⊺
k βk
subject to
A⊺
k αk + B⊺
k βk ≥uk,
k = 1, . . . , K,
λ −αk ≥0,
k = 1, . . . , K,
αk, βk ≥0,
k = 1, . . . , K,
λ unrestricted.
D Appendix: variance of data private algorithm
To complement the results reported in Figures 4 and 5, we present the empirical variance
of the percentage optimality gaps over iterations for both the standard and the momentum-
based data-hiding algorithms. Figure 12 shows how the variance evolves during the ﬁrst
1,000 iterations, offering additional insight into the stability and convergence behavior of the
data-hiding algorithm.
123

1036
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
Fig. 12 Optimality gap variances of the data private algorithm over iterations.
Fig. 13 The shares of parties when K = 15.
E Appendix: additional simulation study results
In this appendix, we report additional scalability experiments with K ∈{15, 20} for m = 5.
Figures 13 and 14 illustrate the market share conﬁgurations for K = 15 and K = 20,
respectively,whileFigures15and16presentthecorrespondingaveragepercentageoptimality
gaps under the different privacy mechanisms.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1037
Fig. 14 The shares of parties when K = 20.
Fig. 15 The average percentage differences between the objective function values of the non-private and the
differentially private models for K = 15, m = 5 and varying ϵ values.
We observe that as the number of parties increases, the average optimality gap rises
across all privacy budgets, with the effect being more pronounced for smaller ϵ and in
the acquisitive market setting (sK = 2.0c). This pattern is consistent with the variance
accumulation inherent in local differential privacy, where noise is injected independently
by each party and aggregated in the multiplier updates. While standard differential privacy
exhibits the largest degradation, momentum and, in particular, adaptive clipping mitigate this
effect, demonstrating their increasing importance in larger multi-party settings.
123

1038
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
Fig. 16 The average percentage differences between the objective function values of the non-private and the
differentially private models for K = 20, m = 5 and varying ϵ values.
Declarations
Competing Interests We declare that we have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships
that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Albrecht, M., & Stadtler, H. (2015). Coordinating decentralized linear programs by exchange of primal infor-
mation. Eur. J. Oper. Res., 247(3), 788–796.
Amaruchkul, K., Cooper, W. L., & Gupta, D. (2011). A note on air-cargo capacity contracts. Prod. Oper.
Manag., 20(1), 152–162.
Apple Inc. (2017). Differential privacy team: Learning with privacy at scale. https://machinelearning.apple.
com/research/learning-with-privacy-at-scale (accessed on 20 February 2025).
Apple Inc. (2023). Differential privacy overview. https://www.apple.com/privacy/docs/Differential_Privacy_
Overview.pdf (accessed on 20 February 2025).
Atallah, M., Elmongui, H., Deshpande, V., & Schwarz, L. (2003). Secure supply-chain protocols. In EEE
International Conference on E-Commerce, 2003, 293–302.
Bassily, R., Smith, A., & Thakurta, A. (2014). Differentially private empirical risk minimization: Efﬁcient
algorithms and tight error bounds. arXiv preprintarXiv:1405.7085.
Bednarz, A., Bean, N., & Roughan, M. (2009). Hiccups on the road to privacy-preserving linear programming.
In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society, pages 117–120.
Bertsekas, D. P. (2015). Convex Optimization Algorithms. Belmont: Athena Scientiﬁc.
Birbil, ¸S˙I, Frenk, J., Gromicho, J. A., & Zhang, S. (2014). A network airline revenue management framework
based on decomposition by origins and destinations. Transp. Sci., 48(3), 313–333.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1039
Boyd,S.,Xiao,L.,&Mutapcic,A.(2003).Subgradientmethods.LectureNotesofEE392o,StanfordUniversity,
Autumn Quarter. http://web.mit.edu/6.976/www/notes/subgrad_method.pdf (accessed on 20 February
2025).
Bun,M.,&Steinke,T.(2016).Concentrateddifferentialprivacy:Simpliﬁcations,extensions,andlowerbounds.
In Theory of Cryptography Conference, pages 635–658. Springer.
Chaudhuri, K., Monteleoni, C., & Sarwate, A. D. (2011). Differentially private empirical risk minimization.
J. Mach. Learn. Res., 12, 1069–1109.
Chen, X., Miao, S., & Wang, Y. (2023). Differential privacy in personalized pricing with nonparametric demand
models. Oper. Res., 71(2), 581–602.
Chen, X., Simchi-Levi, D., & Wang, Y. (2022). Privacy-preserving dynamic personalized pricing with demand
learning. Manage. Sci., 68(7), 4878–4898.
Chun, S. Y., Kleywegt, A. J., & Shapiro, A. (2016). When friends become competitors: the design of resource
exchange alliances. Manage. Sci., 63(7), 2127–2145.
Cohen-Addad, V., Esencayi, Y., Fan, C., Gaboradi, M., Li, S., & Wang, D. (2022). On facility location
problem in the local differential privacy model. In Camps-Valls, G., Ruiz, F. J. R., and Valera, I., editors,
Proceedings of The 25th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 151
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3914–3929. PMLR.
Cummings, R., Kearns, M., Roth, A., & Wu, Z. S. (2015). Privacy and truthful equilibrium selection for
aggregative games. In Markakis, E. and Schäfer, G., editors, Web and Internet Economics, pages 286–
299, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Ding, S., & Kaminsky, P. M. (2020). Centralized and decentralized warehouse logistics collaboration. Manu-
facturing & Service Operations Management, 22(4), 812–831.
Ding, T., Zhu, S., Chen, C., Xu, J., & Guan, X. (2021). Differentially private distributed resource allocation via
deviation tracking. IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information Processing over Networks, 7, 222–235.
Dong, J., Roth, A., & Su, W. J. (2022). Gaussian Differential Privacy. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat Methodol.,
84(1), 3–37.
Duchi, J. C., Jordan, M. I., & Wainwright, M. J. (2013). Local privacy and statistical minimax rates. In 2013
IEEE 54th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 429–438.
Dwork, C. (2006). Differential privacy. In M. Bugliesi, B. Preneel, V. Sassone, & I. Wegener (Eds.), Automata,
Languages and Programming (pp. 1–12). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Dwork, C., McSherry, F., Nissim, K., & Smith, A. (2006). Calibrating noise to sensitivity in private data
analysis. In Theory of Cryptography Conference, pages 265–284. Springer.
Dwork, C., & Roth, A. (2014). The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Found. Trends Theor.
Comput. Sci., 9(3–4), 211–407.
Erlingsson, U., Pihur, V., & Korolova, A. (2014). Rappor: Randomized aggregatable privacy-preserving ordinal
response. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, CCS ’14, page 1054–1067, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Ertogral, K., & Wu, S. D. (2000). Auction-theoretic coordination of production planning in the supply chain.
IIE Trans., 32(10), 931–940.
Geyer, R. C., Klein, T., & Nabi, M. (2017). Differentially private federated learning: A client level perspective.
arXiv:1712.07557. (accessed on 20 February 2025).
Ghadimi, E., Feyzmahdavian, H. R., & Johansson, M. (2015). Global convergence of the heavy-ball method
for convex optimization. In 2015 European Control Conference (ECC), pages 310–315. IEEE.
Guajardo, M., & Rönnqvist, M. (2016). A review on cost allocation methods in collaborative transportation.
Int. Trans. Oper. Res., 23(3), 371–392.
Guo, L., & Wu, X. (2018). Capacity sharing between competitors. Manage. Sci., 64(8), 3554–3573.
Hale, M. & Egerstedty, M. (2015). Differentially private cloud-based multi-agent optimization with constraints.
In 2015 American Control Conference (ACC), pages 1235–1240.
Han, S., Topcu, U., & Pappas, G. J. (2016). Differentially private distributed constrained optimization. IEEE
Trans. Autom. Control, 62(1), 50–64.
Hastings, M., Falk, B. H., & Tsoukalas, G. (2022). Privacy-preserving network analytics. Manage. Sci., 69(9),
5482–5500.
Hong, Y., & Vaidya, J. (2014). An inference-proof approach to privacy-preserving horizontally partitioned
linear programs. Optimization Letters, 8(1), 267–277.
Hoogervorst, R., Zhang, Y., Tillem, G., Erkin, Z., & S., V. (2019). Solving bin-packing problems under privacy
preservation: Possibilities and trade-offs. Inf. Sci., 500, 203–216.
Hsu, J., Huang, Z., Roth, A., & Wu, Z. S. (2016). Jointly private convex programming. In Proceedings of the
27th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 580–599. SIAM.
Hsu, J., Roth, A., Roughgarden, T., & Ullman, J. (2014). Privately solving linear programs. In International
Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, pages 612–624. Springer.
123

1040
Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
Hu, J., Chen, G., Li, H., Huang, T., & Ran, L. (2023). Achieving linear convergence for differentially private
full-decentralized economic dispatch over directed networks. Inf. Sci., 642, Article 119199.
Huang, Z., Mitra, S., & Vaidya, N. (2015). Differentially private distributed optimization. In Proceedings of
the 2015 International Conference on Distributed Computing and Networking, page 4. ACM.
Hyndman, K., Kraiselburd, S., & Watson, N. (2013). Aligning capacity decisions in supply chains when
demand forecasts are private information: Theory and experiment. Manufacturing & Service Operations
Management, 15(1), 102–117.
Ibaraki, T., & Katoh, N. (1988). Resource Allocation Problems: Algorithmic Approaches. Cambridge, MA,
USA: MIT Press.
Ji, Z., Lipton, Z. C., & Elkan, C. (2014). Differential privacy and machine learning: a survey and review.
arXiv:1412.7584. (accessed on 20 February 2025).
Karaca, U., ˙Ilker Birbil, S., Aydın, N., & Mullao˘glu, G. (2023). Masking primal and dual models for data
privacy in network revenue management. Eur. J. Oper. Res., 308(2), 818–831.
Kasiviswanathan, S. P., Lee, H. K., Nissim, K., Raskhodnikova, S., & Smith, A. (2011). What can we learn
privately? SIAM J. Comput., 40(3), 793–826.
Kearns, M., Pai, M. M., Rogers, R. M., Roth, A., & Ullman, J. (2015). Robust mediators in large games.
arXiv:1512.02698. (accessed on 20 February 2025).
Kearns, M., Pai, M. M., Roth, A., & Ullman, J. (2014). Mechanism design in large games: Incentives and
privacy. Am. Econ. Rev., 104(5), 431–435.
Koneˇcn`y, J., McMahan, H. B., Ramage, D., & Richtárik, P. (2016). Federated optimization: Distributed
machine learning for on-device intelligence. arXiv:1610.02527. (accessed on 20 February 2025).
Kovács, A., Egri, P., Kis, T., & Váncza, J. (2013). Inventory control in supply chains: Alternative approaches
to a two-stage lot-sizing problem. Int. J. Prod. Econ., 143(2), 385–394.
Kuru, N., Birbil, ¸S˙I, Gürbüzbalaban, M., & Yıldırım, S. (2022). Differentially private accelerated optimization
algorithms. SIAM J. Optim., 32(2), 795–821.
Kutanoglu, E., David, W., & S. (1999). On combinatorial auction and Lagrangean relaxation for distributed
resource scheduling. IIE Trans., 31(9), 813–826.
Lai, M., Xue, W., & Hu, Q. (2019). An ascending auction for freight forwarder collaboration in capacity
sharing. Transp. Sci., 53(4), 1175–1195.
Lei, Y., Miao, S., & Momot, R. (2023). Privacy-preserving personalized revenue management. Management
Science.
Li, T., Sahu, A. K., Talwalkar, A., & Smith, V. (2020). Federated learning: Challenges, methods, and future
directions. IEEE Signal Process. Mag., 37(3), 50–60.
Li, W., Li, H., & Deng, C. (2013). Privacy-preserving horizontally partitioned linear programs with inequality
constraints. Optimization Letters, 7(1), 137–144.
Mangasarian, O. L. (2011). Privacy-preserving linear programming. Optimization Letters, 5(1), 165–172.
Mangasarian, O. L. (2012). Privacy-preserving horizontally partitioned linear programs. Optimization Letters,
6(3), 431–436.
McMahan, B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., Hampson, S., & y Arcas, B. A. (2017). Communication-efﬁcient
learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 1273–
1282. PMLR.
Mothukuri, V., Parizi, R. M., Pouriyeh, S., Huang, Y., Dehghantanha, A., & Srivastava, G. (2021). A survey
on security and privacy of federated learning. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst., 115, 619–640.
Narayanan, A. & Shmatikov, V. (2006). How to break anonymity of the Netﬂix prize dataset. arXiv:0610105.
(accessed on 20 February 2025).
Poundarikapuram, S., & Veeramani, D. (2004). Distributed decision-making in supply chains and private
e-marketplaces. Prod. Oper. Manag., 13(1), 111–121.
Pérez-Perales, D., Boza, A., Alarcón, F., & Gómez-Gasquet, P. (2024). Mathematical programming-based
methodology for the evaluation of supply chain collaborative planning scenarios. Ann. Oper. Res., 337(1),
261–312.
Rogers, R. M., & Roth, A. (2014). Asymptotically truthful equilibrium selection in large congestion games.
In Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, page 771–782, New
York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Ryu, J. R., Zheng, Y., Gao, Y., Abuadbba, A., Kim, J., Won, D., Nepal, S., Kim, H., & Wang, C. (2022). Can
differential privacy practically protect collaborative deep learning inference for IoT? Wireless Networks.
Shokri, R. & Shmatikov, V. (2015). Privacy-preserving deep learning. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages 1310–1321.
Speranza, M. G. (2018). Trends in transportation and logistics. Eur. J. Oper. Res., 264(3), 830–836.
Sweeney, L. (1997). Weaving technology and policy together to maintain conﬁdentiality. The Journal of Law,
Medicine & Ethics, 25(2–3), 98–110.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2026) 360:1007–1041
1041
Toft, T. (2009). Solving linear programs using multiparty computation. In Dingledine, R. and Golle, P., editors,
Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 90–107, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer.
Topaloglu, H. (2012). A duality based approach for network revenue management in airline alliances. Journal
of Revenue and Pricing Management, 11(5), 500–517.
Toyota (2006). Fuji Heavy Industries’ U.S. plant to build Toyota Camry. https://global.toyota/en/newsroom/
corporate/25607796.html (accessed on 20 February 2025).
Tran, A., Luong, T., & Pham, X. (2024). Privacy-preserving deep learning model with integer quantization
and secure multi-party computation. Annals of Operations Research.
Vaidya, J. (2009). Privacy-preserving linear programming. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM Symposium on
Applied Computing, pages 2002–2007. ACM.
Verdonck, L., Caris, A., Ramaekers, K., & Janssens, G. K. (2013). Collaborative logistics from the perspective
of road transportation companies. Transp. Rev., 33(6), 700–719.
Wang, D., Ye, M., & Xu, J. (2017). Differentially private empirical risk minimization revisited: Faster and
more general. In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, & R.
Garnett (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. (Vol. 30). Curran Associates Inc.
Wang,Y.,Lin,H.,Lam,J.,&Kwok,K.-W.(2024).Differentiallyprivateconsensusanddistributedoptimization
in multi-agent systems: A review. Neurocomputing, 597, Article 127986.
Wright, C. P., Groenevelt, H., & Shumsky, R. A. (2010). Dynamic revenue management in airline alliances.
Transp. Sci., 44(1), 15–37.
Yang, M., Guo, T., Zhu, T., Tjuawinata, I., Zhao, J., & Lam, K.-Y. (2024). Local differential privacy and its
applications: A comprehensive survey. Computer Standards & Interfaces, 89, Article 103827.
Yang, Q., Liu, Y., Chen, T., & Tong, Y. (2019). Federated machine learning: Concept and applications. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), 10(2), 1–19.
Zhang, T., & Zhu, Q. (2017). Dynamic differential privacy for admm-based distributed classiﬁcation learning.
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., 12(1), 172–187.
Zhao, D., Liu, D., & Liu, L. (2024). Distributed privacy preserving algorithm for economic dispatch over
time-varying communication. IEEE Trans. Power Syst., 39(1), 643–657.
Zhu, J., Xu, C., Guan, J., & Wu, D. O. (2018). Differentially private distributed online algorithms over time-
varying directed networks. IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information Processing over Networks,
4(1), 4–17.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123