TITLE: Sustainable transition to renewable energy: An integrated MCDM-template analysis approach
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06801-7
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 16 January 2024 / Accepted: 4 August 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Sustainable transition to renewable energy: An integrated 
MCDM-template analysis approach
Nasiru Zubairu1 · Ahmed Mohammed2
 · Hajer Al Naabi1 · Zainab Zohny1 · 
Simonov Kusi-Sarpong3,4,5
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06801-7
Abstract
This study examines and evaluates renewable energy (RE) supply chain sources to guide 
practitioners in selecting and investing in viable RE supply chains that drive the transition 
to RE, sustainability, and value creation for stakeholders. The relative influence of the 
various sustainability factors on key RE sources was empirically evaluated using multi-
criteria decision-making analysis. Supplementary data were also analysed using the same 
techniques to assess the tacit factors affecting the transition to RE. Interviews with experts 
were evaluated using template analysis to explore latent factors further to support the tran­
sition to RE. The results revealed solar energy as the most economical, environmentally, 
and socially preferred cleaner energy with fewer barriers to overcome, followed by wind 
energy, Biomass, geothermal, and hydropower energy, respectively. The AHP and TOPSIS 
models provide novel rankings for RE sources to guide stakeholders. Energy supply chain 
participants may embrace the results to make strategic decisions. The study contributed 
to the literature by proposing original empirical models that facilitate understanding the 
viability of various RE supply chain sources and how the transition to RE will contribute 
positively to sustainability performance and assist supply chain practitioners in making 
strategic decisions.
Keywords  Energy transition · Renewable energy · Sustainability · Energy supply 
chains · MCDM · Template analysis
1  Introduction
Renewable energy (RE) is derived from various clean and sustainable sources (Baloch et 
al., 2022). The transition to RE is essential in addressing the rapid growth of energy demand 
and environmental concerns associated with fossil fuels (Ang et al., 2022). The reliance on 
non-RE sources significantly releases harmful emissions, which is a global worry for energy 
security and economic growth (Olabi & Abdelkareem, 2022). The primary cause of climate 
change is the emission of greenhouse gases released by energy production and consump­
tion (Uhunamure & Shale, 2021). The continuous increase in energy demand raises energy 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
security concerns, necessitating energy supply diversification (Cergibozan, 2022). The sus­
tainable transition to RE is necessary for economic growth, environmental sustainability, 
and social progress (Vidadili et al., 2017). The transition to RE is slow globally, and many 
countries are still in the early stages (Østergaard et al., 2020).
The transition to RE sources deserves more research, considering it could result in sig­
nificant environmental, social, and financial benefits across the energy supply chain and 
society (Mondal & Khalil, 2012). The RE supply chain network consists of generating, 
transmitting, and distributing environmentally friendly energy (Zare et al., 2015). The inter­
connections in the RE supply chain further highlighted the implications of the viability of 
RE investments. Multi-criteria decision-making models for viable RE transition that drive 
sustainable performance will be vital for countries that placed the transition to RE into 
their developmental agenda, such as Oman, given the highly capital-intensive nature of 
RE projects (Ullah et al., 2021). Moreover, the outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020 has cre­
ated significant investment uncertainties and other disruptions globally, which inhibit the 
transition to RE (Hosseini, 2020). Other studies have established that solutions to improve 
supply chain performance have embraced multi-criteria modelling techniques (Zubairu et 
al., 2021). Researchers and practitioners continually explore multi-criteria techniques to 
improve sustainability across various supply chain networks (Mohammed et al., 2019 and 
2023). Indeed, RE networks should ultimately pursue modelling techniques to optimise 
sustainable transition to RE.
There is a growing urgency to fast-track the transition to RE for energy diversifica­
tion and sustainability. Countries and corporations are embracing this obligation (Akrofi, 
2021). However, the transition is slow generally (Østergaard et al., 2020). Oman aims for 
energy diversification by exploiting RE to support the country’s energy supply and reduce 
dependence on natural gas (IRENA, 2014). Energy strategies to meet the growing demand, 
enhance competitiveness, and achieve sustainable advantages should incorporate strategies 
and decisions for the transition to RE. Strategy formulation embraces critical decision vari­
ables, but only a few studies have investigated the viable transition to RE incorporating 
environmental, social, and economic sustainability dimensions. Existing literature focuses 
on the physical and natural science features and performance of RE sources (Østergaard et 
al., 2020). A few studies focus on sustainability or implementation challenges, but not both. 
Despite the significant focus on the transition to RE, literature searches revealed no single 
research has proposed recent and updated decision-making models for the viable transi­
tion to RE to complement existing literature and support practitioners and policymakers. 
In addition, RE generation, transition and distribution networks involve several decisions 
concerning the complex management of activities, including human, material, facilities, 
and infrastructures (Pietrosemoli & Rodríguez-Monroy, 2019). In 2014, the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) published Oman’s RE readiness assessment to pin­
point the drivers and comparative advantages, enabling policies and technical measures to 
ensure the successful scale-up of RE sources. Although it gave many recommendations on 
policy and regulatory framework development, target and market implementation, institu­
tional and legal framework, RE sources and research and development mapping, and capac­
ity building development, the strategies for viable transition to RE remained unclear. Yet, 
no single study has focused on the viable transition to RE conducted in Oman to assist 
practitioners and policymakers in strategic decision-making, revealing major research gaps.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
In this study, issues related to the viable transition to RE are explored and evaluated in 
the context of Oman RE supply chain as a case study to establish empirical models and 
promote discourse on the viable transition to RE to assist researchers, practitioners, and 
policymakers in the development and adoption of viable RE sources that drive sustainable 
performance. Oman is highly dependent on domestic subsidised oil and gas energy (Al-
Sarihi & Mansouri, 2022). However, the country can develop into a leading supplier of RE 
energy due to its geographical location. Despite increasing efforts, RE constitutes just 1% of 
Oman’s energy mix (Al-Sarihi & Bello, 2019). Given that previous studies have empirically 
established the sustainable benefits of the transition to RE, there is a potential for Oman to 
review, manage and fast-track RE transition to improve sustainable performance and com­
petitiveness. Oman has the potential to become a leading player in the RE sector. However, 
a comprehensive assessment of various RE sources is key to achieving this goal.
Considering the research gaps highlighted above and the significance of the transition 
to RE for sustainability and value creation in Oman, this study puts forward the following 
research objectives:
OBJ 1. To evaluate the impacts of sustainability on the transition to RE.
OBJ 2. To access tacit factors affecting the sustainable transition to RE.
OBJ 3. To propose recommendations to support the sustainable transition to RE.
To address the first objective of this research, an analytical hierarchy process (AHP) and 
technique for order of preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS) were deployed 
to empirically evaluate the relative impacts of environmental, economic, and social sus­
tainability factors on key RE sources (Saaty, 1980; Yoon & Hwang, 1995). Although prior 
studies have linked RE to sustainability from SCSs, different supply chains or networks may 
have different priorities for embracing the transition. A given sustainable factor may impact 
RE transition differently in a certain context and is relevant to its supply chains. Thus, the 
second objective sought to evaluate other tacit factors, such as policies and infrastructure, 
affecting the sustainable transition to RE. To achieve the last objective, interviews were 
organised with various RE supply chain specialists to explore and evaluate latent informa­
tion influencing the transition to RE and suggest improvement recommendations.
The remainder of the paper is presented in the following structure: the literature review 
is introduced in Sect. 2, which consists of the RE supply chain, energy transition, link­
ages between RE sources and sustainability, factors affecting the energy transition, and a 
framework for a sustainable transition to RE. Section 2 ends by discussing research gaps 
and posing potential research and innovation highlights. Section 3 discusses methodolo­
gies deployed to facilitate rigorous examination of the research problem, including AHP, 
TOPSIS, and template analysis. Section 4 presents the analysis and results. In Sect. 5, we 
begin with a critical discussion of the findings related to the key connections between the 
RE transition and the three dimensions of sustainability in Sects. 5.1.1–5.1.5. Latent factors 
that influence the transition are discussed in Sect. 5.2 and recommendations are presented 
in Sect. 5.3. Section 6 presents the conclusions drawn from the results, their practical and 
theoretical implications, and suggested directions for future research.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
2  Literature review
2.1  Renewable energy supply chain
The RE supply chain refers to the value chain networks responsible for producing, stor­
ing, distributing, and utilising RE resources through the integration of several processes 
in a sustainable manner (Hmouda et al., 2023; Ivanov, 2022; Zubairu et al., 2024). RE 
supply ensures the availability of energy resources to sustain energy demand, which is 
crucial in supporting the economic activities and livelihood of end-users, including, the 
public, corporations and households (Sarkar & Seo, 2021). The RE energy supply chain is 
focused on deploying end-to-end sustainable operation practices from source to final con­
sumers (Biswal and Muduli, 2018). The RE supply chain can be divided into three value 
streams: upstream, midstream, and downstream (Sarkar & Seo, 2021). The upstream seg­
ment includes the resource acquisition and manufacturing of components required for RE 
generation through exploration, extraction and improvement of RE resources (Fontes & 
Freires, 2018). For instance, manufacturing solar panels, wind turbines, cultivating biomass 
sources, and batteries (Hmouda et al., 2023). The midstream phase consists of energy gen­
eration, storage, and distribution, where the actual production of RE is initiated through the 
use of renewable resources (Sarkar & Seo, 2021). The produced RE is later distributed via 
the power generation sites to end-users (Biswal and Muduli, 2018). The downstream value 
chain includes the distribution of RE for consumption by end-users (Lei et al., 2020). The 
downstream also involves providing consumption services, such as installation services for 
RE systems, energy management systems, and energy efficiency and effectiveness consult­
ing (Sarkar & Seo, 2021). The front end of the RE supply chain mainly focuses on the 
production of RE, including sourcing raw materials, manufacturing necessary equipment, 
and generating RE (Fontes & Freires, 2018). The front end of the RE supply chain requires 
significant investments in research and development, facilities and associated infrastructure 
(Ivanov, 2022). In contrast, the back end of the RE supply chain focuses on the distribution 
and consumption of RE, as it involves the efficient transportation of generated energy to end 
users (Hmouda et al., 2023). However, both ends of the RE supply chain are interconnected 
and dependent on each other for the success of the overall RE network system. Thus, chal­
lenges and disruptions on one end can significantly affect the other, for instance, consump­
tion patterns and technological advancements (Ivanov, 2022; Lei et al., 2020).
2.2  Renewable energy transition
As the global population continues to grow, so will the demand for cheap energy. However, 
reliance on fossil fuels is creating drastic negative changes to the climate, which is unsus­
tainable. Transitioning to RE will improve energy productivity and accessibility, which are 
key to achieving “affordable and clean energy” (SDG 7) by 2030 (UNDP, 2022). Energy 
production, distribution, and usage that rely heavily on fossil fuels threaten energy secu­
rity, damage the environment, and compromise social development hence jeopardising 
sustainable development strategies (Vidadili et al., 2017). Global concerns directly linked 
to climate change and human health are focused on reducing carbon emissions (Petinrin 
& Shaaban, 2015). Building RE supply chains that are economically viable, overcoming 
greenhouse emissions, and improving community well-being are key to sustainable devel­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
opment (Petinrin & Shaaban, 2015). Oman’s energy production depends heavily on fossil 
fuels because of its oil and gas reserves, making electricity production available and afford­
able for producers and consumers (Amoatey et al., 2022). However, the ongoing deple­
tion of these reserves, negative impact on the environment, continuous growth of domestic 
energy consumption, increase in fuel prices, and diminishing oil and gas export potential 
creates threats to the country’s sustainable development (Al-Sarihi & Mansouri, 2022). The 
increase in natural gas prices from 2018 to 2022 caused electricity costs to increase by an 
average of 32% (Said et al., 2022). In the same period, electricity consumption increased 
by 7% (Electricity production, 2022), leading to an increase in CO2 emissions by 7% yearly 
(Amoatey et al., 2022). Oman has the second-highest CO2 emission rate in the Gulf region, 
therefore, transitioning to RE sources that safeguard energy security and reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions can contribute substantially to Oman’s sustainable development (Amoatey et 
al., 2022). Investing in infrastructure and technologies to provide clean and more efficient 
energy will encourage growth in an environmentally friendly manner (UNDP, 2022).
2.3  Linkages between renewable energy sources and sustainability
Oman has shown great attention toward RE transition as it is endowed with various RE 
sources including solar, wind, geothermal, biomass, and hydropower energies (Amoatey et 
al., 2022; Kazem, 2011). First, due to the high sun intensity in the Gulf region, solar energy 
is considered a vital source of energy that can be harvested using different technological sys­
tems to support energy-consuming applications including water heating, heating of build­
ings, and distillation (Okedu et al., 2019). Second, Oman’s prime location includes stretched 
coastlines with summer and winter monsoonal wind effects, which ensures the continuous 
availability of wind energy (Sultan et al., 2010). Third, although geothermal energy has 
limited potential in Oman because of the boreholes’ temperatures, it has certain advantages 
over other RE sources such as the small size of its plant and the ability to sustain base load 
electricity (Umar, ‏2018). Fourth, biomass energy production is facing many challenges yet 
is favourable in multiple environmental measures related to waste management (Basha et 
al., 2021; Umar, 2017). Lastly, like geothermal and biomass energies, hydropower energy in 
Oman is limited due to its location in the desert region deprived of permanent water sources 
that can ultimately be used in the generation of hydropower energy (Okedu & Al Siyabi, 
2021). Thus, there is a clear need to empirically assess these main RE sources with multiple 
economic, environmental, and social driving factors alongside threats facing RE transition.
For many years transition to RE was non-competitive with fossil fuel energy systems, 
however, with the progress in technology and the inflation in prices, RE systems are show­
ing better economic, environmental, and social benefits (Mondal & Khalil, 2012). Much 
research focused on the economic factors of RE transition mainly on investment require­
ment, availability, reliability, cost of energy, feed-in tariff (FiT), and return on investment 
(ROI). With the reduction in RE technologies cost, Oman’s energy sector is driven toward 
RE utilisation (Elia et al., 2021). The advancement in RE technologies reduced investment 
costs thus driving the transition towards RE systems (Evans et al., 2012). ROI is a key mea­
sure when evaluating the profitability of RE projects and an essential requirement for invest­
ment opportunities evaluation (Capellán-Pérez et al., 2019). Long-term power purchase 
agreements such as FiT must be established to promote investments (Albadi et al., 2009). 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Also, Meeting the availability and reliability requirements is essential to avoid energy losses 
and poor investments in RE systems (Al-Badi et al., 2020).
Oman’s 2040 vision stresses the use of RE for its environmental benefits such as reduc­
ing greenhouse gas emissions, toxic emissions, water pollution, soil erosion, and deflation 
of finite natural resources. Fossil fuel energy production directly affects climate change as it 
emits GHG mostly CO2 which is responsible for half the global warming issue (Forghani et 
al., 2023; Pourali et al., 2023). However, it is argued that RE are not yet 100% clean energy 
as few solar energy systems use toxic substances that may potentially be released into the 
environment (Pourmoghadam & Kasaeian, 2023). Also, the loss of vegetation due to the use 
of land for RE facilities directly increases soil loss rates (Panagos et al., 2015). RE energy 
production will eventually resolve the deflation of finite natural resources (Twidell, 2021). 
The transition to RE has both positive and negative implications (Vezmar et al., 2014). 
The social benefits include job creation, business opportunities, energy supply security, and 
health and well-being. The associated negative effects include costs of endangering wildlife, 
loss of vegetation, noise pollution, bad odour, and visual intrusion (Sahoo & Sethi, 2021).
The transition to RE is linked with many positive benefits including job creation, busi­
ness opportunities, energy supply security, and health and well-being. The development of 
RE systems creates high-value job opportunities that can tremendously assist the resolving 
the unemployment issue as well as creating business opportunities for investors (Cole & 
Banks, 2017). RE transition will facilitate long-term energy security (Mondal & Khalil, 
2012). The reduction of toxic emissions released by fossil fuel energy systems not only 
delivers value to the climate and environment but enhances residents’ living standards in 
health and wellbeing well-being (Kasem, 2019). However, it is established that RE produc­
tion and distribution are also associated with social challenges, such as endangering wild­
life and loss of vegetation. For example, wind turbines threaten many bird species in their 
breeding areas, and solar energy facilities, requiring the clearance of vegetation from the 
target sites (Charabi et al., 2022; Macknick et al., 2013). They also include the disturbance 
caused by RE facilities such as solar panels and wind turbines deployed close to residential 
areas. These facilities cause visual intrusion, bad odour is linked with biomass treatment, 
and wind turbines cause noise intrusions (Dai et al., 2015; Okudoh et al., 2014; Tsoutsos et 
al., 2005) (See Table 1).
2.4  Factors affecting the renewable energy transition
The increasing demand for RE transition to support energy security encouraged the inves­
tigation of potential tacit factors that may affect the transition progress (Al-Ajmi, 2014). 
Factors policies and regulations, advanced and cost-effective technologies, subsidy regimes, 
grid connectivity and capacity, storage capacity, and land availability affect the transition to 
RE. The assessment of the effect of these factors on the transition to RE is essential (Wee 
et al., 2012). Many studies argued that efficient policies and subsidy regimes are required 
to facilitate RE transition (Al Hatmi et al., 2014; Al-Ajmi, 2014; Al-Badi et al., 2009; Al-
Sarihi & Bello, 2019; Charabi & Al-Badi, 2015; Mondal & Khalil, 2012). Other studies 
posited that there are increasing developments in RE technologies at relatively lower costs, 
which supports the transition (Al-Badi et al., 2009; Al-Sarihi & Bello, 2019; Azam et al., 
2018; Charabi & Al-Badi, 2015; Mondal & Khalil, 2012; Umar & Wamuziri, 2016). Extant 
literature also highlights that the current grid connectivity and capacity restrict the smooth 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
transition to RE (Keck et al., 2022). Similarly, RE power output requires a certain storage 
and grid capacity depending on the type of RE source to meet demands (Cárdenas et al., 
2021). It is also established that land availability may limit the transition to RE as it com­
petes with the need to preserve natural ecosystems as well as human needs (Capellán-Pérez 
et al., 2017). In addition to sustainability concerns, these literature findings suggest policies 
and regulations, advanced and cost-effective technologies, subsidy regimes, grid connectiv­
ity and capacity, storage capacity, and land availability as the tacit factors that influence the 
transition to RE (see Table 2).
2.5  A framework for a sustainable transition to renewable energy
RE is the most sustainable way of meeting the global energy demand (Kumar et al., 2023). 
RE supply chains allow energy to be environmentally, socially, and economically gener­
ated, transmitted, distributed, and consumed (Zare et al., 2015). The growing attention on 
RE supply networks reflects the increasing demand for RE as an energy source (Fontes & 
Freires, 2018). The viability of RE supply chains is driven by desires to minimise environ­
mental problems, maximise social benefits, minimise costs, and maximise revenues (Win­
kler, 2005). However, the availability of RE sources does not guarantee the viability of RE 
investments because many factors, including policies, technology, infrastructure, and local 
capacities, need to be addressed (Rövekamp et al., 2021). Energy policies are established to 
assist the transition to RE and perform an important role towards sustainable development 
(Sharvini et al., 2018). However, the dearth of RE policies in Oman makes it challenging to 
develop sustainable long-term RE systems. For RE supply chain participants to realise the 
benefits of the transition, a range of favourable subsidy regimes must be established, includ­
Table 1  Sustainability factors driving the renewable energy transition
Sources
Sustainability factors
Environmental
Social
Economic
Amoatey et al. (2022); Pourali et al. (2023); 
Forghani et al. (2023)
Greenhouse gas 
emissions
Pourmoghadam and Kasaeian (2023); Kasem (2019)
Toxic emissions
Evans et al. (2012)
Investment 
requirement, 
Cost of 
Energy
Albadi et al. (2009)
Feed in tariff
Capellán-Pérez et al. (2019)
Return of 
investment
Panagos et al. (2015) Charabi et al., 2022; Macknick 
et al. (2013)
Vegetation, 
Wildlife, Noise 
pollution
Twidell (2021)
Deflation of 
finite natural 
resources
Cole and Banks (2017)
Job creation
Mondal and Khalil (2012)
Energy supply 
security
Availability, 
Reliability
Tsoutsos et al. (2005); Dai et al. (2015); Okudoh et 
al. (2014); Sahoo and Sethi (2021)
Visual intrusion, 
Bad odour
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
ing tax holidays, carbon credits, emission trading, and FiT, amongst others, to encourage 
adoption and returns for investors (Shum, 2017). RE production technologies are essential 
to realising the economic benefits of the transition, and their continuous improvement is 
vital towards achieving cost-effective implementation (Amoatey et al., 2022). The need for 
improved energy storage capacity is increasing as they are required in all value chain net­
works from generation to consumption (Kebede et al., 2022). Most RE harvesting stations 
require huge land availability that can only be found in remote areas, which affects grid 
connectivity and capacity because having a facility away from the existing grid will incur 
higher costs and energy losses (Al-Sarihi & Mansouri, 2022). This study investigates the 
viability of RE transition, including the drivers and challenges facing the transition to guide 
supply chain practitioners to optimise sustainable performance.
2.6  Gaps in renewable energy transition-related research
RE supply chain networks facilitate sustainable energy production and consumption, 
thereby integrating all value chain participants to optimise environmental effects, social 
benefits, and financial performance (Wee et al., 2012). This research is a case study of 
Oman, which aims to increase its RE production from 1 to 30% by 2030, primarily tar­
geting its vast solar resources (Amoatey et al., 2022; Charabi & Gastli, 2011). However, 
most studies focused on exploring various RE sources, and a few papers investigated the 
economic, environmental, and social benefits of RE energy sources, solutions to RE chal­
lenges, or individual assessments of different RE sources (Al-Yahyai et al., 2012; Charabi 
Gastli, 2011). Similarly, Malik et al. (2015) assessed solar and wind energy using diverse 
Table 2  Tacit factors driving the renewable energy transition
Sources
Tacit Factors
Policies and 
regulations
Advanced and 
cost-effective 
technologies
Subsidy 
regimes
Grid con­
nectivity 
and capacity
Storage 
capacity
Land 
avail­
abil­
ity
Mondal and Khalil 
(2012)
✔
✔
✔
Al-Ajmi (2014)
✔
✔
Al-Badi et al. 
(2009)
✔
✔
✔
Al-Sarihi and 
Bello (2019)
✔
✔
✔
Charabi and Al-
Badi (2015)
✔
✔
✔
Umar and Wamuz­
iri (2016)
✔
✔
✔
Al Hatmi et al. 
(2014)
✔
✔
Azam et al. (2018)
✔
Keck et al. (2022)
✔
Cárdenas et al. 
(2021)
✔
✔
Capellán-Pérez et 
al. (2017)
✔
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
criteria including economic, technical, environmental, planning, policies, and regulations. 
Azam et al. (2018) ranked available RE sources in Oman but focused on limited drivers and 
neglected the adoption barriers. Limited attention is given to the strategic planning toward 
the sustainable transition to RE. Only one paper investigated viable RE sources and barri­
ers to technology adoption (Al-Sarihi & Mansouri, 2022). No single research has proposed 
updated and holistic models to facilitate the viable transition to RE in Oman, indicating a 
major research gap in the literature. The most efficient way to energise the world sustainably 
is by RE (Owusu & Asumadu-Sarkodie, 2016; Binh et al., 2023). However, there has been 
no prior study that evaluates RE sources against sustainability dimensions and analyses the 
factors that have implications for viable transition to RE sources to assist policymakers and 
practitioners in strategic decision-making, indicating another research gap. This created a 
need for a holistic analysis of the factors that influence the RE transition to prioritise the RE 
sources in Oman, to assist in the selection of viable RE sources and to ease and fast-track 
the transition to RE.
2.7  Research and innovation highlights
In light of the research gaps established, and the importance of transition to RE for energy 
security and sustainable development, the following are the key research and innovation 
highlights from this study:
 
●
A novel framework is proposed for assessing the factors influencing the sustainable 
transition to RE, including variables published in extant RE studies and tacit issues 
synonymous with RE supply chains (Fig. 1).
 
●
New and updated MCDM models are produced, which empirically measure and priori­
tise the factors influencing the transition to RE, to guide practitioners and policymakers 
in strategic decision-making (Sect. 4.1).
 
●
The study divulges methodological rigour. It is the first research to combine template 
analysis, AHP, and TOPSIS techniques to support RE transition in Oman. Combining 
these established approaches minimises the limitations of each method (Sects. 3.1; 3.2).
 
●
The theoretical/scientific and managerial/practical implications of the study are pro­
vided to support practitioners, policy and researchers to address the identified factors 
and fast-track RE transition (Sect. 6.1).
3  Methodology
The study adopted the case study approach to investigate the subject (Yin, 2017). A case 
study approach is chosen for its perspicuity and subjectivity to establish a clear guide for 
practitioners in selecting and investing in viable RE supply chains (Pu & Lam, 2023). A case 
study provides in-depth data collection from various information sources including reports, 
observations, questionnaires, and interviews (Creswell & Poth, 2016). Data collection is 
planned to determine multiple RE sources' adaptability based on sustainability dimensions. 
To achieve the research objectives, this study deploys multiple methods of data gathering 
and evaluation to fully apprehend practitioners’ insights relevant to sustainable transition 
to RE within the Oman RE supply chain network as the case study. Both quantitative and 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
qualitative approaches are utilised to capture experts’ opinions concerning the influence 
of sustainability dimensions and other factors on RE transition. RE sources, sustainability 
dimensions, and related variables are selected through a literature review, which was further 
validated by experts (Zubairu et al., 2021). The quantitative survey data was analysed using 
AHP and TOPSIS as a hybrid multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) method (Choudhary 
& Shankar, 2012; Mohammed et al., 2021). For the qualitative part of this study, interviews 
were conducted with RE experts which were analysed using template analysis (Brooks et 
al., 2015). Synthesising qualitative and quantitative approaches supports credibility and 
validity and assists in minimising bias and risk in research (Creswell & Poth, 2018). Com­
bining AHP and TOPSIS as MCDM methods with template analysis enhances the nobility 
of this study as the first that synthesised these three methods to study the transition to RE.
Fig. 1  Framework for a sustainable transition to renewable energy
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
3.1  Multi-criteria decision-making techniques: AHP and TOPSIS
The prioritisation of RE sources for the sustainable transition to RE is a decision-making 
problem. In this study, MCDM methods are utilised in the quantitative part, because of their 
suitability to use multiple preferences to resolve different conflicting criteria using math­
ematical equations, resulting in specific criteria preferences (Sindhu et al., 2017). Different 
MCDM methods, including ELECTRE, AHP, TOPSIS, Rough sets theory, and ANP were 
analysed in comparison to each other, and the analysis revealed the superiority of combin­
ing AHP and TOPSIS methods in evaluating and ranking related alternatives (Choudhary 
& Shankar, 2012). Hence, hybrid MCDM techniques consisting of AHP and TOPSIS are 
adopted to aid in the prioritisation of the various RE sources based on their implications on 
sustainability and other tacit variables.
AHP is an MCDM method that performs pairwise comparisons of selected variables 
using experts’ perspectives as decision support systems (Listyaningsih and Utami, 2018). 
This approach uses decision-makers judgment based on their knowledge and experience to 
assess the alternatives (Joshi et al., 2020). AHP allows the evaluation of multiple factors 
and achieves weights of each factor resulting in the prioritisation of each of the economic, 
environmental, and social sustainability factors along with other variables affecting the RE 
transition. Four sequential steps are carried out to use AHP analysis (Wu et al., 2021):
First, multiple pairwise comparisons of various sustainability factors were carried out 
based on a standardised comparison scale of nine levels to determine the relative importance 
of each factor against other factors, from one being equally important to nine as absolutely 
more important (Saaty, 1980). Second, geometric mean is used to group participants’ opin­
ions to synthesise the individual experts’ preferences and establish a single matrix com­
paring different RE sustainability factors. The advantage of the geometric mean over the 
average mean is the consideration of the compound occurring between decision-makers 
(Saaty, 1989). Third, the normalised matrix of AHP pairwise comparison is reached by 
dividing each column entry with the total column entries summation and taking the aver­
age of each raw. Normalised weights of RE sustainability factors support the identification 
of the importance of each factor in the sustainable transition to RE. Fourth, consistency is 
established to prove the fairness of experts’ perspectives in allocating the importance of 
RE sustainability factors. A consistency ratio (CR) of 0.1 or less is acceptable and indicates 
acceptable results. CR is calculated by dividing the consistency index (CI) by the random 
index (RI). The consistency index is calculated CI = (λmax–N)/(N−1) where λmax is the 
average of weighted sum values divided by criteria weight and the random index (RI) for 
the seven-criteria matrix according to Saaty (2008) developed table is 1.32.
TOPSIS is a prioritisation method that ranks alternatives according to their geometric 
distance from the positive-ideal and negative-ideal solutions. It aggregates experts’ opin­
ions and selects the highest-performing alternative that is the closest to the ideal solution 
and farthest from the negative ideal solution (Joshi et al., 2020). In this study, RE sources 
were ranked according to their economic, environmental, and social considerations, as well 
as other factors such as Policies and regulations, subsidy regimes, and land availability that 
affect the transition to RE using the TOPSIS method. TOPSIS requires the use of weighted 
criteria that, in this study, are established from the AHP analysis.
First, creating a comparison matrix illustrates the effectiveness of economic, social, envi­
ronmental, and restricting factors on the adaption of various RE sources to accelerate the 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
transition to RE in Oman. TOPSIS method uses a 9-point rating scale similar to t AHP to 
rank RE sources based on sustainability factors. Second, similar to AHP analysis, geomet­
ric mean is used to cumulate interviewees’ results into an individual representative matrix 
making it easier to analyse in upcoming steps. Third, to achieve a normalised comparison 
matrix, each column value is divided by the square root of column entries’ square sum­
mation. Fourth, AHP analysis results in distinct sustainability factors weights utilised in 
TOPSIS analysis. The weighted normalised decision matrix is accomplished by multiplying 
column values with weights resulting from AHP analysis. Fifth, this study aims to evaluate 
the impacts of sustainability on various RE sources to support the transition to RE includ­
ing factors such as ROI and investment requirements. The best ideal solution is to have 
the highest ROI and lowest investment requirement. Hence ROI's largest value illustrates 
the positive ideal solution while the investment requirement’s largest value presents the 
negative ideal solution. Sixth, different RE sources’ distances from the ideal best solution 
are computed by summing entries subtracted from the ideal best solution than the square 
root of the value. Similarly, the distance from the ideal worst solution is calculated with the 
same formula. The last step gives the preference of RE sources in transitioning to RE. The 
performance score is found by dividing the ideal best distance by the summation of both the 
ideal best and ideal worst distances found in the previous step. The highest rank is given to 
the RE source with the highest performance score.
Considering the MCDM analyses, AHP and TOPSIS, were conducted based on the fac­
tors derived from reviews of prior literature (see Fig. 1). To avoid bias and improve the 
validity of findings, interviews were conducted and analysed using template analysis to 
explore tacit variables and expert opinions to gain a better understanding of key factors rel­
evant to improving sustainable transition to RE, which is discussed in Sect. 3.2. Deploying 
this hybrid of multi-mixed methods approach consisting of surveys and interviews, which 
are analysed using AHP, TOPSIS and template analysis, enhances the study’s contextual 
relevance and minimises subjectivity in research findings. The latent factors influencing the 
transition to RE are established by analysing stakeholders’ insights to enrich the analytical 
framework and offer a comprehensive understanding (Zubairu et al., 2021).
3.2  Template analysis of interviews
Template analysis is a qualitative approach used to complete the deficiencies in quantitative 
approaches (Brooks & King, 2014). Template Analysis is a component of thematic analysis 
that uses a structured process to analyse data using hierarchical coding (Brooks et al., 2015). 
Template analysis was chosen as it provides a strong and systematic process yet offers flex­
ibility to data analysis (Brooks & King, 2012). It is particularly advantageous for studies 
aiming to analyse text materials focusing on discovering themes and prioritising similarities 
without offering any pre-estimated fixed sequence of coding classes (Anderson-Ingstrup & 
Ridder, 2020). Relatively, it enables the researcher to establish theme order depending on 
data richness (Waring & Wainwright, 2008). It captures major themes in the primary analy­
sis and further identifies additional sub-themes with analysis progression (Johnson, 2019). 
Interview questions are designed to augment AHP and TOPSIS results. Data collected from 
experts’ interviews were analysed using template analysis to access latent information, gain 
a better understanding, and improve the objectivity and validity of the results. Findings from 
template analysis enable this paper to suggest recommendations to support the sustainable 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
transition to RE. Template analysis in this study is carried out through the following steps 
(Brooks et al., 2015).
First, familiarisation in this study has been done by first scanning data collected, fol­
lowed by the selection of five participants as a subset for initial analysis. Second, five inter­
view transcripts are randomly selected and coded, highlighting items in the text relevant 
to addressing the questions to develop a priori themes. Third, after analysing selected data 
in hand, grouping is used to establish the links between major themes and related narrow 
themes creating hierarchical relationships. Fourth, the initial template is now created using 
clustered themes from the interview data. Fifth, an analysis of the remaining interview data 
is carried out to update themes established previously, by adding new themes or restructur­
ing existing themes’ orders. Last, with the evaluation of all data, the final template is estab­
lished with higher, second, and third-order themes to achieve study objectives.
3.3  Sample of respondent
A quantitative survey and qualitative interview questionnaires provide a unique entry to 
experts’ understanding and opinions (Shen et al., 2017). To achieve study objectives, struc­
tured interviews with experts are required. The study used a purposive sampling approach 
to select the RE experts. Purposive sampling is the recruitment of specific participants pos­
sessing the necessary experience and knowledge (Campbell et al., 2020). RE field in Oman 
is in its initial development stages providing limited evidence on RE systems sustainability 
(Amoatey et al., 2022). Therefore, expert sampling is the best method to choose as part of 
purposive sampling (Etikan et al., 2016). Purposive expert sampling is employed to select 
RE experts with the essential knowledge needed to investigate the study objective. RE 
experts with diverse experience and qualifications working in both local and international 
organisations, as well as public and private sectors are selected for this study. For data col­
lection, 18 professionals who are involved in the RE decision-making from different RE 
value chains in Oman participated in the interviews and 20 completed the AHP and TOPSIS 
surveys. All responses were analysed to derive useful and valid findings.
3.4  Research rigour
Energy specialists with extensive experience are recruited for this study (Zubairu et al., 
2021). The RE experts are recruited from nine different energy corporations and work across 
diverse supply chain networks having both similarities and differences in terms of experi­
ences regarding the sustainable transition to RE. This assisted in generating rich insights 
that are all-encompassing to improve the validity of findings and minimise bias (Yamini 
& Gajanand, 2022; Clottey and Benton Jr, 2020). In addition, multiple-mixed methods, 
including AHP, TOPSIS, and template analysis approaches, are deployed in this work to 
benefit from the three techniques' analytical and empirical strengths. This assists in address­
ing potential methodological shortcomings (Olsen, 2022).
To minimise ambiguity, the specialists who participated in the MCDM surveys and inter­
views were given definitions of key terms, instructions, and demonstrations on completing 
the MCDM questionnaire (Flynn et al., 2018). Research validity and applicability are para­
mount for the grant that funded this work, which requires the research team to present the 
practical and policy implications of the study. Consequently, two researchers with extensive 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
expertise met in person to discuss key research findings. The reliability of the research ele­
ments was ensured by producing and continuously updating the project database to record 
all documents, notes, and meeting details while maintaining strict confidentiality (Alsmadi 
et al., 2023).
4  Analysis and results
4.1  Analysis of the impact of sustainability on renewable energy transition
To validate and substantiate whether the sustainability variables identified from existing 
literature influence the RE transition, prior literature was conducted with RE supply chain 
specialists in Oman. The exercise confirms the literature results that solar (A1), wind (A2), 
biomass (A3), geothermal (A4), and hydropower (A5) are the key sustainable RE energy 
sources in Oman. The study also corroborates that all three sustainability dimensions, envi­
ronmental, economic, and social, are considered in RE decision-making. The study further 
confirms that the economic considerations include investment requirement (F1), availability 
(F2), reliability (F3), cost of energy (F4), FiT (F5), and ROI (F6). Greenhouse gas emis­
sions (E1), toxic emissions (E2), water pollution (E3), soil erosion (E4), and deflation of 
finite natural resources (E5) are the environmental factors influencing the transition to RE 
sources. Social factors include job creation (S1), business opportunities (S2), energy sup­
ply security (S3), health and wellbeing (S4), Wildlife (S5), vegetation (S6), noise pollution 
(S7), bad odour (S8), and visual intrusion (S9). These factors are analysed empirically using 
AHP and TOPSIS to determine the relative impacts on the RE transition (Objective 1).
Assessment of sustainability factors makes it possible to evaluate the different RE 
sources’ potential in Oman. AHP is a flexible and comprehensive decision-making process 
that helps in prioritising multiple alternatives and making an optimal decision. The process 
consists of a hierarchy structure that starts from the objective, followed by an assessment of 
set criteria, and is finalised with RE alternatives comparison (Malik et al., 2015). It is used 
to assess RE economic, environmental, and social considerations by using RE expert judg­
ments. Geometric mean later combines the pairwise comparison as it is an easy extension in 
fuzzy sets and guarantees a unique solution (Yu et al., 2022).
4.1.1  Evaluation of the impacts of economic criteria on the renewable energy 
transition
Economic criteria were rated by experts from 1–9, with 9 showing extreme importance, 
and the geometric mean of each criterion was calculated. The weights and ranks of each 
economic criterion are developed (see Table 3 & Appendix 1-A). AHP findings revealed that 
ROI is the most important factor to consider when economically assessing RE sources. Cost 
of energy and FiT scored second and third most important respectively. System availability 
scored the lowest importance (see Table 3 & Appendix 1-A). TOPSIS analysis of paired 
comparison of RE sources concerning economic factors revealed solar energy is the most 
economical RE alternative investors and energy stakeholders should seek to harvest. Bio­
mass energy is found to be the third best alternative after wind energy. Hydropower energy 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
was shown to be better economically than geothermal which scored lowest (see Table 3 & 
Appendix 1-B).
4.1.2  Evaluation of the impacts of environmental criteria on the renewable energy 
transition
The group pairwise comparison matrix of each environmental criterion against the other 
is performed, and their relative weights are established. Water pollution is found to have 
extreme importance, followed by toxic and greenhouse gas emissions, while deflation of 
finite natural resources and soil erosion scored the lowest (see Table 4 & Appendix 2-A). 
Expectedly, solar energy was found to be the best RE alternative in terms of environmental 
performance. Wind energy remained second while the third best alternative is hydropower 
energy. geothermal energy environmental evaluation showed it is in fourth place with bio­
mass scoring lowest (see Table 4 & Appendix 2-B).
4.1.3  Evaluation of the impacts of social criteria on the RE transition
Nine social considerations influencing RE transition are established. Health and well-being, 
energy supply security and job creation score the top three most important criteria respec­
tively, followed by business opportunities, vegetation, and wildlife preservation. Noise pol­
lution, bad odour, and visual intrusion showed the least importance (see Table 5 & Appendix 
3-A). Social evaluation of RE alternatives revealed solar as the most socially preferred with 
wind being the second-best alternative. Hydropower energy scored third followed by bio­
mass energy. Geothermal energy is socially lowest preferred (see Table 5 & Appendix 3-B).
Order of preference for environ­
mental factors
The relative influence of 
environmental factors on key 
RE sources
Factors
Weight
Priority
RE sources
Score
Rank
E1
0.185
3rd
A1
0.742
1st
E2
0.194
2nd
A2
0.711
2nd
E3
0.310
1st
A3
0.294
5th
E4
0.140
5th
A4
0.354
4th
E5
0.172
4th
A5
0.392
3rd
Table 4  Impacts of environmen­
tal criteria on the RE transition
 
Order of preference for economic 
factors
The relative influence of 
economic factors on key RE 
sources
Factors
Weight
Priority
RE sources
Score
Rank
F1
0.111
4th
A1
0.876
1st
F2
0.069
6th
A2
0.732
2nd
F3
0.108
5th
A3
0.286
3rd
F4
0.229
2nd
A4
0.099
5th
F5
0.160
3rd
A5
0.217
4th
F6
0.322
1st
Table 3  Impacts of economic 
criteria on the renewable energy 
transition
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
4.2  Assessment of tacit factors affecting the transition to sustainable renewable 
energy
The literature review revealed that policies and regulations (C1), advanced and cost-effec­
tive technologies (C2), subsidy regimes (C3), grid connectivity and capacity (C4), storage 
capacity (C5), and land availability (C6) as are the key factors affecting the transition to RE, 
which are later confirmed by experts’ opinions during the interviews. To achieve objective 
two of this study, an AHP group pairwise comparison matrix of different factors that affect 
the RE transition is developed showing their relative weights (see Table 6 & Appendix 4-A). 
Findings concluded policies and regulations are the most important factors to consider in 
facilitating the transition to RE. Subsidy regimes and grid connectivity and capacity scored 
second and third, respectively, while storage capacity scored the lowest importance. TOP­
SIS results of paired comparison of the impacts of these latent factors on the key RE sources 
revealed that more priority should be given to solar and wind energies, due to their high 
ranks as first and second, respectively. Biomass energy is found to be the third best alterna­
tive followed by hydropower energy. Geothermal energy is the least favourite due to the 
availability of several restrictions (see Table 6 & Appendix 4-B).
4.3  Template analysis for the sustainable transition to renewable energy
To address the third objective of this research, interviews were conducted individually with 
18 RE supply chain specialists and decision-makers to explore and evaluate latent informa­
tion that influences the transition to RE and to suggest recommendations for improvement. 
Order of preference for 
factors
The relative influence of factors on key 
RE sources
Factors Weight Priority RE sources
Score Rank
C1
0.227
1st
A1
0.868 1st
C2
0.159
4th
A2
0.680 2nd
C3
0.194
2nd
A3
0.223 3rd
C4
0.175
3rd
A4
0.117
5th
C5
0.109
6th
A5
0.176 4th
C6
0.136
5th
Table 6  Impact of factors affect­
ing the transition to sustainable 
renewable energy
 
Order of preference for social 
factors
The relative influence of social 
factors on key RE sources
Factors
Weight
Priority
RE sources
Score
Rank
S1
0.148
3rd
A1
0.865
1st
S2
0.102
4th
A2
0.591
2nd
S3
0.191
2nd
A3
0.262
4th
S4
0.221
1st
A4
0.254
5th
S5
0.074
6th
A5
0.393
3rd
S6
0.101
5th
S7
0.062
7th
S8
0.054
8th
S9
0.048
9th
Table 5  impacts of social 
criteria on the renewable energy 
transition
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
The interviews were analysed using template analysis validated some earlier findings and 
identified other latent factors specific to the transition to RE in Oman.
4.3.1  Initial template development
As directed by Brooks et al. (2015), five experts’ responses were analysed to obtain the 
initial template. Initial template themes selected highlight RE sources and sustainability fac­
tors recognised from the literature review. Initial higher-order themes involve solar energy, 
wind energy, financial sustainability and considerations, environmental awareness and con­
siderations, policies and regulations, transition to RE benefits, and recommendations. Each 
theme included a few second-order themes that are highly linked to literature yet require 
more development and analysis to realise alignment with study factors further used in AHP 
and TOPSIS analysis (Brooks & King, 2014).
4.3.2  Final template and results
Advance analysis of the additional experts’ interviews is conducted to develop the final tem­
plate and compare it to the initial template as advised by King et al. (2018). The final template 
is redefined and simplified into 4 categories: RE sources, sustainability factors, RE transi­
tion drawbacks, and recommendations almost similar to the initial template. The high-order 
theme includes solar energy, wind energy, and other sources as RE sources. These themes 
validate literature findings of the various sources of RE as well as TOPSIS analysis revealing 
the preferred adoptability of solar and wind energies. Sustainability factors' high-order theme 
involves financial, environmental, and social considerations confirming literature findings fur­
ther used in AHP and TOPSIS analysis. Financial sustainability considerations include ROI, 
investment cost, and energy cost criteria realised from the literature. Similarly, environmental 
awareness and consideration include all criteria analysed in this study: air, water and soil pol­
lution, as well as deflation of finite natural resources. Although second-order themes related to 
social consideration were limited to energy supply security, job creation, and business oppor­
tunities, these factors are found to be top-ranked in AHP analysis. RE transition drawbacks 
included all factors found in the literature review except for land availability which was briefly 
mentioned in one interview as difficulty in choosing a suitable location.
5  Discussion
5.1  Renewable energy as a catalyst for sustainability
The transition to RE is associated with economic, environmental, and social dimensions of 
sustainability. Template analysis of experts’ interviews confirmed the importance of these 
three sustainability pillars in transitioning to RE.
5.1.1  Economic considerations
Economic consideration is established as a higher-order theme in template analysis, which 
conforms with the literature findings that revealed that economic factors as key drivers for 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
RE investments (Kilinc-Ata & Dolmatov, 2023; Martínez et al., 2023). AHP analysis identi­
fied ROI and energy cost as having the highest in RE financing. This is further validated by 
template analysis that placed both ROI and energy cost as second-order themes. It is argued 
that fossil fuels will be greatly replaced by RE due to long-term cost benefits and ROI (Li, 
2023; Capellán-Pérez et al., 2019). FiT is established as the third most important economic 
factor from AHP analysis and is confirmed by the template analysis as participants discussed 
the lack of government regulations supporting investing in RE projects. Unclear policies are 
bottlenecks for RE investments (Albadi et al., 2009). Investment requirements are found to 
be the fourth most important economic factor. One respondent lamented the high initial cost 
required to establish RE projects, the dearth of infrastructure, and the lack of governmental 
support. RE systems availability and reliability are prioritised as the least important eco­
nomic factors in the qualitative analysis. Template analysis further confirmed these results 
showing availability and reliability as a secondary theme.
5.1.2  Environmental considerations
Results from template analysis revealed environmental considerations as a higher-order 
theme. A respondent confirmed that the environmental factors are major considerations 
toward RE transition while another added it is a moderate factor only. “The environmental 
consequences of non-RE sources are obvious and widespread. Recent tragic floods and fam­
ines in certain areas are simply a warning of what is to come” in justification of the impor­
tance of environmental factors in RE transition. Low-carbon supply chains are required to 
reduce greenhouse gases which were identified as an environmental factor in the literature 
(Hren et al., 2023). It was expected for GHG emissions reduction to be the most important 
environmental concern toward RE transition due to the enormous number of studies consid­
ering RE systems as a critical element of a low GHG energy economy (Forghani et al., 2023; 
Mukhtarov et al., 2023; Pourali et al., 2023). However, GHG was found as the third most 
important environmental factor in AHP analysis. The most and second important environ­
mental factors in the study were found to be water pollution and toxic emissions which are 
third-order themes in template analysis results. Majeed and Luni's (2019) study revealed the 
negative effect of renewable energy on the environment due to the inefficient use of water 
causing underground water pollution. The deflation of finite resources has been identified as 
an environmental factor in prior studies (Twidell, 2021). However, AHP analysis ranked it 
low, and interview results also confirmed this position revealing limited interest in resource 
depletion. This is surprising as many studies demand the need to transition to RE to over­
come the challenge of finite resources depletion.
5.1.3  Social considerations
The literature review identifies social measures as an important sustainability pillar to con­
sider when transitioning to RE, and this is echoed by the results of the template analysis. 
Health and well-being are found to be the most important social criteria. The environment 
has a strong impact on health and well-being. Energy supply security is found to be the 
second most important social factor driving the transition to RE. Template analysis further 
supports this finding as this energy supply security is a third-order theme. Similarly, numer­
ous studies have posited that energy supply is a key driver toward RE transition (Amoatey 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
et al., 2022; Cergibozan, 2022; Olabi & Abdelkareem, 2022; Vidadili et al., 2017). The third 
most important factor found in AHP analysis is job creation, and interview analysis con­
firmed this by ranking it as a second-order theme. It is argued that RE systems require higher 
manpower and hence create more jobs than fossil fuel operations (Bulavskaya and Reynès, 
2018). AHP analysis ranked business opportunity as the fourth most important social factor. 
Similarly, the template analysis established this factor as a third-order theme. Most of the 
interview respondents argued that RE transition drives business opportunities. The business 
opportunities created by the RE transition include research, local manufacturing, and logis­
tics (Maradin et al., 2017). Noise pollution, bad odour, and visual intrusion showed the least 
importance in the AHP-TOPSIS analysis. These findings are validated by template analysis 
due to the non-existing of these factors in the high-order themes.
5.2  Factors affecting the viable transition to renewable energy
The analysis concluded that policies and regulations are the most important barriers to 
overcoming when transitioning to RE. When the respondents were asked to identify RE 
transition drawbacks, their responses were focused on policies and regulations, technologi­
cal advancement, subsidy regimes, grid connectivity, and complex RE plants. Template 
analysis further identified a lack of legal framework, cross-border carbon policy region­
ally, and tax incentives as the main policy barriers. Subsidy regimes and grid connectivity 
scored second and third on their influence on sustainable transition to RE. Template analysis 
confirmed these superior effects, ranking both second-order themes. Effective policies and 
regulations, along with subsidy regimes, facilitate investments toward RE transition (Al 
Hatmi et al., 2014; Al-Ajmi, 2014; Al-Badi et al., 2009; Al-Sarihi & Bello, 2019; Charabi 
& Al-Badi, 2015; Lu et al., 2020; Mondal & Khalil, 2012). It is argued that there should 
be potent policies in place to promote RE transition (Siram et al., 2022). Storage capacity 
and land availability scored the lowest importance in the AHP analysis. Similarly, it was 
not a major theme under template analysis. A study also argues storage systems have been 
developed in recent years to increase efficiency (Abdalla et al., 2021). Results suggest that 
RE plants should be considered due to their complex design, installation, and maintenance.
5.3  Recommendations
The analysis of expert opinions suggests that policies and regulations, subsidy regimes, 
training, awareness, and research need to be strengthened. This study proposed that policy­
makers should review and revise RE policies and regulations to establish a support system 
for investors to attract investments into the RE sector. The policies suggested by RE experts 
are related to wheeling as compensation for excess energy, incentives to attract foreign 
investment, national frameworks for foreign direct investment, incentivising the acquisition 
of RE, carbon credits, and tax exemption. Subsidy regimes are key to the RE transition. 
Thus, government and other relevant stakeholders should consider providing the required 
support to make RE competitive against conventional fossil energy. The support could be 
grants, low-cost financing for investors, and higher subsidies for low-income households, 
among other initiatives. It is also established that the lack of trained and licensed employees 
is slowing down the transition to RE, which can be addressed through structured training 
and licensing programs. It is also important to increase people’s awareness about different 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
RE systems and the associated advantages of RE utilisation. More support should be given 
to RE sources and supply chain-related research to facilitate more findings, insights and 
recommendations to support practitioners and policymakers in making informed strategic 
decisions and to fast-track the transition to RE.
6  Conclusion
Oman aims for energy diversification by exploiting RE to support the country’s energy sup­
ply and reduce dependence on natural gas. Energy strategies to meet the growing demand, 
enhance competitiveness, and achieve sustainable advantages should incorporate strategies 
and decisions for the transition to RE. This study has investigated the sustainable transition 
to RE incorporating environmental, social, and economic sustainability dimensions along 
with drivers and challenges for the transition. AHP was used to determine the relative influ­
ence of sustainability factors and other tacit variables influencing the sustainable transition 
to RE. Similarly, RE sources were evaluated using TOPSIS to evaluate the impacts of sus­
tainability dimensions on key RE sources. ROI and cost of energy are the most important 
economic criteria to consider when analysing RE sources. Likewise, water pollution, toxic 
emissions, and greenhouse gas emissions are the most important criteria to consider when 
evaluating the environmental impact of RE. Health and well-being, energy supply security, 
and job creation are the most important social factors to focus on when analysing the social 
implications of RE sources. The analysis also concluded it is policies and regulations, sub­
sidy regimes, and grid connectivity and capacity affect the sustainable transition to RE. It is 
concluded that solar and wind energies represent the best RE sources to utilise and harvest 
in Oman. Finally, recommendations for policymakers and investors were proposed for the 
sustainable transition to RE.
6.1  Study implications
6.1.1  Managerial/practical implications
The study develops decision-making tools and promotes discourse on the sustainable transi­
tion to RE in the transition to RE sources to drive sustainable performance. The paper sug­
gested that more emphasis and support investment and incentives should be given to solar 
and wind energies. Solar and wind energies have the potential to support Oman’s energy 
vision of growing RE to 40% of its energy mix by 2040. It is recommended that solar energy 
should be prioritised ahead of other RE sources to increase RE in Oman’s energy mix due to 
its economic, environmental, and social advantages over the rest of RE sources. Quantita­
tive AHP modelling suggests solar energy has the highest potential as it has more developed 
policies and regulations, more advances and cost-effective technologies, and higher stor­
age capacity and the lowest challenges to overcome, such as land availability, as it can be 
installed in various places such as house roofs.
In this study, factors related to the sustainable transition to RE are explored and evaluated 
in the context of the Oman RE supply chain as a case study. The high impact of solar and 
wind energies in energy diversification and RE transition may be specific to Oman given its 
geographical location and socio-political factors. Yet the results of this research might be 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
expanded to present Gulf countries due to their geographical and socio-political similarity 
(Basha et al., 2021; Praveen et al., 2020). The execution of the study proposition provides 
the best economic, environmental, and social RE transition options.
6.1.2  Theoretical/scientific implications
This research contributes to RE supply chain literature by incorporating sustainability 
dimensions in RE transition. This paper develops a framework for sustainability dimensions 
including economic, environmental, and social factors affecting RE sources selection for 
sustainable RE transition. Quantitative and qualitative approaches, including AHP, TOPSIS, 
and template analysis, were applied to this study methodology. AHP as an MCDM method 
was confirmed in this study to be appropriate in evaluating the relative importance of eco­
nomic, environmental, and social factors toward RE transition. AHP ranks these sustain­
ability factors independently to further be used in ranking different RE sources. This work 
illustrates TOPSIS's suitability as an MCDM technique in prioritising various RE sources 
according to their sustainability performance. TOPSIS deploys AHP results in ranking RE 
sources depending on economic, environmental, and social criteria independently. In this 
study template, an analysis of experts’ interviews captures latent information and obtains 
a better understanding. Template analysis information is compared to Literature, AHP, and 
TOPSIS analysis confirming their conclusions and enhancing the validity of results. It also 
provides managerial recommendations and implications for practitioners’ decision-making. 
The incorporation of AHP, TOPSIS, and template analysis enhances the original of this 
research.
6.2  Future research directions
This research is centred on the assessment of viable RE sources of sustainability leading 
toward RE transition. The study review and analysis are focused on Oman RE transition 
adoption, which creates a limitation when applying study results to different geographical 
locations and socio-political factors. Hence, future work is required to use the methodol­
ogy developed in this research for case studies with different geographical locations, socio-
political factors, and economies.
The quantitative and qualitative methods used in this study include limitations; hence, 
different methods of compilation should be considered. AHP analysis limitation is that 
answer intuitiveness depends on the size of the matrix (Hartwich, 1999). In this study, four 
multi-dimensional matrices are designed, which is considered extremely lengthy and time-
consuming; thus, experts tend to lose interest at a certain time. For future work, fewer data 
collection methods, such as the Best–Worst Method (BWM), could be adopted to ensure a 
focus on more accurate results.
Study framework construction highly depends on literature; hence, RE sources and sus­
tainability factors that are not studied in previous literature are not included. For future 
research, it might be required to add new sustainability factors in the RE transition field 
including factors recommended by experts in this study. Additionally, it will be interesting 
for future studies to deploy machine learning techniques such as decision trees, random 
forests, and support vector machines to identify factors for RE transition objectively, and 
to build updated frameworks and typologies. Similarly, machine learning can be integrated 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
with AHP and TOPSIS models to select variables for MCDM analysis strategically. This 
will enable predictive modelling and forecasting of future trends to proactively offer valu­
able insights into the future trends of RE transition.
Appendix 1:
Part A: See Table 7.
Part B: See Table 8. 
Part C:
Table 7  Order of preference for economic factors affecting the transition to renewable energy
Criteria
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
Weight
Priority
F1
0.10
0.14
0.11
0.14
0.08
0.09
0.111
4th
F2
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.06
0.069
6th
F3
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.09
0.09
0.15
0.108
5th
F4
0.17
0.22
0.27
0.23
0.28
0.21
0.229
2nd
F5
0.19
0.13
0.19
0.13
0.16
0.17
0.160
3rd
F6
0.38
0.34
0.24
0.35
0.30
0.32
0.322
1st
Table 8  Relative influence of various economic factors on key renewable energy sources
Criteria
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
Score
Rank
A1
4.91
5.09
6.16
5.25
5.16
6.94
0.876
1st
A2
6.57
5.73
5.23
5.91
5.30
7.17
0.732
2nd
A3
5.71
4.10
5.09
4.97
3.94
4.82
0.286
3rd
A4
6.54
4.14
4.56
6.16
3.79
5.01
0.099
5th
A5
7.23
4.25
5.31
5.73
4.39
5.14
0.217
4th
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Table 9  Order of preference for environmental factors affecting the transition to renewable energy
Criteria
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
Weight
Priority
E1
0.19
0.20
0.21
0.13
0.20
0.185
3rd
E2
0.18
0.19
0.19
0.22
0.19
0.194
2nd
E3
0.28
0.32
0.31
0.34
0.30
0.310
1st
E4
0.19
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.13
0.140
5th
E5
0.16
0.18
0.18
0.17
0.17
0.172
4th
Table 10  Relative influence of various environmental factors on key renewable energy sources
Criteria
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
Score
Rank
A1
2.83
2.56
2.00
2.21
2.63
0.742
1st
A2
2.62
2.70
2.06
2.01
2.87
0.711
2nd
A3
4.51
5.38
4.12
3.77
2.71
0.294
5th
A4
3.79
4.02
3.62
3.81
3.21
0.354
4th
A5
2.84
2.84
4.00
2.98
3.37
0.392
3rd
Appendix 2:
Part A: See Table 9.
Part B: See Table 10.
Part C:
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Appendix 3:
Part A: See Table 11.
Part B: See Table 12.
Part C:
Table 11  Order of preference for social factors affecting the transition to renewable energy
Criteria
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
Weight
Priority
S1
0.137
0.096
0.115
0.126
0.208
0.204
0.161
0.163
0.123
0.148
3rd
S2
0.122
0.086
0.071
0.061
0.091
0.098
0.147
0.115
0.126
0.102
4th
S3
0.227
0.230
0.191
0.168
0.178
0.155
0.169
0.187
0.214
0.191
2nd
S4
0.249
0.326
0.261
0.230
0.213
0.252
0.173
0.137
0.144
0.221
1st
S5
0.047
0.068
0.077
0.077
0.072
0.071
0.072
0.097
0.084
0.074
6th
S6
0.063
0.082
0.115
0.085
0.094
0.094
0.137
0.132
0.103
0.101
5th
S7
0.052
0.036
0.069
0.081
0.061
0.042
0.061
0.073
0.087
0.062
7th
S8
0.046
0.041
0.056
0.092
0.040
0.039
0.046
0.055
0.068
0.054
8th
S9
0.056
0.034
0.045
0.080
0.043
0.046
0.035
0.041
0.050
0.048
9th
Table 12  Relative influence of various social factors on key renewable energy sources
Criteria
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
Score
Rank
A1
5.91
7.08
6.48
6.08
4.55
3.34
1.78
1.88
4.39
0.865
1st
A2
4.21
5.83
5.96
5.78
4.68
3.39
4.34
1.77
4.66
0.591
2nd
A3
4.56
4.43
3.65
4.74
4.61
3.97
2.93
4.72
3.32
0.262
4th
A4
3.42
3.24
3.73
4.60
4.14
3.44
2.48
3.03
2.71
0.254
5th
A5
4.19
3.45
4.39
5.39
3.81
2.82
3.13
2.04
3.81
0.393
3rd
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Appendix 4:
Part A: See Table 13.
Part B: See Table 14.
Part C:
Acknowledgements  The authors would like to acknowledge that the research leading to these results 
has received funding from the Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation (MoHERI) of the 
Sultanate of Oman under the Block Funding Program. MoHERI Block Funding Agreements No MoHERI/
BFP/MUSCATUNIVERSITY/01/2020 and BFP/RGP/EI/23/234.
Table 13  Order of preference for factors affecting the transition to renewable energy
Criteria
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
Weight
Priority
C1
0.22
0.36
0.17
0.22
0.14
0.26
0.227
1st
C2
0.08
0.14
0.17
0.16
0.23
0.16
0.159
4th
C3
0.25
0.16
0.20
0.23
0.20
0.12
0.194
2nd
C4
0.18
0.16
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.19
0.175
3rd
C5
0.16
0.06
0.10
0.09
0.11
0.13
0.109
6th
C6
0.11
0.12
0.21
0.13
0.11
0.14
0.136
5th
Table 14  Relative influence of various barriers factors on key renewable energy sources
Alternatives
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
Score
Rank
A1
4.488
5.590
4.924
4.507
3.825
4.840
0.868
1st
A2
3.200
5.475
4.488
4.824
4.343
5.782
0.680
2nd
A3
2.644
4.127
2.903
3.044
2.795
4.089
0.223
3rd
A4
2.360
3.571
2.611
2.881
2.819
3.618
0.117
5th
A5
2.805
4.320
2.360
3.382
3.159
2.690
0.176
4th
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Declarations
Conflict of interest  No conflicts of interest in the development of this research.
Ethical approval  This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by 
any of the authors.
Informed consent  Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdalla, A. N., Nazir, M. S., Tao, H., Cao, S., Ji, R., Jiang, M., & Yao, L. (2021). Integration of energy 
storage system and renewable energy sources based on artificial intelligence: An overview. Journal of 
Energy Storage, 40, Article 102811.
Akrofi, M. M. (2021). An analysis of energy diversification and transition trends in Africa. International 
Journal of Energy and Water Resources, 5(1), 1–12.
Al Hatmi, Y., Tan, C. S., Al Badi, A., & Charabi, Y. (2014). Assessment of the consciousness levels on 
renewable energy resources in the Sultanate of Oman. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 40, 
1081–1089.
Al-Ajmi, M. Z. (2014). Assessment of Renewable Energy Resources Potential in Oman: An Overview. In: 
13th Research Seminar Series Workshop.
Al-Badi, A. H., Ahshan, R., Hosseinzadeh, N., Ghorbani, R., & Hossain, E. (2020). Survey of smart grid 
concepts and technological demonstrations worldwide emphasizing on the Oman perspective. Applied 
System Innovation, 3(1), 5.
Al-Badi, A. H., Malik, A., & Gastli, A. (2009). Assessment of renewable energy resources potential in Oman 
and identification of barrier to their significant utilization. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 
13(9), 2734–2739.
Albadi, M. H., El-Saadany, E. F., & Albadi, H. A. (2009). Wind to power a new city in Oman. Energy, 34(10), 
1579–1586.
Alsmadi, A. A., Alrawashdeh, N., Al-Gasaymeh, A., Alhawamdeh, L. N., & Al-Hazimeh, A. M. D. (2023). 
Adoption of blockchain technology in supply chain. SAGE Open, 13(1), Article 21582440231160143.
Al-Sarihi, A., & Bello, H. (2019). Socio-economic and Environmental Implications of Renewable Energy 
Integrity in Oman: Scenario Modelling Using System Dynamics Approach. In: Climate Change and 
Energy Dynamics in the Middle East(pp. 17–46).
Al-Sarihi, A., & Mansouri, N. (2022). Renewable energy development in the Gulf Cooperation Council 
countries: Status, barriers, and policy options. Energies, 15(5), 1923.
Al-Yahyai, S., Charabi, Y., Gastli, A., & Al-Badi, A. (2012). Wind farm land suitability indexing using multi-
criteria analysis. Renewable Energy, 44, 80–87.
Amoatey, P., Al-Hinai, A., Al-Mamun, A., & Baawain, M. S. (2022). A review of recent renewable energy 
status and potentials in Oman. Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments, 51, Article 101919.
Anderson-Ingstrup, J., & Ridder, H. M. (2020). A scoping review and template analysis of manual-based 
complex interventions in dementia care. Clinical Interventions in Aging, 15, 363.
Ang, T. Z., Salem, M., Kamarol, M., Das, H. S., Nazari, M. A., & Prabaharan, N. (2022). A comprehen­
sive study of renewable energy sources: Classifications, challenges and suggestions. Energy Strategy 
Reviews, 43, Article 100939.
Azam, M. H., Abushammala, M. F., & Qazi, W. A. (2018). Evaluation of the significant renewable energy 
resources in Sultanate of Oman using analytical hierarchy process. International Journal of Renewable 
Energy Research (IJRER), 8(3), 1528–1534.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Baloch, Z. A., Tan, Q., Kamran, H. W., Nawaz, M. A., Albashar, G., & Hameed, J. (2022). A multi-perspec­
tive assessment approach of renewable energy production: Policy perspective analysis. Environment, 
Development and Sustainability, 24(2), 2164–2192.
Basha, J. S., Jafary, T., Vasudevan, R., Bahadur, J. K., Ajmi, M. A., Neyadi, A. A., ... & Fattah, I. R. (2021). 
Potential of utilization of renewable energy technologies in gulf countries. Sustainability, 13(18), 10261.
Bilgen, S., Keleş, S., Kaygusuz, A., Sarı, A., & Kaygusuz, K. (2008). Global warming and renewable energy 
sources for sustainable development: A case study in Turkey. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 12(2), 372–396.
Binh An, N., Kuo, Y. L., Mabrouk, F., Sanyal, S., Muda, I., Hishan, S. S., & Abdulrehman, N. (2023). Eco­
logical innovation for environmental sustainability and human capital development: The role of envi­
ronmental regulations and renewable energy in advanced economies. Economic Research-Ekonomska 
Istraživanja, 36(1), 243–263.
Biswal, J. N., Muduli, K., Satapathy, S., & Tripathy, S. (2018). A framework for assessment of SSCM strate­
gies with respect to sustainability performance: An Indian thermal power sector perspective. Interna­
tional Journal of Procurement Management, 11(4), 455–547.
Brooks, J., & King, N. (2012). Qualitative psychology in the real world: The utility of template analysis.
Brooks, J., & King, N. (2014). Doing template analysis: evaluating an end of life care service. Sage Research 
methods cases.
Brooks, J., McCluskey, S., Turley, E., & King, N. (2015). The utility of template analysis in qualitative psy­
chology research. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 12(2), 202–222.
Bulavskaya, T. and Reynès, F., 2018. Job creation and economic impact of renewable energy in the Nether­
lands. Renewable energy, 119, pp.528-538.
Campbell, S., Greenwood, M., Prior, S., Shearer, T., Walkem, K., Young, S., Bywaters, D., & Walker, K. 
(2020). Purposive sampling: Complex or simple? Research case examples. Journal of Research in 
Nursing, 25(8), 652–661.
Capellán-Pérez, I., De Castro, C., & Arto, I. (2017). Assessing vulnerabilities and limits in the transition to 
renewable energies: Land requirements under 100% solar energy scenarios. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 77, 760–782.
Capellán-Pérez, I., De Castro, C., & González, L. J. M. (2019). Dynamic energy return on energy invest­
ment (EROI) and material requirements in scenarios of global transition to renewable energies. Energy 
Strategy Reviews, 26, Article 100399.
Cárdenas, B., Swinfen-Styles, L., Rouse, J., Hoskin, A., Xu, W., & Garvey, S. D. (2021). Energy storage 
capacity vs. renewable penetration: A study for the UK. Renewable Energy, 171, 849–867.
Cergibozan, R. (2022). Renewable energy sources as a solution for energy security risk: Empirical evidence 
from OECD countries. Renewable Energy, 183, 617–626.
Charabi, Y., & Al-Badi, A. H. (2015). Creating an enabling environment for renewable energy application in 
the Sultanate of Oman. International Journal of Green Energy, 12(11), 1169–1177.
Charabi, Y., & Gastli, A. (2011). PV site suitability analysis using GIS-based spatial fuzzy multi-criteria 
evaluation. Renewable Energy, 36(9), 2554–2561.
Charabi, Y., Abdul-Wahab, S., Al-Mahruqi, A. M., Osman, S., & Osman, I. (2022). The potential estimation 
and cost analysis of wind energy production in Oman. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 
24(4), 5917–5937.
Choudhary, D., & Shankar, R. (2012). An STEEP-fuzzy AHP-TOPSIS framework for evaluation and selec­
tion of thermal power plant location: A case study from India. Energy, 42(1), 510–521.
Clottey, T., & Benton, W. C., Jr. (2020). Recommendations for assessing unit nonresponse bias in dyadic 
focused empirical supply chain management research. Decision Sciences, 51(2), 423–447.
Cole, P., & Banks, G. (2017). Renewable energy programmes in the South Pacific-Are these a solution to 
dependency? Energy Policy, 110, 500–508.
Creswell, J. W., & Poth, C. N. (2016). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five 
approaches. Sage publications.
Creswell, J. W., & Poth, C. N. (2018). Research Design: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches (4th ed.). 
Sage.
Dai, K., Bergot, A., Liang, C., Xiang, W. N., & Huang, Z. (2015). Environmental issues associated with wind 
energy–A review. Renewable Energy, 75, 911–921.
Electricity production. (2022, February). Retrieved from Trading economics: ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​t​r​a​d​i​n​g​e​c​o​n​o​m​i​c​s​.​c​o​m​
/​o​m​a​n​/​e​l​e​c​t​r​i​c​i​t​y​-​p​r​o​d​u​c​t​i​o​n
Elia, A., Kamidelivand, M., Rogan, F., & Gallachóir, B. Ó. (2021). Impacts of innovation on renewable 
energy technology cost reductions. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 138, Article 110488.
Etikan, I., Musa, S. A., & Alkassim, R. S. (2016). Comparison of convenience sampling and purposive sam­
pling. American Journal of Theoretical and Applied Statistics, 5(1), 1–4.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Evans, A., Strezov, V., & Evans, T. J. (2012). Assessment of utility energy storage options for increased 
renewable energy penetration. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16(6), 4141–4147.
Flynn, B., Pagell, M., & Fugate, B. (2018). Survey research design in supply chain management: The need 
for evolution in our expectations. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 54(1), 1–15.
Fontes, C. H. D. O., & Freires, F. G. M. (2018). Sustainable and renewable energy supply chain: A system 
dynamics overview. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 82, 247–259.
Forghani, K., Kia, R., & Nejatbakhsh, Y. (2023). A multi-period sustainable hydrogen supply chain model 
considering pipeline routing and carbon emissions: The case study of Oman. Renewable and Sustain­
able Energy Reviews, 173, Article 113051.
Hartwich, F. (1999). Weighting of agricultural research results: Strength and limitations of the analytic hier­
archy process (AHP). Universitat Hohenheim.
Hmouda, A. M., Orzes, G., & Sauer, P. C. (2023). Sustainable supply chain management in energy produc­
tion: A literature review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 191, Article 114085.
Hosseini, S. E. (2020). An outlook on the global development of renewable and sustainable energy at the time 
of COVID-19. Energy Research & Social Science, 68, Article 101633.
Hren, R., Vujanović, A., Van Fan, Y., Klemeš, J. J., Krajnc, D., & Čuček, L. (2023). Hydrogen produc­
tion, storage and transport for renewable energy and chemicals: An environmental footprint assessment. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 173, Article 113113.
IRENA, I. R. (2014). Sultanate of Oman renewables readiness assessment. Muscat: IRENA.
Ivanov, D. (2022). Blackout and supply chains: Cross-structural ripple effect, performance, resilience and 
viability impact analysis. Annals of Operations Research, 1–17.‏
Johnson, K. W. (2019). Mama bear conversations: a template analysis of mothers message board discussions 
of hpv vaccination and weight management for their pre-adolescent and adolescent children.
Joshi, S., Sharma, M. and Singh, R.K., 2020. Performance evaluation of agro-tourism clusters using AHP–
TOPSIS. Journal of Operations and Strategic Planning, 3(1), pp.7-30.
Kasem, A. (2019). Exploring the impact of renewable energy on climate change in the GCC countries. Inter­
national Journal of Energy Economics and Policy. https://doi.org/10.32479/ijeep.8477
Kazem, H. A. (2011). Renewable energy in Oman: Status and future prospects. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 15(8), 3465–3469.
Kebede, A. A., Kalogiannis, T., Van Mierlo, J., & Berecibar, M. (2022). A comprehensive review of station­
ary energy storage devices for large scale renewable energy sources grid integration. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 159, Article 112213.
Keck, F., Jütte, S., Lenzen, M., & Li, M. (2022). Assessment of two optimisation methods for renewable 
energy capacity expansion planning. Applied Energy, 306, Article 117988.
Kilinc-Ata, N., & Dolmatov, I. A. (2023). Which factors influence the decisions of renewable energy inves­
tors? Empirical evidence from OECD and BRICS countries. Environmental Science and Pollution 
Research, 30(1), 1720–1736.
Kim, K., Park, H., & Kim, H. (2017). Real options analysis for renewable energy investment decisions in 
developing countries. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 75, 918–926.
King, N., Brooks, J., & Tabari, S. (2018). Template analysis in business and management research. In Quali­
tative methodologies in organization studies (pp. 179–206). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
Kumar, C. M. S., Singh, S., Gupta, M. K., Nimdeo, Y. M., Raushan, R., Deorankar, A. V., Kumar, T. M. A., 
Rout, P. K., Chanotiya, C. S., Pakhale, V. D., & Nannaware, A. D. (2023). Solar energy: A promising 
renewable source for meeting energy demand in Indian agriculture applications. Sustainable Energy 
Technologies and Assessments, 55, Article 102905.
Lei, X., Shiyun, T., Yanfei, D., & Yuan, Y. (2020). Sustainable operation-oriented investment risk evaluation 
and optimization for renewable energy project: A case study of wind power in China. Annals of Opera­
tions Research, 290, 223–241.
Liao, C., Erbaugh, J. T., Kelly, A. C., & Agrawal, A. (2021). Clean energy transitions and human well-being 
outcomes in lower and middle income countries: A systematic review. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 145, Article 111063.
Listyaningsih, V. and Utami, E., 2018. Decision support system performance-based evaluation of village 
government using AHP and TOPSIS methods: Secang sub-district of Magelang regency as a case study. 
International Journal of Intelligent Systems and Applications, 4(18-28).
Lu, Y., Khan, Z. A., Alvarez-Alvarado, M. S., Zhang, Y., Huang, Z., & Imran, M. (2020). A critical review of 
sustainable energy policies for the promotion of renewable energy sources. Sustainability, 12(12), 5078.
Macknick, J., Beatty, B., & Hill, G. (2013). Overview of opportunities for co-location of solar energy tech­
nologies and vegetation  (No. NREL/TP-6A20–60240). National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), 
Golden, CO (United States).
Majeed, M. T., & Luni, T. (2019). Renewable energy, water, and environmental degradation: A global panel 
data approach. Pakistan Journal of Commerce and Social Sciences (PJCSS), 13(3), 749–778.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Malik, A., Al Badi, M., Al Kahali, A., Al Nabhani, Y., Al Bahri, A., & Al Barhi, H. (2015, December). A 
methodology of ranking renewable energy alternatives using AHP and their sensitivity with respect to 
criteria weights. In 2015 Saudi Arabia Smart Grid (SASG) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
Maradin, D., Cerović, L., & Mjeda, T. (2017). Economic effects of renewable energy technologies. Naše 
Gospodarstvo/our Economy, 63(2), 49–59.
Martínez, L., Dinçer, H., & Yüksel, S. (2023). A hybrid decision making approach for new service develop­
ment process of renewable energy investment. Applied Soft Computing, 133, Article 109897.
Mohammed, A., Govindan, K., Zubairu, N., Pratabaraj, J., & Abideen, A. Z. (2023). Multi-tier supply chain 
network design: A key towards sustainability and resilience. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 182, 
Article 109396.
Mohammed, A., Harris, I., Soroka, A., & Nujoom, R. (2019). A hybrid MCDM-fuzzy multi-objective pro­
gramming approach for a G-resilient supply chain network design. Computers & Industrial Engineer­
ing, 127, 297–312.
Mohammed, A., Harris, I., Soroka, A., Naim, M., Ramjaun, T., & Yazdani, M. (2021). Gresilient supplier 
assessment and order allocation planning. Annals of Operations Research, 296, 335–362.
Mondal, A., & Khalil, H. S. (2012). Renewable energy readiness assessment report: the GCC countries. Mas­
dar, UAE: Masdar Institute.
Mukhtarov, S., Aliyev, F., Aliyev, J., & Ajayi, R. (2023). Renewable energy consumption and carbon emis­
sions: Evidence from an oil-rich economy. Sustainability, 15(1), 134.
Okedu, K. E., & Al Siyabi, M. S. (2021). Harnessing Hydropower Potential in Desert Regions: The Case of 
Wadi Dayqah Dam, Quriyat. Oman. Frontiers in Water, 68, 686856.
Okedu, K., Nadabi, H., & Aziz, A. (2019). Prospects of solar energy in Oman: Case of oil and gas industries. 
International Journal of Smart Grid-ijSmartGrid, 3(3), 138–151.
Okudoh, V., Trois, C., Workneh, T., & Schmidt, S. (2014). The potential of cassava biomass and applicable 
technologies for sustainable biogas production in South Africa: A review. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 39, 1035–1052.
Olabi, A. G., & Abdelkareem, M. A. (2022). Renewable energy and climate change. Renewable and Sustain­
able Energy Reviews, 158, Article 112111.
Olsen, W. (2022). Systematic mixed-methods research for social scientists. Palgrave Macmillan.
Østergaard, P. A., Duic, N., Noorollahi, Y., Mikulcic, H., & Kalogirou, S. (2020). Sustainable development 
using renewable energy technology. Renewable Energy, 146, 2430–2437.
Owusu, P. A., & Asumadu-Sarkodie, S. (2016). A review of renewable energy sources, sustainability issues 
and climate change mitigation. Cogent Engineering, 3(1), 1167990.
Panagos, P., Borrelli, P., Meusburger, K., Alewell, C., Lugato, E., & Montanarella, L. (2015). Estimating the 
soil erosion cover-management factor at the European scale. Land Use Policy, 48, 38–50.
Petinrin, J. O., & Shaaban, M. (2015). Renewable energy for continuous energy sustainability in Malaysia. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 50, 967–981.
Pietrosemoli, L., & Rodríguez-Monroy, C. (2019). The Venezuelan energy crisis: Renewable energies in the 
transition towards sustainability. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 105, 415–426.
Pourali, M., Kavianpour, M. R., Kamranzad, B., & Alizadeh, M. J. (2023). Future variability of wave energy 
in the Gulf of Oman using a high resolution CMIP6 climate model. Energy, 262, Article 125552.
Pourmoghadam, P., & Kasaeian, A. (2023). Economic and energy evaluation of a solar multi-generation 
system powered by the parabolic trough collectors. Energy, 262, Article 125362.
Praveen, R. P., Keloth, V., Abo-Khalil, A. G., Alghamdi, A. S., Eltamaly, A. M., & Tlili, I. (2020). An insight 
to the energy policy of GCC countries to meet renewable energy targets of 2030. Energy Policy, 147, 
Article 111864.
Pu, S., & Lam, J. S. L. (2023). The benefits of blockchain for digital certificates: A multiple case study analy­
sis. Technology in Society, 72, Article 102176.
Rövekamp, P., Schöpf, M., Wagon, F., Weibelzahl, M., & Fridgen, G. (2021). Renewable electricity business 
models in a post feed-in tariff era. Energy, 216, Article 119228.
Saaty, T.L. and Wind, Y., 1980. Marketing applications of the analytic hierarchy process. Management sci­
ence, 26(7), pp.641-658.
Saaty, T.L., 1989. Group decision making and the AHP. In The analytic hierarchy process: Applications and 
studies (pp. 59-67). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Saaty, T.L., 2008. Decision making with the analytic hierarchy process. International journal of services sci­
ences, 1(1), pp.83-98.
Sahoo, M., & Sethi, N. (2021). The intermittent effects of renewable energy on ecological footprint: Evidence 
from developing countries. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 28(40), 56401–56417.
Said. A, D. A. (2022). The effect of natural gas prices for energy sectors in the middle east. Universiti Tun 
Hussein Onn Malaysia.
SAOC, O. P. (2018). OPWP's 7-year statement (2018–2024). Muscat: SAOC.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Sarkar, M., & Seo, Y. W. (2021). Renewable energy supply chain management with flexibility and automa­
tion in a production system. Journal of Cleaner Production, 324, Article 129149.
Sharvini, S. R., Noor, Z. Z., Chong, C. S., Stringer, L. C., & Yusuf, R. O. (2018). Energy consumption trends 
and their linkages with renewable energy policies in East and Southeast Asian countries: Challenges and 
opportunities. Sustainable Environment Research, 28(6), 257–266.
Shen, S., Doyle-Thomas, K. A., Beesley, L., Karmali, A., Williams, L., Tanel, N., & McPherson, A. C. 
(2017). How and why should we engage parents as co-researchers in health research? A scoping review 
of current practices. Health Expectations, 20(4), 543–554.
Shum, K. L. (2017). Renewable energy deployment policy: A transition management perspective. Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 73, 1380–1388.
Sindhu, S., Nehra, V., & Luthra, S. (2017). Investigation of feasibility study of solar farms deployment using 
hybrid AHP-TOPSIS analysis: Case study of India. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 73, 
496–511.
Siram, O., Sahoo, N., & Saha, U. K. (2022). Changing landscape of India’s renewable energy and the contri­
bution of wind energy. Cleaner Engineering and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clet.2022.100506
Sultan, A. Y., Charabi, Y., Gastli, A., & Al-Alawi, S. (2010). Assessment of wind energy potential locations 
in Oman using data from existing weather stations. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 14(5), 
1428–1436.
Thabane, L., Thomas, T., Ye, C., & Paul, J. (2009). Posing the research question: Not so simple. Canadian 
Journal of Anesthesia/journal Canadien D’anesthésie, 56(1), 71–79.
Thousand Oaks, CA.
Tsoutsos, T., Frantzeskaki, N., & Gekas, V. (2005). Environmental impacts from the solar energy technolo­
gies. Energy Policy, 33(3), 289–296.
Twidell, J. (2021). Renewable energy resources. Routledge.
Uhunamure, S. E., & Shale, K. (2021). A SWOT analysis approach for a sustainable transition to renewable 
energy in South Africa. Sustainability, 13(7), 3933.
Ullah, Z., Elkadeem, M. R., Kotb, K. M., Taha, I. B., & Wang, S. (2021). Multi-criteria decision-making 
model for optimal planning of on/off grid hybrid solar, wind, hydro, biomass clean electricity supply. 
Renewable Energy, 179, 885–910.
Umar, T. (2017, July). Briefing: Towards a sustainable energy: the potential of biomass for electricity genera­
tion in Oman. In: Proceedings of the institution of civil engineers-engineering Sustainability (Vol. 171, 
No. 7, pp. 329–333). Thomas Telford Ltd.
Umar, T. (2018). Geothermal energy resources in Oman. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers-
Energy, 171(1), 37–43.
Umar, T., & Wamuziri, S. (2016). Briefing: Conventional, wind and solar energy resources in Oman. Pro­
ceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers-Energy, 169(4), 143–147.
UNDP (2022), “Goal 7: Affordable and clean energy”, available at: ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​u​n​d​p​.​o​r​g​/​s​u​s​t​a​i​n​a​b​l​e​-​d​e​v​e​l​
o​p​m​e​n​t​-​g​o​a​l​s​#​a​f​f​o​r​d​a​b​l​e​-​a​n​d​-​c​l​e​a​n​-​e​n​e​r​g​y (accessed 10 October 2022).
Vezmar, S., Spajić, A., Topić, D., Šljivac, D., & Jozsa, L. (2014). Positive and negative impacts of renewable 
energy sources. International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering Systems, 5(2), 47–55.
Vidadili, N., Suleymanov, E., Bulut, C., & Mahmudlu, C. (2017). Transition to renewable energy and sustain­
able energy development in Azerbaijan. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 80, 1153–1161.
Waring, T., & Wainwright, D. (2008). Issues and challenges in the use of template analysis: Two comparative 
case studies from the field. Electronic Journal of Business Research Methods, 6(1), 85–94.
Wee, H. M., Yang, W. H., Chou, C. W., & Padilan, M. V. (2012). Renewable energy supply chains, perfor­
mance, application barriers, and strategies for further development. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 16(8), 5451–5465.
Winkler, H. (2005). Renewable energy policy in South Africa: Policy options for renewable electricity. 
Energy Policy, 33(1), 27–38.
Wu, Z., Mohammed, A., & Harris, I. (2021). Food waste management in the catering industry: Enablers and 
interrelationships. Industrial Marketing Management, 94, 1–18.
Yamini, S., & Gajanand, M. S. (2022). Inventory decision-making biases: A review and suggestions for future 
research. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 29(6), 1889–1912.
Yin, R. K. (2017). Case study research and applications: Design and methods. Sage publications.
Yoon, K., & Hwang, C. L. (1995). Multiple Attribute Decision Making: An Introduction. Sage.
Yu, W., Patros, P., Young, B., Klinac, E. and Walmsley, T.G., 2022. Energy digital twin technology for indus­
trial energy management: Classification, challenges and future. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 161, p.112407.
Zare, K., Mehri-Tekmeh, J., & Karimi, S. (2015). A SWOT framework for analyzing the electricity supply 
chain using an integrated AHP methodology combined with fuzzy-TOPSIS. International Strategic 
Management Review, 3(1–2), 66–80.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Zubairu, N., Dinwoodie, J., Govindan, K., Hunter, L., & Roh, S. (2021). Supply chain strategies as drivers of 
financial performance in liquefied natural gas networks. Supply Chain Management, an International 
Journal, 26(5), 579–591.
Zubairu, N., Mohammed, A., and Zeinab, Z. (2024). Navigating the path to sustainable energy transition in 
Oman: a systematic literature review and future research opportunities, Management of Environmental 
Quality,
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Nasiru Zubairu1 · Ahmed Mohammed2
 · Hajer Al  Naabi1 · Zainab Zohny1 · 
Simonov Kusi-Sarpong3,4,5
 
 Ahmed Mohammed
amm.alhamdany@gmail.com
Nasiru Zubairu
nzubairu@muscatuniversity.edu.om
Hajer Al Naabi
halnaabi@muscatuniversity.edu.om
Zainab Zohny
zzohny@yahoo.com
Simonov Kusi-Sarpong
simonov2002@yahoo.com
1 
Faculty of Transport and Logistics, Muscat University, Muscat, Sultanate of Oman
2 
Department of Management, Birmingham Business School, University of Birmingham, Dubai 
International Academic City, P.O. Box 341799, Dubai, United Arab Emirates
3 
Department of Finance Accounting & Business Systems, Sheffield Hallam University, 
Sheffield, UK
4 
Department of Procurement and Supply Chain Management, University for Development 
Studies, Tamale, Ghana
5 
Department of Transport and Supply Chain Management, University of Johannesburg, 
Johannesburg, South Africa
1 3