TITLE: Cub model-based clustering of Likert-type data with a tourist satisfaction application
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05964-z
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-05964-z
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Cub model-based clustering of Likert-type data with a tourist
satisfaction application
Nicolò Biasetton1
· Pierpaolo D’Urso2 · Marta Disegna1 · Luigi Salmaso1
Received: 7 June 2023 / Accepted: 21 March 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
In investigating customer satisfaction with products or services, the most popular approach
still relies on interviews or questionnaires to obtain consumers’ opinions, and responses are
usually measured by means of Likert-type scales. However, Likert-type data are inherently
imprecise and uncertain. Thus, to obtain reliable analysis using such data, an a-posteriori
correction must be adopted. The fuzziﬁcation procedure is the most common a-posteriori
way to deal with uncertainty of Likert-type data. In this study, an alternative method to
address the uncertainty of such data when used as input of a cluster analysis is proposed.
The suggested method is based on the CUB model and the Fuzzy C-Medoids Clustering of
Mixed Data algorithm and it is theoretically and empirically presented using real case study
data. Advantages of the FCMd-CUB method are discussed in the conclusion section.
Keywords Likert-type variables · Fuzzy cluster analysis · CUB model · Mixed information
1 Introduction
Feelings, emotions, and preferences are complex psychological processes of interest in sev-
eral disciplines (e.g. marketing, economics, and business) and are the basic information of
any Customer Satisfaction (CS) analysis. These human emotions/feelings are typically cap-
tured in surveys that generally use ordinal scales, such as Likert-type scales. Since their
introduction (Likert, 1932), Likert-type scales have been widely and commonly adopted in
B Nicolò Biasetton
nicolo.biasetton@unipd.it
Pierpaolo D’Urso
pierpaolo.durso@uniroma1.it
Marta Disegna
marta.disegna@unipd.it
Luigi Salmaso
luigi.salmaso@unipd.it
1
Department of Management and Engineering, University of Padova, Stradella S. Nicola, 3, Vicenza
36100, Italy
2
Department of Social Sciences and Economics, Sapienza University of Roma, P.le Aldo Moro, 5, Roma
00185, Italy
123

Annals of Operations Research
both industry and academia, as they are user-friendly, easy to develop and easy to administer
(see Gil et al., 2015). These scales are made up of a set of items, usually formulated in terms
of linguistic expressions coded into natural numbers, characterised by a rank order. Despite
their advantages, Likert-type scales can only return imprecise and vague information about
the investigated respondents’ feelings. First, people are asked to convert their thoughts into
linguistic expressions and then into natural numbers, and these conversions can be inaccu-
rate, causing loss of information, imprecision, and uncertainty (see D’Urso, 2007). Second,
the meaning of each linguistic expression of the scale can be subjectively interpreted by the
respondents due to their knowledge about the phenomenon under investigation, their cul-
ture, nationality, personal experiences and understanding of the question (see, Davidov et
al., 2014). However, since most CS analyses rely on Likert-type scales to capture human
thinking and personal feelings, it is fundamental to understand how to handle the uncertainty
embedded in these scales to obtain reliable and accurate analysis and thus correctly inform
practitioners. To the best of our knowledge, both a-priori alternatives and a-posteriori correc-
tions have been suggested in the literature. Among a-priori alternatives, the use of different
scales or methods to capture motivations, personal opinions/ judgements, or other psycho-
graphic variables has been discussed. In particular, la Rosa et al. (2015) and Shirahama et al.
(2021) explored the use of simple visual analogue scales, while Gil and González-Rodríguez
(2012) and Li (2013) suggested the use of fuzzy rating scales. The idea behind the a-priori
alternatives is to avoid the use of Likert-type scales. Unfortunately, these alternative scales
are less user-friendly, less popular, and more complex to both implement and analyse than
the traditional Likert-type scale. Moreover, many researches work with secondary data, i.e.,
data obtained from existing sources and not originated by the researchers’ own collection,
and a-priori alternatives cannot be used. Because of these reasons, researchers have devel-
oped a-posteriori corrections to account for the uncertainty of the Likert-type data. Among
a-posteriori corrections, two approaches emerge in the literature: the fuzzy sets theory-based
approach; the CUB (Combination of discrete Uniform and shifted Binomial random vari-
ables) model-based approach. The approach based on fuzzy sets theory has been extensively
used to consider the imprecision and vagueness inherent in both Likert-type variables and
human thinking (see Coppi & D’Urso, 2002); Hu et al., 2005; Hung & Yang2010). Based
on this approach, Likert-type data are recorded in fuzzy numbers prior to further analysis.
Differently, the CUB model-based approach (introduced by Piccolo, 2003)aims to model the
ﬁnal answer as a mixture of two internal aspects, feeling and uncertainty.
As demonstrated by la Rosa et al. (2015), Likert-type data are among the most widely
used segmentation variables in cluster analysis, but most studies do not take into account the
uncertainty embedded in this type of data (Biasetton et al., 2023). As revealed in the literature
review conducted by Biasetton et al. (2023), only 14% of the analysed articles explicitly
address the issue of Likert-type data uncertainty in cluster analysis. This has been done
either by transforming Likert-type scales into fuzzy numbers (Disegna et al., 2018; D’Urso
et al., 2016, 2015; Khoo-Lattimore et al., 2019; D’Urso & Leski, 2020; D’Urso et al., 2014;
D’Urso & De Giovanni, 2014) or by asking respondents to consider the distance between
Likert-type scale points equal in order to reduce bias (Stavroulakis et al., 2020). Regarding
the distance between scale points, while Likert (1932) suggested it could be considered equal,
more recent researchers have introduced the idea that the distance between scale points cannot
be deﬁned (Dolnicar, 2019), and the intervals between two consecutive response categories
cannot be presumed equal (Jamieson, 2004). This implies the impossibility of using any
arithmetic computations to analyse Likert-type data. The discussion about the equality of
distance between consecutive response categories is still ongoing (Harpe, 2015; D’Urso et
al., 2021). To these literature, the work of Biasetton et al. (2023) has to be added as a ﬁrst
123

Annals of Operations Research
attempt to use the CUB model to a-posteriori correct Likert-type data in cluster analysis. In
particular, Biasetton et al. (2023) suggested recoding Likert-type data in fuzzy numbers using
estimates of the CUB model with covariates to derive the parameters of the fuzzy number
membership function.
As a follow-up to the method presented by Biasetton et al. (2023), this paper suggests
a novel clustering method in which the original Likert-type data are not pre-transformed
and their uncertainty is handled including the estimates of the CUB model as segmentation
variables of the algorithm. In particular, the CUB model with covariates is used to estimate
two latent components of the respondent’s answer behaviour, i.e. feelings and uncertainty,
which are then included as input information, along with the original respondents’ answer, of
a clustering algorithm for mixed data. The reader should note that the CUB model allows for
modelingoneordinalvariable,i.e.,onequestion,atatime.Thus,theCUBmodeldoesn’tallow
for the consideration of complex multivariate dependence structures among different ordinal
variables. The use of a clustering algorithm allow to partially overcome this limitation by
providing a multivariate description of responses, looking at similarities among respondents,
without, however, aiming to study the dependence among ordinal variables.
In this paper, we suggest combining the CUB model with covariates with the Fuzzy C-
Medoids Clustering of Mixed Data (FCMd-MD) model (D’Urso & Massari, 2019) to capture
both the uncertainty/imprecision related to Likert-type scale data and the uncertainty associ-
ated with the assignment of a unit to each cluster. Furthermore, the FCMd-MD model allows
one to automatically obtain the importance of each segmentation variable group (i.e., original
Likert-type data, feelings, uncertainties) in the creation of the ﬁnal partition. In the follow-
ing, the suggested model will shortly be indicated as Fuzzy C-Medoids Clustering of CUB
Data (FCMd-CUB). Compared to the a-posteriori fuzziﬁcation of the Likert-type data, the
FCMd-CUB allows us to model the uncertainty adding individuals’ characteristics, making
the clustering analysis more precise and ﬂexible. Furthermore, the FCMd-CUB model differs
from the clustering model suggested by Biasetton et al. (2023) since it has the advantage of
not requiring the pre-recoding of Likert-type data into fuzzy data.
The paper is organised as follows. In Sect.2, the suggested method for clustering con-
sumers’ satisfaction using Likert-type data is described. In particular, in Sect. 2.1 the basic
notation of the CUB model is discussed; in Sect. 2.2 an overview of dissimilarity measures for
mixed data is presented; in Sect. 2.3 the Fuzzy C-Medoids Clustering of CUB Data (FCMd-
CUB) is described. In Sect.3, the results obtained by applying the FCMd-CUB model to
empirical data are shown. In Sect.4, some concluding remarks and guidelines for future
research are provided.
2 Methods
2.1 CUB model
The Combination of discrete Uniform and shifted Binomial random variables (CUB) model
has been ﬁrst introduced by Piccolo (2003) to analyse and model Likert-type data responses.
The underlying assumption of this model is that individual responses to a Likert-type ques-
tion are the result of the combination of two components named feeling and uncertainty.
Speciﬁcally, the feeling component determines the level of respondent’s agreement/ pleas-
antness towards the object investigated while the uncertainty component collects different
non-measured factors, e.g. respondent laziness, difﬁculties in understanding the question,
123

Annals of Operations Research
ignorance of the topics, wording and length of the scale, that affect the ﬁnal response. Thus,
the lower the uncertainty, the more reliable the answers. The ﬁnal choice on an ordinal rating
scale to express the evaluation of an object, the satisfaction with a service or the agreement
with a sentence (according to the question asked) is the result of latent pairwise comparisons
between the speciﬁc score and all the other possible scores (i.e. items of the Likert-type
scale), and each comparison corresponds to a success (the object obtains a high score) or a
failure (the object receives a low score).
Therefore, the probability distribution of the response variable can be modelled by a
shifted binomial. Usually, each ﬁnal answer is characterised by a certain degree of feeling
and a certain degree of uncertainty. However, when the respondent is completely uncertain
toward a question (i.e., no feeling component), the probability of choosing each evaluation is
the same for each response, and the uniform distribution can properly represent the decision-
making process. Consequently, the probability distribution of the response variable for the
CUB model is a mixture of a shifted binomial and a uniform distribution.
Consider R as the response variable representing the ratings expressed by a sample of
respondent when answering a question that required to be answered on a Likert-type scale.
Assume that R can only take an integer value from 1 to m, with m > 3, where m is the
highest value of the scale. Let us say, without loss of generality, that 1 represents the worst
evaluation and m the best evaluation. The CUB model, which models the probability that R
takes the generic value r, with 1 ≤r ≤m, is formulated as follows:
Pr(R = r) = π
m −1
r −1

(1 −ξ)r−1ξm−r

+ (1 −π)
 1
m

(1)
where (1-π), with π ∈(0; 1], measures the weight of the uncertainty of the responses
since it increases with the importance of the discrete Uniform distribution and (1 −ξ),
with ξ ∈[0; 1], is a measure of perception towards the satisfaction aspect, as it increases the
probability of giving high scores to the responses. The parameter (1−π) is called uncertainty
since it charges for the inherent uncertainty that arises when perception is translated into an
evaluation and, therefore, measures the overall uncertainty of the respondent’s assessment.
The parameter (1 −ξ) can be considered as a measure of the feeling towards the object.
The CUB model reported in Formula 1 has been further improved by allowing to include the
respondents’ characteristics within the model. Covariates can affect feelings and uncertainty:
the generalisation of the CUB model with covariates allows one to identify an individual value
of feeling and uncertainty for each respondent (for a comprehensive treatment see Piccolo &
Simone, 2019). Note that feelings and uncertainty are not constrained to be affected by the
same set of covariates, so if p covariates affect the uncertainty and q covariates affect the
feelings, the CUB (p; q) model with covariates is formulated as follows:
Pr(Ri = r|xi, zi) = πi
m −1
r −1

(1 −ξi)r−1ξm−r
i

+ (1 −πi)
 1
m

(2)
⎧
⎨
⎩
logit(πi) = log
 
πi
1−πi

= xiβ
logit(ξi) = log
 
ξi
1−ξi

= nziγ
≡

πi =
1
1+e−β0−β1x1,i −...−βpxp,i
ξi =
1
1+e−γ0−γ1z1,i −...−γq zq,i
(3)
where Ri represents the response of the i-th respondent, i = 1, ..., n; xi is the vector of p
covariates that affect the uncertainty of the i-th respondent; zi is the vector of q covariates
that affect the feeling of the i-th respondent; β is the vector of (p + 1) unknown coefﬁcients
to be estimated for the uncertainty; γ is the vector of (q + 1) unknown coefﬁcients to be
estimated for the feeling.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Model’s parameters are estimated using a maximum likelihood function. An Expectation-
Maximization (EM) algorithm provides a computational solution for calculating the
maximum likelihood estimates. Operatively the CUB model algorithm use the frequency
distribution of the observed Likert-type data and, starting from an initial random estimation
of π and ξ, iteratively update them in order to ﬁt the CUB model to the observed frequency
distribution. On the version considering covariates (Eqs.2 and 3), on each iteration the β and
γ unknown parameters are estimated and updated.
In this work, to estimate the CUB models the R library proposed by Iannario (2016) and
Simone (2020) has been adopted.
2.2 Mixed data
As described in Sect.1, the segmentation variables will be of three different kinds: the original
Likert-type variables (Y), which are ordinal variables; the feelings () and the uncertainties
() which are both probabilities, i.e. continuous variables in the range [0; 1]. Therefore, the
distance or dissimilarity measure to use in the clustering algorithm has to be able to handle
simultaneously different types of data.
In this paper, following D’Urso and Massari (2019), the Gower (1971) dissimilarity has
been adopted and the ﬁnal dissimilarity measure between units i and j is calculated as a
weighted sum of different dissimilarity measures, one for each kind of information considered
(Likert data, feeling and uncertainty component) as follows:
wd2
i j = yd2(yi, y j) +

w2
ξ · ξd2(ξi, ξ j) + w2
π · πd2(πi, π j)

= yd2(yi, y j) +

s∈{ξ,π}
w2
s · sd2(Xi, X j)
= yd2
i j +

s∈{ξ,π}
w2
s · sd2
i j
(4)
where yd2, ξd2 and πd2 are suitable dissimilarity measures for the original Likert-type data
(Y - ordinal variables), feelings and uncertainties components (,  - continuous variables),
respectively; w2
ξ and w2
π are the weights of feeling and uncertainty, respectively, in the
calculation of the ﬁnal dissimilarity. The sum of the weights is constrained to be unitary, and
the weight of the original Likert-type data is set equal to 1. Note that, for comparison’s sake
across attribute types, within the clustering algorithm the dissimilarity measures (for Y,
and ) are normalised to vary in the range [0; 1].
According to Eq.(4), yd2 is a suitable dissimilarity measure for ordinal data while both
ξd2 and πd2 are suitable dissimilarity measures for probabilities.
Researchers can select the best dissimilarity measures for their applications based on
data at hand and on dissimilarity measure’s properties. A review of distance measures and
dissimilarity indices for different types of attributes, including ordinal and interval-valued
data, can be found in D’Urso and Massari (2019) and D’Urso et al. (2022). We suggest
the adoption of the Kendall distance for ordinal data, to compute the dissimilarity between
respondents with respectto their response to Likert-type questions, and the Euclidean distance
toobtainthedissimilaritybetweenrespondentswithrespecttotheirfeelingsanduncertainties,
as suggested by Everitt et al. (2011).
Remark 1 Likert-type data. Likert-type scales are a set of items formulated in linguis-
tic expression coded into natural numbers and characterised by a rank order. While Likert
(1932) suggested that the distance between two consecutive response categories on a 5-points
123

Annals of Operations Research
scale were equal, classifying Likert-type data as interval data, nowadays many researchers in
different ﬁelds believe that the distance between two scale points cannot be deﬁned or pre-
sumed equal, classifying Likert-type data as ordinal data (Dolnicar, 2019). This discussion
is not new (for more details seeGardner, 1975) and researchers must be aware of it, since the
decision on how to classify Likert-type data impacts the kind of statistical analysis that can
be implemented.
In this study, Likert-type data are considered ordinal data. As a result, Likert-type data
cannot be analysed by statistical method deﬁned on a vector space and since the distance
between two consecutive items of the scale cannot be either deﬁned or presumed equal,
the distance or dissimilarity measure to be adopted for such data cannot be a distance for
continuous data.
Remark 2 Kendall distance. The Kendall distance measures the correspondence between
the ranking of 2 vectors. The total number of possible pairings of such 2 vectors of size n, is
1
2n(n −1). Ordering the pairs by the values of the ﬁrst vector, if the two vectors (namely x
and y) are correlated, then they would have the same relative rank orders: for each yi, count
the number of y j > yi (concordant pairs - c) and the number of y j < yi (discordant pairs -
d). The Kendall distance (Kendall, 1949; Abdi, 2007; D’Urso & Vitale, 2022) is then deﬁned
as:
dKendall(x, y) = 1 −τKendall = 1 −
nc −nd
1
2n(n −1)
(5)
where nc is the total number of concordant pairs and nd is the total number of discordant
pairs. Note that suitable extension of the Kendall distance corrected for ties, such as the
Kemeny distance (D’Urso & Vitale, 2022, see), can been considered. Moreover, the choice
of the Kendall distance can represent a limit of this study: despite the characteristics of con-
sidering the order of ordinal variables instead of assuming equal distance between contiguous
categories, it cannot perfectly capture the variability and the difference in ratings.
2.3 Clustering for mixed data with CUB parameters: FCMd-CUB
Since the segmentation data of the clustering algorithm are of different types (the original
data are ordinal data, while both the feeling and the uncertainty components are continuous
variables), a clustering algorithm of mixed data must be adopted (for a detailed review on
this kind of clustering algorithm see D’Urso & Massari, 2019). In this study we suggest
using the Fuzzy C-Medoids Clustering of Mixed Data (FCMd-MD) model developed by
D’Urso and Massari (2019), where the input data are the observed data together with the
estimated information derived from the CUB model, i.e. estimates of the individual feeling
and uncertainty for each question. Thus, in the following we will brieﬂy address the suggested
model as the Fuzzy C-Medoids Clustering of CUB Data (FCMd-CUB). Following D’Urso
and Massari (2019), the FCMd-CUB objective function to be minimised is as follows:
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
min : n
i=1
C
c=1 um
icwd2
ic =
n
i=1
C
c=1 um
ic

yd2(yi,yc) +

w2
ξ · ξd2(ξi,ξc) + w2
π · πd2(πi,πc)

=
n
i=1
C
c=1 um
ic

yd2
i j + 
s∈{ξ,π} w2
s · sd2
i j

(s.t.)
C
c=1 uic = 1, uic ≥0
wξ + wπ = 1, wξ ≥0, wπ ≥0
(6)
123

Annals of Operations Research
where:
• uic represents the membership degree of the i-th object to the c-th cluster;
• m > 1 represents a weighting exponent that control the fuzziness of the partition. The
closer it is to 1 the closer the partition is to a crisp one. As recommended by Krishnapuram
et al. (2001), in this study, m has been set at the value of 1.5;
• wd2
ic represents the weighted dissimilarity measure between the i-th object and the c-th
medoid:
Note that the CUB parameters’ weights are automatically estimated within the clustering
procedure by solving a Lagrangian problem. In the following the steps to solve the Lagrangian
problem are described.
Let us consider the following Lagrangian function:
L(ui, ws, λ, γ ) =
n

i=1
C

c=1
um
ic
⎛
⎝yd2
i j +

s∈{ξ,π}
w2
s · sd2
i j
⎞
⎠−λ
 C

c=1
uic −1

−γ
⎛
⎝
s∈{ξ,π}
ws −1
⎞
⎠
(7)
where ui = (ui1, ..., uiC)′ is the vector of i-th observation membership degrees to all the C
clusters and λ and γ are the Lagrange multipliers for the equality constraints.
The membership degree uic for each unit and for each cluster is computed. We set the
partial derivatives of (7) with respect to uic (∀i ∈Z | 1 ≤i ≤n and ∀c ∈Z | 1 ≤c ≤C)
and with respect to λ equal to zero, yielding:
∂L(ui, ws, λ, γ )
∂uic
= 0 ⇐⇒mum−1
ic
⎛
⎝yd2
ic +

s∈{ξ,π}
w2
s · sd2
ic
⎞
⎠−λ = 0
⇐⇒uic =
⎛
⎝
λ
m
 
yd2
ic + 
s∈{ξ,π} w2s · sd2
ic

⎞
⎠
1
m−1
(8)
∂L(ui, ws, λ, γ )
∂λ
= 0 ⇐⇒
C

c=1
uic = 1
(9)
Combining (8) and (9) we obtain:
λ
m
1
m−1 =
1
C
c=1
⎡
⎣

1
 
yd2
ic+
s∈{ξ,π} w2s ·sd2
ic


1
m−1
⎤
⎦
(10)
and substituting (10) in (8) we ﬁnally obtain:
uic =
1
C
c′=1
⎡
⎣
 
yd2
ic+
s∈{ξ,π} w2s ·sd2
ic

 
yd2
ic′+
s∈{ξ,π} w2s ·sd2
ic′


1
m−1
⎤
⎦
(11)
123

Annals of Operations Research
The same procedure is applied to obtain ws = (wξ, wπ). We set the partial derivatives of
(7) with respect to ws ∀s ∈{ξ, π} and γ equal to zero, yielding:
∂L(ui, ws, λ, γ )
∂ws
= 0 ⇐⇒ws = γ
2
1
n
i=1
C
c=1 um
icsd2
ic
(12)
∂L(ui, ws, λ, γ )
∂γ
= 0 ⇐⇒

s∈{ξ,π}
ws = 1
(13)
Combining (12) and (13) we can obtain:
γ
2 =
1

s∈{ξ,5π}
1
n
i=1
C
c=1 um
icsd2
ic
(14)
which substituted in (12) leads to
ws =
1

s′∈{ξ,π}
n
i=1
C
c=1 um
icsd2
ic
n
i=1
C
c=1 um
ics′d2
ic
(15)
Based on the obtained solutions of the minimisation problem (namely Eqs.11 and 15) the
FCMd-CUB algorithm have been developed and coded using the software R. The algorithm
is schematically illustrated in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 FCMd-CUB algorithm
1: Fix C number of clusters, m = 1.5, max.iteration and generate randomly the degree matrix U;
2: Set iter = 0
3: Set w ←(0.5, 0.5)
▷Initialize feeling and uncertainty weights
4: (y, ξ, π)c|c = 1, ..., C
▷Pick initial random medoids
5: (y, ξ, π)OL D,c|c = 1, ..., C
▷Deﬁne Old medoids as different from initial
6: while ((y, ξ, π)c ̸= (y, ξ, π)OL D,c ∧iter < max.iter) do
7:
(y, ξ, π)OL D,c ←(y, ξ, π)c
▷Store the current medoids
8:
Compute ui (i = 1, . . . , n) using (11)
9:
Compute w by using (15)
10:
for c = 1 to C do
▷Select the new medoids
11:
q = argmin1≤i′≤n
n
i′′=1 um
i′′c

yd2
i′i′′ + 
s∈{ξ,π} w2s · sd2
i′i′′

12:
return (y, ξ, π)c ←(y, ξ, π)q
13:
end for
14:
iter ←iter + 1
15: end while
3 Case study
In this Section, an application of the proposed FCMd-CUB model to the clustering of tourists
accordingly to their satisfaction against different aspects of the visited destination is pre-
sented. Data are drawn from the annual inbound survey of International Tourism in Italy
conducted by the Bank of Italy (Banca d’Italia). The inbound-outbound frontier survey is
the technique adopted for data collection. The stratiﬁed sampling method is applied (using
different types of stratiﬁed variables for each type of frontier) and face-to-face interviews are
carried out at national borders (including highways, railways, airports and ports). Sampling
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Percentage distribution for each item
is done independently on each type of frontier. Tourists are interviewed at the end of the
trip when they return to their place of habitual residence. The interviews are conducted at
different times of the day, on both working days and holidays, and month by month, with a
ﬁxed number of interviews per period of the survey. In this study, a sample of 3,127 foreign
tourists who spent at least one night in the Venice municipality in 2017 have been analysed.
The respondents were asked to report their level of satisfaction with 9 different aspects of the
destination: hospitality and friendliness of locals (“Friendliness”); hotels and other accom-
modation (“Accommodation”); food and beverages (“Food & Beverages”); prices and cost of
living (“Prices”); landscape and natural environment (“Landscape”); quality and variety of
products offered in stores (“Product sold”); information and tourist services (“Information”);
safety (“Safety”); overall level of satisfaction with the destination (“Overall”). The level of
satisfaction has been collected using a 10-point Likert-type scale from 1 = “Very unsatisﬁed”
to 10 = “Very satisﬁed”. Together with satisfaction, socio-demographic characteristics and
trip information were asked through the survey. The sample is made up of people who travel
for tourism, holiday, or fun and whose vacation is cultural.
Cluster analysis was conducted using the level of satisfaction with the different aspects
of the destination as segmentation variables. Figure1 represents the observed percentage
distribution of the level of satisfaction in each aspect of the destination. In general, satisfaction
is quite high regardless of the aspect considered (mainly equal to or greater than 6), except
for the aspect related to prices and cost of living (“Prices”).
Since the frequencies of unsatisﬁed tourists are minimal for most of the aspects considered,
the 10-point Likert-type scale has been recoded into a 7-point Likert-type scale grouping the
low items of the scale (from 1 to 4) into a singular one. Figure2 shows the procedure adopted
to recode the scale and Fig.3 represents the percentage distribution observed of the level of
satisfaction for each aspect of the destination on the new scale.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 2 Recoding of the 10-point Likert-type scale into the 7-point Likert-type scale
Fig. 3 Percentage distribution for each item on the modiﬁed scale
Feeling and uncertainty have been estimated for each respondent and for each question
(i.e. segmentation variable) using Eqs.(2) and (3). The set of covariates of the CUB model
is described in Table 1 and includes both socio-demographic and trip characteristics.
The modiﬁed Likert-type data, feelings and uncertainty for each Likert-type variable have
been used as input variables of the FCMd-CUB model. The Gower dissimilarity discussed
in Sect. 2.2 has been adopted using the Kendall distance for ordinal data (i.e. the modiﬁed
Likert-type data) and the Euclidean distance for feelings and uncertainties. The FCMd-CUB
model has been run for C = 2, . . . , 10 clusters.
Remark 3 Cluster validity. Since the FCMd clustering algorithm requires one to a-priori
deﬁne the number of clusters to extract, a validation procedure is adopted to deﬁne the ﬁnal
optimal partition. Due to its particularly satisfactory results in recognising the true number
of clusters (see Arbelaitz, Gurrutxaga, Muguerza, Pérez, & Perona, 2013, for an extensive
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 Description of the CUB model covariates
Variable
Description
Socio-demographic characteristics
Age
<=34 / >34
Employment status
Self-employed / Employed / Other
Country of origin
EU countries / Non EU countries
Trip information
N◦of people that shared expenses
Count
N◦of night spent in holiday
Count
Accommodation type
Hotel / Other
simulation study) the Fuzzy Silhouette index (SILF) ((see Campello & Hruschka 2006), i.e.
the fuzzy version of the Average Silhouette Width (ASW) criterion (Kaufman & Rousseeuw,
2009), has been adopted. The SILF is a composite index which allows one to account for both
the separability between the clusters and the homogeneity of units inside the same cluster.
The SILF index represents the weighted average of individual silhouettes width, λi, with
weights derived from the fuzzy membership matrix U = uic : i = 1, ..., I; c = 1, ..., C and
is deﬁned as follows:
SI LF =
N
i=1(uir −uiq)αλi
N
i=1(uir −uiq)α , λi =
(bi −ai)
max (bi, ai)
(16)
where ai is the average distance between the i-th unit and the units belonging to the cluster
r, with which i is associated with the highest membership degree; bi is the minimum (over
clusters) average distance of the i-th unit to all units belonging to the cluster q with q ̸= r;
(r, q) ∈[1, ..., c] are respectively the ﬁrst- and second-best clusters (accordingly to the
membership degrees) to which the i-th unit is associated; (uir −uiq)α is the weight of each
λi, calculated upon the fuzzy membership matrix U where (uir, uiq) are the ﬁrst and second
largest element of the i-th row; α ≥0 is an optional user deﬁned weighting coefﬁcient (the
ASW index is obtained by setting α = 0).
The index has to be maximised, at least locally, in fact the higher the value of SILF, the
better the assignment of the units to the clusters simultaneously obtaining the minimisation
of the intra-cluster distance and the maximisation of the inter-cluster distance.
The SILF index has been computed for c ∈[2, . . . , 10]. The best partition suggested by
this index is C = 2 followed by C = 4. In the upcoming discussion, we will focus on the
four-clusters partition. Indeed, from both a managerial and practical standpoint, opting for
the two-clusters partition is unappealing, as it lacks general informativeness and utility for
devising new policies and strategies.
As an indication of the dimension of the clusters the weighted sample size of the 4 clusters
can be considered. The sum of the membership degrees by cluster is 900.6, 325.2, 785.8 and
1115.3 for cluster from 1 to 4 respectively.
In order to label the ﬁnal clusters, the weighted percentage distribution of the modiﬁed
level of satisfaction (7-point Likert-type scale) for each aspect of the destination and for each
cluster is represented in Fig. 4. Note that the black dots in the plot represent the category
assumed by the medoid of the cluster on each of the response. The weighted percentages are
computed using membership degrees as weights.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Weighted distribution of the segmentation variables with medoids’ indication
Cluster 2 is the smaller and groups tourists who are in general more satisﬁed with all
aspects of the destination, except “Landscape”, compared to the tourists in the other clusters.
We can therefore labelled this cluster as the “Enthusiasts”. Cluster 4 is the largest and brings
together tourists who are more satisﬁed with the landscape and natural environment but less
satisﬁed with all other aspects of the destination than other tourists. This cluster can therefore
be labelled as the “Unfulﬁlled”. Clusters 1 and 3 are very similar. However, cluster 1 groups
tourists who rated the “Safety” and “Accommodation” aspects of the destination higher,
while Group 3 tourists better evaluated the services offered by the Venice municipality, such
as information and tourist services, they appreciated more the hospitality and friendliness of
locals, and the quality of food and beverages offered by the city. Therefore, cluster 1 can be
labeled as the “Moderates” and cluster 3 as the “Experiential tourists”.
Figure5 shows, the estimated values of feeling and Uncertainty for the ﬁnal medoids. As
we can observe, the “Enthusiasts” (Cluster 2) show the highest level of uncertainty, while the
“Experienced tourists” (Cluster 3) exhibit less uncertain, especially regarding “Landscape”
and “Prices”. The weights attributed by the automatic optimization within the FCMd-CUB
algorithm to the feeling and uncertainty components are respectively 0.515 and 0.485, respec-
tively, not highlighting any particular dominance between the two components.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 5 Feeling and uncertainty parameter for each medoid by cluster
Table 2 Weighted distribution of the CUB model covariates
Variable
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Cluster 4
p-value
Socio-demographic characteristics
Age <=34 (%)
32.72
34.35
36.11
34.77
Self-employed (%)
6.25
12.78
6.75
4.94
***
Employed (%)
87.60
67.06
86.66
89.93
***
EU (%)
74.77
64.66
74.07
75.42
***
Trip information
N◦of people
1.739
0.659
1.590
2.184
***
N◦of night
0.58
0.220
0.515
0.727
***
Hotel (%)
69.64
72.11
66.60
68.22
Weighted percentage distributions and weighted means are reported. Signiﬁcance of the χ2 test of indepen-
dence and ANOVA test, respectively for binary and quantitative variables, is reported. All test results are not
signiﬁcant unless indicated otherwise: ***Signiﬁcant at p ≤0.01, **Signiﬁcant at p ≤0.05, *Signiﬁcant at
p ≤0.1
As an indication of the inﬂuence of covariates on the cluster, their weighted distribution
or weighted average is reported in Table 2 along with the signiﬁcance of the test.
4 Conclusions
In customer satisfaction analysis, Likert-type scales are frequently used to gather personal
feelings and evaluations about a post-experience or post-use. However, the information
obtained using such scales is uncertain and imprecise. Therefore, Likert-type data need to be
123

Annals of Operations Research
preprocessed before being used in further analysis, such as cluster analysis. This study aims
to present an alternative way to a-posteriori handle the uncertainty and vagueness naturally
embedded in Likert-type data when a cluster analysis is conducted. Although in the literature
the most common preprocessing operation is fuzziﬁcation, in this study we suggest modelling
the Likert-type data uncertainty by means of the CUB model with covariates (Piccolo, 2003).
Furthermore, the estimates of the CUB model parameters, i.e. feelings and uncertainty, are
used, together with the original respondents’ answers to the Likert-type questions, as input
variables of the clustering algorithm. Although any clustering algorithm for mixed data can
be adopted, we suggest applying the FCMd-MD model (D’Urso & Massari, 2019) to obtain
a more realistic multivariate description of the units and to identify the importance of each
segmentation information in the creation of the ﬁnal partition. Therefore, in this study we
suggest to combine the CUB model with the FCMd-MD algorithm, obtaining the so-called
FCMd-CUB model.
The main advantages in using the suggested a posteriori correction are: 1) the possibility of
modeling individual uncertainty arising from Likert-type data using additional respondents’
features collected through the questionnaire; 2) the removal of the elicitation problem, i.e. the
necessity to deﬁne the membership function of the fuzzy numbers, since no fuzzy recoding
is involved. From a business point of view, the FCMd-CUB model is of particular interest
since it allows one to obtain more reliable clusters with the possibility to effectively direct
marketing and managerial resources to speciﬁc customers.
Limitations of the present work include: 1) the choice of the dissimilarity measure to use
for ordinal variables; 2) the estimates of the CUB model parameters; 3) the inability to study
the multivariate dependence structure among ordinal variables. With respect to the ﬁrst point,
in this work the Kendall distance has been used because it is suitable for ordinal variables,
including Likert-type data. However, it’s important to note that the Kendall distance only
allows to measure similarities or dissimilarities between items (i.e. ratings) and doesn’t take
into account the difference in terms of the number of items between two responses. Thus,
a different dissimilarity measure for ordinal variables should be considered. Concerning
the uncertainty and feeling parameters estimated using the CUB model with covariates, it’s
important to note that these parameters represent an approximation of individual character-
istics. In fact, the individual parameters are computed with minor adjustment over the global
parameters based on individual covariates: this results in the impossibility to obtain param-
eters perfectly suited for the individual (in fact, despite their answer could be different, two
people with equal covariates will get the same parameters). Further studies should be devoted
to the improvement of this point. Finally, as mentioned in the introduction, the FCMd-CUB
model is unable to study the complex multivariate dependence structure among questions
and further studies should be devoted to overcome this limitation.
Acknowledgements We sincerely thank prof. Domenico Piccolo and prof. Rosaria Simone for the fruitful
discussion that led to the improvement of the present work. We also thank the reviewers for providing comments
and suggestions that let us better convey the value of the present work.
This study was carried out within: the BIRD 2022 project titled “Fuzzy theory in Unsupervised Machine
Learning algorithm and Sentiment Analysis; the MICS (Made in Italy - Circular and Sustainable) Extended
Partnership and received funding from the European Union Next-Generation EU (PIANO NAZIONALE
DI RIPRESA E RESILIENZA (PNRR) - MISSIONE 4 COMPONENTE 2, INVESTIMENTO 1.3 - D.D.
1551.11-10-2022, PE00000004); the MOST-Sustainable Mobility National Research Centre and received
funding from the European Union Next-GenerationEU (PIANO NAZIONALE DI RIPRESA E RESILIENZA
(PNRR)-MISSIONE 4 COMPONENTE 2, INVESTIMENTO 1.4-D.D. 1033 17 June 2022, CN00000023).
This manuscript reﬂects only the authors’ views and opinions, neither the European Union nor the European
Commission can be considered responsible for them.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Padova within the CRUI-CARE Agree-
ment.
Declarations
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abdi, H. (2007). The Kendall rank correlation coefﬁcient. Encyclopedia of measurement and statistics (pp.
508–510). Sage.
Arbelaitz, O., Gurrutxaga, I., Muguerza, J., Pérez, J. M., & Perona, I. (2013). An extensive comparative study
of cluster validity indices. Pattern Recognition, 46(1), 243–256.
Biasetton,N.,Disegna,M.,Barzizza,E.,&Salmaso,L.(2023).AnewadaptivemembershipfunctionwithCUB
uncertainty with application to cluster analysis of Likert-type data. Expert Systems with Applications,
213, 118893.
Campello, R. J., & Hruschka, E. R. (2006). A fuzzy extension of the silhouette width criterion for cluster
analysis. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 157(21), 2858–2875.
Coppi, R., & D’Urso, P. (2002). Fuzzy K-mean clustering models for triangular fuzzy time trajectories.
Statistical Methods and Applications, 11, 21–24.
Davidov, E., Meuleman, B., Cieciuch, J., Schmidt, P., & Billiet, J. (2014). Measurement equivalence in cross-
national research. Annual Review of Sociology, 40, 55–75.
Disegna, M., D’Urso, P., & Massari, R. (2018). Analysing cluster evolution using repeated cross-sectional
ordinal data. Tourism Management, 69, 524–536.
Dolnicar, S. (2019). Market segmentation analysis in tourism: a perspective paper. Tourism Review Ahead-of-
print Ahead-of-Print.
D’Urso, P. (2007). Clustering of fuzzy data. In J. V. De Oliveira & W. Pedrycz (Eds.), Advances in fuzzy
clustering and its applications (pp. 155–192). Wiley.
D’Urso, P., & De Giovanni, L. (2014). Robust clustering of imprecise data. Chemometrics and Intelligent
Laboratory Systems, 136, 58–80.
D’Urso, P., De Giovanni, L., & Massari, R. (2014). Self-organizing maps for imprecise data. Fuzzy Sets and
Systems, 237, 63–89.
D’Urso, P., Disegna, M., Massari, R., & Osti, L. (2016). Fuzzy segmentation of postmodern tourists. Tourism
Management, 55, 297–308.
D’Urso, P., Giovanni, L. D., Disegna, M., Massari, R., & Vitale, V. (2021). A tourist segmentation based on
motivation, satisfaction and prior knowledge with a socio-economic proﬁling: A clustering approach
with mixed information. Social Indicators Research, 154(154), 335–360.
D’Urso, P., & Leski, J. M. (2020). Fuzzy clustering of fuzzy data based on robust loss functions and Ordered
Weighted Averaging. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 389, 1–28.
D’Urso, P., & Massari, R. (2019). Fuzzy clustering of mixed data. Information Sciences, 505, 513–534.
D’Urso, P. , De Giovanni, L. & Vitale, V. (2022). A robust method for clustering football players with mixed
attributes. Annals of Operations Research 1–28.
D’Urso, P., Disegna, M., Massari, R., & Prayag, G. (2015). Bagged fuzzy clustering for fuzzy data: An
application to a tourism market. Knowledge-Based Systems, 73, 335–346.
D’Urso, P., & Vitale, V. (2022). A Kemeny distance-based robust fuzzy clustering for preference data. Journal
of Classiﬁcation, 39(3), 600–647.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Everitt, B., Landau, S., Leese, M., & Stahl, D. (2011). Cluster analysis (5th ed.). Wiley.
Gardner, P. L. (1975). Scales and statistics. Review of Educational Research, 45(1), 43–57.
Gil, M.Á. & González-Rodríguez, G. (2012). Fuzzy vs. Likert scale in statistics. In Combining experimentation
and theory: A hommage to abe mamdani (pp. 407–420). Springer.
Gil, M. A., Lubiano, M., la Rosa, De., de Sàa, S., & Sinova, B. (2015). Analyzing data from a fuzzy rating
scale-based questionnaire: A case study. Psicothema, 27(2), 182–191.
Gower, J.C. (1971). A general coefﬁcient of similarity and some of its properties. Biometrics 857–871.
Harpe, S. E. (2015). How to analyze likert and other rating scale data. Currents in Pharmacy Teaching and
Learning, 7(6), 836–850.
Hu, H.-Y., Lee, Y.-C., & Yen, T.-M. (2010). Service quality gaps analysis based on fuzzy linguistic servqual
with a case study in hospital out-patient services. The TQM Journal, 22(5), 499–515.
Hung, W. L., & Yang, M. S. (2005). Fuzzy clustering on LR-type fuzzy numbers with an application in
Taiwanese tea evaluation. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 150(3), 561–577.
Iannario, M. , Piccolo, D. & Simone, R. (2016). CUB: A class of mixture models for ordinal data. R package
version 0.1, available at: https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/CUB/CUB.pdf, accessed October 29
2016.
Jamieson, S. (2004). Likert scales: How to (ab)use them. Medical Education, 38, 1212–1218.
Kaufman, L., & Rousseeuw, P. J. (2009). Finding groups in data: An introduction to cluster analysis. Wiley.
Kendall, M. G. (1949). Rank correlation methods. Journal of the Institute of Actuaries, 75(1), 140–141.
Khoo-Lattimore, C., Prayag, G., & Disegna, M. (2019). Me, my girls, and the ideal hotel: Segmenting motiva-
tions of the girlfriend getaway market using fuzzy C-Medoids for fuzzy data. Journal of Travel Research,
58(5), 774–792.
Krishnapuram, R., Joshi, A., Nasraoui, O., & Yi, L. (2001). Low-complexity fuzzy relational clustering algo-
rithms for web mining. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 9(4), 595–607.
la Rosa, De., de Sàa, S., Gil, M., Gonzalez-Rodriguez, G., López, M. T., & Lubiano, M. (2015). Fuzzy rating
scale-based questionnaires and their statistical analysis. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 23(1),
111–126.
Li, Q. (2013). A novel likert scale based on fuzzy sets theory. Expert Systems with Applications, 40(5),
1609–1618.
Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of psychology, 22(140), 5–55.
Piccolo, D. (2003). On the moments of a mixture of uniform and shifted binomial random variables. Quaderni
di Statistica, 5, 85–104.
Piccolo, D., & Simone, R. (2019). The class of cub models: Statistical foundations, inferential issues and
empirical evidence. Statistical Methods & Applications, 28(3), 389–435.
Shirahama, N., Watanabe, S., Moriya, K., Koshi, K., & Matsumoto, K. (2021). A new method of subjective
evaluation using visual analog scale for small sample data analysis. Journal of Information Processing,
29, 424–433.
Simone, R. (2020). FastCUB: Fast EM and best-subset selection for CUB models for rating data. R package,
available on CRAN at https://cran.r-project.org/package=FastCUB.
Stavroulakis, P. J., Papadimitriou, S., Tsioumas, V., Koliousis, I. G., Riza, E., & Kontolatou, E. O. (2020).
Strategic competitiveness in maritime clusters. Case Studies on Transport Policy, 8(2), 341–348.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123