TITLE: Agent‐based modeling of new product market diffusion: an overview of strengths and criticisms
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2021
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-03944-1
---

Vol.:(0123456789)
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-03944-1
1 3
S.I. : SIMULATING COMPLEX SYSTEMS
Agent‐based modeling of new product market diffusion: 
an overview of strengths and criticisms
William Rand1   · Christian Stummer2 
Received: 6 October 2019 / Revised: 19 December 2020 / Accepted: 8 January 2021 / 
Published online: 10 February 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Market diffusion of new products is driven by the actions and reactions of consumers, dis-
tributors, competitors, and other stakeholders, all of whom can be heterogeneous in their 
individual characteristics, attitudes, needs, and objectives. These actors may also interact 
with others in various ways (e.g., through word of mouth or social influence). Thus, a typi-
cal consumer market constitutes a complex system whose behavior is difficult to foresee 
because stochastic impulses may give rise to complex emergent patterns of system reac-
tions over time. Agent-based modeling, a relatively novel approach to understanding 
complex systems, is well equipped to deal with this complexity and, therefore, may serve 
as a valuable tool for both researchers studying particular market effects and practition-
ers seeking decision support for determining features of products under development or 
the appropriate combination of measures to accelerate product diffusion in a market. This 
paper provides an overview of the strengths and criticisms of such tools. It aims to encour-
age researchers in the field of innovation management, as well as practitioners, to consider 
agent-based modeling and simulation as a method for gaining deeper insights into market 
behavior and making better-informed decisions.
Keywords  Complex systems · Agent‐based modeling · New product diffusion · Market 
simulation · Overview
1  Introduction
Bringing new products to market on a regular basis is a necessity for the long-term survival 
of a company. In doing so, managers face several challenges. First, market introduction of 
innovations is usually costly and failure can result in forfeiture of extensive investments 
 * Christian Stummer 
 
christian.stummer@uni‑bielefeld.de
 
William Rand 
 
wmrand@ncsu.edu
1 
Department of Business Management, North Carolina State University, 2801 Founders Drive, 
Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
2 
Department of Business Administration and Economics, Bielefeld University, Universitaetsstr. 25, 
33615 Bielefeld, Germany

426
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
in the development of the new product. Second, there is only a single opportunity to “get 
it right” in the important initial phase of market penetration, in which a successful take-
off can set up a wave of contagious consumption; in consumer markets, this takeoff often 
determines whether the innovation survives in the market (Delre et al. 2007b; Golder and 
Tellis 2004). Third, it is difficult to predict the course of launching a new product into a 
consumer market because market stakeholders—such as consumers, distributors, and com-
petitors—are not homogenous but rather diverse, and their behavior is influenced by the 
actions and reactions of others. Therefore, a better understanding of market behavior is a 
major concern for innovation management.
While the first two abovementioned issues (i.e., cost and single opportunity) “merely” 
increase the pressure on decision-makers, the main difficulty lies in appropriately predict-
ing market behavior arising from the heterogeneity of stakeholders in the market (with 
respect to their individual characteristics, attitudes toward a product’s attributes, needs, 
objectives, etc.) and their interactions with each other. Thus, a consumer market is a prime 
example of a complex system for which both micro-level analysis (i.e., a consumer’s adop-
tion of an innovation) and macro-level analysis (i.e., the overall pattern of innovation diffu-
sion) are of interest.
Complex systems are inherently intricate, typically involve stochastic elements, may 
show chaotic behavior, and are predisposed to unexpected and emergent outcomes (Foote 
2007; for a discussion on the characterization of complex systems, see Ladyman et  al. 
2013; a great source of material on complexity science is the Santa Fe Institute 2020). 
The outcome of these systems emerges through the large number of interactions among 
a system’s entities and of these entities with their environment, forming loops of recircu-
lating signals and feedback (Holland 1998, 2014; Miller and Page 2009). The effects of 
interactions occasionally make the observed emergent phenomena in complex systems dif-
ficult to understand and might lead to counterintuitive findings. For example, Helbing et al. 
(2000) concluded that putting a column (a pillar) just before an emergency exit, slightly 
asymmetrically, about one meter away from the exit, helps to reduce the harmful conse-
quences of irrational herding behavior in collective panic (e.g., when a fire breaks out in a 
crowded building). Another example is the emergence of dominant designs for which it can 
be shown that even substantial technological advantage might not be sufficient to guarantee 
a leading market position (Haurand and Stummer 2018a). In certain cases, the results of a 
complex system analysis could be considered to be intuitive and still contribute to answer-
ing important questions. For example, Watts and Dodds (2007) show that seeding appro-
priate individuals in a word-of-mouth campaign can result in accelerated diffusion of a new 
product, but complexity can arise from identifying exactly which members of the network 
to seed. In their analysis, Watts and Dodds argue that, occasionally, the people with the 
most connections are not the ones who should be seeded.
Agent-based modeling (ABM) has turned out to be particularly useful for studying 
the behavior of complex systems. Its appeal stems from the fact that ABM only requires 
the encoding of micro-rules governing the behavior of involved stakeholders in order to 
observe emergent macro-level behavior (while knowledge of the specific macro-dynamics 
is not necessary). An overview of the background and recent state of the field of ABM as 
well as examples of applications from various disciplines is provided by Macal (2016). 
He indicates that ABM is being applied to a wide variety of fields, from energy manage-
ment to airport safety to innovation diffusion; further recent applications can be found, for 
example, in Marketing (Sonderegger-Wakolbinger and Stummer 2015), fashion supply 
chains in the apparel industry (Backs et al. 2021), or management education (Stummer and 
Kiesling 2021). An early review with respect to innovation management and new product 

427
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
development research was provided by Garcia (2005). On a more aggregate level of market 
modeling, in computational economics, Dawid (2006) explored how to use ABM for inves-
tigating innovation and technological change in industries.
Since this time, the field has continued to evolve and there is a substantial amount 
of new research and knowledge generation that has occurred. The current paper aims to 
encourage both researchers and practitioners to leverage the benefits of ABM—while 
being aware of the limitations—for studying consumer market behavior when planning the 
launch of new products. To this end, it not only provides an overview of the strengths and 
criticisms of ABM but also offers a starting point for employing ABM in the field of inno-
vation management.
The remainder of the paper is organized in the following manner: Sect. 2 introduces 
the general idea underlying ABM and describes its basic features. Section 3 elaborates the 
strengths of ABM in the context of market introduction of an innovation. Section 4 consid-
ers the criticisms of applying an ABM approach for this purpose. Section 5 addresses the 
setting up of agent-based models and lists software that might be useful when implement-
ing ABM-based simulation tools. Section 6 outlines two examples of ABM of new product 
market diffusion. Section 7 provides an outlook to promising avenues for future research on 
using ABM in this field.
2  Background
When past data is not available to inform future projections (e.g., for new products or new 
markets) and conducting a real-world experiment is impossible or too expensive (e.g., as 
the product does not yet actually exist), potential management measures under considera-
tion can be tested by means of a market model. In certain instances, analytical approaches 
(e.g., based on mathematical programming) can identify an optimal strategy. However, for 
complex problems in which (time) dynamics are important, such an analytical solution may 
be difficult to find or may not exist at all. In these instances, simulation approaches such as 
system dynamics (SD), discrete event simulation (DES), and agent-based simulation come 
into play (for a comparison, see Borshchev and Filippov 2004).
Among these approaches, ABM is the most recent, as the necessary computational 
capacity was not previously available: its expansion in the social sciences began only in the 
early 1990s (e.g., Holland and Miller 1991) while SD and DES date back to the 1950s and 
1960 s; Klein et al. (2018) provide an overview of the development of ABM in the social 
sciences. In ABM, an agent is “an autonomous computational individual or object with 
particular properties and actions” and an agent-based model is a computational model in 
which “a phenomenon is modeled in terms of agents and their interactions” (Wilensky and 
Rand 2015, p. 1). Macal (2016) distinguishes four different levels of ABM, among which 
adaptive ABM is the most far-reaching (the other three levels are labeled individual, auton-
omous, and interactive ABM). In an adaptive ABM approach, interacting autonomous 
agents represent stakeholders who may change their behavior as a result of receiving new 
information or, more generally, learning. Thus, agents can remember previous encounters 
with various situations as well as the outcomes of their prior behaviors in such situations 
(i.e., they store experiences into their internal state). This type of ABM can often represent 
the reality in markets into which new products are introduced.
ABM can be considered a particular mindset in that it describes a system from the 
perspective of its constituent units (Bonabeau 2002). These units—the agents—are (1) 

428
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
self-contained and uniquely identifiable, (2) autonomous and self-directed, that is, an 
agent relates individual information to its own decisions and actions, (3) have an indi-
vidual state (e.g., having adopted a particular innovation) that varies over time (i.e., 
the agent’s behavior may be conditioned on its state), and (4) exhibit dynamic interac-
tions with other agents that influence their behavior (Macal and North 2010). Thus, 
the behavior of agents affects their own actions, the actions of other agents, and the 
environment. Technically, ABM can be characterized as a decentralized bottom-up 
approach. As such, it can account for (1) population heterogeneity in terms of attrib-
utes and decision-making processes, (2) the impact of social influences on the dynam-
ics of markets, and (3) the emergent phenomena arising from agents’ interactions 
(Negahban and Yilmaz 2014). Thus, ABM often provides a natural complement to 
other approaches to understanding complex systems, such as system dynamics, social 
network analysis, and machine learning (Rand et al. 2018).
In a market model, consumer agents are usually heterogeneous with regard to how 
they make their individual decisions (i.e., which factors they are driven by and what 
weights they have assigned to these factors). For example, certain consumer agents 
can be more price sensitive, while others are more quality sensitive. Moreover, con-
sumer agents can communicate with each other through word of mouth and might be 
exposed to marketing messages from advertising campaigns. Periodically, consumer 
agents have to decide whether to adopt an innovation, reject it, or postpone the deci-
sion. Other agents who represent distributors, points of sale, competitors, etc. can be 
modeled in a similar manner and each may have different aims and actions at their 
disposal.
An expedient starting point for further reading about the purpose and advantages 
of ABM is the now classic exposition by Bonabeau (2002) on when to employ ABM. 
Wilensky and Rand (2015) provide a general overview of the use of ABM in a wide 
variety of fields and a fundamental how-to guide for the construction and use of ABM 
in scientific research. Railsback and Grimm (2019) adopt an approach that is more ori-
ented toward the natural sciences but is still useful in the social sciences. An extensive 
tutorial on ABM in the social sciences (including readings and demonstration soft-
ware) is available from a website maintained by Axelrod and Tesfatsion (2020). Tes-
fatsion (2020a) also provides a comprehensive website dedicated to tracking all the 
work around ABM and economics. For general-purpose ABM, the email discussion 
list maintained by SIMSOC (2020) as well as the network for computational modeling 
in social and ecological sciences (CoMSES 2020) and its accompanying OpenABM 
website are useful sites.
3  Strengths
Human behaviors, reactions, and interactions are the missing elements in numerous 
traditional approaches for predicting system behavior and testing interventions (Macal 
2016). ABM can overcome this shortcoming. To this end, a typical ABM approach has 
three elements—namely, a set of agents, a set of agent relationships and methods of 
interaction, and an environment in which the agents interact with each other and which 
might serve as the testbed for possible interventions. In the following, we elaborate on 
the strengths of ABM in relation to these elements.

429
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
3.1  Heterogeneity and individuality of stakeholders
ABM can account for the heterogeneity of diverse stakeholders across a population. Con-
sumer innovativeness—that is, the predisposition of a consumer to buy new products more 
often and more quickly than other people (Midgley and Dowling 1978)—provides a prime 
example in this regard, as it drives the consumers’ decision to adopt on their own, inde-
pendent of being exposed to advertising or discussing the product with a peer (as will be 
addressed in Sect. 3.3). Often, the consumer population is divided into different classes 
based on the amount of innovativeness present in the group: those who are the most inno-
vative are referred to as innovators and those who are the least innovative as laggards (Rog-
ers 2003). This classification is merely based on when the consumer adopts; however, that 
conflates natural innovativeness with the effect of word of mouth, advertising, and network 
effects. ABM—at least in theory—provides a means to separate these forces (although this 
has not been well explored in the literature yet).
Furthermore, ABM not only accounts for heterogeneous characteristics of agents (e.g., 
their innovativeness, preferences, or communication behavior) but also keeps track of indi-
vidual agents and their experiences during the course of a simulation run. This individual 
information is made up of the history of an agent’s decisions, an agent’s internal notion 
of the external world, an agent’s observation of the reactions of other agents in response 
to their actions, and the retained memory of past events (Macal and North 2010). All of 
these individual aspects of the agent can affect an agent’s decisions going forward. In other 
words, even if two agents are exactly the same at the beginning of the simulation run (i.e., 
heterogeneity does not play a role), due to dynamic, and often random, effects during the 
run they may make different individual decisions in the future.
In their comparison of ABM and SD, Borshchev and Filippov (2004) provide an illus-
trative example of the advantages of modeling individual agents in contrast to not distin-
guishing between the members of a certain group, as in SD approaches. In their example, 
they examine how the word-of-mouth activity of a consumer may depend on how long ago 
the purchase of an innovation took place. It is assumed that immediately after an adop-
tion event, a consumer engages actively in word-of-mouth communication regarding the 
product, which is followed by a decrease in the intensity of promoting the product, before 
it stabilizes at a moderate level (i.e., after some time consumers will talk about their expe-
rience only when asked directly by a peer). Such behavior can be easily implemented in 
ABM because each consumer agent can individually store—and thus remember—the time 
of product adoption. However, in SD, this is not possible because SD does not distinguish 
between the entities included in the adopters’ group type or compartment1. Therefore, 
aggregating the adopters in SD into one (or any reasonable finite number) of compartments 
will distort the results. While it is possible to create an increasing number of containers to 
store different consumers on the basis of time since purchase, ABM provides for this in a 
much more convenient manner.
1  It should be noted that SD can model a limited amount of heterogeneity by having different stocks repre-
senting different levels of innovativeness for instance, but modeling individuality is not possible in SD, and 
modeling extreme heterogeneity, where each agent is unique from all other agents, would be impractical 
and defeat the purpose of using SD where the goal is to accumulate common types in a common stock.

430
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
3.2  Decision‐making behavior
ABM provides researchers with the ability to apply various behavioral rules that take 
into account different elements of agents’ decision-making (e.g., when adopting an 
innovation). Nagahban and Yilmaz (2014) distinguish the following six main variants of 
modeling the decision-making process: Preference matching (e.g., Schramm et al. 2010) 
is a straightforward approach that evaluates the degree of similarity between a consumer 
agent’s preferences and product attributes (including the traditional five factors: relative 
advantage, compatibility, trialability, observability, and perceived risk). Alternatively, 
the modeled innovation adoption process may follow a stage-based approach in which 
consumer agents undergo several stages before making the final decision to adopt or 
reject the product (e.g., as described by Rogers 2003). Utility functions are also com-
monly used for evaluating product choice. In calculating the individual utility value, 
personal preferences (i.e., weights for some decision criteria), word-of-mouth influ-
ence, or impact of advertising, budget constraints, etc. may play a role (e.g., Delre et al. 
2007b), which distinguishes utility functions from simpler preference-matching func-
tions. In application cases where social influence triggers innovation adoption, decisions 
can be modeled based on an exposure threshold, that is, a consumer agent adopts the 
product only if the proportion of their neighbors who have already adopted it is greater 
than a critical threshold. Preferences might dynamically evolve over time, depending 
on the consumer agent’s past experience with a product, which of course requires some 
sort of learning process. Finally, choices might be made randomly. It must be noted that 
several of these aspects can be combined, thereby enhancing the flexibility of ABM.
3.3  Interaction among stakeholders
One of the powerful aspects of ABM is that (like the real world) it is naturally decen-
tralized; thus, only local information is available to each agent. Consequently, modeling 
the interactions among agents (i.e., who is, or could be, connected to whom, and the 
mechanisms of these interactions) is rather important. Interactions can occur in diverse 
forms, and the literature can be confusing, because before the advent of ABM, it was 
often necessary to conflate different notions of interaction to make them easier to under-
stand (e.g., the Bass model conflates direct network effects and word of mouth).
In an attempt to simplify this concept, we divide interactions into two broad catego-
ries: (1) direct interactions, where consumers directly interact with some other agent 
(e.g., in word-of-mouth communication), and (2) indirect interactions, where consumers 
do not directly interact with an agent but are affected by knowledge of the total sum of 
other agents’ decisions (e.g., in the form of social influence). In the following, we also 
discuss the various ways for modeling social networks in which these interactions might 
occur.
3.3.1  Word of mouth and advertising
Dating back to the original studies on innovation diffusion (Ryan and Gross 1943), 
researchers have realized that there are at least two methods of direct interaction: (1) 
word-of-mouth, direct conversations, or interactions among consumers and (2) advertis-
ing interactions between consumers and the brand.

431
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
Consumers create and share word-of-mouth information regarding products (for an 
overview, see Berger 2014) and, thus, may influence their peers’ attitudes in a positive 
or negative manner (for empirical results regarding the mechanisms of word of mouth, 
see, e.g., Dellarocas 2003; Leskovec et al. 2007; Richins 1983). This influencing usu-
ally occurs within a user’s social network (Young 2009). In his original model, Bass 
(1969) did not distinguish between this force and the overall force of social network 
effects, which we will describe in the next section. However, in ABM versions of the 
Bass model (Rand and Rust 2011), researchers have the opportunity to model this pro-
cess more directly.
Advertising is the second form of direct interaction. ABM can account for various forms 
of advertising (e.g., mass media advertising campaigns, point-of-sale advertising, etc.; for 
studies on the potential influence on consumer behavior, see, e.g., Abernethy and Franke 
1996; Horsky and Simon 1983), in which the direct interaction occurs between a consumer 
agent and an abstract advertising agent. Since this advertising agent is external to the social 
network, this is often characterized as an external force (Young 2009). In the Bass model 
mentioned above, this force includes both the decision to adopt an innovation because the 
consumer is influenced by advertising and the decision to adopt an innovation indepen-
dently from any advertising event, but again ABM could enable researchers to separate 
these different effects. Moreover, ABM considers the relationship between advertising and 
word-of-mouth, exploring when one force might have more or less effect than the other 
(Rahmandad and Sterman 2008).
3.3.2  Social influence
Indirect interaction happens when one agent’s decision is influenced by the decisions of 
many others, even though that decision is not directly communicated to the focal agent 
(Clements 2004). The most common type of indirect interaction is social influence. Fash-
ion markets provide an illustrative example in this regard, as consumers in these markets 
exchange not only product information but also norms related to consumptive behavior 
(Cialdini and Goldstein 2004). Procedurally, social influence can be modeled through a 
threshold mechanism of collective action, that is, as long as the proportion of adopters in 
an agent’s personal network remains below the threshold (i.e., only a few of the agent’s 
peers behave in a particular manner), the agent is not affected by social influence; how-
ever, once the number of these peers exceeds the threshold, the consumer agent suddenly 
decides to change its mind and behaves differently (Granovetter and Soong 1986). ABM 
provides researchers with the ability to model consumers who have varying degrees of 
trust in the different members of their social network and, thus, the social influence exerted 
on them may vary.
3.3.3  Social network
As in real markets, in which not all consumers interact directly with all others, agents 
in a market model typically interact only with a subset of other agents. How the agents 
are interconnected is termed an agent-based model’s topology or connectedness (for a 
detailed discussion, see Macal and North 2010). Social networks are the most prominent 
means to represent this connectedness. They may consider different types of social ties, 
that is, strong ties with people within their social circles and weak ties with other people 
(Watts and Strogatz 1998). It is noteworthy that weak ties may also play a crucial role in 

432
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
innovation diffusion because they often function as bridges among different social groups 
(Brown and Reingen 1987; Goldenberg et al. 2007; Hu et al. 2019).
Several mechanisms have been proposed for determining the linkages among agents (for 
an overview, see Kiesling et al. 2012; Negahban and Yilmaz 2014). While random net-
works (Erdős and Rényi 1959; Watts and Dodds 2007) or regular networks (Goldenberg 
et al. 2010) do not approximate actual social networks very well, small-world networks 
(Watts and Strogatz 1998) and scale-free (preferential) networks (Barabási and Albert 
1999; Delre et al. 2010) exhibit characteristics that are typical of social networks (e.g., 
some of the agents function as hubs with numerous connections, while most of the agents 
only have a few connections). Empirical networks (e.g., Leskovec et al. 2007), of course, 
would be best as they are based on data extracted from social networking sites, but creat-
ing such a network for a consumer market is difficult, if not impossible, due to lack of data 
or restrictions on the access to that data. One solution that researchers have employed over 
the years is to generate synthetic networks that either simulate the properties of a known 
network—where not all the data can be accessed—or, in certain cases, merely simulate the 
properties of an expert’s belief regarding the underlying properties of this network (Chica 
and Rand 2017; Trusov et al. 2013). In ABM, the social network can be refined as new data 
regarding the underlying network is collected.
Spatial representation in network generation might take into account that two consumer 
agents located close to each other have a higher probability of being connected in the social 
network than consumer agents living farther apart (e.g., Günther et al. 2011). Further, net-
works can be static (i.e., all links are fixed) or dynamic (i.e., a few links might be added 
or removed in the course of a simulation run). As different markets might exhibit different 
network structures of consumers and several studies (e.g., Bearden and Rose 1990; Delre 
et al. 2007a) have demonstrated that the selected network type might make a difference for 
innovation diffusion, it is advisable to give due consideration to this issue.
3.4  Testbed for strategies and scenarios
A particular strength of ABM lies in its ability to be used as a testbed for strategies before 
they are employed in actual markets (remember that usually there is only a single oppor-
tunity to succeed with the market introduction of an innovation). Moreover, correspond-
ing simulation experiments can be run in an early phase of product development to aid 
in determining the features of the prospective new product and to learn about its possible 
diffusion in a market that might not even exist when the simulation is executed. To this 
end, multiple “futures” might be considered, each of which can be represented through a 
scenario for which a simulation might be run; each simulation can be easily adapted to a 
particular future through parameterization of the respective market [an example is provided 
by Günther et al. (2017)]. Combining ABM with traditional methods of scenario analysis 
that explore different alternative futures can deliver the benefits of both, thereby resulting 
in robust quantitative projections (Roper et al. 2011). Simulation results from such appli-
cation cases must of course be interpreted at the qualitative level rather than adhering too 
closely to quantitative outcomes.
From a research viewpoint, ABM provides an opportunity to test the conditions under 
which the diffusion of innovations succeeds or fails. For example, Delre et  al. (2007b) 
study the effects of targeting and timing of advertising campaigns on consumer adoption 
and innovation diffusion. ABM might also be used for investigating competition among 
several brands (Schramm et  al. 2010) or the effect of repeat purchases (Stummer et  al. 

433
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
2015), which would be impossible through the traditional diffusion model, and its exten-
sions, proposed by Bass (1969).
4  Criticisms
Although ABM has a number of benefits, it is subject to criticism. In this section, we dis-
cuss criticism that was raised with respect to (1) parameterization, (2) verification and vali-
dation, (3) arbitrariness, (4) lack of causality, and (5) computational cost. However, most of 
these critiques hold true for numerous modeling techniques and, in certain cases, are less 
of a concern for ABM than for other approaches.
4.1  Parameterization
An ABM that is complex enough to model realistic innovation diffusion scenarios will 
often have a larger number of parameters than traditional modeling approaches, and it is 
not always possible to infer the correct value for all of these parameters. As a result, how 
to identify suitable parameter values for an agent-based model is a frequent concern of 
researchers and practitioners using ABM. The best way to do so depends on the market 
that is being modeled and the particular goal of the simulation study. If the goal is simply 
to explore a proof of existence, then as long as the parameters are internally consistent, 
there is no need for additional validation (Holland 2012). If the focus is on investigating 
abstract market behavior (e.g., the impact of sparse vs. dense social networks on innovation 
diffusion), parameters could be based on reasonable values taken from literature. However, 
if the goal of the simulation study is to make real-world empirical predictions, then the 
parameters must be derived from relevant empirical studies. Typically, choice-based con-
joint data are used to elicit consumer preferences (e.g., Zhang et al. 2011). For an illustra-
tive example of how to collect data required for parameterization of ABM for new product 
market diffusion, see Sect. 6.2.
4.2  Verification and validation
Verification is the process of ensuring that the model corresponds with the conceptual 
model, while validation provides the modeler with confidence in terms of how accurately 
the model represents the actual system (Balci 1994). Although it is impossible to com-
pletely verify or validate a model (Grimm and Railsback 2005), substantial effort needs to 
be made to make sure the model is scientifically correct. In fact, validation and verification 
are among the greatest challenges in ABM (Midgley et al. 2007).
In their respective guidelines, Rand and Rust (2011) suggest verifying a model using 
(1) documentation, relating the implemented model to the conceptual model; (2) program-
matic testing, ensuring that the code works at the micro-level; and (3) test cases, ensuring 
that the output of the model makes sense for conditions where the output is known. When 
validating a model, researchers must perform (1) micro-face validation, which ensures that 
the agents correspond to their real-world counterparts “on face”—that is, that the con-
sumer agents’ behavior correspond in a meaningful way to the behavior of actual consum-
ers or that the agents possess a realistic amount of information; (2) macro-face validation, 
which checks that the output makes sense “on face”; (3) empirical input validation, which 
assesses the validity of the model’s parameters by comparing them to real-world data; and 

434
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
(4) empirical output validation, which compares the output of the model to real-world out-
put (Rand and Rust 2011). Further, a sensitivity analysis can be conducted, which involves 
varying parameter values and observing the effects of any such values on system behavior 
(Ten Broeke et al. 2016). The findings from this analysis can then be used to highlight 
parameters that have the greatest effect on the system’s behavior.
North et al. (2010) provide a real-life example in which an agent-based model is devel-
oped, calibrated, verified, and validated for Procter & Gamble. To this end, North et al. 
used household panel data (including detailed time-series purchase histories from hun-
dreds of shoppers covering multiyear periods), scanner data from store checkout counters 
at a variety of retail stores, aggregate and time-series industry statistics (including mar-
ket shares, sales volumes, and advertising trends), and detailed industry data (including 
information on retail store shelf stocks, product pricing numbers, and product promotion 
counts), all of which received from Nielsen and Information Resources Inc. (IRI). Exten-
sive material on empirical validation and verification of agent-based models is available on 
the website maintained by Tesfatsion (2020b).
4.3  Arbitrariness
Another concern related to validation is what critics express as “Well, a model can show 
anything”. What they mean by this statement is that since the agent-based model is con-
structed by the researcher, it can generate whatever results the researcher wishes to achieve 
and, thus, results are arbitrary. The best response to this criticism is that if the model is 
well validated, then it must correspond to a real-world phenomenon or at least mirror it so 
well that it is impossible for validation tests to tell the difference.
This criticism is not unique to ABM. Game theoretic models and regression models also 
require researchers to examine numerous different models before selecting the one they 
decide to present. Regardless of the modeling framework, researchers must convince their 
audience—that is, other researchers as well as practitioners—that the model was set up in a 
reasonable manner and that the model represents a fair description of reality. Only then can 
the model be helpful in explaining the phenomenon that the modeler originally intended to 
examine. If the model is able to make out-of-sample predictions, then the model has gained 
an additional level of validation.
In many ways, this issue is related to Lucas’ (1976) critique of macroeconomics, 
according to which no macro model is useful for predicting beyond the data that is already 
observed, because predictions require the use of data that was not previously used to vali-
date the model. The goal is for ABM to help combat the Lucas critique by identifying 
not only the data process that generates the patterns of interest but also by identifying the 
generative mechanisms that give rise to these patterns. In this case, the Lucas critique no 
longer holds since the behavioral model can assist in moving beyond historical data (Rand 
2019).
4.4  Lack of causality
Causality plays a significant role in management publications with techniques such as nat-
ural experiments or randomized controlled trials becoming increasingly important in the 
traditional management science toolkit. ABM, and simulation methods in general, is often 
criticized as lacking a means to assess causality. This criticism is fair. Even if the inputs to 
an agent-based model and the outputs against out-of-sample empirical data are validated, 

435
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
all they show is that the model is one possible explanation of the relationship between the 
input and output. Occasionally, that is the only goal of the model—that is, to show that the 
model is one possible explanation of the relationship between input and output—which is 
also referred to as an “existence proof” (Holland 2012).
However, if an agent-based model is constructed well, then it will be constructed from 
previously established causal mechanisms. Thus, it is still assembled from causal theory 
even if the final aggregation of mechanisms is not proven to be causal. Often, ABM is 
employed when one of the traditional methods of establishing causality cannot be used. 
For example, the necessary natural experiment that would help establish that causality does 
not exist or conducting a randomized control trial to establish that causality is too costly. 
In these cases, if the researcher builds the ABM from individual mechanisms that are well-
grounded and which may have been independently validated, then even though it would be 
difficult to argue that the model is causal, it would still further validate the theory.
Further, it may also be the case that in order to develop these causal relationships, the 
researcher must almost always restrict the data to a much smaller dataset than all of the 
possible data related to the phenomenon at hand. However, ABM has no such restriction; 
thus, it is possible to create a model using ABM that can take advantage of all the acces-
sible data.
4.5  Computational cost
Finally, ABM is often criticized as being computationally expensive, which is true as simu-
lating up to millions of agents requires substantial computational resources. However, one 
of the reasons why ABM continues to be increasingly useful is that the cost of computation 
is always decreasing. Moreover, the benefit of the computational cost is in the rich detail 
that the model generates. Thus, the cost is not without benefit. For example, a game theory 
model can be computationally cheap but a Nash equilibrium reveals nothing about how the 
model achieved that equilibrium; it only says that it will. In contrast, ABM not only identi-
fies an existing final equilibrium state, but also provides all data related to the system’s 
path to get to that equilibrium as well as the properties and behaviors of each agent (Rand 
and Rust 2011).
If the goal is to decrease computational cost, then the researcher can make decisions to 
do so. The researcher can reduce the resolution of the agents, having one agent represent 
the actions of a thousand agents, or they can choose to not record every action taken by 
each agent. A trade-off between computational time and the level of detail being recorded 
is inevitable, and the researcher should make this decision appropriately (Wilensky and 
Rand 2015).
5  Implementation
5.1  Setting up the model
Before actually setting up the model, it is necessary to determine whether ABM is 
appropriate for the specific project or decision under investigation. For this purpose, 
Rand and Rust (2011) provide four indicative indicators (i.e., medium numbers, local 
and potentially complex interactions, heterogeneity, and rich environments), one neces-
sary indicator (i.e., temporal aspects), and one sufficient indicator (i.e., adaptive agents). 

436
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
They also examine the match between these indicators and the market diffusion of an 
innovation, thereby concluding that this application case is well-suited for an ABM 
approach.
After opting to develop an agent-based model, the following questions need to be 
answered when designing the model (these questions are drawn and merged from lists 
by Macal and North (2010) and Rand and Rust (2011)): What specific problem should 
be solved by the model? This question relates to the scope of the model, that is, to the 
aspects that must be examined with the market model. What should be the agents in the 
model, and what properties does each agent have? This relates to the stakeholders and 
which of their attributes must be considered in the model. What is the agents’ environ-
ment and how do they interact with the environment? What agent behaviors are of inter-
est? This includes a particular consideration of adoption decisions. How do the agents 
interact with each other? Where might the data come from, particularly data on agent 
behaviors, for such a model? This question relates to inputs and outputs of the ABM 
approach. What is the order of events in the model? How can the model be validated?
“It can scarcely be denied that the supreme goal of all theory is to make the irre-
ducible basic elements as simple and as few as possible without having to surrender 
the adequate representation of a single datum of existence” (Einstein 1934, p. 165), or 
as it is often summarized, “Make everything as simple as possible, but not simpler.” 
This quote certainly applies to setting up agent-based models. Therefore, it is advisable 
to begin with straightforward decision rules for the agents. Once a basic understand-
ing of the system is obtained, more complex agent behaviors can be integrated (Bona-
beau 2002; Garcia 2005; North and Macal 2007). Lower levels of complexity in models 
might also help in convincing decision-makers to accept ABM because higher complex-
ity in models reduces transparency and makes it more difficult to explain the model’s 
outputs (Macal 2016).
5.2  Software
The ABM community has developed several software toolkits that enable individuals to 
set up agent-based applications. The most popular ones are open source-based products 
such as NetLogo (2020), Repast (2020), and MASON (2020), as well as commercial prod-
ucts like AnyLogic (2020). NetLogo is an open-source tool that has a graphical integrated 
development environment (IDE) and uses a language similar to natural language, which 
makes it easy for new users to work with NetLogo. It has also been used to develop very 
large-scale applications. Further, the Recursive Porous Agent Simulation Toolkit (Repast) 
is a software framework originally built in Java but is now available in a number of other 
languages. It has often been cited for its ability to work on high performance computing 
architectures. The Multi-Agent Simulator of Networks (MASON) is a rather fast toolkit 
written in Java. AnyLogic is a comprehensive proprietary simulation package that enables 
not only ABM but also dynamic modeling systems and other types of simulations. In addi-
tion to these already popular packages, Mesa (2020) is a Python-based agent-based soft-
ware toolkit that has recently become increasingly popular, partially due to the popularity 
of the Python language. Lately, several researchers also use the Julia framework for ABM 
(e.g., Basurto et al. 2020; for a corresponding software package, see Vahdati 2019). The 
previously mentioned network CoMSES (2020) includes a computational model library, 
access to an active community, and various educational resources.

437
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
6  Sample applications
In the following section, two illustrative applications of applying ABM to new product 
market diffusion are presented with references to some of the issues that have been covered 
in Sect. 3 and 4. With regards to the criticisms of ABM, we will specifically describe how 
parameterization, verification, and validation were addressed within these two applications. 
However, we do not go into detail about arbitrariness, causality, and computational cost 
since those are more general criticisms, and our discussion of them in the context of these 
applications would largely be repetitive. The first application focuses on investigating theo-
retical considerations related to market behavior when the initial market diffusion has to 
be supplemented with a post-launch promotional campaign. In the second application, the 
agent-based model deals with repeat purchase decisions and it accounts for several compet-
ing products; this case also shows how decision-makers might take advantage from such a 
simulation approach.
6.1  Targeting and timing promotional activities for new products
The agent-based model proposed by Delre et al. (2007b) aims to study the effects of target-
ing and timing of promotional activities on furthering the takeoff and subsequent diffusion 
of new products. With regard to targeting, they investigate whether it is more favorable 
to target numerous small groups of consumers in distant places (“throwing gravel”) or to 
target a proportion of consumers from rather large groups (“throwing rocks”). With regard 
to timing, they investigate when is the best time to initiate a mass media promotional cam-
paign and, in doing so, take advantage of the difference between white goods (i.e., longer-
term consumer durables; e.g., refrigerators) and brown goods (i.e., shorter-term consumer 
durables; e.g., consumer electronics).
The only stakeholders considered in this model are consumers. The respective consumer 
agents have individual expectations concerning the quality of the new product and they are 
heterogeneous in their sensibility to their neighbors’ behavior—that is, a minimum share of 
adopters among the direct neighbors in their social network is required before social influ-
ence is exerted in their direction. Both consumer characteristics are represented by just a 
single parameter for each agent.
The decision-making behavior of consumer agents is modeled in a straightforward man-
ner. First, a consumer agent must be aware of the existence of the product, which is the 
case once at least one of its direct neighbors has already adopted the product. Second, the 
utility value of the consumer agent needs to exceed an individualized minimum level of 
utility. An agent’s utility is calculated as the weighted sum of product value for this agent 
and social influence exerted on it. The product value is set to 1 if the agent’s expectation 
of product quality is lower than the actual product quality, and it is 0 otherwise. During 
initialization of a run, the parameters for the agents’ expectations are drawn from a uniform 
distribution ranging from 0 to 1; the actual quality value of the new product is set to 0.5. 
The social influence is 1 if the share of direct neighbors who have already adopted the new 
product is higher than the agent’s threshold value in this respect, and it is 0 otherwise; this 
parameter is drawn from a normal distribution that can be modified.2
2  For additional details, see Delre et al. (2007b, p. 830).

438
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
Word of mouth in this model is merely a means to make other consumer agents aware of 
the new product: once a consumer agent adopts the product, this event automatically makes 
all the agent’s direct neighbors aware of the new product. Advertising is done in the form of 
external promotion, that is, a mass media campaign. When a consumer agent is affected by 
such a campaign, it becomes aware of the new product.
The effect of social influence depends on the consumer agent’s individual sensibility 
(as described above). The underlying social network is a small-world network to which 
random links are added.
In their paper, Delre et al. (2007b) test alternative launching strategies, which differ in 
the targeting of the post-launch mass media promotion campaign and its timing. This is 
modeled by varying the advertising received by the agents. It must be noted that during the 
initial market introduction, a number of consumer agents are made aware of the new prod-
uct in order to begin its diffusion in the market. Once this initial diffusion process levels 
off, the post-launch campaign is necessary to prolong market penetration.
Parameterization is partially based on insights from prior studies (e.g., the social influ-
ence is stronger for brown than for white goods) but mostly Delre et al. (2007b) simply 
chose reasonable parameters. Verification and validation of this agent-based model is only 
briefly mentioned. The authors run sensitivity analyses; an empirical validation is not 
performed.
The findings show that strategic planning of seeding is a key determinant for innovation 
diffusion. They suggest, for example, that management must avoid both huge premature 
campaigns and weak late campaigns. Moreover, the results constitute a theoretical contri-
bution to the distinction among product categories—that is, they offer suggestions on how 
to position promotional campaigns in different markets.
6.2  Innovation diffusion of repeat purchase consumer products
In their work, Stummer et al. (2015) demonstrate how ABM can be used to evaluate prod-
uct launch strategies for a repeat purchase consumer product in a competitive setting. The 
product under investigation is a novel high-performance second-generation biofuel (pro-
duced from biomass through the Fischer–Tropsch process), which, at that time, was under 
development at Vienna University of Technology and that upon market introduction had 
to compete against both regular and premium fuel (both produced from crude oil). As the 
authors learned later, the biofuel being investigated ultimately did not make it to the market 
but the model is nonetheless useful for understanding how the product might have diffused 
in the market.
The main group of stakeholders considered in the agent-based market model are con-
sumers who are heterogeneous in various respects: they have individual preferences for 
a fuel’s attributes (i.e., quality, price, environment friendliness, brand, consumption, and 
raw material); show individual mobility behavior and, thus, fuel consumption patterns; and 
apply individual strategies for choosing a gas station, which partially depends on the geo-
graphical location of both the user’s home and the gas station. Gas stations form a second-
ary group of stakeholders. They are more or less attractive for consumers and carry all 
or just a subset of fuel types. In principle, they could proactively decide on their product 
range, prices, and additional advertising campaigns. However, in the numerical analysis in 
this paper, the parameters for each gas station are exogenous and fixed over the simulation 
horizon.

439
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
The decision-making process of consumer agents follows Rogers’ (2003) stage-based 
model of how innovations are adopted—that is, consumers must become aware of the new 
fuel, form an attitude (e.g., through word of mouth or being exposed to advertising) about 
its attributes, make a purchasing decision, gain first-hand experience when driving the 
refueled car, and exchange information about the fuel, thereby seeking reinforcement of 
their prior decision. The consumers’ purchasing decision (i.e., which type of fuel to choose 
for refilling the gas tank at a given point in time during a simulation run) is based on the 
consumers’ individual utility function, in which individual preferences as well as their atti-
tudes toward the fuels’ attributes are taken into account.
Word-of-mouth communication between consumer agents plays a prominent role in this 
agent-based model. Consumers who are directly interconnected in the social network meet 
periodically and mutually exchange some of their opinions on (selected) fuels and fuel 
attributes, thereby updating their respective information bases and affecting each other’s 
attitudes. The selection of the topics discussed by the agents (e.g., the quality of the novel 
biofuel) follows three key assumptions, namely, (1) consumers tend to talk when they have 
obtained new information, (2) consumers will pass on information regarding a product 
attribute if it is unexpected and important (to them), and (3) bad news travels fast. It must 
be noted that the extent of information received thus far by a consumer agent is recorded in 
the agent’s local database. Accordingly, it becomes increasingly difficult to change a con-
sumer agent’s mind as they require more and more information and have already formed a 
sound attitude. Advertising is modeled in a similar manner as word-of-mouth communica-
tion but the information exchange takes place unidirectionally with an artificial advertis-
ing agent that approaches a subset of consumer agents selected with respect to the type of 
advertising event (e.g., mass media advertising, focused advertising with respect to some 
target groups, or on-site advertising at selected gas stations). The impact of information 
received from an advertising agent is considerably smaller than the impact of information 
received from a peer or through first-hand experience.
Social influence is not a decisive factor in this diffusion model because the type of fuel 
used is not observable by other consumers, and there is no easy way for consumers to 
determine the market share of a particular fuel type. Thus, there is no group pressure to 
behave differently just because of the observable behavior of others.
Consumers are connected through a scale-free social network that also has a spatial 
component. Parameters for this network are set in a manner that makes it highly clustered, 
and communication about fuels is highly localized, which mirrors results from a sociologi-
cal study conducted with respect to communication patterns regarding fuels.
The simulation tool, implemented in MASON, was used as a testbed for several pricing 
strategies when introducing the novel biofuel in the market. These strategies include three 
price levels as well as penetration pricing and price skimming. Moreover, the effects of a 
delisting policy is tested in further simulation experiments.
Parameterization was a prime concern for Stummer et al. (2015). They first conducted 
several expert interviews to learn about relevant decision attributes. Then, they convened 
a focus group discussion to more closely capture the consumer perspective (e.g., impor-
tance of fuel characteristics, communication behavior, and credibility of producers). Next, 
a pre-study and conjoint experiment with a representative sample of 1,000 consumers were 
conducted to elicit consumer preferences for a fuel’s attributes and learn about the con-
sumers’ driving habits; tank refilling strategies, such as when and where they refuel; and 
product recommendation behavior. Data from this survey was directly used to parameter-
ize the 10,000 consumer agents for market simulation—that is, preferences, driving hab-
its, refilling strategy, and recommendation behavior from each respondent were used for 

440
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
parameterization of 10 agents each. Further, the abovementioned sociological study with 
hundreds of interviews was conducted in order to learn how often, when, with whom, and 
on which topics consumers discuss fuels. Finally, the authors accounted for geographical 
population distribution taken from census data and the positions and types of gas stations 
taken from OpenStreetMap.
Verification and validation of the simulation results followed the procedure suggested 
by Knepell and Arangno (1993). All the required checks succeeded: (1) conceptual valid-
ity is shown as the model is grounded in well-established theory, in particular, the frame-
work by Rogers (2003); (2) internal validity is shown by means of unit and integration 
tests as well as by conducting simulation experiments with extreme parameters; (3) micro-
level external validity is shown by analyzing and verifying individual agent’s decisions; 
(4) macro-level external validity is shown by running the simulation just for the premium 
fuels (i.e., without the biofuels present on the simulated market) and comparing results to 
actual market shares of premium fuels; and (5) cross-model validity is shown by reproduc-
ing similar results with the Bass model after appropriately calibrating its input parameters.
Simulation results also smoothly passed a face validation when being presented to prac-
titioners from the fuel market. While it was not surprising for them that lower prices yield 
quicker market penetration and larger market shares, they emphasized that the value added 
from such an ABM approach lies in the opportunity to compare the outcomes from several 
alternative scenarios and to learn which combination of measures (including advertising 
campaigns) yields which market share at which point in time.
7  Outlook to further research
From the two examples discussed above and from the overview of ABM provided, it is evi-
dent that the main benefits of ABM lie in its ability to capture emergent phenomena and its 
flexibility to represent various market settings. Thus, in numerous instances, ABM is “the 
only game in town to [appropriately] deal with such situations” (Bonabeau 2002, p. 7287). 
This paper has highlighted the strengths and criticisms of applying ABM in innovation 
management; moreover, it provides starting points for researchers, as well as practitioners, 
who are willing to try out the method for their own purposes.
Despite the major progress that the ABM community has made since Holland and 
Miller (1991), Epstein and Axtell (1996), and Bonabeau (2002) published their seminal 
works and the numerous ABM applications in innovation management that are based on 
sound empirical data and provide useful results (e.g., Kangur et al. 2017; Stummer et al. 
2015; Sun et al. 2019; Wolf et al. 2015), there remains substantial research to be done in 
the application of ABM to new product diffusion. For example, as most ABM approaches 
in the field of innovation management involve agents that represent humans, a particular 
challenge lies in quantifying, calibrating, and justifying soft factors driving the behavior 
of their real-world counterparts, such as occasionally irrational behavior and subjective 
choices (Bonabeau 2002). Therefore, it would be useful to develop standardized meth-
ods for relating human behavior to the rules embedded in agents in an agent-based model. 
Smith and Rand (2018) provide an example of how rules of agent behavior can be derived 
from laboratory experiments and argue for a deepening of the relationship between behav-
ioral scientists and agent-based modelers. Not only would this have the benefit of providing 
researchers interested in ABM with valid rules of human behavior, it would also provide 
behavioral scientists with a testbed where they could see how their research would unfold 

441
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
on a large scale via the ABM approach. Further research is necessary to create a standard-
ized methodology out of this process and to specifically apply it to innovation diffusion 
research.
Several drivers of consumer adoption are often conflated in the literature, which 
include: (1) the effect of advertising, (2) the effect of word of mouth, (3) indirect social 
influence, and (4) the individual’s own innovativeness and risk-taking behavior. Therefore, 
a particularly promising area for the use of ABM in research on new product adoption 
lies in disentangling these different effects. After all, if we can pull apart, for example, 
consumer innovativeness from word of mouth, then we can provide marketing managers 
with new insights into how to strategically invest in cultivating influencer relationships. 
Although there has been some empirical work that attempts to untangle these effects (e.g., 
Aral et al. 2009), theoretically, all these different forces can be modeled separately within 
ABM. However, with a few exceptions (e.g., Watts and Dodds 2007), not much research 
has clearly divided them and understood the different roles each of these effects plays.
This issue will become even more important, since it is safe to predict that interactions 
on diverse social media platforms (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, etc.) will continue 
to grow in frequency and variety and, thus, the impact of referrals and normative social 
influence will increase. Although there has been substantial research on the spread of 
information on social media (e.g., Lerman and Ghosh 2010; Yoo et al. 2016) and on new 
product adoption decisions (as illustrated throughout this paper), there is little work relat-
ing the spread of information on social media to actual purchase decisions (e.g., regard-
ing the question of how a firm’s social media presence influences the diffusion of its new 
products). Research relating these two areas of modeling would be important in order to 
better understand the relationship between social media and product adoption. An ABM 
approach might be capable of doing this.
The social media platforms mentioned above (and new and unrealized platforms), as 
well as the large number of apps that incorporate social network features, might be also 
used to gain more insight regarding the structure of individuals’ social networks. This new 
source of big data has provided researchers with the ability to build models that contain 
more realistic models of users’ social networks (Chica and Rand 2017; Rand et al. 2015). 
ABM could benefit from better incorporation of data on social ties for transition from tra-
ditional and theoretical to empirical and more realistic social network structures (Negahban 
and Yilmaz 2014), thereby creating an opportunity for further research.
Further, the emergence of smart products increases uncertainty regarding future mar-
kets and simultaneously provides new management opportunities (e.g., Dawid et al. 2017; 
Decker and Stummer 2017; Raff et al. 2020). Given the highly unknown nature of these 
markets, it is evident that a method like ABM, which can make forecasts about new and 
different markets, would be useful as a tool for learning about potential market behavior 
well before deciding to enter markets in which factors such as trust or perceived disempow-
erment play a more crucial role for adoption processes than in traditional markets (Michler 
et al. 2020; Schweitzer and van den Hende 2016; Souka et al. 2020).
The same holds true for various business model innovations. Two-sided digital plat-
forms provide a prominent example (for overviews, see Parker et al. 2016; Stummer et al. 
2018); initial ABM applications have already been introduced by Haurand and Stummer 
(2018b, 2019) and Heinrich and Gräbner (2019), but more work needs to be done in this 
regard. However, in addressing these challenges and forecasting the behavior of future mar-
kets, it may be necessary to combine ABM approaches with other approaches, such as sce-
nario analysis, thereby enabling the simulation of several possible alternative futures in 
order to test various innovation or technology strategies (e.g., Günther et al. 2017). Similar 

442
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
to the combination of lab experiments and ABM described above, developing and applying 
such multi-method approaches—particularly in the area of decision-making under uncer-
tainty—is another promising avenue for further research.
Finally, this paper is mainly concerned with applying ABM to analyzing alternative 
strategies for market introduction of new products and furthering their diffusion into their 
respective markets. What has been neglected thus far in most ABM works is supply-related 
restrictions—that is, the majority of ABM studies essentially assume infinite supply or pro-
duction capacity and zero manufacturing lead times (Negahban and Yilmaz 2014). Conse-
quently, it would be worthwhile to pursue research activities to extend the focus of ABM 
from market introduction to aspects related to both supply and production as was done, for 
example, by Backs et al. (2021). The same applies for other aspects of intrafirm organiza-
tional design. For example, for increasing the “smartness” of products, software develop-
ers necessarily play a more prominent role in developing such products; however, employ-
ing and integrating these experts may change the hitherto existing “rules of the game” in 
numerous extant teams that are predominantly constituted of traditional engineers (Porter 
and Heppelmann 2015). ABM could aid the study of organizational measures that must be 
applied to overcome resistance from potential team members. Additional issues that can 
be addressed by ABM in an innovation management setting are, for example, co-location 
of departments, product development–marketing integration, information dissemination 
between different departments, and structures of innovation networks (Garcia 2005). For 
overviews on using ABM for organization structures, see Dawid et  al. (2001), Fioretti 
(2012), and Gómez-Cruz et al. (2017); corresponding examples of applications in the con-
text of innovation management are described by Backs et al. (2019) and Günther (2007).
It is evident from this overview that there are several areas of new product market dif-
fusion, in particular, and innovation management, within a broader scope, that are ripe for 
analysis using ABM tools. Not only do already developed ABM tools provide substan-
tial insight into complex markets but, as discussed above when laying out future research 
opportunities, the promise of ABM to help understand new and uncertain areas of market 
progress is substantial. Moreover, ABM tools are likely to benefit from increasing avail-
ability of computing power, thereby strengthening the role of these tools in supporting 
innovation management.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. 
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat​iveco​mmons​.org/licen​ses/by/4.0/.
References
Abernethy, A. M., & Franke, G. R. (1996). The information content of advertising: A meta-analysis. Jour-
nal of Advertising, 25(2), 1–17.
AnyLogic. (2020). AnyLogic simulation software. http://www.anylo​gic.com/. Accessed 30 October 2020.

443
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
Aral, S., Muchnik, L., & Sundararajan, A. (2009). Distinguishing influence-based contagion from homoph-
ily-driven diffusion in dynamic networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(51), 
21544–21549.
Axelrod, R., & Tesfatsion, L. (2020). On-line guide for newcomers to agent-based modeling in the social 
sciences. http://www2.econ.iasta​te.edu/tesfa​tsi/abmre​ad.htm. Accessed 31 October 2020.
Backs, S., Günther, M., & Stummer, C. (2019). Stimulating academic patenting in a university ecosystem: 
An agent-based simulation approach. Journal of Technology Transfer, 44(2), 434–461.
Backs, S., Jahnke, H., Lüpke, L., Stücken, M., & Stummer, C. (2021). Traditional versus fast fashion supply 
chains in the apparel industry: An agent-based simulation approach. Annals of Operations Research 
(forthcoming). https​://doi.org/10.1007/s1047​9-020-03703​-8.
Balci, O. (1994). Validation, verification, and testing techniques throughout the life cycle of a simulation 
study. Annals of Operations Research, 53(1), 121–173.
Basurto, A., Dawid, H., Harting, P., Hepp, J., & Kohlweyer, D. (2020). Economic and epidemic implica-
tions of virus containment policies: Insights from agent-based simulations. In Universität Biele-
feld Working Paper in Economics and Management, 05-2020, Bielefeld: Bielefeld University.
Barabási, A.-L., & Albert, R. (1999). Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286(5439), 
509–512.
Bass, F. M. (1969). A new product growth model for consumer durables. Management Science, 15(5), 
215–227.
Bearden, W. O., & Rose, R. L. (1990). Attention to social comparison information: An individual differ-
ence factor affecting consumer conformity. Journal of Consumer Research, 16(4), 461–471.
Berger, J. (2014). Word of mouth and interpersonal communication: A review and directions for future 
research. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 24(4), 586–607.
Bonabeau, E. (2002). Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for simulating human systems. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 99(suppl. 3), 
7280–7287.
Borshchev, A., & Filippov, A. (2004). From system dynamics and discrete event to practical agent based 
modeling: Reasons, techniques, tools. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference of the 
system dynamics society. https​://www.anylo​gic.de/resou​rces/artic​les/from-syste​m-dynam​ics-and-
discr​ete-event​-to-pract​ical-agent​-based​-model​ing-reaso​ns-techn​iques​-tools​/. Accessed 30 October 
2020.
Brown, J. J., & Reingen, P. H. (1987). Social ties and word-of-mouth referral behavior. Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 14(3), 350–362.
Chica, M., & Rand, W. (2017). Building agent-based decision support systems for word-of-mouth pro-
grams: A freemium application. Journal of Marketing Research, 54(5), 752–767.
Cialdini, R. B., & Goldstein, N. J. (2004). Social influence: Compliance and conformity. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 55(1), 591–621.
Clements, M. T. (2004). Direct and indirect network effects: Are they equivalent? International Journal 
of Industrial Organization, 22(5), 633–645.
CoMSES (2020) A growing collection of resources for computational model-based science. http://www.
comse​s.net. Accessed 30 October 2020.
Dawid, H. (2006). Agent-based models of innovation and technological change. In L. Tesfatsion & K. 
L. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of computational economics (Vol.  2, pp.  1235–1272). Amsterdam: 
North-Holland.
Dawid, H., Decker, R., Hermann, T., Jahnke, H., Klat, W., König, R., & Stummer, C. (2017). Manage-
ment science in the era of smart consumer products: Challenges and research perspectives. Central 
European Journal of Operations Research, 25(1), 203–230.
Dawid, H., Reimann, M., & Bullnheimer, B. (2001). To innovate or not to innovate? IEEE Transactions 
on Evolutionary Computation, 5(5), 471–481.
Decker, R., & Stummer, C. (2017). Marketing management for consumer products in the era of the inter-
net of things. Advances in Internet of Things, 7(3), 47–70.
Dellarocas, C. (2003). The digitization of word of mouth: Promise and challenges of online feedback 
mechanisms. Management Science, 49(10), 1407–1424.
Delre, S. A., Jager, W., & Janssen, M. A. (2007a). Diffusion dynamics in small-world networks with 
heterogeneous consumers. Computational & Mathematical Organization Theory, 13(2), 185–202.
Delre, S. A., Jager, W., Bijmolt, T. H. A., & Janssen, M. A. (2007b). Targeting and timing promotional 
activities: An agent-based model for the takeoff of new products. Journal of Business Research, 
60(8), 826–835.

444
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
Delre, S. A., Jager, W., Bijmolt, T. H. A., & Janssen, M. A. (2010). Will it spread or not? The effects 
of social influences and network topology on innovation diffusion. Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 27(2), 267–282.
Einstein, A. (1934). On the method of theoretical physics. Philosophy of Science, 1(2), 163–169.
Epstein, J. M., & Axtell, R. (1996). Growing artificial societies: Social science from the bottom up. 
Washington: Brookings Institution Press.
Erdős, P., & Rényi, A. (1959). On random graphs I. Publicationes Mathematicae (Debrecen), 6, 290–297.
Fioretti, G. (2012). Agent-based simulation models in organization science. Organizational Research 
Methods, 16(2), 227–242.
Foote, R. (2007). Mathematics and complex systems. Science, 318(5849), 410–412.
Garcia, R. (2005). Use of agent-based modeling in innovation/new product development research. Jour-
nal of Product Innovation Management, 22(5), 380–398.
Goldenberg, J., Libai, B., Moldovan, S., & Muller, E. (2007). The NPV of bad news. International Jour-
nal of Research in Marketing, 24(3), 186–200.
Goldenberg, J., Libai, B., & Muller, E. (2010). The chilling effects of network externalities. International 
Journal of Research in Marketing, 27(1), 4–15.
Golder, P. N., & Tellis, G. J. (2004). Growing, growing, gone: Cascades, diffusion, and turning points in the 
product life cycle. Marketing Science, 23(2), 207–218.
Gómez-Cruz, N. A., Loaiza-Saa, I., & Ortega-Hurtado, F.-F. (2017). Agent-based simulation in manage-
ment and organizational studies: A survey. European Journal of Management and Business Econom-
ics, 26(3), 313–328.
Granovetter, M., & Soong, R. (1986). Threshold models of interpersonal effects in consumer demand. Jour-
nal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 7(1), 83–99.
Grimm, V., & Railsback, S. F. (2005). Individual-based modeling and ecology. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Günther, M. (2007). Agent-based simulation of intra-organizational knowledge diffusion and the impact on 
the emergence of innovations [in German]. PhD thesis, School of Business, Economis, and Statistics, 
University of Vienna.
Günther, M., Lüpke, L., & Stummer, C. (2017). Cross-over between scenario analysis and agent-based mar-
ket simulation for technology planning. In Proceedings of PICMET ‘17: Technology Management for 
Interconnected World (pp. 1–9). Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering 
and Technology (PICMET).
Günther, M., Stummer, C., Wakolbinger, L. M., & Wildpaner, M. (2011). An agent-based simulation 
approach for the new product diffusion of a novel biomass fuel. Journal of the Operational Research 
Society, 62(1), 12–20.
Haurand, M. D., & Stummer, C. (2018a). Stakes or garlic? Studying the emergence of dominant designs 
through an agent-based model of a vampire economy. Central European Journal of Operations 
Research, 26(2), 373–394.
Haurand, M. D., & Stummer, C. (2018b). The early-stage development of two-sided digital platforms: A 
simulation approach. In Proceedings of the European conference on information systems (ECIS). AIS 
Electronic Library, Research Paper 49.
Haurand, M. D., & Stummer, C. (2019). Evaluating market entry strategies for two-sided digital platforms 
under competition: A simulation approach. In Proceedings of the fortieth international conference on 
information systems (ICIS). AIS Electronic Library, Paper 2188.
Helbing, D., Farkas, I., & Vicsek, T. (2000). Simulating dynamical features of escape panic. Nature, 
407(6803), 487–490.
Heinrich, T., & Gräbner, C. (2019). Beyond equilibrium: Revisiting two-sided markets from an agent-based 
modelling perspective. International Journal of Computational Economics and Econometrics, 19(3), 
153–180.
Holland, J. H. (1998). Emergence: From chaos to order. Redwood City: Addison-Wesley.
Holland, J. H. (2012). Signals and boundaries: Building blocks for complex adaptive systems. Cambridge: 
MIT Press.
Holland, J. H. (2014). Complexity: A very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holland, J. H., & Miller, J. H. (1991). Artificial adaptive agents in economic theory. American Economic 
Review, 81(2), 365–370.
Horsky, D., & Simon, L. S. (1983). Advertising and the diffusion of new products. Marketing Science, 2(1), 
1–17.
Hu, H., Wang, L., Jiang, L., & Yang, W. (2019). Strong ties versus weak ties in word-of-mouth marketing. 
Business Research Quarterly, 22(4), 245–256.

445
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
Kangur, A., Jager, W., Verbrugge, R., & Bockarjova, M. (2017). An agent-based model for diffusion of elec-
tric vehicles. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 52, 166–182.
Kiesling, E., Günther, M., Stummer, C., & Wakolbinger, L. M. (2012). Agent-based simulation of innova-
tion diffusion: A review. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 20(2), 183–230.
Klein, D., Marx, J., & Fischbach, K. (2018). Agent-based modeling in social science, history, and philoso-
phy: An introduction. Historical Social Research, 43(1), 7–27.
Knepell, P. L., & Arangno, D. C. (1993). Simulation validation: A confidence assessment methodology. Los 
Alamitos: IEEE Computer Society Press.
Ladyman, J., Lambert, J., & Wiesner, K. (2013). What is a complex system? European Journal for Philoso-
phy of Science, 3(1), 33–67.
Lerman, K., & Ghosh, R. (2010). Information contagion: An empirical study of the spread of news on digg 
and twitter social networks. In: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Weblogs and 
Social Media (pp. 1–9). https​://arxiv​.org/pdf/1003.2664.pdf. Accessed 30 October 2020.
Leskovec, J., Adamic, L. A., & Huberman, B. A. (2007). The dynamics of viral marketing. ACM Transac-
tions on the Web, 1(1), 228–237.
Lucas, R. E. (1976). Econometric policy evaluation: A critique. In Carnegie-Rochester Conference 
Series on Public Policy (Vol. 1, pp. 19–46).
Macal, M. C. (2016). Everything you need to know about agent-based modelling and simulation. Jour-
nal of Simulation, 10(2), 144–156.
Macal, M. C., & North, M. J. (2010). Tutorial on agent-based modelling and simulation. Journal of 
Simulation, 4(3), 151–162.
Mahajan, V., Muller, E., & Bass, F. M. (1990). New product diffusion models in marketing: A review 
and directions for research. Journal of Marketing, 54(1), 1–26.
MASON. (2020). MASON multiagent simulation library core in Java. http://cs.gmu.edu/~eclab​/proje​cts/
mason​/. Accessed 30 October 2020.
Mesa. (2020). Mesa: Agent-based modeling in Python 3+. https​://mesa.readt​hedoc​s.io/en/maste​r/. 
Accessed 30 October 2020.
Michler, O., Decker, R., & Stummer, C. (2020). To trust or not to trust smart consumer products: A lit-
erature review of trust-building factors. Management Review Quarterly, 70(3), 391–420.
Midgley, D., & Dowling, G. R. (1978). Innovativeness: The concept and its measurement. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 4(4), 229–242.
Midgley, D., Marks, R., & Kunchamwar, D. (2007). Building and assurance of agent-based models: An 
example and challenge to the field. Journal of Business Research, 60(8), 884–893.
Miller, J. H., & Page, S. E. (2009). Complex adaptive systems: An introduction to computational models 
of social life. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Negahban, A., & Yilmaz, L. (2014). Agent-based simulation applications in marketing research: An 
integrated review. Journal of Simulation, 8(2), 129–142.
NetLogo (2020). NetLogo multi-agent programmable modeling environment. http://ccl.north​weste​
rn.edu/netlo​go/. Accessed on 30 October 2020.
North, M. J., & Macal, C. M. (2007). Managing business complexity. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
North, M. J., Macal, C. M., Aubin, J. S., Thimmapuram, P., Bragen, M., Hahn, J., Karr, J., Brigham, N., 
Lacy, M. E., & Hampton, D. (2010). Multiscale agent-based consumer market modeling. Com-
plexity, 15(5), 37–47.
Parker, G. G., Van Alstyne, M. W., & Choudrary, S. P. (2016). Platform revolution: How networked markets 
are transforming the economy and how to make them work for you. New York: Norton & Company.
Porter, M. E., & Heppelmann, J. E. (2015). How smart, connected products are transforming companies. 
Harvard Business Review, 93(10), 97–114.
Rahmandad, H., & Sterman, J. (2008). Heterogeneity and network structure in the dynamics of diffusion: 
Comparing agent-based and differential equation models. Management Science, 54(5), 998–1014.
Railsback, S. F., & Grimm, V. (2019). Agent-based and individual-based modeling: A practical intro-
duction (2nd ed.). Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Raff, S., Wentzel, D., & Obwegeser, N. (2020). Smart products: Conceptual review, synthesis, and 
research directions. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 37(5), 379–404.
Rand, W. (2019). Theory-interpretable, data‐driven agent‐based modeling. In P. K. Davis, A. O’Mahony & 
J. Pfautz (Eds.), Social‐behavioral modeling for complex systems (pp. 337–357). Hoboken: Wiley.
Rand, W., & Rust, R. T. (2011). Agent-based modeling in marketing: Guidelines for rigor. International 
Journal of Research in Marketing, 28(3), 181–193.
Rand, W., Rust, R. T., & Kim, M. (2018). Complex systems: Marketing’s new frontier. AMS Review, 
8(3), 111–127.

446
 
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447
1 3
Rand, W., Herrmann, J., Schein, B., & Vodopivec, N. (2015). An agent-based model of urgent diffusion 
in social media. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 18(2), 1.
Repast. (2020). Repast Symphony cross platform Java-based modeling system. https​://repas​t.githu​b.io/
repas​t_simph​ony.html. Accessed 30 October 2020.
Richins, M. L. (1983). Negative word-of-mouth by dissatisfied consumers: A pilot study. Journal of 
Marketing, 47(1), 68–78.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York: Free Press.
Roper, A. L., Cunningham, S. W., Porter, A. L., Mason, T. W., Rossini, F. A., & Banks, J. (2011). Fore-
casting and management of technology. New York: Wiley.
Ryan, B., & Gross, N. C. (1943). The diffusion of hybrid seed corn in two Iowa communities. Rural 
Sociology, 8(1), 15.
Santa Fe Institute (2020). Complexity explorer: Online courses and educational materials about com-
plexity science. https​://www.compl​exity​explo​rer.org/. Accessed 30 October 2020.
Schramm, M. E., Trainor, K. J., Shanker, M., & Hu, M. Y. (2010). An agent-based diffusion model with 
consumer and brand agents. Decision Support Systems, 50(1), 234–242.
Schweitzer, F., & van den Hende, E. A. (2016). To be or not to be in thrall to the march of smart prod-
ucts. Psychology & Marketing, 33(10), 830–842.
SIMSOC (2020). News and discussion about computer simulation in the social sciences. https​://www.jiscm​
ail.ac.uk/cgi-bin/webad​min?A0=simso​c. Accessed 30 October 2020.
Smith, E. B., & Rand, W. (2018). Simulating macro-level effects from micro-level observations. Manage-
ment Science, 64(11), 5405–5421.
Sonderegger-Wakolbinger, L. M., & Stummer, C. (2015). An agent-based simulation of customer multi-
channel choice behavior. Central European Journal of Operations Research, 23(2), 459–477.
Souka, M., Böger, D., Decker, R., Stummer, C., & Wiemann, A. (2020). Is more automation always bet-
ter? An empirical study of customers’ willingness to use autonomous vehicle functions. International 
Journal of Automotive Technology and Management, 20(1), 1–24.
Stummer, C., & Kiesling, E. (2021). An agent-based market simulation for enriching innovation manage-
ment education. Central European Journal of Operations Research (forthcoming). https​://doi.
org/10.1007/s1010​0-020-00716​-3.
Stummer, C., Kiesling, E., Günther, M., & Vetschera, R. (2015). Innovation diffusion of repeat purchase 
products in a competitive market: An agent-based simulation approach. European Journal of Opera-
tional Research, 245(1), 157–167.
Stummer, C., Kundisch, D., & Decker, R. (2018). Platform launch strategies. Business & Information Sys-
tems Engineering, 60(2), 167–173.
Sun, X., Liu, X., Wang, Y., & Yuan, F. (2019). The effects of public subsidies on emerging industry: An 
agent-based model of the electric vehicle industry. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 140, 
281–295.
Ten Broeke, G., Van Voorn, G., & Ligtenberg, A. (2016). Which sensitivity analysis method should I use for 
my agent-based model? Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 19(1), 5.
Tesfatsion, L. (2020a). Agent-based computational economics. http://www2.econ.iasta​te.edu/tesfa​tsi/ace.
htm. Accessed 30 October 2020.
Tesfatsion, L. (2020b). Empirical validation and verification of agent-based models. http://www2.econ.iasta​
te.edu/tesfa​tsi/EmpVa​lid.htm. Accessed 30 October 2020.
Trusov, M., Rand, W., & Joshi, Y. V. (2013). Improving prelaunch diffusion forecasts: Using synthetic net-
works as simulated priors. Journal of Marketing Research, 50(6), 675–690.
Vahdati, A. R. (2019). Agents.jl: Agent-based modeling framework in Julia. Journal of Open Source Soft-
ware, 4(42), 1611.
Watts, D. J., & Dodds, P. S. (2007). Influentials, networks, and public opinion formation. Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 34(4), 441–458.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 393(6684), 
440–442.
Wilensky, U., & Rand, W. (2015). An introduction to agent-based modeling: Modeling natural, social, and 
engineered complex systems with NetLogo. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wolf, I., Schröder, T., Neumann, J., & de Haan, G. (2015). Changing minds about electric cars: An empiri-
cal grounded agent-based modelling approach. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 94, 
269–285.
Yoo, E., Rand, W., Eftekhar, M., & Rabinovich, E. (2016). Evaluating information diffusion speed and its 
determinants in social media networks during humanitarian crises. Journal of Operations Manage-
ment, 45, 123–133.

447
Annals of Operations Research (2021) 305:425–447 
1 3
Young, H. P. (2009). Innovation diffusion in heterogeneous populations: Contagion, social influence, and 
social learning. American Economic Review, 99(5), 1899–1924.
Zhang, T., Gensler, S., & Garcia, R. (2011). A study of the diffusion of alternative fuel vehicles: An agent-
based modeling approach. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 28(2), 152–168.
Zhong, X., & Ozdemir, S. Z. (2010). Structure, learning, and the speed of innovating: A two-phase model 
of collective innovation using agent based modelling. Industrial and Corporate Change, 19(5), 
1459–1492.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.