TITLE: On a general class of portfolio diversification measures induced by risk measures
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07153-6
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07153-6
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
On a general class of portfolio diversiﬁcation measures
induced by risk measures
Maria-Laura Torrente1
· Pierpaolo Uberti2
Received: 13 September 2024 / Accepted: 3 March 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
This paper introduces a novel and effective methodology for constructing portfolio diver-
siﬁcation measures derived from any reference risk measure. The central contribution lies
in leveraging the extensive theoretical developments in risk measurement to systematically
inform and enhance the design of diversiﬁcation metrics. The link between risk and diver-
siﬁcation is exploited through an optimization framework in which the objective function
is deﬁned as a weighted Euclidean distance dependent on risk. We prove that the result-
ing objective function satisﬁes key axiomatic properties typically required to diversiﬁcation
measures, and that the corresponding optimization problem admits a unique solution that
is inherently related to the intuitive concept of geometric diversiﬁcation, thereby providing
theoretical support for it. The key economic interpretation relies on determining the point in
the allocation space that is equally distant – under a risk-sensitive metric – from the vertices
of the simplex, i.e. the fully concentrated portfolios. An important economic insight of our
approach is its applicability within a general long-short investment framework–a signiﬁcant
advancement, given that most classical diversiﬁcation measures are restricted to long-only
portfolios. Finally, to support the robustness of our ﬁndings, we present a comprehensive
empirical analysis across multiple real-world ﬁnancial datasets, highlighting meaningful
comparisons between our proposed measure and several widely used diversiﬁcation metrics.
Keywords Portfolio Diversiﬁcation Measures · Risk Measures · Coherent Risk Measures ·
Risk-Adjusted Geometric Diversiﬁed Portfolio
Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation G10 · G11 · D81
These authors contributed equally to this work.
B Maria-Laura Torrente
marialaura.torrente@economia.unige.it
Pierpaolo Uberti
pierpaolo.uberti@unimib.it
1
Department of Economics, University of Genova, Via Vivaldi 5, Genova 16126, Italy
2
Department of Statistics and Quantitative Methods, University of Milano-Bicocca, Via Bicocca degli
Arcimboldi 8, Milano 20126, Italy
123

Annals of Operations Research
1 Introduction
The concept of diversiﬁcation was ﬁrst introduced by Markowitz (1952), laying the founda-
tion for what is now known as modern portfolio theory. The main idea is that the optimal
investment should reduce portfolio risk by exploiting low or negative correlations among
asset returns. However, it is well known that in long-only settings, the classical Markowitz
model frequently yields highly concentrated portfolios, allocating the wealth to a small subset
of the available assets with a few large positions. In response to this limitation, a signiﬁ-
cant body of literature over the past two decades has reformulated the portfolio allocation
problem from the perspective of diversiﬁcation. Among others, Choueifaty and Coignard
(2008) and Choueifaty et al. (2013) propose an allocation strategy based on maximizing
the so-called diversiﬁcation ratio, which quantiﬁes the degree of risk spreading. DeMiguel
et al. (2009) examine the equally weighted portfolio as an example of naive diversiﬁcation
and assess its out-of-sample performance relative to more sophisticated approaches. Several
studies–including Clarke et al. (2013), Maillard et al. (2010), Qian (2006), and Roncalli and
Weisang (2016)–advance the equal risk contribution strategy, which aims to balance risk
exposure equally across all assets in the portfolio. Moreover, Meucci (2009) proposes the
use of principal component analysis (PCA) to extract uncorrelated risk factors and promote
diversiﬁcation at the factor level. The aforementioned studies approach diversiﬁcation from
a strictly quantitative perspective, focusing on factors such as the number of assets held in
a portfolio, individual asset exposures, and the contribution of each asset to overall port-
folio risk. However, diversiﬁcation can also be interpreted more broadly, with attention to
its economic and strategic implications. For instance, diversiﬁcation based on environmen-
tal, social, and governance (ESG) criteria has been analyzed in relation to both short- and
long-term performance outcomes (see Bertelli & Torricelli, 2024). Similarly, Hendriks et al.
(2024) examine the role of country-level diversiﬁcation from a behavioral ﬁnance standpoint.
Additional studies explore other dimensions of diversiﬁcation, including its macroeconomic
effects and implications for investor decision-making (see Hunjra et al. (2021), Hunjra et al.
(2020), Mehmood et al. (2019)).
Despite the simplicity of the concept of portfolio diversiﬁcation, there is, to the best
of our knowledge, no universally accepted deﬁnition currently established in the litera-
ture. Recent efforts to review and consolidate the existing body of work reﬂect a growing
interest in systematizing and unifying the theoretical and practical approaches to diversiﬁ-
cation. Over the past decade, three notable academic contributions–an unpublished working
paper Fragiskos (2013), two peer-reviewed articles Flint et al. (2020); Koumou and Dionne
(2022), and a comprehensive volume by Lhabitant (2017)–have attempted to put order into
the existing measures. Fragiskos (2013) focus on asset diversiﬁcation, providing a non-
technical overview of the most commonly employed diversiﬁcation strategies. Flint et al.
(2020) propose a classiﬁcation of diversiﬁcation measures into ﬁve distinct categories:
cardinality-based, weight-based, return-based, risk-based, and higher-moment-based mea-
sures. The monograph by Lhabitant (2017) offers an in-depth and technical exposition of
existing diversiﬁcation measures. Finally, Koumou and Dionne (2022) present a structured
review of the foundational concepts of portfolio diversiﬁcation.
In contrast, the axiomatic theory of risk measures is a well-established area of the literature.
Starting from the seminal contribution by Artzner et al. (1999), which introduced the notion of
coherent risk measures, numerous axiomatic frameworks have been developed to formalize
the desired properties of risk measures. Among others, we recall the deviation risk measures
proposed by Rockafellar et al. (2006), the convex risk measures introduced in Föllmer and
123

Annals of Operations Research
Schied (2002), the spectral risk measures presented in Acerbi (2002), the downside risk
measures examined in Sortino and Van der Meer (1991), and the dynamic risk measures
discussed in Acciaio and Penner (2011). Each of these axiomatic frameworks encompasses an
inﬁnite variety of risk measures, resulting in a highly complex and interdependent landscape
of theoretical models, as documented in Frittelli and Rosazza Gianin (2002). Given that
many risk measures were employed in practice prior to the development of formal axiomatic
foundations, a substantial branch of the literature has been dedicated to classifying widely
used measures within the corresponding theoretical frameworks. For example, Acerbi and
Tasche (2002) demonstrate that Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) satisﬁes the properties of
a coherent risk measure, while Inui and Kijima (2005) examine the conditions under which
Expected Shortfall adheres to coherency axioms.
There exists a fundamental connection between portfolio diversiﬁcation and risk mea-
surement. In particular, the sub-additivity property–commonly required in the axiomatic
deﬁnitions of risk measures–captures the economic principle of diversiﬁcation by ensuring
that the risk of a portfolio does not exceed the aggregate risk of its individual components.
This property reﬂects the intuitive notion that combining assets should not increase overall
risk and may, in fact, reduce it. For comprehensive reviews of diversiﬁcation measures within
portfolio theory, we refer the reader to Flint et al. (2020) and Lhabitant (2017).
In this paper, we contribute to the literature by proposing a general theoretical framework
that deﬁnes a diversiﬁcation measure induced by a given risk measure. This approach lever-
ages the extensive variety of risk measures available in the literature to construct a broad
class of portfolio diversiﬁcation measures. A key strength of the framework lies in its gener-
ality: it operates directly from the axiomatic properties of risk measures, without requiring
explicit functional forms. In particular, deviation-based and coherent risk measures–such as
those introduced by Rockafellar et al. (2006) and Artzner et al. (1999), respectively–give rise
to induced diversiﬁcation measures that differ primarily in their treatment of deterministic
translations, thus preserving the intrinsic features of the original risk measure. By incorpo-
rating risk explicitly, the proposed diversiﬁcation measure goes beyond simple functions of
portfolio weights; it reﬂects how asset allocation interacts with the underlying risk structure.
Within the taxonomy proposed by Lhabitant (2017), the measure we develop can be classiﬁed
as one that depends jointly on both asset weights and the portfolio’s risk characteristics. From
a technical standpoint, we reformulate the conditions deﬁning the Risk-Adjusted Geomet-
ric Diversiﬁed Portfolio (deﬁned in Torrente & Uberti, 2023) as an equivalent optimization
problem. We show that the associated objective function–called Geometric Portfolio Diversi-
ﬁcation Measure (GPDM)–satisﬁes several desirable properties for a portfolio diversiﬁcation
measure. These properties are discussed with attention to their economic relevance. The intu-
ition behind geometric diversiﬁcation is to identify a portfolio allocation that is equidistant, in
a risk-adjusted sense, from the vertices of the unit simplex–each representing a portfolio fully
concentrated in a single asset and thus maximally concentrated. When conventional distances
are used, the solution to this problem is trivially the equally weighted portfolio. However,
when the distance is adjusted to account for risk, the optimization yields nontrivial and eco-
nomicallymeaningfulallocations.Theinterpretationoftheallocationisstraightforwardwhen
the dependence structure among the assets is not considered. Yet an important strength of our
approach is that it also allows for closed-form solutions even when the dependence structure
within the risks of the asset classes is taken into account. Technically, the optimization prob-
lem can be solved in a closed form whether the matrix deﬁning the risk-adjusted distance
is diagonal or not. Taken together, these results provide a novel contribution to the growing
literature on portfolio diversiﬁcation assessed through risk-based metrics. This is a rapidly
developing area of research, with notable contributions including Embrechts et al. (2009) and
123

Annals of Operations Research
Tasche (2006). More recently, the diversiﬁcation quotient, introduced by Han et al. (2023a,b)
within an axiomatic framework, represents a signiﬁcant advancement in this domain. Finally,
unlike most classical diversiﬁcation measures, which are restricted to the long-only setting,
our proposed measures are deﬁned in a general long-short framework, enhancing their appli-
cability in more ﬂexible and realistic investment environments. Considering that the main
contribution of this paper is methodological, the empirical application–although based on
real ﬁnancial data–is designed to compare our proposed diversiﬁcation measures with those
already present in the literature and to support the robustness of our approach. A separate
study focusing on the economic implications and potential applications of the proposal is
presented in Torrente and Uberti (2025), where the maximum diversiﬁcation paradigm is sys-
tematically compared with the minimum risk approach for a given risk measure. That study
reports particularly interesting results in terms of effective risk reduction in out-of-sample
experiments.
Thepaperisorganizedasfollows.Section2containsthenotationtogetherwithpreliminary
and background results useful for the comprehension of the paper. In Section 3 the GPDM is
introduced, its main theoretical properties are proved and analyzed by providing their useful
economic interpretation; further, as a corollary result, it is shown that the GPDMs induced
by the deviation risk measures fulﬁll all the stated properties, and the ones induced by the
coherent and the convex risk measures do satisfy all but one of them. Section 4 proposes
some theoretical directions to provide a generalization of the notions of RAD, RAGDP
and GPDM aimed at incorporating dependence structure between assets. Section 5 provides
a comprehensive empirical study to evaluate the performance of some GPDMs, deﬁned
using different well-known risk measures (standard deviation, Value-At-Risk computed at a
signiﬁcance level of 5%, mean absolute deviation, maximum drawdown), in comparison with
various classical diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes, listed in Section5.1. The
numerical experiments are performed on the datasets S&P500, DAX, ESX, FTSE, Nikkei,
S&P500 constituents (see also Appendix 8). Finally, Section 6 contains some ﬁnal remarks
and concludes the paper. All proofs can be found in the Appendix 7.
2 Background material
In this section, we introduce the notation used throughout the paper (see Section 2.1), enu-
merate some general properties required for the deﬁnition of axiomatic risk measures (see
Section 2.2), and formally recall the concept of risk-adjusted geometric diversiﬁed portfolios
(see Section 2.3).
2.1 Preliminaries and notation
Let m ≥n ≥2, let Matm×n(R) denote the set of m × n real matrices and Mm×n(R) be the
subset of Matm×n(R) consisting of all full-rank matrices, i.e., those matrices A ∈Mm×n(R)
such that rank(A) = n. We denote by 0m×n and 1m×n the m × n matrices whose elements
are all equal to zero and one, respectively.
Throughout the paper, we interpret the columns A j, with j = 1, . . . , n, of any matrix
A ∈Matm×n(R) as the historical returns of the j-th asset of the portfolio. Thus, A represents
the standard matrix of portfolio returns, with m observations across n risky assets. We deﬁne
n = {w = (w1, . . . , wn) ∈Rn : n
j=1 w j = 1} and Wn = {w = (w1, . . . , wn) ∈Rn
≥0 :
n
j=1 w j = 1} as the sets of long-short and long-only portfolios, respectively. A portfolio is
123

Annals of Operations Research
uniquely identiﬁed by the vector w, where the j-th component w j is the weight of the j-th
asset. We denote by ∂Wn the subset of Wn (and of n) containing portfolios with at least
one null component. The single asset portfolio fully allocated to the j-th asset is denoted by
e j ∈∂Wn, where e1, . . . , en are the standard basis vectors of Rn.
2.2 Axiomatic risk measures
We recall the setting used to provide a general axiomatic characterization of risk measures, see
among others Acerbi and Tasche (2002), Artzner et al. (1999), Rachev et al. (2008), Rockafel-
lar et al. (2006). We consider a standard probability space (, A, P), and the set of functions
X :  →R, treated as random variables, belonging to the linear space L2(, A, P), where
L2(, A, P) is the space of all real-valued random variables X :  →R that are square-
integrable with respect to P. Note that this space contains all constant random variables
X ≡α, with α ∈R. In what follows, with a slight abuse of notation, we will use the real
number α to denote the constant random variable taking value α almost surely. Similarly,
inequalities of the form X ≤Y or X ≥Y, where X, Y ∈L2(, A, P), are to be understood
as holding almost surely.
Deﬁnition 1 A function ρ : L2(, A, P) →R ∪{+∞} is:
- normalized if ρ(0) = 0;
- strictly positive if ρ(X) > 0 for all non-constant X and ρ(X) = 0 for constant X;
- monotone if for each X1, X2 with X1 ≤X2 it follows that ρ(X1) ≥ρ(X2);
- sub-additive if ρ(X1 + X2) ≤ρ(X1) + ρ(X2) for each X1, X2;
- shift-invariant if ρ(X + α) = ρ(X) for each X and α ∈R;
- translation-invariant if ρ(X + α) = ρ(X) −α for each X and α ∈R;
- positively homogeneous if ρ(αX) = αρ(X) for each X and α ≥0;
- convex if ρ(αX1+(1−α)X2) ≤αρ(X1)+(1−α)ρ(X2) for each X1, X2 and α ∈[0, 1].
Deﬁnition 2 A coherent risk measure is a mapping ρ : L2(, A, P) →R ∪{+∞} that
satisﬁes the properties of monotonicity, sub-additivity, translation invariance, and positive
homogeneity (see Artzner et al., 1999). If ρ is normalized, strictly positive, sub-additive,
shift-invariant and positively homogeneous then it is called a deviation risk measure (see
Rockafellar et al., 2006). Alternatively, if the conditions of subadditivity and positive homo-
geneity are replaced by the weaker property of convexity, the risk measure is said convex
(see Föllmer & Schied, 2002).
A more detailed account of the various axiomatic deﬁnitions of risk measures proposed
in the literature is beyond the scope of the present paper.
Remark 1 Note that the properties of translation invariance and shift invariance, as stated
in Deﬁnition 1, are mutually incompatible. Consequently, an axiomatic risk measure can
satisfy at most one of these two alternative properties. Moreover, if the risk measure is
absolute–in the sense that its value carries intrinsic economic meaning (as in the case of
CVaR, where the value represents the expected average loss at a given conﬁdence level)–
then translation invariance plays a signiﬁcant role. Conversely, in a relative context, where
the risk measure serves only to induce a ranking among alternatives, translation invariance
and shift invariance are effectively equivalent, as neither property affects the ordering of risky
alternatives determined by the risk measure.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The previous remark is useful to anticipate the speciﬁc behavior of the portfolio diver-
siﬁcation measures proposed in this paper with respect to deterministic translations (see
Section 3), which directly depends on the properties of the underlying risk measure.
2.3 Risk-adjusted geometric diversified portfolio
In this section, we recall the notions of Risk-Adjusted Distance and Risk-Adjusted Geometric
Diversiﬁed Portfolio, as introduced in Torrente and Uberti (2023).
Let n ≥2 be the number of assets, and let X j, for each j = 1, . . . , n, denote the return
of the the j-th asset over a given period. Consider the tuple of n possibly correlated random
variables X = (X1, . . . , Xn)t. Using the notations deﬁned above, we assume that each X j ∈
L2(, A, P), and let ρ : L2(, A, P) →R ∪{+∞} be a chosen risk measure. Throughout
the paper, we make the standing assumption that ρ(X j) > 0 for each j = 1, . . . , n. To
simplify notation, we denote by ρ(X) = (ρ(X1), . . . , ρ(Xn))t.
Deﬁnition 3 (Risk-Adjusted Distance) The Risk-Adjusted Distance (RAD) dρ(X) : Rn ×
Rn →R is deﬁned by
dρ(X)(x, y) =
⎛
⎝
n

j=1
1
ρ(X j)(x j −y j)2
⎞
⎠
1
2
,
∀x, y ∈Rn.
Deﬁnition 4 (Risk-Adjusted Geometric Diversiﬁed Portfolio) Let dρ(X) be a RAD; the Risk-
Adjusted Geometric Diversiﬁed Portfolio (RAGDP) with respect to dρ(X) is represented by
the portfolio w∗= (w∗
1, . . . , w∗
n) ∈Rn such that
n

j=1
w∗
j = 1
and
dρ(X)(w∗, ei) = dρ(X)(w∗, ek),
∀i, k ∈{1, . . . , n}.
Equivalently the coordinates of the RAGDP satisfy
w∗
j = 1
2

1 −n −2
nMρ(X)
ρ(X j)
 
,
j = 1, . . . , n,
(1)
where Mρ(X) is the arithmetic mean of ρ(X1), . . . , ρ(Xn).
Remark 2 The RAGDP w∗is a long-only portfolio, that is w∗∈Wn if and only if n ≤3
or n > 3 and Mρ(X) ≥n−2
n ρmax, where ρmax is the maximum of ρ(X1), . . . , ρ(Xn) (see
Torrente & Uberti, 2023, Proposition 3.3). Further, notice that the more restrictive condition
w∗
j > 0 for each j = 1, . . . , n is equivalent to the cases n ≤3 or n > 3 and Mρ(X) >
n−2
n ρmax.
3 Geometric portfolio diversiﬁcation measures
In this section, we introduce the Geometric Portfolio Diversiﬁcation Measures (GPDMs),
a class of functions that, starting from suitable risk measures, aim to quantify the portfolio
123

Annals of Operations Research
diversiﬁcation. By construction, GPDMs are induced by risk measures and rely on the geo-
metric diversiﬁcation strategy, recalled in Section 2.3, which serves as a pure technical tool
for their deﬁnition. We adopt the notation and assumptions introduced in Section 2.
Deﬁnition 5 (Geometric Portfolio Diversiﬁcation Measure) The Geometric Portfolio Diver-
siﬁcation Measure (GPDM) with respect to the risk measure ρ is the map ρ(X) :
n × Matm×n(R) \ {0m×n} →R≥0 deﬁned by
ρ(X)(w, A) := (rank(A) −1)

1 −
fρ(X)(w)
max j=1,...,n fρ(X)(e j)
 
(2)
for each w ∈n and A ∈Matm×n \ {0m×n}, where fρ(X) : n →R≥0 is:
fρ(X)(w) :=
n

j=1
n

k= j+1

d2
ρ(X)(w, e j) −d2
ρ(X)(w, ek)
2
(3)
for each w ∈n.
The GPDM depends on both the portfolio return matrix A and the individual risk measure
values involved in the function fρ(X). The multiplicative factor (rank(A)−1) accounts for the
dependence structure among the stochastic returns and thus reﬂects the number of effectively
different assets. The second multiplicative factor, involving the function fρ(X), quantiﬁes the
diversiﬁcation of the portfolio w based on the speciﬁed risk measure. In the following, we
enumerate and prove several important theoretical properties that characterize ρ(X) as a
valid diversiﬁcation measure. We then discuss their economic interpretation. It is useful to
precede these results with Lemma 1, which addresses some technical aspects of the function
fρ(X). For the reader’s convenience, we brieﬂy recall that a permutation matrix is a square
matrix containing exactly one entry equal to 1 in each row and each column, with all other
entries equal to zero; such a matrix represents a reordering of the components of a vector or
the rows/columns of a matrix.
Lemma 1 Let fρ(X) be the map introduced in Deﬁnition 5 and w∗be the RAGDP with respect
to dρ(X). Then the following properties hold true:
(i) fρ(X)(ei) > 0, for each i = 1, . . . , n;
(ii) fρ(X)(ei) ≤fρ(X)(e j) if and only if ρ(Xi) ≥ρ(X j) for each i, j = 1, . . . , n;
(iii) fρ(X) is strictly convex;
(iv) for each permutation matrix  ∈Matn×n(R) we have fρ(X)(tw) = fρ(X)(w) for
each w ∈n;
(v) w∗is the unique global minimum of fρ(X) over n and fρ(X)(w∗) = 0.
If ρ is shift-invariant then
(vi) fρ(X+α) = fρ(X) for each α ∈R.
If ρ is positively homogeneous then
(vii) fρ(αX) =
1
α2 fρ(X) for each α > 0.
Remark 3 Note that the function ρ(X) is well-deﬁned for any choice of the risk mea-
sure ρ: this is an immediate consequence of Lemma 1, item (i), which implies that
max j=1,...,n fρ(X)(e j) > 0. Furthermore, from the convexity of fρ(X) (see Lemma 1, item
(iii)) it follows that fρ(X)(w) ≤max j=1,...,n fρ(X)(e j), hence ρ(X)(w, A) ≥0 for any
(w, A) ∈n × Matm×n(R) \ {0m×n}.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In Proposition 2, we compute the maximum of the GPDM and prove that the corresponding
optimization problem admits a unique solution, which is attained at the RAGDP, as deﬁned
in Deﬁnition 4.
Proposition 2 Let ρ(X) be the GPDM with respect to dρ(X) and A ∈Matm×n(R) be a
nonzero matrix. The optimization problem maxω∈n ρ(X)(w, A) admits a unique solution
that coincides with w∗, the RAGDP with respect to dρ(X), and satisﬁes ρ(X)(w∗, A) =
rank(A) −1.
As a consequence of Proposition 2 and formula (1), it is worth noting that the point w∗,
which attains the maximum of the GPDM, never coincides with any vector of the standard
basis e j, j = 1, . . . , n. This result underscores the model’s inherent preference for diversi-
ﬁcation over concentration. Furthermore, item (ii) of Lemma 1 implies the existence of an
ordering among the evaluations fρ(X)(e j), which depends on the values ρ(X j), j = 1, . . . , n.
This induces an ordering of the diversiﬁcation measures associated with single-asset portfo-
lios, which, in general, assume different values. This outcome reﬂects the fact that the GPDM
is designed to address diversiﬁcation in a long-short setting, where fully concentrated port-
folios do not necessarily represent the worst-case scenario, as is typically the case in the
long-only framework.
The main properties of ρ(X) are collected in Propositions 3, 4 and 5.
Proposition 3 The GPDM ρ(X) satisﬁes the following properties.
P1. (Quasi-concavity) Let A ∈Matm×n(R) be a non-zero matrix; for any w, z ∈n and
α ∈[0, 1] it holds that
ρ(X)(αw + (1 −α)z, A) ≥min{ρ(X)(w, A), ρ(X)(z, A)},
with strict inequality for at least one value of α.
P2. (Generalized Risk Degeneracy) Let A ∈Matm×n(R) be a non-zero matrix such that
Ai and A j are linearly dependent for each i, j = 1, . . . , n; then ρ(X)(w, A) = 0 for
each w ∈n.
P3. (Reverse Risk Degeneracy) For each w ∈Wn \ ∂Wn the equation ρ(X)(w, A) = 0
in the variable A ∈Matm×n(R) admits a solution A∗which is lower comonotonic.
P4. (Symmetry) Let A ∈Matm×n(R) be a non-zero matrix and  ∈Matn×n(R) be a
permutation matrix; then ρ(X)(tw, A) = ρ(X)(w, A) for each w ∈n.
We provide the economic interpretation of the properties stated in Proposition 3. Quasi-
concavity, implied by concavity, although a less restrictive condition, captures the economic
intuition that a diversiﬁed portfolio is preferable to holding its individual constituents in
isolation. Generalized Risk Degeneracy ensures that the diversiﬁcation measure does not
depend solely on the number of assets in the portfolio, but rather on the number of effec-
tively different assets. In particular, it prevents the possibility of improving diversiﬁcation by
adding redundant assets, such as those constructed through linear combinations of existing
ones. Reverse Risk Degeneracy prevents an undesirable edge case in which a portfolio com-
posed of linearly independent assets is assigned a diversiﬁcation level equivalent to that of a
completely undiversiﬁed portfolio. Symmetry is straightforward and ensures that the degree
of diversiﬁcation is invariant under any reordering of the assets in the portfolio.
Proposition 4 Let ρ(X) be the GPDM with respect to the risk measure ρ.
If ρ is shift-invariant then ρ(X) satisﬁes the following property.
123

Annals of Operations Research
P5. (Shift-invariance) Let A ∈Matm×n(R) be a non-zero matrix such that 1m×1 and 11×n
do not belong to the linear span of A and At respectively. Let α ∈R; then ρ(X)(w, A+
α) = ρ(X)(w, A) for each w ∈n.
If ρ is positively homogeneous then ρ(X) satisﬁes the following property.
P6. (Homogeneity) Let A ∈Matm×n(R) be a non-zero matrix and α
> 0; then
ρ(X)(w, αA) = ρ(X)(w, A) for each w ∈n.
Shift-invariance expresses the idea that any deterministic translation of the returns in
matrix A–including the addition of a risk-free asset–does not improve the degree of diversi-
ﬁcation. Homogeneity states that the diversiﬁcation of a portfolio remains unchanged under
any scale transformation of the input data.
Proposition 5 Let ρ(X) be the GPDM with respect to dρ(X). Let A ∈Matm×n(R) be a
nonzero matrix, An+1 ∈Matm×1(R) be the return of a further asset and A+ = (A
:
An+1) ∈Matm×(n+1)(R). Let w∗and w∗
+ be the unique solutions of the optimization prob-
lems maxw∈n ρ(X)(w, A) and maxw+∈n+1 ρ(X)(w+, A+) respectively. Then the GPDM
ρ(X) satisﬁes the following properties.
P7. (Generalized Duplication Invariance) If An+1 is linearly dependent on the columns of
A then ρ(X)(w∗
+, A+) = ρ(X)(w∗, A).
P8. (Generalized Size Monotonicity) If An+1 is linearly independent of the columns of A
then ρ(X)(w∗
+, A+) > ρ(X)(w∗, A).
The two properties in Proposition 5 describe the behavior of the GPDM as the number
n of portfolio assets increases. In particular, Generalized Duplication Invariance states that
diversiﬁcation remains unchanged when a linearly redundant asset is added to the portfolio.
In contrast, Generalized Size Monotonicity asserts that the inclusion of an effectively different
asset strictly improves the level of diversiﬁcation.
There are analogies between the properties stated in Propositions 3, 4, and 5 and the axioms
that characterize a coherent portfolio diversiﬁcation measure, as introduced in Koumou and
Dionne (2022). In particular, each of our properties can be seen as an analogue or a gen-
eralization of those axioms. Regarding Generalized Risk Degeneracy, if multiple copies of
the same asset are included, the resulting diversiﬁcation remains null. As for Generalized
Duplication Invariance and Generalized Size Monotonicity, adding an asset that is either
identical to one of the existing portfolio constituents or entirely distinct from all of them
results in a diversiﬁcation value that is either unchanged or strictly greater than that of the
original portfolio.
Remark 4 We emphasize that the proposed approach is well-suited to transform a given risk
measure into a GPDM. As highlighted in the introduction, this choice allows us to leverage
the vast number of risk measures available in the literature to deﬁne induced diversiﬁcation
measures. Moreover, the approach is fully developed within a long-short framework, indicat-
ing that the resulting class of diversiﬁcation measures remains well-deﬁned and meaningful
even when some portfolio weights are negative.
In the following corollary, we summarize the results of Propositions 3, 4, and 5, stating
the properties satisﬁed by GPDMs induced by several well-known classes of risk measures,
as introduced in Deﬁnition 2.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Corollary 6 If ρ is a:
• deviation risk measure, then ρ(X) satisﬁes all the properties P1-P8;
• coherent risk measure, then ρ(X) satisﬁes all the above properties except P5;
• a convex risk measure, then ρ(X) satisﬁes all the above properties except P6.
4 Extending RAGDP to multivariate asset dependence
The current formulation of RAD, RAGDP and GPDM (see Deﬁnitions 3, 4 and 5) does not
adequately capture the dependence structure among assets, except in the special case where
one asset is a linear combination of others. However, in realistic ﬁnancial contexts, assets
often exhibit complex multivariate dependencies that extend beyond linear relationships. In
this section, we propose a generalization of the notions of RAD, RAGDP and GPDM to
incorporate such dependence structures. We outline several theoretical directions for this
generalization, leaving their implementation and empirical validation as promising topics for
future research.
Tothisend,webeginSection4.1byrecallingtheMahalanobisdistancewhich,byaccount-
ing for both the variances of individual assets and the covariances between them, provides
a natural foundation for introducing the Mahalanobis strategy (see Deﬁnition 7), an asset
allocation strategy that explicitly incorporates dependencies among assets. This construction
extends the RAGDP to the case of correlated assets, with variance taken as the default risk
measure. A more general framework capable of accommodating arbitrary risk measures is
then presented in Section 4.2. There, we introduce a broader class of distances, proper gen-
eralizations of the Mahalanobis distance, deﬁned through a symmetric positive deﬁnite risk
matrix that encodes the information associated with any chosen risk measure. Such gener-
alization allows us to deﬁne both the general RAGDP strategy and the general GPDM (see
Deﬁnition 10 and 11).
We use the notation introduced in Sections 2 and 3, and introduce additional notation here.
For real matrices, when m = n, we denote by Matn(R) the set of all real square matrices and,
similarly, by Mm×n(R) ⊂Matm×n(R) the subset of full-rank matrices. Let S+
n (R) denote
the set of all n × n real symmetric positive deﬁnite matrices, and let D+
n (R) ⊂S+
n (R) be
the subset consisting of diagonal matrices with strictly positive diagonal entries. We indicate
with 1n the n × n matrix whose elements are all equal to one. For each A ∈Matm×n(R)
we denote by Ai ∈Mat1×n(R) the ith row of A, and by A(i, j) ∈Mat(m−1)×(n−1)(R) the
submatrix of A obtained by deleting its ith row and its jth column. For each A ∈Matn(R)
we denote by diag(A) ∈Matn×1(R) the column vector of the diagonal elements of A.
4.1 The Mahalanobis strategy
We begin by recalling the deﬁnition of the Mahalanobis distance. To this end, we assume
from now on that A ∈Mm×n(R), and let 
 ∈S+
n (R) denote the covariance matrix of A.
Deﬁnition 6 Let
 ∈Matn(R)bethecovariancematrixofportfolioreturns A ∈Matm×n(R).
The Mahalanobis distance d
−1 : Rn × Rn →R is
d
−1(x, y) := (x −y)t
−1(x −y),
∀x, y ∈Rn.
Note that the Mahalanobis distance accounts for both the variances of individual assets
and the covariances between them. It reduces to the classical Euclidean distance in the special
123

Annals of Operations Research
case of uncorrelated assets with unit variance. From a geometric perspective, the Mahalanobis
distance ﬁrst transforms the data into standardized, uncorrelated returns, and then computes
the standard Euclidean distance in the transformed space. Mathematically, it can be viewed
as a special case of a broader class of distances deﬁned through a symmetric positive deﬁnite
matrix (see Deﬁnition 8).
In the following, we introduce an asset allocation strategy, called Mahalanobis strategy,
based on the Mahalanobis distance.
Deﬁnition 7 The Mahalanobis strategy is represented by the portfolio w∗= (w∗
1, . . . , w∗
n) ∈
Rn such that
n

j=1
w∗
j = 1
and
d
−1(w∗, ei) = d
−1(w∗, ek),
∀i, k ∈{1, . . . , n}.
Remark 5 The Mahalanobis strategy can equivalently be deﬁned as the unique solution to
the following convex constrained minimization problem:
minw∈n f
−1(w),
(4)
where
f
−1(w) := 1
2
n

i=1
n

j=1

d2

−1(w, ei) −d2

−1(w, e j)
2
,
for each w ∈n.
(5)
Further, by some simple computations an explicit closed-form representation of the Maha-
lanobis strategy can be derived, as established in the following proposition.
Proposition 7 Let S = (si j) ∈S+
n (R) be the inverse of the covariance matrix 
, that is
S = 
−1. The coordinates of the Mahalanobis strategy w∗= (w∗
1, . . . , w∗
n) ∈n are given
by
(w∗
1, . . . , w∗
n−1)t = E−1
n bn
w∗
n
= 1 −n−1
j=1 w∗
j,
(6)
where En ∈S+
n−1(R) and bn ∈Mat(n−1)×1(R) are deﬁned by
En := S(n,n) + snn1n−1 −(Dn + Dt
n)
(7)
bn := 1
2

diag(S)(n) + snn1(n−1)×1

(8)
with
Dn := (St
n)(n)11×(n−1) ∈Matn−1(R).
(9)
In the case of uncorrelated assets, the Mahalanobis strategy simpliﬁes to the RAGDP
where the variance is chosen as given risk, as shown in the following proposition.
Proposition 8 In the case of uncorrelated assets, the Mahalanobis strategy coincides with
the RAGDP when the variance is used as the reference risk measure.
In the following, we provide a toy example to describe, in a stylized framework, the impact
on the allocation when considering the dependence structure among the assets.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Compositions of the optimal RAGDP portfolios when the dependence structure among assets is either
ignored (w∗) or incorporated. In the latter case, w∗
M,0.2 and w∗
M,0.4 correspond to scenarios where the
correlation between assets 1 and 2 is 0.2 and 0.4, respectively
Example 1 Let us consider n = 3 risky assets, and assume that their covariance matrix is
given by

 =
⎡
⎣
1
0.24
0
0.24 1.44
0
0
0
2.25
⎤
⎦.
The correlation between the ﬁrst two assets is 0.2. In this case, the RAGDP is w∗=
(0.3934, 0.3465, 0.2601). As expected, when the dependence structure is ignored, the allo-
cation favors the assets with lower risk, while the riskiest asset receives the smallest weight.
Once the dependence is taken into account, as encoded in 
, the portfolio identiﬁed by what
we called the Mahalanobis strategy is w∗
M,0.2 = (0.4269, 0.4010, 0.1721) (see Figure 1). In
this case, the allocation to the third asset (the riskiest one) decreases, whereas the weights of
the ﬁrst two correlated assets increase (albeit at different rates).
If the correlation between the ﬁrst two assets increases to 0.4, the optimal portfolio
becomes w∗
M,0.4 = (0.4860, 0.4818, 0.0322), further highlighting the reduction in the allo-
cation to the riskiest uncorrelated asset and the corresponding increase in the weights of the
two positively correlated assets (see again Figure 1).
4.2 Generalization to different risk measures
The Mahalanobis strategy extends the RAGDP to the case of correlated assets by adopting
variance as the default risk measure (see Proposition 8). To introduce a more general frame-
work that accommodates arbitrary risk measures, we begin by recalling a broader class of
distances – generalizations of the Mahalanobis distance deﬁned through a symmetric positive
deﬁnite matrix.
Deﬁnition 8 Let W ∈S+
n (R). The map ⟨·, ·⟩W : Rn × Rn →R such that ⟨x, y⟩W := xtW y,
for each x, y ∈Rn, deﬁnes an inner product on Rn and induces the norm ∥· ∥W : Rn →R,
where ∥x∥W := √⟨x, x⟩W =
√
xtW x, for each x ∈Rn, and the distance function (metric)
dW : Rn × Rn →R deﬁned by
dW(x, y) := ∥x −y∥W =

(x −y)tW(x −y),
∀x, y ∈Rn.
123

Annals of Operations Research
In the special case W ∈D+
n (R), the function dW, called W-weighted Euclidean distance
function (metric), becomes
dW(x, y) =
 n

i=1
wi(xi −yi)2
 1
2
,
∀x, y ∈Rn,
where wi > 0, i = 1, . . . , n, are the diagonal entries of W.
Risk measures are incorporated into the framework through the deﬁnition of a risk matrix
(see Deﬁnition 9), which, under the general assumptions stated in Section 2 (in particular,
we recall the standing assumption that ρ(X j) > 0 for each j = 1, . . . , n, see Section 2.3),
can be shown to be symmetric and positive deﬁnite (see Proposition 9).
Deﬁnition 9 The risk matrix Rρ,X of X associated to the risk ρ is the n × n matrix whose
elements ri j are deﬁned by:
ri j = corr(Xi, X j)

ρ(Xi)ρ(X j),
∀i, j ∈{1, . . . , n},
where corr(Xi, X j) denotes the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient of the pair (Xi, X j).
Proposition 9 The risk matrix Rρ,X is symmetric and positive deﬁnite.
We consider the distance dR−1
ρ,X deﬁned by the positive deﬁnite matrix R−1
ρ,X (see Deﬁnition
8). Now, we can generalize the notion of Mahalanobis strategy to any risk measure ρ.
Deﬁnition 10 Let ρ be any risk measure and Rρ,X be the risk matrix of X associated to the
risk ρ. The general Risk-Adjusted Geometric Diversiﬁed Portfolio (RAGDP) strategy with
respect to the distance dR−1
ρ,X is represented by the portfolio w∗= (w∗
1, . . . , w∗
n) ∈Rn such
that
n

j=1
w∗
j = 1
and
dR−1
ρ,X (w∗, ei) = dR−1
ρ,X (w∗, ek),
∀i, k ∈{1, . . . , n}.
In the special case in which the risk measure ρ is represented by the variance of X then
RVar,X is the covariance matrix of X, dR−1
Var,X is the Mahalanobis distance (see Deﬁnition 6)
and the general RAGDP coincides with the Mahalanobis strategy (see Deﬁnition 7).
We now state a proposition that yields an explicit characterization of the general RAGDP
strategy.
Proposition 10 Assumptions as in Deﬁnition 10. Let S ∈S+
n (R) be the inverse of the risk
matrix Rρ,X, that is S = R−1
ρ,X. The coordinates of the general RAGDP strategy w∗=
(w∗
1, . . . , w∗
n) ∈n are given by (6) where En ∈S+
n−1(R) and bn ∈Mat(n−1)×1(R) are
deﬁned by (7) and (8).
In the following, we introduce the general Geometric Portfolio Diversiﬁcation Measures,
which quantify the level of portfolio diversiﬁcation by incorporating information on the
dependence structure among assets.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Deﬁnition 11 The general Geometric Portfolio Diversiﬁcation Measure (GPDM) with
respect to the risk measure ρ is the map R−1
ρ,X : n × Matm×n(R) \ {0m×n} →R≥0
deﬁned by
R−1
ρ,X (w, A) := (rank(A) −1)
⎛
⎝1 −
fR−1
ρ,X (w)
max j=1,...,n fR−1
ρ,X (e j)
⎞
⎠
for each w ∈n and A ∈Matm×n \ {0m×n}, where fR−1
ρ,X : n →R≥0 is:
fR−1
ρ,X (w) :=
n

j=1
n

k= j+1

d2
R−1
ρ,X (w, e j) −d2
R−1
ρ,X (w, ek)
 2
for each w ∈n.
5 Empirical results
In this section, we present a comprehensive empirical analysis to evaluate the performance
of the proposed GPDMs1 (see Deﬁnition 5). In this section, we speciﬁcally focus on selected
instances of the GPDMs and, due to space limitations, we do not conduct the empirical
analysis for the general GPDMs introduced in Section 4; nevertheless, such an analysis can
be carried out by exploiting the theoretical framework developed therein. We then conduct a
direct comparison between several GPDMs–constructed using different well-established risk
measures–and a variety of classical diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indices, as
listed in Section 5.1. The numerical experiments are conducted on multiple datasets (S&P500,
DAX, ESX, FTSE, Nikkei, and S&P500 constituents), which differ in the number of assets;
a detailed description is provided in Section 5.2. As most diversiﬁcation measures proposed
in the literature are deﬁned for the long-only context, a comprehensive comparison with
GPDMs is feasible only within this context. The results of this comparison are reported
in Section 5.3.1. Conversely, the performance of the GPDMs in the long-short setting is
analyzed in Section 5.3.2, where the study is exclusively focused on the GPDMs.
5.1 Diversification measures and concentration indexes
Following the classiﬁcation proposed by Lhabitant (2017), we consider four distinct classes
of diversiﬁcation measures: weight-based measures, entropy-based measures, correlation-
based measures, and risk-based portfolio measures. To introduce each class, we begin by
brieﬂy outlining the corresponding general framework.
Let us assume a single-period framework: the allocation is decided at time t = 0, and
the return is realized at time t = T . The investment universe consists of n ≥2 risky, non-
redundant assets. The returns of these assets over the single period are collected in the n × 1
column vector A = (A1, . . . , An)t, where Ai denotes the (random) return of asset i over the
interval [0, T ]. Let μ be the vector of expected returns of A, i.e.,
μ = E(A) = (μ1, . . . , μn)t,
1 The algorithm used to compute the GPDMs has been implemented in MATLAB. The full source code is
publicly available on GitHub at: https://github.com/mltorrente/GeometricPortfolioDiversiﬁcationMeasure.git
123

Annals of Operations Research
where μi := E(Ai). Let 
 be the n × n covariance matrix of A, deﬁned as

 = cov(A) =
⎛
⎜⎝
σ 2
1 · · · σ1n
...
...
...
σn1 · · · σ 2
n
⎞
⎟⎠,
where the diagonal elements σ 2
i := E[(Ai −μi)2] are the variances of the asset returns, and
the off-diagonal elements σi j := E[(Ai −μi)(A j −μ j)] represent the covariances between
assets i and j. Since the n risky assets are non-redundant–that is, no asset return can be
expressed as a linear combination of the others–
 is non-singular.
We also introduce the notation for the n × 1 vector σ = (σ1, . . . , σn) which represents the
volatilities of the assets and, for the n × n correlation matrix
C =
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎝
1 ρ12 . . . ρ1n
ρ12
1 . . . ρ2n
...
...
...
...
ρn1 ρn2 . . . 1
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎠,
where ρi j is the correlation between assets i and j. Finally, for any long-only portfolio
w ∈Wn, we denote by w ∈Wn the vector of weights sorted in ascending order, that is
w = (w1, . . . , wn), where wi ≤w j for all i < j.
5.1.1 Weight-based diversiﬁcation measures
Weight-based diversiﬁcation measures encompass metrics that, by applying various functions
to the portfolio weights, quantify the concentration of a given long-only portfolio. Within
this framework, the most diversiﬁed portfolio is the one that minimizes the concentration
index. For any long-only portfolio w ∈Wn, we consider the following measures.
1. The concentration ratio of order k, denoted by CRk, measures the concentration of a
portfolio by computing the cumulative weight of its k-largest positions, where k is an
exogenous parameter; it is deﬁned by:
CRk(w) :=
k

i=1
wn−i+1.
It is bounded between 0 and 1. The main issue of CRk is related to the arbitrariness of the
parameter k: for small values of k only a negligible part of the exposures is considered,
while as k gets larger CRk gathers less and less information, till the case k = n for which
CRn ≡1, bringing no information at all.
2. The Herﬁndal-Hirschman index, denoted by HHI and introduced in Herﬁndal (1950) and
in Hirschman (1964), is a classical indicator of the amount of competition in a market;
it is deﬁned by:
HHI(w) :=
n

i=1
w2
i .
It is bounded between 1/n (in the case of the equally weighted portfolio) and 1 (when
the portfolio contains one single asset).
123

Annals of Operations Research
3. The Gini index of concentration, denoted by GIC and introduced in Gini (1921), measures
the degree of inequality in a distribution and is computed as the mean expected absolute
deviation between all pairs of components (weights) scaled by their mean; it is deﬁned
by:
GIC(w) := n + 1 −2 n
i=1(n + 1 −i)wi
n
.
It is bounded between 0 (in the case of the equally weighted portfolio) and 1 (when the
portfolio contains one single asset).
4. The Hall-Tideman index, denoted by HT and introduced in Hall and Tideman (1967),
aims at evaluating and quantifying the concentration risk; it is deﬁned by
HT(w) :=
1
n
i=1 iwi −1.
It is bounded between 1/n (in the case of the equally weighted portfolio) and 1 (when
the portfolio contains one single asset) and it is related to the Gini index of concentration
through the formula
HT (w) =
1
(1 −GIC(w))n .
5. The reciprocal of Hannah-Kay index, denoted by RHK and introduced in Hannah and
Kay (1977), is a generalization of the HHI; it is deﬁned by:
RHK(w) :=
 n

i=1
wα
i

1
α−1
, with α ≥0, α ̸= 1.
It is bounded between 1/n (in the case of the equally weighted portfolio) and 1 (when
the portfolio is composed by one single asset).
6. The comprehensive concentration index, denoted by CCI and introduced in Horvath
(1970), takes into consideration the relative dispersion and the absolute magnitude of the
weights. It is deﬁned as the sum of the largest weight and the square of the other assets
scaled by a coefﬁcient which is proportional to the size of the rest of the position:
CCI(w) := wn +
n−1

i=1
w2
i (1 + (1 −wi)).
It is bounded between the positive value (3n2 −3n + 1)/n3 (in the case of the equally
weighted portfolio) and 1 (when the portfolio contains one single asset).
7. The L p norm, denoted by Yα and introduced in Bouchaud et al. (1997), proposes to use
the p-norm as an indicator of portfolio concentration; it is deﬁned by
Yα(w) :=
n

i=1
wα
i , with α ≥0.
It is a generalization of Shannon’s entropy; special cases are α = 1, which leads to the
uninteresting case Y1 ≡1, and α = 2, which returns HHI, that is Y2 ≡HHI.
123

Annals of Operations Research
5.1.2 Correlation-based diversiﬁcation measures
Correlation-based diversiﬁcation measures rely on the idea that portfolio diversiﬁcation can
be evaluated using the average correlation between all the pairs of assets. Obviously, in this
approach weights need to be considered: indeed, if an asset has zero weight, then its corre-
lation should not play a role in the portfolio diversiﬁcation; on the contrary, if it has a large
weight, its correlation should be highly considered. Correlation-based diversiﬁcation mea-
sures are weighted-average correlation functions constructed using different approaches. In
this context, the most diversiﬁed strategies are realized by portfolios with minimum measure.
For any long-only portfolio w ∈Wn we list the following measures (see Lhabitant, 2017).
1. The weighted average of all pairwise correlations, denoted by ρAV G1, is deﬁned by:
ρAV G1(w) := wtCw −wtw
1 −wtw
.
It is bounded between −1 and 1.
2. The implied average correlation, denoted by ρAV G2, is obtained from ρAV G1 by replacing
the n(n −1) correlations ρi j with a constant average cross-sectional coefﬁcient; it is
deﬁned by:
ρAV G2(w) := wt
w −wtdiag(
)w
(wtσ)2 −wtdiag(
)w .
3. The volatility-based correlation proxy, denoted by ρAV G3, is obtained from ρAV G2 by
deleting the term wtdiag(
)w which can be neglected when the number of assets gets
large; it is deﬁned by:
ρAV G3(w) := wt
w
(wtσ)2 .
4. The variance-based correlation proxy, denoted by ρAV G4 and introduced in Bossu and
Gu (2004), is deﬁned by:
ρAV G4(w) :=
wt
w
wtdiag(
).
5.1.3 Entropy-based diversiﬁcation measures
The most popular function used to measure information is represented by the Shannon
entropy, which has been easily applied in the context of long-only portfolios as an inverse
measure of concentration. Entropy-based diversiﬁcation measures include Shannon entropy
and other entropy functions. In this context, the most diversiﬁed strategies are realized by
portfolios with maximum diversiﬁcation measure. For any long-only portfolio w ∈Wn we
list the following measures.
1. The Shannon entropy, denoted by SE and introduced in Shannon (1948), is deﬁned by:
SE(w) := −
n

i=1
wi ln wi.
It is related to RHK concentration index since
lim
α→∞RHK(w) = e−SE(w)
for each w ∈Wn.
123

Annals of Operations Research
It is bounded between 0 (for a single-asset portfolio) and ln n (in the case of the equally
weighted portfolio).
2. The Renyi entropy, denoted by Hα and introduced in Renyi (1961), is a generalization
of Shannon entropy; it is deﬁned by:
Hα(w) :=
1
1 −α ln
 n

i=1
wα
i

, with α ≥0
When α = 0 and α = 2 the Renyi entropy leads to the Hartley entropy and the collision
entropy respectively; when α →1 then Hα converges to the Shannon entropy.
3. The Tsallis entropy, denoted by HCq and introduced in Tsallis (1988), is a new form of
non-additive entropy deﬁned by:
HCq(w) :=
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
1
q −1

1 −
n

i=1
wq
i

if q ̸= 1
−n
i=1 wi ln wi
if q = 1.
4. The Hill’s effective numbers, denoted by Dq and introduced in Hill (1973), are deﬁned
by:
Dq(w) :=
 n

i=1
wq
i

1
1−q
, with q ∈R.
The parameter q, which in the biological context is called the “order of the diversity” of
the species, can assume any real value, but positive values are usually considered the most
interesting ones. When q = 0, the diversity counts the total number of nonzero weights,
regardless their magnitude; for q = 1, only the relevant weights are considered; for
q = 2, only the very relevant weights are taken into consideration, till the case q →∞
where Dq(w) returns the reciprocal of the maximum component of w. It corresponds to
the exponential of the Renyi entropy; it is a bounded quantity that reaches its maximum
for the equally weighted portfolio.
5. The Rao quadratic entropy, denoted by RQE and introduced in Rao (1982), computes
the average difference between two individuals that would be randomly selected (with
replacements) in a population; it is deﬁned by:
RQE(w) :=
n−1

i=1
n−1

j=i+1
di jwiw j,
where di j is the pairwise distance between the ith and jth individuals, with the require-
ments that di j = d ji and dii = 0, for each i, j. In the case di j = 1, for each i ̸= j, RQE
is the Simpson diversity index, which is equal to 1 −HHI.
5.1.4 Risk-based diversiﬁcation measures
Risk-based diversiﬁcation measures gather metrics that, based exclusively on risk, compute
the level of concentration or diversiﬁcation of a given long-only portfolio. For any w ∈Wn
we list the following measures.
123

Annals of Operations Research
1. The Equal Risk Contribution, denoted by ERC, has been ﬁrstly deﬁned using volatility
(see Maillard et al., 2010), but other measures have been considered in the recent lit-
erature: Conditional Value-At-Risk (see Boudt et al., 2013, Cesarone & Colucci, 2018,
Mausser & Romanko, 2018), expectiles (see Bellini et al., 2021) and mean absolute devi-
ation (see Ararat et al., 2024). When volatility is used as a risk measure ERC computes
the sum of the difference of each assets effective risk contribution as follows:
ERC(w) :=
n

i=1
n

j=1

TRCi(w) −TRC j(w)
2
where
TRCi(w) = wi
(
w)i
√
wt
w
denotes the ith Total Contribution to portfolio Risk. The most diversiﬁed strategy is
realized by the portfolio with minimum ERC, that is, by the portfolio where each asset
equally contributes to the total risk.
2. The diversiﬁcation ratio, denoted by DR and introduced in Choueifaty and Coignard
(2008),computestheportfoliodiversiﬁcationastheratiobetweenthehypotheticalvolatil-
ity of the portfolio if all assets are perfectly correlated and the effective volatility of the
portfolio:
DR(w) :=
wtσ
√
wt
w
.
It is bounded from below by 1, when considering the single asset portfolio or the port-
folio of perfectly correlated assets, and it is unbounded from above, with higher values
corresponding to portfolios with higher diversiﬁcation.
3. The extension of diversiﬁcation ratio, denoted by EDR and introduced in Carmichael
et al. (2015) and Carmichael et al. (2023), is a generalization of DR based on Rao’s
quadratic entropy:
EDR(w) := wt Dw
wt
w ,
where D = (di j)i, j=1,...,N is a dissimilarity matrix whose generic element di j measures
the degree of diversity between each couple of assets, with the requirements that di j ≥0,
di j = d ji and dii = 0 for each i, j. The most diversiﬁed strategy is realized by the
portfolio with maximum EDR.
5.2 Datasets
The empirical analysis is conducted on six different ﬁnancial indices. All datasets consist
of daily asset returns spanning the period from 01/03/2000 to 09/17/2020. The logarithmic
returns used in the analysis are computed from daily closing prices obtained from Bloomberg.
For consistency, assets lacking a complete time series over the selected time window have
been excluded. As a result, the number n of effective constituents in each index is smaller
than its nominal size. The number of assets ranges from 10, in the case of the S&P500, to 391
for the S&P500 constituents dataset, thereby enabling an assessment of the diversiﬁcation
measures across a wide spectrum of portfolio sizes. The dataset used in the empirical analysis
is available upon request from the authors.
123

Annals of Operations Research
The datasets are:
1. S&P500 (n
=
10) is composed by the ten sectors portfolios of the S&P500
index obtained using the Global Industry Classiﬁcation Standard (GICS): Material
(MATR), Information-Technology (INFT), Healthcare (HLTH), Energy (ENRS), Util-
ities (UTIL), Financials (FINL), Consumer-Staples (CONS), Consumer-Discretionary
(COND), Industrials (INDU), Telecommunications (TELS).
2. DAX (n = 23) is the stock index of the major German blue chip companies trading on
the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
3. ESX (n = 38), EURO STOXX 50, is a stock index of the Euro zone composed of 50
European blue-chip companies considered as leaders in their respective sectors.
4. FTSE (n = 69) is the Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 Index composed of the 100
companies listed on the London Stock Exchange with the highest market capitalization.
5. Nikkei (n = 180) is the Nikkei 225, a stock market index for the Tokyo Stock Exchange
composed of 225 large publicly owned companies in Japan.
6. S&P500 constituents (n = 391) is The Standard and Poor’s 500 index composed of 500
large companies listed on stock exchanges in the United States.
5.3 Numerical tests
We consider the diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes described in Section 5.1,
with the following parameter settings: k = n−1 for CRk; α = 3 for RHK, Yα, and Hα; q = 2
for HCq and Dq; and the matrix D = C −In, where In is the identity matrix of order n, for
RQE and EDR. To provide a thorough evaluation of the proposed GPDMs, we consider the
following commonly used risk measures: standard deviation (StDev), Value-at-Risk com-
puted at a 5% signiﬁcance level (V@R), mean absolute deviation (MAD), and maximum
drawdown (MDD). The corresponding GPDMs are denoted by GPDMStDev, GPDMV@R,
GPDMMAD, and GPDMMDD, respectively.
5.3.1 The long-only case
For each dataset described in Section 5.2, we construct the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier
in the long-only case and consider the associated sets of portfolios: PLOS&P500, PLODAX,
PLOESX, PLOFTSE, PLONikkei, and PLOS&Pconst.. This section is devoted to a detailed and
comprehensive description of the numerical tests conducted on the S&P500 index. For the
reader’s convenience, the results and discussion related to the remaining datasets are deferred
to Appendix 8.1.
Figure2displaysthedailyreturnlevelofeachportfolioonthe x-axisandthecorresponding
values of the diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes on the y-axis, computed for
the portfolios in PLOS&P500. For each measure, the most diversiﬁed portfolio is identiﬁed and
represented on the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (see Figure 4, left panel); its composition
is shown in Figure 3. Next, we restrict the analysis to the dominant part of the mean-variance
efﬁcient frontier and again determine the most diversiﬁed portfolio for each of the considered
measures. The resulting optimal portfolios are depicted in Figure 4, right panel. We observe
that the most diversiﬁed portfolios differ in the following cases: CRk, ρAVG1, ρAVG2, ρAVG3,
ρAVG4,SE,andDR.Forthesemeasures,Figure5reportsthecompositionofthecorresponding
most diversiﬁed portfolios.
A ﬁrst general remark is that the efﬁcient frontier does not account for diversiﬁcation.
Therefore, it may be of interest for an investor to select, within the set PS&P500
LO
, the most
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig.2 The values of the various diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes computed for the portfolios
in PS&P500
LO
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 3 The compositions of the optimal portfolios of PS&P500
LO
for various diversiﬁcation measures and con-
centration indexes
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 4 Representation of the most diversiﬁed portfolios of the dataset S&P500 for various diversiﬁcation
measures and concentration indexes on the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (left panel) and when restricted
over the dominant part of the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (right panel)
Fig. 5 The compositions of some optimal portfolios of PS&P500
LO
over the dominant part of the mean-variance
efﬁcient frontier
diversiﬁed portfolio according to a given diversiﬁcation measure. As expected, the most
diversiﬁed portfolios do not necessarily lie on the dominant segment of the efﬁcient frontier.
This observation may partially explain why many empirical out-of-sample studies have found
that simple diversiﬁcation-based investment strategies can outperform the optimal mean-
variance portfolios; see DeMiguel et al. (2009). From Figure 3 and Figure 4, left panel,
we observe that most of the considered measures yield very similar results, identifying the
123

Annals of Operations Research
most diversiﬁed portfolios with comparable positions on the efﬁcient frontier and with similar
asset compositions. In particular, we emphasize that the GPDMs–despite being deﬁned using
different underlying risk measures–closely align with the majority of other measures in
identifying the most diversiﬁed portfolios.
From Figure 4, we observe that the measures identifying the most diversiﬁed portfolios
on the dominated part of the efﬁcient frontier are CRk, ρAVG1, ρAVG2, ρAVG3, ρAVG4, SE,
and DR. When restricting to the dominant part of the frontier, the measures ρAVG3, ρAVG4,
SE, and DR return most diversiﬁed portfolios with compositions that are consistent with the
allocations selected by the majority of other measures. In contrast, the remaining measures–
CRk, ρAVG1, and ρAVG2–exhibit distinctive behavior compared to all others. The values of
CRk change rapidly (see Figure 2), which may primarily depend on the arbitrariness in the
choice of the parameter k and the associated challenges. In this example, with n = 10, the
portfolios on the efﬁcient frontier allocate wealth to no more than 4 assets, which forces the
choice of a relatively high value of k to ensure a mathematically meaningful value for the
measure. However, as previously noted, a high k negatively impacts the informational content
of the measure. Furthermore, Figure 2 clearly shows that the values of both ρAVG1 and ρAVG2
exhibit trends that diverge signiﬁcantly from those of the other measures. In these cases, the
most diversiﬁed portfolios correspond to extreme allocations located at the bottom-right end
of the efﬁcient frontier.2
5.3.2 The long-short case
In the long-short case, we can compute only the GPDMs, as the classical diversiﬁcation
measures proposed in the literature (see Section 5.1) are deﬁned exclusively for long-only
portfolios. In particular, most of the considered measures are well deﬁned only when port-
folio weights are strictly positive–for instance, entropy-based diversiﬁcation measures (see
Section 5.1.3). Other measures, such as the Herﬁndahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), can tech-
nically be computed in the presence of negative weights, though their meaningfulness in
such settings is not guaranteed. In the absence of the possibility for a direct comparison with
alternative measures, we focus below on highlighting a few key features of the GPDMs in
the long-short setting.
For each dataset described in Section 5.2, we construct the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier
in the long-short framework and consider the associated sets of portfolios: PS&P500
LS
, PDAX
LS ,
PESX
LS , PFTSE
LS
, PNikkei
LS
, and PS&Pconst.
LS
This section provides a complete and detailed discussion
of the numerical results for the S&P500 index. For convenience, the results for the remaining
datasets, along with the corresponding analysis, are deferred to Appendix 8.2.
Figure 6 reports the values of the four considered GPDMs, computed for the portfolios
in PS&P500
LS
. For each measure, the most diversiﬁed portfolio is identiﬁed and represented on
the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (see Figure 7, left panel). Next, we restrict our analysis
to the dominant part of the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier and, for each GPDM, determine
the corresponding most diversiﬁed portfolio. The optimal portfolios are shown in Figure 7,
right panel. From the left panel of Figure 7, we observe that, as in the long-only case, the
most diversiﬁed portfolios may lie on the dominated portion of the efﬁcient frontier.
All the GPDMs under analysis consistently identify the same portfolio as the most diver-
siﬁed. This optimal portfolio, whether considering the entire efﬁcient frontier or restricting
2 Note that, in theory, the portfolio at the bottom-right of the efﬁcient frontier would correspond to a full
allocation of wealth in the asset with the lowest expected return. In our implementation, however, this situation
does not arise, since we constrain the portfolio’s expected return to lie within the interval (min μ+ε, max μ−ε),
with ε = 10−5, to avoid numerical issues in the computation of the frontier.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 6 The values of the various GPDMs computed for the portfolios in PS&P500
LS
Fig. 7 Representation of the most diversiﬁed portfolios of the dataset S&P500 for various GPDMs on the
mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (left panel) and when restricted over the dominant part of the mean-variance
efﬁcient frontier (right panel)
to its dominant part, lies very close to the global minimum variance portfolio. This ﬁnding
holds across all datasets under examination (see Appendix 8.2). An intuitive explanation
for this observation is that, in the long-short framework, portfolios that deviate signiﬁcantly
from the global minimum variance portfolio tend to exhibit higher leverage–i.e., they involve
larger absolute exposures to individual assets.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we highlight the intimate relationship between risk measures and portfolio
diversiﬁcationmeasures,andweproposeaneffectivemethodtoconstructaportfoliodiversiﬁ-
cation measure starting from a given risk measure. The key tool linking risk and diversiﬁcation
is the Risk-Geometric Portfolio Diversiﬁcation Measure (GPDM). This connection allows
the incorporation of the information content of a given risk measure into the calculation of
diversiﬁcation, moving beyond the common practice of relying solely on portfolio weights
as the relevant variable for assessing diversiﬁcation, as is the case in the majority of existing
diversiﬁcation measures. In the mathematical formalization of our approach, we prove that
GDPMs satisfy a set of signiﬁcant theoretical properties. Furthermore, empirical comparisons
between GDPMs and many standard diversiﬁcation measures support the validity and rele-
vance of our proposal. This comparison is necessarily limited to the long-only case due to the
restrictions on applying most standard measures in other settings. Indeed, a further distinctive
feature of GDPMs is that they are well-deﬁned in a long-short framework, allowing their cal-
culation even when short selling is permitted. While most of the literature on diversiﬁcation
focuses on the long-only case, we advocate for evaluating diversiﬁcation in the presence of
123

Annals of Operations Research
short positions as well. Our empirical application reveals interesting ﬁndings in this broader
context. Nonetheless, we believe that the generalization and implementation of portfolio
diversiﬁcation measures within the long-short framework warrant deeper investigation in
future research. Considering that the main contribution of this research is methodological,
the empirical application–although conducted on real ﬁnancial data–is primarily devoted to
comparing our proposed GDPMs with diversiﬁcation measures from the existing literature,
thereby supporting the robustness of GDPMs. As pointed put in the introduction, a compre-
hensive study focused on the economic interpretation and impact of GDPMs in the portfolio
optimization context is provided in Torrente and Uberti (2025). That research investigates
the out-of-sample performance of portfolios constructed by maximizing diversiﬁcation com-
pared to those obtained by minimizing a risk measure. As a ﬁnal, marginal byproduct, this
paper supports the validity of the geometric diversiﬁcation strategy in portfolio theory by
showing that the Risk-Adjusted Geometric Diversiﬁed Portfolio can equivalently be obtained
as the solution to a maximization problem whose objective function is a GDPM.
7 Appendix - Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1
Proof We let ρ j = ρ(X j) > 0 for each j = 1, . . . , n.
(i) By some computations, using the expression of fρ(X), see formula (3), and Deﬁnition
3, we get
fρ(X)(w) =
n

j=1
n

k= j+1
 1
ρ j
−1
ρk
 
−2
w j
ρ j
−wk
ρk
 2
.
(10)
By evaluating the above expression at w = ei we have:
fρ(X)(ei) =
i−1

j=1
n

k= j+1,k̸=i
 1
ρ j
−1
ρk
 2
+
n

j=i+1
n

k= j+1
 1
ρ j
−1
ρk
 2
+
n

j=1, j̸=i
 1
ρ j
+ 1
ρi
 2
> 0.
(11)
(ii) We consider the nontrivial case i ̸= j; by some computations, using expression (11),
we get:
fρ(X)(e j) −fρ(X)(ei) =
 1
ρ j
−1
ρi
 
n

k=1,k̸=i,k̸= j
4
ρk
from which the result immediately follows.
123

Annals of Operations Research
(iii) Let w, z ∈n, with w ̸= z and α ∈(0, 1). Recalling that g(x) = x2 is a strictly convex
function we obtain
fρ(X)(αw + (1 −α)z) =
=
n

j=1
n

k= j+1
 1
ρ j
−1
ρk
 
−2α
w j
ρ j
−wk
ρk
 
−2(1 −α)
 z j
ρ j
−zk
ρk
 2
=
n

j=1
n

k= j+1

α
 1
ρ j
−1
ρk
 
−2
w j
ρ j
−wk
ρk
 
+(1 −α)
 1
ρ j
−1
ρk
 
−2
 z j
ρ j
−zk
ρk
 2
< α
n

j=1
n

k= j+1
 1
ρ j
−1
ρk
 
−2
w j
ρ j
−wk
ρk
 2
+ (1 −α)
n

j=1
n

k= j+1
 1
ρ j
−1
ρk
 
−2
 zk
ρ j
−zk
ρk
 2
= α fρ(X)(w) + (1 −α) fρ(X)(z),
which proves that fρ(X) is strictly convex.
(iv) Let π be the permutation of {1, . . . , n} associated to , that is π( j) satisﬁes eπ( j) =
te j, for each j = 1, . . . , n. Note that fρ(X)(w) can also be expressed as follows:
fρ(X)(w) = 1
2
n

j=1
n

k=1

d2
ρ(X)(w, e j) −d2
ρ(X)(w, ek2
.
Using formula (10) and the fact that π is a bijection we get
fρ(X)(tw) = 1
2
n

j=1
n

k=1

1
ρπ( j)
−
1
ρπ(k)
 
−2
wπ( j)
ρπ( j)
−wπ(k)
ρπ(k)
 2
= fρ(X)(w),
for each w ∈n, so that the item is proved.
(v) The uniqueness of the global minimum of fρ(X) over n directly follows from item
(i). Further, using formula (1) and (10), we get fρ(X)(w∗) = 0; consequently, since
fρ(X)(w) ≥0 for each w ∈n, the result follows.
(vi) By the shift-invariance of ρ and the deﬁnition of dρ(X) (see Deﬁnition 3) it immedi-
ately follows that dρ(X+α)(w, e j) = dρ(X)(w, e j) and dρ(X+α)(w, ek) = dρ(X)(w, ek),
hence fρ(X+α)(w) = fρ(X)(w), for each w ∈n, so that the item is proved.
(vii) Using formula (10) and the positive homogeneity of ρ we get
fρ(αX)(w) =
n

j=1
n

k= j+1
 1
αρ j
−
1
αρk
 
−2
 w j
αρ j
−wk
αρk
 2
= 1
α2 fρ(X)(w),
for each w ∈n, so that the item is proved.
⊓⊔
123

Annals of Operations Research
Proof of Proposition 2
Proof By Lemma 1, item (i), it follows that max j=1,...,n fρ(X)(e j) > 0, consequently
max
w∈n ρ(X)(w, A) = (rank(A) −1)

1 −
minw∈n fρ(X)(w)
max j=1,...,n fρ(X)(e j)
 
.
Since w∗is the unique global minimum of fρ(X) over n and fρ(X)(w∗) = 0 (see Lemma
1, item (v)), the result immediately follows.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 3
Proof P1. We start considering some trivial cases: if rank(A) = 1 the property is obviously
veriﬁed, so we assume rank(A) > 1. Further, in the cases α = 0 and α = 1, the
property immediately holds, so we let α ∈(0, 1). Denote ξ(α) = αw +(1−α)z ∈n;
by Lemma 1, item (iii), fρ(X)(ξ(α)) < α fρ(X)(w) + (1 −α) fρ(X)(z). Consequently
ρ(X)(ξ(α), A) = (rank(A) −1))

1 −
fρ(X)(ξ(α))
max j=1,...,n fρ(X)(e j)
 
> (rank(A) −1)

1 −α fρ(X)(w) + (1 −α) fρ(X)(z)
max j=1,...,n fρ(X)(e j)
 
= (rank(A) −1)

α

1 −
fρ(X)(w)
max j=1,...,n fρ(X)(e j)
 
+ (1 −α)

1 −
fρ(X)(z)
max j=1,...,n fρ(X)(e j)
 
≥min{ρ(X)(w, A), ρ(X)(z, A)},
thus property P1 is proved.
P2. From the hypothesis it follows that rank(A) = 1, consequently ρ(X)(w, A) = 0, so
that property P2 is proved.
P3. Since by Lemma 1, item (iii), fρ(X) is a strictly convex function then fρ(X)(w) <
max j=1,...,n fρ(e j) for each w ∈Wn \ ∂Wn; consequently, A∗is a solution of the
equation ρ(X)(w, A) = 0 if and only if rank(A∗) = 1, so that property P3 is proved.
P4. From Lemma 1, item (iv), and equality rank(A) = rank(A), it immediately follows
that ρ(X)(tw, A) = ρ(X)(w, A), so that property P4 is proved.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 4
Proof P5. Sincerank(α1m×n) = 1,thenfromtherank-suminequality(seeHorn&Johnson,
2012, Section 0.4.5) yields rank(A + α) = rank(A) which, combined with the result
of Proposition 1, item (vi), yields ρ(X)(w, A + α) = ρ(X)(w, A), so that property
P5 is proved.
P6. From equality rank(αA) = rank(A) and Proposition 1, item (vii), it immediately fol-
lows that ρ(X)(w, αA) = ρ(X)(w, A), so that property P6 is proved.
⊓⊔
123

Annals of Operations Research
Proof of Proposition 5
Proof Proposition 2 yields ρ(X)(w∗, A) = rank(A)−1 and ρ(X)(w∗
+, A+) = rank(A+)−
1. Since by the hypothesis of P7 and P8 we have either rank(A+) = rank(A) or rank(A+) >
rank(A), the results are immediately proved.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 7
For the following proofs (see also the proof of Proposition 8), we recall some of the nota-
tion already introduced in the main text of the paper, and we also introduce some additional
notation required for clarity. We indicate with 0m×n and 1m×n the m ×n matrices whose ele-
ments are all equal to zero and one respectively (if m = n we simply use 0n and 1n). For each
A ∈Matm×n(R) we denote by Ai ∈Mat1×n(R) the ith row of A, by A(i) ∈Mat(m−1)×n(R)
the submatrix of A obtained by deleting its ith row and by A(i, j) ∈Mat(m−1)×(n−1)(R) the
submatrix of A obtained by deleting its ith row and its jth column. For each A ∈Matn(R)
we denote by diag(A) ∈Matn×1(R) the column vector of the diagonal elements of A.
Proof From Remark 5, Problem (4) is a convex constrained minimization problem that admits
unique solution w∗= (w∗
1, . . . , w∗
n) ∈n. We consider system

(w −e j)t S(w −e j) = (w −en)t S(w −en),
∀j = 1, . . . , n −1
n
k=1 wk = 1.
(12)
If system (12) admits a solution w∗, then by the positivity of f
−1 (deﬁned in formula (5))
it follows that w∗is the minimizer of f
−1 over n and f
−1(w∗) = 0. System (12) can be
equivalently rewritten as follows:
 
(Sj −Sn)w = 1
2(s j j −snn),
∀j = 1, . . . , n −1
wn = 1 −n−1
j=1 w j.
Hence
wn = 1 −11×(n−1)w(n),
(13)
and
⎛
⎜⎝
S1 −Sn
...
Sn−1 −Sn
⎞
⎟⎠
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎝
w1
...
wn−1
1 −11×(n−1)w(n)
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎠= 1
2
⎛
⎜⎝
s11 −snn
...
sn−1,n−1 −snn
⎞
⎟⎠.
(14)
123

Annals of Operations Research
We rewrite the left-hand side of (14) as follows:
⎛
⎜⎝
S1 −Sn
...
Sn−1 −Sn
⎞
⎟⎠
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎝
w1
...
wn−1
1 −11×(n−1)w(n)
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎠=
=

S(n,n) −1(n−1)×1S(n)
n

w(n) −(St
n)(n)11×(n−1)w(n) −snn1(n−1)×1 + snn1n−1w(n)
=

S(n,n) −1(n−1)×1S(n)
i
−(St
n)(n)11×(n−1) + snn1n−1

w(n) −snn1(n−1)×1
=

S(n,n) −(Dn + Dt
n) + snn1n−1

w(n) −snn1(n−1)×1
= Enw(n) −snn1(n−1)×1.
We also rewrite the right-hand side of (14):
1
2
⎛
⎜⎝
s11 −snn
...
sn−1,n−1 −snn
⎞
⎟⎠= 1
2 diag(S)(n) −1
2snn1(n−1)×1
Hence, system (14) becomes
Enw(n) = bn.
(15)
Now, we prove that En ∈S+
n−1(R). First, we consider the following n × n symmetric
matrices
B := S + snn1n,
D := 1n×1Sn + (1n×1Sn)t,
E := B −D,
and denote their real eigenvalues by λ1(B) ≤. . . ≤λn(B), λ1(D) ≤. . . ≤λn(D) and
λ1(E) ≤. . . ≤λn(E), respectively.
We analyze the matrices B, We observe that B is positive deﬁnite since it is the sum of a
symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix and a symmetric positive semideﬁnite matrix (see Horn
& Johnson, 2012, Corollary 4.3.12); therefore, λi(B) > 0 for each i ∈{1, . . . , n}.
Now, we consider the matrix D. Since S ∈S+
n (R), then Sn is not the zero vector, that is
rank(Sn) = 1. By the rank-sum inequality (see Horn & Johnson, 2012, formula 0.4.5.1) it
holds
rank(D) ≤2 · rank(1n×1Sn) = 2 · rank(Sn) = 2,
with rank(D) = 2 if and only if
{0} = range(1n×1Sn) ∩range((1n×1Sn)t) = {k · 1n×1 | k ∈R} ∩{k · St
n | k ∈R}.
Hence, the case rank(D) = 1 occurs if and only if there exists δ > 0 such that Sn =
δ × 11×n(R); consequently, the eigenvalues of D are 0 = λ1(D) = . . . = λn−1(D) <
λn(D) = nδ. Otherwise, rank(D) = 2, and the characteristic polynomial of D is
pD(λ) = det(λIn −D) = λn−2(λ2 + an−1λ + an−2),
(16)
123

Annals of Operations Research
where, according to (Horn & Johnson, 2012, formula (1.2.13)),
an−2 =

1≤k< j≤n
det

2snk
snk + snj
snj + snk
2snj
 
=

1≤k< j≤n

4snksnj −(snk + snj)2
= −

1≤k< j≤n

snj −snk
2 < 0,
where the last inequality follows from the fact that there exist j, k ∈{1, . . . , n}, with j ̸= k,
such that snj ̸= snk. Consequently, from (16) the characteristic equation pD(λ) = 0 has
exactly 2 nonzero solutions with opposite signs, that is the eigenvalues of D are λ1(D) <
0 = λ2(D) = . . . = λn−1(D) < λn(D).
We consider the matrix E. We note that by construction the nth row and the nth column
of E are equal to the zero vector, hence the characteristic polynomial of E is pE(λ) =
det(λIn −E) = λg(λ), where g(λ) is a real polynomial in λ of degree n −1, and there is
at least one eigenvalue of E which is equal to zero. Further, recalling that E = B −D and
exploiting classical Weyl inequalities (see Horn et al., 1998, Theorem 3.1) we have
λ2(E) ≥λ1(B) + λ2(−D.)
Since the eigenvalues of the matrix −D are λi(−D) = −λn−i+1(D), for each i ∈{1, . . . , n},
the previous inequality becomes:
λ2(E) ≥λ1(B) −λn−1(D) = λ1(B) > 0,
implying that λ1(E) = 0 and that 0 < λ2(E) ≤. . . ≤λn(E) are the zeros of the equation
g(λ) = 0.
Finally we consider the symmetric matrix En ∈Matn−1(R). Since En is the principal
submatrix of E obtained by deleting its nth row and nth column (which are both equal to
the zero vector), then the characteristic polynomial of En is pEn(λ) = g(λ), so the real
eigenvalues of En are exactly 0 < λ2(E) ≤. . . ≤λn(E). Consequently, En ∈S+
n−1(R) and
so En is invertible. Then, by using (13) and (15), formula (6) is proved.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 8
Proof Let σi be the variance of asset i, for each i ∈{1, . . . , n}. Then, it holds 
 =
diag(σ1, . . . , σn), S = diag( 1
σ1 , . . . , 1
σn ), Dn = 0n−1 (see formula (9)) and
En = (
−1)(n,n) + 1
σn
1n−1
bn = 1
2

diag(
−1)(n) + 1
σn
1(n−1)×1
 
123

Annals of Operations Research
(see (7) and (8)). In order to compute E−1
n
we apply the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury
formula, see Hager (1989) and Miller (1981), to En:
E−1
n
=

(
−1)(n,n) + 1
σn
1n−1
 −1
=

In−1 −
1
1 + tr( 1
σn 1n−1
(n,n))

(n,n) 1
σn
1n−1


(n,n)
=

In−1 −
1
1 + 1
σn
n−1
j=1 σ j

(n,n) 1
σn
1n−1


(n,n)
=

In−1 −
σn
n
j=1 σ j

(i,i) 1
σn
1n−1


(n,n)
=

In−1 −
1
n
j=1 σ j

(n,n)1n−1


(n,n).
Then applying, Proposition 7, formula (6), we compute
(w∗)(n) = 1
2

In−1 −
1
n
j=1 σ j

(n,n)1n−1


(n,n)

diag(
−1)(n) + 1
σn
1(n−1)×1
 
= 1
2

1(n−1)×1 −
n −1
n
j=1 σ j

(n,n)1(n−1)×1
+ 1
σn


(n,n)1(n−1)×1 −
n−1
j=1 σ j
n
j=1 σ j

(n,n)1n−1

= 1
2

1(n−1)×1 −

n −1
n
j=1 σ j
−1
σn
+
n−1
j=1 σ j
σi
n
j=1 σ j

diag(
)(n)

= 1
2
⎛
⎝1(n−1)×1 −
1
σn
n
j=1 σ j
⎛
⎝(n −1)σn −
n

j=1
σ j +
n−1

j=1
σ j
⎞
⎠diag(
)(n)
⎞
⎠
= 1
2

1(n−1)×1 −
n −2
n
j=1 σ j
diag(
)(n)

(17)
and
w∗
n = 1 −1
211×(n−1)

1(n−1)×1 −
n −2
n
j=1 σ j
diag(
)(n)

= 1 −1
2
⎛
⎝(n −1) −
n −2
n
j=1 σ j
n−1

j=1
σ j
⎞
⎠
= 1 −1
2

(n −2)
n
j=1 σ j
σn + 1

= 1
2

1 −(n −2)
n
j=1 σ j
σn

.
(18)
Finally, from (17) and (18) formula (1) immediately follows.
⊓⊔
123

Annals of Operations Research
Proof of Proposition 9
Proof By construction, the matrix Rρ,X is symmetric and can be rewritten as follows:
Rρ,X = DCX D,
(19)
where CX ∈Matn(R) is the correlation matrix of X1, . . . , Xn and D ∈Matn(R) is the
diagonal matrix with diagonal elements √ρ(X1), . . . , √ρ(Xn). From the hypothesis that X
has full-rank, it follows that CX is symmetric and positive deﬁnite. Further, the assumption
ρ(X j) > 0, for each j ∈{1, . . . , n}, yields rank(D) = n. By applying (Horn & Johnson,
2012, Observation 7.1.8) to (19), we conclude that Rρ,X is positive deﬁnite.
⊓⊔
Proof of Proposition 10
Proof It is enough to repeat the proof of Proposition 7 with S = R−1
ρ,X.
⊓⊔
8 Appendix
We consider the datasets DAX, ESX, FTSE, Nikkei, S&P500 constituents as described in
Section 5.2.
8.1 The long-only case
Figures 8-12 report the values of the diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes
deﬁned in Section 5.3 and computed for the portfolios in PDAX
LO , PESX
LO , PFTSE
LO
, PNikkei
LO
,
PS&Pconst.
LO
(see Section 5.3.1) for the datasets DAX, ESX, FTSE, Nikkei and S&P500 con-
stituents (see Section 5.2), respectively. In each case, the most diversiﬁed portfolios are
computed and represented on the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (see Figure 13, left panel).
When the problem is restricted to the dominant part of the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier,
the most diversiﬁed portfolios are represented in Figure 13, right panel.
From a qualitative point of view, the present experiments conﬁrm the features already
observed for the S&P500 dataset (see Section 5.3.1): Figure 13 shows that, in some cases,
the most diversiﬁed portfolios do not belong to the dominant part of the frontier. Conse-
quently, restricting to the dominant part ends up with a sub-optimal portfolio. Furthermore,
we observe some clusters of points almost overlapping on the frontiers, meaning that many
measures identify very similar most diversiﬁed portfolios. Figure 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 show
that the measures CRk, ρAVG1, ρAVG2, ρAVG3, ρAVG4, SE and DR have peculiar behaviors,
signiﬁcantly differing from the majority of the other measures; such phenomenon has already
been highlighted and discussed in the application on the S&P500. We notice that, as n grows,
the most diversiﬁed portfolios with respect to the majority of the measures tend to concentrate
very close to the global minimum variance portfolio. The GDPMs behave coherently with
the other measures.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig.8 The values of the various diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes computed for the portfolios
in PDAX
LO
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig.9 The values of the various diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes computed for the portfolios
in PESX
LO
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 10 The values of the various diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes computed for the port-
folios in PFTSE
LO
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 11 The values of the various diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes computed for the port-
folios in PNikkei
LO
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 12 The values of the various diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes computed for the port-
folios in PS&Pconst.
LO
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 13 Representation of the most diversiﬁed portfolios of the datasets DAX, ESX, FTSE, Nikkei, S&P const.
for various diversiﬁcation measures and concentration indexes on the relative mean-variance efﬁcient frontier
(left panel) and when restricted over the dominant part of the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (right panel)
8.2 The long-short case
Figure 14 reports the values of the GDPMs deﬁned in Section 5.3 and computed for the
portfolios in PDAX
LS , PESX
LS , PFTSE
LS
, PNikkei
LS
, PS&Pconst.
LS
(see Section 5.3.2) for the datasets
DAX, ESX, FTSE, Nikkei and S&P500 constituents (see Section 5.2). For each case, the
most diversiﬁed portfolios are represented on the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (see Figure
15, left panel). When the problem is restricted to the dominant part of the mean-variance
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 14 The values of the various GDPMs computed for the portfolios in PDAX
LS
, PESX
LS , PFTSE
LS
, PNikkei
LS
,
PS&Pconst
LS
efﬁcient frontier, the most diversiﬁed portfolios are represented in Figure 15, right panel. The
experiments conﬁrm the tendency, already pointed out for the S&P500 index, of the most
diversiﬁed portfolios to concentrate in a small area close to the global minimum variance
portfolio. A different behavior characterizes GDPMMDD since in this case the most diversiﬁed
portfolio signiﬁcantly differs from the global minimum variance and such a difference seems
to grow as n increases. We think that this phenomenon could be related to a not negligible
impact of portfolio’s size n on the calculation of the maximum drawdown.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 15 Representation of the most diversiﬁed portfolios of the datasets DAX, ESX, FTSE, Nikkei, S&P
constituents for various GPDMs on the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (left panel) and when restricted over
the dominant part of the mean-variance efﬁcient frontier (right panel)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the anonymous referees for their valuable comments and sug-
gestions, which have signiﬁcantly improved the quality of this manuscript. Maria-Laura Torrente is a member
of the Gruppo Nazionale per l’Analisi Matematica, la Probabilità e le loro Applicazioni (GNAMPA), which
is part of the Istituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica (INdAM).
Author Contributions The authors equally contributed to the design and implementation of the research, the
analysis of the results and the writing of the manuscript.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Genova within the CRUI-CARE Agree-
ment.
Data Availability The datasets analysed in the current study are available from the corresponding author on
reasonable request.
Declarations
Competing interests The authors have no relevant ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interests to disclose.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Acciaio, B., & Penner, I. (2011). Dynamic Risk Measures. In G. Di Nunno & B. Aksendal (Eds.), Advanced
Mathematical Methods for Finance. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Acerbi, C. (2002). Spectral measures of risk: A coherent representation of subjective risk aversion. Journal of
Banking and Finance, 26, 1505–1518.
Acerbi, C., & Tasche, D. (2002). On the coherence of expected shortfall. Journal of Banking and Finance, 26,
1487–1503.
Ararat, Ç., Cesarone, F., Pinar, M. Ç., & Ricci, J. M. (2024). MAD Risk Parity Portfolios. Annals of Operations
Research, 336, 899–924.
Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J., & Heath, D. (1999). Coherent measures of risk. Mathematical Finance, 9,
203–228.
Bellini, F., Cesarone, F., Colombo, C., & Tardella, F. (2021). Risk parity with expectiles. European Journal
of Operational Research, 291(3), 1149–1163.
Bertelli, B., & Torricelli, C. (2024). The trade-off between ESG screening and portfolio diversiﬁcation in the
short and in the long run. Journal of Economics and Finance, 48(2), 298–322.
Bossu, S., & Gu, Y. (2004). Fundamental relationship between an index’s volatility and the average volatility
and correlation of its components, J.P. Morgan Equity Derivatives, Working paper.
Bouchaud, J.P., Potters, M., & Aguilar, J.P. (1997). Missing information and asset allocation, Working paper,
available at https://arxiv.org/pdf/cond-mat/9707042.pdf
Boudt, K., Carl, P., & Peterson, B. (2013). Asset allocation with Conditional Value-at-Risk budgets. Journal
of Risk, 15, 39–68.
Carmichael,B.,Koumou,G.B.,&Moran,K.(2015).Anewformulationofmaximumdiversiﬁcationindexation
using Rao’s Quadratic Entropy, Working paper available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=3149033
Carmichael, B., Koumou, G.B., & Moran, K. (2023). Unifying portfolio diversiﬁcation measures using Rao’s
quadratic entropy, Journal of Quantitative Economics.
Cesarone, F., & Colucci, S. (2018). Minimum risk versus capital and risk diversiﬁcation strategies for portfolio
construction. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 69(2), 183–200.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Choueifaty, Y., & Coignard, Y. (2008). Toward maximum diversiﬁcation. Journal of Portfolio Management,
35, 40–51.
Choueifaty, Y., Froidure, T., & Reynier, J. (2013). Properties of the most diversiﬁed portfolio. Journal of
Investment Strategies, 2, 49–70.
Clarke, R., De Silva, H., & Thorley, S. (2013). Risk parity, maximum diversiﬁcation, and minimum variance:
An analytic perspective. Journal of Portfolio Management, 39, 39–53.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., & Uppal, R. (2009). Optimal Versus Naive Diversiﬁcation: How Inefﬁcient is the
1/N Portfolio Strategy? The Review of Financial Studies, 22(5), 1915–1953.
Embrechts, P., Furrer, H., & Kaufmann, R. (2009). Different Kinds of Risk. In T. Mikosch, J. P. Kreiß, R.
Davis, & T. Andersen (Eds.), Handbook of Financial Time Series. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Flint, E., Seymour, A., & Chikurunhe, F. (2020). Deﬁning and measuring portfolio diversiﬁcation. South
African Actuarial Journal, 20, 17–48.
Föllmer, H., & Schied, A. (2002). Convex measures of risk and trading constraints. Finance and Stochastics,
6, 429–447.
Fragiskos, A. (2013). What is Portfolio Diversiﬁcation? available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=2331475
Frittelli, M., & Rosazza Gianin, E. (2002). Putting order in risk measures. Journal of Banking & Finance, 26,
1473–1486.
Gini, C. (1921). Measurement of inequality of incomes. Economic Journal, 31(121), 124–126.
Hager, W. W. (1989). Updating the Inverse of a Matrix. SIAM Review, 31(2), 221–239.
Hall, M., & Tideman, N. (1967). Measures of concentration. Journal of American Statistical Society, 62,
162–168.
Han, X., Lin, L., & Wang, R. (2023). Diversiﬁcation quotients: Quantifying diversiﬁcation via risk measures,
available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.13679
Han, X., Lin, L., & Wang, R. (2023). Diversiﬁcation quotients based on VaR and ES. Insurance: Mathematics
and Economics, 113, 185–197.
Hannah, L., & Kay, J. A. (1977). Concentration in Modern Industry. Measurement and the UK Experience,
Macmillan, London: Theory.
Hendriks, G., Slangen, A.H.L., & Heugens, P. P. M. A. R. (2024). Country portfolio diversity and ﬁrms’
portfolio adjustment decisions: A behavioral perspective, International Business Review 33(4).
Herﬁndal, O. Concentration in the U.S. steel industry, Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Columbia University
(1950).
Hill, M. O. (1973). Diversity and evenness: a unifying notation and its consequences. Ecology, 54(2), 427–432.
Hirschman, A. O. (1964). The paternity of an index. The American Economic Review, 54(5), 761–762.
Horn, R. A., & Johnson, C. R. (2012). Matrix Analysis (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Horn, R. A., Ree, N. H., & Wasin, S. (1998). Eigenvalue inequalities and equalities. Linear Algebra and its
Applications, 270(1), 29–44.
Horvath, J. (1970). Suggestion for a comprehensive measure of concentration. Southern Economic Journal,
36(4), 446–452.
Hunjra, A. I., Hanif, M., Mehmood, R., & Nguyen, L. V. (2021). Diversiﬁcation, corporate governance,
regulation and bank risk-taking. Journal of Financial Reporting and Accounting, 19(1), 92–108.
Hunjra, A. I., Alawi, S. M., Colombage, S., Sahito, U., & Hanif, M. (2020). Portfolio construction by using
different risk models: A comparison among diverse economic scenarios, Risks 8(4).
Inui, K., & Kijima, M. (2005). On the signiﬁcance of expected shortfall as a coherent risk measure. Journal
of Banking & Finance, 29(4), 853–864.
Koumou, G.B., & Dionne, G. (2022). Coherent Diversiﬁcation Measures in Portfolio Theory: An Axiomatic
Foundation, Risks 10(11).
Lhabitant, F. S. (2017). Portfolio Diversiﬁcation. Saint Louis: Elsevier.
Lipczynski, J., Wilson, J., & Goddard, J. (2009). Industrial Organization: Competition, Strategy, Policy (3rd
ed.). Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall.
Maillard, S., Roncalli, T., & Teiletche, J. (2010). The Properties of Equally Weighted Risk Contribution
Portfolios. The Journal of Portfolio Management, 36(4), 60–70.
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio Selection. The Journal of Finance, 7(1), 77–91.
Mausser, H., & Romanko, O. (2018). Long-only equal risk contribution portfolios for cvar under discrete
distributions. Quantitative Finance, 18(11), 1927–1945.
Mehmood, R., Hunjra, A.I, & Chani, M.I. (2019). The impact of corporate diversiﬁcation and ﬁnancial structure
on ﬁrm performance: evidence from South Asian countries, Journal of risk and ﬁnancial management
12(1).
Meucci, A. (2009). Managing diversiﬁcation. Risk, 22, 74–79.
Miller, K. S. (1981). On the Inverse of the Sum of Matrices. Mathematics Magazine, 54(2), 67–72.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Qian, E. (2006). On the ﬁnancial interpretation of risk contributions: Risk budgets do add up, Journal of
Investment Management, Fourth Quarter.
Rachev, S., Ortobelli, S., Stoyanov, S., Fabozzi, F. J., & Biglova, A. (2008). Desirable properties of an ideal risk
measure in portfolio theory. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, 11(01), 19–54.
Rao, C. R. (1982). Diversity and dissimilarity coefﬁcients: a uniﬁed approach. Theoretical Population Biology,
21, 24–43.
Renyi, A. (1961). On measures of entropy and information. Proceedings of the Fourth Berkeley Symposium
on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1, 547–561.
Rockafellar, R. T., Uryasev, S., & Zabarankin, M. (2006). Generalized deviations in risk analysis. Finance and
Stochastics, 10, 51–74.
Roncalli, T., & Weisang, G. (2016). Risk parity portfolios with risk factors. Quantitative Finance, 16, 377–388.
Shannon, C.E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication, Bell System Technical Journal 27, 379 -
423 and 623 - 656.
Sortino, F., & Van der Meer, R. (1991). Downside risk. Journal of Portfolio Management, 17(4), 27–31.
Tasche, D. (2006). Measuring sectoral diversiﬁcation in an asymptotic multi-factor framework, available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0505142
Torrente, M., & Uberti, P. (2023). Risk-adjusted Geometric Diversiﬁed Portfolios. Quality & Quantity. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11135-023-01631-w
Torrente, M., & Uberti, P. (2025). The Reasons why Maximum Diversiﬁcation is Better than Minimum Risk,
also in Terms of Risk. Journal of Asset Management, 26, 642–675.
Tsallis, C. (1988). Possible generalization of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistics. Journal of Statistical Physics, 52,
479–487.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123