TITLE: Risk identification in humanitarian food logistics using a hybrid literature search strategy and expert judgment
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2025
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06773-8
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 26 July 2023 / Accepted: 17 July 2025 / Published online: 1 August 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Risk identification in humanitarian food logistics using a 
hybrid literature search strategy and expert judgment
Prima Denny Sentia1,2 · Syaimak Abdul Shukor1
 · Amelia Natasya Abdul Wahab1 · 
Muriati Mukhtar1
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-06773-8
Abstract
When a disaster occurs, Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management (HLSCM) 
works to ensure the timely and appropriate distribution of relief goods. One is food distri­
bution, one of the most needed essential supplies after a disaster. However, delays in the 
delivery of food logistics often occur, resulting in fatal consequences for disaster victims. 
In HLSCM, delays are referred to as risks, while the causes of delays are risk agents that 
must be identified. Identifying risk agents in distribution delays is crucial because it dra­
matically affects the entire HLSCM flow. This study proposes a hybrid literature search 
strategy combined with expert judgment to identify risk agents that cause food delivery 
delays in the HLSCM process. The results of this study indicate that there are 17 risk 
agents affecting food logistics delivery delays. Based on the mathematical aggregation of 
expert judgment results, the highest average values ​are shown by three risk agents: “inven­
tory quantity,” “road conditions,” and “communication problems.” This investigation fills 
the gap in the existing HLSCM literature by explicitly identifying and validating these 
risk factors. The hybrid literature search strategy combines a systematic literature review 
with expert judgment and provides a strong framework for future research. These findings 
offer practical insights for stakeholders to improve logistics efficiency and ensure timely 
aid delivery. While focusing on risk identification, this study lays the groundwork for 
future research to prioritize risk mitigation strategies and further refine HLSCM practices.
Keywords  Humanitarian supply chain management · Humanitarian logistics · Food 
logistics · Distribution delays · Risks identification
1  Introduction
Over the past twenty years, the Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT) has recorded 7348 
disasters worldwide. Disasters claim about 60,000 lives annually and affect more than 4 bil­
lion people. In addition, disasters have caused an economic loss of about US$2.97 trillion 
(CRED, 2020). Floods and earthquakes are categorized as frequent disasters worldwide 
based on the type of natural disaster. From 2004 to 2023, floods dominated disaster cases 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
worldwide, with an annual average of 168 cases and an average of deaths of 5570. Mean­
while, earthquakes showed a yearly average of 26 cases, with the highest death rate reaching 
36,876 people per annual average (CRED, 2025; Van Dijk et al., 2025).
Recent global flood and earthquake disasters have caused severe social disruption and 
significant economic losses worldwide. Floods between 2004 and 2023 resulted in an annual 
average loss of approximately US$42.8 billion, displacing millions and causing widespread 
damage to infrastructure and livelihoods (CRED, 2020; Rice et al., 2022; Rosmadi et al., 
2023; Saad et al., 2023). Significant events such as the Pakistan floods in 2022 and persis­
tent flooding in Malaysia and Africa highlight how vulnerable communities face recurring 
humanitarian crises. Similarly, earthquakes remain among the most frequent and destruc­
tive hazards, exemplified by the 2004 Asian tsunami and recent events in Haiti, Japan, and 
Indonesia, leading to massive casualties, displacement, and economic costs exceeding 
US$43.5 billion annually on average (CRED, 2021, 2025; Zhang, 2014). These disasters 
have underscored the urgent need for effective risk-reduction strategies to mitigate their 
profound impact on societies and economies worldwide (Rosmadi et al., 2023; World Bank, 
2022).
During disasters, victims rely on humanitarian aid from various organizations and indi­
viduals. The efficient delivery of this aid is managed through the Humanitarian Supply 
Chain Management (HSCM) system, which acts as a logistical control for the entire pro­
cess. HSCM encompasses four key stages: preparedness, emergency response, mitigation, 
and rehabilitation. It also oversees the planning, implementation, and control of goods flow, 
emphasizing practicality and cost-effectiveness to ensure timely delivery to those in need 
(Arismawan et al., 2025; Thomas & Mizushima, 2005).
This study refers to the logistics distribution within HSCM as “Humanitarian Logistics 
and Supply Chain Management” (HLSCM). According to Thomas and Kopczak (2005), 
HLSCM is about planning, executing, and controlling the efficient and cost-effective move­
ment and storage of goods, materials, and related information from where they originate to 
where they are consumed, all to alleviate the suffering of vulnerable people. The primary 
aim of HLSCM is to provide timely supplies and services, ensuring essential items such as 
food, water, temporary shelter, clothing, and medicine are distributed during a disaster. Fail­
ing to deliver humanitarian aid can have severe consequences, including fatalities (Chap­
man & Mitchell, 2018; Syahrir et al., 2015; Tadić et al., 2025).
Furthermore, this study concentrates on distributing food logistics among the essential 
items required during a disaster. The rationale is that food distribution constitutes the most 
vital logistics operation, as food is a fundamental necessity following a disaster (Cisneros-
García et al., 2023; Tadić et al., 2025; Voyer et al., 2015). The absence of food on the 
humanitarian aid list will impede post-disaster recovery efforts. Therefore, the natural disas­
ter recovery plan must guarantee that food assistance and distribution are accessible and 
equitably allocated to victims (De Haen & Hemrich, 2007; Leiras et al., 2021; MacNabb & 
Fletcher, 2019; Peters et al., 2021).
Prior research has identified multiple issues with food logistics distribution. These issues 
frequently impede the food logistics distribution system, resulting in delays in distribution. 
The timing and fairness of food aid distribution are prevalent issues in disaster management 
(Çankaya et al., 2019; Cheng et al., 2021; Hasnain et al., 2021; Kembro, 2012; Vitoriano et 
al., 2011; Zulfikri, 2025). The delays stem from multiple issues, including the lack of food 
logistics planning, which concerns the configuration of the amount of food, determining 
1 3
218

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
the ingredients needed, and the quality of the food to be distributed. In specific cases, these 
problems also affect the decision-making process concerning food logistics distribution, 
resulting in inequities and delays in delivery (Guli et al., 2023; Ogazón et al., 2022; Single­
ton et al., 2022).
Conversely, overstocking, substantial waste, shortages, storage stability of food, and the 
lack of protocols for perishable food distribution are also issues in food logistics (Aydin et 
al., 2024; Giedelmann-L et al., 2022). The variability in demand and supply conditions dur­
ing a disaster can be influenced by the quality, reliability, and promptness of the assistance 
provided (Sreedevi & Saranga, 2017). The primary challenge in HLSCM is the efficient 
management and execution of all logistics operations, particularly delivery (Abdi et al., 
2021; Fathollahi-Fard et al., 2019; Sentia et al., 2023). Typically, issues in logistics opera­
tions pertain to delays in the delivery of assistance to victims (Kebriyaii et al., 2021; Mano­
piniwes & Irohara, 2021; Nezhadroshan et al., 2021).
Delays in the distribution of food logistics during disasters indicate that HLSCM has 
many risks that need to be minimized. Although the disaster relief supply chain has measur­
able operating standards, there are still risks that have not been managed. This study aims 
to identify the risks that cause delays in aid distribution in HLSCM. The focus is limited to 
the distribution of food logistics during floods and earthquakes, with the justification that 
both are the most frequent disasters in the world (CRED, 2025). This study is crucial due to 
the direct impact of risks on the entire Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Manage­
ment (HLSCM) flow, affecting efficiency in time, costs, and decision-making. Therefore, 
identifying, managing, and monitoring these risks is essential to reduce potential losses in 
HLSCM.
While HLSCM encompasses various aspects of humanitarian aid, similar studies that 
specifically identify risks within the food logistics component are barely available. This 
research is among the first to identify risks associated with food logistics in humanitarian 
supply chain management. It also introduces a novel methodology by combining a hybrid 
literature search strategy with expert judgment for risk identification. The hybrid literature 
search strategy integrates the “Finding Literature Technique” (Schutt, 2019), which pro­
vides a structured approach to identifying relevant research articles in databases like Sco­
pus and Web of Science, and the “Snowballing Tracing Method” (Wohlin, 2014), which 
expands the search by exploring reference lists of identified articles. This hybrid approach 
ensures a comprehensive and in-depth exploration of existing literature on HLSCM risks, 
serving as the basis for risk identification. Furthermore, the “Two-Stage Expert Judgment 
Process” includes content validity analysis and mathematical aggregation. The hybrid litera­
ture search strategy ensures a thorough exploration of existing research, while the two-stage 
expert judgment process validates and prioritizes the identified risks.
2  Risk in humanitarian supply chain: recent publications
Previous researchers generally discuss risk in the humanitarian supply chain in the context 
of risk management. Effective risk management in these contexts hinges on identifying, 
evaluating, and mitigating potential risk events (Acevedo et al., 2019; Chukwuka et al., 
2023). Risk management includes identification, assessment and mitigation (Fan & Ste­
venson, 2018; Lee, 2024; Minguito & Banluta, 2023). Previous researchers have studied 
1 3
219

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
these activities with various focuses. This chapter presents recent publications regarding 
risk management (which includes risk identification, assessment, and mitigation) and its use 
in studies related to risk in the humanitarian supply chain.
The first topic is risk identification in the humanitarian supply chain, which has drawn 
attention from recent researchers. Jahre (2017) and Yang et al. (2023) have studied the 
risks humanitarian organizations face during natural or man-made disasters. They identified 
macro and micro risks, as well as economic risks along the supply chain. On the other hand, 
Beresford and Pettit (2009) investigated emergency planning and risk reduction in relation 
to the Asian tsunami in Thailand, revealing the Thai government’s establishment of regional 
communication networks, early warning systems, and risk reduction measures.
Risk identification is also carried out at the prepositioning and preparedness levels. A 
study conducted by Jahre and Heigh (2008) analyzed the risk of funding preparedness in 
significantly improving response time and effectiveness. Arnette and Zobel (2019) and 
Balcik et al. (2019) are among the researchers who identified risks in prepositioning for 
humanitarian and disaster supplies. A similar thing was studied by Roh et al. (2015) on pre-
positioned warehouses. They found that pre-positioned warehouses for humanitarian aid 
generated 17 different types of dangers, which can be visualized using Interpretive Struc­
tural Modeling (ISM).
Furthermore, Tay et al. (2022) examined the risks frequently occurring during the disas­
ter management cycle (DMC) Their findings showed five major risk factors in DMC: (1) 
demand risk, (2) supply risk, (3) operational risk, (4) infrastructure risk, and (5) disruption 
risk. The severity of these risks varies depending on the stage of the DMC. This study pro­
posed a supply chain strategy (SCS) that increases risk awareness, collaboration, and hori­
zontal and vertical coordination among key DMC stakeholders. Baharmand et al. (2017) 
studied on in-country transportation risks in humanitarian supply chains, using the 2015 
Nepal earthquake as a case study. They found supply delays, market changes, and limited 
capacity as the most significant risks, with cargo deterioration and ethical issues as minor.
Löffel et al. (2025) is among the first to derive supply chain risks and categories specific 
to humanitarian aid delivery. Their study found six aggregated risk categories in humanitar­
ian aid delivery. Furthermore, a differentiated view of risk types allows for stronger inter-
organizational collaboration within the sector and beyond. Miller and Engemann (2008) 
carried out more extensive research. The study covered the supply chain risks from cata­
strophic and non-catastrophic localized occurrences that impact business operations, like 
fires and power outages. It depicted the hazards associated with natural disasters in the sup­
ply chain and provided the Monte Carlo Simulation Model to simulate their consequences. 
The resulting model evaluated several scenarios, such as node correlation, the effectiveness 
of disaster recovery, and numerous sources.
Humanitarian supply chains are inherently vulnerable to a variety of risks. Therefore, 
Risk identification is a crucial aspect of the humanitarian supply chain, as it helps organiza­
tions identify and mitigate risks associated with natural or man-made disasters. Previous 
research on this theme has identified various risks that are commonly assessed across the 
entire humanitarian supply chain. These include macro-level disruption risks (e.g., natural 
disasters, political instability) and micro-level challenges (e.g., demand fluctuations, supply 
chain disruptions). Effective risk identification is critical to successful aid delivery.
Research on risk identification topic highlights the importance of identifying and miti­
gating risks across all phases of the disaster management cycle, from preparedness and 
1 3
220

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
pre-positioning to emergency response and recovery. Studies on this theme have identified 
various risk categories, including demand, supply, operational, infrastructure, and risks in 
aid procurement.
The second topic discusses the risk assessment process, from identifying risks to devel­
oping mitigation strategies in the humanitarian supply chain. This process helps organiza­
tions respond effectively to threats and build resilience (Lwin & Permwonguswa, 2024). 
For instance, Yang et al. (2023) classified risks into macro and micro levels and analyzed 
their economic impacts, showing how disasters can severely disrupt supply chains. Díaz-
Delgado and Iniestra (2014) also focused on flood risk assessment by creating a forecasting 
model using hydrologic and hydraulic data to predict floods and support evacuation, and aid 
planning. Additionally, Pontré et al. (2011) examined procurement risk management to help 
monitor and address procurement risks and improve organizational capacity in a structured 
way to deal with uncertainties and weaknesses.
The previous study on risk assessment topic is needed to improve the resilience of the 
humanitarian supply chain. Through risk assessment, humanitarian organizations and stake­
holders can anticipate and prepare for various risks. The benefit is that organizations can 
ensure that humanitarian assistance can continue to be distributed effectively, even in dif­
ficult conditions. In addition, humanitarian organizations can develop effective mitigation 
strategies by understanding the risks that may occur.
The third topic is risk mitigation in humanitarian supply chain. Risk management studies 
are further developed to find mitigation at a more complex level. According to case studies, 
humanitarian organizations can manage risk more effectively if they have a solid contin­
gency plan and strong relationships with local suppliers (Balcik & Beamon, 2008). This is 
certainly produced through various studies on risk mitigation. The main goal is to anticipate 
unexpected losses during the humanitarian operation.
Furthermore, previous researchers have produced various risk mitigation strategies. Roh 
et al. (2015) used Interpretive Structural Modeling (ISM) to visualize risks in prepositioned 
warehouses and develop aggressive mitigation strategies. The studies of Beresford and Pet­
tit (2009), Jahre and Heigh (2008), and Sandivari et al. (2023) conducted risk identification 
while offering risk mitigation strategies in the form of emergency planning and risk reduc­
tion by building regional communication networks, early warning systems, and preparing 
emergency funding systems. The goal is for the efficiency and effectiveness of humanitarian 
assistance. Ben-Tal et al. (2011) proposed a methodology to generate a robust logistics plan 
to mitigate demand uncertainty in the humanitarian supply chain. Previous studies on risk 
mitigation emphasize that a multi-faceted approach to risk mitigation, including proactive 
planning, strong partnerships, and strong communication, is needed to ensure timely and 
effective delivery of humanitarian assistance in challenging environments.
The fourth topic is expert judgement for risk analysis in the humanitarian supply chain. 
Experts are considered more knowledgeable than others in the specific field. Expert judg­
ment is an expert opinion given in order to determine a decision. Expert judgment is widely 
used in military intelligence, probabilistic risk analysis, and other fields when empirical data 
is scarce or difficult to obtain (Lin & Bier, 2008).
The presence of expert judgment was deemed appropriate to fill data gaps in HLSCM 
studies. Benini et al. (2017) explained that expert judgment is a professional opinion used 
for making decisions. However, in the humanitarian operations environment, expert judg­
ment is rarely used. Likewise, Agarwal et al. (2020) used expert judgment to explore and 
1 3
221

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
evaluate barriers that arise in the humanitarian supply chain. The research used a hybrid 
framework consisting of fuzzy step-wise weight assessment ratio analysis (SWARA) and 
fuzzy weighted aggregated sum product assessment (WASPAS). The study showed two 
critical aspects to overcoming obstacles in HSCM: long-term strategic planning for humani­
tarian operations and collaboration, cooperation, and coordination between humanitarian 
supply chain actors.
Xu et al. (2021) also used expert judgment to identify indicators that affect the resilience 
of the humanitarian supply chain using the example of a flood event in Hechuan District, 
China, in 2020. Then, a combination of experimental Laboratory and Evaluation of Fuzzy 
Decision Making and Analytic Network Process (Fuzzy-DEMATEL-ANP) was performed. 
The goal was to calculate the mutual relationship between the indicators and the weights of 
each indicator. The results showed that decision-makers in HSCM must coordinate, ensure 
effective transmission of information, and be able to formulate strategic plans.
Furthermore, Altare et al. (2022) combined literature studies and expert judgment to pro­
pose adapting public health indicators for measuring humanitarian response performance 
in various contexts. Besides that, Thalheimer et al. (2022) assessed the opportunities and 
challenges associated with utilizing forecast-based financing (FbF) to expand anticipatory 
and early humanitarian action based on the structured judgments of experts. By integrat­
ing cross-disciplinary expert judgment, they provide a much-needed pathway to transform 
humanitarian action to be more anticipatory and adaptable to change and help minimize 
disaster displacement in climate change vulnerable regions.
The use of expert judgment in previous studies has provided valuable insights into var­
ious aspects of HLSCM. These include identifying and addressing barriers to HLSCM; 
evaluating factors that influence the resilience of humanitarian supply chains; and improv­
ing performance measurement. As a result, using expert judgment in previous studies has 
helped researchers to explore innovative approaches to improve anticipatory action and 
minimize the impact of disasters. Ultimately, integrating expert judgment into HLSCM 
research and practice can significantly improve decision-making and increase the effective­
ness of humanitarian operations.
Previous research has focused on specific risk categories. Although the review mentions 
general risk categories such as demand, supply, and operational risks, there is a lack of in-
depth exploration of specific subcategories within these broader categories. One of these is 
Risk in the food logistics aspect. On the other hand, while expert judgment is used in some 
areas of humanitarian supply chain research, its application in assessing emerging risks in 
food logistics has not been explored.
3  Methodology
3.1  Hybrid literature search strategy
This research proposes a hybrid literature search strategy to identify risk agents in HLSCM 
that combines the finding literature technique proposed (Schutt, 2019) and the snowballing 
tracing method proposed by Wohlin (2014). Based on the research gap that has been stated, 
studies specifically discussing risk identification in HLSCM have never been carried out. 
1 3
222

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Therefore, the hybrid literature search strategy is necessary to find the risk in HLSCM, as 
illustrated in Fig. 1.
According to Fig. 1, the finding literature process, as proposed by Schutt (2019), was 
conducted in nine stages as follow:
1. Identifying the research question. At this stage, the research question determined is 
“What are the risks that affect the delay in logistics distribution to disaster victims in 
HLSCM?”.
2. Identifying a suitable bibliographic database. This study conducting A literature search 
by using the Scopus and WoS databases. Most literature review studies recommend and 
select these databases because they combine a rigorous selection process with broad 
interdisciplinary coverage, giving them a significant advantage over other databases 
(Behl & Dutta, 2019; Chalmeta & Santos-deLeón, 2020).
3. Creating a preliminary list of terms associated with the issue. Therefore, the specified 
list of terms using by this study is “humanitarian”; “supply”; “chain”; “management”; 
“distribution”; “risk”; “logistics”.
4. Limiting the research on journal publications from 2001 to 2022.
5. Employing Boolean search logic by inserting words “AND” to the list of term for limit­
ing, broadening and defining the search result.
6. Using the appropriate subject by choosing an article that is in accordance with the pre­
liminary list of terms proposed.
Fig. 1  The hybrid literature search strategy. Source Author’s own work
 
1 3
223

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
7. Reviewing the results by reading the titles and abstracts, i.e., clicking on the articles to 
generate a list of references and determining whether or not the references are relevant 
to our research.
8. Locate the articles.
9. Taking notes by organizing the standard sections of theory, method, findings, and con­
clusion (Sentia et al., 2023).
The finding literature process has produced 15 articles in total. The Scopus database found 
five articles relating to the search string. However, only four articles were included. One 
article was excluded because it was not related to natural disasters. Similarly, the WoS data­
base found 27 articles, but only 11 were relevant for review. At this stage, the total number 
of articles obtained from the Scopus and WoS databases was 15. These 15 articles are called 
key articles, which are the basis for finding other literature using snowball tracing method 
(Wohlin, 2014).
The articles obtained through the finding literature process continued to the next step, 
i.e., the snowballing tracing method proposed by Wohlin (2014). This study uses “back­
ward snowballing” which takes relevant articles and searches their reference lists for other 
relevant articles. The first stage of backward snowballing is determining the key articles as 
the starting set of articles. Fifteen key articles were obtained in the finding literature pro­
cess. Secondly, the list of references from the key articles was determined by checking two 
things: that the title must describe the topic being studied, and that the author has published 
other relevant papers in the field of HLSCM. Third, the new papers are either excluded or 
included to create the final set of articles.
In the snowballing process, the filtering criteria are applied sequentially. Initially, key 
articles from the “finding literature process” are the starting set. When examining the refer­
ences of these key articles, new papers are included only if their title clearly describes the 
study’s topic (humanitarian logistics, humanitarian supply chain, risk, or delays) and if the 
authors have a track record of publishing relevant work in the HLSCM field. This iterative 
process continues, adding new articles that meet these two core criteria until no further 
relevant papers are found. Finally, all selected articles undergo individual review to specifi­
cally identify risk agents that cause delays in logistics distribution within HLSCM.
The fourth step is to iterate until no new articles are found by repeating the backward 
snowballing procedure or finishing the process depending on the result. At this step, 67 arti­
cles matched the criteria, so the total number of articles was 82. The final articles from the 
hybrid literature search were then reviewed individually to obtain risk agents that roughly 
affect the delay in logistics distribution in HLSCM.
The results of this risk agents’ identification do not specifically lead to food logistics dis­
tribution delays in flooding and earthquakes HLSCM. According to Beaudrie et al. (2016), 
uncertainty in data can be estimated using expert judgment in the presence of adequate 
empirical data and careful elicitation. Therefore, the risk agents obtained need to go through 
an expert judgment process as justification to determine which risk agents affect food logis­
tics distribution delays in flooding and earthquakes in HLSCM.
1 3
224

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
3.2  Expert judgment
The process of implementing expert judgment in this study was carried out by referring to 
Beaudrie et al. (2016), Benini et al. (2017) and O’Hagan et al. (2006), and was later adapted 
to the study’s interests. Figure 2 presents the process of expert judgment in this research.
Expert judgment is required in this study to validate the information obtained from previ­
ous literature reviews (Benini et al., 2017). The first step in generating an expert judgment 
is determining the background and preparation to formulate interests involving experts in 
the research. At this stage, a questionnaire instrument for expert judgment is created based 
on the study’s topic and refers to the risk factors identified in the literature review process.
Fig. 2  Process of expert judgment. Source Author’s own work
 
1 3
225

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
The process of selecting experts based on several key parameters such as expertise, rep­
utation, availability and willingness to participate, understanding of the general problem 
area, number and quality of publications in the field of interest, and experience in the field 
of interest is the next step (Beaudrie et al., 2016; Cooke & Goossens, 2004). Experts were 
chosen from organizations or institutions associated with this research. The expert opinions 
were then compiled, structured, checked for transparency, and controlled to produce data on 
risk agents and classification.
This study employs expert judgment in two stages. Content validity index (CVI) analysis 
was used in the first stage of expert judgment. Meanwhile, a mathematical formulation was 
used to analyze the second stage of expert judgment. CVI begins with expert training and 
questionnaire distribution to ensure that experts understand the scope of the problem being 
studied, the methods used, and how to transform their views into the rating scales contained 
in the questionnaire. Before completing the questionnaire, this is done by briefly presenting 
common heuristics to avoid bias and misunderstanding. This training is essential to improve 
the quality and consistency of assessment by standardizing input and encouraging more 
objective evaluation. Theoretically, there is no set number of experts who should participate 
in the expert judgment process. On the other hand, Meyer and Booker (2001) recommended 
five to nine experts for face-to-face meetings. The number of experts who do not meet in 
person depends on the needs of the study.
During the first stage of expert judgment, questionnaires were distributed to ten lecturers 
to validate the questionnaire’s content related to identifying risk agents that influence logis­
tics distribution delays during natural disasters in humanitarian supply chain management, 
particularly in flooding and earthquake situations. However, out of the 10 experts, only six 
gave feedback, three did not reply, and one refused to give an evaluation. The judgments of 
the six participating experts are shown in Table 1.
At this stage, the questionnaire offers four points of the relevance rating scale: “1 = the 
item is not relevant as the type of risk agent”, “2 = the item is somewhat relevant as the type 
of risk agent”, “3 = the item is quite relevant as the type of risk agent”, and “4 = the item 
is highly relevant as the type of risk agent”. In this context, the expert judgment rates the 
relevance of each item in the questionnaire as a risk agent that influences delay in HLSCM 
is required. The expert’s completed questionnaire was then analyzed using content validity 
index (CVI) analysis.
CVI is an expert judgment evaluation process to assess an instrument or express their 
opinion on a specific aspect. CVI is required as an instrument standardization tool for the 
assessment instrument to be declared relevant and to represent a specific construct for a 
specific assessment purpose. As a result, the expert’s role is straightforward: to add, clarify, 
or modify the necessary aspects (Cook & Beckman, 2006; Fernández-Gómez et al., 2020; 
No.
Designation of 
expert
Institution
Years of 
Experience
1
Associate Professor
Universitas Islam Negeri 
Ar-Raniry
More than 
15 years
2
Senior Lecture
Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia
5–10 years
3
Senior Lecture
Universitas Syiah Kuala
5–10 years
4
Senior Lecture
Universitas Syiah Kuala
5–10 years
5
Lecture
Universitas Teuku Umar
5–10 years
6
Lecture
Universitas Syiah Kuala
5–10 years
Table 1  List of experts for judg­
ing the first stage
 
1 3
226

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Haynes et al., 1995; Yusoff, 2019). CVI is calculated using Lynn’s (1986) recommended 
item-level content validity index (I-CVI) and CVI for scale (S-CVI). The calculation for 
each item is based on the proportion of content experts who give the items a relevance rating 
of 3 or 4 using the formula “agreed item/number of experts”. The number of experts and its 
implication on the acceptable cut-off score of CVI is shown in Table 2.
The risk agents declared valid in the first stage were included in the questionnaire for the 
second stage of expert judgment. In the second stage of the expert judgment process, expert 
opinion questionnaires were distributed to the practitioners and lecturers, different from the 
first. The second questionnaire was distributed to another 10 experts, but only seven gave 
feedback, while three did not reply. Table 3 shows the list of experts involved in this stage.
The questionnaire was distributed to determine how important each risk agent is to the 
delay in food logistics distribution. At this stage, the questionnaire offers five points of the 
importance rating scale: “1 = very unimportant as the type of risk agent”, “2 = unimportant 
No.
Designation of 
expert
Organization
Years of 
experience
1
Operational 
Supervisor
Logistics Services Depart­
ment, Subsidiary Indonesia 
Logistics Bureau of West 
Java, Indonesia
More 
than 15 
years
2
Head of 
Department
Department of Emergency 
and Logistics, Aceh Disaster 
Management Agency 
(BPBA), Indonesia
11–15 
years
3
Professor of 
Supply Chain 
Management
Faculty of System Design, 
Tokyo Metropolitan Univer­
sity, Japan
11–15 
years
4
Section Director
Logistics Section, National 
Disaster Management Agen­
cy (NADMA), Malaysia
5–10 
years
5
Senior Princi­
pal Assistant 
Director
Planning and Preparedness 
Disaster Division, National 
Disaster Management Agen­
cy (NADMA), Malaysia
5–10 
years
6
Head of 
Department
Logistics Department, Hu­
manitarian NGO, Indonesia
5–10 
years
7
Research Fellow
Southeast Asia Disaster 
Prevention Research Initia­
tive (SEADPRI), Universiti 
Kebangsaan Malaysia
5–10 
years
Table 3  List of experts for judg­
ing the second stage
 
Number of experts
Acceptable CVI 
values
Source of 
recommendation
Two experts
At least 0.80
Davis (1992)
Three to five experts
Should be 1
Polit and Beck (2006), 
Polit et al. (2007)
At least six experts
At least 0.83
Polit and Beck (2006), 
Polit et al. (2007)
Six to eight experts
At least 0.83
Lynn (1986)
At least nine experts
At least 0.78
Lynn (1986)
Table 2  The number of experts 
and on the recommended accept­
able cut-off score of CVI
 
1 3
227

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
as the type of risk agent”, “3 = moderate as the type of risk agent”, “4 = important as the type 
of risk agent” and “5 = very important as the type of risk agent”.
The expert training in stage 1 is still maintained at this phase, providing the expert with 
a general understanding of the study’s scope and the questionnaire’s content. The following 
step is to distribute questionnaires to ten experts. The results of the questionnaire then enter 
the stage of aggregation and consensus. The aggregation process in achieving consensus can 
be divided into two ways, namely behavioral aggregation and mathematical aggregation. 
Aggregation is the process of combining data that has been obtained from experts. This 
study uses mathematical aggregation as an analytical process to calculate the mean (Beaud­
rie et al., 2016; Benini et al., 2017). Although it does not involve direct agreement (like 
behavioral aggregation) among experts, mathematical aggregation effectively synthesizes 
diverse opinions into a consensus. The achievement of consensus must comply with four 
principles: Scrutability/Accountability, Empirical Control, Neutrality, and Fairness (Cooke, 
1991).
4  Discussion
4.1  Literature review based on the flow of supplies in HLSCM
According to Balcik et al. (2010), the typical flow of supplies in a relief chain consists of 
three main stages: supply acquisition and procurement, pre-positioning and warehousing, 
and transportation. This study adapts their flow of supplies and finds that the flow of sup­
plies in the HLSCM consists of three stages: supplying, warehousing, and delivering as 
shown in Fig. 3.
Figure 3 illustrates the procurement, storage, and distribution process of goods in HLSCM 
operations. At the procurement stage, various relief goods are obtained from various sources 
such as suppliers and local communities. Furthermore, the collected goods are stored in a 
central warehouse known as the warehousing stage. The central warehouse acts as a center 
for inventory management and preparation of goods before being distributed to victims. At 
the delivering stage, relief goods are then distributed to local distribution centers. These 
centers must be strategically located, namely those close to the disaster-affected area. The 
goal is to facilitate faster and more efficient distribution of aid. Finally, at the delivering 
stage, relief goods are distributed from local distribution centers to demand points.
These three stages have the potential to face various kinds of risks which impact delays 
in delivering relief items to locations affected by the disaster. Therefore, an extensive review 
of 82 articles was conducted to obtain the list of risk agents. In the following sub-chapter, 
the review articles are explained based on the three stages of HLSCM.
4.1.1  Supplying
Logistics operations in disaster situations have unique characteristics. At the procurement 
stage, the logistics chain must provide goods and equipment needed in disaster situations. At 
this stage, Humanitarian organizations are tasked with obtaining relief goods from local or 
global suppliers using various procurement techniques such as donations, direct purchases, 
or tenders (Balcik et al., 2010; Nikbakhsh & Farahani, 2011).
1 3
228

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
The main characteristics of humanitarian logistics operations are the uncertainty of 
demand, delivery with a minimum response time, and the ability to provide different items 
(Beamon & Balcik, 2008). Researchers pointed out that uncertain demand is one of the 
frequent issues in the logistics process, primarily the “supplying” stage. This issue makes 
it difficult for stakeholders to decide what will be stocked and how many relief items are 
required.
Uncertainty in disasters requires HLSCM preparedness in the procurement of relief 
goods (Beamon & Balcik, 2008). Therefore, the humanitarian supply chain must consider: 
(1) “planning”, including what to store, how much to store, and where to store it; (2) “pro­
visioning”, concerning full attention given to “what and how much relief goods to store”; 
(3) “where relief goods should be stored” (Balcik et al., 2016). Due to demand uncertainty, 
Li et al. (2018) and Rawls and Turnquist (2011) also suggested to carefully arrange the pre-
positioning of necessary emergency supplies to boosting readiness of HLSCM.
In addition to uncertainty demand, planning in supplies of emergency relief has also been 
highlighted by several researchers. Common obstacles in planning include ignorance, lack 
of strategic direction, work culture, and employee habits. Therefore, the humanitarian sup­
ply chain must have maturity in planning relief supplies, warehousing, and transportation 
(Barzinpour & Esmaeili, 2014; Chopra & Sodhi, 2004; Heaslip & Barber, 2014; Madu & 
Kuei, 2014).
Kovács and Spens (2007) further highlighted that planning in HLSCM also shows risks 
such as variability in supplies and suppliers; large-scale activities; variable demand; and 
lack of possibility to ensure the quality of food; as well as the inability to provide irregu­
lar supplies such as medical supplies. The issue of supply planning was also highlighted 
Giedelmann-L et al. (2022). This mainly deals with perishable goods, such as fresh produce 
and meat. Samani et al. (2018) who studied the blood supply chain during disaster. At the 
supplying stage, numerous fundamental presumptions, including that the capacity of blood 
facilities at the national, local, and regional levels is highly constrained. Sometimes, sup­
Fig. 3  The HLSCM flow. Source Author’s own work
 
1 3
229

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
pliers tend to provide goods that are not needed during the disaster, so the choice is limited, 
including medicines and food that are past their expiry date.
On the other hand, Özdamar et al. (2004) carried out logistics planning at the macro 
level in the presence of natural disasters involving inter-city transportation of commodities. 
Examples are medical aid materials and personnel, specialized equipment, troops to keep 
orders and conduct rescue activities, food, and other commodities used in relief operations. 
In this case, the coordinating center decides on several things, such as the amount of aid, 
the origin, the destination, the specific vehicles required, and the capacity of the supply 
center and vehicle routes. However, this logistics planning often experiences problems in 
integrating the multi-period multi-commodity network flow problem with the vehicle rout­
ing problem.
In the supply stage, inventory management is also highlighted by researchers. They gen­
erally explain the importance of early placement of relief items in disaster-prone areas. This 
includes ensuring that essential relief items are available when a disaster occurs, thereby 
minimizing response time and saving lives. Inventory management at the supply stage was 
studied by Beamon and Kotleba (2006a, 2006b). Their study stated that demand during a 
disaster is unpredictable. Moreover, the increasing number of victims, which boosts the 
need for critical emergency supplies, pointed out another disaster issue (Rawls & Turn­
quist, 2012).Therefore, the amount of relief supplies requested in the field often fluctuates. 
Demand even spikes in larger emergencies.
During a disaster, the need for relief supplies on the ground depends on a number of 
factors, including the outbreak of war, population changes, and weather. These factors are 
unpredictable and make it difficult to estimate the need for relief supplies for reordering. In 
addition, Lodree and Taskin (2008) explained that inventory management at the provision 
stage is a challenge for humanitarian organizations. They are often faced with challenging 
logistical decisions to ensure that relief goods are in the right place, at the right time, and in 
the right quantities. Therefore, measurable inventory management is needed at the provision 
stage.
The supplying stage there are several common problems related to demand uncertainty, 
logistics planning, and inventory management. For this problem, researchers offer various 
solutions. Özdamar et al. (2004) produced a mathematical model for emergency logistics 
planning. Qin et al. (2012) proposed an integrated single-period inventory model to com­
plete order quantities over time. Likewise, Sahebjamnia et al. (2017) proposed a hybrid 
decision support system (HDSS) to support humanitarian relief chain managers when deal­
ing with large-scale earthquakes and floods. HDSS considers three relevant factors: the 
range of aid items that must be stocked and in what quantity, total cost, and response time.
Giedelmann-L et al. (2022) created a design for an inventory optimization method in the 
context of food logistics to deal with excess stocks, significant levels of waste, shortages, 
and protocols for distributing non-perishable goods, including canned tuna and rice, among 
others. Samani et al. (2018) proposed the blood supply chain (BSC) network using a multi-
objective mixed integer linear programming model and utilizing a fuzzy method. The goal 
is to meet the need for blood supplies during disasters. Furthermore Beamon and Kotleba 
(2006a, 2006b) suggested inventory management solutions based on three models. Firstly, a 
mathematical model that optimizes the number of reorders and reorder level based on reor­
dering, holding, and order costs. Secondly is a heuristic model that determines the optimal 
1 3
230

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
number of reorders based on storage and ordering costs. Lastly is the Naive model based on 
convenience and ease of implementation.
To overcome delays in material flow, Chopra and Sodhi (2004) proposed “smart siz­
ing” for maintaining capacity and inventory, such as holding “reserves,” pooling inventory, 
using redundant suppliers, balancing capacity and inventory, implementing robust backup 
and recovery systems, adjusting pricing and incentives, bringing or keeping production 
in-house, and using Continuous Replenishment Programs (CRP), Collaborative Planning, 
Forecasting and Replenishment (CPFR) and other supply-chain initiatives. On the other 
hand, Rawls and Turnquist (2012) created a dynamic allocation model to maximize pre-
event preparation to fulfill short-term demand for emergency supplies under demand uncer­
tainty (approximately the first 72 h).
This sub-chapter has presented previous research in the context of supplying humani­
tarian logistics. Previous studies have highlighted various challenges related to demand 
uncertainty, logistics planning, and inventory management. Uncertainty complicates deci­
sion-making on what to store, how much to store, and where to store relief goods. Therefore, 
logistic planning is needed to include not only what and how much to store but also where 
to store them strategically. Furthermore, previous studies have shown that inventory man­
agement is needed to ensure the availability of the right supplies in the right quantities at 
the right time. Researchers have proposed various solutions to overcome these challenges, 
including mathematical models to optimize inventory levels, heuristic approaches, and the 
development of decision support systems. It can be concluded that overcoming the chal­
lenges associated with the supply stage requires a multi-faceted approach that combines 
strong planning, effective inventory management, and a focus on building a resilient and 
responsive humanitarian supply chain.
4.1.2  Warehousing
Once procurement of goods in the supply stage is complete, humanitarian organizations 
are responsible for placing their goods and warehouse equipment in appropriate locations 
considering the location of disaster-prone areas. For this purpose, previous researchers have 
extensively investigated the warehousing stage. A major concern at this stage is “where to 
store”, or the placement of relief supplies in warehouses in specific locations. Beneficia­
ries are supplied from pre-positioned inventories in the early days after a disaster as part 
of logistics activities. Humanitarian groups must consider the number, type, location, and 
warehouses needed to store supplies (Şahin et al., 2014).
According to Balcik et al. (2010), initial placement/warehousing often faces difficulties 
such as the high cost of building storage warehouses, operating warehouses, and potential 
damage to warehouses and goods. Researchers have suggested several strategies to address 
their concerns about these issues. For example, to reduce the severity and mortality of disas­
ters, Patrisina et al. (2018) developed a two-stage mixed integer programming model for 
disaster relief operations used in a three-tier relief distribution network consisting of perma­
nent warehouses, regional distribution centers, and refugee camps.
On the other hand, Şahin et al. (2014) provided new insights by using containers as stor­
age facilities. Their study highlighted the benefits of using containers: containers can be 
transported from unaffected areas to the disaster zone immediately after a disaster occurs. 
Containers can be stacked one on top of the other, taking up less space than in a warehouse 
1 3
231

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
building, and their operating costs are cheaper than running a warehouse. In addition, con­
tainers intended for storing relief materials can be reused as shelters early after a disaster. 
The geological accessibility of the selected site should also be considered when measuring 
resilience because road infrastructure can be damaged in disaster situations. In order to pro­
vide alternative means of access to container sites, it would be preferable if container sites 
were positioned closer to railways and highways.
Duran et al. (2011) discussed several matters related to the Pre-Positioning of Emergency 
Items carried out by the humanitarian organization “CARE International”. In carrying out 
disaster response operations, the most crucial aspect is agility in mobilizing and distributing 
supplies. The authors found that the emergency response was often ineffective due to insuf­
ficient supplies or slowness in mobilizing the relief items.
Nagurney and Qiang (2020) developed multiproduct supply chain network models for 
various humanitarian organizations. The models capture the uncertainties associated with 
the costs of their supply chain activities, including procurement, storage, and distribution, 
under multiple disaster scenarios and the uncertainties associated with the demand for disas­
ter relief products at the demand points. Zhang et al. (2020) also mentioned several chal­
lenges for humanitarian relief organizations, such as substantial demand, damaged traffic, 
and high uncertainty. Therefore, their study proposes a distributionally robust model incor­
porating the facility location and resource allocation for a humanitarian relief network in 
an uncertain environment. This model combines the distribution of relief supplies and the 
selection of facility locations.
Döyen et al. (2012) pointed out several problems in the logistics of humanitarian assis­
tance for pre- and post-disaster rescue. This problem emphasizes the number of aid items 
stored in the pre-disaster rescue center, the number of aid items flowing in each echelon, 
and the number of aid item shortages. Therefore, a two-echelon stochastic facility location 
model has been built and helps the system to optimize pre-disaster planning and consider 
post-disaster decisions. Furthermore, this model also helps determine several things, such as 
the location of regional rescue centers (RRCs) and Local Rescue Centers (LRCs), the flow 
of aid goods, the supply of relief goods, and the number of shortages of aid goods.
Caunhye et al. (2012) conducted a literature review that used optimization models to 
solve several logistical problems. They proposed the prepositional facility location model 
using the location maximization coverage framework. Jia et al. (2007) developed a solu­
tion approach for the facility location of medical supplies for large-scale emergencies. This 
model was built to respond to the uncertainty of demand for medical supply shortages dur­
ing disasters. Facility location was also discussed by Klibi et al. (2018), particularly the 
importance of location decisions, the number of distribution centers needed, their capacity, 
and the number of emergency relief items that must be stored. They developed a scenario-
based approach involving three phases: disaster scenario creation, design development, and 
design evaluation.
Ratick et al. (2008) explained the importance of backup and emergency storage facilities 
to reduce the vulnerability of disaster impacts. Backup facilities are also needed to increase 
the supply chain’s resilience and other logistics functions. The authors used set cover loca­
tion modeling to determine the number of reserve facilities to be placed under various cov­
ers, anti-cover, and complementary anti-cover distances. Furthermore, Yang et al. (2021) 
also developed scenario-robust optimization models for stocking multiple disaster relief 
items at strategic facility locations for disaster response.
1 3
232

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Görmez et al. (2011) highlighted the importance of placing a disaster response and 
relief facility in the city of Istanbul, which can potentially experience earthquake. They 
constructed a mathematical model to determine the location of facilities to minimize the 
average distance between the victim’s location and the nearest facility. The results showed 
that five or six facility locations on a regional scale are sufficient, with an average distance 
of 7 km.
Meanwhile, Salmerón and Apte (2010) concentrated on stochastic optimization for asset 
prepositioning in natural disasters. They created a two-stage stochastic optimization model 
as a foundation for allocating budget for developing resources like warehouses, medical 
facilities with staff, ramp spaces, and shelters. Mete and Zabinsky (2010) emphasized the 
unpredictability of demands, particularly for medical equipment. In order to organize the 
storage and distribution of medical supplies, this study presented stochastic programming. 
The authors established the storage location and medical supplies for disaster victims using 
a case study of an earthquake in the Seattle region. The output of the optimization model 
was fed into the simulation with visualization.
Another theme often studied in the warehousing aspect is the distribution center for the 
effectiveness of the logistics process. Paul and Wang (2019) highlighted various post-earth­
quake demand uncertainties, such as damage to facilities, casualties based on severity, and 
travel time. To avoid this, they developed a robust model for earthquake preparedness by 
optimizing the number, location, and capacity of distribution centers (DCs). The goal is to 
minimize the total social costs, which include setup and initial supplies, as well as the depri­
vation costs associated with delayed access to supplies.
Chong et al. (2019) also developed a disaster management model to reduce human suffer­
ing in crises and respond to uncertain demand. The model helped serve as a support model 
for decision-making in real situations especially in terms of: distribution points, inven­
tory levels and costs, considering the uncertainty of a wide range of variables. In addition, 
Chapman and Mitchell (2018) highlighted the placement of distribution centers and public 
knowledge of the location. Their research aims to incorporate the deprivation costs resulting 
from the population’s suffering into a fair division approach to locating distribution centers. 
Several calculations are seen as necessary, such as the travel distance calculation.
Furthermore, Rath and Gutjahr (2014) also suggested the construction of temporary 
depots to deliver relief items from suppliers to victims using a model formulation based on 
the warehouse location–routing problem (WLRP). The transportation system is essential in 
transporting relief items from depots to intermediaries. In terms of transportation, goods are 
sometimes transported by smaller vehicles.
Yılmaz and Kabak (2020) highlighted the criteria for the primary and local distribution 
center location using a hybrid multiple-criteria decision-making approach. The study results 
showed that transportation, cost, infrastructure, and security are determined as the main cri­
teria for the main distribution center location criteria. Meanwhile, cost, warehouse facilities, 
and security are the main criteria for the local distribution center location. In the context of 
infrastructure, warehouses are needed to store, load, unload, and sort relief items effectively. 
Relief items must be stored in a sanitary environment. Warehouse buildings/sites have a 
defined floor capacity, open storage areas for storing vehicles, spill areas, loading bays, 
floodlights, openings, and doors at both ends which are preferred to facilitate relief opera­
tions. They also highlighted security aspects in relief operations. Possible looting attempts 
often threaten humanitarian operations. Therefore, decision-makers must be sure that the 
1 3
233

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
location of the Distribution Center is safe for storing relief items and that security is guaran­
teed in the event of theft or looting.
Bozorgi-Amiri et al. (2012) also explained demand uncertainty, especially in three mat­
ters namely supply, procurement, and transportation costs. They dealt with this uncertainty 
by using a scenario-based approach that tries to capture uncertainty by representing it. In 
several discrete realizations, the stochastic quantity is a different scenario. The model simul­
taneously determines the location of aid distribution centers and the allocation of disas­
ter-affected areas to aid distribution centers. In another study, Bozorgi-Amiri et al. (2011) 
developed a novel robust optimization model to take the disaster relief logistics problem as 
a multi-objective, stochastic, mixed integer, nonlinear programming problem.
4.1.3  Delivering
In the delivery phase, relief goods are transported from the central warehouse to local dis­
tribution centers and finally to the point of demand (beneficiaries). Huang et al. (2015) 
highlighted the frequent occurrence of large-scale natural disasters, which result in many 
casualties and losses. The critical question in this situation is how to react quickly and plan 
a response that will reduce the impact of these disasters. According to this study, many 
logistics distribution problems can arise especially in the delivery phase.
The most challenging part of delivery is transportation which is hampered by various 
problems. These include weather, environmental issues, damaged or inadequate transpor­
tation equipment, and local security. These problems limit the vehicles that can be used 
and result in delays (Balcik & Beamon, 2008; Suzuki, 2020; Ye et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 
2020). With regard to post-disaster weather and environmental issues, L’Hermitte et al. 
(2014) explained that the impact of the physical environment greatly influenced logistics 
operations. Lousy weather conditions caused delays in the loading and unloading process, 
hindered the movement of trucks, and prevented them from using certain airstrips. The road 
conditions also resulted in operational delays on logistics routes. Some roads are muddy and 
flooded, so they cannot be passed, or vehicles must move slowly.
Furthermore, the relief aid delivery process is also affected by the availability of supplies 
and transportation capacity (Garrido et al., 2015). L’Hermitte et al. (2014) mentioned that 
the lack of workers, insufficient land, air, and sea transportation capacity, and exacerbated 
by competition between humanitarian and commercial cargo have affected delays in aid 
delivery.
Post-disaster conditions showed that certain areas were isolated, making it difficult for 
victims to obtain relief items. The situation gets worse when a disaster occurs in a remote 
area. Therefore, it is essential to repair damaged roads to access isolated areas quickly. For 
this issue, Shin et al. (2019) proposed a mathematical model based on Mixed Integer Lin­
ear Programming (MILP) and the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) algorithm, which pro­
vides optimal scheduling, taking into account reconstruction and delivery. In the meantime, 
Bansal et al. (2022) raised the issue of damaged bridges and roads as one of the obstacles 
to the delivery of aid to disaster-affected areas and proposed a ground vehicle (GV) and 
Unmanned Air Vehicle (UAV) collaborative delivery system to be implemented in areas 
that are difficult to reach. On the other hand, Briskorn et al. (2020) mentioned that blocked 
roads by debris caused some locations to be inaccessible so that the delivery of goods was 
hampered.
1 3
234

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Rabta et al. (2018) reviewed the massive challenges in aid distribution in developing 
countries. This issue is mainly related to transportation facilities and transportation infra­
structure. NGO vehicles in developing countries are very limited and expensive due to 
increased fuel consumption, maintenance, and insurance. So far, missions carrying out 
emergency relief operations have been carried out by fleets of old trucks in poor condition. 
This condition limits cargo, so it can only transport light goods. In addition, aid agencies 
are often confronted with the problem of poor or non-existent infrastructure. Low percent­
ages of paved roads and narrow road widths characterize road surface quality in developing 
countries. If a disaster occurs, road conditions will get worse and disrupted. The roads may 
become waterlogged and covered with earth and debris, and bridges may collapse. This situ­
ation causes delays in the delivery of aid to victims.
Ertem et al. (2017) offered the use of intermodal transportation to deliver aid. The study 
identified the use of transportation for certain types of disasters. Similarly, Ye and Liu 
(2014) determined planning for using modes of transportation as part of humanitarian logis­
tics planning. For convenience, all the vehicles were divided into two groups. Group One 
composed of small vehicles, whereas Group Two composed of big vehicles. The vehicles 
in Group One were assumed only to load one commodity at a time, whereas those in Group 
Two were made of multiple parts, each of which could only load one commodity at a time.
In addition to transportation, decisions about vehicle routing and supply allocation are 
critical. The goal is to achieve a rapid and adequate distribution of relief supplies, with 
a focus on equitable service to all beneficiaries. Huang et al. (2012) and Maghfiroh and 
Hanaoka (2018) focused their studies on the last mile distribution aspect. This relates to the 
final stage of delivering relief aid from local distribution centers (LDCs) to populations in 
affected areas. To create an effective distribution system, Maghfiroh and Hanaoka (2018) 
proposed a modified simulation annealing technique with variable neighborhood search to 
solve the last-mile distribution model based on the total travel time criterion. On the other 
hand, Huang et al. (2012) used route arrangement to solve the last mile delivery problem 
(LMDP). The arrangement includes designing vehicle routes and distribution schedules for 
vehicles delivering supplies from distribution centers. They proposed a system of delivering 
one type of commodity per trip.
Tofighi et al. (2016) developed a novel two-stage scenario-based probabilistic-stochastic 
programming (SBPSP) methodology and a two-echelon humanitarian logistics design com­
prising central warehouses (CWs) and local distribution centers (LDCs). The goal is to 
address post-earthquake transportation network routes are considered.
To overcome routing problems, several other researchers have also produced several 
models. Nezhadroshan et al. (2021) designed a humanitarian logistics network with numer­
ous central warehouses and local distribution centers in an integrated manner handled by a 
new scenario-based possibilistic-stochastic programming approach. This condition was due 
to the transportation routes disruption after the disaster. Meanwhile, distribution choices and 
location routing concerns were developed by Elluru et al. (2019). This preemptive approach 
eliminates significant disruption expenses like penalties for not providing customer service, 
facility expansion expenditures, and supply delay costs.
Özdamar and Ertem (2015) studied several logistical models that previous researchers 
had developed for the disaster response phase. They looked into the corresponding vehicle 
representations and vehicle-based pathways for mass evacuation models, victim transpor­
tation, and delivery of products. Considering route efficiency, modeling was developed to 
1 3
235

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
deliver aid to the disaster area. The vehicles depart from the warehouse and travel to various 
demand points. Furthermore, weather conditions and topography affect the delivery process.
On the other hand, Tzeng et al. (2007) built a model of aid distribution using multi-objec­
tive programming to design aid delivery systems in real cases. The function of this model 
is to minimize total costs, minimize total travel time, and maximize minimum satisfaction 
during the planning period. Cao et al. (2018) devised a strategy for channeling aid with 
the perspective of beneficiaries and sustainability. This problem is formulated as a multi-
objective mixed-integer nonlinear programming model to maximize the lowest perceived 
satisfaction and minimize the most significant deviation on victims’ perceived satisfaction 
for all demand points and sub-phases, respectively. In the meantime, a traffic flow issue with 
time-dependent demand uncertainty was reported by Ben-Tal et al. (2011). They developed 
a robust optimization model (RO) to solve the traffic issue.
On the other hand, apart from weather, environmental issues and transportation prob­
lems, another issue raised by previous researchers is the issue of security. The delivery pro­
cess can also be disrupted for security reasons. Looting, snatching, illegal appointments, the 
influence of local people, and the distribution of unfair and low-quality products by relief 
providers are common phenomena (Khan et al., 2019). Kembro (2012) studied food logis­
tics delivery during droughts in East Africa, a region which has historically experienced 
political instability, civil war, regional conflicts, floods, and drafts. Global Food Aid (GFA) 
is one of the organizations that provide massive support for events in Africa, especially in 
the distribution of food aid. However, GFA often encounters several significant obstacles, 
such as requiring a long time to transport and distribute the food. Therefore, this study 
proposes a new initiative to pre-position stock in strategic locations where food will be pre-
positioned in strategic locations around the world.
L’Hermitte et al. (2014) reported that security issues were also the cause of delays in the 
delivery of aid in the case of the food crisis in Somalia. There was a threat of mines and bor­
der closure to Al-Shabaab’s ban on humanitarian agencies from working in South-Central 
Somalia. The maritime piracy issue around the Horn of Africa necessitates setting up a naval 
escort for the vessels. Yulianto et al. (2021) also reported looting by the community in the 
2018 earthquake in Palu, Indonesia. Looting was carried out in the disaster relief warehouse 
and distributed to the community. This issue is due to the use of assistance from the respon­
dents who assisted in the first few days after the disaster.
Different from previous studies, Qi and Hu (2020) focused on emergency cold chain 
logistics to handle strict requirements on temperature control of food, medicine, and other 
perishable or perishable fresh products. One of the things that must be done is to arrange 
shipping routes to maintain the quality of the goods to be delivered. Likewise, Gentili et al. 
(2022) raised the problem of sending perishable items, such as medicines, during a disaster. 
After a disaster, the condition of roads can be badly damaged, especially by floods and hur­
ricanes. Therefore, this study developed multiple optimization models to study different 
operational aspects of a drone delivery system through extensive experiments.
Furthermore, the issue of transparency and humanitarian network in the delivery process 
was also a concern of previous researchers. Transparency in the management of disaster 
assistance is needed so that victims receive fair assistance. Khan et al. (2019) indicated 
that public trust plays a substantial role as a mediator in the dimensions and components 
of transparency and enhances the effectiveness of HL. For efficient logistics distribution, 
Sheu (2007) proposed the optimization of hybrid fuzzy clustering for emergency logistics 
1 3
236

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
distribution operations in the face of urgent requests for assistance. The proposed approach 
involves five effective mechanisms: time-varying relief demand forecasting, affected-
area grouping, determination of distribution priority, group-based relief distribution, and 
dynamic relief supply.
The supply chain is a network that is interconnected between each other. Various orga­
nizations exchange information to operate in a coordinated manner. Therefore, efficiency, 
speed, and reliability are critical in the disaster relief supply chain. Meanwhile, the integra­
tion of the humanitarian supply chain was the focus of a study conducted by Gavidia (2017). 
This study combined information systems literature to propose using integrated Enterprise 
Resource Planning (ERP) as the next step towards integrating humanitarian supply chains. 
The functionality of the ERP system enables the configuration of material orders and the 
execution of deliveries in real-time.
Human resources are essential in disaster management operations in the delivery process. 
Disasters have a very dynamic and complex nature. Therefore, it must be supported by com­
petent human resources. Meduri and Rao (2019) identified the competencies that humanitar­
ian logistics need and the competencies they prefer. This study developed a model based 
on disaster logistics specifically for emergency relief personnel. Zayas-Cabán et al. (2020) 
further discussed the convergence of volunteers in disaster-affected areas. This volunteer 
convergence provided many benefits for humanitarian logistics. In logistics operations, a 
shortage of volunteers can disrupt the delivery process. Meanwhile, excess volunteers lead 
to futility and waste.
Covering all stages of supplying, warehousing, and delivering, coordination and com­
munication between HLSCM stakeholders is needed (Apte et al., 2016). Kabra and Ramesh 
(2016) assessed that various actors and organizations involved in disaster management have 
an essential role. Therefore, communication between them needs to be done to avoid vari­
ous risks, such as disaster uncertainty. Organizations should continuously identify, measure 
and assess their operating environment for further improvement. Kabra et al. (2015) high­
lighted the problem of a lack of coordination between organizations in managing disasters. 
The five categories of coordination barriers found in this research are management barriers, 
technological barriers, cultural barriers, people barriers, and organizational barriers. This 
situation resulted in delays in the performance of aid operations in delivering aid. On the 
other hand, Li et al. (2018) developed a maximum cooperation model with budget consid­
erations to maximize benefits for the disaster-affected population.
Meanwhile, Heaslip and Barber (2014) examined military participation in humanitarian 
aid operations. In the response phase, military participation has a positive impact, especially 
when sending aid to remote locations. However, during these three phases, coordination 
between the military and NGOs was the most challenging thing to achieve. Collaboration 
between the two can lead to more effective assistance. Therefore, this study offers recom­
mendations in the form of a civil-military logistics cooperation model that implements the 
3 C’s (cooperation, coordination, and collaboration). In the planning phase, collaboration is 
carried out by assessing needs, requests, transportation management, or distribution of the 
last mileage. Also, in this phase, the establishment of joint civil-military warehousing can be 
carried out. In the response phase, collaboration is carried out through logistics distribution. 
In the reconstruction phase, better and more sustainable collaboration is needed to prepare 
for the next operation.
1 3
237

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
The empirical study by Kabra and Ramesh (2016) provided guidelines for disaster 
organizations to understand factors for improving humanitarian supply chain (HSC) per­
formance. Meanwhile, Bisri and Beniya (2016) built a network modeling between organiza­
tions using social network analysis to strengthen cooperation between organizations. Balcik 
et al. (2010) explained that humanitarian relief involves many actors with different mis­
sions, interests, and expertise. The coordination mechanism between these actors is often 
challenging to create an effective HSC.
Furthermore, Lu et al. (2016) also measured humanitarian organizations’ logistical per­
formance using the SCOR framework. Reliability, responsiveness, agility, cost, and asset 
management were the five key performances assessed. In measuring the reliability of logis­
tics processes, performance in delivering the right products, at the right time, in the right 
amount and condition to the right customer is a key supply chain requirement. Moreover, 
the response time of the supply chain is a key factor in humanitarian operations to measure 
responsiveness. The agility measurement to demand surges in disaster relief operations is 
also crucial, with cost being the primary measure of financial logistics performance. In 
contrast, management asset is less crucial to humanitarian organizations due to having few 
assets and resources, and heavily relying on outside resources and capabilities for emer­
gency relief operations.
4.1.4  Identification risk agent based on literature review
The literature review has been grouped into the stages of supplying, warehousing, and deliv­
ering. The results of the review showed that, in general, no previous research had specifi­
cally discussed risk in HSCM. Previous research only highlighted various problems in the 
supplying, warehousing, and delivering phases. Based on these problems, recent publica­
tions offer solutions in the form of models, simulations, and frameworks. However, risks 
affecting logistics delivery delays can be identified through the problems that have been the 
focus of previous research. Regarding the literature review, this study identified 18 risks that 
might arise in HLSCM, as shown in Table 4.
4.2  Determining risk using experts’ judgment
The first stage in expert judgment is content validity index (CVI) analysis using I-CVI. 
The questionnaire contains a list of 18 risk agents according to the topic studied. The CVI 
calculation process was carried out and yielded the content validity results of the first stage, 
as shown in Table 5. The I-CVI results were then used as a guide in revising, deleting, or 
replacing the risk agent items to make them more in line with the research instrument.
According to Table 4, the mean value of I-CVI is 0.93, which indicates that the 18 risk 
agents are accepted. However, the experts suggested for RA13 and RA14 to be combined 
with the consideration that the size and weight of an item are one unit that mutually influ­
ences the delivery process. Furthermore, several experts also suggested changing the words 
“type of transportation” to “mode of transportation” (RA7). This is done with the consider­
ation that the word “mode” is more frequently used in various HSCM literature.
The first stage of expert judgment ultimately produces 17 risk agents that the experts 
have validated. These 17 risk agents then go through the second stage of expert judgment. 
In this stage, the aim is to determine how each risk agent influences the delays in food 
1 3
238

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
No.
Risk agent
Authors
1.
Number of demand
Uncertainty demand makes it difficult for 
stakeholders to determine how much assis­
tance should be distributed immediately.
Beamon and Kotleba (2006a, b), Ben-Tal et al. 
(2011), Bozorgi-Amiri et al. (2011), Chapman and 
Mitchel (2018), Chong et al. (2019), Döyen et al. 
(2012), Huang et al. (2015), Jia et al. (2007), Kabra 
and Ramesh (2016), Kovács and Spens (2007), 
Li et al. (2018), Lodree and Taskin (2008), Lu et 
al. (2016), Maghfiroh and Hanaoka (2018), Mete 
and Zabinsky (2010), Nagurney and Qiang (2020), 
Paul and Wang (2019), Rawls and Turnquist (2011, 
2012), Samani et al. (2018), Sheu (2007), Tofighi et 
al. (2016), Yang et al. (2021), Zhang et al. (2020)
2.
Amount of inventory
If demand is higher than supply, it must 
wait for re-delivery.
Apte et al. (2016), Balcik et al. (2010), Beamon and 
Balcik (2008), Cao et al. (2018), Chong et al. (2019), 
Chopra and Sodhi (2004), Döyen et al. (2012), 
Duran et al. (2011), Garrido et al. (2015), Giedel­
mann-L et al. (2022), Kembro (2012), Lodree and 
Taskin (2008), Lu et al. (2016), Mete and Zabinsky 
(2010), Qin et al. (2012), Samani et al. (2018)
3.
Number of warehouse
The excessive number of warehouses (de­
pots) results in stopping and dismantling 
vehicles repeatedly.
Balcik et al. (2010), Barzinpour and Esmaeili 
(2014), Caunhye et al. (2012), Chong et al. (2019), 
Duran et al. (2011), Garrido et al. (2015), Görmez 
et al. (2011), Heaslip and Barber (2014), Jia et al. 
(2007), Klibi et al. (2018), Maharjan and Hanaoka 
(2018), Nezhadroshan et al. (2021), Patrisina et 
al. (2018), Rath and Gutjahr (2014), Ratick et al. 
(2008), Sahebjamnia et al. (2017), Salmerón and 
Apte (2010), Samani et al. (2018)
4.
Capacity of warehouse
Limited warehouse capacity is an obstacle 
to material handling and loading/unload­
ing activities in receiving large assistance 
quantities.
Bozorgi-Amiri et al. (2012), Chopra and Sodh 
(2004), Klibi et al. (2018), Paul and Wang (2019), 
Şahin et al. (2014), Yılmaz and Kabak (2020)
5.
Warehouse facility
The lacked warehouse facilities can inter­
fere with material handling and loading/
unloading activities.
Klibi et al. (2018), Nezhadroshan et al. (2021), 
Samani et al. (2018), Yang et al. (2021), Yılmaz and 
Kabak (2020)
6.
Number of transportation
Lacking the number of transportation may 
result in repeated deliveries to fulfill the 
demand.
Baharmand et al. (2017), Garrido et al. (2015), 
Huang et al. (2015), Kovács and Spens (2007), 
Rabta et al. (2018)
7.
Type of transportation
Limited types of transportation make the 
assistance distributed to hard-to-reach 
areas more difficult.
Bansal et al. (2022), Ertem et al. (2017), Heaslip and 
Barber (2014), Huang et al. (2012), L’Hermitte et al. 
(2014), Özdamar et al. (2004), Özdamar and Ertem 
(2015b), Suzuki, 2020, Ye and Liu (2014), Yılmaz 
and Kabak (2020)
8.
Capacity of transport
Must ensure the compatibility between 
available transportation and the relief items 
that will be delivered.
Ertem et al. (2017), Garrido et al. (2015), Heaslip 
and Barber (2014), Huang et al. (2012), L’Hermitte 
et al. (2014), Rath and Gutjahr (2014)
9.
Sequence of distribution
Poor selection of vehicle routing methods 
causes ineffective delivery processes.
Balcik et al. (2010), Elluru et al. (2019), Görmez et 
al. (2011), Huang et al. (2012), Maghfiroh and Hana­
oka (2018), Mete and Zabinsky (2010), Nezhadro­
shan et al. (2021), Özdamar et al. (2004), Özdamar 
and Ertem (2015b), Patrisina et al. (2018), Qi and 
Hu (2020), Rath and Gutjahr (2014), Sahebjamnia et 
al. (2017), Samani et al. (2018), Tofighi et al. (2016)
Table 4  List of risk agent based on literature review
1 3
239

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
logistics distribution. The second stage of expert judgment entails an analysis using a simple 
mathematical aggregation to calculate the mean. This study sets a value of 3 as the minimum 
mean calculation for each risk agent measured. Therefore, the mean calculation of items 
greater than 3 indicates that the risk agent is important for the food logistics distribution 
delays. Table 6 presents the result of calculating the mean for the risk agents.
According to Table 6, the mean value for all the risk agents is above 3. Therefore, it can 
be concluded that the proposed risk agents contribute to the food logistics distribution delay. 
The highest mean value is demonstrated by “amount of inventory”, “road condition”, and 
“communication problem”. The amount of inventory refers to the number of relief items 
needed when a disaster occurs. If the demand exceeds the supply, the delivery process must 
be repeated, disrupting the aid delivery’s effectiveness.
Furthermore, road conditions are related to post-disaster road conditions. Post-disaster 
road damage cause vehicles to experience difficulties when delivering aid. Finally, ineffec­
No.
Risk agent
Authors
10.
Length of path
The long-distance route will have an im­
pact on the long delivery process time.
Ben-Tal et al. (2011), Cao et al. (2018), Caunhye et 
al. (2012), Chapman and Mitchell (2018), Görmez 
et al. (2011), Nezhadroshan et al. (2021), Özdamar 
et al. (2004)
11.
Road condition
The difficulty of road conditions post-
disaster results in the vehicles encountering 
obstacles in distributing assistance.
Bansal et al. (2022), Briskorn et al. (2020), Gentili 
et al. (2022), L’Hermitte et al. (2014), Rabta et al. 
(2018), Shin et al. (2019), Zhang et al. (2020)
12.
Quality of goods
If the product is damaged during transpor­
tation or loading/unloading activities, it is 
necessary to fulfill the lack of demand by 
re-delivery the assistance.
Giedelmann-L et al. (2022), Khan et al. (2019), 
Kovács and Spens (2007), Qi and Hu (2020), Sa­
mani et al. (2018)
13.
Size of an item
Oversized goods allow delivery of as­
sistance that could not be done at once to 
fulfill the demand.
Beamon and Kotleba (2006a)
14.
Weight of an item
Hefty of the weight of an item will hamper 
material handling and loading/unloading 
activities.
Mete and Zabinsky (2010), Suzuki (2020), Ye and 
Liu (2014)
15.
Probability of safety passed
Security issues such as looting, civil war, 
maritime piracy, and political instability 
caused delays in delivering relief items.
Kembro (2012), Khan et al. (2019), L’Hermitte et 
al. (2014), Şahin et al. (2014), Yılmaz and Kabak 
(2020), Yulianto et al. (2021)
16.
Number of workers
A limited number of workers lacking skills 
causes loading/unloading activities to take 
a long time.
L’Hermitte et al. (2014), Madu and Kuei (2014), 
Meduri and Rao (2019), Zayas-Cabán et al. (2020)
17.
Communication problem
Poor communication between stakehold­
ers resulted in the delivery process being 
constrained.
Balcik et al. (2016), Bisri and Beniya (2016), 
Gavidia (2017), Heaslip and Barber (2014), Kabra 
and Ramesh (2016), Kabra et al. (2015), Khan et al. 
(2019), Kovács and Spens (2007), Madu and Kuei 
(2014)
18.
Weather condition
Rain, fog, flood, or wind conditions can 
delay the assistance delivery processes.
Gentili et al. (2022), Huang et al. (2015), L’Hermitte 
et al. (2014), Ye et al. (2019)
Table 4  (continued)
 
1 3
240

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
tive communication between the various actors and organizations involved in the disaster 
management process hamper the food logistics delivery process, disrupt the entire logistics 
process in HLSCM, and result in delays in the delivery of aid.
Table 5  I-CVI result
Item
Expert 1
Expert 2
Expert 3
Expert 4
Expert 5
Expert 6
Number of agreement
Item CVI
RA1
X
–
X
X
X
X
5
0.83
RA2
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA3
–
X
X
X
X
X
5
0.83
RA4
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA5
X
–
X
X
X
X
5
0.83
RA6
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA7
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA8
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA9
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA10
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA11
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA12
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA13
X
–
X
–
–
X
3
0.5
RA14
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA15
X
–
X
X
X
X
5
0.83
RA16
X
X
X
X
–
X
5
0.83
RA17
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
RA18
X
X
X
X
X
X
6
1.00
Mean I-CVI
0.93
RA , risk agent, X item is relevant, I-CVI item content validity index. Minimum I-CVI is 0.83 for 6 experts 
(refer to Table 1)
No.
Risk agent
Mean of risk agent
1.
Number of demand
4.43
2.
Amount of inventory
4.57
3.
Number of warehouse
3.14
4.
Capacity of warehouse
3.86
5.
Warehouse facility
4.00
6.
Number of transportation
3.86
7.
Mode of transportation
3.71
8.
Capacity of transport
4.29
9.
Sequence of distribution
4.29
10.
Length of path
4.14
11.
Road condition
4.57
12.
Quality of goods
4.00
13.
Size and weight of an item
3.71
14.
Probability of safety passed
4.14
15.
Number of workers
3.43
16.
Communication problem
4.57
17.
Weather condition
4.14
Table 6  The result of calculating 
the mean
 
1 3
241

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
5  Conclusion
This study has identified risks that cause delays in aid distribution during HLSCM. The 
results showed that there were 17 risks that were significantly related to delays in food logis­
tics. The first round of expert assessment resulted in 17 RAs verified by experts, namely: 
(1) Amount of Stock; (2) Transportation Capacity; (3) Warehouse Capacity; (4) Commu­
nication Constraints; (5) Amount of Demand; (6) Amount of Transportation; (7) Number 
of Warehouses; (8) Number of Workers; (9) Probability of Safety Passed; (10) Quality of 
Goods; (11) Road Conditions; (12) Distribution Sequence; (13) Size and Weight of Goods; 
(14) Length of Route; (15) Mode of Transportation; (16) Warehouse Facilities; (17) Weather 
Conditions. Meanwhile, in the second stage, expert assessments were analyzed using a 
mathematical framework to determine the extent to which each RA contributed to delays in 
food logistics distribution. Questionnaires were distributed to experts, and the results were 
compiled to determine consensus. This investigation uses mathematical aggregation as an 
analytical procedure to calculate the average value. The results show that all the proposed 
risk agents contribute to the delay in food logistics distribution. The highest average values ​
are shown by “inventory quantity”, “road conditions”, and “communication problems”.
These 17 risks can be considered by stakeholders and actors involved in HLSCM to build 
an efficient logistics delivery system. The main expectation is that the delay in food logistics 
delivery can be minimized and appropriate and timely assistance can be provided to victims. 
The 17 risk agents are an epistemological contribution to the field of HLSCM. Furthermore, 
this study has filled the gap in previous studies that failed to identify risk agents in HLSCM, 
especially in the food logistics sector.
Meanwhile, methodologically, the combination of hybrid literature search strategies and 
expert judgment is an important contribution to future research that examines issues similar 
to this study. The proposed new methodology contains systematic stages to facilitate future 
researchers to find literature on a particular topic. However, this study only focuses on the 
stage of identifying risks that cause delays in food logistics delivery. Therefore, for further 
research, this study can be developed with the most significant risk ranking in food logistics 
delivery delays by suggesting risk mitigation to minimize these risks.
Funding  Open access funding provided by The Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia and Universiti 
Kebangsaan Malaysia
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and 
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. 
You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. 
The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, 
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative 
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, 
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​
t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​n​s​.​o​r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​-​n​c​-​n​d​/​4​.​0​/.
1 3
242

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
References
Abdi, A., Abdi, A., Fathollahi-Fard, A. M., & Hajiaghaei-Keshteli, M. (2021). A set of calibrated metaheuris­
tics to address a closed-loop supply chain network design problem under uncertainty. International 
Journal of Systems Science: Operations & Logistics, 8(1), 23–40. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​2​3​3​0​2​6​7​4​.​
2​0​1​9​.​1​6​1​0​1​9​7
Acevedo, J. E. B., Tenjo, L. B. R. C., & Fuentes, E. Á. (2019). Development of mathematical model of 
logistics humanitarian assistance with resilience to risk management in earthquakes and earthquakes in 
caqueza, Cundinamarca. Ingeniería Solidaria, 15(1), 1–33. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​6​9​2​5​/​2​3​5​7​-​6​0​1​4​.​2​0​1​9​.​
0​1​.​0​2. SE-Research Articles.
Agarwal, S., Kant, R., & Shankar, R. (2020). Evaluating solutions to overcome humanitarian supply chain 
management barriers: A hybrid fuzzy SWARA– Fuzzy WASPAS approach. International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction, 51(July), 101838. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101838
Altare, C., Weiss, W., Ramadan, M., Tappis, H., & Spiegel, P. B. (2022). Measuring results of humanitarian 
action: Adapting public health indicators to different contexts. Conflict and Health, 16(1), 1–8. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​
d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​8​6​/​s​1​3​0​3​1​-​0​2​2​-​0​0​4​8​7​-​5​
Apte, A., Gonçalves, P., & Yoho, K. (2016). Capabilities and competencies in humanitarian operations. Jour­
nal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 6(2), 240–258. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​8​
/​J​H​L​S​C​M​-​0​4​-​2​0​1​5​-​0​0​2​0​
Arismawan, Short, M., Al-Mhdawi, M. K. S., Sentia, P. D., & Sari, C. M. A. (2025). Humanitarian logistics 
supply chain management framework: A literature review. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environ­
mental Science, 1479(1), 012059. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​8​/​1​7​5​5​-​1​3​1​5​/​1​4​7​9​/​1​/​0​1​2​0​5​9
Arnette, A. N., & Zobel, C. W. (2019). A risk-based approach to improving disaster relief asset pre-posi­
tioning. Production and Operations Management, 28(2), 457–478. https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.12934
Baharmand, H., Comes, T., & Lauras, M. (2017). Managing in-country transportation risks in humanitarian 
supply chains by logistics service providers: Insights from the 2015 Nepal earthquake. International 
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 24, 549–559. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.07.007
Balcik, B., & Beamon, B. M. (2008). Facility location in humanitarian relief. International Journal of Logis­
tics Research and Applications, 11(2), 101–121. https://doi.org/10.1080/13675560701561789
Balcik, B., Beamon, B. M., Krejci, C. C., Muramatsu, K. M., & Ramirez, M. (2010). Coordination in humani­
tarian relief chains: Practices, challenges and opportunities. International Journal of Production Eco­
nomics, 126(1), 22–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2009.09.008
Balcik, B., Bozkir, C. D. C., & Kundakcioglu, O. E. (2016). A literature review on inventory management 
in humanitarian supply chains. Surveys in Operations Research and Management Science, 21(2), 101–
116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sorms.2016.10.002
Balcik, B., Silvestri, S., Rancourt, M. È., & Laporte, G. (2019). Collaborative prepositioning network design 
for regional disaster response. Production and Operations Management, 28(10), 2431–2455. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​p​o​m​s​.​1​3​0​5​3​
Bansal, S., Goel, R., & Maini, R. (2022). Ground vehicle and UAV collaborative routing and scheduling 
for humanitarian logistics using random walk based ant colony optimization. Scientia Iranica, 29(2), 
632–644. https://doi.org/10.24200/sci.2021.58309.5664
Barzinpour, F., & Esmaeili, V. (2014). A multi-objective relief chain location distribution model for urban 
disaster management. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 70(5–8), 1291–
1302. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-013-5379-x
Beamon, B. M., & Balcik, B. (2008). Performance measurement in humanitarian relief chains. International 
Journal of Public Sector Management, 21(1), 4–25. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513550810846087
Beamon, B. M., & Kotleba, S. A. (2006a). Inventory management support systems for emergency humani­
tarian relief operations in South Sudan. The International Journal of Logistics Management, 17(2), 
187–212. https://doi.org/10.1108/09574090610689952
Beamon, B. M., & Kotleba, S. A. (2006b). Inventory modeling for complex emergencies in humanitarian 
relief operations. Inventory Management: Non-classical Views, 5567, 129–149. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​
0​/​1​3​6​7​5​5​6​0​5​0​0​4​5​3​6​6​7​
Beaudrie, C. E. H., Kandlikar, M., & Ramachandran, G. (2016). Using Expert judgment for risk assessment. 
In Assessing Nanoparticle Risks to Human Health (pp. 91–119). ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​b​9​7​8​-​0​-​3​2​3​-​3​
5​3​2​3​-​6​.​0​0​0​0​5​-​0
Behl, A., & Dutta, P. (2019). Humanitarian supply chain management: A thematic literature review and future 
directions of research. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1–2), 1001–1044. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​
s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​1​8​-​2​8​0​6​-​2​
1 3
243

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Ben-Tal, A., Chung, B., Do, Mandala, S. R., & Yao, T. (2011). Robust optimization for emergency logistics 
planning: Risk mitigation in humanitarian relief supply chains. Transportation Research Part B: Meth­
odological, 45(8), 1177–1189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2010.09.002
Benini, A., Chataigner, P., Noumri, N., Parham, N., Sweeney, J., & Tax, L. (2017). Expert Judgment: The use 
of expert judgment in humanitarian analysis - Theory, methods and applications. In Assessment Capaci­
ties Project - ACAPS. Retrieved from ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​w​w​w​.​a​c​a​p​s​.​o​r​g​/​s​i​t​e​s​/​a​c​a​p​s​/​f​i​l​e​s​/​r​e​s​o​u​r​c​e​s​/​f​​i​l​e​s​/​a​c​a​p​s​_​e​x​
p​e​r​t​_​j​u​d​g​m​e​n​t​_​-​_​f​u​l​l​_​s​t​u​d​y​_​a​u​g​u​s​t​_​2​0​1​7​.​p​d​f​%​0​A ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​c​i​t​e​s​e​e​r​x​.​i​s​t​.​p​s​u​.​e​d​u​/​v​i​e​w​d​o​c​/​d​o​w​n​l​o​a​d​?​d​o​i​
=​1​0​.​1​.​1​.​6​8​4​.​1​3​0​3​&​r​e​p​=​r​e​p​1​&​t​y​p​e​=​p​d​f
Beresford, A., & Pettit, S. (2009). Emergency logistics and risk mitigation in Thailand following the Asian 
tsunami. International Journal of Risk Assessment and Management, 13(1), 7–21. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
5​0​4​/​I​J​R​A​M​.​2​0​0​9​.​0​2​6​3​8​7​
Bisri, M. B. F., & Beniya, S. (2016). Analyzing the National disaster response framework and inter-organi­
zational network of the 2015 nepal/gorkha earthquake. Procedia Engineering, 159(June), 19–26. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​
/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​p​r​o​e​n​g​.​2​0​1​6​.​0​8​.​0​5​9​
Bozorgi-Amiri, A., Jabalameli, M. S., & Mirzapour Al-e-Hashem, S. M. J. (2011). A multi-objective 
robust stochastic programming model for disaster relief logistics under uncertainty. OR Spectrum, 35, 
905–933(2013).
Bozorgi-Amiri, A., Jabalameli, M. S., Alinaghian, M., & Heydari, M. (2012). A modified particle swarm opti­
mization for disaster relief logistics under uncertain environment. International Journal of Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology, 60(1–4), 357–371. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-011-3596-8
Briskorn, D., Kimms, A., & Olschok, D. (2020). Simultaneous planning for disaster road clearance and dis­
tribution of relief goods: A basic model and an exact solution method. Or Spectrum, 42(3), 591–619. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00291-020-00589-7
Çankaya, E., Ekici, A., & Özener, O. Ö. (2019). Humanitarian relief supplies distribution: An application of 
inventory routing problem. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 119–141. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​
s​1​0​4​7​9​-​0​1​8​-​2​7​8​1​-​7​
Cao, C., Li, C., Yang, Q., Liu, Y., & Qu, T. (2018). A novel multi-objective programming model of relief 
distribution for sustainable disaster supply chain in large-scale natural disasters. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 174, 1422–1435. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​j​c​l​e​p​r​o​.​2​0​1​7​.​1​1​.​0​3​7
Caunhye, A. M., Nie, X., & Pokharel, S. (2012). Optimization models in emergency logistics: A literature 
review. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 46(1), 4–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seps.2011.04.004
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED). (2025). 2024 disaster in number.
Chalmeta, R., & Santos-deLeón, N. J. (2020). Sustainable supply chain in the era of industry 4.0 and big 
data: A systematic analysis of literature and research. Sustainability, 12(10), 4108. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​
3​9​0​/​s​u​1​2​1​0​4​1​0​8​
Chapman, A. G., & Mitchell, J. E. (2018). A fair division approach to humanitarian logistics inspired by 
conditional value-at-risk. Annals of Operations Research, 262(1), 133–151. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​
1​0​4​7​9​-​0​1​6​-​2​3​2​2​-​1​
Cheng, J., Feng, X., & Bai, X. (2021). Modeling equitable and effective distribution problem in humanitarian 
relief logistics by robust goal programming. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 155, 107183. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​
/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​c​i​e​.​2​0​2​1​.​1​0​7​1​8​3​
Chong, M., Lazo, J. G., Pereda, M. C., & De Machuca, J. M. (2019). Goal programming optimization model 
under uncertainty and the critical areas characterization in humanitarian logistics management. Journal 
of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 9(1), 82–107. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​8​/​J​H​L​
S​C​M​-​0​4​-​2​0​1​8​-​0​0​2​7​
Chopra, S., & Sodhi, M. M. S. (2004). Managing risk to avoid: Supply-chain breakdown. MIT Sloan Man­
agement Review, 46(1).
Chukwuka, O. J., Ren, J., Wang, J., & Paraskevadakis, D. (2023). A comprehensive research on analyzing 
risk factors in emergency supply chains. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Manage­
ment, 13(3), 249–292. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-10-2022-0108
Cisneros-García, I., Dorantes-Álvarez, L., Parada-Arias, E., Alamilla-Beltrán, L., Ortíz-Moreno, A., Necoe­
chea-Mondragón, H., & Gutiérrez-López, G. F. (2023). Recommended food supplies under condi­
tions of natural and provoked catastrophes. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 83, 
103218. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifset.2022.103218. Contents.
Cook, D. A., & Beckman, T. J. (2006). Current concepts in validity and reliability for psychometric instru­
ments: Theory and application. The American Journal of Medicine, 119(2), 166. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​
6​/​j​.​a​m​j​m​e​d​.​2​0​0​5​.​1​0​.​0​3​6​.​.​e​7​-​1​6​6​.​e​1​6​.​
Cooke, R. M. (1991). Experts in uncertainty: Opinion and subjective probability in science. In Environmental 
Ethics and Science Policy. Retrieved from ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​b​o​o​k​s​.​g​o​o​g​l​e​.​c​o​m​/​b​o​o​k​s​?​h​l​=​e​n​&​l​r​=​&​i​d​=​4​t​a​Z​B​r​_​n​v​
B​g​C​&​o​i​=​f​n​d​&​p​g​=​P​R​1​1​&​d​q​=​C​o​o​k​e​,​+​R​.​+​M​.​+​E​x​p​e​r​t​s​+​i​n​+​U​n​c​e​r​t​a​i​n​t​y​:​+​O​p​i​n​i​o​n​+​a​n​d​+​S​u​b​j​e​c​t​i​v​e​&​o​t​
s​=​k​6​5​m​e​n​2​A​8​3​&​s​i​g​=​5​a​p​S​V​Z​y​_​v​A​i​p​U​d​L​R​s​G​8​N​i​e​v​9​S​_​U​#​v​=​o​n​e​p​a​g​e​&​q​&​f​=​f​a​l​s​e
1 3
244

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Cooke, R. M., & Goossens, L. H. J. (2004). Expert judgement elicitation for risk assessments of critical infra­
structures. Journal of Risk Research, 7(6), 643–656. https://doi.org/10.1080/1366987042000192237
RED, T. C. for R. on the E. of D. (2020). Human cost of disasters: An overview of the last 20 years 2000-
2019. In The UN office for disaster risk reduction. https://doi.org/10.18356/79b92774-en
CRED. (2021). Extreme events defining our lives Executive summary. In Disaster in number. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​7​8​7​/​e​e​e​8​2​e​6​e​-​e​n​
Davis, L. L. (1992). Instrument review: Getting the most from a panel of experts. Applied Nursing Research, 
5(4), 194–197. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​S​0​8​9​7​-​1​8​9​7​(​0​5​)​8​0​0​0​8​-​4
De Haen, H., & Hemrich, G. (2007). The economics of natural disasters: Implications and challenges for food 
security. Agricultural Economics, 37(S1), 31–45. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​5​7​4​-​0​8​6​2​.​2​0​0​7​.​0​0​2​3​3​.​x
Díaz-Delgado, C., & Iniestra, J. G. (2014). Flood risk assessment in humanitarian logistics process design. 
Journal of Applied Research and Technology, 12(5), 976–984. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​S​1​6​6​5​-​6​4​2​3​(​1​4​
)​7​0​6​0​4​-​2
Döyen, A., Aras, N., & Barbarosoğlu, G. (2012). A two-echelon stochastic facility location model for human­
itarian relief logistics. Optimization Letters, 6(6), 1123–1145. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​1​5​9​0​-​0​1​1​-​0​4​2​
1​-​0​
Duran, S., Gutierrez, M. A., & Keskinocak, P. (2011). Pre-Positioning of emergency items for CARE inter­
national. Interfaces, 41(3), 223–237. https://doi.org/10.1287/inte.1100.0526
Elluru, S., Gupta, H., Kaur, H., & Singh, S. P. (2019). Proactive and reactive models for disaster resilient sup­
ply chain. Annals of Operations Research, 283(1), 199–224. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-017-2681-2
Ertem, M. A., İşbilir, M., & Şahin Arslan, A. (2017). Review of intermodal freight transportation in humani­
tarian logistics. European Transport Research Review, 9(1), 10. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​1​2​5​4​4​-​0​1​7​-​0​
2​2​6​-​z​
Fan, Y., & Stevenson, M. (2018). A review of supply chain risk management: Definition, theory, and research 
agenda. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 48(3), 205–230. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-01-2017-0043
Fathollahi-Fard, A. M., Ranjbar-Bourani, M., Cheikhrouhou, N., & Hajiaghaei-Keshteli, M. (2019). Novel 
modifications of social engineering optimizer to solve a truck scheduling problem in a cross-docking 
system. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 137(August), 106103. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​c​i​e​.​2​0​
1​9​.​1​0​6​1​0​3​
Fernández-Gómez, E., Martín-Salvador, A., Luque-Vara, T., Sánchez-Ojeda, M. A., Navarro-Prado, S., & 
Enrique-Mirón, C. (2020). Content validation through expert judgement of an instrument on the nutri­
tional knowledge, beliefs, and habits of pregnant women. Nutrients, 12(4). ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​3​3​9​0​/​n​u​
1​2​0​4​1​1​3​6​
Garrido, R. A., Lamas, P., & Pino, F. J. (2015). A stochastic programming approach for floods emergency 
logistics. Transportation Research Part E, 75, 18–31.
Gavidia, J. V. (2017). A model for enterprise resource planning in emergency humanitarian logistics. Journal 
of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 7(3), 246–265.
Gentili, M., Mirchandani, P. B., Agnetis, A., & Ghelichi, Z. (2022). Locating platforms and scheduling a 
fleet of drones for emergency delivery of perishable items. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 168, 
108057. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.108057
Giedelmann-L, N., Guerrero, W. J., & Solano-Charris, E. L. (2022). System dynamics approach for food 
inventory policy assessment in a humanitarian supply chain. International Journal of Disaster Risk 
Reduction, 81, 103286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2022.103286
Görmez, N., Köksalan, M., & Salman, F. S. (2011). Locating disaster response facilities in Istanbul. The 
Journal of the Operational Research Society, 62(7), 1239–1252. https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.2010.67
Guli, A. E., Barakagira, A., & Zombeire, R. (2023). Humanitarian food assistance and nutrition outcomes 
among refugees: A historical perspective. Journal of Scientific Research and Reports, 29(1), 26–37. 
https://doi.org/10.9734/jsrr/2023/v29i11723
Hasnain, T., Sengul Orgut, I., & Ivy, J. S. (2021). Elicitation of preference among multiple criteria in food 
distribution by food banks. Production and Operations Management, 30(12), 4475–4500. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​
r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​p​o​m​s​.​1​3​5​5​1​
Haynes, S., Richard, D., & Kubiancy, E. (1995). Content validity in psychosocial assessments: A functional 
approach to concept and method. Psychological Assessment, 7(3), 238–247.
Heaslip, G., & Barber, E. (2014). Using the military in disaster relief: Systemising challenges and opportuni­
ties. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 4(1), 60–81. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​1​1​0​8​/​J​H​L​S​C​M​-​0​3​-​2​0​1​3​-​0​0​1​3​
Huang, M., Smilowitz, K., & Balcik, B. (2012). Models for relief routing: Equity, efficiency and efficacy. 
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 48(1), 2–18. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​
.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​t​r​e​.​2​0​1​1​.​0​5​.​0​0​4​
1 3
245

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Huang, K., Jiang, Y., Yuan, Y., & Zhao, L. (2015). Modeling multiple humanitarian objectives in emer­
gency response to large-scale disasters. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation 
Review, 75, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2014.11.007
Jahre, M. (2017). Humanitarian supply chain strategies– a review of how actors mitigate supply chain risks. 
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 7(2), 82–101. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​
0​8​/​J​H​L​S​C​M​-​1​2​-​2​0​1​6​-​0​0​4​3​
Jahre, M., & Heigh, I. (2008). Does the current constraints in funding promote failure in humanitarian supply 
chains? Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal, 9(2), 44–54. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​1​6​2​5​8​3​1​
2​.​2​0​0​8​.​1​1​5​1​7​1​9​8
Jia, H., Ordóñez, F., & Dessouky, M. M. (2007). Solution approaches for facility location of medical supplies 
for large-scale emergencies. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 52(2), 257–276. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​
1​0​1​6​/​j​.​c​i​e​.​2​0​0​6​.​1​2​.​0​0​7​
Kabra, G., & Ramesh, A. (2016). Information technology, mutual trust, flexibility, agility, adaptability: 
Understanding their linkages and impact on humanitarian supply chain management performance. Risk 
Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy, 7(2), 79–103. https://doi.org/10.1002/rhc3.12096
Kabra, G., Ramesh, A., & Arshinder, K. (2015). Identification and prioritization of coordination barriers in 
humanitarian supply chain management. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 13, 128–
138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2015.01.011
Kebriyaii, O., Hamzehei, M., & Khalilzadeh, M. (2021). A disaster relief commodity supply chain network 
considering emergency relief volunteers: A case study. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply 
Chain Management, 11(3), 493–521. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-08-2020-0073
Kembro, J. (2012). Implementing strategic stock to improve humanitarian aid response. Emerald Emerging 
Markets Case Studies, 2(7), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1108/20450621211284642
Khan, M., Young, L. H., & Han, B. J. (2019). A systematic review of performance enhancement of humani­
tarian logistics through transparency: Current status and perspectives. International Journal of Supply 
Chain Management, 8(2), 549–568.
Klibi, W., Ichoua, S., & Martel, A. (2018). Prepositioning emergency supplies to support disaster relief: A 
case study using stochastic programming. INFOR: Information Systems and Operational Research, 
56(1), 50–81. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​0​3​1​5​5​9​8​6​.​2​0​1​7​.​1​3​3​5​0​4​5
Kovács, G., & Spens, K. M. (2007). Humanitarian logistics in disaster relief operations. International Jour­
nal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, 37(2), 99–114.
L’Hermitte, C., Tatham, P., & Bowles, M. (2014). Classifying logistics-relevant disasters: Conceptual model 
and empirical illustration. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 4(2), 
155–178.
Lee, S. (2024). Analysing supply chain risk management strategies in humanitarian organization. Wagenin­
gen University.
Leiras, A., Gonçalves, P., Chawaguta, B., Junior, I. D. B., & Yoshizaki, H. T. Y. (2021). Food aid supply and 
distribution in insecure regions: World food programme operation analysis in Ethiopia. Production, 31, 
2–13. https://doi.org/10.1590/0103-6513.20210070
Li, X., Ramshani, M., & Huang, Y. (2018). Cooperative maximal covering models for humanitarian relief 
chain management. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 119, 301–308. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​c​i​
e​.​2​0​1​8​.​0​4​.​0​0​4​
Lin, S. W., & Bier, V. M. (2008). A study of expert overconfidence. Reliability Engineering and System 
Safety, 93(5), 711–721. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2007.03.014
Lodree, E. J., & Taskin, S. (2008). An insurance risk management framework for disaster relief and supply 
chain disruption inventory planning. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 59(5), 674–684. ​h​t​t​p​
s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​5​7​/​p​a​l​g​r​a​v​e​.​j​o​r​s​.​2​6​0​2​3​7​7
Löffel, M., Schmidt, C. G., & Wagner, S. M. (2025). Supply chain Risk management for humanitarian aid 
delivery: Risk identification and contingency analysis. The International Journal of Logistics Manage­
ment, 36(1), 225–258. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-01-2024-0041
Lu, Q., Goh, M., & De Souza, R. (2016). A SCOR framework to measure logistics performance of humanitar­
ian organizations. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 6(2), 222–239. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-09-2015-0038
Lwin, H. W., & Permwonguswa, S. (2024). Supply chain risk management in humanitarian operations in 
Myanmar. Journal of Supply Chain Management: Research & Practice, 1, 33–44.
Lynn, M. R. (1986). Determination and quantification of content validity. Nursing Research, 35(6), 382–385. ​
h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​9​7​/​0​0​0​0​6​1​9​9​-​1​9​8​6​1​1​0​0​0​-​0​0​0​1​7
MacNabb, E., & Fletcher, B. J. (2019). Hurricanes, disasters, and food insecurity: The intersection of two 
social events. In Emerging voices in natural hazards research. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​B​9​7​8​-​0​-​1​2​-​8​1​5​
8​2​1​-​0​.​0​0​0​1​2​-​6
1 3
246

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Madu, C. N., & Kuei, C. H. (2014). Disaster relief supply chain quality management (DRSCQM). Interna­
tional Journal of Quality & Reliability Management, 31(9), 1052–1067. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​8​/​I​J​Q​R​
M​-​0​8​-​2​0​1​3​-​0​1​3​6​
Maghfiroh, M. F. N., & Hanaoka, S. (2018). Dynamic truck and trailer routing problem for last Mile distri­
bution in disaster response. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 8(2), 
252–278. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-10-2017-0050
Maharjan, R., & Hanaoka, S. (2018). A multi-actor multi-objective optimization approach for locating tem­
porary logistics hubs during disaster response. Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain 
Management, 8(1), 2–21. https://doi.org/10.1108/JHLSCM-08-2017-0040
Manopiniwes, W., & Irohara, T. (2021). Optimization model for temporary depot problem in flood disaster 
response. Natural Hazards, 105(2), 1743–1763. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-020-04374-1
Meduri, Y., & Rao, D. S. (2019). Preferred humanitarian competencies: An empirical exploration. Interna­
tional Journal of Management and Business Research, 9(1), 27–40.
Mete, H. O., & Zabinsky, Z. B. (2010). Stochastic optimization of medical supply location and distribution 
in disaster management. International Journal of Production Economics, 126(1), 76–84. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​
g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​i​j​p​e​.​2​0​0​9​.​1​0​.​0​0​4​
Meyer, M. A., & Booker, J. M. (2001). Eliciting and analyzing expert judgment: A practical guide (7th ed.). 
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Miller, H. E., & Engemann, K. J. (2008). A Monte Carlo simulation model of supply chain risk due to natural 
disasters. International Journal of Technology Policy and Management, 8(4), 460–480. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​5​0​4​/​I​J​T​P​M​.​2​0​0​8​.​0​2​0​1​6​9​
Minguito, G., & Banluta, J. (2023). Risk management in humanitarian supply chain based on FMEA and 
grey relational analysis. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 87(PB), 101551. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​
j​.​s​e​p​s​.​2​0​2​3​.​1​0​1​5​5​1​
Nagurney, A., & Qiang, Q. (2020). Quantifying supply chain network synergy for humanitarian organiza­
tions. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 64(1/2), 12:1–1216. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​4​7​/​J​R​D​.​2​
0​1​9​.​2​9​4​0​4​3​0​
Nezhadroshan, A. M., Fathollahi-Fard, A. M., & Hajiaghaei-Keshteli, M. (2021). A scenario-based possi­
bilistic-stochastic programming approach to address resilient humanitarian logistics considering travel 
time and resilience levels of facilities. International Journal of Systems Science: Operations and Logis­
tics, 8(4), 321–347. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​2​3​3​0​2​6​7​4​.​2​0​2​0​.​1​7​6​9​7​6​6
Nikbakhsh, E., & Farahani, R. Z. (2011). 15 - Humanitarian logistics planning in disaster relief operations 
(R. Z. Farahani, S. Rezapour, & L. B. T.-L. O. and M. Kardar, Eds.). ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​B​9​7​8​-​0​-​1​
2​-​3​8​5​2​0​2​-​1​.​0​0​0​1​5​-​3
O’Hagan, A., Buck, C. E., Daneshkhah, A., Eiser, J. R., Garthwaite, P. H., Jenkinson, D. J., & Rakow, T. 
(2006). Uncertain judgements: Eliciting experts’ probabilities. In Journal of the royal statistical society: 
Series A (Statistics in Society) (Vol. 170). https://doi.org/10.1002/0470033312
Ogazón, E., Smith, N. R., & Ruiz, A. (2022). Reconfiguration of foodbank network logistics to Cope with a 
sudden disaster. Mathematics, 10(9), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.3390/math10091420
Özdamar, L., & Ertem, M. A. (2015a). Models, solutions and enabling technologies in humanitarian logistics. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 244(1), 55–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.11.030
Özdamar, L., & Ertem, M. A. (2015b). Models, solutions and enabling technologies in humanitarian logistics. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 244(1), 55–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.11.030
Özdamar, L., Ediz, E., & Baste, K. (2004). Emergency logistics planning in natural disasters LINET. Annals 
of Operations Research, 129, 217–245.
Patrisina, R., Sirivongpaisal, N., & Suthummanon, S. (2018). A logistical relief distribution preparedness 
model: Responses to a probable tsunami case study in West sumatra, Indonesia. Industrial Engineering 
and Management Systems, 17(4), 850–863. https://doi.org/10.7232/iems.2018.17.4.850
Paul, J. A., & Wang, X. (Jocelyn) (Eds.). (2019). Robust location-allocation network design for earthquake 
preparedness. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 119, 139–155. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​
6​/​j​.​t​r​b​.​2​0​1​8​.​1​1​.​0​0​9​
Peters, K., Silva, S., Gonçalves, R., Kavelj, M., Fleuren, H., Hertog, D., & Den, Freeman, M. (2021). The 
nutritious supply chain: Optimizing humanitarian food assistance T. INFORMS Journal on Optimiza­
tion, 3(2), 200–226. https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoo.2019.0047
Polit, D. F., & Beck, C. T. (2006). The content validity index: Are you sure you know what’s being reported? 
Critique and recommendations. Research in Nursing & Health, 29(5), 489–497. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
0​2​/​n​u​r​.​2​0​1​4​7​
Polit, D. F., Beck, C. T., & Owen, S. V. (2007). Is the CVI an acceptable indicator of content validity? 
Appraisal and recommendations. Research in Nursing & Health, 30(4), 459–467. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
0​0​2​/​n​u​r​.​2​0​1​9​9​
1 3
247

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Pontré, J., Welter, V., Malta, V., Faria, J. N., I., & Chernyshova, A. (2011). Risk management in humanitarian 
procurement and supply chain. Journal of Public Procurement, 11(3), 301–322. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​0​
8​/​J​O​P​P​-​1​1​-​0​3​-​2​0​1​1​-​B​0​0​1​
Qi, C., & Hu, L. (2020). Optimization of vehicle routing problem for emergency cold chain logistics based on 
minimum loss. Physical Communication, 40, 101085. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phycom.2020.101085
Qin, J., Xing, Y., Wang, S., Wang, K., & Chaudhry, S. S. (2012). An inter-temporal resource emergency 
management model. Computers & Operations Research, 39(8), 1909–1918. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​
.​c​o​r​.​2​0​1​1​.​0​7​.​0​0​8​
Rabta, B., Wankmüller, C., & Reiner, G. (2018). A drone fleet model for last-mile distribution in disaster 
relief operations. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 28, 107–112. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
1​6​/​j​.​i​j​d​r​r​.​2​0​1​8​.​0​2​.​0​2​0​
Rath, S., & Gutjahr, W. J. (2014). A math-heuristic for the warehouse location-routing problem in disaster 
relief. Computers and Operations Research, 42, 25–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2011.07.016
Ratick, S., Meacham, B., & Aoyama, Y. (2008). Locating backup facilities to enhance supply chain disaster 
resilience. Growth and Change, 39(4), 642–666. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​4​6​8​-​2​2​5​7​.​2​0​0​8​.​0​0​4​5​0​.​x
Rawls, C. G., & Turnquist, M. A. (2011). Pre-positioning planning for emergency response with service qual­
ity constraints. Or Spectrum, 33(3), 481–498. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00291-011-0248-1
Rawls, C. G., & Turnquist, M. A. (2012). Pre-positioning and dynamic delivery planning for short-term 
response following a natural disaster. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 46(1), 46–54. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​
/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​s​e​p​s​.​2​0​1​1​.​1​0​.​0​0​2​
Rice, M., Hughes, L., Steffen, W., Bradshaw, S., Bambrick, H., Hutley, N., & Morgan, W. (2022). A super­
charged climate: rain bombs, flash flooding and destruction.
Roh, S., Kwak, D. W., Beresford, A., & Pettit, S. (2015). Challenges in humanitarian logistics management: 
An empirical study on pre-positioned warehouses. In The proceedings of 20th international symposium 
on logistics reflections on supply chain research and practice.
Rosmadi, H. S., Ahmed, M. F., Mokhtar, M., Bin, & Lim, C. K. (2023). Reviewing challenges of flood risk 
management in Malaysia. Water, 15(13), 2390. https://doi.org/10.3390/w15132390
Saad, M. H. M., Kamarudin, M. K. A., Toriman, M. E., Abd Wahab, N., Ata, F. M., Samah, M. A. A., & 
Manoktong, S. N. (2023). Analysis of the flash flood event and rainfall. Journal of the Malaysian Insti­
tute of Planners, 21(1), 58–71.
Sahebjamnia, N., Torabi, S. A., & Mansouri, S. A. (2017). A hybrid decision support system for managing 
humanitarian relief chains. Decision Support Systems, 95, 12–26. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​d​s​s​.​2​0​1​6​.​1​
1​.​0​0​6​
Şahin, A., Ertem, A., M., & Emür, E. (2014). Using containers as storage facilities in humanitarian logistics. 
Journal of Humanitarian Logistics and Supply Chain Management, 4(2), 286–307. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
1​0​8​/​J​H​L​S​C​M​-​0​8​-​2​0​1​3​-​0​0​2​9​
Salmerón, J., & Apte, A. (2010). Stochastic optimization for natural disaster asset prepositioning. Produc­
tion and Operations Management, 19(5), 561–574. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​j​.​1​9​3​7​-​5​9​5​6​.​2​0​0​9​.​0​1​1​1​9​.​x
Samani, M. R. G., Torabi, S. A., & Hosseini-Motlagh, S. M. (2018). Integrated blood supply chain planning 
for disaster relief. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 27(March 2018), 168–188. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​
/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​i​j​d​r​r​.​2​0​1​7​.​1​0​.​0​0​5​
Sandivari, L. Y., Cortés, C. E., & Rey, P. A. (2023). Integrated risk averse and possibilistic humanitarian 
logistic model with social costs and material convergence. INFOR: Information Systems and Opera­
tional Research, 61(2), 199–232. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​0​/​0​3​1​5​5​9​8​6​.​2​0​2​3​.​2​1​6​8​5​8​3
Schutt, R. K. (2019). Investigating the social world. SAGE Publications, Inc.
Sentia, P. D., Shukor, A., Wahab, S., A. N. A., & Mukhtar, M. (2023). Logistic distribution in humanitar­
ian supply chain management: A thematic literature review and future research. Annals of Operations 
Research, 323, 175–201. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05232-6
Sheu, J. B. (2007). An emergency logistics distribution approach for quick response to urgent relief demand 
in disasters. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 43(6), 687–709. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2006.04.004
Shin, Y., Kim, S., & Moon, I. (2019). Integrated optimal scheduling of repair crew and relief vehicle after 
disaster. Computers & Operations Research, 105, 237–247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2019.01.015
Singleton, C. R., Chaparro, M. P., O’Malley, K., Fuster, M., & Rose, D. (2022). Emergency food distribution 
efforts in new orleans, LA after hurricane Ida. Frontiers in Public Health, 10, 968552. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​
0​.​3​3​8​9​/​f​p​u​b​h​.​2​0​2​2​.​9​6​8​5​5​2​
Sreedevi, R., H. Saranga (Ed.). (2017). Uncertainty and supply chain risk: The moderating role of sup­
ply chain flexibility in risk mitigation. International Journal of Production Economics 193, 332–342 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2017.07.024.
Suzuki, Y. (2020). Impact of material convergence on last-mile distribution in humanitarian logistics. Inter­
national Journal of Production Economics, 223, 107515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.107515
1 3
248

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Syahrir, I., Suparno, & Vanany, I. (2015). Healthcare and disaster supply chain: Literature review and future 
research. Procedia Manufacturing, 4(Iess), 2–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.11.007
Tadić, S., Veljović, M., Krstić, M., & Zečević, S. (2025). Humanitarian logistics: A framework for structuring 
and research. Transportation Research Procedia, 83, 72–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2025.02.011
Tay, H. L., Banomyong, R., Varadejsatitwong, P., & Julagasigorn, P. (2022). Mitigating risks in the disaster 
management cycle. Advances in Civil Engineering, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/7454760
Thalheimer, L., Simperingham, E., & Jjemba, E. W. (2022). The role of anticipatory humanitarian action to 
reduce disaster displacement. Environmental Research Letters, 17(1), 014043. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​8​8​
/​1​7​4​8​-​9​3​2​6​/​a​c​4​2​9​2​
Thomas, A. S., & Kopczak, L. R. (2005). From logistics to supply chain management: The path forward in 
the humanitarian sector. Fritz Institute.
Thomas, A., & Mizushima, M. (2005). Logistics training: Necessity or luxury? Forced Migration Review, 
60–61.
Tofighi, S., Torabi, S. A., & Mansouri, S. A. (2016). Humanitarian logistics network design under mixed 
uncertainty. European Journal of Operational Research, 250(1), 239–250. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​1​6​/​j​.​e​
j​o​r​.​2​0​1​5​.​0​8​.​0​5​9​
Tzeng, G. H., Cheng, H. J., & Huang, T. D. (2007). Multi-objective optimal planning for designing relief 
delivery systems. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 43(6), 673–
686. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2006.10.012
Van Dijk, A., Beck, H., Bangalath, H. K., Larraondo, P. R., Edirisinghe, C., Dorigo, W., & Rahman, J. (2025). 
Global Water Monitor 2024: Summary Report.
Vitoriano, B., Ortuño, M. T., Tirado, G., & Montero, J. (2011). A multi-criteria optimization model for 
humanitarian aid distribution. Journal of Global Optimization, 51(2), 189–208. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​
0​7​/​s​1​0​8​9​8​-​0​1​0​-​9​6​0​3​-​z​
Voyer, J., Dean, M., & Pickles, C. (2015). Understanding humanitarian supply chain logistics with systems 
dynamics modeling. Faculty Publications, 22, 1–19.
Wohlin, C. (2014). Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a replication in software 
engineering. In EASE ’14: Proceedings of the 18th international conference on evaluation and assess­
ment in software engineering, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/2601248.2601268
World Bank. (2022). Pakistan monsoon floods 2022. In Pakistan floods 2022: Post-disaster needs assess­
ment. World Bank Group.
Xu, W., Xiong, S., Proverbs, D., & Zhong, Z. (2021). Evaluation of humanitarian supply chain resilience in 
flood disaster. Water (Switzerland), 13(16), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.3390/w13162158
Yang, M., Kumar, S., Wang, X., & Fry, M. J. (2021). Scenario-robust pre-disaster planning for multiple relief 
items. Annals of Operations Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-021-04237-3
Yang, C., Tian, K., & Gao, X. (2023). Supply chain resilience: Measure, risk assessment and strategies. Fun­
damental Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fmre.2023.03.011. https://doi.org/.
Ye, Y., & Liu, N. (2014). Humanitarian logistics planning for natural disaster response with bayesian infor­
mation updates. Journal of Industrial and Management Optimization, 10(3), 665–689. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​3​9​3​4​/​j​i​m​o​.​2​0​1​4​.​1​0​.​6​6​5​
Ye, Y., Hong, Z., Fang, J., & Chen, P. K. (2019). A follow-up sharing–Scheduling method for resource dis­
tribution in mountain earthquake response. IEEE Access: Practical Innovations, Open Solutions, 7, 
145259–145271. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2943940
Yılmaz, H., & Kabak, Ö. (2020). Prioritizing distribution centers in humanitarian logistics using type-2 fuzzy 
MCDM approach. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 33(5), 1199–1232. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​1​0​8​/​J​E​I​M​-​0​9​-​2​0​1​9​-​0​3​1​0​
Yulianto, E., Yusanta, D. A., Utari, P., & Satyawan, I. A. (2021). Community adaptation and action during the 
emergency response phase: Case study of natural disasters in palu, Indonesia. International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction, 65, 102557. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2021.102557
Yusoff, M. S. B. (2019). ABC of content validation and content validity index calculation. Education in 
Medicine Journal, 11(2), 49–54. https://doi.org/10.21315/eimj2019.11.2.6
Zayas-Cabán, G., Lodree, E. J., & Kaufman, D. L. (2020). Optimal control of parallel queues for managing 
volunteer convergence. Production and Operations Management, 29(10), 2268–2288. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​
1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​p​o​m​s​.​1​3​2​2​4​
Zhang, H. (2014). Explaining the perceived justice of disaster relief policy: An empirical study based on the 
2008 Wenchuan earthquake in China. International Journal of Social Welfare, 23(2), 150–164. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​
d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​1​/​i​j​s​w​.​1​2​0​5​0​
Zhang, P., Liu, Y., Yang, G., & Zhang, G. (2020). A distributionally robust optimization model for designing 
humanitarian relief network with resource reallocation. Soft Computing, 24(4), 2749–2767. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​0​0​7​/​s​0​0​5​0​0​-​0​1​9​-​0​4​3​6​2​-​z​
1 3
249

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 352:217–250
Zulfikri, A. (2025). Implementation of cross docking: Food aid distribution program in Sigi regency. Sinergi 
International Journal of Logistics, 3(2), 121–134.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Prima Denny Sentia1,2 · Syaimak Abdul Shukor1
 · Amelia Natasya Abdul Wahab1 · 
Muriati Mukhtar1
 
 Syaimak Abdul Shukor
syaimak@ukm.edu.my
Prima Denny Sentia
primadennysentia@usk.ac.id
Amelia Natasya Abdul Wahab
anaw@ukm.edu.my
Muriati Mukhtar
muriatimukhtar@gmail.com
1 
Center for Artificial Intelligence Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 
Bangi, Selangor 43600, Malaysia
2 
Industrial Engineering Department, Universitas Syiah Kuala, Banda Aceh 23111, Indonesia
1 3
250