TITLE: A non-anticipative learning-optimization framework for solving multi-stage stochastic programs
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06100-7
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06100-7
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
A non-anticipative learning-optimization framework for
solving multi-stage stochastic programs
Dogacan Yilmaz1 · ˙I. Esra Büyüktahtakın2
Received: 18 May 2023 / Accepted: 3 June 2024 / Published online: 3 July 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
We present a non-anticipative learning- and scenario-based prediction-optimization (Scen-
PredOpt) framework that combines deep learning, heuristics, and mathematical solvers for
solving combinatorial problems under uncertainty. Speciﬁcally, we transform neural machine
translation frameworks to predict the optimal solutions of scenario-based multi-stage stochas-
tic programs. The learning models are trained efﬁciently using the input and solution data of
the multi-stage single-scenario deterministic problems. Then our ScenPredOpt framework
creates a mapping from the inputs used in training into an output of predictions that are
close to optimal solutions. We present a Non-anticipative Encoder-Decoder with Attention
(NEDA) approach, which ensures the non-anticipativity property of multi-stage stochas-
tic programs and, thus, time consistency by calibrating the learned information based on the
problem’s scenario tree and adjusting the hidden states of the neural network. In our ScenPre-
dOpt framework, the percent predicted variables used for the solution are iteratively reduced
through a relaxation of the problem to eliminate infeasibility. Then, a linear relaxation-based
heuristic is performed to further reduce the solution time. Finally, a mathematical solver
is used to generate the complete solution. We present the results on two NP-Hard sequen-
tial optimization problems under uncertainty: stochastic multi-item capacitated lot-sizing and
stochastic multistage multidimensional knapsack. The results show that the solution time can
be reduced by a factor of 599 with an optimality gap of only 0.08%. We compare the results
of the ScenPredOpt framework with cutting-edge exact and heuristic solution algorithms
for the problems studied and ﬁnd that our framework is more effective. Additionally, the
computational results demonstrate that ScenPredOpt can solve instances with a larger num-
ber of items and scenarios than the trained ones. Our non-anticipative learning-optimization
approach can be beneﬁcial for stochastic programming problems involving binary variables
that are solved repeatedly with various types of dimensions and similar decisions at each
period.
Dogacan Yilmaz, Esra Büyüktahtakın have contributed equally to this work.
B ˙I. Esra Büyüktahtakın
esratoy@vt.edu
Dogacan Yilmaz
dy234@njit.edu
1
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology, 200
Central Ave, Newark, NJ 07114, US
2
Grado Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Virginia Tech, 250 Perry St, Blacksburg, VA
24061, US
123

2860
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Keywords Multi-stage stochastic programming · Machine learning · Lot-sizing · Knapsack ·
Sequential decision-making · Combinatorial optimization · Relax-and-ﬁx heuristics
1 Introduction
In this paper, we present a study at the intersection of machine learning (ML) and opera-
tions research (OR). In recent years, signiﬁcant effort and interest have been put into the
ﬂourishing area of using ML to solve OR problems. Although signiﬁcant results have been
achieved, there is still a need for frameworks that can handle the special requirements of
various OR problems. Here, we focus on this direction and address OR problems involv-
ing uncertainty. We present a framework for solving scenario-based multi-stage stochastic
programs by combining learning, heuristics, and mathematical solvers.
The uncertainty is crucial in many OR problems and must be addressed for accurate
and realistic representations of systems of interest. Although modeling uncertainty can take
many forms, we focus on scenario-based problems, which can be formulated in two or more
stages. In general, scenario-based programs are complex to solve. Multi-stage stochastic
optimization models are considered to be much harder than two-stage stochastic models.
The sequence ξt, t = 2, . . . , T is the stochastic process, and the decision made at period t
is xt, t = 1, . . . , T . In a multi-stage stochastic program, a decision x1 is taken before the
observation of an uncertainty ξ2, but then the decision process repeats itself:
decide(x1) →observe(ξ2) →decide(x2) →... →decide(xT ) →observe(ξT )
The decision xt is made in period t and may depend on the data of the process up to and
including period t, but not on the future due to the non-anticipativity of the unrealized future
uncertainty outcomes. Then the T-stage multi-stage stochastic programs can be expressed as:
min
A1x1=b1
x1≥0
c⊺
1 x1 + E[
min
B2x1+A2x2=b2
x2≥0
c⊺
2 x2 + E[· · · + E[
min
BT xT−1+AT xT =bT
xT ≥0
c⊺
T xT ]]],
(1a)
where xt ∈{0, 1}nt . The ﬁrst-stage matrices c1, A1, and b1 are known with sizes of n1 × 1,
m1 ×n1, and m1 ×1, respectively. For the other stages, t = 2, . . . , T , matrices ct, Bt, At, and
bt have sizes of nt ×1, mt ×nt−1, mt ×nt and mt ×1, respectively. At stage t, the number of
variables is nt ∈Z+, and the number of constraints is mt ∈Z+ for all t = 1, . . . , T . Some
or all of these matrices can contain uncertainty.
Multi-stage stochastic programs are very practical in modeling various applications,
including airline revenue management (Möller et al., 2008), capacity planning (Huang &
Ahmed, 2009), epidemic control planning (Yin & Büyüktahtakın, 2021; Yin et al., 2023b; Yin
& Büyüktahtakın, 2022; Yin et al., 2023a), invasive species control and surveillance (Kıbı¸s
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2023), and risk-averse optimization (Homem-de Mello andPagnon-
celli, 2016; Bushaj et al., 2022). Despite their modeling power, they pose a computational
challenge and usually require specially designed algorithms and heuristics. Exact solution
approaches include Lagrangian relaxation (Chen et al., 2002), Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition
(Singh et al., 2009), and branch-and-price (Lulli & Sen, 2004).
Most solution algorithms for multi-stage stochastic mixed-integer programs include some
form of decomposition or cutting-plane approach, including include Lagrangian relaxation
(Chen et al., 2002), Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition (Singh et al., 2009), branch-and-price
(Lulli & Sen, 2004), and scenario dominance cuts (Büyüktahtakın, 2022, 2023), and
decomposition-based heuristics, such as progressive hedging (Watson & Woodruff, 2011).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2861
In this study, we propose a learning strategy and a testing framework to solve multi-stage
stochastic programming problems with binary and continuous variables in a fast setting.
Optimization problems are solved repeatedly on a daily basis or more frequently in various
areas, including but not limited to logistics (Schmidt & Wilhelm, 2000), energy (Vespucci et
al., 2012), healthcare (Guerriero & Guido, 2011), and the air transport industries (Barnhart
et al., 2003). Stochastic programs can be used to generate realistic pictures of systems and
provide beneﬁts over deterministic problems (Zakaria et al., 2020). However, their size and
solution time can limit their beneﬁt. Therefore, problem-speciﬁc methods are often required
for applications that are frequently solved. This process requires an expert and can be time-
consuming. We address this issue and provide a general learning framework for solving
scenario-based multi-stage stochastic programs, particularly those that entail making similar
decisions over a speciﬁed time horizon.
Furthermore, multi-stage stochastic problems require the property of non-anticipativity.
Simply put, it ensures that we cannot use information from future periods and the imple-
mentability of solutions. The non-anticipativity constraints are fundamental for multi-stage
stochastic problems, and they can grow rapidly with the number of scenarios. The underlying
stochastic process can be represented with scenarios with a ﬁnite number of realizations. The
frameworkthatweareproposingisspeciﬁcallydesignedtohandlescenario-basedmulti-stage
problems and non-anticipativity requirements. We propose a new type of neural network:
Non-anticipative Encoder-Decoder with Attention or NEDA, where the Encoder-Decoder
with Attention part of the algorithm is based on the neural translation architecture of Luong
et al. (2015).
In this study, we propose the ScenPredOpt learning optimization framework, built on Pre-
dOptdevelopedinYilmazandBüyüktahtakın(2024)formulti-perioddeterministicproblems.
The PredOpt utilizes an encoder-decoder model with attention to learning from the solutions
of deterministic multi-stage problems. The PredOpt framework also eliminates infeasible pre-
dictions that are reported as a challenge in Yilmaz and Büyüktahtakın (2023b). The PredOpt
framework predicts the values of both binary decision variables and tight or close-to-tight
constraints. These predicted tight constraints are used to create a relaxation of the model.
The relaxed model is then used to ﬁnd a level of predictions that does not cause an infeasible
solution. Then, once a suitable level is found, the problem is solved full-scale to generate the
solution. The PredOpt reduces the solution time by three orders of magnitude with a small
optimality gap below 0.1%. Furthermore, models can predict longer instances with more
items than they are trained with.
This study presents NEDA to tackle the challenge of non-anticipativity of the predictions
by reconstructing the attention calculations of the model presented in Luong et al. (2015).
NEDA ensures that at each node, the same decision will be made for a subset of scenarios that
share that same node of the scenario tree at any stage t. Additionally, a new training paradigm
is developed for the proposed NEDA based on deterministic instances that are much easier
to solve than scenario-based stochastic instances. We utilize the presented framework by
enabling a heuristic to further improve the solution time. The heuristic can capture solution
characteristics of a stochastic problem that are not identiﬁed by a learning model, since it
is trained with deterministic instances. The linear programming (LP)-based heuristic further
reduces the solution time while still maintaining solution quality. Additionally, we present a
variance-based item-wise expansion strategy.
We present the computational results for ScenPredOpt through stochastic versions of two
fundamental OR problems: capacitated lot-sizing and knapsack. In the stochastic multi-item
capacitated lot-sizing (SMCLSP), several items are considered for production in a planning
horizon. The aim is to minimize the sum of production, setup, and inventory costs while
123

2862
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
satisfying the demand. The lot-sizing problem is considered central to production planning
with a diverse range of variations and applications (Jans & Degraeve, 2008; Tempelmeier,
2013). The stochastic multi-stage multi-dimensional knapsack (SMSMK) is a dynamic and
stochastic version of the classical knapsack problem. The objective is to ﬁnd stable solutions
by maximizing the proﬁt and the stability bonus while satisfying the resource requirements.
The stability of solutions over time can be highly crucial for many cases, since frequently
changing decisions can be costly or unimplementable. Some examples where stability might
be required include generating human-interpretable dashboards, routing, anomaly detection,
and audience-aware advertising (Cohen et al., 2016). Even though we present the com-
putational results of our framework for these two problems, we do not modify our solution
frameworkforthem.Therefore,ourframeworkisgeneralandcanbeappliedtootherscenario-
based multi-stage stochastic programs where similar set of decisions are made in each stage.
Both the knapsack and lot-sizing are regarded as general stochastic multi-stage problems and
are employed frequently to measure the computational advances in solving scenario-based
multi-stage stochastic programs (Guan et al., 2009; Büyüktahtakın, 2023).
The main research contribution of this study is a prediction-optimization framework that
can efﬁciently solve scenario-based multi-stage stochastic programs involving binary and
continuous variables. We utilize neural machine translation frameworks with heuristics and
optimizers to predict the optimal solutions of those multi-stage stochastic programs. Our
training data involves all parameters and optimal solutions to simpler single-scenario prob-
lems. The rationale behind the approach is to create an efﬁcient deep learning-based mapping
from the inputs used in training into an output of solution predictions that are close to opti-
mal. Our learning schema involved training, validation, and test sets that contain 3,500,000,
10,000, and 20 instances, respectively. We compare the results of the ScenPredOpt frame-
work with Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2022) and cutting-edge solution algorithms
such as stochastic dual dynamic integer programming and progressive hedging and heuristics
such as relax-and-ﬁx and adaptive ﬁxing. The details of these baselines used to compare our
approach are described in Sect.5.2.
As an innovative feature of this study, we address the challenge of non-anticipativity with
a new neural architecture called NEDA that is speciﬁcally designed to solve scenario-based
multi-stage stochastic programs. A training mechanism based on deterministic instances,
rather than stochastic programs, is presented to signiﬁcantly reduce training data genera-
tion time. Additionally, a novel framework, ScenPredOpt, is presented to utilize predictions
from the proposed NEDA neural network. ScenPredOpt integrates a heuristic based on LP
relaxation to further improve solution time reductions. Moreover, we propose a variance-
based item-wise generalization algorithm that considers the variability of the predictions and
extends the predictions to instances with a larger number of items. Our goal is to reduce
the solution times of multi-stage stochastic programming problems where they are solved
repeatedly, such as vehicle routing, electric power systems, and airline crew planning. Our
motivationistodevelopageneralframeworkthatcansolvethoseproblemswithoutaproblem-
speciﬁc design and generate fast and close-to-optimal solutions to multi-stage stochastic
programs with many scenarios, periods, and varying dimensions.
2 Literature review
In recent years, the ﬁeld of machine learning (ML) for solving OR has drawn signiﬁcant
attention. For an excellent review on this subject, we refer to Bengio et al. (2021). Speciﬁcally,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2863
using ML for solving scenario-based two-stage stochastic programs has gained traction. The
closest study to ours is presented by Frejinger and Larsen (2019). They utilize a learning
framework based on a neural translation architecture to solve two-stage stochastic programs.
Even though they share the same motivation as ours, i.e., reducing the solution times of
stochastic programs, their methodology is signiﬁcantly different. While we present a new
neural architecture that can handle non-anticipativity for multi-stage problems, Frejinger
and Larsen (2019) do not consider the non-anticipativity aspect of the two-stage problem.
Frejinger and Larsen (2019) present a training paradigm based on fully solved stochastic
problems, while we present a training strategy based on deterministic and easy-to-solve
instances. In addition, Frejinger and Larsen (2019) ensure the feasibility of predictions using
a probability mask, but we present an iterative methodology to select a prediction level that
eliminates infeasibility. Additionally, while they predict an averaged solution description
for the recourse decision, we output the fully detailed solution for all stages and scenarios
of the problem. In a similar vein, Larsen et al. (2022b) present a framework to solve two-
stage stochastic programs. The authors work on a problem in which the solution for the
second stage is computationally demanding. Therefore, they predict a higher-level and less
detailed solution description instead of predicting fully detailed second-stage decisions using
multilayer perceptrons.
Abbasi et al. (2020) present a methodology to solve stochastic optimization problems
in two stages using well-known machine learning algorithms and a case study on blood
transshipment problems with uncertain demand. Abbasi et al. (2020) train their models on
the solutions of fully solved stochastic problems and predict only the ﬁrst-stage decision
variables. The ﬁrst-stage variables are directly actionable; the second-stage variables appear
to handle uncertainty and are not actionable. They use classical ML algorithms such as
classiﬁcation and regression trees, k-nearest neighbors, random forest, and neural networks.
In practice, the solution framework outperforms the existing policy, but has an optimal-
ity gap of 14%. Wu et al. (2021) utilize a conditional variational auto-encoder to solve
graph-based two-stage stochastic optimization problems. An encoder is used to generate
low-dimensional representations of scenarios, which can be used through a decoder for tasks
like scenario reduction and objective prediction. The presented methodology can be used for
larger problems and more scenarios than the ones they are trained with. In Crespo-Vazquez
et al. (2018), a methodology based on ML is presented to solve the participation problem
of wind and storage power plants deﬁned as a two-stage stochastic programming model.
They utilize multivariate clustering to generate a set of scenarios from historical data, and
the probabilities of scenarios are calculated by a trained Long-Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
model. Bengio et al. (2020) present a framework to solve two-stage stochastic programs
by predicting a representative scenario of all uncertainty. Therefore, the problem can be
solved with a representative scenario deterministically instead of all scenarios and achieve
the same solution faster than the Gurobi solver. Also, by only generating a surrogate problem,
ﬁrst-stage feasibility is ensured since the surrogate problem is solved with Gurobi in their
framework.
Zheng et al. (2021) propose an encoder-decoder-based framework to solve the online
route planning problem that is formulated as a two-stage stochastic program. For supervised
learning, the labels are generated by a heuristic algorithm, and probability masking is applied
to ensure feasibility. Dumouchelle et al. (2022) utilize neural networks to solve two-stage
problems by estimating the expected second-stage cost, which can be done in two ways. In
the single-cut version, the expected cost is predicted for a set of scenarios, and in the multi-cut
version, the expected cost is predicted for a single scenario. Then, those estimations from the
neural network are used in an approximate formulation containing the ﬁrst-stage decisions.
123

2864
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
The resulting framework can be used to solve large problems in seconds. Larsen et al. (2022a)
present a study to solve two-stage programs using ML to speed up difﬁcult-to-solve second-
stage problems. They propose to use multilayer perceptrons and predict the value of the target
function when performing the well-known L-shaped method.
In a recent study, Nair et al. (2020) present a learning framework to enhance mixed-
integer programming (MIP) solvers using two neural networks. One network is trained to
perform multiple partial assignments for its integer variables, which generates smaller sub-
problems that can be paralleled. The model is trained using feasible solutions instead of
optimal solutions. Another network is trained for variable selection during the branch-and-
bound algorithm to generate a bound for the objective function value with a smaller tree. Shen
et al. (2021) present a new methodology to enhance branch-and-bound algorithms using ML.
In the ﬁrst step, a graph convolutional network is trained using optimal solutions to problems
that can be expressed as graphs. Then, for testing, the trained model outputs a value for
each decision variable that represents the probability of being in the optimal solution. In the
next step, a probabilistic branching technique with a guided depth-ﬁrst search is proposed
to utilize the optimal solutions predicted. Liu et al. (2022) propose a learning framework
by predicting the size of the local branching neighborhood. In the ﬁrst step, the size of
the branching is predicted as a regression task using graph neural networks. In the second
stage, the predicted size is dynamically adapted within the local branching algorithms using
a trained reinforcement learning model. The results show that the size parameter can be
learned, resulting in signiﬁcant performance gains.
Yilmaz and Büyüktahtakın (2023a) present a deep-reinforcement learning framework to
solve stochastic programs based on a two-stage scenario. The authors utilize two different
agents for each stage of the problem and can generate solutions for hard problems in a fraction
of a second. Bushaj and Büyüktahtakın (2024) present a novel 2-D Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) framework that is supported by K-means where the agent, mimicking robot
movements, assigns a value of 1 or 0 to each of the variables for the multi-dimensional
knapsack problem. Bushaj et al. (2023) integrate an agent-based simulation with a DRL
framework for epidemic intervention planning where a governor DRL agent can enforce
interventions in the agent-based simulation environment.
Ding et al. (2020) present a study at the intersection of ML and OR. In their framework,
a graph convolutional network is trained to predict values of binary decision variables. Then
those predictions can either be used to generate a heuristic prediction with a local branching
type cut or result in an exact solution with a root branching rule. In a recent study, Jiménez-
Cordero et al. (2022) present a methodology for constraint generation that is used to warm-
start the solution process. They train an ML model to predict invariant constraints, which is
the set of constraints that cannot be removed from the integer programs without changing the
feasible region. Shen et al. (2022) aim to improve the solution time of large-scale optimization
problems by presenting an ML-based pricing heuristic for the column generation algorithm.
The ML model is trained using optimal solutions to the pricing problem in the column
generation algorithm, which is the bottleneck of the algorithm. When you have an ML model
thatpredictstheoptimalsolutiontothepricingproblem,theefﬁciencyofthebranch-and-price
increases signiﬁcantly, which is an exact method.
In Kotary et al. (2021), the authors are interested in learning the OR solution using ML
when there are multiple optimal solutions. Additionally, as a result of randomization within
combinatorial optimization techniques, the learning task may face a challenge. To overcome
this, the problem of optimal dataset design is introduced with a heuristic to ﬁnd solutions
with the smallest total variation. Paulus et al. (2021) present a framework in which integer
programming solvers are integrated into neural network architectures as layers that can be
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2865
learned. The main idea is to provide gradients for both the cost terms and the constraints of
an integer program. Therefore, the proposed model can learn the cost and constraints of the
problem without explicitly specifying it. Huang et al. (2022) suggest a methodology to rank
cuts in a cutting plane algorithm since a good set of cuts can signiﬁcantly reduce the solution
time. The main idea is to learn a scoring function that can measure the efﬁciency of the cuts
and that can be generalized to other instances. The proposed framework can be used during
branch-and-cut algorithms with a solver.
Recently, Dai et al. (2021) have introduced Neural Stochastic Dual Dynamic Programming
(v-SDDP) to combat high-dimensional and long-horizon stochastic dynamic programs that
can be hard to solve with Stochastic Dual Dynamic Programming (SDDP). They utilize a
neural network to predict a high-quality value function to increase the efﬁciency of the SDDP
solution. Their study has a similar ﬂavor to ours in terms of its high-level objective, i.e.
using ML to help solve sequential stochastic optimization problems. However, they focus on
stochastic dynamic programs rather than multi-stage stochastic programs and their solution
methodology is entirely different from ours.
2.1 Key contributions of the study
An extensive amount of interest has recently been put toward learning to solve optimization
problems; however, there is still a lack of research for solving scenario-based multi-stage
stochastic programs. Speciﬁcally, deep learning-based supervised methodologies can be
considered to solve challenges of training, feasibility, and non-anticipativity in multi-stage
stochastic programs. Our motivation is two-fold. First, recent advances at the intersection
of machine learning and mathematical optimization programs show a promising direction in
solving combinatorial optimization problems (Liu et al., 2022; Larsen et al., 2022b). Second,
the vast-applicability and computational difﬁculties of scenario-based multi-stage stochastic
programs inspire us to tackle the computational complexity of the problem. Our goal is to sig-
niﬁcantly enhance learning-optimization solution algorithms for scenario-based multi-stage
stochastic programs by presenting a general framework. Our contributions are summarized
below.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that utilizes an encoder-decoder model
to learn the solutions of multi-stage stochastic programs. We present an innovative attention-
based encoder-decoder model called NEDA, in which the hidden states of the models are
adjusted based on the scenario tree to ensure the non-anticipativity of the predicted decision
variables. We propose a novel training paradigm for NEDA based on deterministic instances
and scenario sampling. This strategy prevents solving stochastic optimization problems to
generate training labels, which is computationally intractable.
We introduce the ScenPredOpt framework to handle multi-stage programs by utilizing a
general LP-based heuristic to speed up the solution. The ScenPredOpt framework is designed
to handle general scenario-based multi-stage programs with binary variables by integrat-
ing decisions made by learning models, heuristics, and commercial solvers. Moreover, we
improve the item-wise generalization algorithm to account for the variability of the prediction
in predicting problems with a large number of items. We test the success of the ScenPredOpt
algorithm with a varying number of periods, items, and scenarios. The results show that it
outperforms heuristics and that the solution time can be improved by a factor of 599 with a
gap of only 0.08%.
Our ScenPredOpt framework provides signiﬁcant novelty over the PredOpt presented
in Yilmaz and Büyüktahtakın (2024) including but not limited to LP relaxation. ScenPre-
123

2866
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
dOpt outlines a general methodology to solve scenario-based multi-stage stochastic MIPs,
where PredOpt focuses on multi-period deterministic MIP problems. Multi-stage stochastic
programming presents quite different challenges and, therefore, requires novel methodolo-
gies. First, the ScenPredOpt framework involves a novel ML framework, namely the NEDA
network, which generates predictions that meet the non-anticipativity requirement of the
multi-stage stochastic programs while PredOpt fails to satisfy this property. Furthermore, we
extend the item-wise generalization algorithm with a variance-based strategy and compare
it with PredOpt.
Section 3 presents the formulation of SMCLSP and SMSMK and a brief review dis-
cussion of the traditional solution approaches. Section4 outlines the details of NEDA,
scenario sampling-based training, ScenPredOpt framework, and item-wise generalization
algorithm. Then in Sect.5, implementation details, including instance generation, training,
and evaluation, are presented. Section6 demonstrates the computational results along with
generalization experiments. Finally, Sect.7 concludes the study with suggestions for future
directions.
3 Problems
3.1 Stochastic multi-item capacitated lot-sizing problem
Lot-sizing applications have been central for many industries, including but not limited to
glass, chemical, pharmaceutical, steel, paper, and manufacturing. The lot size problem has
many variations, including setup times, multiple machines, cyclical schedules, and perishable
inventories (Jans & Degraeve, 2008). In this study, we present a scenario-based version of the
classical MCLSP. Here, some or all parameters of the problem can be uncertain and can be
represented with scenarios. The objective is to minimize the total cost of production, setup,
and inventory costs while satisfying the demand for each item under all scenarios. Therefore,
MCLSP and SMCLSP are NP-Hard (Bitran & Yanasse, 1982).
SMCLSP can be expressed as an MIP, with the number of periods T , items I, and scenarios
S. The parameters of the problems are assumed to be non-negative and are as follows:
production cost ps
it, setup cost f s
it, inventory cost per unit hs
it, demand ds
it, and capacity cs
t
∀i ∈{1, . . . , I} , ∀t ∈{1, . . . , T } , ∀s ∈{1, . . . , S}. The probability of each scenario is
represented by ωs. The set of scenarios that share the same scenario path with scenario s up
to and including period t for item i is represented by s
it. Non-negative continuous variables
xs
it and vs
it represent the units produced and inventory at the end of each period, respectively.
The binary variable ys
it takes the value 1 if the item i is produced in period t for scenario s,
and 0 if not. The SMCLSP formulation:
min
S

s=1
ωs
I

i=1
T

t=1
(ps
itxs
it + f s
it ys
it + hs
itvs
it)
(2a)
s.t. vs
i,t−1 + xs
it −ds
it = vs
it
∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S
(2b)
I

i=1
xs
it ≤cs
t
∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S
(2c)
xs
it ≤ys
itcs
t
∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S
(2d)
xs
it = xs′
it
∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S, s′ ∈s
it
(2e)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2867
ys
it = ys′
it
∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S, s′ ∈s
it
(2f)
vs
it = vs′
it
∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S, s′ ∈s
it
(2g)
xs
it, vs
it ≥0 ∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S
(2h)
ys
it ∈{0, 1} ∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S.
(2i)
The objective function (2a) minimizes the expected cost of production, setup, and inven-
tory in all scenarios, items, and periods. Constraints (2b) assure the ﬂux of inventory in
a periodic setting, while demand is satisﬁed for each item i. Constraints (2c) limit the
amount produced for each item by a shared capacity for all items, and constraints (2d)
administer the setup cost for the item i produced in period t. Constraints (2e), (2f), and
(2g) are non-anticipativity constraints for xs
it, ys
it, and vs
it, respectively. Then constraints (2h)
establish the nonnegativity of xs
it and vs
it. Finally, the constraints (2i) put binary restrictions
on ys
it.
The variants of the lot-sizing problem include uncertain demand (Brandimarte, 2006), bio-
fuel production (Kantas et al., 2015), and carbon emissions (Benjaafar et al., 2012). Lot-sizing
solution approaches have been studied extensively in the literature. Notably, an exact solu-
tion framework was presented by Florian et al. (1980). Furthermore, another important exact
approach with valid (ℓ,S) inequalities and a separation algorithm was introduced by Barany
et al. (1984). More recently, Büyüktahtakın et al. (2018) present dynamic programming-
based inequalities to improve the solution of the multi-item capacitated lot-sizing problem.
Büyüktahtakın and Liu (2016) present a study on solving single-item capacitated lot-sizing
problem by combining dynamic programming with data ﬁtting and approximation. We refer
to Pochet and Wolsey (2006) for a review of algorithms on lot-sizing. For general information
on stochastic lot-sizing problems, we refer to the review by Tempelmeier (2013). Stochastic
lot-sizing problems can be much more challenging, and thus solution approaches such as
dynamic programming (Huang & Küçükyavuz, 2008) and progressive hedging (Haugen et
al., 2001) are used. Also, more general approaches that are speciﬁcally developed to solve
multi-stage scenario-based programs can be utilized to solve SMCLSP. One of the most recent
and highly successful approaches has been developed by Zou et al. (2019). Their developed
stochastic dual dynamic integer programming (SDDiP) framework utilizes different types
of cutting planes and achieves a state-of-the-art solution framework for solving multi-stage
stochastic programs in different settings (Lara et al., 2020; Yu & Shen, 2020). In another
recent study, Büyüktahtakın (2023) proposes scenario dominance cutting planes to solve
SMCLSP quickly and with high quality. Heuristic approaches based on the relax-and-ﬁx
approach are highly used to solve both deterministic and stochastic versions of the MCLSP
(Helber & Sahling, 2010; Toledo et al., 2015; Absi & van den Heuvel, 2019; Beraldi et al.,
2006).
3.2 Stochastic multi-stage multi-dimensional knapsack problem
The stochastic multi-stage multi-dimensional knapsack problem is a periodical version of
the well-known knapsack problem that also includes uncertainty. In this setting, the aim is
to maintain a stable solution over time by maximizing the proﬁt and the stabilization bonus
while ensuring that capacity constraints are not violated. Even in a single-dimensional setting,
the problem is NP-Hard (Bampis et al., 2022). The consideration of stability over time plays
a vital role in applications such as periodically changing prices, energy, raw materials, and
resources.
123

2868
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
SMSMK is formulated as a binary integer program for a number of periods T , items I,
and scenarios S. The binary variable xs
it denotes the decision to insert the item i ∈{1, . . . , I},
in period t ∈{1, . . . , T }, in scenario s ∈{1, . . . , S} by taking a value of 1, and 0 otherwise.
The binary variable ys
it is introduced as the stabilization bonus and assigned a value of 1 if
the decision in period t and t + 1 is identical, that is, xs
it, xs
i,t+1 = 0, or xs
it, xs
i,t+1 = 1.
Otherwise, ys
it takes the value 0. For item i, period t and scenario s the proﬁt is denoted by
ps
it, and the bonus is denoted by bs
it except for t ̸= T since T −1 is the last period the stability
bonus is added. The problem considers J different knapsack constraints, and the weights are
denoted by ws
i jt for each item i ∈{1, . . . , I}, knapsack constraint j ∈{1, . . . , J}, period
t ∈{1, . . . , T }, and scenario s ∈{1, . . . , S}. For each resource constraint, the capacity of
the knapsack is indicated by cs
jt. s
it is the set of scenario indexes that share the same path
with scenario s up to and including period t for item i. In addition, ωs is the probability of
each scenario. We modify the formulation in Bampis et al. (2022) to include scenarios and
present the problem as:
max
S

s=1
ωs(
I

i=1
T

t=1
ps
itxs
it +
I

i=1
T −1

t=1
bs
it ys
it)
(3a)
s.t.
I

i=1
ws
i jtxs
it ≤cs
jt
∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀j = 1, . . . , J, ∀s = 1, . . . , S
(3b)
ys
it ≤−xs
i,t+1 + xs
it + 1 ∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T −1, ∀s = 1, . . . , S
(3c)
ys
it ≤xs
i,t+1 −xs
it + 1 ∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T −1, ∀s = 1, . . . , S (3d)
xs
it = xs′
it
∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S, s′ ∈s
it
(3e)
ys
it = ys′
it
∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T −1, ∀s = 1, . . . , S, s′ ∈s
it
(3f)
xs
it ∈{0, 1} ∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S
(3g)
ys
it ∈{0, 1} ∀i = 1, . . . , I, ∀t = 1, . . . , T −1, ∀s = 1, . . . , S.
(3h)
The objective function (3a) maximizes the expected proﬁt and stability bonus over all
scenarios. Constraints (3b) are knapsack constraints that limit the weights of selected items
by capacity. The following constraints (3c) and (3d) secure the enforcement of the bonus
if xit = xi,t+1. Precisely, they represent the linear equivalent of ys
it = 1 −|xs
i,t+1 −xs
it|.
Constraints (3e) and (3f) ensure the non-anticipativity for xs
it and ys
it, respectively. Finally,
binary restrictions for xs
it and ys
it are given in constraints (3g) and (3h).
The knapsack problem has been studied extensively in the OR literature in various forms.
The knapsack problem has a wide range of applications, and many types of complex OR
problems can be expressed as knapsack-type sub-problems (Varnamkhasti, 2012). Examples
include multiple objectives (Ishibuchi et al., 2014), online knapsack (Cygan et al., 2016),
stochastic knapsack (Kosuch & Lisser, 2011), and probabilistic constraints (Gaivoronski et
al., 2011). Numerous exact and heuristic approaches have been developed to solve different
versions of the knapsack problem. We refer to Cacchiani et al. (2022) for a discussion of
recent advances in knapsack problems. As there are not many solution approaches specially
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2869
developed for SMSMK (3a)-(3h), we utilize a well-known solution framework, namely pro-
gressive hedging (PH), for scenario-based multi-stage problems. Introduced by Rockafellar
and Wets (1991), PH uses the idea of relaxing non-anticipativity constraints and solves sub-
problems independently. Later, a punishment for violating non-anticipativity is added to the
objective for each sub-problem. PH performs well in various stochastic integer problems (Gul
et al., 2015; Veliz et al., 2015). Büyüktahtakın (2022) presents the scenario dominance con-
cept and a new scenario sub-problem that respects the non-anticipativity constraints to derive
bounding relations between scenario couples and solve the multi-stage stochastic knapsack
problem.
4 Methodology
Our methodology innovatively integrates deep learning with heuristics and optimization
solvers to ﬁnd efﬁcient solutions to multi-stage stochastic optimization problems. The deep
learning aspect of our methodology utilizes neural machine translation frameworks to pre-
dict solutions that are close to optimal. This is achieved by learning a mapping from input
deﬁned by the problem parameters to an output deﬁned by solver-generated optimal solu-
tions. The details of the neural machine translation for the multi-stage stochastic programs
and non-anticipative encoder-decoder with attention (NEDA) are given in Sect.4.1. Then, in
Sect.4.2, we introduce the ScenPredOpt framework that combines learning-based decision
making, heuristics, and mathematical optimization solvers, achieving remarkable reductions
in solution time, as demonstrated in Sect.6.
4.1 Non-anticipative encoder-decoder with attention
4.1.1 Neural machine translation and the requirements for multi-stage
non-anticipativity
Amachinetranslationsystemisusedtotranslatefromonelanguagetoanother.Inrecentyears,
neural network-based translation systems have gained signiﬁcant attention and achieved
remarkable results (Stahlberg, 2020). In such systems, the sequence x1, x2, . . . , xm is the
input of the source language and is translated into the target language by generating the
output sequence y1, y2, . . . , yn. The neural machine translation model is trained using pairs
of input and output sequence pairs by maximizing the conditional probability: P(y | x) =
n
t=1 P(yt | yi|i<t, x). The readers can refer to Stahlberg (2020) for a detailed review
of neural machine translation systems. We develop our NEDA based on the architecture
presented by Luong et al. (2015).
The neural architecture presented by Luong et al. (2015) includes three main components.
The encoder is responsible for processing the input sequence to generate a high-dimensional
representation of the input sequence at each time step. Ideally, all characteristics of the input
sequence, such as meaning, grammar, and semantics, are captured by this high-dimensional
representation. The decoder is responsible for generating the output sequence one word at
a time using the encoder representation and the already translated words. Both the encoder
and decoder are recurrent neural networks, usually with the choice of computing units being
123

2870
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Fig. 1 An example scenario tree that contains four stages and eight scenarios, where s = ω represents the
scenario ω. The black dashed rectangular ﬁgure shows the scenario groups with the same decisions
LSTMs. The link between the encoder and the decoder is established through a module
called attention, which allows the decoder to selectively focus on crucial information from
the encoder. Sequence-to-sequence models are suitable for predicting periodic optimization
problems since they can handle information ﬂow between periods of the problem. This can
be a challenge with traditional ML algorithms that do not consider patterns over time. In
addition, they perform well on a variety of tasks. For detailed information on the original
neural network, we refer to Luong et al. (2015), and for its adaptation, we refer to Yilmaz
and Büyüktahtakın (2024).
The PredOpt framework presented in Yilmaz and Büyüktahtakın (2024) predicts the deci-
sion variables of multi-period deterministic problems to be integrated with a commercial
solver. PredOpt can reduce the solution time to up to three orders of magnitude with opti-
mality gaps lower than 0.1% for deterministic problems. However, the PredOpt framework
is not out-of-the-box reconcilable with the scenario-based multi-stage stochastic problems.
The main incompatibility between the learning network presented in Yilmaz and Büyük-
tahtakın (2024) and scenario-based multi-stage stochastic problems is the non-anticipative
nature of the decision variables. Figure1 shows a representation of a scenario tree of a prob-
lem with four stages, two scenarios per stage and therefore a total of eight scenarios. In
Fig.1a, the scenario tree is presented in standard form, and in Fig.1b, the scenario tree is
presented in a disaggregated form. In the scenario formulation of the problem, the variables
are deﬁned independently for each scenario, as in Fig.1b. However, they are connected with
a non-anticipativity constraint since two variables that share the same scenario path up to
stage t should be assigned the same decisions for the implementability of the solutions. The
grouping of constraints is shown with dashed lines for each stage in Fig.1b. The decision
variables should take the same value if they share the same realizations of the scenarios up
to the node’s stage, which is also known as time consistency. For example, all decisions for
scenario one should be identical; therefore, there is only one scenario group. In stage two,
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2871
there are two scenario groups: The upper group for scenarios one to four and the lower group
for scenarios ﬁve to eight.
The learning network can generate predictions using the data in tabular and extended
formats, as presented in Fig.1b. However, this raises a critical complication for the problem
of interest with non-anticipativity. This is because the attention-based neural network uses
the processed input information from the preceding and subsequent periods. The former case
is harmless since the information from the preceding periods is the same for all scenarios
that have the same parent node. However, for the succeeding periods, the child nodes will
have different parameters to represent changing scenario data. In effect, the original input
data and, therefore, the processed input data are likely to be different for each distinct child
node. Since those generated hidden states will be used within the attention mechanism, the
predictions can end up being different for each scenario group that requires non-anticipativity.
This would lead to a violation of the non-anticipative structure of the problem and would
result in an unimplementable decision. For example, we can consider predicting the ﬁrst
scenario group consisting of scenarios one to four in the second stage. The parameters and,
therefore, the input data for the ﬁrst stage would be the same for scenarios one to four. On
the other hand, when we are at stage three, only scenarios one and two are identical.
Similarly, scenarios three and four are identical, considering only stage three. Assuming
that the attention-based learning model decides by only considering the preceding and suc-
ceeding periods, i.e., the attention window of size one, the predictions made would be the
same for scenarios one and two and the same for scenarios three and four at stage three.
These two sets of predictions would probably be different from each other at stage three,
since the encoder uses fourth-stage data when predicting. This would violate the fundamental
non-anticipativity requirement. In this small example, if the size of the attention window is
two, then four different predictions can be made for the ﬁrst scenario group, that is, scenarios
one to four of the second stage. The learner network makes use of input data for the fourth
period and the third period, which would have different parameters for child nodes. Having
this violating condition makes the predictions for the scenario-based multi-stage stochas-
tic program infeasible and inexecutable. In order to eliminate this violation, we propose a
novel neural network architecture called Non-anticipative Encoder-Decoder with Attention
or NEDA.
4.1.2 NEDA framework
The proposed NEDA model is based on the network presented by Luong et al. (2015) and
modiﬁed to handle the non-anticipative nature of the issue of interest. The main idea is to
generate the same encoder hidden state information for all succeeding periods that share the
same parent node. Building on previous example, in Fig.1b, we can consider generating a
second-stage prediction for the ﬁrst scenario group consisting of scenarios 1 to 4. To generate
a prediction that ensures non-anticipativity, the hidden states on the next periods within the
attention windows should be the same. This is accomplished by averaging the encoder hidden
states of child nodes. Here, the hidden states of scenarios 1 to 8 of the ﬁrst stage and the
scenarios 1 to 4 of the third stage have been averaged separately to generate predictions
using an attention window of one. The alignment for averaging operations depends on the
123

2872
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
structure of the scenario tree and is performed separately for each stage and scenario group
when generating predictions. When generating the second stage prediction for the second
scenario group consisting of scenarios ﬁve to eight, the hidden states of scenarios 1 to 8
of the ﬁrst stage and those of 5 to 8 of the third stage have been averaged separately. The
encoder processes all input sequences at once and generates the hidden states, which ideally
capture the characteristics and features of the problem parameters. The forward encoder layer
LST Me
f generates the hidden state −→
h e
t,s and the backward encoder layer LST Me
b generates
the hidden state ←−
h e
t,s. Given the current period t and the length of the attention window D,
we can represent the hidden state generated for each scenario s ∈{1, . . . , S} as:
−→
h e
t−D,s, . . . , −→
h e
t,s, . . . , −→
h e
t+D,s = LST Me
f (xt−D,s, . . . , xt,s, . . . , xt+D,s),
(4a)
←−
h e
t−D,s, . . . , ←−
h e
t,s, . . . , ←−
h e
t+D,s = LST Me
b(xt−D,s, . . . , xt,s, . . . , xt+D,s).
(4b)
The hidden states of the forward and backward LSTM layers within the attention window
are concatenated and represented as a single encoder hidden state he
t,s = [−→
h e
t,s, ←−
h e
t,s] ∀t ∈
{t −D, . . . , t, . . . , t + D} ∀s ∈{1, . . . , S}. Let t,s denote the indices of scenarios that
share the same scenario realization up to the current period t with scenarios s. Therefore, for
each scenario s in the problem, averaged hidden states he
t,s can be calculated as:
he
t,s =

s∈t,s he
t,s
|t,s|
.
(5)
The explanation behind the the averaging step is to determine all groups of scenarios that
have a hidden state similar to the current prediction period t. If those hidden states are close
to each other, then the averages of the hidden states would be close to each other. In the end,
the model would make a similar prediction of binary variables. However, if the hidden states
vary from each other, the trained NEDA model would get varying hidden states throughout
the periods. Therefore, the attention scores and context calculated in succeeding steps would
lead to differently predicted binary variables for the same scenario clusters violating non-
anticipativity. To prevent that, the NEDA model would make an unsure prediction using the
averaged hidden states, and the determination of those decision variables would be left to
the ScenPredOpt framework, therefore, to the commercial solver to ﬁnd the best obtainable
values.
The decoder cell state is initialized as the scenario average and produces the output
sequence. The decoder LST Md also generates the decoder hidden state hd
t,s for the cur-
rent period t using the decision made in the previous period:
hd
t,s = LST Md(yt−1,s),
(6)
Then the attention module is used to further incorporate averaged encoder hidden state he
i,s
by making a comparison with the current decoder hidden state hd
t,s. The attention score ai,s
is calculated as:
ai,s =
exp(score(hd
t,s, he
i,s))
t+D
t′=t−D exp(score(hd
t,s, he
t′,s))
∀i ∈{t −D, . . . , t + D} , ∀s ∈{1, . . . , S} ,(7)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2873
and the score is calculated by the following formula:
score(hd
t,s, he
i,s) = hd
t,s
⊺Wαhe
i,s
∀i ∈{t −D, . . . , t + D} .
(8)
Using the attention scores, a weighted average of encoder hidden states is taken to calculate
the context:
cnt,s =
t+D

i=t−D
ai,s × he
i,s.
(9)
Finally, context cnt,s is concatenated with the decoder hidden state and passed through a
linear layer to generate a prediction for scenario s in period t. Note that for all scenarios that
share the same scenario realization up to period t, the predicted values would be the same
since the predictions are calculated from the same averaged hidden states calculated with Eq.
(5).
4.2 The ScenPredOpt framework
4.2.1 Training and scenario sampling
In the ScenPredOpt framework, the learner is responsible for decisions in all periods over all
scenario paths that are linked with non-anticipativity constraints, as ensured by the NEDA
framework.
One major challenge for solving scenario-based multi-stage stochastic programs is the
generation of training instances. The encoder-decoder models require a signiﬁcant amount
of training data generated by a commercial solver in the order of millions to learn the optimal
solutions. Therefore, this instance generation approach would be unsuitable for scenario-
based multi-stage stochastic programs, even for short-period instances, as they are much
more complex and signiﬁcantly harder to solve than deterministic multi-stage problems.
To overcome this computation challenge, we propose a training strategy based on scenario
sampling. In this strategy, at each training epoch, we sample a single scenario for each instance
and perform a training step using that scenario data and its optimal solution.
Our proposed training based on scenario sampling achieves a few computational advan-
tages. First, considering that the model is trained by the optimal solutions of 3,500,000
instances, it can be computationally infeasible to solve many multi-stage stochastic prob-
lems with multiple scenarios. However, solving the problem with only a single scenario, i.e.,
a single scenario path in Fig.1b, only takes a few seconds with the Gurobi solver. In this
setting, the non-anticipativity constraints in the formulation are removed, and therefore, each
subproblem of scenarios can be solved independently in a fast manner. Second, by sampling
a problem with a single scenario path, we increase the learning efﬁciency in a manner similar
to experience replay (Mnih et al., 2013). In scenario formulation, the parameters of a single
instance can be very similar if they share a common scenario path, e.g., scenarios 1 and 2 in
Fig.1a. This powerful correlation can reduce training efﬁciency and cause instability (Zha
et al., 2019). By sampling a single scenario of the individual problem for each epoch, we
overcome this challenge. Therefore, the model is not trained on scenario-based multi-stage
problems, but on deterministic multi-stage problems where only a single scenario is con-
sidered throughout the planning horizon. Thus, for each epoch during training, a problem
123

2874
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Fig. 2 The high-level ﬂow chart of ScenPredOpt (Algorithm 1)
containing a single scenario and its solution is used for a training step. As a result, the hidden
states of the model are not averaged using Eq. (5) during training and only averaged during
testing when the problem contains all scenarios.
4.2.2 Predicting tight constraints
IntheScenPredOptparadigm,themodelistrainedtopredicttightorclose-to-tightconstraints,
as well as binary variables. The aim is to reduce the problem’s size with those predictions;
therefore, the solution time is reduced with ScenPredOpt. The tight or close-to-tight con-
straints are included in the formulation, and others are excluded for faster computation. For
the SMCLSP, constraints (2c) are labeled tight if I
i=1 xs
it ≥ηcs
t for a given tightness coef-
ﬁcient η ∈[0, 1]. If xs
it ≥ηys
itcs
t , the constraints (2d) are assumed to be tight. Similarly,
for SMSMK, constraints (3b) are labeled as tight if I
i=1 ws
i jtxs
it ≥ηcs
jt. The remaining
constraints related to bonus enforcement are removed from the relaxation, since they do not
affect the feasible region. The technique deﬁned on the tightness coefﬁcient η is general and
can be applied to any inequalities in various forms (≤, ≥) or types (budget and ﬁxed-charge
constraints).
During training, the model learns tight or close-to-tight constraints, and this information
is used during testing to ensure the feasibility of the variables predicted by the model used,
thus speeding up the ScenPredOpt framework. Also, the predicted tight constraints do not
impact the feasibility of the ScenPredOpt solution framework since the original formulation
with all constraints are used to determine the full solution rather than the relaxed formulation
(Fig.2). The tightness coefﬁcient η is chosen according to the positive class ratio of the binary
variables, ensuring that the positive class ratio of labeled tight constraints remains consistent.
This helps prevent class imbalance that arises from labeling and ensures effective training.
4.2.3 ScenPredOpt algorithm
Unlike the PredOpt for deterministic multi-period problems presented in Yilmaz and Büyük-
tahtakın (2024), the ScenPredOpt presents an additional loop with LP relaxation of the
problem, as a helper to the ML and optimizer, for solving scenario-based multi-stage prob-
lems, as described in Algorithm 1. Here, a portion of the binary variables obtained by the
LP-relaxation solution is used in combination with the model-predicted binary variables to
improve the efﬁciency of the solutions. The high-level structure of the ScenPredOpt algorithm
is presented in Fig.2.
A large number of approaches utilize LP relaxations to solve a multitude of problems
involving integers. Commonly, the main idea is to solve the LP relaxation of the problem and
ﬁx some integer variables to reduce the solution time. LP-based heuristics with a variable
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2875
ﬁxing strategy have been extensively employed in some of the most well-known and exten-
sively studied problems in OR, such as lot-sizing (Denizel & Süral, 2006), knapsack (Chen
& Hao, 2014), vehicle routing (Cacchiani et al., 2014), and facility location (Guastaroba &
Speranza, 2014). With a similar motive, we propose ﬁxing binary variables based on the
LP relaxation of the problem in an iterative way to maintain feasibility. Preliminary results
showed that the LP-based approach has further reduced solution time without decreasing
solution quality. The NEDA model is trained on deterministic instances based on scenario
sampling and not on the exact solutions of stochastic programs. We believe that including
the LP relaxation solution of the original problem helps ScenPredOpt capture discoveries
that were not identiﬁed in the model due to training on deterministic instances and averaging
hidden states. For various problems, different heuristics can be integrated instead of the LP
relaxation-based heuristic to suit the problem needs better.
Algorithm 1 presents the details of the ScenPredOpt algorithm. For testing, the ScenPre-
dOpt algorithm takes a trained NEDA model M, input data from the test set α, initial level
(percent) for model-predicted binary variables θM, initial level (percent) for LP relaxation-
assigned binary variables θL P, reduction in the level (percent) for model-predicted binary
variables λM, and reduction in the level (percent) for LP relaxation-assigned binary vari-
ables λL P. The output of the framework is the best objective function value determined by
the ScenPredOpt framework. Also, four operators are deﬁned. First, the operator F M I P is
an MIP solver, and the inputs to F M I P are the problem parameters α, the binary variables
predicted by the model and used at a certain level β f
M, the binary variables assigned by the
relaxation of the LP and used at a certain level β f
L P, and the set of constraints C. MIP solver
F M I P returns z as the best solution found or ∅that denotes an infeasible problem. Second,
the operator F M I P−FE AS is a feasibility checker for an MIP and takes a set of arguments
similar to that of an MIP solver F M I P. Here, it is assumed when the sets β f
M or β f
L P are ∅,
and the problem is solved without ﬁxing those variables. Also, instead of using the set of
all constraints C, the feasibility check is performed using a set of predicted tight constraints

C. The feasibility-checker operator F M I P−FE AS terminates when a ﬁrst feasible solution is
found, or the original problem is certiﬁed to be infeasible, which is denoted by ∅. Third, the
operator F L P is an LP solver and takes the same arguments as F M I P except for LP-assigned
binary variables β f
L P since they are not yet determined. Unlike the MIP solver F M I P, the LP
solver F L P removes the restrictions of binary variables from the formulation and solves the
problem as an LP. Finally, the operator P is the top prediction generator and takes a pair of
inputs as a set of variables: all of the predicted binary variables by model βM and prediction
level θM, or LP relaxation assigned binary variables βL P and prediction level θL P. Here, the
predicted variables are selected up to the desired percent of all variables by a function of
max(βM, 1 −βM), where βM ∈[0, 1] is the predicted value for the variables predicted by
the model. Similarly, LP-assigned variables are determined by using max(βL P, 1 −βL P),
where βL P ∈[0, 1]. The calculated values are ordered from the smallest to the largest and
selected up to the input prediction level or prediction percent of the total variables. This
approach determines a set of variables closest to binary values (0 or 1); thus, the model is
more conﬁdent in its prediction. The selected variables are labeled as 0 or 1 based on their
proximity. The output of this operator is a set of ﬁxed variables: β f
M or β f
L P, depending on
the input.
123

2876
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
The ScenPredOpt algorithm, presented in Algorithm 1, starts by predicting binary vari-
ables βM and tight constraints 
C in steps 1 and 2, respectively. In Step 3, the set of variables
predicted and ﬁxed by the model, β f
M, is determined with an initial level θM. Next, the
prediction level feasibility loop is introduced in Step 4, and it is continued until a feasible
solution is found using the MIP feasibility checker F M I P−FE AS. Note that in this step, we
use predicted variables from the model and a set of tight constraints 
C but do not include
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2877
any LP-assigned binary variables β f
L P. Within this loop, if no feasible solution is found,
the prediction level θM is reduced by λM, and a smaller set of β f
M is generated. Once this
loop ends, a linear relaxation of the problem is solved using LP solver F L P in step 8 using
determined predictions β f
M and all constraints C instead of predicted tight constraints 
C. The
resulting variables constitute the set of LP-assigned binary variables βL P. Then in step 9, the
set of ﬁxed variables is determined with an initial level for LP-assigned binary variables θL P.
Here, β f
L P excludes the set of model-predicted variables β f
M, i.e., β f
L P ∩β f
M = ∅always
holds. In Step 10, a new loop begins and continues until a feasible solution is found. This
loop is necessary to overcome the possible infeasibility resulting from ﬁxing binary variables
from the LP relaxation. Similarly to the loop in Step 4, this loop solves the problem using
model-predicted variables β f
M and a set of tight constraints 
C, but also includes ﬁxing LP-
assigned binary variables β f
L P during the solution. Within the loop, the level for LP-assigned
binary variables θL P is reduced by λL P, and the set of LP-assigned ﬁxed binary variables
β f
L P is updated. Once a feasible solution is found, a new loop begins in step 14 to achieve a
solution to report by ScenPredOpt. However, this loop utilizes the complete formulation of
the problem considering all constraints C and not just the predicted set of tight constraints

C, and either solves the problem fully or reports infeasibility. This is to ensure that the fea-
sibility is maintained with the original problem. The loop deﬁned by Steps 14 to 18 is only
used when it is necessary to ensure feasibility and is not run often by ScenPredOpt since the
former loops ﬁnd a feasible solution with high success. If no feasible solution is found, both
the ﬁxed levels for the model-predicted binary variables θM and the LP relaxation-assigned
binary variables θL P are reduced by λM and λL P, respectively. Then, in the next iteration,
both the variables predicted by the model β f
M and the variables assigned by LP relaxation
β f
L P are updated. Then, in Step 20, the best solution is determined by ScenPredOpt, and
the corresponding objective function value is returned from the solution found in the loop
starting at Step 14.
4.3 Generalization with Item-wise Expansion
Here, we present an item-wise generalization algorithm that enables a NEDA model trained
withafewitemstopredictproblemswithalargesetofitems.Thispresentsanimportantaspect
of the ScenPredOpt solution framework because then models can be trained using small-sized
problems that are easier to solve, providing a signiﬁcant time reduction in generating training
instances and model training time. The NEDA model can be used to process variable-length
input sequences due to the recursive nature of LSTMs. Therefore, a trained NEDA model can
be used to predict instances with similar distributions that have a different number of periods
withoutanymodiﬁcation.InYilmazandBüyüktahtakın(2024),theauthorsintroduceanitem-
wise generalization algorithm and show that the model is very successful in generalizing in
the item dimension. Here, we improve the item-wise generalization algorithm by considering
the variability in the predictions made.
123

2878
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Algorithm 2 presents the details of the variance-based item-wise generalization algorithm.
The inputs to the algorithm are the trained model M, the number of items during model
training I M, the input data from the test set α, the set of items in the test set i ∈{1, . . . , I} and
the threshold prediction count δ. The output is a set of predictions ˆβi ∀i ∈{1, . . . , I}. In Step
1, we initialize the prediction count γi to zero, for each item i. Then the cumulative prediction
βi is initialized as 0 for each item i. In Step 3, we initialize the set of saved predictions πi for
each item i ∈{1, . . . , I}, which is a set to save the predictions made at each iteration. Next, an
iteration is started until each item i is predicted at least a threshold prediction count δ times.
In Step 5, we sample a subset of items B with a size equal to the number of items with which
the model is trained, that is, |B| = I M. Later, we generate predictions ˆθB using the trained
model M. The input to the model is the data from the selected subset αB, in which the right-
hand coefﬁcients are resized to account for an increase in the number of items. For SMCLSP,
we adjust Eq. (2c) as cs
t = cs
t ×

i∈B ds
it
I
i=1 ds
it
, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀s = 1, . . . , S,. For SMSMK, we
adjust Eq. (3b) to cs
jt = cs
jt ×

i∈B ws
i jt
I
i=1 ws
i jt
, ∀t = 1, . . . , T , ∀j = 1, . . . , J, ∀s = 1, . . . , S.
Effectively, we reduce the test instance to the size of the training instance. In Step 7, we sum
the current predictions ˆθi with ˆβi for the selected subset B. In Step 8, we save the current
predictions ˆθi by concatenating them with the existing predictions πi. Then, the prediction
count γi is increased for each item i ∈B. In Step 11, we calculate the standard deviation σi for
all items i ∈{1, . . . , I} using the set of saved predictions πi. Then, in Step 12, we divide the
cumulative predictions ˆβi by their respective counts γi. Then, for each item i ∈{1, . . . , I}, we
calibrate the predictions with the calculated standard deviations. The main idea is to push the
variables with higher variability closer to 0.5 so that they are determined by the ScenPredOpt
instead of directly ﬁxing them. Here, we intend to hold variables with lower variability in high
regard. For example, if two variables have similar predictions, we prefer the variables that
are consistently predicted rather than the more uncertain and inconsistently predicted ones.
Therefore, we add or subtract the variability from predictions based on their proximity to 0
or 1. Then, those variables with higher deviations would be left to the solver. Also, we add
or subtract variance instead of the standard deviation since we found empirically that using
the latter is a severe punishment for variability, and the former performs better. Furthermore,
the variance σ 2
i is smaller than the standard deviation σi since all predictions are between
0 and 1. In Step 15, if the resulting prediction ˆβi is smaller than 0.5, we add the variance
σ 2
i . Then we ensure that the prediction is not more than 0.5; otherwise, it might be predicted
as 1 within the ScenPredOpt framework. Otherwise, the variance σ 2
i is subtracted from the
prediction ˆβi to push more uncertain predictions to the middle ground, to be determined by
the commercial solver. Similarly, we ensure that the ﬁnal prediction value is not less than
0.5.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2879
5 Implementation and Experimentation Details
In this section, the details of generating instances, experimentation setup, and evaluation
metrics are presented. A high-performance computing cluster is used for instance generation,
training, and testing. The cluster runs on Linux 3.10.0 with Intel Xeon Gold 6226R 2.90 GHz,
96 GB of memory, and an NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU. Test instances are solved using Gurobi
Optimizer 9.5 instead of CPLEX 20.1.0 since it was faster on preliminary stochastic multi-
stage test problems. Python 3.8.5 and PyTorch 1.7.1 are used for training and testing. Gurobi
is used with Python API. All reported solution times are in CPU seconds. All models are
trained using GPUs.
123

2880
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
5.1 Instance generation
Theparametersoftheinstancesaresampledfromthenonnegativeuniformintegerdistribution
between the integers a and b represented by U [a, b]. For testing instances, we also employ
a scenario-capping strategy to reduce the exponentially growing number of scenarios with
increasing time periods. In this setting, after the capping period, no new scenario is generated,
and the data from the remaining stages are assumed to be the same or deterministic. After
the capping period, for each scenario node, the set of succeeding scenarios is generated to
be the same. For example, in Fig.1a, all parameters of the fourth stage scenario would be
the same if the capping period is set to three. Otherwise, the parameters for scenarios 1,3,5,
and 7 would be identical and the parameters for scenarios 2,4,6, and 8 would be identical. In
Appendix A, we present further details of the generated test instances.
SMCLSP Instances: Instance generation for SMCLSP is implemented according to the
approach given in Büyüktahtakın et al. (2018). The hardness of the SMCLSP is controlled
by two main factors: capacity-to-demand ratios c ∈{10, 14} and setup-to-holding cost ratio
r = 1, 000.Theproductioncost ps
it isdrawnfromU [1, 200],theinventorycosths
it issampled
from U [1, 100], and the demand ds
it is drawn from U [500, 1500]. The overall means of d
and h are represented by ¯d and ¯h, respectively. Capacity ct is drawn from U

0.8c ¯d, 1.2c ¯d

and setup cost f s
it is drawn from U

0.9r ¯h, 1.1r ¯h

. Two different models are trained for
SMCLSP: The ﬁrst model is trained with T = 40 periods and I = 8 items. The second
model is trained with T = 30 periods and I = 12 items. For both models, data sets with
some combinations of T ∈{10, 15} and S ∈{32, 64, 81, 125, 243, 512}, where S is the
number of scenarios, are used for testing. For item-wise expansion, we used T ∈{15, 10},
S ∈{32, 64, 81}, and I ∈{24, 32, 16} for the ﬁrst model with I = 8 and T ∈{15, 10},
S ∈{32, 64, 81}, and I ∈{36, 48, 24} for the second model with I = 12. For SMCLSP, 18
test sets are generated, each including 20 test instances.
SMSMK Instances: Instances are generated similar to Angulo et al. (2016). Proﬁt
ps
it is drawn from U [1, 1000], stability bonus bs
it is drawn from U [1, 1000], weights
of the elements wi jt are drawn from U [1, 1000], and capacity cs
jt is drawn from
U

0.5 I
i=1 wi jt, 0.8 I
i=1 wi jt
 
. Two models are trained for SMSMK: The one with
T = 30 periods with I = 8 items and the second with T = 30 periods with I =
10 items. The test set for both models has some combination of T
∈{10, 15} and
S ∈{32, 64, 81, 125, 243, 512}. For the ﬁrst model trained with I = 8, instances with
T ∈{15, 10}, S ∈{32, 64, 81}, and I ∈{24, 32, 16} are used to test item-wise expansion.
For the second model trained with I = 10, the test set with T ∈{15, 10}, S ∈{32, 64, 81},
and I ∈{30, 40, 20} are generated with item-wise expansion. A total of 30 test sets, each
with 20 instances, have been generated.
5.2 Implementation Specifications
For SMCLSP, we implement SDDiP based on Ding et al. (2019) with a default setting and
a time limit of 7200s until 20 stable iterations are achieved. Additionally, we implement a
heuristic based on Absi and van den Heuvel (2019) to generate a baseline for comparison.
Within the heuristic, the number of ﬁxed periods is assigned as T
20, and the periods with
binary variables are assigned as T
10. For SMSMK, we utilize the PH approach presented by
Watson and Woodruff (2011) to compare the quality of our solution. Their PH algorithm is
an enhanced version of the classical PH algorithms that address convergence issues. SDDiP
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2881
is not applicable for SMSMK, since SDDiP requires the complete or relatively complete
recourse condition, and SMSMK is not completely recourse. Additionally, we utilize the
heuristic solution presented in Bertsimas and Demir (2002) for the benchmark, as there is
no existing heuristic approach speciﬁcally developed for SMSMK given by Eq. (3). Their
heuristic solves an LP relaxation of the problem at each iteration. Due to the computational
challenge of this heuristic, we set 0.1% of binary variables to 0 instead of a single variable
at each step of the iteration. This modiﬁcation results in a much faster heuristic solution
at the cost of a slightly increased optimality gap for instances with a very large number of
variables. Our objective with this modiﬁcation is to present a more fair time comparison
between ScenPredOpt and the heuristic of Bertsimas and Demir (2002).
We set the initial level for model-predicted binary variables θM = 50% for SMCLSP
and θM = 40% for SMSMK. For both problem types, we assign the initial level for the
LP relaxation-assigned binary variables θL P = 5%. Also, the reduction in the level for
the model-predicted binary variables λM = 10% and the reduction in the level for the LP
relaxation-assigned binary variables λL P = 1%. The time to generate predictions is less than
one second for all instances and is included in timeScenPredOpt. For all tables, we present
the number of stages T and the total number of scenarios sc.
5.3 Model training
The NEDA models are trained with longer period problems than the instances in the test
set to capture and learn more sequential decision structures with the attention structure.
The instances used in the training set are deterministic and solved in 1.7s on average. The
SMCLSP models in Tables 1 and 2 have 128 and 64 hidden units in the decoder for both the
forward and backward layers, respectively. The former SMCLSP model is trained for 18h
using a training set with T = 40. The latter SMCLSP model is trained using T = 30 problems
in 30h. The SMSMK models with the results presented in Tables 4 and 5 are trained using
instances with T = 30 and contain 256 and 128 hidden units in both forward and backward
layers, respectively. The encoders contain two bidirectional LSTM layers, while the decoder
contains a unidirectional 2-layer LSTM. We have utilized a standard learning schema by
applying training, validation, and test sets that contain 3,500,000, 10,000, and 20 instances,
respectively (Alpaydin, 2020). Furthermore, a dropout schema (Srivastava et al., 2014) is
used to regularize learning with a random rate of {0.25, 0.30, 0.35}, which is known to limit
overﬁtting. We use the popular Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.01 for
SMCLSP and 0.001 for SMSMK (Kingma & Ba, 2014).
5.4 Evaluation methodology
We have utilized the following metrics to measure the success of ScenPredOpt solution time
and its quality compared to exact and heuristic approaches.
• timeGRB: Average solution time in CPU seconds for SMCLSP or SMSMK with Gurobi
9.5 in its default settings.
• timeScenPredOpt: Average solution time in CPU seconds for SMCLSP or SMSMK
with the ScenPredOpt framework.
• timeHeur: Average solution time in CPU seconds for the heuristic of Absi and van den
Heuvel (2019) for SMCLSP and the heuristic of Bertsimas and Demir (2002) for
SMSMK.
123

2882
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
• timeSDDiP: Average solution time in CPU seconds for SMCLSP with SDDiP.
• timePH: Average solution time in CPU seconds for SMSMK with the PH algorithm.
• accScenPredOpt(%): Percentage of correct binary variables predicted and ﬁxed by
ScenPredOpt (or accScenPredOptWoLP for ScenPredOpt without LP relaxation) with
respect to the Gurobi solution.
In addition, we deﬁne the following metrics:
Deﬁnition 1 The optimality gap between the ScenPredOpt solution ˆx∗(heuristic solution
for optGapHeur, SDDiP solution for optGapSDDiP, and PH solution for optGapPH) and
Gurobi solution x∗. Let Z(•) be the corresponding operator to calculate the value of the
function given any solution. Then the optimality gap is:
optGapScenPredOpt(%) =

Z(ˆx∗) −Z(x∗)

Z(x∗)
× 100.
(10)
Deﬁnition 2 The solution time improvement factor achieved by employing the ScenPredOpt
framework (heuristic time improvement for timeImpHeur, SDDiP time improvement for
timeImpSDDiP, and PH time improvement for timeImpPH) compared to Gurobi solution
time is:
timeImpScenPredOpt =
timeGRB
timeScenPredOpt .
(11)
Deﬁnition 3 The one-sided Wilcoxon signed rank test is used to measure if both samples are
from the same population. It is a nonparametric alternative to the t test and appropriate for
statistically comparing solution times of ML-based OR approaches (Accorsi et al., 2022). We
conclude that ScenPredOpt is statistically faster than the heuristic if the p-value is smaller
than 0.01. The hypotheses are as follows:
H0 : median(timeHeur −timeScenPredOpt) < 0,
(12a)
H1 : median(timeHeur −timeScenPredOpt) > 0.
(12b)
6 Results
This section provides a discussion of computational experiments. We compare the ScenPre-
dOpt framework with the optimization solver, exact, and heuristic approaches. The test set
for each speciﬁed characteristic of an instance includes 20 test instances, and all the results
presented in the tables are average values for those 20 instances. All instances are solved
using Gurobi 9.5 with a 2h time limit (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2022).
6.1 Quality of predictions for SMCLSP
Table 1 presents the detailed computational results for the ﬁrst set of SMCLSP instances.
The 8-item model is trained using deterministic instances sampled by scenarios with T = 40
periods and 8 items. The local attention structure helps the model to generalize instances with
a varying number of periods. In the ﬁrst set of Table 1, the test has 32 scenarios and T = 10
stages. Gurobi achieves an average solution time of more than 3000s, while SDDiP reduces
the solution time to nearly 450s with a gap of 0.03% to the Gurobi value. The heuristic
signiﬁcantly reduces the solution time to almost 8s, with a relatively high optimality gap of
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2883
Table 1 Average results of experiments for SMCLSP with 8 items
T
10
10
10
15
15
15
Avg
Mdn
Std
#sc
32
64
81
125
243
512
176
103
165
timeGRB
3042
4582
5773
6508
7203
6,850
5660
7200
2,919
timeScenPredOpt
4
13
16
53
77
95
43
18
60
timeSDDiP
454
738
924
4342
2151
1715
1721
1203
1553
timeHeur
8
89
80
341
749
743
335
103
385
timeImpScenPredOpt
600
376
599
264
145
105
348
141
498
timeImpSDDiP
6
8
10
2
4
4
6
4
6
timeImpHeur
319
148
150
34
13
10
112
14
207
optGapGRB(%)
0.02
0.07
0.07
0.13
0.18
0.11
0.10
0.07
0.09
optGapScenPredOpt(%)
0.16
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.51
0.36
0.21
0.09
0.35
optGapSDDiP(%)
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
optGapHeur(%)
2.13
1.88
1.78
1.14
1.18
1.14
1.54
1.45
0.61
accScenPredOpt(%)
99.64
99.90
99.90
99.89
99.05
99.26
99.61
99.93
0.78
accScenPredOptWoLP(%)
99.64
99.90
99.90
99.89
99.05
99.26
99.61
99.93
0.78
2.13%. ScenPredOpt remedies the trade-off between solution time and quality and achieves
a 3.6-second solution with only a 0.16% optimality gap. Here, the solution time is reduced
by a factor of 600, when compared to Gurobi. For the third set of instances with 81 scenarios,
ScenPredOpt achieves a similar solution time improvement with a gap of only 0.08%. The
Gurobisolutiontimeoftheinstancesisnotnecessarilyproportionaltothenumberofscenarios
or stages; rather, it is likely related to the structure of scenario trees. However, ScenPredOpt
can solve the 8-item SMCLSP for all cases much faster than Gurobi, SDDiP, and heuristic.
Also, compared to the heuristic, the optimality gaps are much smaller. The p-values for
the Wilcoxon signed rank test are all below 0.01, ensuring that ScenPredOpt is faster than
the heuristic. The time improvement factor values for ScenPredOpt decrease as problems
become more difﬁcult because the solution time is set to a 2-hour time limit. Gurobi would
require a much longer solution time than two hours for harder instances, as proved by the
increasing optimality gap. Since ScenPredOpt has no solution time set, the solution with
ScenPredOpt starts to take a long time, and the time improvement values appear to shrink.
The time improvement values would be much higher if the Gurobi benchmark instances did
not terminate early on.
Table 2 shows the computational results with 12-item SMCLSP. Here, the model is trained
using T = 30-period instances with 12 items. The results show a similar trend to that of Table
1, favoring ScenPredOpt over the heuristic. Gurobi solves the ﬁrst three sets of instances in
Table 2 on an average of more than 6000s. ScenPredOpt solves all three of those instances
in less than a minute, achieving a small optimality gap of less than 0.41%. The SDDiP
halves solution time with a small optimality gap, but still does not reach a fast solution
like ScenPredOpt. The last three sets of instances are signiﬁcantly challenging since none
of the individual instances can be solved to optimality in the set 2-hour time limit using
Gurobi, hence the average Gurobi solution time of approximately 7200s. For such instances,
the heuristic time is close to or more than 1000s, whereas the ScenPredOpt time is closer to
100s with a signiﬁcantly lower optimality gap compared to the heuristic. Also, LP-relaxation
provides an accuracy improvement in the ScenPredOpt.
123

2884
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Table 2 Average results of experiments for SMCLSP with 12 items
T
10
10
10
15
15
15
Avg
Mdn
Std
#sc
32
64
81
125
243
512
176
103
165
timeGRB
6187
6185
6158
7200
7202
7201
6689
7200
1815
timeScenPredOpt
43
17
24
58
150
95
64
41
80
timeSDDiP
3548
3681
3790
7131
7145
7197
5415
7082
292
timeHeur
212
242
289
967
996
1,355
677
610
566
timeImpScenPredOpt
322
623
462
165
89
115
296
159
348
timeImpSDDiP
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
timeImpHeur
101
90
83
10
8
6
49
10
77
optGapGRB(%)
0.07
0.07
0.10
0.17
0.15
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.07
optGapScenPredOpt(%)
0.26
0.30
0.41
0.17
0.25
0.87
0.38
0.31
0.33
optGapSDDiP(%)
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.01
optGapHeur(%)
2.12
1.92
1.91
1.17
1.31
1.18
1.60
1.56
0.54
accScenPredOpt(%)
98.79
99.02
98.66
99.41
98.81
97.21
98.67
98.94
1.01
accScenPredOptWoLP(%)
98.70
99.01
98.70
99.39
98.90
97.05
98.63
98.88
1.05
All p-values of the Wilcoxon test are smaller than 0.01, suggesting that ScenPredOpt is
faster with a much smaller optimality gap than the heuristic. Therefore, ScenPredOpt achieves
a notable computational advance by generating fast, high-quality solutions to challenging
scenario-based multi-stage stochastic programs. Also, for Tables 1 and 2, the overall average
and median solution time with the ScenPredOpt is smaller than the heuristic solution time
with a lower standard deviation. Therefore, we can highlight that ScenPredOpt outperforms
the heuristic in the solution.
6.1.1 Comparison of ScenPredOpt and Gurobi in the ﬁrst few seconds
Figure3 presents the progress of the normalized objective function values during the ﬁrst
seconds of the solution for ScenPredOpt and Gurobi. Speciﬁcally, Fig.3a and b show the
progress of the solution for the third and ﬁfth sets of instances in Table 1, with 81 and 243
scenarios, respectively. Figures3c and d show the progress of the solution for the third and
ﬁfth sets of instances in Table 2, having 81 and 243 scenarios, respectively. All four ﬁgures
highlight that ScenPredOpt reduces the objective function value at a faster rate compared
to Gurobi. In addition, the progress of the objective value stabilizes earlier, underlining the
success of ScenPredOpt.
6.1.2 Instance-by-Instance results and comparison with PredOpt
In Table 3, we present the instance-by-instance results for 10 SMCLSP instances with larger
scenarios than the previously-presented ones. The problem contains 8 items, 13 periods,
and 2 scenarios per stage without scenario-capping. Therefore, each instance contains 4096
scenarios. The results are generated using the 8-item model in Table 1. The Gurobi does
not reach an optimal solution for any problem within the given 2-hour solution time limit.
In addition, SDDiP cannot reach a better solution than Gurobi in a given 20-stable iteration
limit. The solution time of ScenPredOpt changes between 80 and 882s. The heuristic has
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2885
Fig. 3 Progress of Gurobi and ScenPredOpt objective values during the ﬁrst few seconds of the solution
process. All solution times are given in CPU seconds
a higher solution time than ScenPredOpt for all 10 instances within the range of 1222 to
2086s. This translates to a higher time-improvement factor of ScenPredOpt compared to the
heuristic for all instances. Also, the optimality gaps between ScenPredOpt and heuristic dif-
fer considerably in favor of the ScenPredOpt. Table 3 demonstrates that ScenPredOpt is not
only dominant in averages but also superior in instance-by-instance cases compared to the
heuristic solution times and the optimality gap and solution time of exact approaches. Further-
more, Table 3 presents a comparison between ScenPredOpt and the PredOpt introduced in
Yilmaz and Büyüktahtakın (2024). The solution time of PredOpt is denoted by timePredOpt,
the time improvement factor achieved by PredOpt is denoted by timeImpPredOpt, and the
resulting optimality gap is denoted by optGapPredOpt. In 8 over 10 instances, ScenPredOpt
outperforms PredOpt in terms of both the solution time and the optimality gap. In instance
2, ScenPredOpt has a better optimality gap than PredOpt, but with a slightly higher solution
time. The third instance presents the opposite case, where ScenPredOpt has a better solution
time with a larger optimality gap compared to PredOpt. The averages highlight the superi-
ority of ScenPredOpt over PredOpt, with the former having a lower average solution time, a
higher time improvement, and a lower optimality gap.
To summarize the results presented in Tables 1, 2, and 3 and Fig.3, ScenPredOpt achieves
a better solution than the heuristic and PredOpt in a statistically faster process. The optimality
gap of state-of-the-art SDDiP is lower than that of ScenPredOpt at the cost of signiﬁcantly
increased solution time. Therefore, ScenPredOpt can be a favorable alternative to Gurobi and
SDDiP by providing a fast and high-quality solution at a fraction of the computational cost
without requiring expert knowledge about the problem solved.
123

2886
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Table 3 Detailed results of experiments for SMCLSP with 8 items
#instance
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Avg
timeGRB
7201
7201
7207
7201
7208
7201
7201
7201
7201
7201
7202
timeScenPredOpt
80
89
374
166
882
85
90
100
100
92
206
timePredOpt
92
74
505
237
1405
157
136
101
143
168
302
timeSDDiP
1297
856
3317
1260
2261
1454
845
1368
896
1121
1468
timeHeur
2086
1222
1591
2074
1581
1637
2033
1917
1751
1493
1738
timeImpScenPredOpt
90
81
19
43
8
85
80
72
72
78
63
timeImpPredOpt
78
97
14
30
5
46
53
71
50
43
49
timeImpSDDiP
6
8
2
6
3
5
9
5
8
6
6
timeImpHeur
3
6
5
3
5
4
4
4
4
5
4
optGapGRB(%)
0.15
0.02
0.05
0.08
0.05
0.10
0.14
0.11
0.04
0.10
0.09
optGapScenPredOpt(%)
0.13
0.58
0.07
0.66
0.22
0.29
0.05
0.43
0.01
0.74
0.32
optGapPredOpt(%)
0.16
0.65
0.04
0.76
0.27
0.44
0.07
0.60
0.07
0.92
0.40
optGapSDDiP(%)
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.03
optGapHeur(%)
1.87
1.16
1.80
1.17
0.97
1.24
0.90
1.93
1.86
1.94
1.48
6.2 Quality of predictions for SMSMK
Table 4 presents the ﬁrst set of results for SMSMK. The model is trained with T = 30-period
instances. For the ﬁrst set with 32 scenarios, the solution time is reduced from more than
1000s with Gurobi to only one second with ScenPredOpt. This is much faster compared to
the heuristic with a better optimality gap, i.e., a 2.73% gap with the heuristic compared to
1.09% with ScenPredOpt. The PH improves the Gurobi solution time for most cases with a
slight optimality gap, but it is much slower compared to the heuristic or ScenPredOpt. For
example, PH reduces the solution time more than half with only a 0.02% optimality gap in
almost 2000s in the fourth test set of Table 4. The ScenPredOpt can provide a solution in less
than 5s with only a 0.82% optimality gap. While the heuristic outperforms PH in solution
time, ScenPredOpt outperforms the heuristic in terms of both solution time and optimality
gap. Also, all p-values of the Wilcoxon signed-rank are smaller than 0.01 highlighting the
success of the ScenPredOpt over the heuristic.
Table 5 presents another set of instances for SMSMK with 10 items. The results highlight
the quality of the ScenPredOpt solution over the heuristic and the time improvement over
Gurobi and PH, similar to Table 4. For example, in the last data set with 512 scenarios, the
solution time is reduced to almosta minute from two hours. This signiﬁcanttime improvement
factor of 150 is achieved with an optimality gap of only 0.77%. Similarly to the tables
presented previously with SMCLSP and SMSMK, all p-values for the Wilcoxon test are
less than 0.01. Also, the optimality gaps of the heuristic are much larger than those of the
ScenPredOpt for all instances. Furthermore, LP-relaxation enhances ScenPredOpt accuracy.
To sum up Tables 4 and 5, ScenPredOpt achieves a signiﬁcant reduction in solution time
compared to Gurobi and PH at the cost of a small optimality gap. Also, it outperforms the
heuristic in terms of solution quality and time for all cases. Thus, ScenPredOpt is a promising
alternativetootherexactandheuristicalgorithmsforgeneratingfastbuthigh-qualitysolutions
to complex problems that need to be solved repeatedly and quickly. Furthermore, both models
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2887
Table 4 Average results of experiments for SMSMK with 8 items
T
10
10
10
15
15
15
Avg
Mdn
Std
#sc
32
64
81
125
243
512
176
103
165
timeGRB
1155
2149
2144
4501
7200
6949
4016
6954
3348
timeScenPredOpt
1
2
2
5
12
17
6
2
8
timePH
77
708
1051
1936
7355
6760
2981
657
3305
timeHeur
4
9
11
29
179
170
67
17
86
timeImpScenPredOpt
1013
1585
1617
1206
713
533
1111
525
1775
timeImpPH
17
10
3
5
1
1
6
1
19
timeImpHeur
245
233
185
154
46
44
151
48
286
optGapGRB(%)
0.03
0.03
0.07
0.22
1.21
1.01
0.43
0.01
0.65
optGapScenPredOpt(%)
1.09
1.06
1.28
0.82
1.31
1.30
1.14
1.10
0.61
optGapPH(%)
0.09
0.02
0.05
0.02
0.18
0.17
0.09
0.02
0.16
optGapHeur(%)
2.73
3.61
3.11
2.82
3.44
2.71
3.07
3.07
1.15
accScenPredOpt(%)
92.84
94.26
91.53
95.17
93.00
94.67
93.58
95.50
5.47
accScenPredOptWoLP(%)
92.84
94.26
91.53
95.17
93.00
94.67
93.58
95.50
5.47
Table 5 Average results of experiments for SMSMK with 10 items
T
10
10
10
15
15
15
Avg
Mdn
Std
#sc
32
64
81
125
243
512
176
103
165
timeGRB
2351
5344
5130
6400
7200
7200
5604
7200
2868
timeScenPredOpt
1
2
4
14
34
69
21
6
34
timePH
1920
2489
1958
2989
5670
7406
3739
3037
3180
timeHeur
3
9
11
29
66
168
48
18
61
timeImpScenPredOpt
2374
4502
2047
660
329
150
1677
330
2840
timeImpPH
18
13
8
4
1
1
7
1
19
timeImpHeur
633
597
449
228
115
45
344
143
471
optGapGRB(%)
0.05
0.30
0.26
0.61
0.95
1.22
0.57
0.37
0.58
optGapScenPredOpt(%)
1.10
1.27
1.11
1.01
0.82
0.77
1.01
0.91
0.61
optGapPH(%)
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.11
0.22
0.10
0.04
0.15
optGapHeur(%)
2.83
2.83
2.30
2.58
2.37
2.11
2.50
2.39
0.97
accScenPredOpt(%)
91.66
91.45
92.46
94.48
95.61
95.70
93.73
94.99
5.44
accScenPredOptWoLP(%)
91.33
91.37
91.32
94.48
95.72
94.66
93.27
95.09
5.56
are tested with the parameters given for the two-stage problem and the results are presented
in Appendix B.
6.3 Generalization: quality of predictions for item-wise expansion algorithm
In this section, we present the computational results for test sets with a larger number of items
than the models are trained with. In the previous section, the results showed that the models
can maintain high-quality solutions with the increasing number of periods and scenarios.
The expansion in the period dimension is organic since encoder-decoder models can handle
123

2888
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
variable-length input and output structures. Also, the presented NEDA model can handle a
varying number of scenarios by averaging different groups of scenarios based on the scenario
tree of the problem using Eq. (5). This provides substantial ﬂexibility to solve instances with
a changing number of scenarios and periods. However, predicting a problem with a different
number of items is not straightforward with the NEDA, since the predictions are made using a
ﬁxed-length output. Algorithm 2 presents an item-wise expansion algorithm that can generate
predictions for a problem with a large number of items using a model trained with a small
number of items. The main idea is to generate predictions for a subset of items multiple
times with the trained model of a ﬁxed number of items and combine them to generate a ﬁnal
prediction for all items considered in the test instance. This algorithm provides signiﬁcant
beneﬁts, as a trained model has the potential to make predictions for a problem with any
number of periods, scenarios, and items for a certain distribution of input data. Therefore,
the ScenPredOpt framework can provide high levels of ﬂexibility without generating training
instances and performing training for the new set of instances with a larger number of items.
Furthermore, we compare this with the item-wise expansion strategy presented in Yilmaz
and Büyüktahtakın (2024) and show that the deviation-based item-wise expansion method is
a further improvement over the former one. For these results, we use metrics timePredOpt,
timeImpPredOpt, optGapPredOpt, and optGapPredOpt.
Table 6 presents the results of the item-wise expansion for the SMCLSP. The ﬁrst three
sets of results are generated using the model trained with 8 items in Table 1, and the last three
sets of results are generated using the model trained with 12 items in Table 2. The results
demonstrate that the ScenPredOpt used within the item-wise expansion algorithm can provide
high-quality solutions. For example, in the third set of instances with 16 items, predictions
from the 8-item model yield a time improvement of 300, which is signiﬁcantly more than the
heuristic time improvement of 65. In addition, the optimality gap of ScenPredOpt is 0. 09%,
which is 20 times lower than the heuristic optimality gap of 1.84%. Also, in the ﬁrst, second,
fourth, and ﬁfth datasets, ScenPredOpt outperforms SDDiP in terms of optimality gap and
solution time. For all the test sets in Table 6, ScenPredOpt outperforms the heuristic in terms
of solution time and optimality gap. Also, all p-values for the Wilcoxon signed-rank test are
all lower than 0.01, conﬁrming that ScenPredOpt is statistically faster than the relax-and-ﬁx
heuristic. Moreover, ScenPredOpt outperforms PredOpt in terms of optimality gap in 3 out
of 6 test sets and has the same average optimality gap for the remaining 3 instances at the cost
of reduced time improvement. Therefore, the variance-based item-wise algorithm achieves
a better optimality gap compared to Yilmaz and Büyüktahtakın (2024).
Table 7 presents the item-wise expansion results for SMSMK, similar to Table 6. The ﬁrst
three results are produced with the 8-item model in Table 4, and the remaining three sets
of results are produced using the 10-item model in Table 5. The results highlight that the
models can be used to predict instances with a varying number of items coming from the
same distribution using Algorithm 2. The instances presented in Table 7 do not terminate
within a set solution time limit of 7200s and achieve signiﬁcant optimality gaps with Gurobi.
For example, Gurobi achieves an optimality gap of 0.67% for the second dataset. The Scen-
PredOpt terminates in only 13s on average and achieves a 0.70% optimality gap compared
to the best solution found by Gurobi. For the same test set, the heuristic terminates in 27s
with a larger gap of 1.07%. On average, ScenPredOpt reduces the solution time by more than
700, with an optimality gap below 1%. The heuristic has an average time improvement factor
of 377 with a larger gap. We also conclude that the ScenPredOpt is faster than the heuristic
since p-values for the Wilcoxon signed rank test are below 0.01 except for the fourth test
set. Additionally, the variance-based item-wise strategy given in Algorithm 2 outperforms
the strategy given by Yilmaz and Büyüktahtakın (2024) in terms of the optimality gap for
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2889
Table 6 Average results of generalization experiments for SMCLSP
T
15
10
10
15
10
10
Avg
Mdn
Std
#sc
32
64
81
32
64
81
59
64
20
Train Items
8
12
10
10
2
Test Items
24
32
16
36
48
24
30
28
10
timeGRB
1954
3708
6273
4380
2664
7200
4363
7200
3439
timeScenPredOpt
36
166
188
93
93
107
114
40
299
timePredOpt
43
115
32
46
75
77
65
34
95
timeSDDiP
7220
7232
7037
7227
7249
7223
7198
7223
221
timeHeur
69
298
237
123
232
531
248
103
283
timeImpScenPredOpt
45
29
300
73
19
117
97
35
170
timeImpPredOpt
72
42
406
105
29
142
133
50
210
timeImpSDDiP
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
timeImpHeur
30
16
65
49
10
25
33
12
47
optGapGRB(%)
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.03
optGapScenPredOpt(%)
0.04
0.09
0.09
0.16
0.16
0.19
0.12
0.11
0.10
optGapPredOpt(%)
0.04
0.09
0.09
0.19
0.21
0.24
0.15
0.12
0.12
optGapSDDiP(%)
0.10
0.13
0.04
0.25
0.25
0.06
0.14
0.10
0.10
optGapHeur(%)
1.39
2.13
1.84
1.35
2.17
2.06
1.82
1.82
0.46
accScenPredOpt(%)
99.95
99.99
99.96
99.53
99.64
99.32
99.73
99.90
0.37
accScenPredOptWoLP(%)
99.93
99.95
99.89
99.20
99.34
98.93
99.54
99.73
0.54
all test sets in Table 7. On average, the reduction of the optimality gap with Algorithm 2 is
greater than 0. 2% with an increased average solution time of 6s. In addition, the accuracy
of the ﬁxed binary variables is increased by more than 2% as a result of the LP-relaxation in
the ScenPredOpt framework.
In summary, the ScenPredOpt framework with the variance-based item-wise expansion
algorithm can be used to predict instances with a varying number of items. This provides
signiﬁcant ﬂexibility for model training, since training can be performed using problems with
a small number of items, which is easier to solve. Also, trained models do not need to retrain
with changing number of items. Tables 6 and 7 provide the generalization results, in which
ScenPredOpt outperforms the heuristics in terms of solution time and quality in 11 of 12
instances. Furthermore, Algorithm 2 reaches a better or the same optimality gap as Yilmaz
and Büyüktahtakın (2024) at the cost of an increased solution time.
7 Conclusions and future work
In this study, we presented a learning-enabled framework for solving scenario-based multi-
stage stochastic programs. We address the non-anticipativity of predicted variables by
developing the NEDA based on attentional encoder-decoder models. Additionally, generat-
ing labels for training instances can be untraceable when considering signiﬁcant training data
requirements. We overcome this issue by sampling a scenario and solving this deterministic
problem to optimality, which is used for training. Furthermore, we present the ScenPre-
dOpt algorithm to utilize the predictions without causing any infeasibility. We integrate an
123

2890
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Table 7 Average results of generalization experiments for SMSMK
T
15
10
10
15
10
10
Avg
Mdn
Std
#sc
32
64
81
32
64
81
59
64
20
Train Items
8
10
9
9
1
Test Items
24
32
16
30
40
20
27
27
8
timeGRB
7,200
7,200
7,200
7,200
7,200
7,200
7,200
7,200
0
timeScenPredOpt
11
13
13
16
26
13
15
12
13
timePredOpt
8
7
8
9
13
8
9
7
5
timePH
8,925
7,430
3,148
7,358
9,866
4,540
6,878
7,243
6,058
timeHeur
18
27
21
14
29
19
21
20
7
timeImpScenPredOpt
875
716
809
685
381
752
703
604
440
timeImpPredOpt
1,043
1,261
1,328
1,114
721
1,101
1,095
970
535
timeImpPH
1
1
4
1
1
2
2
1
2
timeImpHeur
424
274
368
541
260
395
377
358
124
optGapGRB(%)
0.69
0.67
0.65
0.54
0.54
0.68
0.63
0.57
0.24
optGapScenPredOpt(%)
0.64
0.70
0.84
0.70
0.59
0.81
0.71
0.68
0.25
optGapPredOpt(%)
0.92
0.93
1.11
0.93
0.76
1.02
0.94
0.88
0.33
optGapPH(%)
0.26
0.34
0.10
0.29
0.62
0.08
0.28
0.12
0.33
optGapHeur(%)
1.29
1.07
1.82
1.04
0.80
1.48
1.25
1.15
0.48
accScenPredOpt(%)
94.36
94.35
94.27
94.68
94.89
95.25
94.63
95.17
2.24
accScenPredOptWoLP(%)
91.95
92.06
91.25
92.89
92.85
93.65
92.44
92.88
2.52
Table 8 Details of test instances for SMCLSP
Table
T
sc
scPer
capPer
binVar
contVar
const
NAC
testItems
1
10
32
2
6
2,560
5,120
8,536
3,096
8
10
64
4
4
5,120
10,240
14,984
4,104
8
10
81
3
5
6,480
12,960
20,586
6,816
8
15
125
5
4
15,000
30,000
40,131
8,256
8
15
243
3
6
29,160
58,320
88,221
26,256
8
15
512
2
10
61,440
122,880
228,888
98,328
8
2
10
32
2
6
3,840
7,680
12,644
4,644
12
10
64
4
4
7,680
15,360
22,156
6,156
12
10
81
3
5
9,720
19,440
30,474
10,224
12
15
125
5
4
22,500
45,000
59,259
12,384
12
15
243
3
6
43,740
87,480
130,509
39,384
12
15
512
2
10
92,160
184,320
339,492
147,492
12
6
15
32
2
6
11,520
23,040
32,808
9,288
24
10
64
4
4
20,480
40,960
58,016
16,416
32
10
81
3
5
12,960
25,920
40,362
13,632
16
15
32
2
6
17,280
34,560
48,972
13,932
36
10
64
4
4
30,720
61,440
86,704
24,624
48
10
81
3
5
19,440
38,880
60,138
20,448
24
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2891
LP-based heuristic to further reduce the solution time and to integrate heuristic solution capa-
bilities that might not be captured with a learning methodology. We present the results of our
framework by generating benchmark instances with a commercial solver, exact approaches,
and heuristics. The results show that the solution time can be reduced by three orders of
magnitude by achieving a small optimality gap of less than 1%. Additionally, we present a
variance-based item-wise expansion algorithm and test if the models can be used to predict
instances with a larger number of items than they are trained with. The results show that the
trained models and ScenPredOpt provide a high amount of ﬂexibility and can be utilized
to solve instances with varying stages, scenarios, and items. Our framework is general and
can be utilized to solve scenario-based multi-stage stochastic programs with binary variables
where such problems need to be solved repeatedly quickly, such as resource allocation, price
optimization, and scheduling.
We have demonstrated the applicability of our methodology in the context of two promi-
nent multi-stage stochastic programs: multi-item lot-sizing and dynamic knapsack. The
multi-item lot-sizing problem can be relaxed to the multi-item knapsack problem (Pochet
& Wolsey, 2006). The multi-item knapsack problem resembles the broader class of general
multi-stage stochastic MIPs. By considering diverse dimensions, such as items, locations,
products, processes, and more, our approach accommodates a ﬂexible framework. Conse-
quently, our item-wise expansion method can be employed to enhance the scalability of
predictions to larger instances, applying to a variety of dimension types.
Our study shows a way to successfully integrate learning models, heuristics, and existing
mathematical solvers to achieve signiﬁcant reductions in solution time. In this way, the
best of each approach can be used. The scenario-based multi-stage stochastic programs
have a wide range of applications in which learning-based frameworks can be exploited.
Further studies can focus on solving multi-stage stochastic programs by integrating scenario-
generation mechanisms into the framework. Further studies can focus on advancing the
scalability of the proposed ScenPredOpt framework for larger dimensional instances. Also,
risk-averse stochastic programs can be tackled by adjusting the NEDA model, the probability
of scenarios and the distribution of uncertain elements. Another direction relates to the
integration of heuristics. Instead of general LP-based heuristics, problem-speciﬁc heuristics
can be integrated into the ScenPredOpt solution framework to achieve better solutions faster.
AppendixA The details of the test instances
Here, we present the details of our testing instances for each table in Sect.6. Table 8 gives
the details of SMCLSP instances presented in Tables 1, 2, and 6. Table 9 gives the details
of SMSMK instances presented in Tables 4, 5, and 7. We denote the number of scenarios
sc, the number of scenarios per period scPer, and the period in which no further scenarios
are generated for the problem as capPer. These three variables are interconnected as: sc =
scPercapPer−1. We have utilized a scenario-capping strategy to combat the exponentially
growing number of scenarios. Additionally, the number of binary variables is denoted by
binVar, and the number of continuous variables is denoted by contVar. Note that SMSMK
does not contain any continuous variables. We also present the total number of constraints
excluding variable restrictions as const and the number of non-anticipativity constraints as
N AC, and the number of items in the test set as test Items.
123

2892
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Table 9 Details of test instances for SMSMK
Table
T
sc
scPer
capPer
binVar
const
NAC
testItems
4
10
32
2
6
4,864
8,272
2,064
8
10
64
4
4
9,728
15,152
2,736
8
10
81
3
5
12,312
20,258
4,544
8
15
125
5
4
29,000
42,879
5,504
8
15
243
3
6
56,376
90,161
17,504
8
15
512
2
10
118,784
218,640
65,552
8
5
10
32
2
6
6,080
9,620
2,580
10
10
64
4
4
12,160
17,500
3,420
10
10
81
3
5
15,390
23,500
5,680
10
15
125
5
4
36,250
49,380
6,880
10
15
243
3
6
70,470
104,500
21,880
10
15
512
2
10
148,480
256,020
81,940
10
10
2
4
-
-
72
89
0
8
2
16
-
-
264
341
0
8
2
64
-
-
1,032
1,349
0
8
2
256
-
-
4,104
5,381
0
8
2
1,024
-
-
16,392
21,509
0
8
2
4,096
-
-
65,544
86,021
0
8
11
2
4
-
-
90
100
0
10
2
16
-
-
330
388
0
10
2
64
-
-
1,290
1,540
0
10
2
256
-
-
5,130
6,148
0
10
2
1,024
-
-
20,490
24,580
0
10
2
4,096
-
-
81,930
98,308
0
10
7
15
32
2
6
22,272
30,096
6,192
24
10
64
4
4
38,912
51,008
10,944
32
10
81
3
5
24,624
36,466
9,088
16
15
32
2
6
27,840
36,540
7,740
30
10
64
4
4
48,640
62,320
13,680
40
10
81
3
5
30,780
43,760
11,360
20
AppendixB Quality of predictions for 2SMK
In this section, we present the results for a two-stage multi-dimensional knapsack problem
(2SMK). The traditional solution methodologies for two-stage problems can be notably
separated from the multi-stage problem. While the latter is usually considered more complex
with growing scenario trees and non-anticipativity constraints, two-stage problems are highly
utilized for various applications. Our aim here is to show that our trained model can still be
used as an out-of-the-box solution approach if a model has already been trained for a multi-
stage problem.
Table 10 presents the results for the two-stage problem with 8 items, similar to Table
4, and Table 11 demonstrates the results for 2SMK with 10 items, as in Table 5. For both
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2893
Table 10 Average results of experiments for 2SMK with 8 Items
T
2
2
2
2
2
2
Avg
Mdn
Std
sc
4
16
64
256
1,024
4,096
910
160
1,474
timeGRB
0.01
0.05
0.32
1.24
15.78
301.93
53.22
0.53
172.49
timeScenPredOpt
0.01
0.02
0.08
0.33
2.63
28.50
5.26
0.23
11.79
timePH
19.67
91.09
369.65
85.43
1,239.67
7,245.41
1,508.49
30.92
2,769.87
timeHeur
0.02
0.10
0.61
2.49
17.01
218.58
39.80
1.17
83.71
timeImpScenPredOpt
1
2
4
4
8
15
6
2
12
timeImpPH
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
timeImpHeur
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
optGapGRB(%)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
optGapScenPredOpt(%)
0.26
0.98
1.67
2.21
2.19
2.58
1.65
0.27
2.66
optGapPH(%)
0.60
0.11
0.21
0.11
0.11
0.56
0.28
0.00
0.59
optGapHeur(%)
3.76
4.27
4.26
5.05
4.10
2.77
4.03
2.50
4.68
Table 11 Average results of experiments for 2SMK with 10 items
T
2
2
2
2
2
2
Avg
Mdn
Std
sc
4
16
64
256
1,024
4,096
910
160
1,474
timeGRB
0.02
0.06
0.33
3.11
18.75
419.07
73.56
0.53
226.31
timeScenPredOpt
0.01
0.03
0.07
0.61
59.35
31.35
15.24
0.22
101.46
timePH
25.68
2.07
369.30
523.64
1,822.98
7,892.68
1,772.73
33.43
3,023.11
timeHeur
0.02
0.10
0.53
2.92
16.73
235.86
42.70
1.13
90.04
timeImpScenPredOpt
2
2
5
5
5
18
6
4
9
timeImpPH
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
timeImpHeur
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
optGapGRB(%)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
optGapScenPredOpt(%)
0.17
1.99
3.15
2.78
2.58
3.64
2.39
1.65
2.53
optGapPH(%)
0.33
0.13
0.08
0.05
0.04
0.92
0.26
0.00
0.51
optGapHeur(%)
2.75
4.29
3.58
4.58
3.28
3.98
3.75
2.77
3.81
Tables 10 and 11, the ﬁrst three sets of instances are solved in a second with Gurobi, since
the number of scenarios and, therefore, the size of the problem is small. Even in these cases,
the solution time of ScenPredOpt is shorter than that of all other approaches. As instances
become harder and larger, the beneﬁts of ScenPredOpt become clearer. For example, the last
data set from Table 10 is solved in more than 5min on average. ScenPredOpt reduces the
average solution time below 30s, achieving a faster solution than Gurobi, heuristic, and PH.
For all the cases in Tables 10 and 11, the p-values for the Wilcoxon test are smaller than 0.01,
conﬁrming that the ScenPredOpt outperforms the heuristic solution time. Additionally, the
average optimality gap of ScenPredOpt is better than the heuristic for all cases in Tables 10
and 11, making it a superior solution approach. However, the optimality gaps for two-stage
problems in Tables 10 and 11 seem to be higher than those in the multi-stage problems in
Tables 4 and 5. This is because of the lack of periods required for attention structure in NEDA
to capture problem characteristics, which can likely be remedied by training the model using
the solutions of two-stage problems. Also, the solution characteristics might be different for
123

2894
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Fig. 4 The comparison of the change in the optimality gap and the improvement in time with varying tightness
coefﬁcients η. The top two ﬁgures represent the 6 sets of SMCLSP instances presented in Table 1, and the
bottom two ﬁgures represent the 6 sets of SMSMK instances presented in Table 4
a two-stage problem than a multi-stage problem since, in a long-enough multi-stage problem,
decisions tend to be cyclical. Nevertheless, ScenPredOpt outperforms the heuristic for solving
two-stage problems in terms of solution time and quality. It can be used to achieve signiﬁcant
solution time beneﬁts for large-scale problems when a trained multi-stage model is available.
AppendixC Results on the tightness parameter
In this section, we present the results for changing the tightness coefﬁcients η presented
in Sect.4.2.2. Here, our objective is to test the stability and solution performance of the
ScenPredOpt with varying tightness coefﬁcients η. Figure4 provides the results for SMCLSP
and SMSMK containing η ∈{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9}. Figure4a and b provide the optimality gap
and time improvement for the 6 sets of SMCLSP instances presented in Table 1, respectively.
Figure4c and d provide the optimality gap and the time improvement for the 6 sets of SMSMK
instances presented in Table 4, respectively.
The results highlight that ScenPredOpt provides highly stable solutions in various η val-
ues. The prediction of tight constraints are only used within the ﬁrst loop in Algorithm 1
within a feasibility checker to ﬁnd the ﬁrst feasible solution. Later in the algorithm, this
information is used to generate an optimal solution. Since this former operation is much less
computationally challenging compared to the latter, the variation η has a minimal impact on
the time improvement. In addition, the optimality gap is stable across instances, since it is
determined by the latter process of solving the problem to optimality with all constraints. As
discussed in Sect.4.2.2, the value of η has a crucial impact on successful model training.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2895
Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation CAREER
Award, cofunded by the CBET / ENG Environmental Sustainability program, and the Division of Mathematical
Sciences in MPS/NSF under Grant No. CBET-1554018. We would like to thank the anonymous referee and
the guest editor for their helpful and constructive comments that have signiﬁcantly improved our paper’s
quality and presentation of the results. Furthermore, we acknowledge the support of New Jersey Institute of
Technology Academic & Research Computing (ARC )Systems for High Performance Computing resources.
The authors also thank Dr. Selina Cai for her help in accessing ARC resources.
Funding This study was funded by the National Science Foundation CAREER Award (grant number CBET-
1554018).
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest Author DY declares that he has no Conﬂict of interest. Author EB declares that she has
no Conﬂict of interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abbasi, B., Babaei, T., Hosseinifard, Z., Smith-Miles, K., & Dehghani, M. (2020). Predicting solutions of
large-scale optimization problems via machine learning: A case study in blood supply chain management.
Computers & Operations Research, 119, 104941.
Absi, N., & van den Heuvel, W. (2019). Worst-case analysis of relax and ﬁx heuristics for lot-sizing problems.
European Journal of Operational Research, 279(2), 449–458.
Accorsi, L., Lodi, A., & Vigo, D. (2022). Guidelines for the computational testing of machine learning
approaches to vehicle routing problems. Operations Research Letters, 50(2), 229–234.
Alpaydin, E. (2020). Introduction to machine learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Angulo, G., Ahmed, S., & Dey, S. S. (2016). Improving the integer l-shaped method. INFORMS Journal on
Computing, 28(3), 483–499.
Bampis, E., Escofﬁer, B., & Teiller, A. (2022). Multistage knapsack. Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
126, 106–118.
Barany, I., Van Roy, T. J., & Wolsey, L. A. (1984). Strong formulations for multi-item capacitated lot sizing.
Management Science, 30(10), 1255–1261.
Barnhart, C., Belobaba, P., & Odoni, A. R. (2003). Applications of operations research in the air transport
industry. Transportation Science, 37(4), 368–391.
Bengio, Y., Frejinger, E., Lodi, A., Patel, R., & Sankaranarayanan, S. (2020). A learning-based algorithm to
quickly compute good primal solutions for stochastic integer programs. In International Conference on
Integration of Constraint Programming, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and Operations Research, pp. 99–111.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Bengio, Y., Lodi, A., & Prouvost, A. (2021). Machine learning for combinatorial optimization: a methodolog-
ical tour d’horizon. European Journal of Operational Research, 290(2), 405–421.
Benjaafar, S., Li, Y., & Daskin, M. (2012). Carbon footprint and the management of supply chains: Insights
from simple models. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 10(1), 99–116.
Beraldi, P., Ghiani, G., Grieco, A., & Guerriero, E. (2006). Fix and relax heuristic for a stochastic lot-sizing
problem. Computational Optimization and Applications, 33(2), 303–318.
123

2896
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Bertsimas, D., & Demir, R. (2002). An approximate dynamic programming approach to multidimensional
knapsack problems. Management Science, 48(4), 550–565.
Bitran, G. R., & Yanasse, H. H. (1982). Computational complexity of the capacitated lot size problem. Man-
agement Science, 28(10), 1174–1186.
Brandimarte, P. (2006). Multi-item capacitated lot-sizing with demand uncertainty. International Journal of
Production Research, 44(15), 2997–3022.
Bushaj, S. & Büyüktahtakın, ˙I. E. (2024). A K-means supported reinforcement learning framework to multi-
dimensional knapsack. Forthcoming in Journal of Global Optimization.
Bushaj, S., Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE., & Haight, R. G. (2022). Risk-averse multi-stage stochastic optimization for
surveillance and operations planning of a forest insect infestation. European Journal of Operational
Research, 299(3), 1094–1110.
Bushaj, S., Yin, X., Beqiri, A., Andrews, D., & Büyüktahtakın, I. E. (2023). A simulation-deep reinforcement
learning (SiRL) approach for epidemic control optimization. Annals of Operations Research, 328(1),
245–277.
Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE. (2022). Stage-t scenario dominance for risk-averse multi-stage stochastic mixed-integer
programs. Annals of Operations Research, 309(1), 1–35.
Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE. (2023). Scenario-dominance to multi-stage stochastic lot-sizing and knapsack problems.
Computers & Operations Research, 153, 106149.
Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE., & Liu, N. (2016). Dynamic programming approximation algorithms for the capacitated
lot-sizing problem. Journal of Global Optimization, 65(2), 231–259.
Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE., Smith, J. C., & Hartman, J. C. (2018). Partial objective inequalities for the multi-item
capacitated lot-sizing problem. Computers & Operations Research, 91, 132–144.
Cacchiani, V., Hemmelmayr, V. C., & Tricoire, F. (2014). A set-covering based heuristic algorithm for the
periodic vehicle routing problem. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 163, 53–64.
Cacchiani, V., Iori, M., Locatelli, A., & Martello, S. (2022). Knapsack problems-an overview of recent
advances. Part II: Multiple, multidimensional, and quadratic knapsack problems. Computers & Opera-
tions Research, 143, 105693.
Chen, C., Cai, W., Büyüktahtakın, ˙I. E., & Haight, R. G. (2023). A game-theoretic approach to incentivize
landowners to mitigate an emerald ash borer outbreak. IISE Transactions, pp. 1–15.
Chen, Y., & Hao, J.-K. (2014). A “reduce and solve” approach for the multiple-choice multidimensional
knapsack problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 239(2), 313–322.
Chen, Z.-L., Li, S., & Tirupati, D. (2002). A scenario-based stochastic programming approach for technology
and capacity planning. Computers & Operations Research, 29(7), 781–806.
Cohen, E., Cormode, G., Dufﬁeld, N., & Lund, C. (2016). On the tradeoff between stability and ﬁt. ACM
Transactions on Algorithms, 13(1), 1–24.
Crespo-Vazquez, J. L., Carrillo, C., Diaz-Dorado, E., Martinez-Lorenzo, J. A., & Noor-E-Alam, M. (2018).
A machine learning based stochastic optimization framework for a wind and storage power plant partic-
ipating in energy pool market. Applied Energy, 232, 341–357.
Cygan, M., Je˙z, Ł, & Sgall, J. (2016). Online knapsack revisited. Theory of Computing Systems, 58(1), 153–
190.
Dai, H., Xue, Y., Syed, Z., Schuurmans, D., & Dai, B. (2021). Neural stochastic dual dynamic programming. In
International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=aisKPsMM3fg
Denizel, M., & Süral, H. (2006). On alternative mixed integer programming formulations and LP-based
heuristics for lot-sizing with setup times. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 57(4), 389–399.
Ding, J.-Y., Zhang, C., Shen, L., Li, S., Wang, B., Xu, Y., & Song, L. (2020). Accelerating primal solution
ﬁndings for mixed integer programs based on solution prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 34, pp. 1452–1459. Palo Alto, CA: Association for the Advancement of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Ding, L., Ahmed, S., & Shapiro, A. (2019). A python package for multi-stage stochastic programming.
Optimization Online, 1–41.
Dumouchelle, J., Patel, R., Khalil, E. B., & Bodur, M. (2022). Neur2sp: Neural two-stage stochastic program-
ming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12006.
Florian, M., Lenstra, J. K., & Rinnooy Kan, A. (1980). Deterministic production planning: Algorithms and
complexity. Management Science, 26(7), 669–679.
Frejinger, E. & Larsen, E. (2019). A language processing algorithm for predicting tactical solutions to an
operational planning problem under uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08216.
Gaivoronski, A. A., Lisser, A., Lopez, R., & Xu, H. (2011). Knapsack problem with probability constraints.
Journal of Global Optimization, 49(3), 397–413.
Guan, Y., Ahmed, S., & Nemhauser, G. L. (2009). Cutting planes for multistage stochastic integer programs.
Operations Research, 57(2), 287–298.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2897
Guastaroba, G., & Speranza, M. G. (2014). A heuristic for BILP problems: The single source capacitated
facility location problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 238(2), 438–450.
Guerriero, F., & Guido, R. (2011). Operational research in the management of the operating theatre: a survey.
Health Care Management Science, 14(1), 89–114.
Gul, S., Denton, B. T., & Fowler, J. W. (2015). A progressive hedging approach for surgery planning under
uncertainty. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 27(4), 755–772.
Gurobi Optimization, LLC (2022). Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, version 9.5. https://www.gurobi.com
Haugen, K. K., Løkketangen, A., & Woodruff, D. L. (2001). Progressive hedging as a meta-heuristic applied
to stochastic lot-sizing. European Journal of Operational Research, 132(1), 116–122.
Helber, S., & Sahling, F. (2010). A ﬁx-and-optimize approach for the multi-level capacitated lot sizing problem.
International Journal of Production Economics, 123(2), 247–256.
Homem-de Mello, T., & Pagnoncelli, B. K. (2016). Risk aversion in multistage stochastic programming: A
modeling and algorithmic perspective. European Journal of Operational Research, 249(1), 188–199.
Huang, K., & Ahmed, S. (2009). The value of multistage stochastic programming in capacity planning under
uncertainty. Operations Research, 57(4), 893–904.
Huang, K., & Küçükyavuz, S. (2008). On stochastic lot-sizing problems with random lead times. Operations
Research Letters, 36(3), 303–308.
Huang, Z., Wang, K., Liu, F., Zhen, H.-L., Zhang, W., Yuan, M., Hao, J., Yu, Y., & Wang, J. (2022). Learning
to select cuts for efﬁcient mixed-integer programming. Pattern Recognition, 123, 108353.
Ishibuchi, H., Akedo, N., & Nojima, Y. (2014). Behavior of multiobjective evolutionary algorithms on many-
objective knapsack problems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 19(2), 264–283.
Jans, R., & Degraeve, Z. (2008). Modeling industrial lot sizing problems: A review. International Journal of
Production Research, 46(6), 1619–1643.
Jiménez-Cordero, A., Morales, J. M., & Pineda, S. (2022). Warm-starting constraint generation for mixed-
integer optimization: A machine learning approach. Knowledge-Based Systems, 253, 109570. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2022.109570
Kantas, A. B., Cobuloglu, H. I., & Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE. (2015). Multi-source capacitated lot-sizing for econom-
ically viable and clean biofuel production. Journal of Cleaner Production, 94, 116–129.
Kıbı¸s, E. Y., Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE., Haight, R. G., Akhundov, N., Knight, K., & Flower, C. E. (2021). A multistage
stochastic programming approach to the optimal surveillance and control of the emerald ash borer in
cities. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 33(2), 808–834.
Kingma, D. P. & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
Kosuch, S., & Lisser, A. (2011). On two-stage stochastic knapsack problems. Discrete Applied Mathematics,
159(16), 1827–1841.
Kotary, J., Fioretto, F., & Van Hentenryck, P. (2021). Learning hard optimization problems: A data generation
perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 24981–24992.
Lara, C. L., Siirola, J. D., & Grossmann, I. E. (2020). Electric power infrastructure planning under uncertainty:
Stochastic dual dynamic integer programming (SDDiP) and parallelization scheme. Optimization and
Engineering, 21(4), 1243–1281.
Larsen, E., Frejinger, E., Gendron, B., & Lodi, A. (2022a). Fast continuous and integer l-shaped heuristics
through supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00897.
Larsen, E., Lachapelle, S., Bengio, Y., Frejinger, E., Lacoste-Julien, S., & Lodi, A. (2022). Predicting tac-
tical solutions to operational planning problems under imperfect information. INFORMS Journal on
Computing, 34(1), 227–242.
Liu, D., Fischetti, M., & Lodi, A. (2022). Learning to search in local branching. In Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 36, pp. 3796–3803. Palo Alto, CA: Association for the
Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Lulli, G., & Sen, S. (2004). A branch-and-price algorithm for multistage stochastic integer programming with
application to stochastic batch-sizing problems. Management Science, 50(6), 786–796.
Luong, M.-T., Pham, H., & Manning, C. D. (2015). Effective approaches to attention-based neural machine
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025.
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A., Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D., & Riedmiller, M. (2013).
Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602.
Möller, A., Römisch, W., & Weber, K. (2008). Airline network revenue management by multistage stochastic
programming. Computational Management Science, 5(4), 355–377.
Nair, V., Bartunov, S., Gimeno, F., von Glehn, I., Lichocki, P., Lobov, I., O’Donoghue, B., Sonnerat, N.,
Tjandraatmadja, C., Wang, P., Addanki, R., Hapuarachchi, T., Keck, T., Keeling, J., Kohli, P., Ktena, I.,
Li, Y., Vinyals, O., & Zwols, Y. (2020). Solving mixed integer programs using neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.13349.
123

2898
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
Paulus,A.,Rolínek,M.,Musil,V.,Amos,B.,andMartius,G.(2021).Comboptnet:Fittherightnp-hardproblem
by learning integer programming constraints. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
8443–8453. Cambridge, MA: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research.
Pochet, Y., & Wolsey, L. A. (2006). Production planning by mixed integer programming. New York, NY:
Springer.
Rockafellar, R. T., & Wets, R.J.-B. (1991). Scenarios and policy aggregation in optimization under uncertainty.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 16(1), 119–147.
Schmidt, G., & Wilhelm, W. E. (2000). Strategic, tactical and operational decisions in multi-national logistics
networks: A review and discussion of modelling issues. International Journal of Production Research,
38(7), 1501–1523.
Shen, Y., Sun, Y., Eberhard, A., & Li, X. (2021). Learning primal heuristics for mixed integer programs. In
2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8. Piscataway, NJ: Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
Shen, Y., Sun, Y., Li, X., Eberhard, A., & Ernst, A. (2022). Enhancing column generation by a machine-
learning-based pricing heuristic for graph coloring. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 36, pp. 9926–9934. Palo Alto, CA: Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence.
Singh, K. J., Philpott, A. B., & Wood, R. K. (2009). Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition for solving multistage
stochastic capacity-planning problems. Operations Research, 57(5), 1271–1286.
Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2014). Dropout: A simple way to
prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1), 1929–1958.
Stahlberg, F. (2020). Neural machine translation: A review. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 69,
343–418.
Tempelmeier, H. (2013). Stochastic lot sizing problems. Handbook of Stochastic Models and Analysis of
Manufacturing System Operations (pp. 313–344). New York, NY: Springer.
Toledo, C. F. M., da Silva Arantes, M., Hossomi, M. Y. B., França, P. M., & Akartunalı, K. (2015). A relax-
and-ﬁx with ﬁx-and-optimize heuristic applied to multi-level lot-sizing problems. Journal of Heuristics,
21(5), 687–717.
Varnamkhasti, M. J. (2012). Overview of the algorithms for solving the multidimensional knapsack problems.
Advanced Studies in Biology, 4(1), 37–47.
Veliz, F. B., Watson, J.-P., Weintraub, A., Wets, R.J.-B., & Woodruff, D. L. (2015). Stochastic optimization
models in forest planning: A progressive hedging solution approach. Annals of Operations Research,
232(1), 259–274.
Vespucci, M. T., Maggioni, F., Bertocchi, M. I., & Innorta, M. (2012). A stochastic model for the daily
coordination of pumped storage hydro plants and wind power plants. Annals of Operations Research,
193(1), 91–105.
Watson, J.-P., & Woodruff, D. L. (2011). Progressive hedging innovations for a class of stochastic mixed-integer
resource allocation problems. Computational Management Science, 8(4), 355–370.
Wu, Y., Song, W., Cao, Z., & Zhang, J. (2021). Learning scenario representation for solving two-stage stochas-
tic integer programs. In International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/
forum?id=06Wy2BtxXrz
Yilmaz, D. & Büyüktahtakın, ˙I. E. (2023a). A deep reinforcement learning framework for solving two-stage
stochastic programs. Optimization Letters, pp. 1–28.
Yilmaz, D., & Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE. (2023). Learning optimal solutions via an LSTM-optimization framework.
Operations Research Forum, 4(2), 48.
Yilmaz, D., & Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE. (2024). An expandable machine learning-optimization framework to sequen-
tial decision-making. European Journal of Operational Research, 314(1), 280–296.
Yin, X., Bushaj, S., Yuan, Y., & Büyüktahtakın, ˙I. E. (2023a). Covid-19: Agent-based simulation-optimization
to vaccine center location vaccine allocation problem. IISE Transactions, 1–16.
Yin, X., & Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE. (2021). A multi-stage stochastic programming approach to epidemic resource
allocation with equity considerations. Health Care Management Science, 24(3), 597–622.
Yin, X., & Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE. (2022). Risk-averse multi-stage stochastic programming to optimizing vaccine
allocation and treatment logistics for effective epidemic response. IISE Transactions on Healthcare
Systems Engineering, 12(1), 52–74.
Yin, X., Büyüktahtakın, ˙IE., & Patel, B. P. (2023). Covid-19: Data-driven optimal allocation of ventilator
supply under uncertainty and risk. European Journal of Operational Research, 304(1), 255–275.
Yu, X., & Shen, S. (2020). Multistage distributionally robust mixed-integer programming with decision-
dependent moment-based ambiguity sets. Mathematical Programming, 196, 1025–64.
Zakaria, A., Ismail, F. B., Lipu, M. H., & Hannan, M. A. (2020). Uncertainty models for stochastic optimization
in renewable energy applications. Renewable Energy, 145, 1543–1571.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 355:2859–2899
2899
Zha, D., Lai, K.-H., Zhou, K., & Hu, X. (2019). Experience replay optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.08387.
Zheng, J., Wang, L., Wang, S., Liang, Y., & Pan, J. (2021). Solving two-stage stochastic route-planning problem
in milliseconds via end-to-end deep learning. Complex & Intelligent Systems, 7(3), 1207–1222.
Zou, J., Ahmed, S., & Sun, X. A. (2019). Stochastic dual dynamic integer programming. Mathematical
Programming, 175(1), 461–502.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123