TITLE: Reputation in Contests
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07107-y
---

Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-026-07107-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Reputation in Contests
Chen Cohen1 · Ishay Rabi2 · Aner Sela2
Received: 24 May 2025 / Accepted: 5 February 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
We investigate two-stage parallel contests with a ﬁnite number of heterogeneous agents with
various skills (cost of efforts) and reputations, as well as a ﬁnite number of heterogeneous
contests. Each agent’s value of winning is a combination of a nominal value and the reputation
of the competing agents. We demonstrate that reputation in contests may lead to an unstable
environment. We present a sufﬁcient condition for resolving this instability, which results
in the existence of a subgame perfect equilibrium with pure strategies which cannot be
explicitly calculated. However, we arrive at this equilibrium by introducing algorithms that
describe dynamic processes in which the agents’ strategies approach the equilibrium point.
We demonstrate that our equilibrium is far more likely to hold in an environment where the
agents’ skills and reputations are correlated.
Keyword Parallel contests; Reputation; Heterogenous agents, Non-linear effort costs
JEL classiﬁcation: D44 · D72 · D82 · J31
1 Introduction
"Reputation, reputation, reputation! Oh, I have lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal
part of myself, and what remains is bestial." This scene from the play "Othello" by William
Shakespeare begins the book of Origgi (2019) to emphasize why reputation is so important in
our lives, both personally and socially. In any situation, an agent’s reputation, which refers to
his general quality or ability as perceived or assessed by other agents, primarily has a direct
impact on his opponents. For example, in the well-known biblical tale of "David and Goliath"
Ishay Rabi and Aner Sela supported by the Department of Economics, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
84105 Beer Sheva, Israel.
B Aner Sela
anersela@bgu.ac.il
Chen Cohen
chencohe@post.bgu.ac.il
Ishay Rabi
ishay.rabi@gmail.com
1
Department of Public Policy and Administration, Guilford Glazer Faculty of Business and
Management, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 84105 Beer Sheva, Israel
2
Department of Economics, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 84105 Beer Sheva, Israel
123

Annals of Operations Research
(1 Samuel 17), Saul, the king of Israel, and his soldiers are battling the Philistines in the Valley
of Elah. Goliath, the Philistine champion, challenges the Israelites to send out a champion of
their own to decide the outcome in single combat twice daily for 40 days, but Saul and all of
his soldiers are afraid to face Goliath because of his reputation as an unconquerable warrior.
Finally, David accepts the challenge, defeats the opponent, and establishes his reputation
as a valiant warrior before ascending to the throne of Israel. This story shows that, in any
competition, an agent’s value of winning depends on the reputation of his opponents; the
higher their reputation, the higher an agent’s value of winning.
In this paper, we assume that each agent has his own reputation and that an agent’s winning
value in a contest is inﬂuenced by the reputations of all the agents in the contest. We study
the issue of reputation in a two-stage model of parallel contests. In the ﬁrst stage, agents
simultaneously select the contest in which they want to compete, with the restriction that
each agent may only compete in a single contest. In the second stage, after selecting their
contests, the agents observe the number of agents who chose the same contest as they did, as
well as these agents’ abilities and reputations, and then in each contest, the agents compete
against one another, with the winner receiving a prize based on a nominal value and the
reputation of the contending agents.
Given that an agent’s expected payoff depends on the nominal prize as well as the endoge-
nous allocation of agents in each contest and their reputations, choosing which contest to enter
may not be an easy decision. An agent wants to compete against highly reputable opponents
because it increases his winning value, which is dependent on his opponents’ reputations,
but it also makes winning the prize more difﬁcult because there is a correlation between
agents’ reputations and their abilities. For instance, different universities have different repu-
tations around the world, and the value of attending a particular university increases with its
reputation. On the other hand, it is undoubtedly more challenging for young researchers to
obtain tenure at universities with a strong reputation. Similarly, professional tennis players
must decide which tournaments they want to enter throughout the year, some of which take
place at the same time. A tournament with highly reputable players will increase the value
of winning, but it will also be much more difﬁcult to win.
We ﬁrst consider m ≥2 parallel contests, each of which has a generalized Tullock
contest success function ((Tullock, 1980)). We assume that the parallel contests include n
heterogeneous agents with different reputation types and identical effort cost functions. Then,
there are circumstances in which there is no pure strategy equilibrium, meaning that some
agents always prefer to leave the contest they chose to enter since by doing so they can
increase their expected payoffs. This is because the value of the payoff for the agents is
endogenously deﬁned by the reputations of the agents in the contest. We actually provide a
simple illustration of how a highly reputable agent is constantly evading the less reputable
agents, such that a pure strategy equilibrium does not exist. Then we present a sufﬁcient
condition that, if met, ensures a subgame perfect equilibrium with pure strategies. We use
a variety of examples throughout the analysis to demonstrate the viability of the sufﬁcient
condition.
Later, we assume that there are n heterogeneous agents with two possible types, each
with a different non-linear cost of effort and a different reputation. Furthermore, the costs of
effort are non-linear and not explicitly given. All we know about these costs of effort is that
they are increasing and weakly convex in effort. We also assume some ranking, including
the agents’ costs of effort, that clariﬁes the relative strength of the agents of different types,
and we assume the same ranking for reputation, meaning that agents with low costs of
effort are more reputable. In that case, it is impossible to characterize the subgame perfect
equilibrium since the costs of effort are not explicitly given, so the agents’ expected payoffs
123

Annals of Operations Research
over the parallel contests cannot be calculated. To overcome this obstacle, we use revealed
preference techniques to demonstrate the existence of a subgame perfect equilibrium with
pure strategies and provide an algorithm that enables us to calculate this equilibrium, namely,
the allocation of agents across the contests. The algorithm is based on ﬁnite sequential steps,
each of which includes an instruction that enables some types of agents to move across the
contests. Our parallel contests have a subgame perfect equilibrium with pure strategies when
the algorithm reaches a point at which no agent wants to change his position. At this point,
the algorithm is said to have reached an equilibrium. As a result, our algorithms not only ﬁnd
a pure strategy equilibrium, which cannot be calculated because not all of the parameters
(effort costs) are explicitly speciﬁed, but they also present dynamic processes that simulate
the agents’ behavior, in which players change their strategies until they reach the equilibrium
point. These algorithms demonstrate step by step how agents learn to play the equilibrium
strategies, indicating the reliability of this equilibrium as a predictor of agent behavior in our
parallel contests with reputation.
Our ﬁndings in this paper demonstrate that reputation in contests can lead to an unstable
environment. Our goal is to determine when the reputation effect on contests leads to a
stable outcome, that is, the conditions under which a subgame perfect equilibrium exists. We
establish sufﬁcient conditions that, in some cases, become necessary for the existence of this
equilibrium, and we demonstrate that achieving these conditions is signiﬁcantly more likely
when agents’ skills (costs of effort) and reputations are closely aligned. On the other hand,
when agents have reputations that are unrelated to their skill sets (a low rank for an agent’s
cost of effort and a high rank for his reputation), the entire model becomes unstable.
1.1 Related literature
The economic literature contains several papers that deal with parallel contests. These include
the works of Konrad and Kovenock (2012) and Juang et al. (2020) who examine models of
parallel all-pay contests with homogeneous players, and Azmat and Möller (2009), who
study two parallel Tullock contests with homogeneous players. Azmat and Möller (2018)
investigate parallel all-pay contests with a continuum of heterogeneous agents, and Morgan
et al. (2018) examine two parallel contests involving a continuum of heterogeneous agents
in which each agent’s performance is deterministic but noisy. In each of the aforementioned
models, the authors presumptively assume that agents are homogenous and have a linear
cost of effort. Those who take into account heterogeneous agents also presumptively assume
a continuum of agents. Grossmann (2021), for example, investigates parallel contests with
a continuum of two types of agents and concludes that in order to maximize total effort,
the designer should assign identical prizes across contests and allow agents to participate
in multiple contests. In contrast to the preceding papers, Cohen et al. (2024) deal with a
ﬁnite number of heterogeneous agents whose effort costs are non-linear. The current model
deviates from Cohen et al. (2024) by assuming that the prizes are not constant and depend
on the types (reputations) of the participating agents. This modiﬁcation is crucial because,
in contrast to all the papers mentioned above, an additional contestant does not necessarily
disadvantage the other contestants.1
The majority of research on parallel contests is conducted in ﬁelds other than traditional
economics, such as operations research and computer science, which is most likely due to
1 The economic literature also discusses parallel auctions (see, for example, Moldovanu et al. (2008) and
Ashlagi et al. (2011)). There is a signiﬁcant distinction between auctions and contests in that in contests all
agents bear their costs of effort, whereas in auctions only the winners bear the costs of their bids.
123

Annals of Operations Research
the complexity of equilibrium calculations in these models.2 Korpeo˘glu et al. (2022) study
parallel innovation contests, where agents can compete and improve their solutions for each.
Each contest is won by the agent with the highest output, which is a noisy function of the
agent’s effort. They look into the circumstances in which the organizers beneﬁt from an agent
competing in multiple contests. Deng et al. (2023) study parallel contests and assume that
agents using mixed strategies can participate in any number of contests, whereas Chan and
Parkes (2020) study parallel contests and assume that agents in their model can choose their
contests using pure strategies; however, like the previous papers, in their model, each agent
can compete in multiple contests rather than being limited to one contest as in ours. The main
difference between our model of parallel contests and these models is that in these models,
an agent can participate in multiple contests, whereas in our model, each agent can only
participate in one. It is worth noting that Deng et al. (2022) investigate the parallel contest
model and, like us, assume that each contestant participates in only one contest. However, in
their model, the agents only choose which contest to participate in and are not involved in
the subsequent stages; speciﬁcally, they make no costly efforts. Furthermore, in their model,
agents use mixed strategies to select contests, whereas we use pure strategies to achieve
equilibrium. Dipalantino (2009) investigate parallel contests with incomplete information
and also ﬁnd the symmetric equilibrium in mixed strategies, in which a contestant participates
with a high probability in a set of contests with the highest rewards. In addition, Deng et
al. (2022) and the other models mentioned above assume either linear or no costs of effort,
whereas in our model, the costs of effort are not necessarily linear and can be any type
of weakly convex cost of effort. Stouras et al. (2025) investigate a competition between
two contest designers with incomplete information; the designers decide the prizes for their
contests, and the agents decide which contest to participate in; similarly to our model, each
agent can participate in only one contest. However, the agents’ output is a noisy function of
their efforts, and unlike our stochastic success function, in their model, the higher the agent’s
output, the higher the prize he receives.
We assume that after the agents’ entry decision in which contest they take part, the contests
in the second stage are done under complete information; that is, the agents’ reputations and
abilities are commonly known. There are numerous examples in the literature (for example,
Levin and Smith 1994, and Fullerton and McAfee 1999) of agents who decide to enter a
contest or auction knowing the number and abilities of their opponents, as in our model, so
that the game is played with complete information in the second stage. In the second stage
of our model of parallel contests, each contest takes place using a Tullock CSF (see, for
example, Skaperdas 1996, Baye and Hoppe 2003, Ewerhart 2015, Sela 2020, and Cohen
et al. 2023).3 Based on the uniqueness of the equilibrium in one-stage generalized Tullock
contests either in complete or incomplete information (see Szidarovszky and Okuguchi 1997,
Yamazaki 2008, Einy et al. 2015, and Ewerhart and Quartieri 2020), our algorithm converges
to the equilibrium in the case of non-linear costs of effort. The uniqueness of the equilibrium
is important because it implies that there will always be a single equilibrium in every contest
in the second stage for any change in the allocation of agents determined by the algorithm
in the ﬁrst stage.
The theoretical economic literature (e.g., Wilson 1985; Mailath and Samuelson 2015)
primarily focuses on reputation effects in repeated games where each player builds his own
reputation based on prior actions. Some of these models, for example, assume that a long-run
2 Segev (2020) provides a survey of crowdsourcing contests, including parallel contests.
3 Ales et al. 2017, Terwiesch and Xu 2008, and Ghosh and Kleinberg 2016 all have examples of contests
with stochastic contest success functions that are similar to the Tullock contest success function.
123

Annals of Operations Research
player playing against a series of short-lived opponents can develop a reputation for playing in
a certain way and thus beneﬁt from commitment power (see, for instance, Kreps and Wilson,
1982; Kreps et al., 1982; Milgrom and Roberts, 1982; Cripps et al., 2004; Ely et al., 2008).
In other words, we believe that in any dynamic model, each agent’s reputation has been
established at some point and has not changed since, and we begin studying a model from
this point forward. It is critical to note that, while an agent’s reputation is ﬁxed in our model,
it is not the same as that agent’s ability; they can be correlated or not, and the relationship
between them has a signiﬁcant impact on our results.
Similar studies addressing ﬁxed reputation which is commonly known in two-stage con-
tests, with an interpretation of reputation analogous to that in our model, include Damiano et
al. (2010; 2012). The model by Damiano et al. (2010) considers a continuum of agents with
heterogeneous types (talent or reputation) who must choose between two organizations of
ﬁxed sizes. They assume that an agent’s payoff increases with the average type of organization
they join, but this payoff also increases with their ranking within the organization. Damiano
et al. (2012) expand on their previous model by incorporating a competition between the
two organizations, with each organization having the power to decide how to award prizes.
Each organization beneﬁts from the average type, and the agent’s payoff increases with the
nominal prize as well as the average type in the organization he chooses. In both of these
models, agents simultaneously select the organization they wish to join. However, unlike our
model, in which agents compete against one another in each contest (organization) and the
outcome is determined by their actions, in their models, competitions among agents within
these organizations are solely based on their types; that is, the agents are not active during
that stage of the competition.
The literature on status in contests is very similar to that on reputation in contests (see, for
example, Hopkins and Kornienko 2004, Kosfeld and Neckermann 2011, Bhattacharya and
Dugar (2014), and Charness et al. (2014)). Both situations are similar in that an agent prefers
to be surrounded by high-type agents. However, in our model of contests with reputation, an
agent wants to be in a group with high-type (highly reputable) agents, and the distribution
of the agents in the other groups does not affect his payoff, while in status contests, an agent
wants to be in the highest status class with the high-type agents, but the distribution of the
agents in the other groups have a signiﬁcant impact on his payoff. For example, Moldovanu
et al. (2007), and Dubey (2010) assume that each agent cares about the number of agents
in the categories above and below him. In particular, agents receive a positive utility that is
proportional to the number of agents in lower status categories and a negative utility that is
proportional to the number of agents in higher status categories.
Our paper focuses on determining a pure Nash equilibrium, a key concept in economic
theory for predicting agent behavior in a variety of situations. Although Nash equilibrium is
applicable in a wide range of practical situations, it is not always clear how agents know to
behave exactly as predicted by Nash equilibrium. One explanation is that agents use Nash
equilibrium strategies after engaging in adaptive processes such as learning, imitation, or
evolution, which result in their actions convergent to a point known as Nash equilibrium (see,
for example, Kandori et al. 1993, Roth and Erev 1995, Monderer et al. 1997, and Fudenberg
and Levine 1998). Similarly, we not only demonstrate the existence of equilibrium in pure
strategies and develop algorithms for computing it, but we also describe dynamic processes
by which fully rational agents learn to play the pure strategy equilibrium.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We describe the model of two-stage parallel
contests with reputation in Section 2. We analyze the second stage in Section 3. We analyze
the ﬁrst stage of our model in Section 4, where agents have asymmetric reputations but
similar cost functions. In Section 5, we analyze the ﬁrst stage of our model, where agents
123

Annals of Operations Research
have asymmetric cost functions as well as asymmetric reputations. Section 6 discusses the
robustness and strength of our results, while Section 7 concludes. The appendix contains the
proofs.
2 The model
Consider a set of n asymmetric agents, N = {1, 2, . . . , n}, and a set of m asymmetric
contests, M = {1, 2, . . . , m}, where m < n. Each agent i ∈N has a reputation type αi
where αi ≥αi+1 for i = 1, 2, ..., n −1, and each contest k ∈M has a nominal prize vk.
In the ﬁrst stage, each agent chooses a contest k ∈M to compete in where the set of agents
who choose to compete in contest k is denoted by Nk, and nk is the number of agents who
choose to compete in contest k. In the second stage, after all of the agents have chosen a
contest to compete in, the agents observe their opponents who chose the same contests as
them, and then agents who chose the same contest compete against one another to win the
contest under complete information. The agents in the contest k simultaneously exert their
efforts. Let xi denote the effort of agent i ∈Nk. The probability that agent i will win contest
k is pi =
gi(xi)

j∈Nk g j(x j). If 
j∈Nk g j(x j) = 0, we assume pi = 1/nk for all i ∈Nk, which
implies that a single entrant in a contest wins the prize with probability 1 without exerting any
effort. The production function gi(xi) is assumed to be zero at xi = 0, continuous, strictly
increasing, and weakly concave in xi for all xi ∈R+. Agent i who exerts an effort of xi bears
the cost of his effort ˆci(xi) regardless of whether he wins or loses, where ˆci(x) : R+ →R+
is the effort cost function, which is strictly increasing and weakly convex in the effort xi.
In addition, the winning value for the winner of contest k is a function fk(vk, ¯αk) where vk
is the nominal prize of contest k and ¯αk = (αi)i∈Nk is the vector of all reputation types of
the agents who have chosen contest k. For a ﬁxed number of agents in contest k, the value
function fk(vk, ¯αk) is increasing in the nominal prize vk as well as in each of the reputation
types of the agents in contest k, (αi)i∈Nk. We also assume that the value function is non-
decreasing with respect to the reputation of an additional agent. Formally, let fk(vk, ¯αk) be
the value function given a set of agents with reputation vector ¯αk. In addition, we assume
that for any two potential agents entering the contest with reputation types αγ and αδ where
αγ ≥αδ, fk(vk, ¯αk, αγ ) ≥fk(vk, ¯αk, αδ). This implies that agents’ marginal contributions
to the value function do not decrease with their reputation type. The assumption that the value
function is based on all contestants’ reputation types, including the agent’s type, makes sense
in many cases where the agent’s reputation elevates the competition, making winning more
valuable. However, this assumption is made to simplify the calculations because, under this
assumption, all contestants in the same contest have the same value, whereas if a contestant’s
value function is based on all contestants’ reputations in the contest, excluding his own
reputations, the contestants have different value functions. This is not a critical assumption,
because our main ﬁndings in this paper about the existence of equilibrium hold true even if
we assume that an agent’s value function is solely determined by the reputation of the other
agents in the contest.
The expected payoff of agent i ∈Nk is:
fk(vk, ¯αk)
gi(xi)

j∈Nk g j(x j) −ˆci(xi).
(1)
123

Annals of Operations Research
Let y j = g j(x j) for all j ∈Nk. Then, the expected payoff given by (1) is equivalent to
fk(vk, ¯αk)
yi

j∈Nk y j
−ci(yi),
(2)
where ci = ˆci ◦g−1
i
.4 The assumptions on gi and ˆci imply that ci is a well-deﬁned function
with ci(0) = 0, and that ci is strictly increasing and weakly convex with respect to yi. Thus,
we will consider the maximization function given by (2) and assume that the agents’ costs of
effort can be ranked such that for all x ≥0, ci(x) ≤ci+1(x), i = 1, ..., n −1. Then, we can
say that an agent with a lower cost function has a higher ability than other agents with higher
cost functions. This competition will be known as the model of two-stage parallel contests
with reputation.5
To study the dynamics of the competition, we ﬁrst analyze the second stage, in which each
agent has already chosen the speciﬁc contest in which he competes, and now each agent i
in each contest k chooses the effort level to compete with the other agents who have chosen
the same contest. Following that, we analyze the competition in the ﬁrst stage, in which the
agents choose the contest, based on the analysis of the second stage.
3 The second stage
There are m contests taking place at the same time in the second stage. At this stage of the
competition, analyzing contest k ∈M is sufﬁcient because the m contests are independent
of one another. The maximization problem of agent i in contest k is
max
xi
fk(vk, ¯αk)
xi

j∈Nk x j
−ci(xi).
(3)
The FOC (ﬁrst-order condition) of this maximization problem is
fk(vk, ¯αk)

j∈Nk x j −xi

j∈Nk x j
2 = c′
i(xi).
We assume that the prize value and the agents’ cost functions are such that all the agents in
contest k are active. If there are inactive agents, only the subset of active agents is considered.
Following that, solving the maximization problem (3) yields the well-known result:
Proposition 1 In the second stage of the model of two-stage parallel contests with reputation,
if i ∈Nk, then agent i ’s equilibrium effort is
xi = pi

j∈Nk
x j,
where pi is agent i’s winning probability and is given by
pi = 1 −(nk −1)c′
i(xi)

j∈Nk c′
j(x j) ,
(4)
4 This transformation was proposed by Szidarovszky and Okuguchi (1997), and Yamazaki (2008).
5 We can assume a much more general contest success function here than the one given by (1). However, we
also require the uniqueness of the equilibrium in the second stage of each contest, so we consider the contest
success function given by (1).
123

Annals of Operations Research
and agent i’s expected payoff is given by
ui = fk(vk, ¯αk)pi −ci(xi).
(5)
If the agents’ effort costs are linear, ci(x) = ci x, agent i’s expected payoff is given by
ui = fk(vk, ¯αk)(pi)2.
(6)
So far, we have analyzed the second stage of the model of two-stage parallel contests
with reputation. In the following section, we will analyze the ﬁrst stage of this competition,
focusing on the effect of reputation on the agents’ strategies in the ﬁrst stage. The ﬁrst stage
analysis will be divided into two cases. In case A, we will assume that all the agents have the
same linear cost functions, whereas in case B, we will assume that agents have asymmetric
cost functions which are non-linear that can be ranked as described above.
4 The ﬁrst stage - case A
Given the analysis of the second stage, in which the agents choose pure strategies (efforts)
according to Proposition 1, we will say that our model of two-stage parallel contests with
reputation has a subgame perfect equilibrium in pure strategies if, in the ﬁrst stage, the agents
choose their contests using pure strategies such that, given the choices of the other agents,
no agent wishes to switch to a different contest.
It is unclear whether an agent would prefer to compete against high-type or low-type
agents. This is because highly reputable agents increase the winning value of the contest,
whereas low-cost (high-ability) agents are difﬁcult to compete with. These two effects must
be considered by each agent when determining his best strategy. In the following section, we
will assume that all the agents have the same linear cost function, ci(xi) = cxi, ∀i ∈N, and
analyze their dynamics solely based on their reputation, whereas in the following section,
we will look at a more general situation in which cost functions differ between agents.
Even when agents have the same cost function, the two effects exist; however, in terms of
competitiveness, there is no difference between competing against a highly reputable agent
and competing against a less-reputable agent. Thus, agents have an incentive to follow highly
reputable agents because the winning value is higher with these agents, and the chances of
winning are independent of agent type. As such, we will analyze the competition dynamics
solely based on the reputations of the agents, and we will speciﬁcally ﬁnd subgame perfect
equilibrium with pure strategies for these competitions.
Even if all the agents’ cost functions are symmetric, the analysis of the model of parallel
contests with reputation is complex. Furthermore, it is clear in some cases that there is no
subgame perfect equilibrium in pure strategies. This is especially true when there is no clear
relationship between the agents’ reputations and abilities (cost of effort), as in the case under
consideration. The reason for this is that a highly reputable agent can signiﬁcantly increase
the value of the prize and, in particular, the expected payoffs of the other agents in the contest
in which he competes, providing an incentive for other agents to follow him to every contest
he chooses. Such a situation is depicted in the following example.
Example 1 Consider a set of three agents N = {h,l,l} with one highly-reputable agent (h-
type) and two less-reputable agents (l -type), and a set of two contests M = {1, 2} with
nominal prizes of v1 = v2 = 10. The h-type agent has a reputation level of αh = 30, while
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 1 The expected payoff, effort and realized prize for the agents
Contest 1
Contest 2
Contest 1
Contest 2
Realized Prize
Effort
Payoff
Realized Prize
Effort
Payoff
1
{h,l,l}
∅
106.66
23.70
11.85
-
-
-
2
{h,l}
{l}
155
38.75
38.75
10
-
10
3
{h}
{l,l}
300
-
300
10
2.5
2.5
the l-type agent has a reputation level of αl = 1 . The value function in both contests is
f A(vk, ¯αk) = vk

i∈Nk αi
nk
.
For both types of agents, the cost function is ci(xi) = xi. To understand the contest dynamics,
we look at every possible agent allocation across the two contests and calculate the agents’
expected payoffs in the second stage. Following that, we will be able to identify subgame
perfect equilibria in pure strategies, speciﬁcally, agents’ allocations across the two contests
such that no agent wishes to move to another contest. There are six possible permutations
for the agents’ allocation across the contests; however, due to the symmetry of the contests,
only three are relevant. Because of the symmetry of the cost functions, the effort, payoff, and
realized prize (the level of the value function given the allocation of agents) are the same for
all the agents in the same contest. The table below depicts all possible allocations and the
corresponding expected payoffs for the agents (See Table 1).
Beginning with allocation 1, in which all the agents chose the same contest, the h-type
agent with a payoff of 11.85 will increase his payoff by switching to the other contest, bringing
us to allocation 3. However, in allocation 3, one l-type from contest 2, who now receives a
payoff of 2.5, would prefer to move to contest 1, which brings us to allocation 2, where he
will receive a payoff of 38.75. Now, in allocation 2, the l-type agent who competes in contest
2 and has a payoff of 10 would choose to move to contest 1, bringing us to allocation 1 in
which he receives a payoff of 11.85. As a result, there is no allocation from which no agent
wishes to move on, and thus no subgame perfect equilibrium in pure strategies exists in this
case.
The example 1 shows that a subgame perfect equilibrium in pure strategies does not
always exist in our model of two-stage parallel contests with reputation. This occurs when
there is a movement loop, as in the preceding example, speciﬁcally when a highly-reputable
agent moves from contest i to contest j, which is followed by the movement of less-reputable
agents and a chain reaction that returns us to an inﬁnite loop. Identifying the conditions under
which these loops do not exist will provide us the sufﬁcient conditions for the existence of
equilibrium. First, we order the agents’ incentives to shift from place to place based on their
level of reputation.
Lemma 1 Consider the model of two-stage parallel contests with reputation where all the
agents have the same cost function ci(xi) = cxi for all i ∈N. Let i, j ∈Nk and αi ≥α j.
Then if agent i does not want to switch from contest k to contest s, neither does agent j.
Lemma 1 demonstrates that if highly-reputable agents do not want to move from one
contest to another, less-reputable agents in the same contest do not want to move either. In
particular, if the agent with the highest reputation in a contest does not want to move to a
123

Annals of Operations Research
different contest, then all the agents in the same contest will not want to move either. This
enables us to analyze the corner equilibrium points as follows:
Proposition 2 Consider the model of two-stage parallel contests with reputation where all
the agents have the same cost function, ci(xi) = cxi for all i ∈N. Let ¯α be the vector of
all the agents reputation types in N and α1 be the highest reputation type. Then, if for all
s ∈M, s ̸= k:
√fk(vk, ¯α)
√fs(vs, α1) ≥n,
there is a subgame perfect equilibrium in which all the agents choose to compete in contest
k.
According to proposition 2, when all the agents are allocated to contest k and the other
contests remain empty, if the highest-reputable agent does not want to move to another
contest, then there is a subgame perfect equilibrium in which, in the ﬁrst stage, all the agents
choose to compete in contest k. It is important to note that a corner equilibrium can exist
when all the agents prefer to compete in contest k rather than contest s even if vk < vs. Using
the same approach, we can identify not only corner equilibria but also interior equilibria. In
particular, we will have such an equilibrium when the most reputable agent in every contest
does not want to move.
The following example considers a scenario with two types of agents, one with a low
reputation and one with a high reputation, and demonstrates that if there are enough highly
reputable agents in the competition, a pure strategy equilibrium must exist.
Example 2 Consider the set of agents N = {1, 2, 3, ..., n} with h > 1 highly-reputable (h-
type) andl > 1 less-reputable (l-type) agents, that is, αh > αl. There are two parallel contests,
M = {1, 2} with nominal prizes of v1 > v2. All the agents regardless of their reputation have
the same cost function c(xi) = xi. The value function in both contests is
f A(vk, ¯α) = vk

i∈Nk αi
nk
.
In the ﬁrst stage, both h-type and l-type agents decide which contest to enter. The number of
l-type and h-type agents in contests i, i = 1, 2, is denoted asli and hi respectively. According
to Proposition 1, the expected payoff of the agents who chose to compete in contest i is
vi
hiαh + liαl
(hi + li)3 .
Assume, without loss of generality, that h-type agents from contest 2 want to switch to
contest 1. In this case, we let h-type agents move from contest 2 to contest 1 one by one. If
there is at least one h-type agent left in contest 2 who has no incentive to move to contest 1
then by Lemma 1, all the l-type agents in contest 2 do want to move either to contest 1 and we
actually have an equilibrium allocation of the agents between the two contests. Accordingly,
assume that h −1 h -type agents compete in contest 1, meaning that there is exactly one h
-type agent left in contest 2. This agent will have no incentive to move to contest 1 if his
expected payoff in contest 2 is greater than his expected payoff in contest 1 when he joins
this contest. This occurs when
v1
hαh + l1αl
(h + l1)3
≤v2
αh + l2αl
(1 + l2)3 ,
(7)
123

Annals of Operations Research
which yields
(h + l1)3
(l2 + 1)3 ≥v1(hαh + l1αl)
v2(αh + l2αl) .
Now, since
v1(hαh + l1αl)
v2(αh + l2αl) < v1αh(h + l1)
v2αl(1 + l2) ,
a sufﬁcient condition for the last h-type in contest 2 to stay there is
(h + l1)3
(l2 + 1)3 > v1αh(h + l1)
v2αl(1 + l2) ,
or, alternatively,
h + l1
l2 + 1
2
> v1αh
v2αl
.
This holds if
h >
v1αh
v2αl
(l2 + 1) −l1.
(8)
We can see from (8), that as the number of h -type agents increases, an equilibrium with pure
strategies will be reached.
When a new agent enters a contest, it has two simultaneous effects on the value of the
other agents in that contest. The reputation and competitiveness effects. The reputation effect
can increase or decrease the value of the prize depending on the new agent’s reputation in
comparison to the reputations of the other agents in the contest. However, because there is one
more agent to compete against for winning, the competitiveness effect reduces the expected
payoff of the agents in the contest. In that case, we say that an additional agent in a contest
has a negative cumulative (competitiveness plus reputation) effect. The cumulative effect is
deﬁned formally as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 We say that the introduction of a new agent into a contest has a positive (or
negative) cumulative effect if, as a result of the new agent’s entry into the contest, the expected
payoff increases (decreases) for all other agents in that contest. Formally, let ui(vk, Nk) be
the equilibrium expected payoff of agent i in contest k with a set of agents Nk and a nominal
prize of vk. We say that a β-type agent with a reputation level of αβ has a negative cumulative
effect on contest k if for every agent i ∈Nk:
ui(vk, Nk) > ui(vk, Nk ∪{β}).
(9)
If agents have linear effort costs, ci(xi) = cxi, condition (9) is equivalent to:
fk(vk, ¯αk)
n2
k
> fk(vk, ¯αk, αβ)
(nk + 1)2
.
(10)
When a new agent enters a competition, the cumulative effect, which takes reputation and
competitiveness effects into account, can be either positive or negative. When the cumulative
effect is negative, either the agent’s reputation is low relative to the reputations of the agents
already competing, or the agent’s reputation is high, but the competitiveness effect has a
greater impact, resulting in a lower expected payoff for the agents who already compete.
On the other hand, when the cumulative effect is positive, it shows that the reputation effect
outweighs the competitiveness effect, which is always negative. In our model of two-stage
123

Annals of Operations Research
parallel contests with reputation, the negative cumulative effect of all agents is critical to
the existence of equilibrium. This means that even if the most reputable agent enters a
competition, the expected payoff of the agents currently competing in that competition will
decrease. Then, we will show that a pure-strategy equilibrium will exist.
Based on the monotonicity of the value function with respect to the entrant’s reputation, if
an agent with reputation αγ have a negative cumulative effect, then any agent with reputation
αδ ≤αγ must also have a negative cumulative effect. This follows because the competitive-
ness effect remains constant for a given cost function, while the marginal contribution to the
prize value is non-decreasing in reputation.
For each value function fk(vk, ¯αk), there are different sufﬁcient conditions for the cumu-
lative effect to be negative for any nominal prize vk and any given reputation vector αk.
Obviously, there are some value functions for which sufﬁcient conditions do not exist, but in
the following, we illustrate two examples in which the value functions have negative cumu-
lative effects under certain conditions regardless of the distribution of the agents among the
contests and their reputation types.
Claim 1 Consider the model of two-stage parallel contests with reputation. Assume that
contest k has the following value function
f (vk, ¯αk) = h(vk, αmin).
where αmin = min{α : α ∈¯αk} and h : R2
+ →R+ is a monotonically increasing function
in both vk and αmin. Then, the value function f (vk, ¯αk) has a negative cumulative effect for
any number of agents nk, any nominal prize vk and any given reputation vector αk.
This result is straightforward because the entry of any agent either reduces or does not
change the reputation effect, but it increases the competitiveness effect. As a result, the
addition of any new agent reduces the cumulative effect, implying that the value function
h(vk, αmin) has a negative cumulative effect regardless of the agents’ reputation types. While
the previous claim demonstrated that a value function could have a negative cumulative effect
without any conditions, the following claim demonstrates that for the value function given in
Example 2, a modest level of agents’ heterogeneity in each contest is sufﬁcient to guarantee
that it will have a negative cumulative effect.
Claim 2 Considerthemodeloftwo-stageparallelcontestswithreputationwherealltheagents
have the same cost function, ci(xi) = cxi for all i ∈N. The set of agents includes h-type
and l-type agents with reputation types of αh and αl respectively where αh > αl. Let h and
l be the number of h-type and l-type agents in the competition, where h + l = n. The value
function in both contests is
f A(vk, ¯α) = vk

i∈Nk αi
nk
.
Then, if αh ≤3αl, this value function has a negative cumulative effect for any nominal prize
vk and any given reputation vector αk.
When the introduction of a new highly reputable agent into a contest has a negative
cumulative effect, the option to move between contests in loops is removed. Then, in contrast
to Example 1, agents will not follow the movements of highly reputable agents. Even if the
agent with the highest reputation joins a contest and increases its value function, his negative
cumulative effect will reduce the expected payoffs of the agents in that contest and thus
the incentive of other agents to enter this contest. With this property of negative cumulative
effect, we can implement an algorithm and show that the competition will reach a situation
123

Annals of Operations Research
where no agent moves. In such a case, we say that the algorithm has reached equilibrium, and
in particular, the model of two-stage parallel contests with reputation has a subgame perfect
equilibrium.
Algorithm 1 The algorithm has the following four steps:
Step 1
Begin with all contests empty and deny any agent access to the contests.
Step 2
Assign the agent with the lowest reputation who has not yet been assigned
to the contest in which he has the highest expected payoff.
Step 3
Allow agents who have already been assigned to contests to switch contests
if they so desire.
Step 4
Repeat steps 2-3 until all the agents have been assigned to a contest
and no agent wants to move in step 3.
Algorithm 1 assigns agents in ascending order of reputation, beginning with the agent with
the least reputable reputation and ending with the agent with the most reputable reputation.
Despite the fact that each new additional agent offers the opportunity to switch contests, the
agents remain in the contest to which they were initially assigned. The following theorem
demonstrates that this algorithm converges to equilibrium and that agents do not move during
its execution.
Theorem 1 Consider the model of two-stage parallel contests with reputation consisting of
m contests and n agents where all the agents have the same cost function, ci(xi) = cxi for
all i ∈N. Then, if any additional agent to any contest has a negative cumulative effect,
Algorithm 1 reaches equilibrium such that there is a subgame perfect equilibrium with pure
strategies.
Theorem 1 proves that if the agents have a negative cumulative effect on the payoff in
each of the contests they enter, our model of parallel contests with reputation has a subgame
perfect equilibrium. For example, according to Claim 1, if the value function in each contest
is the minimum function f (vk, ¯αk) = min{α : α ∈¯αk}, then we have a subgame perfect
equilibrium in pure strategies. Similarly, according to Claim 2, if the value function in each of
two parallel contests with two types of agents is the average function f A(vk, ¯α) = vk

i∈Nk αi
nk
,
then we have a subgame perfect equilibrium in pure strategies if the difference in the agents’
reputation types is not too large.
5 The ﬁrst stage - case B
So far, we have assumed that the cost functions of all the agents are the same. We will show in
this section that this is not a limiting assumption in our model and that the results, particularly
the existence of subgame perfect equilibrium with pure strategies, can be obtained even under
weaker conditions when the agents have asymmetric cost functions. Thus, we consider here
a set of agents N = {1, 2, ..., n} with n agents of two types, highly-reputable agent (h)
and low-reputable agent (l), such that their reputation types satisfy αh ≥αl and their cost
functions satisfy ch(x) ≤cl(x) for all x ≥0. In other words, an agent’s reputation and ability
are related.
Cohen et al. (2023) demonstrated the existence of subgame perfect equilibrium in a model
of two-stage parallel contests with asymmetric, non-linear cost functions and a value function
based on a ﬁxed nominal prize. We extend their work by considering value functions that are
123

Annals of Operations Research
not ﬁxed and are endogenously deﬁned by the nominal prize and the reputation types of the
agents who chose to compete in the same contest.
We assumed in the previous section that the agents’ competitiveness effect was the same
because their cost function (or ability) was the same. In this case, the competitiveness effect is
not homogeneous, as highly reputable agents incur lower costs for each level of effort. Thus,
the competitiveness effect of including highly reputable agents in the contest has a greater
negative impact, implying that the cumulative effect, which is the sum of the competitiveness
and reputation effects, will be lower (more negative) in that case. Thus, as in the previous
section, we make the same assumption that the value functions have a negative cumulative
effect. Then, we can implement an algorithm and demonstrate that the competition will
eventually reach a state in which no agents move, i.e., the algorithm has reached equilibrium.
Algorithm 2 The algorithm has the following four steps:
Step 1
Allocate the agents randomly across the contests.
Step 2
Let the h-type agents switch contests if they want.
Step 3
Let a single l-type agent move between the contests.
Step 4
Repeat steps 2-3 until, in step 3, no l-type agent wants to move
and every agent is assigned to a contest.
The next theorem shows that this algorithm converges to equilibrium and, more speciﬁ-
cally, to an allocation of the agents across the contests such that no agent wants to move from
his location to another one.
Theorem 2 Consider the model of two-stage parallel contests with m contests and two types
of agents h and l where their reputation types satisfy αh ≥αl and their cost functions satisfy
ch(x) ≤cl(x) for all x ≥0. If any additional h-type agent has a negative cumulative effect on
the contest, algorithm 2 reaches equilibrium such that there is a subgame perfect equilibrium
with pure strategies.
6 Discussion
In this section, we investigate the robustness and strength of our main ﬁndings. According
to Theorems 1 and 2, in our model of two-stage parallel contests, a sufﬁcient condition for
the existence of a subgame perfect equilibrium with pure strategies is that any additional
agent to any contest has a negative cumulative effect. In the following, we want to highlight
that this sufﬁcient condition for the existence of equilibrium is far more likely to hold in
an environment where the agents’ skills and reputations are correlated. In Example 1, we
show that when agents have different reputation types but the same cost of effort, namely,
the agents’ skills and reputations are not correlated, the subgame perfect equilibrium with
pure strategies does not exist. Example 3 is slightly different from Example 1, such that the
agents’ skills and reputations are correlated, that is, highly reputable agents have a lower cost
than less reputable agents. As a result, the negative cumulative effect is more likely to hold,
implying the existence of a subgame perfect equilibrium based on pure strategies.
Example 3 As in Example 1, consider a set of three agents N = {h,l,l} with one highly-
reputable agent (h-type) and two less-reputable agents (l-type), and a set of two contests
M = {1, 2} with nominal prizes of v1 = v2 = 10. The h-type agent has a reputation level of
αh = 30, while the l-type agent has a reputation level of αl = 1. The value function in both
contests is
123

Annals of Operations Research
Table 2 The expected payoff,
effort and realized prize for the
h-type agent
Realized Prize
Effort
Payoff
1
{h,l,l}
106.66
30.20
17.36
2
{h,l}
155
45.28
45.28
3
{h}
300
-
300
Table 3 The expected payoff,
effort and realized prize for the
l-type agents
Realized Prize
Effort
Payoff
1
{h,l,l}
106.66
22.32
9.48
2
{h,l}
155
38.49
32.72
3
{l,l}
10
2.5
2.5
4
{l}
10
-
10
f A(vk, ¯αk) = vk

i∈Nk αi
nk
.
For both types of agents, the cost function is ci(xi) = ci xi, where cl = 1 and ch = 0.85. As
shown in Example 1 , only three permutations are relevant due to the contest’s symmetry.
However, because each type of agent has a distinct cost function, the expected payoff and
effort will differ between them. The two tables below show the realized prize, expected
payoff, and effort from the perspective of an h-type (l-type) agent for all permutations.
The h-type agents can be found alone, with one, or two l-type agents. Similarly, a l-type
agent can compete alone, with another l-type agent, another h-type agent, or with all agents
participating in the same contest.
Starting with all agents selecting the same contest, the h-type agent gets a payoff of 17.36
(Table 2, case 1). He will increase his payoff to 300 by switching to the other contest (Table
2, case 3). Contest 2 now contains only one h-type agent, whereas Contest 1 contains two
l-type agents. In this case, one l-type agent from contest 1 who received a payoff of 2.5 (Table
3, case 3) would prefer to move to contest 2, where he will receive a payoff of 32.72 (Table
2, case 2). The h-type agent has no incentive to move because both contests have exactly one
l-type agent, and the l-type agent who is alone in contest 1 would prefer a payoff of 10 (Table
3, case 4) over 9.48 if he switched to the other contest (Table 3, case 1). So we have reached
a point of equilibrium.
As demonstrated in Theorem 2, the requirement for a negative cumulative effect is a
sufﬁcient condition for the existence of a subgame perfect equilibrium with pure strategies
in our model of parallel contests with reputation. However, it is sometimes a necessary
condition.
Figure 1 elucidates the relationship between the negative cumulative effect condition
and the existence of pure-strategy equilibrium. This ﬁgure depicts a situation with seven
agents, ﬁve of which are low-type agents and two of which are high-type agents. There are
two contests with the same nominal prize (normalized to 1), and the value function for each
contest is f (vk, ¯αk) = vk

i∈Nk αi
nk
. We also assume that low-type agents have a low reputation
(αl = 1) and a high marginal cost of effort (cl = 10), whereas the reputations and marginal
costs of effort of high-type agents vary and are shown in Figure 1. 6
6 The method for numerically determining, for a given reputation, the maximum cost that will still result in
an equilibrium existence in each scenario is outlined in the appendix.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Fig. 1 Cumulative negative effect as a sufﬁcient condition
Fig. 2 Cumulative negative effect as a necessary condition
According to Claim 2, when αh ≤3αl, there is a subgame perfect equilibrium with pure
strategies even if the marginal cost of effort of both types of agents is identical. However,
in this case with heterogeneous marginal costs of effort, we examine for each value of the
high-type’s reputation, the maximum marginal cost of effort (so that the high-type agents are
as weak as possible) such that there is still an equilibrium allocation of the agents (the curve
of red dots). On the same graph, we have added the appropriate value of the cost of effort for
each value of the high-types’ reputation, so that the value function has a negative cumulative
effect (the green curve). There is a gap between the red and green curves, which is due to
the fact that the condition of the negative cumulative effect is sufﬁcient for the existence of
equilibrium. However, it is not necessary.
Figure 2 depicts the same situation as Figure 1 but with a different number of agents.
There is one high-type agent and three low-type agents in Figure 2. We can see that when
123

Annals of Operations Research
the number of agents is small, as in this case, the condition of the negative cumulative effect
merges with the condition of equilibrium’s existence. In other words, the negative cumulative
effect condition becomes a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for the existence of a subgame
perfect equilibrium with pure strategies.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we studied parallel contests in which the agents’ reputations play a crucial role
in determining the outcome of the competition. We analyzed a model of two-stage parallel
contests where, in the ﬁrst stage, agents simultaneously select the contests in which they
want to compete, and in the second stage, agents who selected the same contest compete
against each other for a single prize determined not only by a nominal value but also by the
reputation of the competing agents.
Our model may have a subgame-perfect equilibrium in mixed strategies, but we are inter-
ested in the presence of a subgame-perfect equilibrium in pure strategies. We believe that
there is a distinction between pure strategy equilibrium and mixed strategy equilibrium, par-
ticularly in multi-stage games such as our two-stage parallel contests (see, Harsanyi (1973)).
In our model, if agents use mixed strategies in the ﬁrst stage to decide which contest to com-
pete in, and if at the start of the second stage, after seeing how all agents are allocated among
the contests, some of them will have an incentive to change their decisions, while agents who
choose pure strategies in the ﬁrst stage, when they observe the allocation of agents among
the contests, will not regret their decisions and, in particular, do not want to change their
location at the start of the second stage. As a result, a subgame-perfect equilibrium with pure
strategies in our model’s ﬁrst stage is a more stable solution, making it more realistic and
valuable.
We initially assumed that the parallel contests include heterogeneous agents with distinct
reputation types and identical cost functions. Then, we showed that there are situations in
which there is no subgame perfect equilibrium with pure strategies, implying that some agents
always prefer to leave the contest they chose to enter since by doing so they can increase
their expected payoffs. Then, we provided a sufﬁcient condition on the agents’ value function
that guaranteed the existence of the pure-strategy equilibrium, and we demonstrated that this
sufﬁcient condition is feasible for several forms of the agents’ value function.
Then, we assumed that there are n heterogeneous agents with two possible types, each
with a different nonlinear cost of effort and a different reputation, and that the non-linear
costs of effort are not explicitly given. For this case, we establish a sufﬁcient condition for
the existence of a subgame perfect equilibrium using pure strategies. Later, we demonstrated
using computer simulations that when the number of agents is small, our sufﬁcient condition
is also necessary for the existence of subgame perfect equilibrium with pure strategies, but
as the number of agents increases, our condition is sufﬁcient but no longer necessary. When
our sufﬁcient conditions are met, although the equilibrium strategies cannot be explicitly
calculated, we provide algorithms for computing this equilibrium using revealed preference
techniques. The algorithms describe not only the pure strategy equilibrium, but also the
dynamic process by which rational agents modify their strategies in response to other agents’
strategies until all agents’ strategies approach the equilibrium point of our parallel contest
with reputation.
We found that the alignment between an agent’s skills (cost functions) and reputation plays
a crucial role in determining the likelihood of achieving a subgame perfect equilibrium with
123

Annals of Operations Research
pure strategies in such contests. When the reputations of agents are closely related to their skill
levels, the model tends to achieve stability with pure strategy equilibria. When reputations
and skills are misaligned, resulting in low-ranked agents having high reputations, the model
becomes unstable, and pure-strategy equilibria become elusive. By our analysis, we improve
our understanding of the complexities of reputation-driven parallel contests. Understanding
the implications of reputation in parallel contests provides a useful lens through which to
examine the dynamics of other competitive environments, as reputation continues to have a
signiﬁcant impact on a variety of social and economic phenomena.
We study the presence of subgame perfect equilibrium with pure strategies in our parallel
contests, but we say nothing about it, including how the agents are distributed across the
contests. The reason for this is that in our paper ((Cohen et al., 2024)), we study parallel
contests without reputation and show that the equilibrium is never unique by replacing a
high-skill agent from one contest with several low-skill agents from another contest without
changing each agent’s expected payoff in all contests. This is also true in our model with
reputation, and as a result, we can have almost any type, with either many or few high-
reputable agents in some contests, as long as there is no limit on the number of agents in each
contest.
8 Appendix
8.1 Proof of Lemma 1
Assume that i, j ∈Nk, and αi > α j, and that agent i does not want to move from contest k
to contest s, while agent j wants to make this movement. We will show that such a scenario
leads to a contradiction. By (6), agent i’s expected payoff in contest k is
fk(vk, ¯αk)
 
1 −(nk −1)ci

j∈Nk c j

2
.
By symmetry of the agents’ effort costs, we obtain that all the agents in contest k (including
agents i and j) have the same expected payoff, which is given by
fk(vk, ¯αk)
n2
k
.
An i-type agent will not switch from contest k to contest s if the expected payoff in contest
k is greater than the expected payoff in contest s after he joins this contest. This holds true if
fk(vk, ¯αk)
n2
k
≥fs(vs, ¯αs, αi)
(ns + 1)2
.
Similarly, j-type agent wants to switch from contest k to contest s if
fk(vk, ¯αk)
n2
k
< fs(vs, ¯αs, α j)
(ns + 1)2
.
The last two inequalities imply that
fs(vs, ¯αs, α j) > fs(vs, ¯αs, αi).
123

Annals of Operations Research
The monotonicity of fs(.) in each reputation type and our presumption that αi > α j are
incompatible with this inequality. As a result, if the i-type agent from contest k does not want
to move to contest s, the j-type agent from contest k will not either.
8.2 Proof of Proposition 2
By (6), if all the agents chose to compete in contest k, the expected payoff of agent i is
fk(vk, ¯α)
 
1 −(n −1)ci

j∈N c j

2
,
where ¯α is the vector of reputation types of all the agents in contest k. Because all the agents
have the same cost function ci(xi) = cxi, ∀i ∈N, agent i’s winning probability is 1/n. This
means that if all the agents choose to compete in contest k, the expected payoff of agent i is
fk(vk, ¯α)
n2
We can conclude from Lemma 1 that the allocation of agents in which all the agents compete
in contest k is in equilibrium if there is no other contest s ∈M, s ̸= k, that the highest
reputable agent, agent 1, with a reputation type of α1, would prefer over contest k. Agent 1
prefers contest s over contest k if
fs(vs, α1) > fk(vk, ¯α)
n2
,
or, alternatively, if
√fk(vk, ¯α)
√fs(vs, α1) < n.
Thus, there is an equilibrium in which all the agents choose to compete in contest k, if
√fk(vk, ¯α)
√fs(vs, α1) ≥n.
8.3 Proof of Claim 2
The number of l-type and h-type agents who decide to participate in contests i ∈M in the
ﬁrst stage will be denoted as li and hi respectively. According to Proposition 1, the expected
payoff of the agents who chose to compete in contest i is
vi
hiαh + liαl
(hi + li)3 .
An entry of an additional l-type agent has a negative cumulative effect on a contest, as
it increases the contest’s competitiveness and decreases (or has no effect on) the average
reputation in the contest. However, an additional h-type agent has two opposing effects.
After another h-type agent entered the contest, the expected payoff of each agent in that
contest is
vi((hi + 1)αh + liαl)
(hi + 1 + li)3
123

Annals of Operations Research
We compare the previous payoff of the agents to the new one after the h-type agent joined
the contest to determine whether the cumulative effect is positive or negative. Thus, the
cumulative effect is negative if
vi(hiαh + liαl)
(hi + li)3
−vi((hi + 1)αh + liαl)
(hi + 1 + li)3
≥0.
Let αh = γ αl, where γ > 1. Then the condition that the cumulative effect is negative is
vi(hiγ αl + liαl)
(hi + li)3
−vi((hi + 1)γ αl + liαl)
(hi + 1 + li)3
≥0,
or, alternatively,
(hi + 1 + li)3
(hi + li)3
≥γ (hi + 1) + li
γ hi + li
.
It can be veriﬁed that the last inequality is satisﬁed for every γ ≤3. This means that if
αh ≤3αl, the cumulative effect of an h-type is negative, namely, contest i will become less
attractive for new agents of any type.
8.4 Proof of Theorem 1
Algorithm 1 begins with all the agents unassigned and all contests empty. Beginning with
step 2, the agent with the lowest reputation is assigned to a contest. He will not want to
change contests in step 3. Returning to step 2, the agent with the second lowest reputation
will be assigned to the contest in which he has the highest expected payoff. If the contest is
not the same as the previous agent’s, the previous agent will not join the new agent in step 3.
The previous agent chose his current contest because it offered the highest expected payoff
at the time of his assignment, and the new agent’s entry into a different contest signiﬁcantly
reduces the expected payoff in that contest due to the negative cumulative effect. As a result,
the alternative contest becomes even less appealing to the previous agent than when he
rejected it and chose another contest. If, on the other hand, the new agent is assigned to the
same contest as the previous agent, according to Lemma 1, the previous agent will not want
to switch contests.7
This argument applies to subsequent steps, and no contest switching will occur during the
algorithm’s steps. As a result, once all of the agents have been assigned to the contests, no
one will want to switch, and the algorithm will reach an equilibrium.
8.5 Proof of Theorem 2
We start by allocating the agents randomly across the contests. Let an allocation be denoted
by the set of agents in each contest, {N1, . . . , Nm}, and let ut(Nk) be the equilibrium expected
payoff of an agent of type t ∈{h,l} in contest k.
Instep2,weletonly h-typeagentsmoveuntiltheycouldnotincreasetheirexpectedpayoff.
Because we only distribute h-type agents in step 2 and allow them to move sequentially, it is
obvious that if any h-type agent moves from contest j to contest k such that uh(Nk ∪{h}) >
uh(N j), none of the h-type agents will want to move back to contest j, implying that there
7 Lemma 1 was proven for agents with symmetric costs of effort, but it is easily veriﬁed that it also holds for
agents with asymmetric costs of effort, as long as agents with higher reputations have lower costs of effort.
123

Annals of Operations Research
will be a ﬁnite number of h-type agents’ moves until equilibrium for the h-type agents only
is reached.
In step 3, a single l-type agent moves from contest i to j if ul(N j ∪{l}) > ul(Ni). No
h-type agent will join contest j as a result of this move. This is because the h-type agents
did not wish to join contest j prior to the move, meaning uh(N j) < uh(Nk) for their current
contest k, and the entry of the l-type agent further reduces the expected payoff in contest j
due to the negative cumulative effect (uh(N j ∪{l}) < uh(N j)).
Furthermore, once a l-type agent has left contest i, he will not return. Because a l-type
agent chose to leave contest i, his expected payoff in contest j is strictly higher. If no h-type
agent joins contest i in the subsequent Step 2, the l-type agents will not move to contest
i. If, however, the departure of the l-type agent attracts an h-type agent to join contest i,
the expected payoff in contest i will decrease due to the negative cumulative effect of the h
-type agent, reinforcing the l-type agent’s decision not to return. As the algorithm progresses,
the h-type agents will not participate in more contests until they stop moving. As a result,
according to Lemma 1, the l-type agents will stop moving, and the competition will reach
equilibrium.
9 The process of creating graphs
We implemented a computer simulation to produce the graphs. The simulation is conducted in
several steps. All of the agent permutations among the contests are created by the simulation
in the ﬁrst step. For each allocation in each permutation, the simulation then calculates the
equilibrium values of the second stage, namely, the prize, based on the agents’ reputations,
efforts, winning probabilities, and expected payoffs. The simulation then produces a map
of "adjacent permutations." A pair of permutations is referred to as "adjacent permutations"
if, with the exception of the allocation of one agent between the contests, the distribution
of agents in each permutation is the same. Then, for each permutation i, it is examined
if there is an adjacent permutation j where the agent who switches locations receives a
greater expected payoff than in permutation i. If this is the case, then permutation i is not an
equilibrium permutation. If there are no adjacent permutations for which the expected payoff
of the agent changing his location is higher than his prior expected payoff, the permutation
is an equilibrium permutation.
With this simulation algorithm, we can examine the existence of equilibrium. Given that
there are two different types of agents, we can determine the high-type agents’ maximum
ﬁxed marginal cost while maintaining equilibrium. We employ a binary search algorithm
variant for this purpose (Lehmer 1960; Bottenbruch 1962). The algorithm receives potential
upper and lower bounds where the maximum cost of the high-type agent exists in equilibrium
and reduces the range of possibilities as follows (pseudo code):
Function: find_max_cost_in_equilibrium(model)
// The assumed range for the cost of the high-type agent
cost_min = 0 // Minimum cost value
cost_max = 100 // Maximum cost value (adjust as needed)
precision = 0.001 // Desired precision
// Perform a binary search for the maximum cost value
WHILE cost_max - cost_min ≥precision:
cost_to_test = (cost_min + cost_max) / 2 // Midpoint of the range
equilibrium_exists = run_simulation(model, cost_to_test)
123

Annals of Operations Research
IF equilibrium_exists
// If there is an equilibrium allocation, move the lower bound up
cost_min = cost_to_test
ELSE:
// If there is no equilibrium allocation, move the upper bound down
cost_max = cost_to_test
/* The maximum cost value of the strong agent
for this model is stored in cost_min */
RETURN cost_min
Thus, it is possible to ﬁnd the point where the cost of the strong agent is maximal and
there is still equilibrium.
10 Compliance with ethical standards
The work described above is original research that has not been published previously, and is
not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. This publication has
been approved by all coauthors, if any, as well as by the responsible authorities – tacitly or
explicitly – at the institute where the work has been carried out. This article does not contain
any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. No conﬂict
of interest exists in the submission of this work. All the authors declare that they have no
conﬂict of interest. The author has no relevant ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interests to disclose.
Funding Open access funding provided by Ben-Gurion University.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ales, L., Cho, S. H., & Körpeo˘glu, E. (2017). Optimal award scheme in innovation tournaments. Operations
Research, 65(3), 693–702.
Ashlagi, I., Monderer, D., & Tennenholtz, M. (2011). Simultaneous ad auctions. Mathematics of Operations
Research, 36(1), 1–13.
Azmat, G., & Möller, M. (2009). Competition among contests. The RAND Journal of Economics, 40(4),
743–768.
Azmat, G., & Möller, M. (2018). The distribution of talent across contests. The Economic Journal, 128(609),
471–509.
Baye, M. R., & Hoppe, H. C. (2003). The strategic equivalence of rent-seeking, innovation, and patent-race
games. Games and Economic Behavior, 44(2), 217–226.
Bhattacharya, H., & Dugar, S. (2014). Partnership formation: The role of social status. Management Science,
60(5), 1130–1147.
Bottenbruch, H. (1962). Structure and use of ALGOL 60. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 9(2), 161–221.
Chan, H., Parkes, D. C., & Lakhani, K. R. (2020, May). The price of anarchy of self-selection in tullock
contests. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
Systems (pp. 1795–1797).
123

Annals of Operations Research
Charness, G., Masclet, D., & Villeval, M. C. (2014). The dark side of competition for status. Management
Science, 60, 38–55.
Cohen, C., Rabi, I., & Sela, A. (2023). Optimal seedings in interdependent contests. Annals of Operations
Research, 328(2), 1263–1285.
Cohen, C., Rabi, I., Sela, A. (2024). An algorithmic analysis of parallel contests. Working paper.
Cripps, M. W., Mailath, G. J., & Samuelson, L. (2004). Imperfect monitoring and impermanent reputations.
Econometrica, 72(2), 407–432.
Cripps, M. W., Mailath, G. J., & Samuelson, L. (2007). Disappearing private reputations in long-run relation-
ships. Journal of Economic Theory, 134(1), 287–316.
Damiano, E., Li, H., & Suen, W. (2010). First in village or second in Rome? International Economic Review,
51(1), 263–288.
Damiano, E., Li, H., & Suen, W. (2012). Competing for talents. Journal of Economic Theory, 147(6), 2190–
2219.
Deng, X., Gafni, Y., Lavi, R., Lin, T., & Ling, H. (2023, June). From monopoly to competition: optimal
contests prevail. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Vol. 37, No. 5, pp.
5608–5615).
Deng, X., Li, N., Li, W., & Qi, Q. (2022). Competition among parallel contests. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.06866.
DiPalantino, D., & Vojnovic, M. (2009, July). Crowdsourcing and all-pay auctions. In Proceedings of the 10th
ACM conference on Electronic commerce (pp. 119–128).
Dubey, P., & Geanakopolos, J. (2010). Grading exams: 100, 99, 98,..., A, B, C ? Games and Economic Behavior
69(1), 72–94.
Einy, E., Haimanko, O., Moreno, D., Sela, A., & Shitovitz, B. (2015). Equilibrium existence in Tullock contests
with incomplete information. Journal of Mathematical Economics, 61, 241–245.
Ewerhart, C. (2015). Mixed equilibria in Tullock contests. Economic Theory, 60, 59–71.
Ewerhart, C., & Quartieri, F. (2020). Unique equilibrium in contests with incomplete information. Economic
Theory, 70, 243–271.
Ely, J., Fudenberg, D., & Levine, D. K. (2008). When is reputation bad? Games and Economic Behavior,
63(2), 498–526.
Fudenberg, D., & Levine, D. K. (1998). The theory of learning in games (Vol. 2). MIT press.
Fullerton, R. L., & McAfee, R. P. (1999). Auctionin entry into tournaments. Journal of Political Economy,
107(3), 573–605.
Ghosh, A., & Kleinberg, R. (2016). Optimal contest design for simple agents. ACM Transactions on Economics
and Computation (TEAC), 4(4), 1–41.
Grossmann, M. (2021). Entry regulations and optimal prize allocation in parallel contests. Review of Economic
Design, 25(4), 289–316.
Harsanyi,J.C.(1973).Gameswithrandomlydisturbedpayoffs:Anewrationaleformixed-strategyequilibrium
points. International journal of game theory, 2(1), 1–23.
Hopkins, E., & Kornienko, T. (2004). Running to keep the same place: consumer choice as a game of status.
American Economic Review, 94(4), 1085–1107.
Juang, W. T., Sun, G. Z., & Yuan, K. C. (2020). A model of parallel contests. International Journal of Game
Theory, 49(2), 651–672.
Kandori, M., Mailath, G. J., & Rob, R. (1993). Learning, mutation, and long run equilibria in games. Econo-
metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 29–56.
Konrad, K. A., & Kovenock, D. (2012). The lifeboat problem. European Economic Review, 56(3), 552–559.
Korpeo˘glu, E., Korpeoglu, C. G., & Hafalır, ˙IE. (2022). Parallel innovation contests. Operations Research,
70(3), 1506–1530.
Kosefeld, M., & Neckermann, S. (2011). Getting more work for nothing? Symbolic awards and worker
performance. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(3), 86–99.
Kreps, D. M., Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., & Wilson, R. (1982). Rational cooperation in the ﬁnitely repeated
prisoners’ dilemma. Journal of Economic Theory, 27(2), 245–252.
Kreps, D. M., & Wilson, R. (1982). Reputation and imperfect information. Journal of Economic Theory, 27(2),
253–279.
Lehmer, D. H. (1960). Teaching combinatorial tricks to a computer. Combinatorial Analysis, 179–193.
Levin, D., & Smith, J. L. (1994). Equilibrium in auctions with entry. American Economic Review, 585–599.
Mailath, G. J., & Samuelson, L. (2015). Reputations in repeated games. Handbook of Game Theory with
Economic Applications, 4, 165–238.
Milgrom, P., & Roberts, J. (1982). Predation, reputation, and entry deterrence. Journal of Economic Theory,
27(2), 280–312.
Moldovanu, B., Sela, A., & Shi, X. (2007). Contests for status. Journal of Political Economy, 115(2), 338–363.
123

Annals of Operations Research
Moldovanu, B., Sela, A., & Shi, X. (2008). Competing auctions with endogenous quantities. Journal of
Economic Theory, 141(1), 1–27.
Monderer, D., Samet, D., & Sela, A. (1997). Belief afﬁrming in learning processes. Journal of Economic
Theory, 73(2), 438–452.
Morgan, J., Sisak, D., & Vardy, F. (2018). The ponds dilemma. The Economic Journal, 128(611), 1634–1682.
Origgi, G. (2019). Reputation: What it is and why it matters. Princeton University Press.
Roth, A. E., & Erev, I. (1995). Learning in extensive-form games: Experimental data and simple dynamic
models in the intermediate term. Games and Economic Behavior, 8(1), 164–212.
Segev, E. (2020). Crowdsourcing contests. European Journal of Operational Research, 281(2), 241–255.
Sela, A. (2020). Optimal allocations of prizes and punishments in Tullock contests. International Journal of
Game Theory, 49, 749–771.
Skaperdas, S. (1996). Contest success functions. Economic Theory, 7, 283–290.
Stouras, K. I., Erat, S., & Lichtendahl, K. C., Jr. (2025). Dueling contests and platform’s coordinating role.
Management Science, 71(2), 1488–1503.
Szidarovszky, F., & Okuguchi, K. (1997). On the existence and uniqueness of pure Nash equilibrium in
rent-seeking games. Games and Economic Behavior, 18(1), 135–140.
Terwiesch, C., & Xu, Y. (2008). Innovation contests, open innovation, and multiagent problem solving. Man-
agement science, 54(9), 1529–1543.
Tullock, G. (1980). Efﬁcient Rent Seeking. In J. M. Buchanan, R. D. Tollison, & G. Tullock, Toward a theory
of the rent-seeking society. Texas A & M University.
Wilson, R. (1985). Reputations in games and markets. Game-theoretic models of bargaining, 96, 27–62.
Yamazaki, T. (2008). On the existence and uniqueness of pure-strategy Nash equilibrium in asymmetric rent-
seeking contests. Journal of Public Economic Theory, 10(2), 317–327.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123