TITLE: The methodological problem of unit roots: stationarity and its consequences in the context of the Tinbergen debate
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05172-1
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05172-1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The methodological problem of unit roots: stationarity
and its consequences in the context of the Tinbergen debate
Muhammad Ali Nasir1
· Jamie Morgan2
Accepted: 4 January 2023 / Published online: 23 January 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
In this paper we highlight an important yet often neglected issue that arises within the context
of the broader set of concerns set out in Keynes’s seminal critique of Tinbergen’s early work
in econometrics and that is the problem of “trend” in the dataset. We use the example of
conforming data to achieve stationarity to solve a problem of unit roots to highlight that
Keynes concerns with the “logical issues” regarding the “conditions which the economic
material must satisfy” still gains little attention in theory and practice. There is a lot more
discussion of the technical aspects of method than there is reﬂection on conditions that
must be satisﬁed when methods are applied. Concomitantly, there is a tendency to respond
to problems of method by applying ﬁxes rather than addressing the underlying problem.
We illustrate various facets of the argument using central bank policy targeting and using
examples of differencing, co-integration and Bayesian applications.
Keywords Tinbergen debate · Research methods · Causal inference · Policy targeting
JEL classiﬁcation B16 · B23 · B41 · C11 · C18
1 Introduction
It is widely recognized but often tacitly neglected that all statistical approaches have intrinsic
limitations that affect the degree to which they are applicable to particular contexts (in its
most controversial form see Leamer 1983; 2010). John Maynard Keynes was perhaps the
ﬁrst to provide a concise and comprehensive summation of the key issues in his critique of
Jan Tinbergen’s book Statistical Testing of Business Cycle Theories Part 1: A Method and
its application to investment activity (1939).
1 The book has a short ﬁrst chapter highlighting
1 Note, statistical methods adopted by Tinbergen were in use by other sciences long before his 1939 work. For
example, Sir Francis Galton’s seminal paper, “Regression towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature” (Galton,
1886). Moreover, even critics of Keynes’s General Theory accepts that his work arose in times favourable to
the development of economic analysis (see e.g. Luzzetti & Ohanian, 2011).
B Muhammad Ali Nasir
m.a.nasir@leeds.ac.uk
1
University of Leeds, Leeds, West Yorkshire, UK
2
Leeds Beckett University, Leeds, West Yorkshire, UK
123

114
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
“logical issues”, a longer second chapter explaining the method of multiple correlation and
thenthreechaptersofselectedexamples.AccordingtoKeynesitis“grievouslydisappointing”
that so little attention is paid to the logical issues in the form of:
explaining fully and carefully the conditions which the economic material must satisfy
if the application of the method is to be fruitful… [According to Keynes, Professor
Tinbergen] is much more interested in getting on with the job than in spending time
in deciding whether the job is worth getting on with. He so clearly prefers the mazes
of arithmetic to the mazes of logic, that I must ask him to forgive the criticisms of one
whose tastes in statistical theory have been, beginning many years ago, the other way
round. (Keynes, 1939, p. 559)
Tinbergen’s original work was undertaken for the League of Nations, a relatively short-
lived organization, and the methods Tinbergen did much to promote have outlived the League.
The Cowles Commission (and later the Cowles Foundation), for example, did a great deal
to promote the use of mathematics and statistics in economics ﬁrst at University of Chicago
and then at Yale (Christ, 1994).
Keynes’s intervention has, of course, become the basis of the “Tinbergen debate” and is a
touchstone whenever historically or philosophically informed methodological discussion of
econometrics is undertaken.2 It has remained the case, however, that Keynes’s concerns with
the “logical issues” regarding the “conditions which the economic material must satisfy” still
gain little attention in theory and practice.3 There is a lot more discussion of the technical
aspects of method than there is reﬂection on conditions that must be satisﬁed when methods
are applied. As David Hendry, a founding ﬁgure in the London School of Economics (LSE)
approach to econometrics, notes, though few technically-minded econometricians are aware
of the fact, Keynes provides proto-forms of most of the main concerns with linear regression
models and method (Hendry, 1980; see also Garrone & Marchionatti, 2004). Today one might
bullet these as:4
• The problem of “completeness” (missing variable bias);
• Lag treatment and unit of measurement problems (mis-speciﬁcation),
• Issues focused on the distinction between cause and effect and the status of variables
(simultaneity, endogeneity and exogeneity), as well as the problem of association between
explanatory variables (multicollinearity) and “spurious correlation”;
• The problem of measurability and issues focused on whether the parameters obtained are
actually the true parameters (identiﬁcation);
• Issues regarding changes in association over time and the “Acceleration principle” (Time-
variation of coefﬁcients);
• Assumptions of linearity (the possibility of nonlinearity).
On the problem of completeness, for example, Keynes asks, “is it assumed that the factors
investigated are comprehensive and that they are not merely a partial selection out of all the
factors at work?” (Keynes, 1973, p. 286-7). In terms of measurability he notes numerous
2 For various discussions see Hendry and Morgan (1995), Leeson (1998) and Louçã (1999).
3 It is still a matter of debate whether Keynes was entirely opposed to use of econometric methods. See,
for example, comments such as “Newton, Boyle and Locke all played with alchemy. So let him continue”
(Keynes, 1973, p. 320). He notes that had Tinbergen have been a private student he would have deserved every
encouragement, however, it is very dangerous for a collection of reasonable economists to give his ideas any
sort of imprimatur in its present stage….
4 Note, we could have selected any of the following points as a focus for possible ﬁxes (see later). For example,
endogeneity. See, for example, Ullah et al. (2018); Ullah et al. (2021).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
115
features relevant to what happens to an economy (and with reference to Tinbergen’s work,
within a business cycle) are unmeasurable–matters of expectations, conﬁdence, innovations
and progress, political determinations, labour disputes and so on–and as anyone familiar
with Keynes understands, his list resonates with other work he undertook discussing change
and degrees of uncertainty and what one can know. As Garrone and Marchinoatti (2004)
point out, Tinbergen, however, does little to address such concerns in his reply and Keynes
foreshadowed exactly this with his expectation that Tinbergen would likely react by seeking
to “drown his sorrows in arithmetic”. This is in fact what occurred and anyone familiar with
how the vast majority of papers in econometrics are structured will recognise this is (no irony
intended) a pattern repeated ever since.
It seems reasonable to suggest, furthermore, that Tinbergen’s response either evades
or misunderstands the underlying implications of Keynes’s critique (see Lawson 1989). If
Keynes’s technical concerns follow from, rather than can be isolated from, his concern with
conditions (i.e. the “logical issues”), then it seems reasonable to infer he has a conception
of conditions that differs from those the methods typically require and which Tinbergen
seems to rely on.5 With this in mind, some critics, including well-known Keynesians and
Post Keynesians argue that econometric use is limited insofar as its methods imply a “closed
system”, while most situations are “open system” and there has been some debate regarding
what these terms means and whether the variability or irregularity of real world situations
strictly limits the application of some methods (for a range of positions see Chick & Dow
2005; Lawson, 2015, 1997; Pratten, 2005; Fleetwood, 2017).6
The “Tinbergen debate”, of course, was not solely focused on conditions nor was it always
strictly focused on content rather than competency. For example, Samuelson (1946) ques-
tioned Keynes’s technical skills and insight, Klein (1951) refers to Keynes’s intervention as
his “sorriest performance” and Stone (1978) combines the two–questioning both Keynes’s
understanding of econometrics and his temperament. As Garrone & Marchionatti (2004)
make clear, though, many others at least partly concede that Keynes’s concerns were well-
founded and require at the very least careful response (for example, Patinkin 1976; Hendry,
1980; Pesaran & Smith, 1985; Rowley, 1988; McAleer, 1994; Dharmpala and McAleer, 1996;
Keuzenkamp 2000).
The purpose of this paper, however, is not to reprise the “Tinbergen debate” but rather to
highlight an important yet often neglected issue that arises within the context of the broader
5 At times the two seem to assume different worlds. Consider, on the issue of completeness, Tinbergen
responds to Keynes that many of “these external events will be, as a rule, of an unsystematic character, and
may thus be part of unexplained residuals” (Tinbergen, 1940, p 141). This implies a framework of analysis
in which everything which cannot be explained can be attributed to the residuals, but this in turn requires
these to conform to deﬁnite conditions (homoscedasticity, no serial correlation, normality etc.) before one can
draw any inferences. This presupposes a closed system. Similarly, on non-linearity, Tinbergen suggests in his
reply to Keynes that “If we imagine the individual demand curve to be highly curvilinear, and if we imagine a
great number of such demand curves to be added up, then the very fact that the place of maximum curvature
will be different for most of these individual curves will already lead to a joint curve which is much more
linear than any of the individual curves (p, 149)”. This is a naïve example of aggregation, you cannot simply
add up all the functions or estimates based on separate factors to obtain one consolidated composite function
without assuming a world of strict homogeneities. Finally, in replying to Keynes’s critique of quantifying a
relationship which has already been explained by the economic theory, Tinbergen justiﬁes his position by
stating “For statistical testing there may be a difﬁculty of accuracy. Provided, however, the economist can
guarantee what variables enter into each of these relations and reliable statistics exist for all these variables,
the statistician is able to estimate the degree of uncertainty in the results in the ordinary way”. If economists
can “guarantee” these aspects, what is left to estimate and how does this reconcile doubt regarding accuracy?
6 For further context see the discussion Lawson & Morgan (2021a, 2021b) and Olsen & Morgan (2005).
123

116
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
set of concerns we have set out and that is the problem of “trend” in the dataset.7 In his
original intervention Keynes writes:
The treatment of time-lags and trends deserves much fuller discussion if the reader is
to understand clearly what it involves… [And] The introduction of a trend factor is
even more tricky and even less discussed. (Keynes, 1939, p. 565).
We would argue that Keynes is correct to suggest the problem of “trend” warrants “fuller
discussion”. According to Keynes, Tinbergen’s approach to method did not pay much atten-
tion to the process of evolution of the trend, and Tinbergen’s speciﬁc data choices were ad
hoc and arbitrary, adopting a nine-year moving average for the pre-war period and rectilinear
trend for the post-war period (Keynes, 1973). According to Keynes, this invites suspicion that
the difference was a purposive convenience, a construction of statistical fact to service expla-
nation (Keynes, 1939). Tinbergen’s reply in the Economic Journal focuses on the attractions
of a linear model–“for short periods there is not much difference between a straight line and
moving average” (Tinbergen, 1940, p. 152)–and this is for all intents and purposes merely
deﬂection, since it does not respond to Keynes’s concerns regarding both the periodisation
of data and the signiﬁcance of how a trend might arise and evolve and how method deals
with this. There is, however, more at stake here than a speciﬁc focus on problems arising in
Tinbergen’s early work might imply.
It was not until the 1970s that greater attention was paid to the “tricky” issue of trend in
the dataset. In the Journal of Econometrics Granger & Newbold (1974) highlight, without
reference to Keynes, that the presence of a trend in data can potentially lead to a unit root
problem.8 The presence of a unit root is often identiﬁed in macroeconomic data but the
problem of unit roots for macroeconomic policy is rarely explored, despite Keynes’s early
reference to a problem and Granger and Newbold’s separate recognition, and this is a notable
omission since it has the potential to be a fundamental issue for policymaking (Nasir &
Morgan, 2018).9
In the rest of this paper we explore some of the limits of unit root tests and stationarity
using modern central banking as an illustration. However, the limits identiﬁed apply generally
to any policy application where causal relationships are exploited to attempt to achieve some
objective through “targeting”.10 As will become clear, targeting necessarily results in non-
stationary datasets and, if successful, in unit roots. Problems of trends then follow and this
creates a challenge for statistical analysis and thus, insofar as such analysis is used to inform
policy decisions, policy analysis. At the very least, the existence of such problems requires
7 Note, Keynes was not the ﬁrst to note a problem of trend in econometric type methods. Yule (1926) who
looked at the nonsense correlations that come with I(1) variables, though he did not call them I(1), and
linked them back to what he had called spurious correlations in 1897. It is an accident that what Yule called
nonsense correlations are now called spurious correlations. Keynes knew about Yule’s work but it is more
likely that Keynes concern was with the economic issue: what economic forces explained the arbitrary trends in
Tinbergen’s equations? This remains a problem with DSGE models which explain deviations from unexplained
steady states.
8 Note, one might argue that in particular cases a series could be considered as trend-stationary. That would,
however, still invoke problems with the ability to draw inferences in the presence of a trend and problems
identifying the factors leading to the evolvement of a trend in the ﬁrst place.
9 Nasir & Morgan (2018) explored the afﬁnities between ergodicity and stationarity and discussed arising
practical contradictions for central bank policymaking. The current paper elaborates, as stated, in the context
of an underappreciated aspect of Keynes critique of Tinbergen i.e. the treatment of trends. The material also
has implications for the relevance of open and closed system dependent approaches. See also Nasir & Morgan
(2020). Section 2 draws on Nasir & Morgan (2018, 2020).
10 For the importance of causality in particular to macroeconomics, see Hoover (2001).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
117
careful consideration, as Keynes would have it, of the adequacy of conditions, and in more
contemporary parlance familiar to econometricians, the link between what we infer about
“data generating processes” and the application and management of models and statistical
analysis.
2 Back to basics: unit roots and stationarity
Stationarity is a common requirement of statistical approaches to longitudinal data, speciﬁ-
cally time series and panel data. A stationary data series does not possess a unit root. That is,
it does not possess a trend value dominated by its own past values. If it does possess a unit
root then the series will not revert to a mean and the series may be proportionally inﬂuenced
by its internal innovations. This makes standard causal inference problematic because one
cannot readily differentiate the effect of any other explanatory factor from the innovation in
the series.11 According to Granger & Newbold (1974), there is a spurious result and model
problem. The same issue applies if the series “explodes”. So, when stated in typical model
form there are three possible cases.
Consider an AR (1) model:
Yt  ∅Y t−1 + et
(1)
In Eq. (1) et is a random noise process. The coefﬁcient ∅can have one of 3 possible
consequences for the series:
a. a. |∅|=1 where the series contains a unit root and is non-stationary;
b. b. |∅|>1where the series explodes;
c. c. |∅|<1 implying the series is stationary.
In order to “manage” the problem of causal inference it is standard practice to transform a
non-stationary series into a stationary form. For example, one might seek to solve the problem
by differencing.
If one subtracts Yt−1 from both sides of Eq. (1):
Yt −Yt−1  Yt−1 −Yt−1 + et
(2)
ΔY t  et
As Eq. (2) highlights, taking the difference leaves the change in ΔY t as white noise or et
and so by integrating ΔY t becomes stationary. More speciﬁcally, the series Ytis integrated
of order one and whilst Yt ˜I(1) contains a unit root ΔY t is stationary.12
What we want to emphasise is that though differencing and other transformations seem
to be solving a problem often there are new problems created. This can be illustrated using
central bank inﬂation targeting.
11 This point requires acknowledgement of Hendry’s (2004) point that despite the fact that causality and
exogeneity are not required to be invariant characteristics of the data generating process (DGP), they remain
relevant in non-stationary processes.
12 Similarly, a series will be integrated of order d (denoted by Yt ˜I(d)) if Yt is non-stationary, but dYtis
stationary (See Asteriou & Hall 2016). This is often described as integrated of a certain order of differencing,
depending on how many times the difference (d) has been taken, i.e. I(d).
123

118
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
3 Central bank targeting: the tension between tests conducted
for empirical adequacy and actual policy purpose
Modern central banking is focused on price stability and many central banks have formal or
informal inﬂation targeting systems.13 The Bank of England, for example, has an inﬂation
target of 2% with a 1% range. If the allowable leeway is exceeded the Governor of the Bank
must write a letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer at the Treasury explaining why this
is the case and, usually, what the Bank is intending to do to recover the situation. The 1998
Bank of England Act allows the Chancellor to develop and modify the remit of the Bank
and its target. Since independence in 1997 HM Treasury has required the Bank to send a
further letter 3 months after the ﬁrst if the situation persists. Since March 2020 the Bank has
been required to publish its open letter alongside the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee
minutes.14 Furthermore, after the global ﬁnancial crisis and since the creation of a Financial
Policy Committee with formal macroprudential powers, it has been accepted that there can
be reasons to allow deviations to persist for some period in order to expedite other policy
goals, such as ﬁnancial stability and the Monetary Policy Committee and the Financial Policy
Committee are expected to coordinate (Morgan, 2022). This is phrased as discretion based
on discussion of “trade-offs” and a “time horizon”.15
In any case, price stability remains at the heart of Bank independence and the “current cost
of living crisis” in the UK makes this only too clear. It also makes it clear that independence
is no guarantee a Bank can control its inﬂationary environment sufﬁciently to render high
and persistent levels of inﬂation unlikely in all circumstances. Moreover, price stability at
the Bank, as it is at similar central banks worldwide, is situated to a contextualising goal of
furthering economic growth and the Bank seeks to model the relation between inﬂation and
growth in a variety of ways (structural equation DSGEs etc.).
Clearly, both targeted inﬂation and desired growth take positive values. If we return to
the material set out in Sect. 2 and keep this in mind then two potential consequences are
immediately apparent.
First, if the inﬂation target is achieved then the data series will not conform to the statistical
properties of stationarity. Consider this based on Eq. (1): Yt  ∅Y t−1 + et If we specify the
model as inﬂation and an inﬂation target of 2% is consistently achieved then Yt will become
equal to Yt−1 and theta will become 1 and et zero. If theta becomes 1 there is a unit root.
Moreover, if one takes the difference to remove the unit root then the net of the difference
would be zero (a nonsensical result for the series).
Second, if the target is not achieved then the Bank faces a problem of continually aligning
future outcomes based on previous actual positive values for inﬂation in a lead-lag process.
This requires policy to focus above or below the actual target in order to achieve the target.
However, the point of reference still remains the achievement of a long-term positive value
that is unit root creating. Anyone familiar with the continual dance of monetary policy will
know that the target is rarely achieved and if achieved is rarely achieved for long–success
in reality amounts to relatively low and stable inﬂation as a background factor conducive to,
rather than undermining of, economic activity (now and in the immediate future over which
plans are made) through expectations formation and through interest rate policy. As such,
13 The concept of a target was initially proposed by Meade (1978) when deﬁning “The Meaning of “Internal
Balance”. For interesting insights into Nominal Income Targeting, see Tobin (1980) and Bean (1983).
14 See:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ﬁle/
871684/MPC_RemitFINAL.pdf.
15 Visit: https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/inﬂationary-targets.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
119
though, the reality and very purpose of policy means that the initial dataset is highly unlikely
to be stationary over time.
Now, setting out the above may seem trivial. It is important to understand, however, that
stationarity is typically taken to be a condition of empirical adequacy, and as a consequence
stationarity is usually tested for. Stationarity and thus either removing or managing unit root
situations has become basic to empirical work. Testing and conforming data are standard
practice for time series analysis and are part of how authority is claimed, but there is clearly
a potential problem of data interpretation in relation to policy practice if stationarity is our
point of reference.
The targetter, in this case the Bank of England, is, of course, not concerned with achieving
stationarity. The targetter is concerned with achieving the target rate, but policy success leads
to data series with non-mean reverting characteristics and hence a unit root. Put another
way, the test is seeking something at odds with the consequences of policy and thus at odds
with the purpose of policy. This is then exacerbated when data is transformed to conform to
stationarity, since the data can take on new characteristics, which can in turn create problems
of interpretation for policy (as we will show in the next section).
The important point, therefore, is that policy practice (economic objectives) seems to
indicate a focus on stationarity is an undesirable starting point for empirical investigation.
There is a limitation if application focuses on unit root tests and a limitation if the response
is to conform the data series to stationarity. The combination of points implies that there is
a problem if economic properties of the data are put aside in order to ensure that statistical
properties hold. Our standard practice has for years encouraged us to opt for ensuring statis-
tical properties hold, through various ﬁxes. This is a complication for policymakers. It might
be argued that the further a statistical ﬁx takes us away from the conditions in which the
data arises then the more problematic the ﬁx becomes. This returns us to Keynes’s original
intervention on trends.
4 Diﬀerencing and problems of data transformation
In 1939 Keynes questioned Tinbergen’s treatment of trends (1939). Tinbergen took the mov-
ing average and Keynes commentated that:
Thisseemsratherarbitrary.But,apartfromthat,shouldnotthetrendsofthebasicfactors
be allowed to be reﬂected in a trend of the resulting phenomenon? Why is correction
necessary? (Keynes, 1939: p. 565; emphasis added). [And in so far as choice of period
of analysis has implications for parameters and inferences Keynes goes on to suggest]
this looks to be a disastrous procedure. (Keynes, 1939: p. 566).
In his Economic Journal response Tinbergen states:
since a change in period will in most cases change the trend in the dependent variable in
about the same extent as the trend in the agglomerate of explanatory variables. Therefore,
the procedure followed here is not, as Mr. Keynes thinks, disastrous (Tinbergen 19,740, p,
152).
And yet three and half decades later, as we have previously alluded, Granger and New-
bold (1974) show that it could be–albeit it was not their intent to comment on Tinbergen.
In order to establish this they use a Monte Carlo approach and two artiﬁcially generated
series; unit roots failed to reject signiﬁcant association between them, leading to a “spurious
123

120
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
Table 1 Consumer price index
(2000–2021)
Year
CPI(Y t)
ΔY t
Year
CPI(Y t)
ΔY t
2000
0.8
–
2011
4.5
1.2
2001
1.2
0.4
2012
2.8
−1.7
2002
1.3
0.1
2013
2.6
−0.2
2003
1.4
0.1
2014
1.5
−1.1
2004
1.3
−0.1
2015
0.0
−1.5
2005
2.1
0.8
2016
0.7
0.7
2006
2.3
0.2
2017
2.7
2
2007
2.3
0.0
2018
2.5
−0.2
2008
3.6
1.3
2019
1.8
−0.7
2009
2.2
−1.4
2020
0.9
−0.9
2010
3.3
1.1
2021
2.6
1.7
Source: Ofﬁce for the National Statistics (ONS; 2022)
A unit root test is required to establish that the original data was not
stationary and that its ﬁrst difference is stationary. One of the more
common tests is the Augmented Dickey and Fuller (ADF) test. ADF has
particular limitations (see Perron 1989; Ranganathan & Ananthakumar,
2010), but our purpose is to highlight a generally applicable consequence
arising implicitly from the purpose for which the test is undertaken and
so we need not discuss these particular limitations. Table 2 sets out the
results:
regression” problem. To reiterate, to avoid this problem stationarity has become accepted as
a precondition of economic and statistical analysis. As we have already suggested in Sect. 2
contemporary practice to deal with non-stationarity is to take the difference and as previously
stated differencing may transform a non-stationary series with unit roots into a stationary
series.
Consider, however, the focus set out in Sect. 3 on inﬂation. Table 1 sets out UK Consumer
Price Index (CPI) data and its ﬁrst difference ΔY t 2000 to 2021:
The results establish that the series was non-stationary and then becomes stationary after
taking the difference. To expedite explanation of the arising issues the CPI series can also be
represented graphically as Fig. 1:
The point we want to make here is that the patterns in the new treatment of the data are
not identical to the old. Consider what that means, data is differenced in order to achieve
stationarity and policymakers are being asked to rely on this data to make decisions.
Putting aside the Log CPI for the moment, both the CPI and differenced CPI follow similar
patterns. However, there are differences in the pattern for the two for various periods. For
example, between 2010 and 2011 and also 2012–2013. The differenced series also takes
Table 2 ADF test: consumer price index 2000–2021
ADF test Stats
With intercept
p value
Trend & Intercept
p-value
None
p value
At level I (0)
−2.626
0.104
−2.545
0.306
−0.753
0.378
At ﬁrst diff I(1)
−4.543**
0.002
−4.374*
0.013
−4.655**
0.000
*5% level of Signiﬁcance, **1% level of Signiﬁcance
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
121
Fig. 1 Consumer Price Index (2000–2021). Source: Ofﬁce for National Statistics (2022). Note no value for
Log-inﬂation (CPI) in 2015 as the annual CPI inﬂation was 0
negative values for some periods. Clearly, this creates problems of interpretation of data for
policy purposes in so far as one takes stationarity to be a relevant point of reference. This is
important because it is not just an issue of discovering a “well-behaved” dataset, such that
the problem of a spurious result and model are resolved. Rather, it is a matter of constructing
a dataset whose results may now be different in so far as one cannot just assume that the
statistical results necessarily align with the real economic situation.
The outcome highlighted may not seem a particularly important problem because any
policymaker is likely to have at their disposal both series. It is important though to think
about context. Transforming the data series to achieve stationarity is used to address the
problem of causal inference created by the existence of unit roots. Thus if one is approaching
the problem of causation for policy purposes based on stationarity there is a potential problem
of matching one data series to the other.16 One need only refer to Fig. 1 to appreciate that
similar issues arise if one opts for a logarithmic transformation.
To be clear, there is a potential mismatch because standard practice opts to begin from
ensuring that statistical properties hold. Once the data series is transformed, as it is in Fig. 1,
then a problem arises with common analytical statistical methods used to determine the
degree of causality among variables of interest. The change in pattern for 2010–2011 and
2012–2013 and the negative values taken for some periods (which will express as deﬂation)
are in this context extremely important. They will affect signs and magnitudes of relations
and hence have implications for policy discussion. In Keynes’s terms, key questions are,
what is the importance of the trend and how does its treatment bear on the conditions that
the statistical procedure is supposed to be providing insight into?
16 To be clear, the problem of matching is that one is shifting between a non-stationary data series in which the
actual causal processes are occurring and a transformed stationary data series used to explore causal factors.
The danger is that by prioritising statistical properties one obfuscates in terms of actual economic properties.
123
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
18
20
CPI
Diff_CPI
Log_CPI

122
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
The problem may also extend to forecasting. For example, the Bank of England uses
ARIMA modelling, a condition of which is that data be stationary.17 We noted earlier that
pursuing a target might create non-stationarity. If targeting means the data series is non-
stationary, but the model forecasting future inﬂation levels requires the inﬂation series to be
stationary in order that ARIMA can be applied, then another area of mismatch arises.
In general, it might be argued then that relying on a statistical procedure, which removes
the very feature that is central to and is realised through policy, is liable to complicate matters
and may well be counterproductive. One might, of course, consider various existent “work-
arounds”. For example, quantitative macro models incorporate non-stationary shocks, and are
referenced to non-stationary aggregate variables. However, for a work-around to be a reliable
solution it surely must be able to make claims regarding its adequacy to the conditions of
the economy and yet “work-arounds” are not posed as solutions to the basic problem of
mismatch created by the very purpose of macroeconomic targeting.
It should also be noted that testing using or requiring stationarity is not just carried out
by researchers in economics. Tests are common to the ﬁeld of management, ﬁnance, and
accounting, to name just a few. In any case, the underlying point is that there is a “data
generating process” and seemingly more attention is paid to perpetuating statistical method
rather than thinking about the “logical issues” of application. The greater part of intellectual
resources are expended on managing problems of modelling rather than rethinking adequacy
from the more fundamental point of view re the “conditions which the economic material
must satisfy”. This, moreover, is not just an issue invoked by differencing, every ﬁx or work-
around creates some set of problems, for example, in terms of causation, and so involve
swapping one set of problems for another….
5 From diﬀerencing to co-integration?
Various technical problems arise if one uses differencing and these illustrate the issue of trade-
offs when applying ﬁxes. A commonly acknowledged problem is that differencing leads to
loss of long-run information in the data, and this information is central to the adequacy of a
theoretical model (see Geda et al., 2012)18. If one assumes, for example, a model is correctly
speciﬁed as a relationship between two entities (say, X & Y) and both series are differenced
then the error process is also being differenced, which then produces a non-invertible moving
average error process. This leads to issues with estimation (Plosser and Schwert, 1977). If
we difference the variables the model can no longer give a unique long-run solution: if we
have the known value of x we cannot solve for y without knowing the past values of both x
and y, hence a solution for x is not unique for any given x (Asteriou & Hall, 2016).
Recognizing these technical issues has led to attempts to combine short-run differenced
equations with the (“level-based”) long-run. The resulting co-integration models are then
rendered via a stationary vector. However, in terms of limitations, this approach introduces
new versions of existent problems. Co-integration can result in both the failure to identify any
actual, and the tendency to accept spurious, causal factors (Carmen, 2001). For example, the
currently preferred version of co-integration (the Johansen method) has attracted particular
criticism in that it exhibits a high probability of generating outliers, as well as high variance
17 For details, see http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2013/wp471.pdf.
18 One might note here that Keynes’s critique of the treatment of trend data also implies the problem of
information loss. In a different context, Martínez-Rivera & Ventosa-Santaulària (2012) also showed that the
spurious regression problem cannot always be solved by using standard procedures.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
123
and sensitivity to the lag length selected for the Vector Error Correction Model (see Brooks
2008).19
To be clear, in drawing attention to these problems, our purpose is not to pursue detailed
explanation and discussion of the many potential technical issues. The point we wish to
emphasise is that attempts to resolve problems of non-stationarity by either differencing or
ﬁnding a stationary co-integrating process do not necessarily resolve the underlying problem.
That is, whether conforming non-stationary data to stationarity is an appropriate starting
point or foundation for the analysis of causal relationships. “Loss of information” is an
anodyne statement but it places question marks against the adequacy of the treatment of data
and this very obviously creates a subsequent interpretation problem for policymakers. Put
another way, facts are not “speaking for themselves” and one has a variant of the problem
identiﬁed in the Quine-Duhem thesis–auxiliary assumptions and background hypotheses are
being invoked in order to apply ﬁxes–and this is a question mark against any tacit empiricist
position.
These problems, of course, are not restricted to central banking, and issues like information
loss are generalisable.20 In general terms, loss of information creates “de-trending”, which
leads to problems of information absences for a policymaker (e.g., Sargan 1964; Hendry
& Mizon, 1978; Granger & Joyeux, 1980; Juselius, 1991; Fuleky and Bonham, 2015). In
particular, the differencing leads to loss of information on common behaviour of two or more
separate series which, subject to the adequacy of the methods with reference to the data
generating process, could have provided insight regarding causal inferences (for detailed
discussion see Hendry, 1995; Reiss, 2015).21
It is important too to understand that a primary issue here is whether the nature of causation
sought from the data generating process is one the methods used are set up to identify.
Arguably this is obscured by a further technical problem. In the case of co-integration, the
absence of a co-integrated causal relation implies a lack of causal relation in the data series. It
may, however, still be the case that there is some causal relation in the original data series and
vice versa.22 Transforming the data in order to explore this creates a problem based on the
transformation (as already established in the previous section) because of the policy purpose,
which, if achieved, creates a unit root. So, neither the co-integration nor the transformation
to stationarity resolve the problem of stationarity in the original dataset, but at the same time
a basic question of adequacy of theory of causation is invoked (a challenge that technical
discussion is not really set up to meet since it is–in Keynes’s terms–a “logical issue”, or in
more modern philosophical parlance, one wold say the problem is “ontological”).
To fully appreciate what co-integration is not doing we provide an example below. In the
example, we reuse the CPI series and combine it with the short-term nominal interest rate set
by the Bank of England, termed Bank Rate. As previously we adopt a common or standard
19 Moreover, the co-integration is not accurate in terms of predicting co-integrating relationships in the future,
since the basis of the co-integration is static. The assumption of stability in the long-run relationships is not
necessarily warranted either as “linkages may be time-varying and episodic”. One proposal to account for
the potential time-variance in co-integration studies has been suggested by Gregory & Hanson (1996), whose
method detects structural breaks in the data, revealing support of long-run relationships not captured by static
tests. According to Maddala & Kim (1998), Johansen’s procedure is also highly sensitive to the assumption that
errors are independent and normally distributed. If indeed errors are not normally distributed, it has been found
that it is more likely that the null hypothesis of no Cointegration is rejected, despite this being a possibility
(Huang & Yang, 1996).
20 For example, transformation may remove any unit root, but may also result in important information loss
regarding any bubble, which could affect policy prescriptions (see Reiss 2015).
21 The differencing can also lead to inefﬁcient and inconsistent inferences (Mizon, 1995).
22 On co-integration and the “principle of common cause” contrast Sober (2001) and Hoover (2003).
123

124
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
Table 3 Johansen cointegration test summary
Selected (0.05 level*) Number of Cointegrating Relations by Model
Data trend:
None
None
Linear
Linear
Quadratic
Test type
No Intercept
Intercept
Intercept
Intercept
Intercept
No Trend
No Trend
No Trend
Trend
Trend
Trace
0
0
0
0
0
Max-Eig
0
0
0
0
0
Information criteria by rank and model
Data trend:
None
None
Linear
Linear
Quadratic
Rank or No. of CEs
No Intercept
Intercept
Intercept
Intercept
Intercept
No Trend
No Trend
No Trend
Trend
Trend
Log Likelihood by Rank (rows) and Model (columns)
0
−55.346
−55.346
−54.985
−54.985
−54.914
1
−53.915
−51.262
−50.901
−49.219
−49.153
2
−53.176
−49.890
−49.890
−47.150
−47.150
Akaike Information Criteria by Rank (rows) and Model (columns)
0
5.934*
5.934*
6.098
6.098
6.291
1
6.191
6.026
6.090
6.021
6.115
2
6.517
6.389
6.389
6.315
6.315
Schwarz Criteria by Rank (rows) and Model(columns)
0
6.133*
6.133*
6.397
6.397
6.689
1
6.589
6.474
6.588
6.569
6.712
2
7.115
7.086
7.086
7.111
7.111
*Critical values based on MacKinnon-Haug-Michelis (1999)
approach for illustrative purposes, in this case the Johansen method of co-integration. For
completeness we ran available alternative speciﬁcations. The results are presented in Table 3
below:
As Table 3 indicates no evidence of co-integration between CPI and the Bank Rate was
found for the period of analysis. As such, one might then infer, if this were the method adopted
to overcome problems of stationarity in separate datasets in order to explore causation, no
causation existed. However, the only warrantable ﬁnding is that no causation has been found
between the CPI and the Base Rate. The use of methods, moreover, creates new method-
ological problems based on the underlying assumptions of co-integration. Co-integration
tests typically employ the assumption that the co-integration vector is constant during the
period of analysis. The method requires that the two series remain regular and “well-behaved”
during the period. It is, however, possible and arguably likely that the relationships change
and do so more frequently than the periodization chosen for the analysis. This requires yet
another ﬁx. One might, for example, incorporate single break (Hansen & Gregory, 1996) or
“two unknown break” solutions (Hatemi, 2008).23 There is, here, a subtle difference between
23 One might suggest this issue parallels the Frequentist vs. Bayesian parameter problem as well as the issue
of discrete break vs. smooth shift in parameters debate. For the latter see Primiceri (2005) and Nasir (2017).
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
125
additional complication and model sophistication–the adjustment is a complication of meth-
ods rather than an improvement in the sophistication of the model as a direct response to the
data generating process. In any case, the complication creates further problems if there are
multiple breaks.
Finally, if we return to Table 3, a loss of information is also evident when considering
alternative criteria (AIC, SIC LL). Different criteria set out in the columns show different
information loss. Taking all of this into account, what co-integration is not doing is resolving
the original and thus primary problem i.e., the presence of non-stationarity; and it is not,
therefore, resolving this problem for policy insight. Co-integration merely shifts the terms
and focus of argument and analysis regarding causation. It does not resolve the problem of
causation inhering in the original dataset.
6 Bayesian estimation as an occasional solution?
Another possible way forward is to shift to a Bayesian framework. A key claim of Bayesian
approaches is that they do not require stationarity (Sims, 1989; Fanchon & Wendel, 1992).
However, use of Bayes creates problems of commensuration of, and dispute based on, meth-
ods and the assimilation of ﬁndings. For example, the Johansen identiﬁcation procedure
makes use of the observed data and, one might argue, cannot be applied under a pure Bayesian
scheme. There is, though, some dispute here. Engle and Yoo (1987) argue that Bayesian esti-
mation is not appropriate for co-integrated data because the standard priors imply a model that
approaches the classical VAR model estimated with the differenced data. According to Engle
and Yoo, this model is mis-speciﬁed because it does not include the error correction term. By
contrast, Fanchon and Wendel (1992) argue that Bayesian models are useful even in the case
of non-stationarity and co-integration. According to Warne (2006), since the full rank matrix
used in these operations is arbitrary, the individual parameters of the co-integration relations
and the weights are not uniquely determined, and one must make some further assumptions.
However, the Johansen procedure ensures that all the parameters of the co-integrated VAR
are identiﬁed. Signiﬁcantly, the core issue of mis-speciﬁcation remains a dividing line and
this fundamentally affects how one views the problem of stationarity and ranges of methods.
The core concerns we have raised in this paper relate to unit roots, stationarity and the
appropriateness of methods for policy insight. Here, some of the more fundamental critiques
of Bayesian estimation techniques also seem relevant. A great deal of policy work depends on
testing a null hypothesis at some arbitrary signiﬁcance level. This typically relies on a classical
conﬁdence approach. The great advantage of Bayes is that it lacks a sharp null hypothesis.
However, this is also a weakness in so far as the incorporation of priors requires one to make
particular assumptions about changes to behaviour over time (for the fundamental issues see
Efron, 1986). The problem becomes practical in terms of choosing appropriate or adequate
priors (Efron, 2015)24. There are numerous corollary problems that arise. Bayesian updating,
for example, involves four problems:
Firstly, if a possibility was not included as a prior ex ante, it must have zero posterior
probability. Secondly, notwithstanding this technical problem, even if it were possi-
ble within the Bayesian framework to add more possibilities over time as they are
revealed, this would anyway at some point require the downgrading of the probability
24 In the absence of relevant prior experience, the informed priors may lead to superﬁcially appropriate looking
estimates and credible conﬁdence intervals. However, they lack the logical force associated with experience
based priors.
123

126
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
of ex ante included possibilities due to the ﬁnite amount of likelihood available and
the requirement that probabilities sum to unity (the so-called problem of “additivity”).
This downgrading of probability may contribute to highly impactful and extreme out-
comes being overlooked or dismissed by policymakers. Thirdly, reserving a portion
of probability for these possibilities revealed over time, which is then “consumed”
as these possibilities are revealed so that downgrading of the probability of ex ante
included possibilities is avoided, does not help because the amount of reserve needed
is unknown ex ante. Fourthly and ﬁnally, an eventual convergence with objective real-
ity through successive updating based on information revealed over time is of no use
in circumstances in which decisions must be taken now to head off what might be an
extreme outcome in the future. If the convergence to objective probabilities eventually
reveals that an extreme outcome has a high probability it is at that point already too
late to prevent it. (Derbyshire & Morgan, 2022, p. 6)
While the issue here is not stationarity or unit roots, it takes no great perspicacity to
understand that these four problems all speak to the “logical issues” problem i.e. conditions
of application. In any case, if we think of instances where Bayes is posed as a ﬁx or alternative
then Stock notes that “the posteriors reported by the Bayesian unit rooters shed no new light
on the question of whether there are unit roots in economic time-series” (Stock, 1991, p. 409).
As a ﬁnal example, in assessing Patrick Suppes’ probabilistic theory of causality and
Bayesian networks, Julian Reiss states:
While Bayesian networks arguably constitute a development and generalisation of his
probabilistic theory of causality, they ignore that the theory made causal judgements
always against a framework given by a scientiﬁc theory. Purely empirical applications,
such as those intended by the developers of Bayesian networks, fall outside its scope.
And this is for good reason: unless a scientiﬁc theory justiﬁes assumptions such as the
CMC (Causal Markov Condition) and the FC (Faithfulness Condition) and assumptions
about the probability model, there is little reason to believe that they should hold (Reiss,
2016: p. 295).
Given the four problems itemised in the previous quote there is clearly a major challenge
involved in opting for Bayesian methods if one is to make inferences about, for example,
causation.
There is more that might be said here but we have provided sufﬁcient examples to illustrate
that Bayesian analysis adds as much to problems as it does to solutions for policymakers
(contrast Marriott & Newbold, 1998; Stock, 1991; Schotman & Van Dijk, 1991).25
7 Conclusion
Econometrics has changed a great deal since Keynes wrote his assessment of Tinbergen’s
work. His comment, however, that there needs to be careful consideration of the “conditions
25 Stock makes a subsequent point that communicating ﬁndings to a policy audience becomes problematic
once it becomes clear that posteriors are highly sensitive to priors. Fundamental issues also arise in terms
of the truth adequacy of belief expressed in priors. If priors become learning processes in what sense are
they based on adequate information/knowledge and learning strategies (see also Phillips, 1987)? There are
many further methodological issues here that could arise. For example, stating the weaknesses of Bayes is not
an argument for the alternative, unless the alternative lacks weaknesses, or is demonstrably superior for the
purposes posed, and in terms of which debate is engaged. Classical claims may be clearer, but if incorrect they
are not necessarily to be preferred. The main point here is that the issues are not settled.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
127
which the economic material must satisfy” remains as relevant as ever. We have explored a
number of issues focused particularly on a subset of the problem of trends in data. Stationarity
is a common requirement of statistical approaches. Transforming data to eliminate unit roots
achieves stationarity but does so in ways that can create mismatches between policy purposes
and statistical procedures and their properties. This point is, of course, basic and to the sta-
tistically sophisticated, obvious. However, there is a danger that as one becomes statistically
sophisticated one simply suppresses the signiﬁcance of the limits stationarity implies–one
fails to attend to the “logical issues”. Opting for stationarity can be a signiﬁcant problem if
the actual point of policy creates real-world consequences that have unit roots. Shifting back
and forth between data series then involves a mismatch based on applied methods to explore
causal inference and most of the “ﬁxes” are not really ﬁxing this.
Keynes is one of those ﬁgures who is constantly being claimed and interpreted and it is
perhaps worth noting that while his critique was trenchant he appointed an econometrician,
Dick Stone, to be head of the Department of Applied Economics in Cambridge. Stone was
later to write that Keynes suggested of the 1944 White Paper on Employment Policy that
“theoretical economics has now reached a point where it is ﬁt to be applied” and foresaw
“a new era of ‘Joy through Statistics’” (Stone, 1978). Still, there is considerable difference
between the positions of say Aris Spanos, who suggests Keynes’s critique has been addressed
and answered and Lars Syll who suggests it has not and that it cannot be answered (for
examples of their work, see Spanos, 2015; Syll, 2016). There is also a broader issue here, as
Tony Lawson, and to somewhat different ends and following Roy Weintraub, Paul Davidson
and Donald Katzner argue, methods are not chosen and developed merely because they are
the best we have. Developments acquire authority and exhibit path-dependency, and this
is not a neutral or merely objective process of progress (see, for example, Lawson, 2015;
Davidson, 2003; Katzner, 2003). Still, one can at least agree with Keynes that insufﬁcient
attention to the “logical issues” risks development of methods without due attention to the
world they are applied to. This begs ontological questions and these are not simply answered
through work-arounds and ﬁxes.
Finally, there is great scope here for future research. One might, for example, explore
similarissuesandimplicationsacrossthearrayofbusinessschooldepartmentsanddisciplines
where analytical statistics have become common and stationarity has become a fundamental
requirement of data series.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Asteriou, D., & Hall, S. G. (2016). Applied econometrics. Palgrave Macmillan.
Bean, C. R. (1983). Targeting nominal income: An appraisal. Economic Journal, 93(372), 806–819.
Brooks, C. (2008). Introductory econometrics for ﬁnance. Cambridge University Press.
Carmen, G. M. (2001). Causality and cointegration between consumption and GDP in 25 OECD coun-
tries: Limitations of the cointegration approach. Applied Econometrics and International Development,
AEEADE(1), 39–61.
123

128
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
Chick,V.,& Dow,S.(2005).Themeaning of open systems. Journal of Economic Methodology,12(3),363–381.
Christ, C. F. (1994). The cowles commission contributions to econometrics at Chicago: 1939–1955. Journal
of Economic Literature, 32(1), 30–59.
Davidson, P. (2003). “Is “mathematical science” an oxymoron when used to describe economics? Journal of
Post Keynesian Economics, 25(4), 527–545.
Derbyshire, J., & Morgan, J. (2022). Is seeking certainty in climate sensitivity measures counterproductive in
the context of climate emergency? The case for scenario planning. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 182(e17), 121811.
Efron, B. (1986). “Why isn’t everyone a bayesian? The American Statistician American Statistical Association,
40(1), 1–11.
Efron, B. (2015). Frequentist accuracy of bayesian estimate. Journal of Royal Statistical Society B, 77(3),
617–646.
Engle, R. F., & Yoo, B. S. (1987). Forecasting and testing in co-integrated systems. Journal of Econometrics,
35(1), 143–159.
Fanchon, P., & Wendel, J. (1992). Estimating VAR models under non-stationarity and co-integration: Alter-
native approaches for forecasting cattle prices. Applied Economics, 24(2), 207–217.
Fleetwood, S. (2017). The critical realist conception of open and closed systems. Journal of Economic Method-
ology, 24(1), 41–68.
Galton, F. (1886). Regression towards mediocrity in hereditary stature. The Journal of the Anthropological
Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 15, 246–263.
Garrone, G., & Marchionatti, R. (2004). Keynes on econometric method, A reassessment of his debate with
Tinbergen and other econometricians, 1938–1943. University of Torino, Department of Economics.
Working paper No 1/2004.
Geda, A., Ndung’u, N., & Zerfu, D. (2012). Applied time series econometrics. A practical guide for macroe-
conomic researchers with a focus on Africa. Nairobi: Univ. of Nairobi Press.
Granger, C. W., & Joyeux, J. R. (1980). An introduction to long-memory time series models and fractional
differencing. Journal of Time Series Analysis, 1, 15–29.
Granger, C. W. J., & Newbold, P. (1974). Spurious regressions in econometrics. Journal of Econometrics,
2(2), 111–120.
Gregory, A., & Hanson, B. (1996). Residual based tests for cointegration in models with regime shifts. The
Journal of Econometrics, 70, 99–126.
Hatemi-J, A. (2008). Tests for cointegration with two unknown regime shifts with an application to ﬁnancial
market integration. Empirical Economics, 35(3), 497–505.
Hendry, D. F. (1980). Econometrics-alchemy or science? Economica, 47, 387–406.
Hendry, D. F. (2004). Causality and exogeneity in non-stationary economic time series, centre for philosophy
of natural and social science, causality. Metaphysics and Methods Technical Reports CTR 18/04.
Hendry, D. F., & Mizon, G. (1978). Serial correlation as a convenient simpliﬁcation Nota Nuisance: A comment
on a study of the demand for money by the Bank of England. Economic Journal, 88, 349–363.
Hendry, D. F., & Morgan, M. S. (Eds.). (1995). The foundations of econometric analysis. Cambridge University
Press.
Hoover, K. D. (2001). Causality in macroeconomics. Cambridge University Press.
Hoover, K. D. (2003). Nonstationary time series, cointegration, and the principle of the common cause. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 54, 527–551.
Huang, B., & Yang, C. (1996). Long-run purchasing power parity revisited: Monte carlo simulation. Applied
Economics, 28(8), 967–975.
Juselius, K. (1991). Long-run relations in a well-deﬁned statistical model for the data generating process:
Cointegration analysis of the PPP and UIP relations between Denmark and Germany. In J. Gruber (Ed.),
Econometric decision Models: New methods of modelling and applications. Springer Verlag.
Katzner, D. (2003). Why mathematics in economics? Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 25(4), 561–574.
Keuzenkamp, H. A. (2000). Probability, econometrics and truth. The methodology of econometrics. Cambridge
University Press.
Keynes, J. M. (1939). Professor Tinbergen’s method. Economic Journal, 49(195), 558–577.
Keynes, J. M. (1973). The collected writings of J.M. Keynes, vol.&nbsp;XIV, The General Theory and After.
Part II. Defence and Development. London: Macmillan (Royal Economic Society).
Klein, L. (1951). “The life of J. M. Keynes. Journal of Political Economy, 59, 443–451.
Lawson, T. (1989). Realism and instrumentalism in the development of econometrics. Oxford Economic
Papers, 41(1), 236–258.
Lawson, T. (1997). Economics and reality. Routledge.
Lawson, T. (2015). Essays on the nature and state of economics. Routledge.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
129
Lawson, T., & Morgan, J. (2021). Cambridge social ontology, the philosophical critique of modern economics
and social positioning theory: An interview with Tony Lawson, Part 1. Journal of Critical Realism, 20(1),
72–97.
Lawson, T., & Morgan, J. (2021). Cambridge social ontology, the philosophical critique of modern economics
and social positioning theory: An interview with Tony Lawson, Part 2. Journal of Critical Realism, 20(2),
201–237.
Leamer, E. (1983). Let’s take the con out of econometrics. American Economic Review, 73(1), 31–43.
Leamer, E. (2010). Tantalus on the road to Asymptopia. Journal of Economic perspectives, 24(2), 31–46.
Leeson, R. (1998). The ghosts I called I can’t get rid of now: The Keynes-Tinbergen-Friedman-Phillips critique
of keynesian macroeconometrics. History of Political Economy, 30(1), 51–94.
Louçã, F. (1999). The econometric challenge to Keynes: Arguments and contradictions in the early debate
about a late issue’. The European Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 6, 404–438.
Luzzetti, M., & Ohanian, L. (2011). “Macroeconomic paradigm shifts and Keynes’s General Theory.” https://
voxeu.org/article/macroeconomic-paradigm-shifts-and-keynes-s-general-theory
Maddala, G., & Kim, I. (1998). Unit roots, cointegration and structural change. Cambridge University Press.
Marriott, J., & Newbold, P. (1998). Bayesian comparison of ARIMA and stationary ARIMA models. Inter-
national Statistical Review, 66(3), 323–336.
Martínez-Rivera, B., & Ventosa-Santaulària, D. (2012). A comment on ‘Is the spurious regression problem
spurious? Economics Letters, 115(2), 229–231.
McAleer, M. (1994). Sherlock holmes and the search for truth: A diagnostic tale. Journal of Economic Surveys,
8, 317–370.
Meade, J. (1978). The meaning of ‘Internal balance’. Economic Journal, 88(351), 423–435.
Mizon, G. E. (1995). A simple message for autocorrelation correctors: Don’t. Journal of Econometrics, 69(1),
267–288.
Morgan, J. (2022).&nbsp;Macroprudential institutionalism: The Bank of England’s Financial Policy Com-
mittee and the contemporary limits of central bank policy. In P. Hawkins & I. Negru (Eds.), Monetary
Economics, Banking and Policy: Expanding economic thought to meet contemporary challenges. Lon-
don:Routledge.
Nasir, M. A. (2017). Zero Lower Bound & Negative Interest Rates: Choices for Monetary Policy. Feb 3, 2017.
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2881926
Nasir, M. A., & Morgan, J. (2018). The unit root problem: Afﬁnities between ergodicity and stationarity, its
practical contradictions for central bank policy, and some consideration of alternatives. Journal of Post
Keynesian Economics, 41(3), 339–363.
Nasir, M. A., & Morgan, J. (2020). Paradox of stationarity? A policy target dilemma for policymakers. The
Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.qref.2020.05.007
Olsen, W., & Morgan, J. (2005). A critical epistemology of analytical statistics: Addressing the sceptical
realist. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 35(3), 255–284.
Patinkin, D. (1976). Keynes and econometrics: On the interaction between the macroeconomics revolutions
in the interwar period. Econometrica, 44, 1091–1123.
Perron, P. (1989). The great crash, the oil price shock and the unit root hypothesis. Econometrica, 57,
1361–1401.
Pesaran, H., & Smith, R. (1985). Keynes on econometrics. In T. Lawson and H. Pesaran (eds), cit.
Phillips, P. C. B. (1987). Towards a uniﬁed asymptotic theory for autoregression. Biometrika, 74, 535–547.
Plosser, C., & Schvert, W. (1977). Estimation of a noninvertible moving average process: The case of over-
differencing. Journal of Econometrics, 6, 199–224.
Pratten, S. (2005). Economics as progress: The LSE approach to econometric modelling and critical realism
as programmes for research. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 29(2), 179–205.
Primiceri, G. E. (2005). Time varying structural Vector auto-regression and Monetary Policy. Review of Eco-
nomic Studies, 72, 8214–8852.
Ranganathan, T., & Ananthakumar, U. (2010). Unit root test: Give it a break. In 30th International Symposium
on Forecasting, International Institute of Forecasters.
Reiss, J. (2015). Causation, evidence, and inference. Routledge.
Reiss, J. (2016). Suppes’ probabilistic theory of causality and causal inference in economics. Journal of
Economic Methodology, 23(3), 289–304.
Rowley, R. (1988). The keynes-tinbergen exchange in retrospect. In O.F. Hamouda and J.N. Smithin (Eds.),
cit.
Samuelson, P. (1946). Lord keynes and the general theory. Econometrica, 14, 187–200.
Sargan, J. (1964). Wages and prices in the UK: A study in econometric methodology. In P. Hart, G. Mills, &
J. Whittaker (Eds.), Econometric analysis for national planning. Butterworths.
123

130
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 347:113–130
Sargan, J. (1964). “Wages and prices in the UK: a study in Econometric Methodology.”. In P. Hart, G. Mills,
& J. Whittaker (Eds.), Econometric Analysis for National Planning. London: Butterworths.
Schotman, P. C., & Van Dijk, H. K. (1991). On bayesian routes to unit roots. Journal of Applied Econometrics,
6(4), 387–401.
Sims, C. (1989). A nine variable probabilistic model of the US economy. Institute for Empirical Macroeco-
nomics, Federal Reserve of Minneapolis, Discussion Paper, 14.
Sober, E. (2001). Venetian sea levels, british bread prices, and the principle of the common cause. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 52, 331–346.
Spanos, A. (2015). Revisiting Haavelmo’s structural econometrics: Bridging the gap between theory and data.
Journal of Economic Methodology, 22(2), 171–196.
Stock, J. H. (1991). Bayesian approaches to the ‘unit root’ problem: A comment. Journal of Applied Econo-
metrics, 6(4), 403–411.
Stone, R. (1978). Keynes, Political Arithmetic and Econometrics. In&nbsp;Proceedings of the British
Academy, 64, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Syll, L. P. (2016). On the use and misuse of theories and models in mainstream economics. College Publica-
tions/WEA Books.
Tinbergen, J. (1939). Statistical testing of business-cycle theories: II. Business cycles in the United States of
America, 1919–1932. League of Nations, Economic Intelligence Service.
Tinbergen, J. (1940). On a method of statistical business research. A reply. Economic Journal, 50, 141–154.
Tobin, J. (1980). Stabilization policy ten years after.&nbsp;Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Volume,
11: pp.&nbsp;19–90.
Ullah, S., Akhtar, P., & Zaefarian, G. (2018). Dealing with endogeneity bias: The generalized method of
moments (GMM) for panel data. Industrial Marketing Management, 71, 69–78.
Ullah, S., Zaefarian, G., & Ullah, F. (2021). How to use instrumental variables in addressing endogeneity? A
step-by-step procedure for non-specialists. Industrial Marketing Management, 96, A1–A6.
Wrane, A. (2006). Bayesian Inference in Co-integrated VAR model with Applications to the Demand for Euro
Area M3. European Central Bank, Working Paper Series No 692 / November.
Yule, G. U. (1926). Why do we sometimes get nonsense correlations between time-series? Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, 89, 2–9.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123