TITLE: Climbing university rankings under resources constraints: a combined approach integrating DEA and directed Louvain community detection
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2024
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06219-7
---

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-024-06219-7
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Climbing university rankings under resources constraints: a
combined approach integrating DEA and directed Louvain
community detection
Simone Di Leo1
· Alessandro Avenali1 · Cinzia Daraio1 ·
Joanna Wolszczak-Derlacz2
Received: 31 August 2023 / Accepted: 8 August 2024 / Published online: 17 September 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Over recent years, scholarly interest in universities’ allocation and effective utilisation of
ﬁnancial resources has been growing. When used efﬁciently, ﬁnancial resources may improve
universities’ quality of research and teaching, and therefore their positions in world university
rankings. However, despite the relevance of ﬁnancial efﬁciency to university placement in
academic rankings, universities’ total available ﬁnancial resources appear much more sig-
niﬁcant. In the present study, we propose an innovative methodology to determine realistic
ranking targets for individual universities, based on their available ﬁnancial resources. In
particular, we combine data envelopment analysis, as developed by Banker et al. (Manag Sci
30(9):1078–1092, 1984), and a directed Louvain community detection algorithm to examine
318 universities across ﬁve countries, considering their ARWU scores alongside key ﬁnan-
cial indicators (i.e., long-term physical capital, total operating revenues). We identify clusters
of universities with similar ﬁnancial proﬁles and corresponding ARWU scores, as well as
universities that have optimised their use of ﬁnancial resources, representing benchmarks for
similar universities to emulate. The approach is subsequently applied to Italian universities,
as a speciﬁc national case. The ﬁndings may be useful for policy makers and university man-
agers seeking reliable strategies for climbing academic rankings, particularly in countries
with limited public investment in higher education.
Keywords DEA · Community detection · University rankings · ARWU ranking · Financial
sustainability
B Simone Di Leo
dileo@diag.uniroma1.it
Alessandro Avenali
avenali@diag.uniroma1.it
Cinzia Daraio
daraio@diag.uniroma1.it
Joanna Wolszczak-Derlacz
jwo@zie.pg.edu.pl
1
Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering (DIAG), Sapienza University of
Rome, Via Ariosto 25, 00185 Rome, Italy
2
Faculty of Management and Economics, Gda´nsk University of Technology, Narutowicza 11/12, 80-233
Gda´nsk, Poland
123

1378
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1 Introduction
As the ﬁnancial resources available to academic institutions have decreased, the optimisation
of these resources has become increasingly relevant. Universities, as complex institutions,
require considerable ﬁnancial support to carry out their educational, research and community
service activities (i.e., “third mission” activities, as popularised by Etzkowitz & Leydesdorff,
1997). Thus, over the past decade, the ﬁnancial sustainability of universities has become a
critical issue. Only institutions that fully understand the costs of their activities can assess
their ﬁnancially viability, identify potential efﬁciency improvements in comparison to other
universities, and deﬁne targeted strategies to prevent overspending (Di Carlo et al., 2019).
Universities’ allocation of ﬁnancial resources has a direct impact on their ability to attract
high-calibre faculty, conduct quality research and offer competitive curricula. While univer-
sity rankings aim at showcasing these strengths by classifying higher education institutions
(HEIs) on the basis of various outputs (i.e., teaching, research, knowledge transfer, reputa-
tion), their methodologies often fail to account for the vast disparities in ﬁnancial resources
among universities, in terms of both total amounts and per capita (e.g., per student or staff
member). University rankings were introduced as tools to inform university governance.
Despite their limitations, they continue to be widely used and considered (see, e.g., the recent
book by Hazelkorn & Mihut, 2021). However, debates around their underlying data, theory
and methodology persist (Daraio et al., 2022), highlighting their signiﬁcant impact on poli-
cies, strategies and competition dynamics within higher education. Therefore, it is necessary
to deepen our understanding of the interaction between universities’ ﬁnancial resources and
their positioning in prominent academic rankings. Indeed, efﬁcient utilisation of ﬁnancial
resources enables universities to deliver high-quality research and teaching, thus bolster-
ing their standings in the global rankings. However, while ﬁnancial efﬁciency is certainly a
relevant factor in determining universities’ positioning in the rankings, the total amount of
ﬁnancial resources at their disposal appears much more signiﬁcant.
To address this latter factor, the present research applied an innovative methodology to
identify realistic ranking targets for universities based on their available ﬁnancial resources.
Our approach integrated data envelopment analysis (DEA) with variable returns to scale
(VRS) and the directed Louvain community detection algorithm, leveraging data from the
Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) and ﬁnancial metrics extracted from uni-
versities’ 2019 ﬁnancial statements (i.e., long-term physical capital, total amount of operating
revenues). The analysis aimed at identifying clusters of universities with similar ﬁnancial
resources and comparable rankings in the ARWU, considering a set of 318 universities from
ﬁve countries (i.e., USA, UK, Italy, Australia, Poland).1
Speciﬁcally, we utilised the DEA-VRS framework introduced by Banker et al. (1984) to
assess universities’ efﬁciency in maximising their positions in the ARWU ranking, relative
to their available ﬁnancial resources. The DEA considered long-term physical capital and
total operating revenues as inputs, and ARWU score as the output. Subsequently, applying the
Louvain network partition to the DEA results, we identiﬁed homogeneous communities of
universities characterised by similar ﬁnancial resources and ARWU scores, and we explored
the correspondence between these groups and groups based solely on ARWU position.
Following our analysis of the international sample, we narrowed our focus to the Ital-
ian context (i.e., 46 Italian universities) to apply the proposed methodology within a more
1 The year 2019 was selected to prevent the potential bias of the impact of COVID-19 on universities’
investment choices in the subsequent period.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1379
homogeneous context. In Italy, ﬁnancial data are subject to a standardised national account-
ing system, facilitating a more nuanced policy assessment calibrated to the Italian landscape.
Importantly, ﬁnancial statement data from different countries present several criticalities due
to variations in accounting standards, which may prevent a uniform data collection. Fur-
thermore, the Italian case demonstrated the scalability of the proposed methodology and its
adaptability to different analytical contexts.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section2 describes the state of the art
in the literature, introduces the Italian university system and details the main contribution of
the present work. Section3 describes the methodology and dataset. Finally, Sect.4 reports
the ﬁndings and Sect.5 offers concluding remarks.
2 Literature review and contribution
The following section is divided into three subsections. The ﬁrst subsection discusses how
the literature has addressed the evaluation of university performance and the use of rankings
in this regard. The second subsection provides insight into the Italian university system,
while the third subsection introduces the identiﬁed gap in the literature and elucidates the
contribution of the present work to the ongoing debate.
2.1 The performance evaluation of universities
The performance evaluation of universities has become a fundamental practice in higher edu-
cation. Valmorbida and Ensslin (2017) described that the performance assessment process
consists of four sequential steps. The ﬁrst step involves identifying the evaluation context and
the managers involved. Based on this identiﬁcation, the second step involves identifying the
relevant management objectives and their corresponding indicators. The third step involves
measuring these indicators (i.e., the assignation of values). Finally, the fourth step involves
leveraging this information for management (i.e., pinpointing areas for improvement, imple-
menting corrective actions, learning from outcomes to enhance overall performance). This
evaluative process encompasses various aspects, including research, teaching, technology
transfer, social impact and governance, among others.
The evaluation of university performance is crucial for several reasons. First, it helps to guar-
antee the quality of higher education by ensuring that universities meet acceptable standards
of teaching, research and student services. Second, it promotes accountability and trans-
parency by providing an independent mechanism for assessing university performance and
disclosing the results to stakeholders.
University rankings have garnered signiﬁcant interest from both the academic community
and policy makers, as tools for assessing university reputation and performance. Rankings
classify universities based on predeﬁned criteria, with the aim of highlighting real or per-
ceived differences in performance or reputation (Merisotis & Sadlak, 2005). Notable rankings
include the ARWU (also known as the Shanghai Ranking), the Times Higher Education
World University Rankings (THE) and the Quacquarelli-Symonds World University Rank-
ing (QS). Unlike the THE and QS, the ARWU does not incorporate ﬁnancial indicators (the
THE research and teaching scores include some income-based components). Additionally, it
relies solely on publicly available and replicable data (in contrast, the QS and THE are based
on data collected through surveys administered within universities). The ARWU evaluates
universities based on indicators such as research quality, academic citations, awards and
123

1380
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
international collaboration (Liu et al., 2016). Compared to other rankings, it is less prone to
issues such as data manipulation and the overweighting of subjective indicators (Hazelkorn,
2017).
Initially conceived as information tools, academic rankings have evolved into performance
assessment instruments, responding to the escalating competition within higher education and
addressing the growing demand for transparency and accountability. However, this evolution
has sparked debate regarding the limitations of rankings as comprehensive indicators of
academic quality and their potential inﬂuence on university strategies and priorities. In more
detail, several criticisms have been raised concerning the selection and weighting of indicators
and the inherent limitations of the underlying data (for more detail, see Fauzi et al., 2020;
Moed, 2017; Olcay & Bulu, 2017). In addition to these methodological and data criticisms,
the impact of academic rankings on university ﬁnances has also been raised as a relevant
concern. Benito et al. (2019) investigated the inﬂuence of funding on the positions obtained
by the top 300 universities in the 2018 QS, ﬁnding that public funding signiﬁcantly impacted
84% of these universities, explaining up to 51% of the variability in their ranking positions.
Similarly, Berne (2020) demonstrated that the performance of HEIs, as measured by the
ARWU, correlated closely with institutional ﬁnances (expressed in terms of annual budget
per student) and student tuition fees. Furthermore, Avenali et al. (2024) developed a machine
learning-based tool to predict university placement in the ARWU, primarily using ﬁnancial
statement data.
Lepori et al. (2017) analysed the ﬁnancial environment of HEIs as a possible selection
mechanism. They identiﬁed a subset of research universities characterised by high research
volume and signiﬁcantly greater funding compared to the other HEIs in the sample. The
authors suggested that the emergence of these HEIs was critically related to resource con-
centration. Later, Lepori et al. (2019) empirically demonstrated that global academic rankings
can be interpreted as measures of wealth, as US universities, which typically enjoy signiﬁ-
cantly more resources, tend to produce more publications and citations than their European
counterparts. This suggests that the incorporation of a resource metric may improve the
accuracy of international rankings.
Regarding ﬁnancial resources, Baltaru et al. (2022) studied resource disparities between
102 English universities over the period 2008–2017, in relation to their positions in the
ranking provided by the Complete University Guide (CUG). The authors discovered that
a university’s position in the ranking affected all universities except those with historically
established reputations (i.e., elite universities), even after controlling for previous levels of
ﬁnancial resources and institutional differences. They proposed that this relationship may be
explained, in part, by universities’ revenues from tuition fees. Similarly, Kim (2018) analysed
U.S. News and World Report’s Best Colleges ranking to explore the relationship between
universities’ positioning in the ranking and their available ﬁnancial resources. The study
revealed that the distinct ranking criteria encouraged increased spending on teaching and
non-teaching activities, including academic and student services.
While criticisms of university rankings persist, the need for universities’ effective per-
formance evaluation has spurred alternative approaches to leveraging ranking data. Daraio
et al. (2023) proposed the use of the Leiden Ranking to identify top-performing institutions
(“outliers”) in terms of research quality. Additionally, methodologies such as efﬁciency anal-
ysis (Bougnol & Dulá, 2006; Daraio et al., 2015) and multicriteria analysis (Ho et al., 2006;
Sarrico & Dyson, 2000) have been proposed.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1381
2.2 Italian university system
Italian universities have a rich legacy of academic and research excellence, and they are
internationally recognised for their quality and commitment to innovation and advanced
education. Nonetheless, the university system in Italy faces several challenges, including a
persistent funding deﬁcit.
Italian universities are primarily funded by the central government, via the Ministry of Uni-
versities and Research (MUR), which is meant to cover universities’ operating expenses.
However, in recent years, the Italian university system has suffered a series of budget cuts
that have profoundly impacted its ability to uphold rigorous academic standards and main-
tain a stimulating academic environment. Insufﬁcient funding has also led to a shortage
of academic jobs, reduced resources for research and innovation, and diminished educa-
tional opportunities for students (Turri, 2016). Thus, the nexus between Italian universities’
ﬁnancial resources and their reputations and research performance represents a relevant area
of research. The Italian university system comprises 97 universities, of which 67 are state
universities, 19 are legally recognised non-state universities and 11 are legally recognised
non-state telematics universities. Despite this expansive network, not all Italian universities
are represented in international academic rankings. In fact, the 2019 edition of the ARWU
included only 46 Italian universities. This underrepresentation extends to other rankings, as
well. For instance, the latest Leiden Ranking included only 47 Italian universities.
2.3 Gap in the literature and contribution of the present work
Despite the signiﬁcant contributions of previous research on university funding, academic
performance and rankings, there remains a notable gap in the literature regarding the inte-
gration of different approaches to gain a more comprehensive and in-depth understanding of
the relationship between universities’ positioning in academic rankings and their available
ﬁnancial resources.
Most prior studies have explored the effect of funding on academic performance or univer-
sity efﬁciency separately, considering academic rankings as independent indicators. Indeed,
despite the acknowledged limitations of these rankings (as previously discussed), they con-
tinue to be widely used by policy makers. The present research aimed at partially ﬁlling this
gap in the literature by developing a methodology combining DEA and the Louvain commu-
nity detection technique, and applying it to a prominent academic ranking in order to deepen
our understanding of the relationship between academic rankings and universities’ available
ﬁnancial resources. Speciﬁcally, the research aimed at determining the ﬁnancial resources
required for universities to achieve international competitiveness and high positions in the
ranking. Additionally, it aimed at identifying groups of comparable universities based on
ﬁnancial resources, to identify those with the greatest efﬁciency (i.e., those maximising their
position in the ranking relative to their available ﬁnancial resources).
The use of DEA enabled us to identify universities achieving higher levels of efﬁciency.
Subsequently, the Louvain algorithm allowed us to establish groups of universities with sim-
ilar levels of funding and academic performance, facilitating a deeper analysis of higher
education dynamics. Such communities of universities were identiﬁed both internationally
and nationally, with respect to the Italian context. By integrating both qualitative (i.e., uni-
versity positioning in the academic ranking) and quantitative (i.e., university efﬁciency and
heterogeneity) factors, our approach represents a novel contribution to the ﬁeld. As we will
describe in more detail in the “Methodology and data” section, to the best of our knowledge,
123

1382
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
this study represents the ﬁrst application of a combination of DEA and the directed Louvain
community detection algorithm to identify communities of comparable universities based on
their available ﬁnancial resources and performance in an academic ranking.
3 Methodology and data
In this section, we will introduce DEA and brieﬂy explain our process of constructing a
DEA network and applying the Louvain community detection method in the present study.
Subsequently, we will present the dataset that was utilised for the university analysis.
3.1 DEA
DEA is a non-parametric method that is used to assess the productivity or cost efﬁciency of a
decision making unit (DMU) in comparison with other similar units. DMUs are the units of
analysis, which can range from companies to departments or, in the present case, universities.
First introduced by Charnes et al. (1978), DEA aims at evaluating the operational efﬁciency
of a given sample of DMUs near the efﬁcient boundary of their production set. It is a non-
parametric approach that is capable of managing multiple inputs and outputs, assuming free
disposability (i.e., the ability to destroy assets without cost) and convexity.
In input-oriented DEA, the objective is to evaluate the potential reduction in inputs a DMU can
achieve while maintaining its current level of outputs and production technology. Essentially,
this assesses how close a DMU can move towards an estimated efﬁcient frontier, representing
best practices observed across all DMUs under the same technological constraints.
Conversely, output-oriented DEA focuses on maximising the output levels a DMU can
achieve while keeping the number of inputs and amount of technology constant. In the present
analysis, we adopted an output-oriented DEA because we were interested in assessing the
potential expansion of a university output (i.e., ARWU score) while holding the inputs (i.e.,
ﬁnancial resources) and technology constant.
IntheDEAformulationofCharnesetal.(1978),thefrontierismodelledassumingconstant
returns to scale (CRS) and DMUs operating at an optimal scale. Later, Banker et al. (1984)
introduced a DEA model allowing for variable returns to scale (VRS)-a development that has
been seminal for the success of the DEA approach, as described in Nepomuceno et al. (2023).
Formally, the DEA VRS output-oriented linear programming problem can be expressed as
follows:
max φ
s.t.
n
j=1
λ j xi j −xi0 ≤0 ∀i, i = 1, ..., p
n
j=1
λ j yr j −φyr0 ≥0 ∀r,r = 1, ..., q
n
j=1
λ j = 1
λ j ≥0
Where φ represents efﬁciency, x ∈ℜp
+ is the vector of p inputs and y ∈ℜq
+ is the vector
of q outputs, with λ j denoting the weight of peers and λ = (λ1, ..., λn) is the vector of the
weights and n is the number of DMUs. For the sack of clarity, we indicate the optimal values
of λ j after the optimization as λ∗
j.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1383
Consistent with Kneip et al. (2016), we applied tests to assess the convexity hypothesis
required by the DEA model and the returns to scale, with the aim of empirically determining
whether the hypotheses were empirically supported by the data. These tests, implemented in
FEAR (Wilson, 2008), were conducted on our empirical datasets, conﬁrming the coherence
of a VRS-DEA model (see Supplementary Material A for details).
While much of the literature focuses on φ (i.e., the efﬁciency score), our analysis focused
on the weights λ∗
j which reﬂect the relative importance of different peers in establishing an
efﬁciency benchmark. The literature on the linear programming (LP) problem in DEA is
extensive, with considerable discussion of the constraints and weights restriction in DEA
models. Notable contributions to this discussion include works by Pedraja-Chaparro et al.
(1997), Podinovski and Athanassopoulos (1998), Joro and Viitala (2004) and Podinovski
(2016),aswellasvariouschaptersinhandbooksonDEA(e.g.,Cooperetal.2011;Podinovski,
2015; Thanassoulis et al., 2004). While the assessment of LP values is important, also in the
DEA beneﬁt of doubt (BOD) model (see, e.g., Lavigne et al., 2019), use of λ values for the
representation and visualisation of the network among DMUs has been less explored (see
Sect.3.2 for details). Leveraging the representation and visualisation of λ∗
j values enables
not only an evaluation of their ”numerical” values, but also the relation between inefﬁcient
and efﬁcient DMUs, thereby representing all DMUs in a network.
Of note, the λ∗
j values obtained from a DEA formulation are generally not unique, as
highlighted in Banker et al. (1984). The problem of multiple optimal solutions is well-
discussed in the literature, with Banker and Thrall (1992) and Seiford and Zhu (1998) noting
its signiﬁcance in DEA CRS cases but not in DEA VRS models, as applied in our analysis.
Nevertheless, we conducted tests of robustness on our empirical applications to assess λ∗
j
variation as the order of the analysed DMUs changed. These tests aimed at “forcing” the
solver of the linear programming problem to provide different optimal solutions based on
the DMU order. In more detail, they involved randomly altering the DMU order in our two
datasets 100 times, performing DEA for each of the 100 random sets and extracting the
calculated λ∗
j values. The resulting λ∗
j values were consistent up to the 12th decimal place,
primarily due to numerical approximation issues, indicating unique solutions. Although the
results of these tests are not reported in this paper (for brevity), they are available from the
authors upon request. For DEA CRS models, the issue of multiple λ∗
j values is more relevant,
and it may be addressed using the recently proposed bootstrap approach by Kang et al. (2024).
3.2 From DEA to peers communities
The DEA analysis allowed us to construct a directed weighted graph G, relating each DMU
to its peers and reference weights (i.e., a relational network). Formally, given two DMUs a
and b, an edge is created if a is the peer of b, with the weight of this edge determined by
the λ∗
j estimated in the DEA linear programming problem. Figure1 illustrates an example of
graph creation from the DEA linear programming results. The example includes ﬁve DMUs
(i.e., the ﬁve nodes) and ﬁve weighted arcs.
The graphical representation enabled us to apply network analysis techniques to gain deeper
insight into the relationships between nodes. Our research objective was to identify similar
peers in terms of funding, while also considering positionality in the ranking. Community
identiﬁcation appeared to be the best approach for this, because universities function as
communities of academics, non-academic staff and students. Communities are highly inter-
connected sets of nodes (Fortunato & Castellano, 2007), and their identiﬁcation can reveal
similar structures-in the present case, in terms of the resources used in the production process
123

1384
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
Fig. 1 Example of a directed network of weights and peers. Source: own elaboration
(inputs: long-term physical capital and total operating revenues) to generate an ARWU score
(output), as modelled in the DEA. Through community detection, we aimed at identifying the
network of universities. We considered densely connected nodes indicative of communities,
and weakly connected nodes indicative of separate communities.
While the combination of network analysis and DEA has been previously proposed in
the literature, existing methods do not aim at identifying communities in directed weighted
graphs derived from DEA. Instead, the main approaches consider the network as a social
network and apply social network analysis (SNA) techniques. Liu et al. (2009) were among
the ﬁrst to combine DEA with SNA to differentiate efﬁcient DMUs. They employed a two-
step method, constructing a directed and weighted network based on the DEA results and
subsequently calculating eigenvector centrality to rank the analysed DMUs. To resolve the
convergence issues associated with eigenvector centrality measures, de Blas et al. (2018)
proposed a new perspective on the DEA-SNA network. They considered the DEA result as a
bipartite directional graph and applied the hyperlink-induced topic search (HITS) algorithm
(Kleinberg, 1999) to identify peers as efﬁcient units and hubs as inefﬁcient units, thereby
deﬁning a “new” rank. However, one limitation of Blas et al.’s method is that only efﬁcient
DMUs are considered candidates for benchmarking units.
While these approaches attempt to address the challenge of creating partitions or commu-
nities, we did not consider them suitable for our analytical context, as we aimed at modelling
not only the weight of relationships, but also their direction (i.e., from inefﬁcient to efﬁcient
units). Furthermore, we sought to identify communities of similar DMUs without modelling
new “virtual” DMUs, as proposed by the previous authors. Thus, we opted to instead utilise
one of the primary methods available for identifying communities within a network: the Lou-
vain community detection algorithm (Blondel et al., 2008), which optimises modularity as it
progresses. Modularity is a scaling value between -1 (non-modular clustering) and 1 (fully
modular clustering), measuring the relative density of edges within communities compared
to edges outside communities. For an undirected weighted graph, modularity is deﬁned as:
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1385
Q =
1
2m

s,v
[Asv −kskv
2m ]δ(cs, cv)
where Asv represents the weight of the edge between s and v, ks = 
s,v Asv is the sum
of the weights of the edges attached to vertex s, cs is the community to which vertex s is
assigned, the δ function δ(cs, cv) is 1 if cs and cv are the same community and 0 otherwise
and m = 1
2

s,v Asv.
The Louvain method proceeds iteratively in two steps, in order to efﬁciently increase
modularity. First, each node is assigned to a different community, resulting in as many
communities as there are nodes. Second, the neighbours s of node v are evaluated to determine
the gain in modularity that would occur by removing s from its community and placing it in
the community of v. If the gain is positive and maximum, s is moved accordingly; otherwise,
s remains in its current community. Thus, a node is only moved if the modularity gain is
positive (i.e., if moving the node improves overall modularity) and the modularity gain is
the highest among all possible options (i.e., if moving it elsewhere would not lead to greater
improvement).
This process is continually applied for each node until no further improvement can be
achieved. At this point, the ﬁrst phase is complete. Of note, the algorithm output, in terms
of found communities and calculation time, may depend on the order in which the nodes
are considered. However, the authors (Blondel et al., 2008) assert that the order of the nodes
does not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the obtained modularity. To ensure the robustness of the
output concerning node order, we randomly generated several node orderings and ran the
algorithm for each one. In all cases, we consistently found the same communities, ensuring
no uncertainty in terms of the community allocation. The second phase of the algorithm
consisted of building a new network, with nodes representing the communities found in the
ﬁrst phase. The weights of the links between the new nodes were determined by summing
the weight of the links between nodes in the corresponding two communities. Links between
nodes in the same community resulted in self-loops for that community in the new network.
Once this second phase was complete, it became possible to reapply the ﬁrst phase of the
algorithm to the resulting weighted network and to iterate. However, in our case, the version
proposed by the authors presented a fundamental problem, as the concept of modularity was
only formulated for weighted undirected graphs.
In our scenario, as demonstrated above, we were analysing a directed weighted graph. If we
were to have performed a naive directed-to-undirected graph transformation, disregarding
edge directionality and treating the graph as undirected, two main biases could have arisen
(Malliaros & Vazirgiannis, 2013): data ambiguity (i.e., deviations in the clustering results)
and biases in the clustering results (by discarding edge directionality, valuable information
would not be used in the clustering process, generating deviations in the results).
To explain these biases, consider a network in which the connections represent universities.
The relationship between efﬁcient and inefﬁcient universities would not be reciprocal;
efﬁcient universities would serve as “peers” (or best-performing units), while inefﬁcient
universities would look to efﬁcient ones to improve their performance. This would neces-
sitate the use of directed graphs, since we could not disregard the possibility of one-sided
relationships among universities. Failure to account for such one-sided relationships and
naively using undirected graphs could lead to the following biases:
1. Data ambiguity: When considering two universities in close proximity within the net-
work, one efﬁcient and the other inefﬁcient, it would not be speciﬁed which must learn
from the other. They would have a reciprocal link, creating ambiguity that may distort
the results.
123

1386
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
2. Biases in clustering results: Without a clear distinction between efﬁcient and inefﬁcient
universities through directed graphs, we may misidentify groups of universities, under-
estimate the inﬂuence of certain universities, overestimate the inﬂuence of others and
draw incorrect conclusions about network dynamics.
To avoid these biases and successfully identify communities, we adopted the directional
version of Louvain’s algorithm (Dugúe & Perez, 2015). This version, which we call the
directed Louvain community detection algorithm, differs from the classical algorithm pre-
sented above (Blondel et al., 2008) through the modularity gain applied (with all other steps
of the algorithm remaining unchanged). The modularity gain considered in the classical Lou-
vain algorithm does not account for direction, whereas the directional version does, according
to the following formula:
Q = 
c
[ Lc
m −γ kin
c kout
c
2m
2
]
where c represents a community, Lc is the number of intra-community links for community c,
kin
c and kout
c
are the sum of in-going and out-going degrees of the nodes in community c, and
γ is the resolution parameter (typically equal to 1, as in our case). For more detail on the γ
selection see Newman (2016). From the results of the community detection, we were able to
identify “similar” communities of inefﬁcient and efﬁcient units (i.e., peers). Furthermore, by
maintaining the orientation of the graph, we were able to understand which efﬁcient unit(s)
exerted the most inﬂuence on their respective communities.
3.3 Dataset
All available information in the 2019 ARWU (https://www.shanghairanking.com/rankings/
arwu/2019) was collected for the 318 universities in our sample (from ﬁve countries). The
ARWU is based on six indicators:
• Alumni: Number of alumni who have won Nobel Prizes and Fields Medals.
• Award: Number of staff who have won a Nobel Prize in Physics, Chemistry, Medicine
or Economics, or a Fields Medal in Mathematics.
• HiCi: Number of highly cited researchers selected by Clarivate Analytics.
• N&S: Number of papers published in Nature and Science (considering only articles).
• PUB: Number of papers indexed in the Science Citation Index-Expanded and Social
Science Citation Index.
• PCP: Weighted scores of the above ﬁve indicators, divided by the number of full-time
equivalent academic staff.
In the ARWU, the indicators N&S, HiCi and PUB represent a university’s research
performance, while the variables Alumni and Award can be seen as proxies for
a university’s reputation. For the ﬁnal position of a university uni in the rank-
ing, ARWU calculates the total score as a weighted sum of these indicators
(https://www.shanghairanking.com/methodology/arwu/2019):
ARWU Scoreuni =
0.1Alumniuni + 0.2Awarduni + 0.2HiCiuni + 0.2N&Suni + 0.2PU Buni + 0.1PC Puni
ARWU scores range from 0 to 100, with 100 denoting the top position in the ranking. In addi-
tion to the ARWU data, we also gathered information from universities’ ﬁnancial statements
for the ﬁscal year 2019. Speciﬁcally, we collected the net value of long-term physical capital
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1387
Table 1 International sample of
universities (318 observations):
Correlation matrix between the
collected variables
ARWU score
Physical capital
Revenues
ARWU score
1
Physical capital
0.79
1
Revenues
0.85
0.84
1
Source: own elaboration based on data from ARWU and balance sheets
from university balance sheets and total operating revenues from university income state-
ments, while harmonising the different accounting systems to eliminate external revenues
(e.g., hospital activities) and extra activities that might inﬂuence and distort the comparison
between universities. For additional discussion of the problems created by accounting sys-
tem heterogeneity and the harmonisation that is required prior to comparative analysis, see
Avenali et al. (2024).
The net value of long-term physical capital (henceforth referred to as “physical capital”)
represented the long-term assets used to support universities’ production processes while
fulﬁlling their institutional missions. This encompassed the net value of property (e.g., land,
buildings,realestate),plants,equipment,machinery,vehicles,intangibleassets(e.g.,software
licenses, databases) and goodwill. It was calculated as the value of intangible and tangible
ﬁxed assets, net accumulated depreciation and amortisation, as extracted from university
balance sheets. All values were converted into euro using the exchange rate provided by the
Central Bank of Europe on 31 December 2019.
The total operating revenues (henceforth referred to as “revenues”) represented the ongo-
ing overall returns universities received in a year to support their institutional mission-related
operational activities. This information was extracted from university income statements. In
cases where universities engaged in hospital activities or extra activities (e.g., external labora-
tories), returns from these activities were identiﬁed from the income statement and subtracted
from the revenues, to ensure data homogeneity. Once again, revenues were expressed in euro.
Of note, while the ARWU includes more than 1,000 universities, the ﬁnancial statements
of individual universities are not always public or accessible. Thus, it was not possible
to collect ﬁnancial data for all of the ranked universities. However, the dataset included
universities from various countries, such as the US (171 universities), UK (61 universities),
Italy (46 universities), Australia (32 universities) and Poland (8 universities). Additionally,
we extended the dataset for the Italian case by collecting information from the open data
platform of the Italian Ministry of Universities and Research, USTAT (http://ustat.miur.it/).
Speciﬁcally, for each Italian university, we collected data on the number of academic staff
(headcount), number of enrolled students (atalleducationallevels), teaching load (i.e., ratio of
students to academic staff) and student fees. We noted high correlations among the variables
considered, for both the international (Table 1) and the Italian universities (Table 2). In both
cases, there was a correlation greater than 0.8 between revenues and ARWU score. Regarding
the relationship between physical capital and ARWU score, a very high correlation was
observed in the international case (0.79), which dropped to 0.57 in the Italian case For the
Italian universities, we also examined the correlation between ARWU score and the other
collected variables. We found a high correlation between ARWU score and the number of
academic staff, a medium correlation between student fees (a subset of revenues) and ARWU
score and a very low correlation between teaching load and ARWU score (0.12). Table 3
presents the descriptive statistics of the variables collected for the international analysis,
while Table 4 reports the descriptive statistics of the variables collected for the Italian case.
123

1388
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
Table 2 Italian sample (46 universities): Correlation matrix between the collected variables
ARWU score
Physical capital
Revenues
Student fees
Academic personnel
Teaching load
ARWU score
1
Physical capital
0.57
1
Revenues
0.81
0.65
1
Student fees
0.58
0.43
0.75
1
Academic personnel
0.77
0.6
0.95
0.85
1
Teaching load
0.12
0.4
0.4
0.12
0.29
1
Source: own elaboration based on data from ARWU and USTAT
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1389
Table 3 International sample of universities (318 observations): Descriptive statistics on the inputs (physical capital (x1) and revenues (x2)) and the output (ARWU score (y)).
Physical capital and revenues expressed in euro
Variable
25th perc.
Median
Average
75th perc.
Std.
ARWU score (y)
8.34
12.41
16.48
18.47
12.62
Physical capital (x1)
352,280,621
713,865,415
1,054,286,909
1,466,095,518
1,107,559,709
Revenues (x2)
258,641,092
480,024,267
803,330,956
902,927,035
1,018,710,964
Source: own elaboration based on data from ARWU and balance sheets
123

1390
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
Table 4 Italian sample (46 universities): Descriptive statistics on the inputs (physical capital (x1) and revenues(x2)), the output (ARWU score (y)) and other variables considered
in the analysis
Variable
25th perc.
Median
Average
75th perc.
Std.
ARWU score (y)
7.57
9.31
10.60
11.74
3.89
Physical capital (x1)
89,782,452.40
152,039,606.00
199,735,091.00
269,927,318.30
165,066,014.00
Revenues (x2)
130,994,945.00
208,248,230.00
248,997,317.00
300,926,415.50
172,641,476.00
Student fees
17,359,470.20
30,528,771.30
40,928,994.00
39,021,096.01
42,927,912.50
Academic personnel
878.25
1159.50
1476.15
1863.75
987.20
Teaching load
16.33
20.97
20.47
24.81
6.51
Source: own elaboration based on data from ARWU and USTAT
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1391
Fig. 2 Community detection network identiﬁed using the directed Louvain algorithm on 318 universities.
Each colour represents a community (nine communities in total). Labelled nodes represent the efﬁcient units
in their respective communities. Source: own elaboration based on DEA and the directed Louvain analysis
network. (Color ﬁgure online)
4 Results
In this section, we outline the main results of our analysis. The DEA-VRS (Banker et al.,
1984) model considered physical capital (x1) and revenues (x2) as inputs and ARWU score as
the output (y). The basic assumption was that these inputs were the main factors determining
universities’ ARWU scores. Moreover, by analysing academic rankings and comparing the
scores with those obtained using DEA, Bougnol and Dulá (2006) found important equiva-
lences between the DEA and academic rankings, leading them to conclude that “DEA is a
suitable tool for these types of studies” (Bougnol & Dulá, 2006). Employing an output-
oriented approach, given the inputs (i.e., ﬁnancial resources), we aimed at maximising
universities’ ARWU scores and identifying peers (i.e., best in class). Subsequently, these
peers were analysed using the directed Louvain community detection algorithm to identify
communities of universities with similar ﬁnancial resources and ARWU scores.
4.1 International comparison
Figure 2 illustrates the DEA and directed Louvain analysis network. We identiﬁed nine
distinct communities (Community A: aqua green; Community B: black; Community C:
orange; Community D: sand; Community E: green; Community F: violet; Community G:
red; Community H: grey; Community I: light blue). Each colour in the ﬁgure corresponds to a
different community (also denoted by capital letters, as speciﬁed in Table 5), and the labelled
nodes represent the efﬁcient/reference units within their respective communities (i.e., the
efﬁcient DMUs “pointed” to by the directional arcs from the inefﬁcient units).
123

1392
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
Table 5 Descriptive statistics on the communities identiﬁed in the international sample
Community
Colour in Figs. 2 and 3
Number of DMUs
Mean physical capital
Mean revenues
Mean ARWU score
Reference DMU
A
Aqua green
4
6,049,832,760.00
5,877,664,385.00
66.59
Harvard University
B
Black
37
2,813,239,459.00
1,992,333,948.00
33.64
University of Cambridge
C
Orange
19
1,394,417,525.00
2,282,171,655.00
31.14
California Institute
of Technology
D
Sand
2
216,030,524.40
1,045,809,086.00
17.52
University of
Western Sydney
E
Green
102
1,221,794,498.00
691,512,590.10
15.51
Rockefeller University
F
Violet
104
426,216,549.20
337,160,659.10
10.61
Yeshiva University
G
Red
4
69,295,754.20
220,205,929.00
10.03
Vita-Salute San
Raffaele University
H
Grey
2
29,420,685.50
32,049,860.50
8.83
Humanitas University
I
Light Blue
44
244,601,540.20
141,714,426.40
8.18
Scuola Normale
Superiore-Pisa
Source: own elaboration based on DEA and the directed Louvain analysis network
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1393
Fig. 3 Boxplots of the variables analysed using DEA for the international case (from the left to the right:
ARWU score=y, physical capital=x1 and revenues=x2). Colours represent the different communities identiﬁed
(as reported in Table 5). Source: own elaboration based on DEA. (Color ﬁgure online)
Table 5 and Fig.3 report the summary statistics of the identiﬁed communities. Details of
the results per university are provided in Supplementary Material B.
The reported information highlights the heterogeneity in universities’ available resources,
in relation to their ARWU scores. In particular, Community A, comprising four universities
(i.e., Columbia University, Harvard University, New York University, Stanford University),
emerged as the community with both the highest average ARWU score and the greatest
ﬁnancial resources, in terms of both average physical capital and average revenues. In this
community, Harvard University served as the DMU of reference, while also claiming the top
position in the overall ranking. In this analysis, each community had a similar reference peer
in terms of resources. Therefore, in contrast to the classic DEA analysis, which assigns one
or more reference peers to an inefﬁcient DMU, in this scenario, each university had a “most
similar” peer to emulate.
The identiﬁed communities also revealed a proportional relationship between revenues and
ARWU score, with communities’ average ARWU scores increasing in line with their average
revenues. However, this correlation did not hold true for physical capital. In fact, Community
D and Community I had very similar average values of physical capital (216,030,524.40 for
Community D, 244,601,540.20 for Community I), yet signiﬁcantly different ARWU scores
123

1394
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
(17.52 for Community D, 8.18 for Community I). This suggests that universities’ annual
economic resources (i.e., liquid funds) may have a more signiﬁcant inﬂuence on positionality
in academic rankings. In contrast, long-term assets appear less impactful, as they cannot be
easily changed within the same year (e.g., the acquisition of real estate or intangible assets
typically requires a large investment spread over several years). Consequently, this initial
ﬁnding implies that a greater concentration of total operating revenues in fewer universities
could yield beneﬁts, provided that the new resources are effectively utilised and managed.
Another noteworthy ﬁnding is the considerable disparity in the number of universities per
cluster,possiblyinﬂuencedbythepresenceofoutliers.Forinstance,CommunityDcomprised
only two universities, whereas Community F included 104. Theoretically, the DEA analysis
could return an isolated cluster consisting of only one efﬁcient unit.
The results presented here, regarding communities of diverse membership and ﬁnancial
resources, complement the ﬁndings on the structural heterogeneity of universities in terms
of size, disciplinary subject mix and service orientation (i.e., the so-called “third mission”).
Further discussion of the heterogeneity of European universities can be found in Bruni et
al. (2020). As acknowledged in the literature, DEA is susceptible to outliers, which can
affect the frontier and consequently inﬂuence all efﬁciency estimates. However, the present
research aimed at identifying the best-performing universities as examples (i.e., peers) for
other universities to emulate. The community clustering results reﬂect the reality of university
funding. It would be interesting to explore, in future iterations of this research, how these
communities might change if the impact of peers is mitigated through the use of robust
efﬁciency analysis (for an introduction, see Daraio & Simar, 2007).
In our case, even the smallest communities maintained a connection (as evidenced by the
graph in Fig.2 showing no isolated nodes). Consequently, universities with very different
resources were compared. Potentially, it would have been more equitable to consider or
segment the ranking according to the resources available to universities. In this vein, some
steps towards incorporating ﬁnancial resources and promoting greater “fairness” in academic
rankings have been taken, as evidenced by the THE, which, in its current version, also
considers university income.
The following section will focus on the Italian case. This change in the layer of analysis,
transitioning from an international to a national context, will enable us to further reﬂect on
the results of this initial analysis, considering a speciﬁc national system.
4.2 Insight into a single university system: The Italian case
As in the international analysis, for the national case, we applied the DEA technique and
the directed Louvain algorithm to the directed graph of peers and weights for the 46 Italian
universities in the 2019 ARWU. Figure4 displays the resulting graph with the identiﬁed com-
munities. The analysis revealed three main communities and two smaller communities (one of
which was practically isolated): a community of large, generalist universities (in blue), com-
prising nine universities, with Sapienza University of Rome serving as the reference DMU; a
community of medium-sized universities (in light green), encompassing 14 universities, with
University of Pisa serving as the reference DMU; a community of small, research-oriented
universities (in purple), consisting of 18 universities, with Scuola Normale Superiore - Pisa
serving as the reference DMU; a small community (in dark green) comprising two univer-
sities (Humanitas University, International School for Advanced Studies), with Humanitas
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1395
Fig. 4 Italian case: Graphical representation of communities. Labelled nodes represent the efﬁcient units in
their respective communities. Colours represent individual communities identiﬁed using the directed Louvain
method. Source: own elaboration based on DEA and the directed Louvain analysis network. (Color ﬁgure
online)
University serving as the reference DMU; and another small community (in orange) com-
prising three universities (Vita-San Raffaele University, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano,
Tuscia University), with Vita-San Raffaele University serving as the reference DMU.
Detailed results for each Italian university, including their efﬁciency score, ARWU score and
community afﬁliation, are presented in Supplementary Material C.
An analysis of the resources used in relation to the ARWU score (Fig.5) revealed similar
ﬁndings as those observed for the intentional case: universities with higher revenues tended
to achieve higher ARWU scores, with physical capital (despite exhibiting a higher average in
the case of the large, generalist (blue) community) emerging as less inﬂuential than revenues.
Moreover, when comparing the identiﬁed communities with the number of students enrolled
in the various universities (Fig.6) an indicator that is often used as a proxy for university
size-it became evident that the different communities were associated with different univer-
sity sizes. In particular, the blue community represented the largest universities, the green
community represented medium-sized universities and the purple community represented
small universities. The orange and dark green communities, on the other hand, represented
very small universities. A similar trend was observed for the differences in academic staff
across communities (Fig.7). A further interesting ﬁnding emerged, regarding geographical
distribution (Fig.8). Despite the widespread notion of a sharp division between northern and
southern Italy across various dimensions (e.g., income, development, infrastructure) (see,
e.g., Abramo et al., 2016), our analysis did not reveal a signiﬁcant difference in community
afﬁliation between universities based in northern, central or southern regions. This ﬁnding
aligns with a previous result obtained from a Leiden Ranking analysis, also focused on
the Italian case (Daraio et al., 2023). In conclusion, our analysis demonstrated that Italian
universities with greater resources also achieved higher positions in the ARWU ranking.
123

1396
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
Fig. 5 Boxplot of the variables analysed using DEA for the Italian case (from the left to the right: ARWU
score=y, physical capital=x1 and revenues=x2). Colours represent the different communities identiﬁed. Source:
own elaboration based on DEA. (Color ﬁgure online)
Fig. 6 Boxplot of Italian university student enrolment. Colours represent the different communities identiﬁed.
Source: own elaboration based on DEA and the directed Louvain analysis network. (Color ﬁgure online)
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1397
Fig. 7 Boxplot of Italian communities’ number of academic personnel. Colours represent the different com-
munities identiﬁed. Source: own elaboration based on DEA and the directed Louvain analysis network. (Color
ﬁgure online)
Fig. 8 Geographical representation of the number of Italian universities per community. Labelled nodes
represent the efﬁcient units in their respective communities. Colours represent the different communities
identiﬁed. Source: own elaboration based on DEA and the directed Louvain analysis network
123

1398
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we
i) introduced a novel approach combining the DEA-VRS methodology with the (directed)
Louvain algorithm to identify communities of universities with similar ﬁnancial resources
and ARWU scores;
ii) demonstrated that universities’ positioning in an academic ranking is signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by their available ﬁnancial resources;
iii) grouped universities with similar ﬁnancial resources and similar positions in the ranking;
iv) identiﬁed universities with efﬁcient utilisation of ﬁnancial resources as practical targets
for other universities to emulate; and
v) raised concerns regarding the fairness of the ranking.
The results should be considered heuristic, requiring further veriﬁcation and systematic
analysis. However, they have the potential to stimulate further study and provide greater
insight into university rankings and university management, pointing to alternative ways of
allocating research funds.
We analysed 318 international universities and a sample of Italian universities to explore
the prevalent role played by ﬁnancial resources in determining universities’ positioning in
the ARWU ranking. Annual revenues appeared more signiﬁcant than physical capital in
determining higher ARWU scores. Subsequently, we explored the Italian case, identifying
how resources and ranking scores aligned with university size, in terms of student enrol-
ment (a dimension not considered by the ARWU), the number of academic personnel and
geographical location. No signiﬁcant differences were observed in terms of teaching load or
geographical location in the Italian territory.
The results offer valuable insight into the role played by ﬁnancial resources in determining
university positioning within the ARWU. They also prompt further reﬂection on the fairness
of comparing universities with vastly different ﬁnancial resources. Moreover, we emphasise
that the proposed methodology is not intended to provide a deﬁnitive evaluation or ranking
of universities, but rather to compare universities (i.e., peers) and generate key insights into
the dynamics of resource management and how such dynamics impact university positioning
in academic rankings.
From a policy perspective, our results may prompt policy makers to reconsider criteria
for resource allocation, particularly in countries with limited public spending per capita on
higher education and research (e.g., Italy). Indeed, the concentration of resources may play
a key role in determining both international and national competition. Thus, policy makers
could opt to target efﬁcient analysis units (i.e., those with DEA scores of 1) for optimal
resource utilisation. Alternatively, they might consider optimising and revising processes at
less efﬁcient universities, to improve resource allocation. Furthermore, policy makers could
choose to allocate funding disproportionately to speciﬁc communities (e.g., in the Italian
case, the purple community), to amplify the impact of funding concentration and propel
universities in those communities up the ranking. However, it is important to recognise
that improvements reﬂected by ARWU indicators may not necessarily persist in subsequent
years, due to various factors, including academic processes and university inefﬁciencies or
resource gaps. Moreover, any changes in resource allocation or increased funding should
be systematic, rather than ”one-off,” as ﬂuctuations in resources may result in universities
reverting to previous situations. Furthermore, our ﬁndings hold potential utility for university
management tasked with devising reliable strategies for moving up in academic rankings
and making the institution more competitive and efﬁcient. In particular, managers may draw
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1399
inspiration from the best practices observed in leading universities within their respective
communities (i.e., the most efﬁcient universities), thereby realistically improving their ability
to compete and, consequently, their positions in academic rankings.
One weaknesses of the proposed approach is that the optimal λ∗
j values in the DEA formu-
lation were not necessarily unique. This is a critical consideration, as our approach relied on
these values to construct a directed weighted graph for further investigation using network
analysis. As explained in the “Methodology and data” Section, the issue of multiple λ∗
j values
primarily affects DEA CRS models. Thus, it did not affect the DEA VRS model applied in the
present research. Nonetheless, we conducted robustness tests to conﬁrm that our application
yielded a single optimal solution. Should this problem arise in future research, it could be
addressed using the bootstrap approach proposed in the recent paper by Kang et al. (2024).
Another limitation concerns our modelling of revenues as an input of the analysed process.
Traditionally, revenues are considered as an output of the production process of universities,
whereas we have assumed that the ﬁnancial resources available to an institution (proxied by
its revenues) directly inﬂuence its ability to increase its ARWU ranking. Future works could
explore the use of operating costs as an input instead of revenues or carry out comparative
analyses of models that use revenues as an input versus those that use it as an output.
A potential limitation of this work concerns the inﬂuence of possible outliers on the DEA
efﬁciency scores. Although our analysis focused on extremely high-performing universities
(considered peers, and therefore exemplars for inefﬁcient universities to emulate), we believe
it would be beneﬁcial to investigate and attenuate the impact of outliers using the robust
methods developed in efﬁciency analysis. This remains a consideration for future iterations
of this work.
Additional avenues for future research could involve decomposing revenues between
public and private shares, incorporating other ﬁnancial variables in the DEA model and
expanding the dataset to encompass (almost) all ARWU universities (which is not currently
possible, due data limitations). Moreover, the proposed approach could be applied to other
university rankings (e.g., the THE or QS), to ascertain the robustness of the present results
across rankings.
Finally, in a subsequent analysis, it would be interesting to develop conditional DEA mod-
els considering ﬁnancial resources as control variables. This would enable the impact of
ﬁnancial resources on university performance to be estimated, facilitating the identiﬁcation
of appropriate peers for individual universities, based on the output of the conditional DEA
model.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10479-024-06219-7.
Acknowledgements A previous version of this paper was presented at the XXX Meeting of the Economics
of Education Association, 30 June-1 July 2022, Porto (Portugal), and at the XXXIII AiIG Scientiﬁc Meeting
of the Italian Association of Management Engineering (RSA AiIG 2022), 20–21 October 2022, Rome (Italy).
We thank the conference participants for their helpful comments and discussion.
Author Contributions Simone Di Leo: conceptualization, methodology, data collection and analysis; writing;
Alessandro Avenali: conceptualization, data collection, writing-original draft preparation, reviewing;
Cinzia Daraio: conceptualization, writing-Original draft preparation, supervision; Joanna Wolszczak-
Derlacz: data collection, reviewing.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza within the CRUI-
CARE Agreement. The ﬁnancial support of the Sapienza University of Rome, via research awards nos.
RM11916B8853C925 and RM12117A8A5DBD18, is gratefully acknowledged.
123

1400
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
Availability of data and materials The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon request.
Code Availability Not applicable.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest All authors certify that they have no afﬁliations with or involvement in any organization or
entity with any ﬁnancial or non-ﬁnancial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.
Financial interests: The authors declare that they have no ﬁnancial interests.
Ethics approval Not applicable.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abramo, G., D’Angelo, C. A., & Rosati, F. (2016). The north-south divide in the Italian higher education
system. Scientometrics, 109, 2093–2117.
Avenali, A., Daraio, C., Di Leo, S., & Wolszczak-Derlacz, J. (2024). Heterogeneity of national accounting
systems, world-class universities and ﬁnancial resources: What are the links? Journal of Informetrics,
18(2), 101502.
Baltaru, R. D., Manac, R. D., & Ivan, M. D. (2022). Do rankings affect universities’ ﬁnancial sustainability?
Financial vulnerability to rankings and elite status as a positional good. Studies in Higher Education,
47(11), 2323–2335.
Banker, R. D., Charnes, A., & Cooper, W. W. (1984). Some models for estimating technical and scale
inefﬁciencies in data envelopment analysis. Management Science, 30(9), 1078–1092.
Banker, R. D., & Thrall, R. M. (1992). Estimation of returns to scale using data envelopment analysis. European
Journal of Operational Research, 62(1), 74–84.
Benito, M., Gil, P., & Romera, R. (2019). Funding, is it key for standing out in the university rankings?
Scientometrics, 121(2), 771–792.
Berne, O. (2020). What does the Shanghai Ranking really measure? In Working paper. https://hal.science/
hal-02918290/document
Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J. L., Lambiotte, R., & Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast unfolding of communities in large
networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2008(10), P10008.
Bougnol, M. L., & Dulá, J. H. (2006). Validating DEA as a ranking tool: An application of DEA to assess
performance in higher education. Annals of Operations Research, 145, 339–365.
Bruni, R., Catalano, G., Daraio, C., Gregori, M., & Moed, H. F. (2020). Studying the heterogeneity of European
higher education institutions. Scientometrics, 125(2), 1117–1144.
Charnes, A., Cooper, W. W., & Rhodes, E. (1978). Measuring the efﬁciency of decision making units. European
Journal of Operational Research, 2(6), 429–444.
Cooper, W. W., Ruiz, J. L., & Sirvent, I. (2011). Choices and uses of DEA weights. In W. Cooper, L. Seiford,
& J. Zhu (Eds.), Handbook on data envelopment analysis. Springer: Boston, MA.
Daraio, C., Bonaccorsi, A., & Simar, L. (2015). Rankings and university performance: A conditional
multidimensional approach. European Journal of Operational Research, 244(3), 918–930.
Daraio, C., Di Leo, S., & Leydesdorff, L. (2023). A heuristic approach based on Leiden rankings to identify
outliers: Evidence from Italian universities in the European landscape. Scientometrics, 128(1), 483–510.
123

Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
1401
Daraio, C., Iazzolino, G., Laise, D., Coniglio, I. M., & Di Leo, S. (2022). Metachoices in ranking knowledge-
based organizations. Management Decision, 60(4), 9951016.
Daraio, C., & Simar, L. (2007). Advanced robust and nonparametric methods in efﬁciency analysis:
Methodology and applications. New York: Springer.
de Blas, C. S., Martin, J. S., & Gonzalez, D. G. (2018). Combined social networks and data envelopment
analysis for ranking. European Journal of Operational Research, 266(3), 990–999.
Di Carlo, F., Modugno, G., Agasisti, T., & Catalano, G. (2019). Changing the accounting system to foster
universities’ ﬁnancial sustainability: First evidence from Italy. Sustainability, 11(21), 6151.
Dugúe, N., & Perez, A. (2015). Directed Louvain: Maximizing modularity in directed networks [Doctoral
dissertation, Université d’Orléans].
Etzkowitz, H., & Leydesdorff, L. (1997). Introduction to special issue on science policy dimensions of the
triple helix of university-industry-government relations. Science and Public Policy, 24(1), 2–5.
Fauzi, M. A., Tan, C. N. L., Daud, M., & Awalludin, M. M. N. (2020). University rankings: A review of
methodological ﬂaws. Issues in Educational Research, 30, 79–96.
Fortunato, S., & Castellano, C. (2007). Community structure in graphs. arXiv: 0712.2716.
Hazelkorn, E. (2017). Rankings and the reshaping of higher education: The battle for world-class excellence.
Palgrave Macmillan.
Hazelkorn, E., & Mihut, G. (Eds). (2021). Research handbook on university rankings: Theory, methodology,
inﬂuence and impact. Edward Elgar.
Ho, W., Dey, P. K., & Higson, H. E. (2006). Multiple criteria decision-making techniques in higher education.
International Journal of Educational Management, 20(5), 319–337.
Joro, T., & Viitala, E. J. (2004). Weight-restricted DEA in action: From expert opinions to mathematical
models. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 55, 814–821.
Kang, H. J., Kim, C., & Choi, K. (2024). Combining bootstrap data envelopment analysis with social networks
for rank discrimination and suitable potential benchmarks. European Journal of Operational Research,
312(1), 283–297.
Kim, J. (2018). The functions and dysfunctions of college rankings: An analysis of institutional expenditure.
Research in Higher Education, 59(1), 54–87. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11162-017-9455-1
Kleinberg, J. M. (1999). Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
46(5), 604–632.
Kneip, A., Simar, L., & Wilson, P. W. (2016). Testing hypotheses in nonparametric models of production.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 34(3), 435–456.
Lavigne, C., De Jaeger, S.,& Rogge, N. (2019). Identifying the most relevant peers for benchmarking
waste management performance: A conditional directional distance beneﬁt-of-the-doubt approach. Waste
Management, 89, 418–429.
Lepori, B., Geuna, A., & Mira, A. (2019). Scientiﬁc output scales with resources. A comparison of US and
European universities. PloS One, 14(10), e0223415.
Lepori, B., Geuna, A., & Veglio, V. (2017). A typology of European research universities. Differentiation,
layering, and resource distribution. SWPS, 1.
Liu, J. S., Lu, W. M., Yang, C., & Chuang, M. (2009). A network-based approach for increasing discrimination
in data envelopment analysis. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 60(11), 1502–1510.
Liu, N. C., Cheng, Y., & Liu, X. (2016). Academic ranking of world universities. In Encyclopedia of
international higher education systems and institutions (pp. 1–6). Springer.
Malliaros, F. D., & Vazirgiannis, M. (2013). Clustering and community detection in directed networks: A
survey. Physics Reports, 533(4), 95–142.
Merisotis, J., & Sadlak, J. (2005). Higher education rankings: Evolution, acceptance, and dialogue. Higher
Education in Europe, 30(2), 97–101.
Moed, H. F. (2017). A critical comparative analysis of ﬁve world university rankings. Scientometrics, 110(2),
967–990.
Nepomuceno, T. C. C., Seixas Costa, A. P. C., & Daraio, C. (2023). Theoretical and empirical advances in the
assessment of productive efﬁciency since the introduction of DEA: A bibliometric analysis. International
Journal of Operational Research, 46(4), 505–549.
Newman, M. E. (2016). Community detection in networks: Modularity optimization and maximum likelihood
are equivalent. arXiv:1606.02319.
Olcay, G. A., & Bulu, M. (2017). Is measuring the knowledge creation of universities possible? A review of
university rankings. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 123, 153–160.
Pedraja-Chaparro, F., Salinas-Jimenez, J., & Smith, P. (1997). On the role of weight restrictions in data
envelopment analysis. Journal of Productivity Analysis, 8, 215–230.
Podinovski, V. (2015). DEA models with production trade-offs and weight restrictions. In J. Zhu (Ed.), Data
envelopment analysis . Springer: Boston, MA.
123

1402
Annals of Operations Research (2025) 351:1377–1402
Podinovski, V. V. (2016). Optimal weights in DEA models with weight restrictions. European Journal of
Operational Research, 254(3), 916–924.
Podinovski, V. V., & Athanassopoulos, A. D. (1998). Assessing the relative efﬁciency of decision making
units using DEA models with weight restrictions. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 49(5),
500–508.
Sarrico, C. S., & Dyson, R. G. (2000). Using DEA for planning in UK universities: An institutional perspective.
Journal of the Operational Research Society, 51(7), 789–800.
Seiford, L. M., & Zhu, J. (1998). On alternative optimal solutions in the estimation of returns to scale in DEA.
European Journal of Operational Research, 108(1), 149–152.
Thanassoulis, E., Portela, M. C., & Allen, R. (2004). Incorporating value judgments in DEA. In: W. W. Cooper,
L. M. Seiford,& J. Zhu (Eds.), Handbook on data envelopment analysis. Springer: Boston, MA.
Turri, M. (2016). The difﬁcult transition of the Italian university system: Growth, underfunding and reforms.
Journal of Further and Higher Education, 40(1), 83–106.
Valmorbida, S. M. I., & Ensslin, S. R. (2017). Performance evaluation of university rankings: Literature review
and guidelines for future research. International Journal of Business Innovation and Research, 14(4),
479–501.
Wilson, P. W. (2008). FEAR: A software package for frontier efﬁciency analysis with R. Socio-economic
Planning Sciences, 42(4), 247–254.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123