TITLE: Federated calculation of the free-support transportation barycenter by single-loop dual decomposition
JOURNAL: Annals_OR
YEAR: 2026
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-07004-w
---

ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Received: 26 December 2024 / Accepted: 12 December 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
This paper is scheduled to appear in a special issue of the Annals of Operations Research in honor of 
Professor John Mulvey of Princeton University for his many and lasting contributions to the field of 
operations research and especially to optimization methods and modeling applications to business and 
government settings.
 
 Andrzej Ruszczyński
rusz@rutgers.edu
Zhengqi Lin
zhengqi.lin@rutgers.edu
1 
Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers University, 100 
Rockafeller Rd., Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
Federated calculation of the free-support transportation 
barycenter by single-loop dual decomposition
Zhengqi Lin1 · Andrzej Ruszczyński1
Annals of Operations Research
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-025-07004-w
Abstract
We propose an efficient federated dual decomposition algorithm for calculating the Was­
serstein barycenter of several distributions, including choosing the support of the solution. 
The algorithm does not access local data and uses only highly aggregated information. It 
also does not require repeated solutions to mass transportation problems. Because of the 
absence of any matrix–vector operations, the algorithm exhibits a very low complexity 
of each iteration and significant scalability. We illustrate its virtues and compare it to the 
state-of-the-art methods on several examples of mixture models.
Keywords  Optimal transport · Wasserstein Barycenter · Federated learning · Fairness in 
machine learning · Two-stage stochastic programming
1  Introduction
The Monge–Kantorovich transportation distance, frequently referred to as the “Wasser­
stein” metric or the “Earth-Mover’s” distance, is a distance between probability measures 
on a given space Y with metric d(·, ·). For p ≥1, the pth order distance between two mea­
sures µ and ν that have finite pth moments (belong to the space Pp(Y )) is defined as:
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
Wp(µ, ν) =
(
min
π∈Π(µ,ν)
ˆ
Y ×Y
d(y, z)p π(dy, dz)
)1/p
,
(1)
where Π(µ, ν) is the set of all probability measures on Y × Y with the marginals µ and 
ν. We refer the reader to Villani (2009) for the historical account and comments on the 
terminology.
In recent years, the transportation distance has demonstrated promising results in various 
applications, including Generative Adversarial Networks (Arjovsky et al., 2017), clustering 
(Ho et al., 2017), semi-supervised learning (Solomon et al., 2014), and image retrieval (Rub­
ner et al., 2000; Pele & Werman, 2009). Furthermore, recent contributions have extended its 
applicability to measuring the distance between mixture distributions, such as the sketched 
Wasserstein distance proposed by Bing et al. (2022) for finite mixture models, and distances 
tailored to Gaussian mixture models (Chen et al., 2020; Delon & Desolneux, 2020; Kolouri 
et al., 2018).
In this article, we are concerned with a family of probability measures on Y , param­
etrized by an argument x ∈X , where X is another metric space. Formally, such a family 
can be viewed as a stochastic kernel: a measurable mapping Q from X to the space Pp(Y ) 
of probability measures on Y having finite pth moments. For a fixed distribution λ on X 
and any probability measure q on Y , we can define the pth order distance between the ker­
nel Q and the measure q as follows
 
W λ
p (Q, q) =
(ˆ
X
[
Wp(Q(x), q)]p λ(dx)
)1/p
.
(2)
The function W λ
p (Q, q) calculates an “average” transportation distance between Q(x) and 
q, over all parameter values x, weighted by the measure λ. It is a special case of the Inte­
grated Transportation Distance between stochastic (Markov) kernels, recently introduced 
by Lin and Ruszczyński (2023). There is also a connection to the weak transport theory of 
Backhoff-Veraguas and Pammer (2022).
Using the distance (2), we define the pth order transportation barycenter problem as 
follows:
 
min
q∈Pp(Y ) W λ
p (Q, q).
(3)
It is a generalization of the Wasserstein barycenter problem introduced in Agueh and Carlier 
(2011) for discrete distributions λ and p = 2.
1.1  Business and data analysis applications: fairness
Our interest in the barycenter problem is due to its relevance for manifold business applica­
tions. In finance and insurance, the parameter x may represent a particular location, affiliated 
business, or a specific customer group, and Q(x) may represent the distribution of a certain 
characteristic of customers with this designation. Then, the barycenter q may serve as a 
representative distribution for policy development.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
For example, let X ∈X represent a sensitive information of an insured, such as race 
or gender, Z the other risk factors, and L the loss. For simplicity, we assume that X is 
finite. The pure premium is defined as the Bayes predictor µ(X, Z) = E[L|X, Z]. In gen­
eral, the conditional distribution of µ(X, Z), given X = x, is different for different x, 
which may be undesirable or outright illegal. Regressors g(X, Z) having the property that 
E[g(X, Z)|X = x] is the same for all x are called fair (see, Charpentier et al.2023; Caras­
sai, 2024). We denote their class as G fair. The calculation of the fair premium can be now 
formulated as
 
min
g∈G fair E
[(
L −g(X, Z))2]
;
(4)
evidently, without the restriction g ∈G fair, the conditional expectation µ(X, Z) would be 
best. Denote by Q(x) the conditional distribution of µ(X, Z), given X = x. The fundamen­
tal result in this context, due to Chzhen et al. (2020), Gouic et al. (2020), is that (under mild 
technical conditions) the optimal value of problem (4) is equal to the squared optimal value 
of the barycenter problem for p = 2:
 
min
q
∑
x∈X
λ(x) W 2
2 (Q(x), q).
(5)
Furthermore, the barycenter ¯q is equal to the distribution of ˆg(X, Z), where ˆg solves prob­
lem (4). The latter, by the definition of fairness, is the same as the conditional distribution of 
ˆg(X, Z), given X = x, for any x. This leads to the following procedure for solving problem 
(4), as detailed in Gouic et al. (2020). First, we find Bayes regressors µ(X, Z) and develop 
their distributions Q(x), x ∈X . The second step is to find their barycenter ¯q from (5). We 
can also find for each x a mapping Tx such that Txµ(x, Z) has distribution ¯q, and a mapping 
T x such that for any variable Y with distribution ¯q, T xY has distribution Q(x). Then, for 
each x, the best fair predictor is
 
ˆg(x, Z) =
∑
x′∈X
λ(x′)T x′Tx µ(x, Z).
Although the original motivation for this analysis was insurance, one can easily extend these 
techniques to other applications, such as credit qualification, housing, health policy, educa­
tion, etc. Corresponding results for classification can be found in Gaucher et al. (2023). The 
downside of this approach is that the resulting mappings may be randomized.
Based on these ideas, Carassai (2024) proposes a general and robust procedure for pre­
processing arbitrary data sets to guarantee fairness. Its advantage is that it is not restricted 
to the least-squares method and can be applied before training by any machine learning 
method. Suppose the data contains attributes and labels (combined) (X, Z, Y), with X being 
the sensitive attribute, Z representing other attributes, and Y being the labels. It is not suf­
ficient to ignore the attribute X in the data before training; the result may still become unfair, 
due to intrinsic correlation. To make sure that any machine learning procedure will produce 
fair results, we replace the distribution of the data (Z, Y) with the Wasserstein barycenter of 
the conditional distributions Q(x) of (Z, Y), given X = x, for all values of x.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
An important aspect of health and financial applications is that the specific data distribu­
tions Q(x), for x ∈X , are stored in local databases and may not be available directly for 
centralized policy analysis, because of privacy or confidentiality restrictions. We cannot just 
set q to be the mixture distribution λ ◦Q defined as
 
[λ ◦Q](B) =
ˆ
X
Q(x)(B) λ(dx),
for all Borel sets B ⊂Y ,
because its calculation requires direct access to the local data.
1.2  Existing methods
There are continuous efforts to develop efficient algorithms for computing relevant transpor­
tation distances that are relevant to the barycenter problem. Most work focuses on measures 
supported on finitely many points. The Sinkhorn algorithm, introduced by Cuturi (2013), 
incorporates an entropic regularization term into the mass transportation problem and has 
emerged as a baseline approach alongside its variant, Altschuler et al. (2017). As observed 
by Benamou et al. (2015), Sinkhorn is a special case of an alternating Bregman projection 
method. These algorithms have driven significant progress in the field; see, Genevay et al. 
(2016), Lin et al. (2019). Other notable approaches include accelerated primal-dual gradi­
ent descent (Dvurechensky et al., 2018c, b; Kroshnin et al., 2019) and semi-dual gradient 
descent (Cuturi & Peyré, 2018; Cuturi & Peyré, 2016).
The Wasserstein barycenter inherits the computational difficulties associated with opti­
mal transport distances.
Problem (3) exhibits features similar to two-stage stochastic programming problems (see 
Shapiro et al., 2021, and the references therein): the barycenter distribution q is the first 
stage variable, the distributions Q(x), x ∈X , are the second-stage data, and the couplings 
π(x) in (1) between q and Q(x) are the second stage variables.
Two fundamental approaches to problems of this structure are the primal and dual decom­
position methods. They were developed and successfully applied in the area of stochastic 
programming; see (Ruszczyński & Shapiro 2003, Ch. 3) for a thorough exposition and a 
historical account. Recently, similar ideas were explored in connection with the Wasserstein 
barycenter problem.
In the primal approaches, the coordinating problem iterates over the first-stage variables, 
usually by solving a simplified model or conducting a subgradient-based search. The second 
stage problems are solved for each new value of the first-stage variables to provide subgra­
dient information about their optimal values. In stochastic programming, the key contribu­
tions are (Van Slyke & Wets, 1969; Ruszczyński, 1986; Birge & Louveaux, 1988). For the 
Wasserstein barycenter problem, a fundamental difference occurs between formulations in 
which the support of the barycenter is fixed, and formulations in which it is free and has to 
be optimized. Fixed-support models are essentially two-stage linear programming problems 
with transportation subproblems. For a free-support problem (Cuturi & Doucet, 2014) pro­
poses a method of this class with the outer algorithm iterating over the first-stage variables 
(the central distribution) by a simple subgradient method, while the subproblems optimize 
the regularized Wasserstein distance (Sinkhorn distance) and calculate corresponding sub­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
gradients. Inaccuracies due to the regularization can be mitigated by a method of Xie et al. 
(2020).
In the dual approaches, the first-stage variables are replicated, and the subproblems opti­
mize modified transportation problems with respect to both groups of variables. In stochas­
tic programming, such approaches were initiated by Rockafellar and Wets (1991), Mulvey 
and Ruszczyński (1995). The purpose of coordination is to bring the copies of the first 
stage variables to equality. For the fixed-support barycenter problem, Refs. Benamou et 
al. (2015), Lin et al. (2020) propose an approach in the spirit of the Progressive Hedging 
method of Rockafellar and Wets (1991): an alternating Bregman projection method, which 
is a direct extension of the Sinkhorn algorithm. Ref. Dvurechenskii et al. (2018a) applies a 
dual method, by reproducing the first stage variables, as in Mulvey and Ruszczyński (1995), 
and iterating over the dual variables by a subgradient method until coordination is achieved. 
Again, each iteration requires the solution of a transportation problem for each subproblem 
s. Álvarez-Esteban et al. (2016) propose a fixed-point heuristic iteration.
The common drawback of the approaches to the variable-support problem is that they 
require an exact solution of a transportation problem to calculate the Wasserstein distance 
(or its modification) for each subproblem x and at each iteration of the upper-level algorithm.
1.3  Privacy issues and federated learning
The second issue that we plan to address is the privacy of the data. Generally, a distributed 
machine learning framework that enables diverse clients or users to collaboratively train a 
model on a central server while preserving the decentralized nature of sensitive client data is 
developed in the literature under the name of Federated Learning (FL) (see McMahan et al. 
2016; Konečný et al. 2016; Smith et al. 2017; Li et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2021) and the refer­
ences therein). A key characteristic of FL is its emphasis on statistical heterogeneity, which 
refers to the non-iid data across clients. In typical FL application, each client corresponds to 
a user, and the richness of their contributed data reflects various aspects, such as personal, 
cultural, regional, and geographical traits.
Federated learning faces several challenges that arise from its decentralized nature and 
the need to ensure privacy, security, and fairness. The main difficulties include communica­
tion efficiency, as iterative communication between the center and clients can be costly; 
statistical heterogeneity, due to the unique data distributions across clients; privacy and 
security risks, such as inferring sensitive information from shared model updates; fairness 
issues, stemming from decentralized and potentially non-iid data; and ensuring interpret­
ability and explainability in the federated setting. Despite the growing interest in federated 
learning, the above critical challenges are not fully addressed, leaving numerous ongoing 
research directions.
In this paper, we introduce decomposable and parallelizable dual subgradient methods 
for approximating client distributions and determining the Wasserstein barycenter, specif­
ically designed for privacy-preserving settings. We refer to the algorithms based on the 
subgradient methods as the Federated Dual Subgradient Algorithms. Our dual method is 
highly non-standard and it does not follow the dual decomposition approaches known from 
stochastic programming, such as Mulvey and Ruszczyński (1995) and related research. The 
novel ideas are a new reformulation of the free-support problem, detailed in section 2, and 
partial dualization of the local (subproblem) constraints, described in section 3. Most of the 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
dual variables are local, and we avoid repeated solving of the mass transportation problems. 
Instead of that, we employ a closed-form minimization of the Lagrangian.
To the best of our knowledge, it is the first efficient methodology for determining the 
Wasserstein barycenter without repeated subproblem solution, and under the privacy-pre­
serving setting.
2  Discrete approximation of the variable-support problem
In this section, the objective is to develop a convenient mixed-integer reformulation of the 
transportation barycenter problem, under the assumption that the spaces X and Y are finite.
Evidently, if Y is finite, then (1) has a linear programming representation. Let µ and ν be 
discrete measures in P(Y ), supported at positions {y(i)}N
i=1 and {z(j)}S
j=1 with normal­
ized (totaling 1) positive weight vectors wy and wz:
 
µ =
N
∑
i=1
w(i)
y δy(i),
ν =
S
∑
j=1
w(j)
z δz(j).
For p ≥1, let D ∈RN×S
+
 be the distance matrix with the entries Dij = d(
y(i), z(j))p. Then 
the pth power of the p-Wasserstein distance between the measures µ and ν is the optimal 
value of the following transportation problem:
 
min
π∈RN×S
+
N
∑
i=1
S
∑
j=1
Dijπij
s.t.
π⊤1N = wy,
π1S = wz.
(6)
We plan to exploit this linear programming formulation within our approach.
The finiteness of X may result from considering a discrete distribution λ: an approxima­
tion of the true marginal distribution λ. In our approach, we represent the support of λ with 
a set of state points 
{
xs}
s=1,...,N; this may be, for example, a large sample from λ. Fur­
thermore, each distribution Q(xs) is represented by a finite number of particles 
{
ys,i}
i∈I s 
drawn independently from Q(xs). As every conditional distribution Q(xs) is private, we 
assume that the sample 
{
ys,i}
i∈I s is only available locally, to the “device” s, but not 
to other devices or to the coordinator. We use the symbol Q(xs) to denote the empirical 
distribution supported on 
{
ys,i}
i∈I s, and thus Q is a sample-based kernel closely approxi­
mating Q, but subject to the same privacy restrictions. Dereich et al. (2013) and Fournier 
and Guillin (2015) provide tight estimates on the accuracy of empirical approximations of 
probability measures, and Heinemann et al. (2022) guarantees for the resulting approxima­
tion of the barycenter problem.
To achieve the finiteness of the target space, we consider a set Z = {
ζk}
k=1,...,K ⊂Y . 
It consists of pre-selected potential locations for the support of the measure ¯q sought in (3). 
For example, the set Z may be a large sample from the mixture distribution λ ◦Q, where 
Q is a model or approximation of the unknown Q, or a dense grid in Y . The cardinalities 
of the finite sets introduced here: N and K, may be very large; our methods will depend on 
them in a linear way only.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
At this stage, we depart from the usual formulations of a free-support barycenter prob­
lem. We restrict our search to uniform discrete measures ¯q which have their support of car­
dinality M ≪K within the set Z . Thus, we aim to find an ensemble of particles 
Z ⊂Z , 
such that | 
Z | = M and the measure
 
¯q( 
Z ) =
1
| 
Z |

y∈
Z
δy
(7)
is the best in (3) among all measures of this structure. Formally, we define the following 
discrete approximation of problem (3):
 
min

Z ⊂Z
| 
Z | = M

W λ
p ( Q, ¯q( 
Z ))p =
N

s=1
λs

Wp
 Q( · |xs), ¯q( 
Z )p

.
(8)
Our problem is a discretized version of the notoriously difficult variable-support barycenter 
problem.
Problem (8) is a combinatorial optimization problem of considerable complexity, and 
a brute-force approach to it is doomed. We will convert it into a mixed-integer linear pro­
gramming problem, which still appears extremely difficult but has a structure that can be 
exploited to develop a rapid solution method preserving privacy restrictions.
First, we introduce the binary variables
 
γk =

1
if the point ζk has been selected to 
Z ,
0
otherwise,
k = 1, . . . , K.
With this notation, for a nonzero γ, the measure (7) has the form:
 
¯q( 
Z )k =
γk
K
j=1 γj
,
k = 1, . . . , K.
(9)
We may remark here that the above formula defines a probability measure ¯q for any nonzero 
and nonnegative vector γ.
Next, we delve into the linear programming formulation (6) of the Wasserstein distance: 
for every s and every nonzero binary vector γ, the quantity 

Wp
 Q(xs), ¯q( 
Z )p is the 
optimal value of the following transportation problem:
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
min
∑
i∈I s
K
∑
k=1
dsikπsik
s.t.
∑
i∈I s
πsik =
γk
∑K
j=1 γj
,
k = 1, . . . , K,
K
∑
k=1
πsik =
1
|I s|,
i ∈I s,
πsik ≥0,
i ∈I s,
k = 1, . . . , K,

(10)
with dsik = d(
ys,i, ζk)p. Observe that in this formulation we do not assume that 
∑K
j=1 γj = M, although this equation is required at the solution. In our method, we shall 
deal with intermediate approximate solutions violating this cardinality constraint, and we 
shall need a precise formulation of the Wasserstein distance in these cases as well.
The first constraint of problem (10), requiring that the Y -marginal of the transportation 
plan Π matches the distribution (9), is linear with respect to π, but not with respect to the 
variables γ. To remedy this problem, we re-scale the transportation plans by introducing 
new variables:
 
βsik = πsik
K
∑
j=1
γj,
s = 1, . . . , N,
i ∈I s,
k = 1, . . . , K.
(11)
The following linear mixed-integer optimization problem integrates problems (10) into (8): 
 
min
γ,β
N
∑
s=1
ws
∑
i∈I s
k
∑
k=1
dsikβsik 
(12)
 
s.t. βsik ≥0, γk ∈{0, 1},
s = 1, . . . , N,
i ∈I s,
k = 1, . . . , K,

(13)
 
∑
i∈I s
βsik = γk,
s = 1, . . . , N,
k = 1, . . . , K,

(14)
 
K
∑
k=1
βsik =
1
|I s|
K
∑
k=1
γk,
s = 1, . . . , N,
i ∈I s,

(15)
 
K
∑
k=1
γk = M,

(16)
 with ws = λs
M . In (12), we undo the change of variables (11), using M as the normaliza­
tion constant. with a view to (16). Still, the constraints (14)–(15) correctly model the mass 
transportation for any nonzero γ. We do not substitute M for ∑K
k=1 γk in (15) on purpose, 
to facilitate our dual method to be described in the next section.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Again, if the binary restrictions on γ are relaxed to the requirement that γk ∈[0, 1], 
k = 1, . . . , K, the problem (12) correctly models the fixed-support barycenter problem, with 
the restriction of the barycenter support to Z . Its optimal value is the pth power of the opti­
mal value of 3, with this additional restriction.
3  A federated dual subgradient method
As problem (12) involves binary variables, it might be tempting to employ an integer pro­
gramming solver, such as Gurobi, CPLEX, or SCIP. However, two issues or limitations exist 
for such integer programming solvers. First, integer or even linear programming can become 
computationally intractable for large-scale problems with numerous support points of the 
measures. Additionally, to formulate such problems with mixed-integer programming, we 
would need to transmit data from all local devices to the global device (coordinator) and use 
it to train a global model that would incorporate information from all local devices’ data. 
Therefore, to address the limitations of computational intractability, privacy, and security, 
we propose dedicated subgradient-based decomposition methods to solve problem (12).
Problem (12) still has the structure of a two-stage problem of stochastic programming: 
the variables γk, k = 1, . . . , K, are the first-stage variables, which define the barycenter dis­
tribution (9), while the variables βsik, s = 1, . . . , N, i ∈Is, are the second-stage variables, 
defining the couplings πs between the barycenter and the empirical distributions for each 
subproblem s. However, we do not follow the ideas of the decomposition methods discussed 
above, but rather develop a completely new dual method exploiting the specificity of the Was­
serstein barycenter problem. The main idea is to avoid solving the exact mass transporta­
tion subproblems (10) for each value of the upper level variables γ (determining the current 
approximation of the barycenter distribution). Instead of that, we solve simple Lagrangian 
relaxations based on multipliers associated with the assignment equations (15). Owing to that, 
the approximate transportation problems have closed-form solutions. The multipliers are iter­
ated in parallel with the upper-level variables (a single-loop approach) and converge to the 
correct values, so that exact transportation distances are calculated at termination.
We work with central primal variables γk, k = 1, . . . , K, and one dual variable updated by 
the coordinator, and groups of local primal and dual variables which are updated by the clients. 
In this way, we obtain the desired privacy of the local data.
Assigning Lagrange multipliers θsi and θ0 to the constraints (15) and (16), respectively, we 
obtain the Lagrangian function of problem (12):
 
L(γ, β; θ) =
∑
s
∑
i
∑
k
wsdsikβsik +
∑
s
∑
i
θsi
∑
k
( γk
|I s| −βsik
)
+ θ0
( ∑
k
γk −M)
.
The dual variable θ0 has the interpretation of the marginal contribution of an additional point 
of the cloud to reducing the distance (12). The variables θsi serve as thresholds in the assign­
ment of the particles ys,i to the candidate points. We designate θ0 as the global dual variable, 
accessible to both the central device and the local devices. Conversely, θsi, i ∈I s, are local 
variables: they are exclusively accessible to the local device s. The central device will only 
need a k-dimensional vector from each device s.
The corresponding dual function is
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
LD(θ) = min
γ,β∈Γ L(γ, β; θ)
=
K
∑
k=1
min
γk,β··k∈Γk
{
N
∑
s=1
∑
i∈I s
(wsdsik −θsi)βsik +
(
N
∑
s=1
1
|I s|
∑
i∈I s
θsi + θ0
)
γk
}
−Mθ0, (17)
where Γ is the feasible set of the primal variables given by the conditions (13)–(14), and Γk 
is its projection on the subspace associated with the kth candidate point ζk.
The minimization in (17) decomposes into K subproblems, each having a closed-form 
solution. First, we determine how the local assignment variables βsik depend on the γk’s. 
From the definition of the set Γk, we see that if γk = 0 then βsik = 0 for all s = 1, . . . , N 
and i ∈I s. If γk = 1 then for every s it is best to make βsik = 1 for i = i∗(s, k) for which 
the difference wsdsik −θsi is the smallest. Other βsik = 0, for i ̸= i∗(s, k). Then
 
∑
i∈I s
(wsdsik −θsi)βsik = min
i∈I s {wsdsik −θsi}.
This allows us to determine the best value of each γk by simply looking at the two possible 
values of the expression in braces in the formula (17). For all k = 1, . . . , K,
 
γk = 1,
if
N
∑
s=1
1
|I s|
∑
i∈I s
θsi + θ0 <
N
∑
s=1
max
i∈I s {θsi −wsdsik};
(18)
γk ∈{0, 1}, if exact equality holds; and γk = 0, otherwise. This determination can be 
made on the basis of the values of the quantities
 
Tsk = max
i∈I s{θsi −wsdsik} −
1
|I s|
∑
i∈I s
θsi,
k = 1, . . . , K,
(19)
received from the subproblems s = 1, . . . , N. The couplings β then follow as described 
above.
The dual problem has the form
 
max
θ
LD(θ).
(20)
The subdifferential of the dual function can be calculated in the standard way:
 
∂LD(θ) = conv
{[{∑K
k=1
(
ˆγk
|I s| −ˆβsik
)}
s=1,...,N, i∈I s
∑K
k=1 ˆγk −M
]
: (ˆγ, ˆβ) ∈ˆΓ(θ)
}
,
(21)
where ˆΓ(θ) is the set of solutions of problem (17). At the optimal solution ˆθ we have 
0 ∈∂LD(ˆθ).
As usual with the dual methods for mixed-integer programming, the optimal value 
of (20) may be strictly below the optimal value of (12); it is equal to the optimal value 
of the linear programming relaxation, where the conditions γk ∈{0, 1} are replaced by 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
γk ∈[0, 1]. However, such relaxation of (12) correctly models the barycenter problem, with 
the support of q restricted to Z .
An essential virtue of our dual method is that the rule (18) naturally defines the γk’s as 
binary. The number of selected points may differ from M, but M is not a hard parameter of 
the model. If we replace M by the number of γk’s equal to 1, the gap is zero; the solution 
of the relaxation is optimal for the mixed integer formulation. If we keep M unchanged, we 
can construct a feasible solution by setting to 0 the γk’s for which the change in the expres­
sion in the braces in (17) is the smallest. This allows for the estimation of the gap. But this 
correction is not really necessary. It is worth stressing that in the algorithm below, we need 
only one subgradient for each θ, and thus one minimizer in (17).
4  Single-loop algorithms for federated learning
In the FL setting, the γ’s are global variables (known to both the central device and the local 
devices). The dual variables θsi and the βsi’s are private or local variables (known only to 
the corresponding devices s). The central device assumes the responsibility for iterating the 
dual variable θ0 by aggregating the numbers reported by the local devices.
An iteration of the method does not involve solving any mass transportation problems, 
but only closed-form operations. Each local device calculates its temporary values of the β
’s (by setting βs,i∗(s,k),k = 1, and other to 0) and reports the quantities (19) to the global 
device. Upon receiving this information, the global device aggregates the quantities (19), 
determines the value of γ by (18), makes a subgradient step in θ0, and relays it back to the 
local devices. Subsequently, each local device updates its θsi’s using the γ’s and (corrected) 
β’s in a subgradient step. Then the iteration continues.
By employing the dual subgradient method, the central device avoids using private data, 
ensuring privacy preservation. It does not know the data points ys,i, it does not know the 
distances dsik = d(ysi, ζk)p, it does not know the local dual variables θsi, and not even the 
local numbers of particles |I s| or the weights ws. The only local information reported is 
(19).
The calculations do not involve any matrix–vector operations. For each device s, and at 
each iteration of the method, only one pass over source-destination pairs must be executed. 
The work of the global device is of the order O(N · K), where N is the number of devices, 
and K is the total number of potential reference points.
The communication cost per iteration, representing the amount of data that needs to be 
transmitted between the central server and the participating clients (devices or edge nodes) 
for each local device s = 1, . . . , N is of the order of O(K).
In Algorithm 1 below, the variable j denotes the iteration number, starting from 0. The 
symbol θ represents the initial values of the dual variables, while M is the desired cardinal­
ity of the support of the barycenter. The parameter ϵ defines the tolerance level, and α(0) 
represents the initial learning rate. The variables κ1 and κ2 are exponential decay factors 
between 0 and 1, determining the relative contribution of the current subgradient and ear­
lier subgradients to the direction. The variable “maxiter” refers to the maximum number 
of iterations allowed. It’s important to note that the total number of γ’s selected by the 
subgradient method may not necessarily equal M when the stopping criteria are met. We 
introduce the parameter a to ensure that the iteration concludes when ∑K
k=1 γk is close to 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
M. Additionally, the global steps and local steps, performed by the global and local devices, 
respectively, are indicated by comment lines starting with “\ \”. The global variables γ are 
accessible to the local devices.
Algorithm 1  Federated dual subgradient algorithm for the barycenter problem (12)
In the context of (approximate) primal recovery, we select the values θ(j) for the last J 
iterations where LD(θ(j)) closely approaches the optimal solution. Subsequently, we con­
struct the convex hull of the observed subgradients of the dual function at these points, 
approximating the subdifferential defined in equation (21). The minimum norm element 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
within this convex hull represents a convex combination of the corresponding dual points: 
(¯γ, ¯β) = ∑
j∈J ωj(γ(j), β(j)), with ∑
j∈J ωj = 1 and ωj ≥0. Based on convex optimiza­
tion duality theory, if the subgradients were obtained at the optimal point, (¯γ, ¯β) would 
serve as the solution to the convex relaxation of problem (12). Hence, if the norm of the 
convex combination of the subgradients is small, we can accept ¯γ as an approximate solu­
tion. We interpret this as the optimal "mixed strategy" and select each point k with a prob­
ability proportional to ¯γk. In our experiments, we adopt a straightforward strategy using 
ωj = ( ∑
i∈J α(i))−1α(j) ≈1/|J|. This approach finds theoretical support in Larsson et 
al. (1999). The convergence rate for the subgradient method, O(1/√j + 1), has been well-
established since Zinkevich (2003) (also referenced in Garrigos & Gower 2023).
In the stochastic adaptation of the approach, the iteration over k is conducted 
within a randomly chosen batch B(j) ⊂{1, . . . , K} of size B ≪K. Subsequently, 
the subgradient component g(j)
0
= ∑K
k=1 γk −M in line 26 is replaced by its sto­
chastic approximation ˜g(j)
0
= (K/B) ∑k ∈B(j)γk −M. Likewise, the subgradi­
ent components g(j)
si = 1 −∑K
k=1 βsik in line 30 are substituted with their estimates 
˜g(j)
si = 1 −(K/B) ∑
k∈B(j) βsik. If the batches are randomly drawn at each iteration, inde­
pendently of all other data, the algorithm can be seen as a version of the stochastic subgradi­
ent method with momentum, as outlined in Yan et al. (2018), Liu et al. (2020), and related 
literature.
Despite the algorithms’ privacy-preserving design, there may still be privacy risks if the 
implementation is not carefully executed. Inadvertent leakage of sensitive information or 
the possibility of reconstructing individual data from shared model updates or gradients 
could compromise user privacy, especially in scenarios involving small samples of highly 
sensitive data. Furthermore, with non-IID data distributions across clients, imbalances in 
client participation, data skewness, or unequal contributions from different clients could 
lead to biased representations in the computed barycenter, potentially undermining fairness 
and accuracy.
5  Numerical illustration
We use three simple numerical examples to demonstrate the application of the Federated 
Dual Subgradient Algorithm to approximate Wasserstein barycenters under privacy-pre­
serving settings. In each example, we analyze Gaussian mixture models (GMM) com­
posed of N Gaussian distributions. Each Gaussian component is characterized by different 
weights, representing their respective contributions to the overall mixture. The objective 
is to determine the Wasserstein barycenter of the GMMs, which represents a central ten­
dency or average distribution that minimizes the Wasserstein distance with respect to all the 
component distributions. This experiment with the 2-dimensional GMMs aims to illustrate 
the potential of employing the dual algorithm to determine the Wasserstein barycenter in a 
privacy-preserving setting.
In the following experiment, two-dimensional Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) are 
composed of five Gaussian distributions. The means and covariance matrices are pro­
vided below. Figure 1 illustrates the samples of 500 particles representing the GMMs, 
each in a different color, alongside the 2000-point grid of the potential barycenter sup­
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
port points (marked in black) in the top-left corner. The subsequent three figures depict 
the GMMs compared to the selected barycenters with support cardinality M = 500. The 
weights assigned to the GMMs in these figures vary: w = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.2] (top-right); 
w = [0.166, 0.385, 0.063, 0.321, 0.065] (bottom-left); and w = [0.7, 0.1, 0.05, 0.05, 0.1] (bot­
tom-right). As observed, with changes in the weights, the approximated barycenter shifts 
towards the more heavily weighted centers. Additionally, Fig. 2 depicts the selected Was­
serstein barycenter for a 2-dimensional GMM with 10 Gaussian components. The weight, 
mean, and covariance matrix of each Gaussian component are all randomly generated; the 
number of particles was the same as before.
Fig. 2  The GMMs with 10 components and the selected barycenter distribution
 
Fig. 1  The GMMs with 5 components and the selected barycenter distribution
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
 
µ1 =
[−2
−2
]
,
µ2 =
[2
2
]
,
µ3 =
[ 2
−2
]
,
µ4 =
[−2
2
]
,
µ5 =
[0
0
]
.
Σi =
[ 0.5
−0.2
−0.2
0.5
]
,
i = 1, . . . , 5.
However, we quickly recognize that issues such as data leakage or privacy concerns may 
arise with specific choices of hyperparameters and a fairly accurate reference set. As Figs. 
1 and 2 demonstrate, the global device may capture the essence of the data distributions of 
local devices with minimal errors, if the weights are skewed.
We also present an experiment to compare two algorithms for computing the Wasserstein 
barycenter. Our proposed dual subgradient method is a discretized free-support approach, 
where the barycenter’s support is a subset of a larger, pre-defined set of candidate points. 
In contrast, the baseline method is a free-support algorithm based on Bregman projections, 
which optimizes the locations of a fixed number of barycenter points. This iterative process 
computes regularized optimal transport plans to each source measure via the Sinkhorn algo­
rithm at each step, subsequently updating the support locations toward the barycentric map­
ping of the measures until convergence. The method was adapted from the Python Optimal 
Transport (POT) library, a free collection of state-of-the-art algorithms for mass transporta­
tion problems, including the barycenter problem.1 To ensure a rigorous comparison, both 
algorithms are initialized with identical source distributions, and their performance is evalu­
ated on computational efficiency and solution quality. Efficiency is quantified by the total 
solution time and the average time per iteration for each method. The quality of the solution 
is assessed quantitatively by calculating the final Wasserstein barycenter objective value and 
qualitatively through a visual illustration of the structure of the resulting barycenter.
The visualization of barycenters in Fig. 3 is similar to the one presented earlier in Fig. 
1, but focuses on comparing the dual subgradient method with the free-support method 
using fixed-point iterations with alternating Bregman projections with different regulariza­
tion terms. The two-dimensional Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) consist of five Gauss­
ian components, with the same means and covariance matrices as described above. The 
K = 1000 candidate points for the dual subgradient method were randomly sampled from 
a normal distribution with independent components having zero means and variances equal 
to 5. The starting support of cardinality M = 250 of the barycenter for the Bregman projec­
tion method was sampled from the same distribution. The stopping test for the dual method 
is whether the relative change in the dual function (17) is smaller than ε = 10−4 and the 
number of points selected is within ±10% of M = 250. For the alternating Bregman projec­
tion method, the stopping test is whether the relative change of the barycenter drops below 
ε = 10−4.
The subsequent figures illustrate the GMMs and their corresponding barycenters. The 
weights assigned to the GMMs are w = [0.7, 0.1, 0.05, 0.05, 0.1]. The barycenter methods 
visualized are: the dual subgradient method (top-left), alternating Bregman projections with 
Sinkhorn regularization term 0.05 (top-right), 0.1 (bottom-left), and 0.5 (bottom-right). 
Table 1 provides the numbers of iterations, solution time, and the final barycenter value.
A key insight from this analysis is the rapid convergence of the dual method to a high-
quality solution and the fundamental trade-off between accuracy and efficiency in Sinkhorn-
based barycenter computations. According to Fig. 3, a smaller regularization term produces 
a more accurate approximation of the true Wasserstein distance, but this comes at the cost of 
1 The list of contributors is provided at https://pythonot.github.io/contributors.html.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
significantly slower convergence for the Sinkhorn algorithm. When we set the regulariza­
tion term to be 0.05, the algorithm did not reach the tolerance threshold ϵ = 10−4 before 
the maximum iterations. In contrast, the dual subgradient method demonstrates superior 
computational performance and scalability, and much lower time per iteration. Its primary 
advantage lies in its architecture, which does not require the expensive computation of an 
optimal transport plan in each iteration. By relying on computationally cheaper dual vari­
able updates, the method is substantially faster per iteration. This efficiency makes it more 
scalable as the problem size, such as the number of input distributions or the number of 
candidate points, increases, allowing it to outperform even the heavily regularized (e.g., 0.5) 
Sinkhorn-based approaches.
Table 1  Performance Comparison of Barycenter Computation Methods
Method
Regularization
Converged?
Total 
Time (s)
Iterations
Time/Iter. 
(ms)
Barycen­
ter Value
Dual Subgradient
N/A
Yes
23.73
2204
10.77
4.44
Bregman Projections
0.05
No
2397.21
1000
2397.21
4.43
Bregman Projections
0.1
Yes
115.40
187
617.11
4.40
Bregman Projections
0.5
Yes
19.46
252
77.22
4.59
Fig. 3  Barycenters obtained by the different methods: dual subgradient method (top-left), Bregman pro­
jections with Sinkhorn regularization term 0.05 (top-right), 0.1 (bottom-left), and 0.5 (bottom-right)
 
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
6  Conclusion
Our new discrete reformulation of the free-support Wasserstein barycenter problem has a 
very special structure, which allows for the development of efficient and privacy-preserving 
federated optimization algorithms. The main ideas of the reformulation are:
 
●
The search for a limited-cardinality barycenter support within a large, but still finite set 
of candidate points;
 
●
The restriction of the barycenter distributions to uniform distributions on their support 
sets.
The idea of the methods is to dualize not only the constraint that limits the support cardinal­
ity but also the mass-balance constraints at the support of each individual distribution. As 
a result of that, the primal variables representing the barycenter support selection and the 
couplings can be calculated in a closed form, without any matrix–vector operations or non­
linear functions. Although the couplings may be infeasible, the subgradients with respect 
to the dual variables are correct and have closed forms as well. This results in a very low 
iteration complexity.
An essential feature of the proposed method is the protection of data privacy. The coordi­
nator does not have access to the local distributions and receives only aggregate information 
about the usefulness of the support points for each subproblem.
Our numerical experiments indicate that the dual method is highly efficient and scalable, 
and the barycenter distributions obtained are accurate.
To the best of our knowledge, our research represents a pioneering effort presenting fea­
sible and scalable algorithms for determining Wasserstein barycenters within the federated 
setting.
Funding  This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research award N00014-21-1-2161 and by the Air 
Force Office of Scientific Research award FA9550-24-1-0284.
Declarations
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no Conflict of interest.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted 
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Agueh, M., & Carlier, G. (2011). Barycenters in the Wasserstein space. SIAM Journal on Mathematical 
Analysis, 43(2), 904–924.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Altschuler, J., Niles-Weed, J., & Rigollet, P. (2017). Near-linear time approximation algorithms for optimal 
transport via Sinkhorn iteration. In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vish­
wanathan, & R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems. (Vol. 30). Long 
Beach: Curran Associates, Inc.
Álvarez-Esteban, P. C., Del Barrio, E., Cuesta-Albertos, J., & Matrán, C. (2016). A fixed-point approach to 
barycenters in Wasserstein space. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 441(2), 744–762.
Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., & Bottou, L. (2017). Wasserstein GAN, arXiv:1701.07875.
Backhoff-Veraguas, J., & Pammer, G. (2022). Applications of weak transport theory. Bernoulli, 28(1), 
370–394.
Benamou, J.-D., Carlier, G., Cuturi, M., Nenna, L., & Peyré, G. (2015). Iterative Bregman projections for 
regularized transportation problems. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 37(2), A1111–A1138.
Bing, X., Bunea, F., & Niles-Weed, J. (2022). The sketched Wasserstein distance for mixture distributions, 
arXiv:2206.12768.
Birge, J. R., & Louveaux, F. V. (1988). A multicut algorithm for two-stage stochastic linear programs. Euro­
pean Journal of Operational Research, 34(3), 384–392.
Carassai, G. V. (2024). Neural optimal transport at scale: Wasserstein barycenters for fair insurance. Mas­
ter’s thesis, ETH Zürich.
Charpentier, A., Hu, F., & Ratz, P. (2023). Mitigating discrimination in insurance with Wasserstein barycen­
ters. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, (pp. 
161–177). Springer.
Chen, Y., Ye, J., & Li, J. (2020). Aggregated Wasserstein distance and state registration for hidden Markov 
models. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 42(9), 2133–2147.
Chzhen, E., Denis, C., Hebiri, M., Oneto, L., & Pontil, M. (2020). Fair regression with Wasserstein barycen­
ters. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 7321–7331.
Cuturi, M. (2013). Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. In C. Burges, L. Bot­
tou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, & K. Weinberger (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems. (Vol. 26). Curran Associates, Inc.
Cuturi, M., & Doucet, A. (2014). Fast computation of Wasserstein barycenters. In International Conference 
on Machine Learning, (pp. 685–693). PMLR.
Cuturi, M., & Peyré, G. (2016). A smoothed dual approach for variational Wasserstein problems. SIAM Jour­
nal on Imaging Sciences, 9(1), 320–343.
Cuturi, M., & Peyré, G. (2018). Semidual regularized optimal transport. SIAM Review, 60(4), 941–965.
Delon, J., & Desolneux, A. (2020). A Wasserstein-type distance in the space of Gaussian mixture models. 
SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, 13(2), 936–970.
Dereich, S., Scheutzow, M., & Schottstedt, R. (2013). Constructive quantization: Approximation by empiri­
cal measures. Annales de l’IHP Probabilités et Statistiques, 49(4), 1183–1203.
Dvurechenskii, P., Dvinskikh, D., Gasnikov, A., Uribe, C., & Nedich, A. (2018). Decentralize and randomize: 
Faster algorithm for Wasserstein barycenters. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31.
Dvurechensky, P., Dvinskikh, D., Gasnikov, A., Uribe, C., & Nedich, A. (2018). Decentralize and randomize: 
Faster algorithm for Wasserstein barycenters. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, 
N. Cesa-Bianchi, & R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. (Vol. 31). 
Curran Associates, Inc.
Dvurechensky, P., Gasnikov, A., & Kroshnin, A. (2018). Computational optimal transport: Complexity by 
accelerated gradient descent is better than by Sinkhorn’s algorithm. In J. Dy & A. Krause, editors, 
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of 
Machine Learning Research, (pp. 1367–1376), Address, 10–15 Jul 2018. PMLR.
Fournier, N., & Guillin, A. (2015). On the rate of convergence in Wasserstein distance of the empirical mea­
sure. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 162(3), 707–738.
Garrigos, G., & Gower, R. M. (2023). Handbook of convergence theorems for (stochastic) gradient methods, 
arXiv:2301.11235.
Gaucher, S., Schreuder, N., & Chzhen, E. (2023). Fair learning with Wasserstein barycenters for non-decom­
posable performance measures. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 
(pp. 2436–2459). PMLR.
Genevay, A., Cuturi, M., Peyré, G., & Bach, F. (2016). Stochastic optimization for large-scale optimal trans­
port. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 
NIPS’16, (pp. 3440–3448), Red Hook, NY, USA, Curran Associates Inc.
Gouic, T. L., Loubes, J.-M., & Rigollet, P. (2020). Projection to fairness in statistical learning. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2005.11720.
Heinemann, F., Munk, A., & Zemel, Y. (2022). Randomized Wasserstein barycenter computation: Resam­
pling with statistical guarantees. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 4(1), 229–259.
1 3

Annals of Operations Research
Ho, N., Nguyen, X., Yurochkin, M., Bui, H. H., Huynh, V., & Phung, D. (2017). Multilevel clustering via 
Wasserstein means, arXiv:1706.03883.
Kolouri, S., Rohde, G. K., & Hoffmann, H. (2018). Sliced Wasserstein distance for learning Gaussian mixture 
models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 
June 2018.
Konečný, J., McMahan, H. B., Ramage, D., & Richtárik, P. (2016). Federated optimization: Distributed 
machine learning for on-device intelligence.
Kroshnin, A., Tupitsa, N., Dvinskikh, D., Dvurechensky, P., Gasnikov, A., & Uribe, C. (2019). On the com­
plexity of approximating Wasserstein barycenters. In K. Chaudhuri & R. Salakhutdinov, editors, Pro­
ceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of 
Machine Learning Research, pages 3530–3540, Montreal, 09–15 Jun 2019. PMLR.
Larsson, T., Patriksson, M., & Strömberg, A.-B. (1999). Ergodic, primal convergence in dual subgradient 
schemes for convex programming. Mathematical Programming, 86, 283–312.
Li, T., Sahu, A. K., Talwalkar, A., & Smith, V. (2020). Federated learning: Challenges, methods, and future 
directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(3), 50–60.
Lin, T., Ho, N., Chen, X., Cuturi, M., & Jordan, M. I. (2020). Computational hardness and fast algorithm for 
fixed-support Wasserstein barycenter. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.04783.
Lin, T., Ho, N., & Jordan, M. (2019). On efficient optimal transport: An analysis of greedy and accelerated 
mirror descent algorithms. PMLR, 97(3982–3991), 09–15.
Lin, Z., & Ruszczyński, A. (2023). An integrated transportation distance between kernels and approxi­
mate dynamic risk evaluation in Markov systems. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 61(6), 
3559–3583.
Liu, Y., Gao, Y., & Yin, W. (2020). An improved analysis of stochastic gradient descent with momentum. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 18261–18271.
McMahan, H. B., Moore, E., Ramage, D., Hampson, S., & Arcas, B. A. y. (2016). Communication-efficient 
learning of deep networks from decentralized data. arXiv.
Mulvey, J. M., & Ruszczyński, A. (1995). A new scenario decomposition method for large-scale stochastic 
optimization. Operations Research, 43(3), 477–490.
Pele, O., & Werman, M. (2009). Fast and robust earth mover’s distances. In 2009 IEEE 12th International 
Conference on Computer Vision, (pp. 460–467).
Rockafellar, R. T., & Wets, R.J.-B. (1991). Scenarios and policy aggregation in optimization under uncer­
tainty. Mathematics of Operations Research, 16(1), 119–147.
Rubner, Y., Tomasi, C., & Guibas, L. J. (2000). The earth mover’s distance as a metric for image retrieval. 
International Journal of Computer Vision, 40, 99–121.
Ruszczyński, A. (1986). A regularized decomposition method for minimizing a sum of polyhedral functions. 
Mathematical Programming, 35(3), 309–333.
Ruszczyński, A., & Shapiro, A. (2003). Stochastic Programming. Handbooks in OR and MS. Elsevier.
Shapiro, A., Dentcheva, D., & Ruszczyński, A. (2021). Lectures on stochastic programming: Modeling and 
theory. SIAM.
Smith, V., Chiang, C.-K., Sanjabi, M., & Talwalkar, A. (2017). Federated multi-task learning.
Solomon, J., Rustamov, R., Guibas, L., & Butscher, A. (2014). Wasserstein propagation for semi-super­
vised learning. In E. P. Xing & T. Jebara, editors, Proceedings of the 31st International Conference 
on Machine Learning, volume 32 (1) of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 306–314, 
Bejing, China, 22–24 Jun 2014. PMLR.
Van Slyke, R. M., & Wets, R. (1969). L-shaped linear programs with applications to optimal control and 
stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 17(4), 638–663.
Villani, C. (2009). Optimal transport: old and new. Springer.
Wang, J., Charles, Z., Xu, Z., Joshi, G., McMahan, H. B., Arcas, B. A. Y., Al-Shedivat, M., Andrew, G., Aves­
timehr, S., Daly, K., Data, D., Diggavi, S., Eichner, H., Gadhikar, A., Garrett, Z., Girgis, A. M., Hanzely, 
F., Hard, A., He, C., … Zhu, W. (2021). A field guide to federated optimization.
Xie, Y., Wang, X., Wang, R., & Zha, H. (2020). A fast proximal point method for computing exact Wasser­
stein distance. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, (pp. 433–453). PMLR.
Yan, Y., Yang, T., Li, Z., Lin, Q., & Yang, Y. (2018). A unified analysis of stochastic momentum methods for 
deep learning. In Proceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (pp. 
2955–2961).
Zinkevich, M. (2003). Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent. In Pro­
ceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-03), (pp. 928–936).
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3